Title: 

URL Source: https://www.mom.gov.sg/-/media/mom/documents/safety-health/reports-stats/stars-engrg-inquiry-committee-report-part2-annex-4.pdf

Published Time: Fri, 25 Mar 2022 05:05:00 GMT

Markdown Content:
Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 2021 

## 1

# 21 JANUARY 2022 

# Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 February 2021 (PART II – ANNEXES) Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 202 1

## 2

## TABLE OF CONTENTS 

# Part II – Annexes 

## ANNEX A – STOP WORK ORDER .............................................................................. A-1 

## ANNEX B – BIOGRAPHIES OF IC MEMBERS .............................................................. B-1 

## ANNEX C – LETTERS OF APPOINTMENT ................................................................... C-1 

## ANNEX D – TERMS OF REFERENCE OF THE IC ........................................................... D-1 

## ANNEX E – OPENING STATEMENT ........................................................................... E-1 

## ANNEX F – LIST OF WITNESSES ................................................................................ F-1 

## ANNEX G – LIST OF EXHIBITS ................................................................................... G-1 

## ANNEX H – LIST OF WITNESS STATEMENTS AND SUBMISSIONS .............................. H-1 

## ANNEX I – EXPERT REPORTS ..................................................................................... I-1 

## ANNEX J – WRITTEN REPRESENTATIONS .................................................................. J-1 

## ANNEX K – CLOSING SUBMISSIONS ......................................................................... K-1 

## ANNEX L – EXTRACTS FROM THE WORKPLACE SAFETY AND HEALTH ACT ................ L-1 

## ANNEX M – EXTRACTS FROM THE WORKPLACE SAFETY AND HEALTH (RISK MANAGEMENT) REGULATIONS .............................................................................. M-1 

## ANNEX N - EXTRACTS FROM THE WORKPLACE SAFETY AND HEALTH (GENERAL PROVISIONS) REGULATIONS....................................................................................N-1 

## ANNEX O – EXTRACTS OF COMBUSTIBLE DUST-RELATED LEGISLATION .................. O-1 Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 202 1

## J-1 

# ANNEX J – WRITTEN REPRESENTATIONS CONFIDENTIAL 

1 | P a g e 

# RECOMMENDATIONS REPORT 

# FIRE AND EXPLOSION AT STARS ENGRG PTE LTD 

# (32E, TUAS AVENUE 11 )

Prepared by 

Shaik Mohamed Salim PhD, P.E ng .

Principal Specialist 

Institute of Chemical and Engineering Sciences, A*STAR 

Prepared for 

3 November 2021 CONFIDENTIAL   

> 2|P a g e

This Page is Left Blank CONFIDENTIAL   

> 3|P a g e

# Contents 

List of Tables  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 3

Abbreviations  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................... 4

Executive Summary  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............. 5

1 Background and Introduction ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................... 7

2 Methodology - Gap Analysis  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 8

3 FMEA Results and Recommendations  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 9

3.1 Items (1) and (2) – HTF fill and Heating of HTF  ................................ ................................ ................... 9

3.2 Item (3) – Heating jacket integrity ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 12 

3.3 Item (4) – Release and formation of liquid aerosols ................................ ................................ ......... 14 

3.4 Item (5) – Combustible dust ................................ ................................ ................................ .............. 16 

4 Conclusion ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................. 18 

References ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................... 20 

Appendices ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 21 

# List of Tables 

Table 1: Summary of recommendations on legislative requirements ................................ .............................. 18 

Table 2: Summary of recommendations related to standards, guidance material and training development 19 CONFIDENTIAL   

> 4|P a g e

# Abbreviations 

ACOP: approved code of practice under s 40B of the WSH Act 

CSC : Chemical Standards Committee 

FMEA: Failure Mode and Effect Analysis 

HTF: heat transfer fluid 

ISO: International Organization for Standardization 

MOM: Ministry of Manpower 

NFPA: National Fire Protection Association 

OSHA: Occupational Safety and Health Administration of the United States of America 

RMCP: Code of Practice on Workplace Safety and Health R isk Management (issued by the WSH Council) 

SCDF: Singapore Civil Defence Force 

SME: small and medium sized enterprises. 

SMF: Singapore Manufacturing Federation 

SOP: standard operating procedures 

SS: Singapore Standard 

SWP : safe work procedures 

WSH: Workpla ce Safety and Health CONFIDENTIAL   

> 5|P a g e

# Executive Summary 

> 2

The accident at Stars Engrg involved a primary deflagration caused by the release and ignition of 

aerosolised combustible liquid (i.e. HTF) from an over pressurised heating jacket followed by 4

secondary flash fires from combustible dust. An FMEA was conducted to systematically analyse and 

identify gaps within the current legislative requirements and supporting standards. The results from 6

this F MEA has le d to a total of five recommendations on regulatory requirements and five 

recommendations on standards, guidance material and training. 8

In order to prevent accidents involving combustible liquid aerosols from overheated and over 10 

pressurised heating systems, recommendations are made for the WSH Act to ensure that closed, 

heated systems that are not intended for pressurised operations are ex plicitly defined/covered and 12 

properly installed/commissioned under the WSH Act and its subsidiary regulations . Similarly, in the 

WSH (General Provisions) Regulations, recommendations on control measures and maintenance are 14 

made for such heated systems alon g with explicit definitions for “combustible liquid aerosols” and 

“flammable gases and vapours arising from material decomposition” .16 

To support these regulatory requirements, recommendations are also made to review and enhance 18 

SS 537 1 and the RMCP (an ACO P) in terms of their controls for heated equipment/systems, provision 

of safety information and risk assessments of such equipment /systems. It is also recommended that 20 

the C hemical Standards Committee (CSC) 2 look into the feasibility of developing standards to address 

hazards associated with combustible liquid aerosols and thermal decomposition of materials. At the 22 

same time, it is also recommended that the CSC look into the research needed to close the knowl edge 

gaps for the development of such standard s. Recommendations are also made to develop guidance 24       

> 1SS 537 (2008), Code of practice for the safe use of machinery –Part 1: General requirements (published by Enterprise
> Singapore).
> 2Established under the Singapore Standards Council appointed by Enterprise Singapore.

CONFIDENTIAL   

> 6|P a g e

material and training for SMEs to help increase a wareness of material thermal decomposition 

hazards , liquid aerosol explosions and equipment commissioning be st practices .2

In terms of combustible dust hazards, it is recommended that the WSH Act and the WSH (General 

Provisions) Regulations be enhanced via the gazetting of SS 667 3 as an ACOP . It is also recommended 4

that the RMCP reference s and integrate s SS 667’s Dust Hazard Analysis ( DHA ) as part of the overall 

risk assessment regime .6    

> 3SS 667 (2020): Code of practice on handling, storage and processing of combustible dust (published by Enterprise
> Singapore). CONFIDENTIAL
> 7|P a g e

# 1 Background and Introduction 

> 2

The root -cause of the incident on 24 February 2021 at Stars Engrg was likely to be the low amounts 

of heat transfer fluid used in the mixer. This then led the heat transfer fluid to be excessively heated 4

resulting in a pressure build -up in the mixer’s heating jacket. This subsequently led to the rupturing 

of the heating jacket thus releasing hot, pressurised heat transfer fluid into the enviro nment. This 6

pressurised release likely atomised the heat transfer fluid to form a liquid aerosol that was then 

probably ignited by a hot surface. The ignited aerosol cloud resulted in the primary deflagration with 8

significant overpressures. 

> 10

This primary d eflagration event was followed by up to three secondary deflagrations in the form of 

flash fires. These flash fires were likely the result of potato starch within the Stars Engrg factory unit 12 

that were initially agitated and suspended by the overpressure f rom the primary deflagration to form 

a combustible dust cloud. 14 

The causes and evidence related to this accident were documented in my technical accident report 16 

dated 13 Sep 2021. The sequence of events involved in the accident is illustrated in the accide nt block 

flow diagram at page 60 of that report . The accident block flow diagram is reproduced at Appendix 18 

A to this report, with additional labelling to draw attention to the five discrete items represent ing 

the key components in the accident block flow d iagra m (see page  8 below). 20 

In order to prevent such an event from occurring again, suitable preventive measures should be put 22 

in place. In this report, a systemati c and structured review of the key factors involved in the accident 

are analysed in order to derive specific measures that could be implemented. The methodology used 24 

for this analysis is explained in the following section. CONFIDENTIAL   

> 8|P a g e

# 2 Methodology - Gap Analysis 

> 2

Failure Mode and Effect Analysis (FMEA) was the methodology employed to review the various 

factors involved in the accident. This methodology is designed to systematically analyse components 4

and sub -systems to identify potential failure modes in a syste m, their causes and relevant 

consequences. 6

In this FMEA analysis, the system being analysed was the sequence of events involved in the accident. 8

As shown in Appendix A , five discrete items were identified to represent key components in the 

accident block flow diagram namely: 10 

(1) HTF fill in heating jacket 

(2) Heating of HTF 12 

(3) Heating jacket integrity 

(4) Release and formation of liquid aerosols 14 

(5) Combustible dust 

> 16

The five key components were then examined with particular emphasis being placed on existing 

measures available and recommendations for improvements. The detailed FMEA analysis done is 18 

shown in Appendix B .

> 20

It should be highlighted that this FMEA was condu cted to ascertain gaps and potential improvements 

in the safety systems, regulatory framework and standards/guidance at the national level. This FMEA 22 

was not done to identify specific component failures of the mixer machine involved in the accident. CONFIDENTIAL   

> 9|P a g e

# 3 FM EA Results and Recommendations 

> 2

The results from the FMEA generated a number of recommendations to address gaps. 

> 4

3.1 Items ( 1) and ( 2) – HTF fill and Heating of HTF 

The possible causes of failures under these two items can be summarised as follows: 6

a. Equipment ergonomics – distinguishing touch points 4 and anticipating misuse. 

b. Equipment safety information and hazard communication – language clarity and specificity 8

for global users .

c. Improper risk assessment – assessments of tasks that are more related to construct ion site 10 

activities .

d. Improper equipment commissioning – lack of awareness of best practices in equipment 12 

commissioning .

e. Poor/missing SOP – limited engineering and professional knowledge/experience with 14 

process -type equipment (i.e. the mixer machine ).

> 16

In terms of factors (a) and (b) that involve equipment safety and provision of information, Section 16 

of the WSH Act specifies the general duties of manufacturers and suppliers of machinery or 18 

equipment used at work to ensure that such machinery or equipm ent is: 

i. provided with safe use information ;20 

ii. safe and without risk to health when properly used ; and 

iii. adequately examined and tested .22 

The types of equipment currently covered under this section is listed under the Fifth Schedule which 24 

includes equipment intended for operation under pressure and equipment intended to contain 

corrosive, toxic or flammable substances. Therefore, there seems to be a gap for equipment that are 26 

not primarily intended to be operated under pressure or equipment that only contains combustible 

(but not corrosive, toxic or flammable) materials . In particular, heated equipment or equipment with 28 

energy inputs into cl osed systems that could result in overheating or overpressure would need to be    

> 4Controls and other areas on machines users might touch CONFIDENTIAL
> 10 |P a g e

covered in Section 16 of the WSH Act. Whilst it is acknowledged that the mixer machine involved in 

the accident was purchased online from an overseas manufacturer / suppli er and that the reach of 2

the WSH Act is limited in this regard, it is important to ensure that the gap in the WSH Act is addressed 

as regards local manufacture rs/suppliers to prevent future accidents. 4

Other than legislation via the WSH Act, equipment safe ty is currently addressed in SS 537 Part 1 5,

which is an ACOP applicable to all workplaces defined within the scope of the standard . This standard 6

mainly covers mechanical safety issues for example entanglement, cutting and impact hazards. 

Adoption of SS 537 Part 1 is mandatory . Although SS 537 does not cover overheating, overpressure 8

and explosion hazards, it does provide general guidance related to selection of safety measures, risk 

reduction, safeguards and safety devices. It might theref ore be appropriate to review this standard 10 

to cover heated equipment (e.g. the mixer machine ) with reference to ISO 12100 and in particular, 

attention should be given to guidance on “Information for Use” 6. This should raise the equipment 12 

safety awareness o f equipment manufacturers/suppliers and end -users. It should also address the 

quality of safety information provided by the manufacturer and suppliers of equipment. 14 

For factor (c), requirements on risk assessment are stipulated under the WSH (Risk Managem ent) 16 

Regulations with further details provided by the RMCP . The guidance provided by the RMCP is 

designed to provide hazard identification and risk assessment for a wide range of industries and work 18 

environments ranging from construction, shipyards and gen eral manufacturing. Although the general 

principles provided in the RMCP can be made applicable to almost all risk assessments, the 20 

methodology described in the RMCP is more activity or task -centric. This means that process -type 

interactions and their rela ted hazards could be inadvertently missed out by the average risk assessor. 22 

It might therefore be beneficial to review the RMCP and include guidance and examples to enable 

better identification of process related hazards (e.g. overpressure, decompositions) .24 

The fourth factor (d) identified under Items ( 1) and ( 2) was related to equipment commissioning 26 

practices. Although commissioning is not explicitly mentioned, its requirements are implied under           

> 5SS 537 (2008), Code of practice for the safe use of machinery –Part 1: General requirements .
> 6ISO 12100 -1 (2010), Clause 6.4 –Information for use CONFIDENTIAL
> 11 |P a g e

Section 17 of the WSH Act which covers the duties of persons who install or modify machinery or 

equipment. It is therefore recommended that this section be enhanced with the inclusion of key 2

commissioning components such as equipment/process design and information review, 

determination of system boundary limits, inspection and acceptance testing, safe start -up and 4

documentation. 

> 6

For many SMEs 7, there is usually a lack of experience and expertise in commissioning equipment prior 

to operational start -up. It would therefore be helpf ul if a guidance document is developed with the 8

relevant industry association (e.g. SMF) on commissioning best practices for SMEs as a resource and 

as a basis of training programme. This would be similar to courses aimed at other specific aspects of 10 

safety management such as risk assessments and safe work procedures. It should be noted that there 

are courses currently conducted under the Skills Framework ( SFw )8 for commissioning activities. 12 

Finally , for factor (e), the development and implemen tation of safe work procedures have been an 14 

established practice in many workplaces and is stipulated in broad terms under Section 12 of the 

WSH Act and more specifically under the WSH (Risk Management) Regulations 9 with detailed 16 

guidance provided by the RMCP and SS ISO 45001 . However, the issue lies with the types and quality 

of safe work procedures developed and implemented since they are heavily influenced by the risk 18 

assessment conducted and the experience or background of the people developing such pro cedures. 

In this accident , although safe work procedures were available, they addressed activities that are 20 

more closely linked to off -site work which the company had more experience dealing with such as 

working from heights and manual handling. Overall , for safe work procedures, the regulatory 22 

requirements and the standards availab le are adequate and the shortcomings identified would have 

been addressed by the recommended changes in risk assessment mentioned previously under factor 24 

(c).          

> 7SME: small and medium sized enterprises.
> 8Developed by SkillsFuture Singapore (SSG), Workforce Singapore (WSG), and the Singapore Economic Developmen t
> Board (EDB) for Engineering Services: https://www.skillsfuture.gov.sg/skills -framework/engineeringservices .
> 9Regulation 4 –Elimination and control of risk .CONFIDENTIAL
> 12 |P a g e

3.2 Item ( 3) – Heating jacket integrity 

The possible causes that could result in overpressure, vessel rupture and release of HTF are as 2

follows 10 :

a. Closed system – not for pressurised service with no safeguards e.g. venting, pressure 4

monitoring 

b. Overheating of HTF – electrical hea ting of combustible liquid 6

c. Decomposition of HTF – decomposition of combustible liquid at high temperatures 

d. Lack of technical knowledge – thermal runaways, decomposition and liquid aerosol 8

explosion 

> 10

Referring to factor (a), vessels that are not intended fo r pressurised operations do not have any 

specific requirements under the WSH (General Provisions) Regulations that currently covers pressure 12 

vessels and includes additional obligations as regards pressure vessels containing hazardous 

substances (i.e. Regul ation 33). However, it should be noted that closed systems (even if not intended 14 

for pressurised operations ) could also experience overpressures when subjected to operational 

deviations . There should therefore be provisions under the WSH (General Provision s) Regulations for 16 

measures to ensure that overpressures could be prevented or controlled in such closed systems. 

> 18

For factor (b) that relates to overheated heat transfer fluids, the WSH (General Provisions) 

Regulations has requirements for pressuris ed heating systems in the form of steam boilers, steam 20 

receivers and steam containers 11 . However, there are no requirements for heating systems 

(pressurised or otherwise) that rely on other types of heat transfer fluids. As seen in this accident, 22 

combustible liquids with high flash points (greater than 150 C) could still pose a significant hazard 

under certain conditions. Therefore, it is recommended that heating systems t hat use combustible 24 

liquids should also be appropriately assessed with suitable control measures implemented (e.g. 

pressure monitoring, pressure relief venting) and that this can be done in conjunction with the above 26 

recommendation regarding closed s ystems .    

> 10 Factors related to equipment ergonomics, equipment safety information and improper risk assessment have been
> omitted as they have been discussed in the previous Section.
> 11 WSH (General Provisions) Regulations 28 to 30 .

CONFIDENTIAL   

> 13 |P a g e

Currently , the only Singapore standard that defines and addresses hazards posed by combustible 

liquids is SS 532 12 , which is an ACOP applicable to all workplaces defined within the scope of the 2

standard . This standard provides guidance on the storage of flammable and combustible liquids with 

flash points of up to 150 C. The requirements in SS 532 concern storage quantities, conditions of 4

storage (e.g. ventilation, drainage), fire -fighting, emergency response, separation distances and wall 

fire -ratings. The standard ’s scope does not cover flammable or combustible liquids that are used in 6

processes or is an integral part of the processing plant or equipment. Moreover, there is also a lack 

of guidance documents av ailable internationally in the area of flammable mists from high flashpoint 8

fluids. For example, even though NFPA 30 13 does provide some useful information on safety 

measures for handling and use of combustible liquids under process conditions, its sc ope specifically 10 

excludes mists and sprays. Furthermore , NFPA 30B 14 is not directly relevant as it is meant for aerosol 

products (e.g. spray cans). 12 

There is therefore a significant gap in the standards framework for flammable and combustible 14 

liquids use d in processes and in particular combustible liquid aerosols. This gap is partially due to 

knowledge gaps in the areas of mist flammability, mist generation and mitigation measures 15 for such 16 

combustible liquid aerosols. It is therefore recommended that the Chemical Standards Committee 

look into the feasibility of developing a standard to prevent fires and explosions from combustible 18 

liquid aerosols. The committee should also look into the research needed to close the knowledge 

gaps for the development of su ch a standard. 20 

With reference to factor (c), Regulation 26 of the WSH (General Provisions) Regulations stipulates 22 

the precautions for dealing with explosive or flammable dust, gas, vapour or substance. In this 

accident, the decomposition of HTF could have resulted in the generation of flammable gasses and 24                

> 12 SS 532 (2016): Code of practice for the sto rage of flammable liquids ( published by Enterprise Singapore ).
> 13 NFPA 30: Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code ( published by the National Fire Protection Association , USA ).
> 14 NFPA 30B: Code for the Manufacture and Storage of Aerosol Products (published b y the National Fire Protection
> Association, USA ).
> 15 Gant, S., et al .,(2013). Generation of flammable mists from high flashpoint fluids: literature review. Health and Safety
> Executive, Research Report RR980. CONFIDENTIAL
> 14 |P a g e

vapours and it is incumbent o n users of such materials to be aware of this possible hazard and 

implement the measures stated in Regulation 26. In addition , under certain conditions, a 2

combustible liquid could be aerosolised and be ignited to cause fires or explosions. Under Regulation 

26, such a liquid aerosol could be broadly described as a “substance… of such a character and is to 4

such an extent as to be liable to explode on ignition” and such that it would therefore come under 

the regulatory requirements. However, to make it clearer, it is recommended that the terms 6

“combustible liquid aerosols” and “flammable gases and vapours arising from material 

decom position” should be included and be made explicit in Regulation 26. 8

In ter ms of standards, there are no guidance documents available both locally and internationally 10 

that deal with the issues around hazards arising from thermal decomposition of material s (solid and 

liquids). Therefore, it is also recommended the Chemical Standards Committee look into the 12 

feasibility of developing a standard addressing the preventive and control measures for flammable 

gasses and vapours generated from the thermal decompos ition of materials (solid and liquids). 14 

Finally, for factor (d), it is noted that there is a general lack of awareness and knowledge around 16 

thermal runaways, material decomposition hazards and liquid aerosol explosions. There should 

therefore be guidance material and training developed for industry practitioners (e.g. WSH officers) 18 

and SMEs to address these topics. Without a reasonable level of technical knowledge, risk 

assessments conducted would inevitably overlook hazards associated with thermal run aways, 20 

material decomposition hazards and liquid aerosol explosions. This subsequently leads to the 

necessary control and mitigation measures not being implemented. 22 

3.3 Item ( 4) – Release and formation of liquid aerosols 24 

The possible factors related to the re lease and formation of liquid aerosols are listed as follows: 

a. Overpressure – vapour and gasses generated from overheating and decomposition of HTF 26 

b. Overheating – thermal expansion of gasses/vapours 

c. Overfilling – overpressure due to thermal expansion of liquid s28 CONFIDENTIAL   

> 15 |P a g e

d. Corrosion, material fatigue – metal degradation from chemicals and temperature cycling 

e. Poor maintenance – quality of repairs 2

f. Accidental release, puncture – human error and impact hazards 

> 4

Aspects to be addressed related to factors (a), (b) and (c) have been discussed in the previous Section 

3.2 . In terms of corrosion, metal fatigue and maintenance issues (factors ( d) and (e)) , Section 12 of 6

the WSH Act has provisions that requires employers to maintain a safe work environment. 

> 8

Th ere are also requirements for the maintenance of steam boilers/receivers/containers, air 

receivers, pressure vessel, pipes (including conveyance equipment) and gas plants that have been 10 

stipulated in the WSH (General Provisions), under Regulations 28 to 31 and 33 to 35. Therefore , in 

alignment to the previous recommendations for heated systems that are operated : (i) in a closed 12 

configuration ; and/or (ii) using combustible liquids , maintenance of such systems should also be 

explicitly stated in the WSH (Gene ral Provisions) Regulations to strengthen and clarify the general 14 

maintenance requirement under the WSH Act. 

> 16

Finally, in terms of the contribution of human error and impact hazards (factor (f)) , these are currently 

adequately tackled by means of: 18 

 Ergon omics – WSH Guidelines: Improving Ergonomics in the Workplace published by the 

WSH Council 20 

 Behavioural safety – WSH Guide to Behavioural Observation and Intervention published by 

the WSH Council 22 

 Promotional and awareness campaigns – Vision Zero Movement launched by the WSH 

Council 24 

In addition, recommendations made previously in Section  3.1  on machine ergonomics and safety will 26 

also have addressed human errors through distinguishing touch points and anticipating misuse. 

Hence, no further recommendations are needed here. 28 CONFIDENTIAL   

> 16 |P a g e

3.4 Item ( 5) – Combustible dust 

The factors identified that could contribute to a combustible dust flash fire or explosion are as 2

follows: 

a. Equipment failure – overpressures leading to dispersion of stored powders of accumulated 4

surface dust. 

b. Primary explosion – initial deflagration suspending accumulated dust and dispersing stored 6

powdered material 

c. Excessive air velocity – suspension of accum ulated dust on surfaces 8

d. Improper hazard identification and risk assessment – overlooking the potential for 

combustible dust hazards 10 

For the three factors (a, b and c) identified, there are requirements within the WSH (General 12 

Provisions), Regulation 26 that stipulate precautions for processes in a workplace that give rise to 

dust to such an extent as to be liable to explode on ignition. In addition, detailed control and 14 

mitigation measures are also described in SS 667 16 .

> 16

SS 667 was developed as a best practice reference especially for SMEs (small and medium -sized 

enterprises) on the handling and storage of various types of combustible dust in the context of high -18 

rise, multi -storied, multi -tenanted and below ground facilities that are typically fo und in land scarce 

Singapore. This standard was developed by a working group with myself as convenor. 20 

The standard aligns the requirements from various local regulatory agencies with regards to fire, 22 

explosion and other hazards related to combustible dust s so as to achieve better clarity and facilitate 

compliance. In addition, it is also meant to support the creation of new business opportunities by 24 

creating a safe operating environment for emerging industries such as additive manufacturing. 

> 26

SS 667 provid es guidance in the areas of dust hazard identification, characterisation and analysis, 

hazard management via mitigation and prevention, process equipment safety specifications, storage 28     

> 16 SS 667 (2020): Code of practice on handling, storage and processing of combustible dust .CONFIDENTIAL
> 17 |P a g e

requirements, facility and system design including performance -based de sign options as well as 

safety management system implementation. 2

In terms of risk assessments, the current requirements under WSH (Risk Management) Regulations 4

and the RMCP are general in scope but they should in effect, cover combustible dust hazards. 

However, in practice, combustible dust hazards are usually overlooked by risk assessors due to their 6

seemingly innocuous characteristics and forms (e.g. milk, sugar, starch). In some jurisdictions, in 

order to overcome this inherent bias, a more specific ri sk assessment focussing on combustible dust 8

have been mandated , for example OSHA’s 17 Dust Hazard Analysis. SS 667 provides similar guidance 

in terms of assessing the risks from combustible dust. However, compliance to this standard is 10 

currently voluntary with the exception of its provisions relating to fire safety that are now required 

fo r SCDF’s building plan submissions effective 1 st December 2021. It is therefore recommended that 12 

SS 667 be gazetted as an ACOP under the WSH Act with the relevant changes made to the RMCP to 

reference and integrate SS 667’s DHA as part of the overall risk assessment regime. 14  

> 17 OSHA: Occupational Safety and Health Administration of the United States of America.

CONFIDENTIAL   

> 18 |P a g e

# 4 Conclusion 

2

The accident at Stars Engrg involved a primary deflagration caused by the ignition of aerosolised 

combustible liquid (i.e. HTF) followed by secondary flash fires from combustible dust. An FMEA was 4

conducted to systema tically analyse and identify gaps within the regulatory requirements and 

supporting standards. The results from this FMEA can be classified into two main types of 6

recommendations namely regulatory requirements and standards, guidance material and training as 

summarised in  Table 1 and  Table 2 below. 8

Table 1: Summary of recommendation s on regulatory requirements 10 

Legislation  Recommendations 

1

WSH Act, Section 16 - general 

duties of manufacturers and 

suppliers of machinery, Fifth 

Schedule 

Include coverage for heated equipment or equipment with energy 

inputs into closed systems that could result in overheating or 

overpressure .

2 WSH Act, Section 17 –

installation of equipment 

Enhance with the inclusion of key commissioning components 

such as equipment/process design and information review, 

determination of system boundary limits, inspection and 

acceptance testing, safe start -up and documentation. 

3

WSH (General Provisions), 

Regulation 26 - explosive or 

flammable dust, gas, vapour or 

substance 

The terms “combustible liquid aerosols” and “flammable gases 

and vapours arising from mat erial decomposition” should be 

included and be made explicit. 

4 WSH (General Provisions) 

Include suitable control measures (e.g. pressure monitoring, 

pressure relief venting) and maintenance requirements in relation 

to the use of heating systems where such heating systems are 

operated: (i) in a closed configuration; and/or (ii) using 

combustible liquids .

5 WSH Act, Section 40B  SS 667 to be gazetted as an ACOP .CONFIDENTIAL   

> 19 |P a g e

Table 2: Summary of recommendations related to standards, guidance material and training development 

Standards, guidance and 

training  Recommendations 

1

SS 537: Code of practice for the 

safe use of machinery – Part 1: 

General requirements 

Review t o cover: 

a. Heated equipment (e.g. the mixer machine ) with reference to 

ISO 12100 .

b. Guidance on “Information for Use” to address the quality of 

safety information provided by the manufacturer and suppliers 

of equipment .

2 New guidance document and 

training 

Develop a guidance document with the relevant industry 

association (e.g. SMF) on commissioning best practices for SMEs 

as a resource and as a basis of training programme. 

3 RMCP 

a. Review the RMCP and include guidance and examples to enable 

better identification of process re lated hazards (e.g. 

overpressure, decompositions , combustible liquid aerosol ).

b. Reference and integrate SS 667’s DHA as part of the overall risk 

assessment regime. 

4 New Standards 

CSC to look into: 

a. Feasibility of a standard to prevent fires and explosions from 

flammable and combustible liquids used in processes and in 

particular combustible liquid aerosols ;

b. Feasibility of a standard addressing preventive and control 

measures for flammable gasses and vapours generated from the 

thermal decomposition of materials (solid and liquids) ; and 

c. Research needed to close the knowledge gaps for the 

development of such a standard. 

5 New guidance material and 

training 

Create a wareness of hazards associated with thermal run aways 18 ,

material decomposition hazards and liquid aerosol explosions .   

> 18 Exothermic reaction where the heat generated exceeds the heat removed and this surplus heat then further
> accelerates the re action and heat production. CONFIDENTIAL
> 20 |P a g e

# References 

SSC (2020). Code of practice for the handling, storage and processing of combustible dust. SS 667, 

Singapore Standards Council. 

SSC (2008). Code of practice for the safe use of machinery – Part 1: General requirements. SS 537, 

Singapore Standards Council. 2

SSC (2016). Code of practice for the storage of flammable liquids. SS 532, Singapore Standards 

Council. 4

SSC (2018). Occupational health and safety management systems — Requirements with guidance 

for use . SS ISO 45001, Singapore Standards Council .6

NFPA (2021). Flammable and combustible Liquids Code. NFPA 30, National Fire Protection 

Association. 8

NFPA (2019). Code for the Manufacture and Storage of Aerosol Product. NFPA 30, National Fire 

Protection Association .10 

ISO (2010). Safety of machinery — General principles for design — Risk assessment and risk 

reduction. ISO 12100 , International Standards Organisation .12 

WSH Council (201 5). Code o f practice on workplace safety and health (WSH) risk management 

(RMCP) . Workplace Safety and Health Council .14 

Gant, S., et al., (2013). Generation of flammable mists from high flashpoint fluids: literature 

review. Health and Safety Executive, Research Repor t RR980. 16 CONFIDENTIAL   

> 21 |P a g e

# Appendices 

Appendix A: Key components of the accident block flow diagram 

Appendix B: Failure Mode and Effect Analysis (FMEA) of the key components from the accident 22 | P a g e 

## Appendix A: Key components of the accident block flow diagram 

Figure A. 1: Block flow diagram indicating the accident’s sequence of events 23 | P a g e 

## Appendix B: Failure Mode and Effect Analysis (FMEA) of the k ey components from the accident 

Operation/ Item  Failure Mode  Cause  Consequence  Existing 

Controls  Recommendations 

1. HTF fill in heating 

jacket  Low HTF volume 

Equipment 

ergonomics 

Overheating of 

HTF 

WSH Act, SS 537 

Part 1 

Need to include heated equipment, closed 

systems with energy inputs th at could 

result in overheating/ overpressure 

Equipment safety 

information, 

Hazard 

communication 

WSH Act -

Section 16 

Need to include heated equipment, closed 

systems with energy inputs that could 

result in overheating/overpressure 

Guidance or standards on communication 

of equipment hazard/safety information 

Improper risk 

assessment 

WSH (Risk Mgt) 

Reg . & RMCP 

RMCP refers to more task/ activity -centric 

risk assessment . May overlook process 

type interactions 

Improper 

equipment 

commissioning 

WSH Act -

Section 1 7

Training, guidance on commissioning best 

practices 

Poor/missing SOP 

WSH Act, RMCP ,

SS -ISO 45001 

cover SWP 

NIL 24 | P a g e 

(Continued) 

Operation/ Item  Failure Mode  Cause  Consequence  Existing 

Controls  Recommendations 

2. Heating of HTF  Overheated HTF 

Equipment 

ergonomics 

Decomposition of 

HTF, high 

pressure in jacket 

WSH Act, 

SS537 -Part 1 

Need to include heated equipment, closed 

systems with energy inputs that could 

result in overheating/overpressure 

Equipment safety 

information, 

Hazard 

communication 

WSH Act -

Section 16 

Need to include heated equipment, closed 

systems with energy inputs that could 

result in overheating/overpressure 

New guidance or standards on 

communication of equipment 

hazard/safety information 

Improper risk 

assessment 

WSH (Risk Mgt) 

Reg . & RMCP 

RMCP refers to more task/ activity -centric 

risk assessment . May overlook process 

type interactions 

Improper 

equipment 

commissioning 

WSH Act -

Section 1 7

Training, guidance on commissioning best 

practices 

Poor/missing SOP 

WSH Act, RMCP ,

SS -ISO 45001 

cover SWP 

NIL 25 | P a g e 

(Continued) 

Operation/ 

Item 

Failure 

Mode  Cause  Consequence  Existing Controls  Recommendations 

3. Heating 

jacket 

integrity 

Overpressure 

in jacket 

Closed system 

with no venting, 

pressure 

monitoring 

Vessel 

rupture, loss 

of 

containment ,

generation of 

combustible 

liquid aerosols 

WSH (GP) Reg covers 

only pressure vessels 

Needs to have provisions for closed systems that 

could result in overpressure under operational 

deviations 

Overheating of 

HTF 

WSH (GP) Reg. 28 -30 

covers pressurised 

heating systems using 

steam 

 Need to cover other types of heating systems 

 CSC to look into flammable and combustible 

liquids used in processes and in particular 

combustible liquid aerosols 

Decomposition of 

HTF  WSH(GP) Reg. 26 

 WSH(GP) introduce language related to hazards 

arising from decomposition of materials and liquid 

aerosols 

 CSC to look into flammable gasses and vapours 

generated from the thermal decomposition of 

materials 

Equipment design, 

not pressure 

vessel 

WSH Act, SS537 Part 1 

Need to include heated equipment, closed systems 

with energy inputs that could result in overheating/ 

overpressure 

Equipment safety 

information, 

Hazard 

communication 

WSH Act -Section 16 

Need to include heated equipment, closed systems 

with energy inputs that could result in o verheating/ 

overpressure 

Guidance or standards on communication of 

equipment hazard/safety information 

Improper risk 

assessment 

WSH (Risk Mgt) Reg & 

RMCP 

RMCP refers to more task/ activity -centric RA. May 

overlook process type interactions 

Lack of technical 

knowledge  NIL  Training, guidance on aerosols, chemical 

decomposition hazards 

Faulty 

repairs, 

welding 

Lack of 

competency 

Weakened 

weld seams 

WSH (GP) Reg covers 

only pressure vessels & 

steam boilers 

Needs to have provisions for closed systems and 

heated systems 26 | P a g e 

(Continued) 

Operation/ 

Item 

Failure 

Mode  Cause  Consequence  Existing Controls  Recommendations 

4. Release 

and 

formation 

of liquid 

aerosols 

Sudden, 

accidental 

structural 

failure 

Overpressure 

Fire, explosion 

WSH (GP) Reg covers only 

pressure vessels , WSH (Risk 

Mgt) Reg & RMCP 

 Needs to have provisions for closed 

systems that could result in 

overpressure under operational 

deviations 

 Standards for combustible liquid 

aerosols 

 Aerosol hazard assessment into RA 

Overheating 

WSH (GP) Reg. 28 -30 covers 

pressurised heating systems 

using steam 

 Need to cover other types of heating 

systems 

 CSC to look into flammable and 

combustible liquids used in processes 

and in particular combustible liquid 

aerosols 

Overfilling  WSH (GP) Reg covers only 

pressure vessels 

Needs to have provisions for closed 

systems that could result in overpressure 

under operational deviations 

Corrosion, 

material fatigue 

WSH Act Section 12 -

maintenance  NIL 

Poor 

maintenance 

WSH Act Section 12 -

maintenance  NIL 

Accidental 

release, 

puncture 

WSH Guidelines – Ergonomics, 

Behavioural Safety, Vision 

Zero 

NIL 27 | P a g e 

(Continued) 

Operation/ Item  Failure Mode  Cause  Consequence  Existing 

Controls  Recommendations 

5. Combustible dust  Combustible dust 

ignition 

Equipment failure 

Combustible dust 

flash fire, 

explosion 

WSH (GP) Reg &

SS 667  SS 667 to be gazette d as ACOP 

Primary explosion  WSH (Risk Mgt) 

Reg & RMCP 

DHA from SS 667 to be incorporated into 

RMCP 

Excessive air 

velocity  SS 667  SS 667 to be gazette d as ACOP 

Presence of 

ignition sources 

e.g. electrical, hot 

surface, 

electrostatic 

SS 667  SS 667 to be gazette d as ACOP CONFIDENTIAL 

22 | P a g e 

# Contact us: 1

THE SMF’S INPUTS ON EXPLOSION INCIDENT AT 32E TUAS AVENUE 11 

The SMF is pleased to submit the following written comments and recommendations for the Inquiry Committee’s considerations. 

1 Enhance public and private partnership to ensure a safe and conducive workplace 

1.1 While the SMF recognises the authorities’ efforts in enforcing policies and regulations to ensure a safe regulatory framework at work, we believe that the organisations, including SMEs should also share responsibilities to ensure the workers’ safety through for examples, self-implementing guidelines, practices, and standards, given that there is no one-size-fits-all regulatory policy for supporting SMEs due to their heterogeneous nature. The SMF would also like to add that we are mindful to seek a balance between the additional mandatory requirements and to protect organisations, especially SMEs’ interest and needs, and not to cause undue burden to them, in particular where businesses are largely impacted by the recent Covid-19 pandemic. 1.2 In this regard, the SMF as the leading Manufacturing Federation could serve as a conduit to connect between the authorities and the manufacturing industries to co-develop, educate, and promote relevant safety standards to the industries, through SMF-Standards Development Organisation appointed by Enterprise Singapore and our network with the wide industry stakeholders. 1.3 In particular, the SMF would be keen to work with MOM, and other key organisations such as Enterprise Singapore, Singapore Institution of Safety Officers, National Safety Council of Singapore, Workplace Safety and Health Council etc. to further promote and create awareness of safety standards and culture in the workplace. 

2 Setting baseline standards to ensure the workplace safety, safe use of machineries, storage, and handling of combustible dust 

Singapore Standard (SS) 537-1 Code of practice for safe use of machinery – General requirements 

2.1 The SS 537-1 provides comprehensive guidelines on the methods for safeguarding the dangerous parts of machinery and enhancing safety in the use of machinery. It also provides: - basic requirements on the design and manufacture of machinery so as to ensure that machinery used locally is incorporated with basic safety features; and - guidelines on the safety and health issues relating to the installation, testing, maintenance and servicing of machinery. 2.2 The SMF would like to suggest reviewing the SS 537-1 to incorporate any latest requirements following the incident to ensure the safe commissioning, operation, maintenance, and repair of industrial machines operating in a similar manner as that involved in the incident. In consultation with the industry stakeholders, it is noted that the current SS 537-1: 2008, which is an Approved Code of Practice under WSHC would help the company to ensure safe operation and use, given that the standard covers the following: 

- Clause 4.1, as far as reasonably practicable, the user should only procure machinery that has been designed and constructed with adequate safety consideration accounted for. The user shall carry out a risk assessment to identify the residual hazards and provide for the necessary controls to eliminate or mitigate the residual risks or injury; 

- Clause 5 on principles of risk assessment and reduction (e.g. 5.2.3 states risk assessment shall be carried out before work is allowed to commence on any machinery, it includes a schematic representation of the iterative process for eliminating hazards and implementation of safety measures); 

- Clause 6 on hazard management and checks by users; 

- Clause 8 on installation considerations; 

- Clause 9 on maintenance; and 

- Clause 10 on safe work practices. (It states that in developing safe work practices, the manufacturers’ instructions and information must be taken into account, 10.3 on supervisory control) 

SS 667 Code of Practice for Handling, Storage and Processing of Combustible Dust 

2.3 On the handling, storage and processing of combustible dust, the SS 667 is to be referenced to provide requirements and recommendations to prevent fire and explosion hazards resulting from the ignition of fine solid particulates that are suspended within an enclosure or building. 2.4 The SS 667 details the steps to ensure the Dust Hazard Analysis (DHA) and Process Hazard Analysis shall be made compulsory at all facilities using combustible dust such as, but not limited to additive manufacturing, food 2

processing, petrochemicals, pharmaceuticals etc., It requires DHA to include tests for determining combustibility/explosibility, mitigation measures, housekeeping, and periodic and random checks to ensure that the measures are effective. 2.5 Under the requirements of SCDF, the SS 667 shall be applicable to all building plans that are submitted to SCDF for approval from 1 December 2021. 2.6 Additionally, for Additive Manufacturing Facilities operating in Singapore, the adoption of Technical Reference 87 (Safety of Additive Manufacturing Facilities) should be encouraged. This is because the majority of these AM facilities use metal and polymer powders, which are combustible and reactive (such as Titanium, Aluminium etc.). 2.7 The SMF will like to recommend that the WSHC consider adopting the SS 667 and the TR 87 as an Approved Code of Practice. 

ISO 45001 Occupational Health and Safety Management Systems – Requirements with guidance for use 

2.8 The MOM has required certain workplaces to implement a safety and health management systems, including risk assessment and risk management. The implementation of ISO 45001 requirement provides a framework to prevent accidents. An organization is required to establish a process to report, investigate, and take action(s) to control and correct the incident or nonconformity to prevent any recurrence or occurrence. In this incident, despite a series of “red flags” that happened a few months before the explosion occurred, there was no proper investigation conducted. Consultation and participation of workers should be emphasized. Feedbacks should be addressed so that preventive measures could be put in place and corrective action taken promptly. The reception of suggestions would be more effective if workers did not fear the threat of dismissal, disciplinary action or other such reprisals when making them. 2.9 All (whether imported or locally built) machines purchased for used in the workplace should be fit for its purpose in terms of functional and safety aspects. The clause 8.1.4 of ISO 45001 ensures that the process for procuring any products (machines, equipment etc.) from external providers need to include OH&S controls, verified safe for use for workers before being introduced into the workplace. 

Other safety standards 

2.10 The SMF will also like to suggest that other machinery safety and combustible dust standards such as IEC 62071, ISO 13489, NFPA 652, 654, 484, 499 or equivalent could also be reviewed to see whether they are applicable for Singapore’s context, and be adopted as an Approved Code of Practice by the WSHC. Relevant procedures regarding the safe commissioning, operation, maintenance, and repair of the machines shall be established and followed. This can be borrowed from many other industries such as automation industry and process industry. 

3 Advocating the role of Testing, Inspection, and Certification 

3.1 Under the SMF, a Testing, Inspection and Certification (TIC) Interest Group has been set up since 2016, to serve and advance the interests of the testing, inspection and certification industry in Singapore. The SMF will be keen to work with the authorities and key stakeholders to develop and provide recommendations to industry players on new or updated TIC services that can support national or industry initiatives. For e.g. for added safety and quality, machines which are sourced outside Singapore could be subjected to third party Inspection services before shipment to Singapore. 

4 Other safety considerations 

4.1 In addition, the SMF will also like to suggest aligning across certain factories with certain thresholds (certain scale and certain sectors ) that would require an in-house safety manager. The safety manager could take responsibility to report independently on all safety and machine matters to the authorities to ensure safety concerns. 4.2 Procurement of industrial equipment should be also be done through reputable companies / suppliers, vetted by the end-user. - Proper and full documentation of the equipment should be provided by the seller, including standard operation manual and practical maintenance procedures. - Equipment or machine training by OEM or its regional representative if possible. 3

4.3 From machinery safety perspective, electrical fire hazard is one of the hazards that need to be taken into serious consideration. To evaluate various machinery design aspects, e.g. suitable protective devices (MCB etc.), creepage & clearance & insulations – for electric shock protection, material – to prevent spread of fire, fault simulations – for foreseeable misuse, etc. Compliance to machinery safety requirements is an important regime/step to ensuring proper consideration of the safety and application of the machinery are being carried out. However, this is just the upstream (inherent safety) consideration. 4.4 In addition, the machines shall be subjected to Field Safety tests at the “Point of Installation”. That is, after the equipment is installed & commissioned in the SG facility, they shall be subjected to Field Evaluation and continuous operation tests. Only upon successful completion of Field Evaluation of the installed equipment, that the facility be allowed to function. 4.5 The possibility of operating at the allowable stress levels (or the maximum permitted values of operating parameters such as speeds, voltages, current, temperatures etc.) must be examined and ensured safe. Function test of the equipment should be conducted prior to commissioning. Running time can be set by the user to monitor the operating parameters of the equipment. Some key parameters to take note could be: - Temperature - Noise - Electrical stability 4.6 A Daily/Weekly/Monthly/Yearly service record and maintenance checklist should be prepared, used, and archived to allow traceability of the condition of the equipment. 4.7 Routine inspection and periodical non-destructive test can be conducted on key components of equipment to examine its serviceability, in particular welds and joints. 4.8 Operators should be well trained in both the technical and safety aspects of the equipment. 4.9 All staff should be briefed on emergency procedures and designated first-aiders should be present on-site during operation of the equipment. 4.10 Improvised repair and maintenance procedure should be assessed and approved by relevant individual. 4.11 Modification on industrial machines should be in accordance with the manufacturer’s manual. 4.12 Stricter measures shall be implemented to prevent the practice of those who interfere with/alter the basic machine design/configuration, thus compromising the safety of the equipment, of the operating personnel and the facility that houses it and other co-occupants. 4.13 As a last line of defence, the use of appropriate PPE must be made mandatory. It is not clear whether the operators in the Tuas explosion were wearing Fire Retardant work clothes (compliant to NFPA2112 or the equivalent), safety goggles, heat resistant gloves etc., at the time of explosion. Probably, that would have reduced the extent of burn injuries thus preventing fatalities. The presence of a “slipper” at the accident site needs to be looked at. 

5 Conclusion 

The SMF expresses our regret for this unfortunate incident. We stand firm to work closely and to support the authorities and all concerned so that we can learn from this incident and build further appropriate safeguards to prevent future incidents. Work place Safety & Health is a mindset, that can only be enhanced with both Awareness and Education. This mindset cannot be regulated into, nor via increasing costs of regulations and certifications, though that is necessary in itself. The SMF knows that there is still a journey ahead to find this balance between a workplace that is both Innovative and Safe. Written Submission to Inquiry Committee into the Explosion at 32E Tuas Avenue 11 

# Prepared by 

# The Institution of Engineers, Singapore Ministry of Manpower 

Occupational Safety and Health Division 

1500 Bendemeer Road #03-02 

Ministry of Manpower Services Centre 

Singapore 339946 

## Written Submission from The Institution of Engineers, Singapore (IES) In Response To The  Explosion At 32E Tuas Avenue 11 

Overview: 

In response to the invitation from the Ministry of Manpower (MOM) to submit a written representation with regards to the fatal explosion and fire at 32E Tuas Avenue 11 on 24 February 2021, in particular in relation to part (b) of the Terms of Reference (TOR) provided by MOM i.e. on recommendations to prevent the recurrence of such an accident at workplaces, IES is putting forward its feedback and recommendations for MOM’s consideration. 

To prepare this submission, IES had organised a few rounds of expert consultations, discussions and verifications within the engineering faculty to ensure the accuracy and comprehensiveness of our feedback and to professionally assess and review the subject matter. 

The recommendations herewith take into consideration the impact on the industry in terms of safety, the practicality in terms of implementation as well as the operational and business impact to the industry, especially for small and medium enterprises (SMEs). 

This submission is the outcome of discussions by an IES Expert Committee comprising the following engineering experts / practitioners from related industries: 

1. Er. Chong Kee Sen (Chairman) 

Emeritus President, IES 

Director, Engineers 9000 

2. Mr. Jason Oh (Facilitator) 

Council member, IES 

Chairman, Vision Zero Committee and Past Chairman of Health & Safety Engineering Technical Committee, IES 

3. Er. Au Kow Liong 

Council Member, IES 

Managing Director, K L Au Consultants Pte Ltd 

4. Dr Foo Swee Cheng 

Ex. Council member, IES 

Past Chairman of Health & Safety Engineering Technical Committee, IES Honorary Fellow, Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, National University of Singapore 

5.  Mr.  Felipe Ong 

Member, IES 

Head, Industrial Explosion Protection Division (AP), BS&B Safety Systems Asia Pacific Pte Ltd 

6. Dr. Goh Yang Miang 

Ex. Council member, IES and Past Chairman of Health & Safety Engineering Technical Committee, IES 

Associate Professor, Department of the Built Environment, National University of Singapore 

7. Dr. Ivan Sin Siang-Meng 

Member, Health & Safety Engineering Technical Committee, IES 

Ex. Senior SCDF Officer 

Associate Professor And Program Chair In Safety, Health & Environmental Technology, National University Of Singapore 

8. Er. Joseph Goh 

Council Member, IES 

Managing Director, DLM Pte Ltd 

9. Er. Dr. Lim Kok Hwa 

Council Member, IES 

Director, Professional Officers Division , Singapore Institute of Technology 

10. Mr. S. Yogeeswaran 

Council Member, IES Managing Director, CASY Engineering Consultancy Pte Ltd 

11. Dr. Teo Tee Hui 

Council Member, IES 

Faculty in-charge for Electrical Power Systems & Electronics Design Laboratory, SUTD 

Statement of Limitation: 

The submission, however, is made with the understanding that IES’ feedback stands as professional 

and industry recommendations for the purpose of the inquiry and with no legal implication or enforceability. In addition, IES has made use of available information to make certain assumptions with respect to conditions/scenarios that may exist in the future. While IES believes the assumptions made are reasonable for the purposes of the submission, it makes no representation that the conditions/scenarios assumed will occur in the present or future. Feedback and Recommendations 

Our feedback and proposed recommendations are based on the following scope from MOM :

(a) Measures to ensure the safe commissioning, operation, maintenance, and repair of industrial machines operating in a similar manner as that involved in the incident; and 

(b) Measures to ensure the safe supply, storage and handling of combustible dust or powders at workplace settings similar to that involved in the incident. 

Here are our feedback and proposed recommendations: 

1. What additional statutory regulations (if any) for the design, purchase, installation, operating and maintenance of such or similar mixer machines should be put in place? 

 The existing WSH Act especially under Section 16 has covered duties of manufacturers and suppliers comprehensively. However, actual implementation is important and there is a need to introduce multi-layer preventive measures that are robust but yet practical enough to exercise to safeguard the safety and health of workers at the workplace. However, smaller factory operators may not be fully aware of safety guidelines and requirements and may also not strictly follow such guidelines. Thus, more needs to be done to educate and motivate smaller factory operators to understand and comply with existing regulatory requirements. 

 Manufacturers and suppliers act according to information provided by equipment owners/operators who may ask to maintain a high degree of confidentiality with respect to their activities. However, owners/operators must provide essential safety information including definition of process material(s) for both intended normal and anticipated abnormal operating conditions. 

 We propose that the committee consider requiring design and installation of such or similar equipment, before it is being put into use , to be  reviewed by at least one competent third 

party  coming from the  perspective s of  the  fire department, risk insurance,  Professional 

Engineer (PE)  registered  by P rofessional Engineers Board (P EB ) or Chartered Engineer or 

Chartered Technologist registered by IES .

 This would require a re-look into categorizing such or similar equipment that requires the said competent person to review the installation, testing and certification before such machines are put into use. The categorization should take a risk-based approach. This would mitigate the risk where safety provisions in the installation are ignored. 

 Additionally, for the operation of such machines, owners/operators have to appoint a qualified engineer, technologist or technician as the approved operator who has to be registered and has undergone continuous training to operate machineries competently.  The owner should direct the approved operator to keep a record on the maintenance, repairs and fault incidents throughout the operating life span of the machine. Any changes to the machine processes or materials must go through a ‘management of change’ process 

to determine if the combustible dust risk will be altered. If it is, or if there is any doubt, an updated review from a competent third party is required. 

 As there are factory operators of various organisational sizes, consideration needs to be made when rolling out blanket guidelines/regulations that could have impact on the business operations, especially for small factory operators. We propose for MOM to set certain categories and define guidelines relevant for different sizes and types of equipment and levels of potential risk. For example, a small factory operator processing less than 100 kg of highly combustible dust in a densely populated area may be potentially more hazardous than a large factory operator processing a significant amount of the same material in a remote and automated manner. The environment and location of a combustible dust process are very significant factors with respect to the threat to human life. 

 While there should be adequate safeguards to ensure safety, it should not be over-regulated. Equipment could be categorised according to the level of potential risk but it has to be recognised that it is not practical to define and categorise all equipment. 

2. What additional statutory regulations or requirements for the storage and handling of powder that has powder explosive potential should be put in place? 

 Dust as a hazard is presently not fully covered under the major hazards installation (MHI). It is time to place more attention to close this potential risk gap in Singapore. 

 We recommend incorporating  SS 66 7:2021 to be gazetted  as an  Approved Code of Practice 

(ACOP)  as a requirement  before making it a mandatory at  a later phase. 

 The National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) has good Standards that provide requirements on combustible dust risk mitigation by the type of industrial application. The NFPA Standards also define the recognised means of providing combustible dust explosion prevention and protection in Standards NFPA 68 (2018 edition) and NFPA 69 (2010 edition). It specifies clearly the type of equipment that needs to be protected such as silo, elevator, mixer and milling equipment. We recommend that this could be considered for adoption. 

 NFPA 652 – Training of personnel with timeline to do their own dust hazard analysis. We recommend for MOM or the relevant agency to review and adopt this and that such activity is repeated every five years or less or when a process change is planned.  We also recommend for plants that operate with potential combustible dust to comply with SS 667 and NFPA codes. 

 NEA presently regulates dust collector equipment as a means to mitigate pollution only. However, dust collectors are also a potential source of dust explosion. We recommend that the potential risk of dust explosion arising from dust collectors should also be reviewed by the relevant agencies, for example SCDF and MOM. 

 As mentioned earlier, there are still grey areas and gaps that need to be addressed with regard to dust explosion potential. We recommend that a committee consisting of relevant government agencies, industry practitioners and academia to review and relook the good practices and propose a regulatory frame work where required. 

 As an example, the following requirements for Dust Machine/Equipment could be put in place: 

o Classification of Equipment/Machinery handling dust / powder to have IECEx / ATEX / FM Certification as part of commissioning 

o Requiring statutory periodic IECEx-certification / ATEX / FM (annual, biannual, 3-yearly) to be part of Factory-license/MHI-license 

3. Recommendations to strengthen the training, CET, accreditation of person operating such equipment. 

 We propose to tap on the established IECEx certification scheme to train competent personnel who can specialise in dust explosion risk which includes modules on maintenance, dust risk assessment, zoning and operation. The scheme covers functional safety areas as well. This approach might be easier to introduce to the industry as IECEx courses are also available in Singapore. Such training could be managed by the IES Academy. Engineers, technologists and technicians with a background in electrical and mechanical engineering will benefit from these courses. With a competence-based and peer-review registration scheme, IES could assist in the registration of such engineers, technologists and technicians. 

 Existing WSH training related to factories with risk of combustible dust should also be 

updated to ensure that all personnel  are aware  of dust hazards. Some examples include 

"Apply Workplace Safety  and  Health  in Metal Work"  and "Apply Workplace Safety and 

Health  in Process Plant" .

 Continued education and sharing form the cornerstone for the competency and safety of all personnel. Learned Institutions such as IES could collaborate with MOM and SCDF or any other relevant agencies through knowledge exchange where agencies could share or provide more data / information on local accidents so that suitable recommendations can be made for trainings.  We recommend that a system be put in place regarding the requirements for Personnel Competency. For example: 

o Dust Equipment / Machine Functional-Certifier / Inspector (IECEx) 

o Operator Competency on dust explosion awareness / operation-level 

 We also recommend that a system be put in place regarding the requirements for Company Management. For example: 

o Mandatory to conduct DHA and implement control measure to ALARP 

o Mandatory to appoint Dust Competent Person for their site / operation. 

o Mandatory to conduct Management Of Change reviews 

About IES: 

The Institution of Engineers, Singapore (IES) was formally established in July 1966 as the national society of engineers in Singapore. IES is the premier engineering institution in Singapore and is called upon by the Government to provide feedback on professional engineering matters. 

IES is well represented among the faculty members of the major engineering institutions of higher learning in Singapore. Through close collaboration with the local universities and polytechnics, IES organises courses, seminars and talks for engineers and IES members to advance the continuous development of engineers. 

The Institution maintains close links with professional organisations of engineers regionally and throughout the world. These include organisations in Australia, China, Japan, United Kingdom and the United States. The Institution also represents Singapore in the ASEAN Federation of Engineering Organisations (AFEO) and the Federation of Engineering Institutions of Asia and the Pacific (FEIAP) in promoting goodwill and fellowship among all engineers in ASEAN and the Asia-Pacific region. 

Through its Engineering Accreditation Board (EAB), IES obtained full signatory status in the Washington Accord (WA) in June 2006. The entry grants IES the authority to represent Singapore, the first country within the ASEAN region which has obtained full signatory status in the WA, to vet education systems under the WA mutual recognition framework. 

For more info, visit  www.ies.org.sg 

About  The author: 

IES Expert Committee Members 

Representative/s to appear before Inquiry Committee (if required): 

Representative 1 

Name:  Mr.  Felipe Ong 

Occupation: Member, IES Head, Industrial Explosion Protection Division (AP), BS&B Safety Systems Asia Pacific Pte Ltd 

Email:  Felipe.Ong@bsb.com.sg 

Tel:  +65 6513 9780 (Main) / +65 9829 0345 (Mobile) 

Representative 2 

Name: Er. Au Kow Liong 

Occupation: Council Member, IES 

Managing Director, K L Au Consultants Pte Ltd 

Email:  aukliong@klau.com.sg 

Tel: +65 6742 7557 (Main) / +65 9738 0020 (Mobile) 

Representative 3 

Name:  Er. Joseph Goh 

Occupation: Council Member, IES 

Managing Director, DLM Pte Ltd 

Email:  JosephGoh@dlm.com.sg 

Tel:  +65  6743 4788  (Main) / +65 9752 2785 (Mobile) 

Representative 4 

Name: Mr. S. Yogeeswaran 

Occupation: Council Member, IES Managing Director, CASY Engineering Consultancy Pte Ltd 

Email:  yogee@casyconsultancy.com 

Tel: +65  62555176 (Main) / +65 9829 8625  (Mobile) 

End of Written Presentation Submission to the Inquiry Committee – Explosion at 32E Tuas Avenue 11 

## Team formed by SISO – Singapore Institution of Safety Officers 

## Possible Causes of the incident based on Current requirements and / or guidelines 

An analysis of the incident reveals that there are adequate practices or requirements in place to 

ensure safe operation. The below cause and effect diagram shows a sample of identified 

measures available. 

Despite these we have had the incident, so it is important to find a solution based on the root 

cause, especially for SME’s Explosion

Dust

Environment

Measurements

Methods

Material Machines

Personnel

PPE & Clothing

Housekeeping

Fire Retardant Clothing

BOWTIE

HAZOP

Manage Hazardous Substances

Health in Process Plant

Supervise Workplace Safety and

in Process Plant

Apply Workplace Safety and Health

Safety by Design review

Separating areas handling combustible dust from other work areas.

Providing explosion relief vents in powder handling units

in the work ar

Introducing inert gas blanketing to reduce the presence of oxygen

Installing Local Exhaust Ventilation (LEV) systems to capture dust

Past records and Mean time between incidents

Approved vendors

Better design to reduce dust accumulation (Design for Safety)

Use flame-proof equipment or non-sparking tools

Effective bonding and grounding of powder handling units

SDS

Regulated quantity

Test for Ignition energy

alternatives

Replace dust materials with safer

5S

Emergecny Response Plan

Permit-to-Work

Management of Change

Process Safety Leading Indicators

Process Safety Management Audit

BOWTIE

HAZOP

SS 571 : 2011 Code of practice for energy lockout and tagout

SS 667 : 2020 Code of practice for handling, storage and processing of combustib

SS 651: 2019 Safety and health management system for the chemical industry – Req

SS 634 : 2018 Fire Safety for Open Plant Processing Facilities in Oil, Chemical

WSH Guidelines on Process Safety Performance Indicators

WSH Guidelines on Process Hazard Analysis

SS 651: Safety and health management system for the chemical industry – Requirem

WSH (Major Hazard Installation) Regulations

WSH (GP) Section 26. Precautions with regard to explosive or flammable dust, gas

Circular on the Hazards and Controls of Combustible Dusts 23 July 2015 MOM

BizSAFE 3

Safety Case

Track with Process Safety Leading indicators

Competence levels - certification

processing of combustib

SS 667 : 2020 Code of practice for handling, storage and

the chemical industry – Req

SS 651: 2019 Safety and health management system for

Facilities in Oil, Chemical

SS 634 : 2018 Fire Safety for Open Plant Processing

Audit - & Inspection - SS

Good Housekeeping

Humidity

Accessible locations

Adequate ventilation

powder handling units

Inert atmospheres within

Analysis of Possible Causes of Dust Explosion

Authors 

Name 

Choo Choong 

Huat 

Quek Beng Chuan  KK Bullet Tan  Cheah Hoong 

Chuang 

Niranjan 

Masurekar (Niri) 

Occupation  Environmental, 

Health and Safety 

Program 

Manager 

APAC Regional 

HSSEQ Manager 

Head of HSE  HSE Manager  Project Safety & 

OpEx Lead 

Address  SISO, Blk 167 Jalan Bukit Merah, #02 -16, Connection One, Tower 4, Singapore 150167 

Contact No  96181916  97691500  98423633  85336929  97117206 

Email 

Address 

snowman1825@ 

yahoo.com.sg 

quek.bengchuan 

@gmail.com 

kkbullettan@yah 

oo.com.sg 

hoongchuang@y 

ahoo.co.uk 

Niri1@me.com 

Willingness 

to appear 

before the 

Inquiry 

Committee 

No  No  Yes  Yes  Yes Background 

• The cur rent regulatory landscape and support structure for Chemical Process Industry is 

not only adequate but is possibly on par with requirements in other parts of the developed 

world 

• While the MNC’s have been able to adopt these measures and resource them accor ding 

to the needs stipulated, the SME’s lack the economic bandwidth to make it work for them. 

So, in their sincerity to adopt the measures, the solutions are possibly weighed against 

the minimum resources available and almost always measured against the re turns 

• Added to this is the multiple windows a SME needs to approach for clearance and or 

solutions – NEA / SCDF / BCA etc. depending on the application 

• While powder handling SME’s are known to be High Risk, there are other powder based 

SME’s like Sawdust producing units that also would come under the same category. 

• The local entrepreneur needs to be encouraged with a support structure that will trigger 

the behaviors of a Safe and Responsible industrialist or businessman . This has a bearing 

to the r ecommendations provided for the two areas of attention where comments are 

being sought 

## SISO’s Recommendation 1 

## The MHI is a good example where NEA, SCDF and MOM come together to review and 

## guide the Major Hazard Installations and provoke them to look in the right direction to 

## cover all hazards and reduce risk to society at large 

## • A similar ‘single window’ – One stop shop concept could be adopted for SME’s ,

## where all applicable regulatory bodies and stakeholders are represented 

## • Creation of an advisory panel, possibly within the WSH Council to guide the SME 

## during set up and operation 

## • All these high hazard Process SME’s must have a minimum of Bizsafe 3 

## certification, without which they should not be allowed to start 

## Focus of Attention 1

Measures to ensure the safe commissioning, operation, maintenance, and repair of industrial 

machines operating in a similar manner as that involved in the incident 

## Possible Solutions 

1. Guide for SME’s for Safe Operation 

## • Formulate a checklist for simple equipment review for safe operation of the machine 

o SME can use a simplified checklist to conduct risk assessment. It should be 

conducted by manufacturer or equipment owner’s working team, while assisted by 

a competent person. 

o Safety considerations for overall evaluation should include :

▪ Safety interlocking system 

▪ Emergency power off 

▪ Electrical hazard 

▪ Mechanical design ▪ Process liquid heating system 

▪ Exhaust ventilation system 

▪ Chemical hazard and Industrial hygiene 

▪ Exhaust ventilation 

▪ Fire protection system 

▪ Lockout tagout for hazardous energies 

## • Provide guidance on ‘Understand your Machine’ 

o 1)For this type of equipment with process heating system, list out the critical 

parameters: 

▪ Review the material used for compatibility, degrading temperatu re, 

recommended operating temperature, pressure rating if it is a closed system. 

▪ Review the SDS for the Chemical Heat Transfer fluid and Process chemical 

to identify critical information. 

o @Is the liquid for the HTF or process classified as non -combustible, 

flammable, or combustible liquid 

o @hazardous degrading temperature ( such as flashpoint or toxic vapor 

emission), 

o @boiling point 

o @autoignition temperature. 

o @PPE requirement 

o @Other hazards and recommended control measures 

## o 2) Review how the system function and determine the potential hazards 

## o 3) Understanding the components of the machines that are critical 

## • Coach on ‘Evaluating your control measures and risk’ 

o 3) Evaluate the critical parameters and verify against the process interlock and 

availability of safety interlock. 

o 4) Review the process interlock , such as their position, operating characteristic 

and set points. 

o 5) Review the provision of safety interlock system for redundancy purpose. Include 

their position, operating characteristic, include set points. What happen when it 

trip and notificatio n to operator. 

❖ Note 1: A safety interlock usually include the use of ATL ( approved test lab) devices 

designed for safety and do not rely on software in their control circuit. 

❖ When it tripped, the power/hazards should be removed. And a warning notification 

provided. It will require acknowledgment which is usually the provision of a manual reset 

button. 

❖ Example: A “safety” overtemperature controller meets UL873 or FM3545 

❖ Note 2: The 1st process control system will fail 1 day after many uses , the safety interlock 

will step -in to trip, preventing the escalation of the situation. 

❖ Note 3: During normal process condition and during a fault condition, the chemical 

parameters and struct ural integrity will not exceed their HDT for the HT fluid, raw material 

being process and the overall structural of the overall machine. 

## o 6) Use a checklist to document and cross check if there is any recommendation 

that is not fulfilled 

## 2. Guide for Commissioning 

a. Step 1: “Checklist for planning stage” This checklist to be reviewed well in advance before the arrival of the machine. 

Example such as. 

i. Machine’s basic information : Size, weight, facility supplies 

ii. Layout and clearance of Machine 

iii. Chemical s needed and their safety information 

iv. Material of construction 

v. Ventilation system 

vi. Any Fire Safety provision 

b. Step 2: “Checklist prior to switching -on the machine’s power”, Example such as; 

i. LOTO 

ii. Verification of safety clearance 

iii. Facility electrical supply connection 

iv. Safety interlock and guarding 

v. Status of risk assessment, with only acceptable residual risks 

c. Step 3 : “ Chec klist prior to supplying of chemical or gases”, example such as; 

i. Verification of the Safety interlock and ventilation 

ii. Chemical or gas permits and approval, SDS 

iii. Emergency procedure and equipment 

iv. PPE 

v. Storage and waste handling 

d. Step 4: “Checklist before operation” example such as; 

i. Documentation for operator and maintenance tasks 

ii. Training completion 

iii. Corrective actions completion 

iv. Permit / license if needed 

## 3. Guide for Maintenance and repair 

Supplier Manual, Maintenance procedure and Operator procedure .

Safety information should be recheck/included to procedures after risk assessment is 

completed. 

a. Have a set of Maintenance instruction (Maintenance staff) and Operator proce dure 

(worker). 

b. Routine m aintenance should include inspection/testing of the safe ty devices. 

c. Process instruction should include: The operation sequence of the 

process/equipment, including safety instructions. Examples; 

i. Basic tasks, hazards , risk and preventive measures 

ii. What action to take during a fault or emergency 

iii. PPE requirement. 

iv. Basic chemical safety information. 

v. Safety alarms and operator actions needed 

vi. Special consideration: Use of special equipment/hand tools such as explosion 

proof vacuum cleaner, using mopping/wetting of floor rather than sweep to reduce 

dust emi ssion. (for similar case) 

d. Maintenance procedure (for technician) information is available and also example 

such as; 

i. Energy sources for this machine and Lockout tagout procedures. 

ii. Chemical Safety Information and safety control measures. 

iii. Safety devices, thei r locations, functions, settings, testing interval, how to test. 

Warning notification iv. Fault and Troubleshooting recommendations. 

v. Action to take during an emergency such as fire, explosion, chemical spill etc. 

vi. Equipment Inspection schedules and forms used 

vii. Basic machine information. Size of machine, weight, facility supplies 

## 4. Guide for Other Considerations 

a. Management of Change 

i. Review the risk assessment and evaluate the new change. 

ii. The risk assessment team to re -assess the hazards (new or existing) to 

determine the risk and effectiveness of the existing control measures. 

iii. Any retraining needed and documents needs for update. 

b. Vendor/supplier: 

Evaluate the quality and safety of the machine, certified to an applicable safety 

standard or guidel ines. Some certificates are self -certified while others are certified 

by a reputable 3rd party laboratory . Retrofitting a machine will need time, cost and 

additional work .

Accredited / Approved Test Laborator ies : 3rd party companies that conduct 

testing of components or certification of a product according to safety standards and 

are recognized by authorities. Some ex amples , such as UL, TUV and CSA 

IEC organization has certification bodies and have authorized approved test 

laboratories in many countries. They issue d certificates or test reports that indicate 

the ir electrical and electronic components meet ing IEC standards. 

CE Mark : EU requirement for manufacturer to declare and mark their prod uct which 

meet s the European safety requirements/ directives. 

Notified body: An organization /laboratory approved by the EU to conduct 

assessment for their components according the EU requirements . A component with 

notified body certification will be useful in your machine safety assessment. 

c. Training 

i. Operator, and Technician training should include based on the topic in Process 

instruction 

ii. Consideration for renewal training 

d. Risk assessor: 

i. Consider online training availability for required skill set. 

ii. Specialized risk assessment for similar type of equipment safety to be considered. 

iii. Existing consultants and 3 rd parties engineering laboratories may serve as guide or 

lead assessor, if needed. 

iv. They should possess competency in machine design standards and maintenance. 

The above are some recommendations and although may seem exhaustive, will need more time 

to develop. 

## SISO’s Recommendation 2

## Develop a guide for SME’s, that will include elements of PSM, SS 651 etc. , such as 

## Mechanical Integrity, Management of Change, PSSR ( Pre -Start -up Safety Review), Vendor Management etc. This will also include competence requirements for personnel 

## operating such equipment and facilities. 

## Focus of Attention 2

Measures to ensure the safe supply, storage, and handling of combustible dust or powders at 

workplace settings like that involved in the incident 

## Possible Solutions 

1. Guide for SME’s on 

a. Procurement of material 

i. Approved and licensed suppliers / vendors 

ii. Provision of SDS by approved vendor 

b. Test centers – Powders or chemical reactions based on process 

i. Approved testing centers / Laboratories 

c. Design needs of storage and handling 

i. Conveyance / transportation of dust / powders 

ii. Ventilation requirements 

iii. Safety Emergency features 

iv. Emergency response plan & equipment 

d. Training and Competency 

i. Training matrix for Managers / Supervisors / General Workers / Admin etc 

ii. Approved Training Centers 

e. Disposal requirements 

i. NEA regulations and guidelines 

ii. Spil l kits requirement and response 

f. Housekeeping 

i. Industry standard guideline and examples 

ii. Inspections and audits 

g. Area of classification 

i. SCDF requirements / approved certification 

h. Industrial Hygiene 

i. Exposure to raw material and products 

ii. Monitoring of health etc 

i. Uniform and PPE 

i. Approved standards 

ii. Maintenance guidelines 

iii. Vendor support 

j. Leading and Lagging Indicators 

i. Investigation of events 

ii. Closure of actions 

2. Enhance the Technical capability of SME’s through 

a. Blend the relevant Safety Case approach into B iz SAFE for High hazard Process 

SME’s 

b. Relevant Dust handling training with certification of competence for Operators ,

Supervisors and Managers 3. Explore the ‘safety mark accreditation’ for dust / powder handling related equipment and      

> machinery
> 4. Initiate a cultural program to influence the culture on safe handling of powders / dust through
> a. Support from SCIC using the ‘Responsible Care’ (RC) approach
> b. Have a RC mentor for these industries
> c. Create a community of practice amongst this group
> The abov e are some recommendations and although may seem exhaustive, will need more time
> to develop.

## SISO’s Recommendation 3 

## Linked to recommendation 1, we propose t he c reat ion of a Pre -Start -up and on -going 

## list of guidelines and checks aligned with the above points that can be used by SME’s to 

## follow or seek guidance from an advisory panel to continually run their industry safely 

## and productively 

## Reference Documents 

## • PSM Code – OSHA 3132 2000 

## • PSPI Guidelines – WSHC 

## • Responsible Care – ICCA / SCIC 

## • SS 651 

## • BizSAFE – MOM 

## • SEMI S3 - Safety Guideline for Process Liquid Heating Systems 

## • SEMI S2 Safety Guideline, Environmental, Health, and Safety Guideline for 

## Semiconductor Manuf acturing Equipmen tSINGAPORE CIVIL DEFENCE FORCE 

## SCDF – A member of the Home Team  

> HQ SINGAPORE CIVIL DEFENCE FORCE, 91 UBI AVENUE 4, SINGAPORE 408827

Date : 10 November 2021 

Inquiry Committee Secretariat 

Ms Audrina Chua 

Occupational Safety and Health Division 

1500 Bendemeer Road #03 -02 

Ministry of Manpower Services Centre 

Singapore 339946 

WRITTEN REPRESENTATION TO THE INQUIRY COMMITTEE FOR THE FATAL 

ACCIDENT AT STARS ENG RG PTE LTD ON 24 FEBRUARY 2021 

In response to the Inquiry Committee’s invitation, SCDF has prepared a written 

representation with a focus on the measures to ensure the safe supply, storage and handling 

of combustible dust or powders at workplace settings similar to that involved in the 

abovementioned accident. 

2. SCDF’s investigation findings showed that the explosion that occurred in the premises 

after the initial fire in the machine was likely caused by a dust explosion of potato starch 

powder, a form of combustible powder. The accident has demonstrated the risks posed by 

these combustible powders. SCDF is of the view that regulatory controls over combustible 

powders can be tightened. 

3. In the following paragraphs, SCDF has set out our current regulatory regime for 

Petroleum and Flammabl e Materials (P&FM) , which include s four combustible metal powders ,

under the Fire Safety Act (FSA) . We have also explained the limitation s of relying on the FSA 

levers to address the hazards posed by the industrial use of combustible powders, and 

elaborate d on the proposed alternative measures to enable better oversight of the presence 

and use of combustible powders in workplaces by MOM .

Background on SCDF’s Regulatory Regime for Petroleum and Flammable Materials 

4. SCDF regulates substance s that pose a flammability hazard through a licensing 

regime under Part IV of the FSA , which relates to the control of P&FM .

5. SCDF determines the chemic als to be regulated under the P&FM licensing regime 

based on established hazard classification systems such as the UN Hazard Classification and 

the Globally Harmonised System (GHS) which are widely adopted globally , taking into account 

whether the substances are used in Singapore for industrial purposes .

6. The full list of regulated chemicals is found in the Fourth Schedule to the Fire Safety 

(P&FM) Regulations. Of the regulated chemicals, four are c ombustible metal powders (i.e. 

aluminium, iron carbonyl , magnesium, and zinc), which are also classified under the UN SINGAPORE CIVIL DEFENCE FORCE 

## SCDF – A member of the Home Team  

> HQ SINGAPORE CIVIL DEFENCE FORCE, 91 UBI AVENUE 4, SINGAPORE 408827

Hazard Classification system as flammable solids. Although there ar e many other combustible 

powders used for various purposes, we understand that mos t of them, such as milk powder, 

sugar, flour and epoxy resin , are not classified as flammable solids under international 

standards . Therefore, SCDF does not regulate them as such .

Limitations of SCDF’s Regulatory Controls in Addressing Combustible Dust Hazards 

7. While it is possible to amend the list of chemicals in the Fire Safety ( P&FM ) Regulations 

to include other combustible powders , and SCDF is prepared to consider this if necessary ,

SCDF’s view is that doing so may not significantly reduce the risk of dust explosion for the 

following reasons: 

a. Combustible powders are generally in a steady state condition during 

storage , with a low risk of dust explosion . The risk of a dust explosion arises 

when the combustible powders are processed, such as when there is an 

accumulation of the powder in the air , and there are heat sources present within a 

confined space where the processing takes place. 

b. The scope of SCDF’s regulatory regime focuses on the storage of 

substances , and not industrial processes involving these substances . In this 

regard, bringing combustible powders under the P&FM licensing regime would not 

address the risk factors for dust exp losion s, which typically occur during processing 

and not in storage. Furthermore, we understand that process -related dust 

explosion risks at workplaces are currently addressed through safety requirements 

imposed under MOM’s Workplace Safety and Health (Gen eral Provisions) 

Regulations .

Alternative Measures for Better Oversight 

Reflecting fire safety provisions relating to combustible powders in plans submission 

8. Within the existing regime, SCDF has already taken steps to enhance the fire safety 

requirements for premises that store, handle and process combustible powders under SCDF’s 

regulatory purview . SCDF issued a Circular on 1 Jun 2021 to inform the industry of the 

additional fire safety requirements under the recently launched  SS 667 (Code of practice for 

handling, storage and processing of combustible dust) that will apply to all new buildings and 

buildi ngs undergoing fire safety works that store flammable powders . These requirements 

include the installation of additional fire safety cabinets if the quantity of the combustible 

powders exceed the specified Maximum Allowable Quantity (MAQ) and MAQ of the powders 

stored in bulk per fire compartment. 

Sharing of Information with MOM 

9. Currently, buil ding owners who intend to store P&FM (including the four combustible 

metal powders) on their premises are required to declare their intent and cater the necessary SINGAPORE CIVIL DEFENCE FORCE 

## SCDF – A member of the Home Team  

> HQ SINGAPORE CIVIL DEFENCE FORCE, 91 UBI AVENUE 4, SINGAPORE 408827

fire safety measures associated with the storage of the se P&FM when preparing their building 

plans to be submitted to SCDF. 

10. SCDF is open to sharing available information on the regulated combustible metal 

powder s with MOM , for regulatory purposes, subject to the Government’s Instruction Manuals 

on the sharing and use of data within the Government . Such information includes building 

plans and the quantity of P&FM stored on -site .

Relying on Workplace Safety and Health audit regime 

11. We understand that MOM currently has in place a workplace safety and health 

management system and audit regime for selected workplaces (e.g., shipyards, factories 

engaged in manufacturing of petroleum/petrochemical products). Under this regime, 

workplaces must appoint an independent auditor to regularly audit their safety and health 

management systems, including the safe use of combustib le powders and proper 

housekeeping. It may therefore be useful to consider if such a regime could be extended to all 

workplaces that handle combustible powders, so that such workplaces may systematically 

identify and rectify weaknesses in their safety and health management syst em 

Representatives from SCDF for hearings 

12. The following 2 officers will represent SCDF during the hearings to provide further 

clarifications where necessary: 

Colonel (COL) Ng Geok Meng 

Deputy Director 

Hazardous Materials Department 

Singapore Civil Defence Force 

Ng_Geok_Meng@scdf.gov.sg 

Lieutenant Colonel (LTC) Choh Jin Choon 

Senior Assistant Director 

Industrial & Institutional Design Branch 

Fire Safety Department 

Singapore Civil Defence Force 

Choh_Choon_Jin@scdf.gov.sg 

Daniel Seet 

Deputy Commissioner (Operations & Resilience) 

Singapore Civil Defence Force 

For 

Commissioner 

Singapore Civil Defence Force CONFIDENTIAL 

CONFIDENTIAL 1

> 1500 Bendemeer Road
> #04 -01 MOM Services Centre
> Singapore 339946
> contact@wshc.sg
> www.wshc.sg

This submission highlights how workers are educated on workplace risks, in 

particular, those related to handling machinery and combustible dust. It also provides 

recommendations related to WSH training, to prevent the recurrence of accidents like the 

explosion and fire at Stars Engineering Pte Ltd at 32E Tuas Avenue 11 on 24 February 

2021. 

1. Ab out the Workplace Safety and Health Council (WSHC) 

WSHC is a statutory body under the Ministry of Manpower, guided by a Council 

represented by industry, union and government leaders. Its main roles are to: 

a. Educate employers and employees about how to improve workplace safety 

and health, through industry events, promotional material and resources. 

b. Build industry capability in managing WSH, through setting the national WSH 

training framework and administering capability development programmes like 

bizSAFE. 

c. Set standards for acceptable WSH practices, through the formulation of WSH 

guidelines and Approved Codes of Practice. 

2. Workers’ Training and Competency 

a. Workers in relatively high -risk environments such as construction worksites, 

shipyards, and certain factories, are required under the Factories (Safety 

Training Courses) Order and the WSH (Shipbuilding and Ship -repairi ng) 

Regulations, to attend a safety orientation course (SOC) or safety training 

course for their specific role, before working in these workplaces and roles. 

These mandatory WSH training courses teach workers to identify hazards, and 

safe practices that re duce risk for themselves and their colleagues. They are 

conducted in the migrant workers’ native languages. The SOC also covers a 

worker’s WSH -related legal rights and responsibilities. Workers are encouraged 

to report or to whistle blow any unsafe work co nditions, unsafe acts, unsafe 

workplace hazards, work -related incidents, or accidents or near misses at the 

workplace. For example, they are taught to contact MOM at 6317 1111 to report 

WSH issues such as “red flags” that would compromise their safety (see sample 

below from NTUC Learning Hub’s SOC material). The workers at Stars 

Engineering had gone through their SOC. CONFIDENTIAL 

CONFIDENTIAL 2

b. As a condition for work pass renewal, all work permit holders in higher -risk 

industries are required to either i) pass the SOC re -certification test every 2 

years (if they have worked in the sector for 6 years or less) or every 4 years (if 

they have worked in the sector for more than 6 years); or ii) have passed a 

safety supervisor course. 

c. Besides the SOC and the supervisory training courses, non -Malaysian Work 

Permit Holders in the construction, manufacturing, marine, and process 

industries, such as those at Stars Engineering, are also required to attend a 

Settling -In Programme (SIP) within 2 weeks of their arrival in Singap ore, to learn 

about their employment rights. The SIP reinforces the call to report unsafe work 

conditions. Attendees are encouraged to report WSH issues to the Migrant 

Workers Centre if they are more comfortable with approaching an NGO instead 

of the regul atory authorities. 

d. To complement the mandatory training programmes mentioned above, under 

s12(3)(e) of the WSH Act, employers are to ensure that their workers are given 

adequate instruction, information, training, and supervision to carry out their 

work safely. These include sending them for trade and professional WSH 

training relevant their job role. In 2019 (pre -covid), over 300,000 workers 

attended WSH training with accredited training providers, ranging from the 

SOC, to different trade and professional courses. See Annex for a list of 

accredited WSH training courses. Employers’ WSH training obligations also 

include providing instructions and in -house training specific to the workers’ job 

functions, including how to operate and maintain machinery used at the worksite 

safel y. Workers should also be made aware of the safe work procedures and 

safety rules implemented at the workplaces, to properly use and don the PPE 

provided to them, and not to tamper or misuse any machinery and or equipment. CONFIDENTIAL 

CONFIDENTIAL 3

3. General Safety on the Use of Machinery and the Handling of Combustible 

Dust 

To assist the Employer to conduct Risk Assessments for their work processes and 

environment, MOM and the WSHC have published guidelines to address various 

hazards. These include good WSH practices and sugg ested control measures to ensure 

the safe use of machinery and to prevent fires, such as the following :

a. WSH Guidelines on Flammable Materials  – These guidelines provide risk 

control measures for work with flammable materials, including highly flam mable 

liquids like petrol and less apparent fuel sources, such as combustible dust. 

b. WSH Guidelines on Management of Hazardous Chemicals Programme  –

These guidelines address the key elements in managing hazardous chemicals 

during production, storage, transportati on, usage, handling, and disposal. 

c. WSH Guidelines on Process Hazard Analysis  – These guidelines introduces 

enterprises to Process Hazard Analysis (PHA) methodologies to help them 

identify process hazards as early as possible and to put in place measures to 

contr ol risk. 

d. MOM’s Circular on the Hazards and Controls of Combustible Dusts  – The 

circular highlights how dust combustions can occur and introduces some control 

measures. 

WSHC engages industry associations and unions to help in disseminating WSH 

guidelines and other information to their members. We also use our WSH Bulletin to 

inform our 75,000 subscribers. For selected critical updates, MOM will also issue circulars 

to i nform all relevant employers. 

4. Recommendations 

While workers are required to undergo structured training on safe work procedures 

and educated on channels to report WSH issues at the start of the work in Singapore, 

these lessons might not be reinforced th roughout their career, especially if their employer 

does not emphasise adherence to safe work procedures or does not have a

comprehensive in -house training regime. To sustain WSH knowledge among workers, we 

suggest that workers in higher -risk industries be required to also attend refresher WSH 

training at regular milestones throughout their career. Modular refresher training courses 

will be better able to suit the different job roles that each worker may be deployed to 

perform. They can also be updated with the latest WSH knowledge based on recent 

accidents and evolving legislative requirements (such as if stricter controls on use of 

combustible dust and machinery modifications/repairs are put into place). 

For all 600,000 Work Permit Holders across all ind ustries, WSH also intends to 

supplement their employer -sponsored training by sending them continuous WSH 

education in their native language via the FWMOMCare app. Avenues for whistleblowing 

and highlighting of “red flags” can also be reinforced via this channel. CONFIDENTIAL 

CONFIDENTIAL 4

MR CHRISTOPHER KOH 

GENERAL MANAGER, 

WORKPLACE SAFETY AND HEALTH COUNCIL CONFIDENTIAL 

CONFIDENTIAL 5

ANNEX 

LIST OF ACCRE DITED WSH TRAINING COURSES BY INDUSTRY RELEVANCE 

WSH COURSE  INDUSTRY 

1 Perform Design for Safety Professional Duties  Construction/Facilities 

Management 

2 Perform Industrial Audiometric Screening  ALL 

3 Supervise Manufacturing Work for WSH  Manufacturing 

4 Apply Workplace Safety and Health in Shipyard ( Marine 

Saf ety Orientation Course ) Marine 

5 Supervise Marine Work for WSH  Marine 

6 Manage Workplace Safety and Health in Shipbuilding and 

Ship Repair  Marine 

7 Assess Shipyard Safety for Hot -Work Certification  Marine 

8 Operate Explosive Powered Tools  ALL 

9 Perform Metal Scaffold Erection  Construction/Facilities 

Management 

10  Supervise Metal Scaffold Erection  Construction/Facilities 

Management 

11  Perform Rigging of Suspended Scaffold  Construction/Marine 

/Facilities Management 

12  Supervise Suspended Scaffold  Construction/Marine/Fac 

ilities Management 

13  Erect Metal Scaffold in Marine Industry  Marine 

14  Supervise Metal Scaffold in Marine Industry  Marine 

15  Perform Manhole Safety Assessment  Construction/Facilities 

Management 

16  Perform Work -at -Height  ALL 

17  Manage Work -At -Height  ALL 

18  Perform Man -lock Attendant Duties for Compressed Air Work  Construction 

19  Perform Medical -Lock Attendant Duties for Compressed Air 

Work  Construction 

20  Manage Workplace Safety and Health in Construction Sites  Construction 

21  Supervise Workplace Safety and Health for Formwork 

Construction  Construction 

22  Perform Formwork Activities  Construction CONFIDENTIAL 

CONFIDENTIAL 6

WSH COURSE  INDUSTRY 

23 

Apply Workplace Safety and Health in Logistics and 

Transportation (Log istics and Transport ation Safety 

Or ientation Course) 

Logistics and Transport 

24  Apply Workplace Safety and Health in Construction Sites 

(Construction Safety Or ientation Course)  Construction 

25  Supervise Construction Work for Workplace Safety and 

Health  Construction 

26  Apply Workplace Safety and Health in Metal Work 

(Metal working Safety Orientation Course)  Metalworking 

27  Supervise Tunnelling Work for Workplace Safety & Health  Construction 

28  Apply Workplace Safety and Health in Process Plant 

(Process Safety Or ientation Course)  Process 

29  Supervise Workplace Safety and Health in Process Plant  Process 

30  Develop a Risk Management Implementation plan (bizSAFE 

Level 2)  ALL 

31  Develop a Workplace Safety and Health Management 

System Implementation Plan (bizSAFE Level 4)  ALL 

32  Certificate in Workplace Safety & Health (Level A)  ALL 

33  Advanced Certificate in Workplace Safety & Health (Level B) 

Construction 

/Marine/Manufacturing/P 

rocess 

34  Specialist Diploma in Workplace Safety & Health (Level C)  ALL 

35  Graduate Certificate in Workplace Safety & Health (Level D)  ALL 

36  Operate Lorry Crane  ALL 

37  Operate Boom Lift 

Construction, Marine, 

Manufacturing, Facilities 

Management 

38  Operate Scissor Lift 

Construction, Marine, 

Manufacturing, Facilities 

Management 

39  Operate Vertical Personnel Platform 

Construction, Marine, 

Manufacturing, Facilities 

Management 

40  Operate Forklift  ALL 

41  Control Noise and Vibration  ALL 

42  Monitor Noise and Vibration  ALL 

43  Supervise Safe Lifting Operations  ALL 

44  Perform Rigger & Signalman Tasks  Construction and Marine 

45  Perform Work in Confined Space Operation 

Construction/Marine/Fac 

ilities 

Management/Process 

46  Supervise Work in Confined Space Operation 

Construction/Marine/ 

Facilities Management/ 

Process CONFIDENTIAL 

CONFIDENTIAL 7

WSH COURSE  INDUSTRY 

47  Assess Confined Space for Safe Entry and Work 

Construction/Marine/ 

Facilities 

Management/Process 

48  Workshop to Enhance the Safety of Crane Operators  Construction and Marine 

49  Commercial Diving (CSCUBA) for Divers  Marine 

50  Commercial Diving (CSCUBA) for Supervisors  Marine 

51  Commercial Diving (SSDE) for Divers  Marine 

52  Commercial Diving (SSDE) for Supervisors  Marine 

53  Occupational First Aid course  ALL 

54  SSIC (Hot Works)  Marine 

55  SSIC (Painter Trade)  Marine 

56  SOC Tunnelling for workers  Construction 1 | P a g e 

# WRITTEN SUBMISSION 

# (PART 1 – MAIN REPORT) 

# Inquiry Committee into Incident involving Fire and 

# Explosion at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 February 2021 

## Prepared by OSHD 

## Includes recommendation themes for: 

## Theme A: Regulatory Regime on Combustible Dust or Pow ders 

## Theme B: Regulatory Regime on Safe Use of Industrial Machinery 2 | P a g e 

# Contents 

1. Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........... 3

2. Background on OSHD  ................................ ................................ ............................. 4

About OS HD  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 4

OSHD’s efforts in the aftermath of the accident at Stars ............................... 6

3. Theme A: Regulatory Regime on Combustible Dust or Powders ........................... 7

Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 7

Combustible Dust  ................................ ................................ ......................... 7

Benchmarki ng Singapore’s safety regulatory regime for combustible dust 

against other countries  ................................ ................................ ................. 9

Current control on combustible dust in Singapore ................................ ...... 10 

Recommendations ................................ ................................ ..................... 13 

Recommendation (1) – Import and Supply: Requiring Suppliers to Label 

Combustible Dust Hazards Before Selling or Redistributing ........................ 13 

Recommendation (2) – Bulk Storage: Requiring Companies that Handle a 

Prescribed Amount of Specified Combustible Powders to register or notify the 

Authorities ................................ ................................ ................................ . 14 

Recommendation (3) – Usage: Impose duties on Occupiers to alert Building 

Owners and Landlords on use of Combustible Powders as part of their 

Operations ................................ ................................ ................................ . 15 

4 Theme B: Regulatory Regime on Safe Use of Industrial Machinery ..................... 16 

Introduction ................................ ................................ ............................... 16 

The Kneader Machine ................................ ................................ ................. 16 

Benchm arking of Singapore’s regulatory regimes on safe use of machinery 

against other countries ................................ ................................ ............... 16 

Current regulatory regimes on safe u se of industrial machinery in Singapore 

................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 17 

Key considerations on adequacy of regulatory regime ................................ 20 

Recommendations ................................ ................................ ..................... 22 

Recommendation (1) – Encourage buyers of industrial equipment to certify 

the equipment they purchase to Singapore Standard SS 537 -1 ................... 22 

Recommendation (2) – Expand the Fifth Schedule of the WSHA to include 

more industrial equipment ................................ ................................ ......... 22 

5 Conclusion ................................ ................................ ................................ ........... 24 3 | P a g e 

## 1. Introduction 

1.1 On 24 Fe bruary 2021, workers at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd (“ Stars ”) which was located at 

32E Tuas Ave 11, were operating an industrial kneader machine when an explosion 

and fire occurred. It is believed that the explosion and fire occurred at the kneader 

machine following a physical rupture of the kneader machine’s oil jacket due to 

internal overpressure and that the initial explosion and fire was followed by secondary 

flash fires involving combustible dust powders (i.e. potato sta rch powders) .

1.2 The Occupational Safety and Health Division (“ OSHD ”) of the Ministry of Manpower 

(“ MOM ”) is concerned to ensure the prevention of future similar accidents. In this 

regard, this report on MOM’s views as regards to possible recommendations is 

submitted for the Inquiry Committee’s consideration. 

1.3  This report will first provide some general background on the work done by OSHD, 

including OSHD’s efforts in the aftermath of the accident. The report will then discuss 

the following two themes which are relevant to the accident and propose relevant 

recommendations within each theme :

Theme A: Regulatory Regime on Combustible Dust or Powders 

Theme B: Regulatory Regime on Safe Use of Industrial Machine ry 4 | P a g e 

## 2. Background on OSHD 

About OSHD 

2.1.1. OSHD is a division under the Ministry of Manpower (MOM) that promotes 

Occupational Safety and Health at the national level. OSHD works with employers, 

employees and all other stakeholders to identify, assess and manage Workplace Safety 

and Health risks so as to eliminate death, injury and ill health at work. 

Our Vision 

2.1.2. Our vision is a healthy workforce in safe workplaces and a country renowned for best 

practices in workplace safety and health (“ WSH ”) .

The WSH 2028 National Strategy 

2.1.3. MOM established the WSH 2028 Tripartite Strategies Committee in 2018 comprising 

of representatives from government and industry stakeholders to recommend a set 

of 10 -year WSH strategies to realise the vision of having “ A Healthy Workforce in Safe 

Workplaces and A Country Reno wned for Best Practices in Workplace Safety and 

Health ”. As part of the strategy, MOM aims to reduce Singapore’s fatal injury rate to 

below 1.0 per 100,000 workers on a sustained basis by the year 2028. Only four 

countries in the Organisation for Economic Co -operation and Development (OECD) 

have achieved this. The WSH 2028 was launched in 2019. 

2.1.4. The strategic outcomes to track progress in attaining the WSH 2028 are as follow s:

4 Strategic Outcomes 

i) Sustained Reduction in Workplace Injury Rates; 

ii) Minimise Hazards that Lead to Occupational Disease; 

iii) Promotion of Good Workforce Health; and 

iv) Pervasive Adoption of the Vision Zero Culture .

3 Strategies 

i) Strengthen WSH Ownership; 

ii) Enhance Focus on Workplace Hea lth; and 

iii) Promote Technology -Enabled WSH. 5 | P a g e 

OSHD Function 

2.1.5. OSHD main regulatory function is in ensuring compliance with the Workplace Safety 

and Health Act (“ WSHA ”) as well as the Work Injury Compensation Act (“ WICA ”). The 

WSHA provides the regulatory framew ork that focuses on reducing WSH risks at 

source and requiring stakeholders to eliminate or minimise potential risks at 

workplaces. The WICA is a legislative instrument that ensures the right of an employee 

to claim compensation in the event of a work -rela ted injury, death or occupational 

disease. OSHD works closely with the WSH Council and its tripartite partners to 

strengthen WSH culture and practices and to prevent injury and ill -health at work. 

2.1.6. On WSHA, OSHD is tasked with ensuring compliance with the WSHA and its subsidiary 

legislation . This task is undertaken by the Operation departments namely, 

Occupational Safety and Health Inspectorate, the Occupational Safety and Health 

Specialists Department and the Major Hazards Department. The main function is to 

ensure that WSH standards are adhered to. OSHD does this by: 

a) Expanding the reach and depth of enforcement through strategic inspections; 

b) Performing surveillance on workplaces; and 

c) Providing targeted attention to high -risk workplaces. 

2.1.7. The WSHA covers all workplaces in Singapore. But, having regard to the need to use 

limited resources efficiently, OSHD takes a targeted and risk -based approach to its 

work. Accordingly, OSHD targets traditional areas of concern in the construction ,

marine and manufacturing industries, as these industries tend to see a higher number 

of fatal accidents based on past WSH statistics. In 2020, for example, the top two 

causes of workplace fatalities were falls from height and vehicular -related incidents, 

similar to previous years. Together, they contributed to 40% of all workplace fatalities 

in 2020. 

2.1.8. OSHD conducts targeted inspections and sustained enforcement actions based on 

analysis of industry trends and WSH statistics so that the greatest impact on improving 

WSH performance can be delivered. For example, following the spate of fatal 

accidents in first half of 2021, OSHD stepped -up its enforcemen t operations to include 

workplaces with combustible dust hazards and at other high -risk sectors such as 

manufacturing and construction, with a focus on machinery safety. More than 1000 

workplaces were inspected under these operations. 

2.1.9. In addition to its e fforts on the traditional high -risk sectors, OSHD keeps its pulse close 

to the ground on new and emerging risks such as in the areas of workplace health, 6 | P a g e 

mental health and prevention of infectious diseases at workplaces . OSHD works 

closely with its tripart ite partners, industry associations and professional bodies to 

develop guidelines and programmes to raise awareness on such risks. 

OSHD’s efforts in the aftermath of the accident at Stars 

2.2.1 Following the accident at Stars, OSHD identified combustible dust hazard as one of the 

key issues involved in the accident . As a follow -up , OSHD conducted a special 

enforcement operation codenamed “Operation Bullfinch 2” in Ma rch 2021 to assess 

the adequacy of safety measures to address risks associated with dust explosion 

hazards in the manufacturing industry. As part of the operations, OSHD inspect ed 

approximately 500 companies that potentially deal with combustible dust. These 

included manufacturing companies that manufacture, process or handle combustible 

powders such as metallic, chemical or organic (such as food) powders and products .

In particular, OSHD ’s enforcement focused on SMEs that were unlikely to have the 

same level of awareness of the risks of combustible dust hazard as com pared to the 

bigger manufacturing companies .

2.2.2 The results of the O peration revealed that most companies inspected use d or 

generate d small quantities of combustible dust which ha d low explosion risk. 

Notwithstanding, awareness of combustible dust hazards in these companies were 

observed to be low, as evident from the lack of identification of combustible dust 

hazards in their risk assessment. For larger companies that have industrial processes 

involving combustible dus t, these companies were generally observed to have 

identified combustible dust hazards in their risk assessments and have the necessary 

control measures put in place. 7 | P a g e 

## 3. Theme A: Regulatory Regime on Combustible Dust or Powders 

Introduction 

Different agencies regulate combustible dust or powders (hereafter referred as 

“combustible dust”) under their respective legislative ambit . This section provide s an 

overview on how combustible dust is controlled in Singapore and how our safety 

regulatory regime on combustible dust compare s with other developed countries . It 

will end with re commendations on combustible dust control based on the different 

stages along its life cycle .

Combustible Dust 

3.2.1 Combustible dusts are fine particles that are liable to catch fire or explode when 

dispersed in air or other oxidising media under certain conditions. There are many 

types of combustible dusts and they can be group ed into 4 categories: Metals, 

Chemicals, P lastics and Organic Matter . The potato starch used by Stars falls under the 

organic matter group. 

3.2.2 Most of these combustible dusts are not inherently dangerous (e.g. sugar or flour) .

However , a flash fire can occur when four elements (Fuel, Oxygen, Ignition &

Dispersion) are present. When a fifth element (Confinement) is also present, it can 

lead to a combustible dust explosion (please see Figure 1 ).

Figure 1 : Elements required for fires, flash fires and explosions 

(Source: NFPA 652 2019 Figure A.5.2 )8 | P a g e 

3.2.3 Different dusts of the same material can have different ignitability and explosibility 

characteristics, depending on its physical characteristics such as particle size, shape, 

and moisture content. These physical characteristics can change during manufacturing, 

use or while the material is being processed .

Methodology to Determine Risk Level 

3.2.4 International practice uses Kst value ( dust deflagration index ) to measure the relative 

explosion severity co mpared to other dusts. In general, t he larger the K st value of the 

substance, the more severe the explosion (See Table 1 ). However, the severity of the 

explosion is also influenced by other factors such as quantity of combustible dust 

stored or used, and the work process or activity involved. For instance, when 

combustible dust is stored within the packages in a warehouse, it is considered as low 

risk as there is low likelihood for gene ration of dust cloud. On the contrary, if the 

workplace has processes involving open charging of combustible powders into the 

system , the likelihood of dust cloud generation in the workplace is increased and the 

risk of combustible dust explosion will be m uch higher. 

Table 1: Examples of K st values for different types of dusts and risk level 

Dust 

explosion 

class* 

Kst 

(bar.m/s) a

Characteristic a Typical materials b Risk Level 

St 0 0 No explosion  Silica  No Risk 

St 1 0 < K st ≤ 200  Weak explosion  Powdered milk, 

charcoal, sul ph ur, 

sugar and zinc 

Lower Risk 

St 2 20 0 < K st ≤

300 

Strong explosion  Cellulose, wood 

flour, and poly 

methyl acrylate 

Higher Risk 

St 3 Kst > 300  Very strong 

explosion 

Anthraquinone, 

aluminum and 

magnesium          

> *The actual class is sample specific and will depend on specific characteristics of the sample such as particle
> size or moisture level .
> aOSHA CPL 03 -00 -008 –Combustible dust national emphasis program
> bNFPA 68, Standard on explosion prevention by deflagration venting

9 | P a g e 

3.2.5 The American National Fire Protection Association (NFPA ) is one of the internationally 

recognised authorit ies on fire protection. The NFPA standard 652 provides a listing of 

the Kst values of over 100 materials . There is also a more comprehensive database by 

the Institute for Occupational Safety and Health of the German Social Accident 

Insurance (GESTIS -DUST -EX ) which has combustion and explosion characteristics of 

close to 7000 materials. Under this listing, the re were several K st values listed for 

potato starch, which was the combustible dust used by Stars . The highest K st value for 

potato starch provided in the database was 116 (Under Class St 1). 

Benchmarking Singapore’s safety regulatory regime for combustible dust against 

other countries 

3.3.1. A literature scan on the regulatory requirements on combustible dust was conducted 

for 3 developed countries that have established laws and standards – US, UK and 

Australia. Singapore ’s and Australia’s laws are modelled after UK’s outcome -based 

Health and Safety at Work Act which is supplemented with more prescriptive 

subsidiary legislations , whereas US adopts a more prescriptive legislative approach .

3.3.2. Table 2 summarise s the similarities and differences between Singapore and the 3 

countries’ regime s in the control of combustible dust hazards. While our regulatory 

regime is comparable to the 3 countr ies in most of the areas compared , the US ’s and 

UK’s regime of identification and communication of combustible dust hazards is more 

comprehensive .  

> Table 2: Summary of Singapore's regulatory regime against other developed countries

Areas  Findings 

Duties of Employer  • All 3 countries impose a general duty on employers to ensure 

the safety and health of employees at work .

• Singapore’s WSH A similarly  imposes such a general dut y.

Duties of 

Manufacturer, 

Supplier and 

Importer to 

communicate 

hazards 

• UK and US require suppliers, manufacturers or importers of 

combustible dust to provide information and warn of potential 

explosion hazard to users. 

• Australia ’s and Singapore ’s require ment s for suppliers and 

manufacturers are scoped to a narrower list of hazardous 

substance s. Both countries also do not cover the importers. 

o Both countries adopt the labelling requirement in 

accordance with the Globally Harmonised System (GHS) 

which does not include combustible dust. 10 | P a g e 

o Singapore ’s requirements are tied to the Fifth Schedule 

Part II of the WSH A which prescribed a list of hazardous 

substance s, which does not include combustible dust. 

Control Measures 

• Hazardous Area 

• Local exhaust 

ventilation 

• Housekeeping 

• Ignition control 

• Explosion relief 

and venting 

• All 3 countries have prescriptive requirements to control 

combustible dust hazard at the workplace .

• In Singapore, we also have similar prescriptive precautions to 

take for explosive or flammable dust s, gas es , vapour s or 

substance s. This is provided under Reg 26 of the WSH (General 

Provisions) Regulations 

The details of the legislation for the respective countries are appended in Annex A .

Current control on combustible dust in Singapore 

3.4.1.  Due to the wide variety of combustible dust s, there is no single authority regulating 

combustible dust. Instead, different agencies regulate differe nt materials or 

substances (some of which are combustible dust s) under their respective legislation s.

Table 3 summarise s the various agencies’ involvement.  The details of the Regulations 

for respective agencies are compiled in Annex B.

Table 3: Regulatory agencies' roles based on the life cycle stages of combustible powders         

> Agencies Import Distribution Storage Use Disposal
> Singapore
> Customs (SC)
> Import
> declarations are
> submitted
> through
> TradeNet
> platform
> Singapore
> Food Agency
> (SFA)
> Trader needs to be registered to
> import processed food. Labelling
> requirements for food safety are
> imposed.
> [Examples of processed food
> include potato starch, flo ur, etc.,
> which are combustible powders]

11 | P a g e 

Agencies  Import  Distribution  Storage  Use  Disposal 

License to manufacture 

and process of animal 

feed. 

[Animal feed is an organic 

mat ter which are 

combustible powder s]

Singapore 

Civil Defence 

Force (SCDF) 

Petroleum and Flammable Materials (P&FM ) license is required 

for import, storage and use of P&FM at any premises. 

[List of P&FM Include metal powders such as aluminum, 

magnesium , zinc and i ron carbonyl which are combustible 

powders] 

The building plan approval 

for fire safety works will 

also apply to premises that 

store and use flammable 

substances .

Ministry of 

Manpower 

(MOM) 

Protection of persons at 

work under WSHA and its 

subsidiary legislations. 

Precautions and measures 

to be taken at workplaces 

with regards to explosive 

or flammable dust, gas, 

vapour or substance .

National 

Environment 

Agency (NEA) 

The development control 

and building plan 

approvals may apply to 

premises that store and 

use combustible dust to 

ensure compl iance with 

environmental health and 

pollution control 

requirements .

License Toxic 

Industrial Waste 

(TIW ) collectors to 

ensure proper 

disposal of TIW. 

[TIW include 

polyvinylchloride 

waste which is 

combustible dust] 

MOM ’s Circular on the Hazards and Controls of Combustible Dusts in 2015 

3.4.2. Arising from a 201 3 combustible dust fire where 2 workers suffered burn injuries, 

MOM conducted a proactive operation to assess and engage the process industry on 

combustible dust. Following the operations, MOM issued a circular to industry in 2015 

to raise awareness of the hazards and risk control measure s relating to combustible 

dusts in workplaces. A non -exh austive list of combustible dust examples w as included 

in the circular (refer to Table 4 ). 12 | P a g e   

> Table 4 : Example sof combustible dust slisted in MOM 2015 Circular

Category  Examples      

> Metals Aluminium, Bronze, Magnesium, Zinc, Iron Carbonyl.
> Chemicals Adipic Acid, Ascorbic Acid, Sodium Ascorbate, Calcium
> Acetate, Calcium Stearate, Sodium Stearate, Lead Stearate,
> Dextrin, Lactose, Methylcellulose, Paraformaldehyde, Sulphur.
> Plastics Polymers e.g. Polymethylmethacrylate, Polyacrylamide,
> Polyacrylonitrile, Polyethylene, Polyvinylchloride, Resins,
> Melamine.
> Organic Matter Sugars, Corn Starch, Flour, Charcoal, Coal, Peat, Soot, Cellulose
> Pulp, Tobacco, Wood Dust

3.4.3. Companies were advised to implement proper control measures such as dust control, 

ignition control, explosive relief and venting, training and awareness as well as the use 

of personal protective equipment to mitigate the risk and prevent combustible dust 

explosions .

Development of New Singapore Standard on Combustible Dust 

3.4.4. A work group was also set up in 2017 under the Enterprise Singapore (ESG) to develop 

a Singapore Standard for handling, storage and processing of combustible dust . This 

was intended to provide further detailed guidance to the industry beyond MOM’s 

circular. 

3.4.5. The Singapore Standard SS 667: Code of Practice for Handling, Storage and Processing 

of combustible dust was thus developed and launch ed in May 2021 . This new st andard 

included: 

a) Specifi c control measures to prevent combustible dust fire / explosion .

b) New risk assessment approach for combustible dust . It is a system atic review 

to identify and evaluate the potential fire, flash fire and explosion hazards 

associated with the presence of one or more combustible dust s.

c) Recommendation on electrical equipment zoning for the design of facilities 

with dust explosion ha zard whic h make reference to i nternational standard IEC 

60079 -10: Classification of Hazardous Areas .13 | P a g e 

3.4.6. This new Singapore Standard SS 667 will be gazetted as an Approved Code of Practice 

(“ACOP ”) under the WSH A by Dec ember 2021. Under s ection 40C of the WSHA, regard 

shall be had to the relevant ACOPs in determining whether the obligations under the 

WSHA have been discharged. SCDF has also issued a circular to the industry requiring 

compliance to this new standard for new buildings / premises or alteration to existing 

buildings / premises that are submitted to SCDF for fire safety approval from 1

Dec ember 2021.  Please refer to circular in  Annex C.

Recommendations 

3.5.1. The appropriate technical control measures to prevent combustible dust explosion are 

already comprehensively covered by the new Singapore Standard SS 667 . Hence ,

MOM will focus on enhancing the regulatory regime and propose s the following 

recommendations for IC’s consideration : 

> (1)

Import and Supply: Requiring suppliers to label materials with combustible dust 

hazards before selling or redistributing.  

> (2)

Bulk Storage: Requiring companies that handle a prescribed amount of specified 

combustible powders to register or notify the authorities.  

> (3)

Usage: Expanding duties on occupiers to declare to building owners and landlords 

on use of combustible powders as part of their operations .

Recommendation (1) – Import and Supply: Requiring Suppliers to Label 

Combustible Dust Hazards Before Selling or Redistributing 

3.6.1. Notwithstanding the legal requirements and MOM’s circular in 2015 , many companies 

have low awareness of combustible dust hazards, therefore there is a need to increase 

the level of awareness to the users . Learning from the practices of US and UK, MOM 

recommen ds that suppliers are required to label combustible dust hazards before 

selling or redistributing. This will increase awareness in users as to the combustible 

nature of the dusts handled , and ale rt them to the potential hazards .

3.6.2. Although there is already a requirement under section 16 of the WSHA to provide 

information relating to the hazardous substances, this does not apply to combustible 

dusts as it is not covered under Part II of the Fifth Schedule . As many combustible 

dusts are not inherently hazardous (e.g. flour and sugar) , it may be confusing and 

in appropriate to classify them as hazardous substances .14 | P a g e 

3.6.3. A more pragmatic approach is to prescribe a separate list of combustible dust s (e.g. 

those with K st value > 100) that are packed in quantities over a prescribed limit 

(e.g. >25 kg) to be subjected to such labelling requirement s.

Recommendation (2) – Bulk Storage: Requiring Companies that Handle a 

Prescribed Amount of Specified Com bustible Powders to register or notify the 

Authorities 

3.7.1 As show n in Table 3 , SCDF currently licenses companies who store or use metallic 

combustible powders (such as aluminium, magnesium , zinc and iron carbonyl ) under 

their P etroleum and Flammable Materials regime , while SFA regulates traders and 

importers of food product s (some of which are combustible dusts) from a food safety 

perspective .

3.7.2 Having information on which workplace uses or handles combustible dust , especially 

in large quantit ies, will allow the authorities to inspect and intervene proactively to 

ensure that appropriate control measures are put in place. Therefore, MOM 

recommend s that such “higher -risk” workplaces notify the authorities . The criteria for 

the notification requirement can be based on a prescribed list of combustible dust s

and the quantity stored or use d at the workplace .

3.7.3 Prescribing such a list based on both the combustible nature of the dust ( ie , Kst value) 

as well as the quantities stored or used at the workplace provides a calibrated measure. 

It targets high -risk workplaces, while simultaneously avoiding placing an unnecessary 

burden on lower -risk workplaces, such as heartland bakeries which also use 

combustible powders but in much smaller quantities. As for higher -risk workplaces ,

these could be subjected to 3 rd party audits by MOM -approved WSH Auditors to 

ensure adequate control measures are in place and are effective to prevent 

combustible dust expl osion s.

3.7.4  To augment the notification regime, we also recommend :

a)  Leverag ing on building plan submissions by Qualified Persons (QP) to identify 

high er -risk workplace s during the upstream design or planning phase (new 

premises or expansion ). This is so that control measures such as local exhaust 

ventilation s can be designed and installed from the start rather than the 

subsequent retrofitting. 15 | P a g e 

b) Shar ing information on suppliers, distributors, licensees , and occupiers that 

handle or store combustible powders at their workplaces amongst agencies 

such as SCDF, SFA or NEA. 

3.7.5  This will build up a comprehensive database of w orkplaces that use / handle 

combustible dust and help authorities prioritise our resources to better target the 

higher -risk workplaces .

Recommendation (3) – Usage: Impose d uties on Occupiers to alert B uilding Owners 

and Landlords on use of Combustible Powders as part of their Operations 

3.8.1  The Stars fire and explosion resulted in significant damage to the building. Not only 

was Stars ’s premise s affected, but the blast also affected neighbouring units. It is 

therefore in the interest of the building owners to know if their tenants are using o r

handling combustible dusts. 

3.8.2 Therefore, MOM recommend s that occupiers of workplaces to inform their building 

owner or landlord when they are using materials which can pose combustible dust 

explosion risk within their premises. This will enhance the hazard communication on 

the use of combustible powders in workplaces. Building owners can then instruct the ir 

tenants to put in necessary control measures and deconflict if any of their tenants has 

incompatible work. 16 | P a g e 

## 4 Theme B: Regulatory Regime on Safe Use of Industrial Machinery 

Introduction 

4.1.1 This section discusses the regulatory regime governing the safe use of industrial 

machinery under the WSHA and its application to the industrial kneader machine that 

was involved in the fire and explosion . This section also proposes some 

recommendations to strengthen t he regulatory regime .

The Kneader Machine 

4.2.1 The kneader machine is an industrial mixer . It was used by Stars for the heating and 

mixing of high viscosity materials for the purpose of manufacturing fire -retardant 

products . The kneader machine consisted of two main components: 

a) a mixing chamber , which contained a pair of rotating paddles arranged 

horizontally, rotating in opposite direction s, driven by motor, for mixing of the 

materials placed within the mixing chamber , and 

b) a jacket to be filled with heat transfer medium, heated by electric heating 

elements, for heating of materials within the mixing chamber .

4.2.2 Stars bought t he kneader machine online from a Chinese manufacturer. Stars also 

installed and commissioned the machine themselves in Jun e 2020 after it was 

delivered .

Benchmarking of Singapore’s regulatory regimes on safe use of machinery against 

other countries 

4.3.1. Due to the wide variety of machineries, most overseas jurisdiction s impose the 

primary duty of care to ensure the safety of the machinery on the employer (user) .

Some jurisdictions further impose duties on the designers, manufacturers, suppliers 

and installers of the machiner ies. Some jurisdictions also have specific requirement s

for a prescribed class of equipment ( referred to as “statutory equipment ”) that are 

subjected to higher regulatory oversight. 

4.3.2. A similar literature scan of the regulatory regime concerning the safe use of machinery 

was conducted for the 3 developed count ries – US, UK and Australia. The findings are 17 | P a g e 

summarised in Table 6. Extracts of the relevant legislations are presented in Annex D,

E and F.  

> Table 6: Comparison of Regulatory Regime Governing the Safe Use of Machinery Used at Work
> across Jurisdictions

Areas  Findings 

Duties of 

employer to 

ensure 

machine is 

safe to use 

• All countries including Singapore impose a general duty on the 

employers. 

• In addition, Australia and Singapore also impose similar duty on the 

occupier of the workers. 

Duties on 

manufacturer 

/ suppliers 

ensure 

machine is 

safe to use 

when 

operated 

properly 

• UK and Australia impose such a duty on person who designs, 

manufactures, imports or supplies any equipment / machinery for 

work. 

• Singapore impose s duty on person who manufactures or supplies a 

prescribed list of equipment / machinery for work (Part I of Fifth 

Schedule of WSHA) 

• US does not have such a requirement. 

Duties on 

Installers /

Persons who 

modifies the 

machine 

• Only Australia imposes such a duty on person s who install any 

equipment / machinery for work. 

• Singapore imposes a similar duty on person s who install or modify a 

prescribed list of equipment / machinery for work (Part I of Fifth 

Schedule of WSHA) 

Statutory 

Equipment 

Regime 

• In Singapore, lifting equipment and pressure vessels, which can cause 

serious harm or damage if they fail during use, are required to be 

examined by comp etent persons before and at regular intervals during 

use. 

• UK, Australia and US have similar examination requirement s for lifting 

equipment and pressure vessels. 

Current r egulatory regimes on safe use of industrial machinery in Singapore 

4.4.1. In Singapore, we adopt a 3 -tier risk -based approach to regulate safe use of machinery 

at workplaces . Table 7 summarises the regulatory requirements and classes of 

machinery for each tier of the regime.    

> Table 7: Regulatory Regime on Safe Use of Industrial Machinery under WSHA

18 | P a g e 

Tier  Description  Regulatory Requirements 

1 All machinery used at work 

[including the kneader machine 

used by Stars ]

Duty on Owners, Occupiers, 

Principals and Employers to ensure 

that the machinery is safe. 

2

(Medium risk) 

11 classes of machinery specified 

in the Fifth Schedule of the WSHA 

E.g.  forklifts, power presses, 

scaffolds 

Additional dut ies are imposed on 

Manufacturers, Suppliers and 

Installers and Persons who modifies 

to ensure that: 

a) the machinery is safe when 

properly used; 

b) Information about the safe use 

of the machinery is 

available/adhered to; and 

c) The installation or modification 

is in accordance with the 

information supplied by the 

designer, manufacturer or 

supplier of the machinery. 

3

(High risk) 

2 classes of statutory equipment :

a)  Lifting Equipment ( e.g. 

Cranes) 

b)  Pressure vessels ( e.g. Steam 

Boilers) 

These equipment are individually 

registered, tested and examined by a 

MOM Authorised Examiner, before 

use and at regular intervals 

thereafter.       

> Note:
> The re is a parallel safety regime for 33 categories of general consumer products, where they are to
> be tested to specified safety standards and affixed with the “SAFETY Mark” before they can be sold
> in Singapore. This is governed under the Consumer Protection (Trade Descriptions and Safety
> Requirements) Act. These products ar e for personal, domestic consumption hence this regime is not
> applicable for industrial purposes .

Tier 1 – All Machinery used at work 

4.4.2. The kneader machine used by Stars falls within tier 1 of the framework at present , as 

it does not come within any of the specified classes of machinery under the Fifth 

Schedule of the WSHA. For tier 1, which covers all machinery used at work, employers 

and occupiers of workplaces have duties under the WSH A to ensure safety and health 

in relation to the use of machinery. Employers are also legally bound to ensure that 

persons at work have adequate instruction, inform ation, training and supervision for 

them to perform their work .19 | P a g e 

4.4.3. In the event that the operators are non -employees, the o wners of machinery also have 

duties to make available the precautions to be taken for the safe use of the machinery 

to persons using th e machinery and ensure that the machinery is maintained in a safe 

condition. An extract of the relevant sections of the WSH A is presented in Annex G.

Tier 2 ( Medium Risk) – 11 classes of Machinery and Equipment 

4.4.4. Under tier 2, the 11 classes of machinery and equipment are specified in the Fifth 

Schedule of the WSH A (Annex G). The re are additional duties imposed on 

manufacturers, suppliers and persons who erect, install or modify these machineries .

4.4.5. Manufacturers and suppliers shall make available information about the safe use of 

the machinery to persons to whom the machinery is supplied for use at work . This is 

to ensure that the machinery is safe when properly used and that the machinery is 

examined and tested : s 1 6 WSHA . In addition, a ny person who erect s, install s or 

modif ies these machiner ies is to ensure that the machinery is erected, installed or 

modified in such a manner that it is safe when properly used, and  in accordance with 

the information supplied by the designer, manufacturer or suppl ier of the machinery :

s 1 7 WSHA .

Tier 3 (High Risk) – 2 classes of Statutory Equipment 

4.4.6. Tier 3 refers to the highest risk category of industrial machinery and are deemed 

“Statutory Equipment ”. There are 2 classes of machinery under this category , namely 

lifting equipment and pressure vessel s. Under the WSH (General Provisions) 

Regulations, these equipment are to be individually registered, tested and examined 

by a MOM Authorised Examiner before use and at regular intervals thereafter.  An 

extract o f the relevant regulations under tier 3 under the WSH  (General Provisions) 

Regulations  is given in Annex G. The key features of the regulatory regime under tier 

3 are summarised as follows :

4.4.7. Registration Requirements : As part of the conditions for registra tion, the owner of the 

statutory equipment shall ensure that the equipment is designed, constructed and 

tested in accordance with MOM -approved design standards or codes relevant to the 

equipment concerned. This includes the provision of the required safety devices to 

ensure the safe use of the equipment. The owner shall ensure that the equipment is 

examined , tested and registered by an Authorised Examiner to certify that the 

equipment is safe for intended use before it is put into operation . The owner shall de -

register the statutory equipment once it is no longer in use. 20 | P a g e 

4.4.8. Re quirements for periodic test and examination by Authorised Examiners: Following 

the registration, the owner of the statutory equipment shall ensure that the 

equipment is periodically examined and tested by an Authorised Examiner at intervals 

stipulated under the WSH (General Provisions) Regulations and that a Certificate of 

Registration has been issued by the Authorised Examiner after each examination to 

certify that the equipment continues to be in good working condition and safe for 

intended use .

4.4.9. Re quirements for approval for repairs or modification: The owner of the statutory 

equipment shall notify and seek approval from MOM before carrying out any repair 

or modification to any statutory equipment. In addition, these repairs and 

modification shall be supervised by an Authorised Examiner and a new Cert ificate of 

Registration shall be issued by the Authorised Examiner to certify that the equipment 

is in good working condition and safe for intended use after each repair or 

modification .

4.4.10.  Re quirements for Training and Competency of Operator: To ensure that no danger 

should arise due to improper or unsafe operation of the statutory equipment, the 

operator of the statutory equipment must be properly trained or competent to 

operate the equipment. For example, the operator of a mobile or tower crane must 

be the holder of a certificate of registration issued by MOM (MOM licensed crane 

operator) while an operator of a steam boiler must have successfully completed a 

training course acceptable to the Commissioner on the safe operation of the steam 

boiler .

Key considerations on adequacy of regulatory regime 

4.5.1. Stars, being the owner of the kneader machine, the occupier of the workplace and the 

employer of the workers involved in the work , is responsible for discharging the duties 

under the WSHA. MOM is of the view that the current laws are adequate to address 

the lapses by Stars that have emerged from the evidence led in the first tranche of the 

inquiry hearing .

4.5.2. Nevertheless, there are 2 areas that warrant consideration: 

a) What can be done to ensure machines that are bought online are safe to use? 

b) What can be done to ensure that owners who commission or repair the machines 

themselves are doing it correctly in accordance with the manufacturer’s 

instructions or recommendations? 21 | P a g e 

4.5.3. In today’s globalised trade and economy, one can easily order and purchase an 

equipment online (local ly or from overseas ), and have it shipped to the premise. It is 

common to have the equipment installed or commissioned by the manufacturer or 

supplier as well as for the manufacturer / supplier to provide after -sales or 

maintenance support , especially if the equipment is costly and complex to operate. 

However, given the wide variety of industrial equipment and cost s involved , such 

after -sales support may not always materialise , especially if the equipment is 

purchased from overseas .

4.5.4. In relation to the classes of equipment specified in the Fifth Schedule of the WSHA 

(see [ 4.4.4 ] above), if the buyer engages the supplier to provide the after -sales support 

to ensure that the equipment is properly installed, commissioned, and is safe to use, 

the provisions of the WSHA allow us to hold the supplier responsible for any safety 

lapses in provision of such services . However, if the buyer decides to forgo the after -

sales support, the onus and responsibility to ensure the safety of the equipment rest 

squarely on him as the owner of the equipment .

4.5.5. Nevertheless, manufacturers and suppliers of equipment have a responsibility to 

ensure that their equipment are properly designed , safe to use when operated 

properly and that relevant information about their installation, commissioning, use ,

repair and modification are supplied to the buyer. Beyond legal or contractual 

responsibilities, it is also in the manufacturer’s interest to ensure the quality of his 

equipment. 

4.5.6. In additi on, t he law is unambiguous in that the employer is responsible to ensure that 

his employees receive  adequate instruction, information, training and supervision as 

is necessary for them to perform their work safely , be it in commissioning, operating 

or repa iring the equipment . The employer can engage the supplier or agent or an 

expert to train his employees to fulfil his duties. 

4.5.7. In summary, i t is too onerous and impractical to mandate after -sales support or 

regulate all imports of equipment to ensure that they safe to use. However , we can 

encourage owners of industrial equipment to engage competent parties to assist them .

The owners of the equipment must adopt sound engineering principles in the handling 

of industrial machines , and they ought to seek technical support or assistance from 

the suppliers if they lack the knowledge or competency. 22 | P a g e 

Recommendation s

4.6.1 MOM therefore propose s the following recommendations for the IC’s consideration: 

1) Encourage buyers of industrial equipment to certify the equipment they purchase 

to Singapore Standard SS 537 -1

2) Expand the Fifth Schedule of the WSHA to include more industrial equipment 

Recommendation ( 1) – Encourage buyers of industrial equipment to certify the 

equipment they purchase to Singapore Standard SS 537 -1

4.7.1. There is an existing Singapore Standard SS 537 -1: Code of Practice for the Safe Use of 

Machinery – General Requirements tha t provides :

a) Requirements on the design and manufacture of machinery to ensure that the 

machinery incorporates basic safety features. 

b) Guidance on the safety and health issues relating to the installation, testing, 

maintenance and servicing of machinery. 

c) Guidance on the methods for safeguarding the dangerous parts of machinery 

and enhancing safety in the use of machinery. 

4.7.2. The SS 537 -1 h as been adopted as an ACOP under the WSHA . Therefore , MOM 

recommends that buyers of industrial equipment be encouraged to engage a 3 rd party 

Testing Inspection or Certification (TIC) body to certify that the machine they had 

purchased conforms to the principles and guidance stipulated in the standard. Such a 

certification will provide an added assurance to the buyer if he chooses to forg o the 

after -sales support from the suppliers of the equipment , since s ection 40C of the 

WSHA provides that regard shall be had to the relevant ACOPs in determining whether 

the obligations under the WSHA have been discharged .

Recommendation ( 2) – Expand the Fifth Schedule of the WSHA to include more 

industrial equipment 

4.8.1 The main components of the kneader machine (mixing chamber with heating oil jacket) 

can be found in a wide spectrum of industrial machine s used at workplaces in various 

configurations, on di fferent scale s and for different application s. Despite the multiple 

casualties arising from the Stars explosion, the kneader machine is generally not a 

high -risk machine and may be used in a manner that is entirely safe . The primary cause 

of the accident was largely due to operational errors rather than the underlying design 23 | P a g e 

of the machine. Hence , MOM is of the view that it would not be appropriate to classify 

the kneader machine as “S tatutory Equipment ” and subject it to the most stringent 

tier 3 regime .

4.8.2 Instead, MOM recommends expanding the Fifth Schedule of the WSHA to cover a 

broader range of industrial equipment such as those powered by mechanical, 

electrical, hydrau lic or pneumatic energy . This will then subject more equipment ,

including the kneader machine , to the tier 2 regime. By doing so, duties will be 

imposed on the manufacturers, suppliers, installers and persons who modify the se 

machine s to ensure they are safe to use when operated properly and that relevant 

information about their installation, commissioning, use , repair and modification are 

supplied to the buyer. 

4.8.3 It is also timely to review and update the Fifth Schedule as it has not been amended 

since the enactment of the WSHA in 2006 and the list of machinery and equipment 

may not adequately account for developments in machine designs, usage and safety 

features over the years. In the review , we will also assess the necessity to include the 

lower risk category of hand tools such as handheld grinders or drills. 24 | P a g e 

## 5 Conclusion 

5.1. The Stars fire and explosion was preventable. We will learn from this tragic accident 

and ma ke improvements to the regulatory regime to prevent a recurrence . However, 

there is a limitation to any regulatory regime as it will never be exhaustive or 

comprehensive. Mandating requirements across all machine types and work 

processes will also lead to overregulation in certain sectors of the industry. This case 

underscores the importance of duty holders such as occupier s, employer s, owner s,

manufacturer s or supplier s of equipment tak ing ownership of workplace safety and 

health to prevent needless loss o f lives and injuries to workers .

5.2. This is also why the Tripartite Strategies Committee emphasise s the need to 

strengthen workplace safety and health ownership in the WSH2028 strategies to 

realise the vision of a healthy workforce in safe workplaces, a country renowned for 

best practices in Workplace Safety and Health .1 | P a g e 

# WRITTEN SUBMISSION 

# (PART 2 – ANNEXES) 

# Inquiry Committee into Incident involving Fire and 

# Explosion at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 February 2021 

## Prepared by OSHD 

## Include Annexes for: 

## Theme A: Regulatory Regime on Combustible Dust or Pow ders 

## Theme B: Regulatory Regime on Safety of Industrial Machinery 2 | P a g e 

# Contents 

Annex A Scan on Overseas Regulations on Combustible Dust  ................................ .... 3

Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals, Flammable or Hazardous Substances 

and Combustible Dusts ................................ ................................ ............... 23 

Annex C SCDF Circular on Implementation of SS 667: 2020 – Code of Practice for 

Handling, Storage and Processing of combustible dust .............................. 61 

Annex D US - Extracts from the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 and 

related legislations ................................ ................................ ..................... 62 

Annex E UK - Extracts from the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974 and related 

legislations ................................ ................................ ................................ . 64 

Annex F Australia - Extracts from the Work Health and Safety Act 2011 and related 

legislations ................................ ................................ ................................ . 75 

Annex G Singapore - Extracts from the Workplace Safety and Health Act and related 

legislations ................................ ................................ ................................ . 96 Annex A Scan on Overseas Regulations on Combustible Dust 

3 | P a g e 

## Annex A Scan on Overseas Regulations on Combustible Dust 

Duties of Manufacturer/ Supplier/Importer 

Country  Act/Regulations  Extract of Act/Regulations on Duties of Manufacturer/ Supplier/Importer 

UK HSE  Health and Safety at Work 

etc. Act 1974 

Suppliers or manufacturers 

of flammable dusts that can 

explode, particularly where 

these are new substances, 

have a duty under section 6

to inform anyone to whom 

the substance is supplied 

about its properties. This may 

include the results of tests for 

explosibility. 

6 General duties of manufacturers etc. as regards articles and substances for use at work. 

(4) It shall be the duty of any person who manufactures, imports or supplies any substance —

(a)to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that the substance will be safe and without risks to 

health at all times when it is being used, handled, processed, stored or transported by a person at work 

or in premises to which section 4 above applies; 

(b)to carry out or arrange for the carrying out of such testing and examination as may be necessary for 

the performance of the duty imposed on him by the preceding paragraph 

(c)to take such steps as are necessary to secure that persons supplied by that person with the substance 

are provided with adequate information about any risks to health or safety to which the inherent 

properties of the substance may give rise, about the results of a ny relevant tests which have been 

carried out on or in connection with the substance and about any conditions necessary to ensure that 

the substance will be safe and without risks to health at all such times as are mentioned in paragraph 

(a) above and when the substance is being disposed of; and 

(d)to take such steps as are necessary to secure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that persons so 

supplied are provided with all such revisions of information provided to them by virtue of the preceding 

paragra ph as are necessary by reason of its becoming known that anything gives rise to a serious risk 

to health or safety. 

(5)It shall be the duty of any person who undertakes the manufacture of any substance to carry out or 

arrange for the carrying out of any ne cessary research with a view to the discovery and, so far as is Annex A Scan on Overseas Regulations on Combustible Dust 

4 | P a g e 

Country  Act/Regulations  Extract of Act/Regulations on Duties of Manufacturer/ Supplier/Importer 

reasonable practicable, the elimination or minimisation of any risks to health or safety to which the 

substance may give rise at all such times as are mentioned in paragraph (a) of subsection (4) above .

(6) Nothing in the preceding provisions of this section shall be taken to require a person to repeat any 

testing, examination or research which has been carried out otherwise than by him or at his instance, 

in so far as it is reasonable for him to rely on the results thereof for the purposes of those provisions. 

Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974 (legislation.gov.uk) 

US OSHA  Hazard Communication 

Standard 

- Classification of products 

for combustible dust hazards 

Chemical manufacturers or 

importers to classify the 

hazards of chemicals which 

they produce or import. 

Where manufacturers are 

aware that the downstream 

use of their product routinely 

generates combustible dusts, 

a warning addressing a

potential explosion hazard 

should be included on the 

label as an immediate visual 

reminder. SDS should also 

1910.1200 (b)(1) 

This section requires chemical manufacturers or importers to classify the hazards of chemicals which 

they produce or import, and all employers to provide information to their employees about the 

hazardous chemicals to which they are exposed, by means of a hazard communication program, l abels 

and other forms of warning, safety data sheets, and information and training. In addition, this section 

requires distributors to transmit the required information to employers. (Employers who do not 

produce or import chemicals need only focus on thos e parts of this rule that deal with establishing a 

workplace program and communicating information to their workers.) 

1910.1200(c) Definition 

Hazardous chemical means any chemical which is classified as a physical hazard or a health hazard, a 

simple asphyx iant, combustible dust, pyrophoric gas, or hazard not otherwise classified. 

Label means an appropriate group of written, printed or graphic information elements concerning a 

hazardous chemical that is affixed to, printed on, or attached to the immediate co ntainer of a hazardous 

chemical, or to the outside packaging. 

Safety data sheet (SDS) means written or printed material concerning a hazardous chemical that is 

prepared in accordance with paragraph (g) of this section. Annex A Scan on Overseas Regulations on Combustible Dust 

5 | P a g e 

Country  Act/Regulations  Extract of Act/Regulations on Duties of Manufacturer/ Supplier/Importer 

include the pot ential 

explosion hazard. 

Hazard Communication 

Guidance for Combustible 

Dusts | Occupational Safety 

and Health Administration 

(osha.gov) 

1910.1200(d) 

Hazard classification .

1910.1200(d)(1) 

Chemical manufacturers and importers shall evaluate chemicals produced in their workplaces or 

imported by them to classify the chemicals in accordance with this section. For each chemical, the 

chemical manufacturer or importer shall determine the hazard classes, and, where appropriate, the 

category of each class that apply to the chemical being classified. Employers are not required to classif y

chemicals unless they choose not to rely on the classification performed by the chemical manufacturer 

or importer for the chemical to satisfy this requirement. 

1910.1200(d)(2) 

Chemical manufacturers, importers or employers classifying chemicals shall ide ntify and consider the 

full range of available scientific literature and other evidence concerning the potential hazards. There 

is no requirement to test the chemical to determine how to classify its hazards. Appendix A to § 

1910.1200 shall be consulted fo r classification of health hazards, and Appendix B to § 1910.1200 shall 

be consulted for the classification of physical hazards. 

1910.1200 (f)(1) 

Labels on shipped containers. The chemical manufacturer, importer, or distributor shall ensure that 

each conta iner of hazardous chemicals leaving the workplace is labeled, tagged, or marked. Hazards 

not otherwise classified do not have to be addressed on the container. 

1910.1200(g)(1) Annex A Scan on Overseas Regulations on Combustible Dust 

6 | P a g e 

Country  Act/Regulations  Extract of Act/Regulations on Duties of Manufacturer/ Supplier/Importer 

Chemical manufacturers and importers shall obtain or develop a safety data shee t for each hazardous 

chemical they produce or import. Employers shall have a safety data sheet in the workplace for each 

hazardous chemical which they use. 

Application of O SHA's Amended Hazard Communication Standard (HCS 2012) to Combustible Dust 

(1910.1200)] | Occupational Safety and Health Administration 

Australia  Work Health and Safety 

Regulations 2011 

Labelling of hazardous 

chemicals classified under 

GHS. Combustible dust 

hazard is not a classification 

under GHS. 

335 Labelling hazardous chemicals 

(1) The manufacturer or importer of a hazardous chemical must ensure that the hazardous 

chemical is correctly labelled as soon as practicable after manufacturing or importing the 

hazardous chemical. 

(2) A hazardous chemical is correctly labelled if the selection and use of label elements is in 

accordance with the GHS and it complies with Part 3 of Schedule 9. 

338 Supplier labelling hazardous chemicals 

The supplier of a hazardous chemical must not supply the hazardous chemical to another 

workplace if the supplier knows or ought reasonably to know that the hazardous chemical is 

not correctly labelled in accordance with regulation 335. 

339 Supplier to provide safety data sheets 

(1) The supplier of a hazardous chemical to a workplace must ensure that the current safety data 

sheet for the hazardous chemical is provided with the hazardous chemical: 

(a) when the hazardous chemical is first supplied to the workplace; and Annex A Scan on Overseas Regulations on Combustible Dust 

7 | P a g e 

Country  Act/Regulations  Extract of Act/Regulations on Duties of Manufacturer/ Supplier/Importer 

(b) if the safety data sheet for the hazardous chemical is amended — when the hazardous 

chemical is first supplied to the workplace after the safety data sheet is amended. 

Hazardous chemical in the Regulations means a substance, mixture or article that satisfies the criteria 

for any one or more hazard classes in the GHS (including a classification referred to in Schedule 6 to 

these Regulations), unless the only hazard class or classes for which the substance, mixture or article 

satisfies the criteria are any one or more of the following: 

(a) acute toxicity —oral —category 5; 

(b) acute toxicit y—dermal —category 5; 

(c) acute toxicity —inhalation —category 5; 

(d) skin corrosion/irritation —category 3; 

(e) aspiration hazard —category 2; 

(f) flammable gas —category 2 ;

(g) acute hazard to the aquatic environment —category 1, 2 or 3; 

(h) chronic hazard to the aquatic environment —category 1, 2, 3 or 4; 

(i) hazardous to the ozone layer. 

Note:  Schedule 9 - Classification, packaging and labelling requirements 

Work Health and Safety Regulations 2011 (legislation.gov.au) 

Duties of Employer Annex A Scan on Overseas Regulations on Combustible Dust 

8 | P a g e 

Country  Act/Regulations  Extract of Act/Regulations on Duties of Employer 

UK HSE  Health and Safety at 

Work etc. Act 1974 

To ensure the safety of both 

employees and other people 

from the risks arising from the 

work activity, so far as is 

reasonably practicable. 

1.1.1.1 2 General duties of employers to their employees. 

(1) It shall be the duty of every employer to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, the health, safety and 

welfare at work of all his employees. 

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of an employer’s duty un der the preceding subsection, the matters 

to which that duty extends include in particular —

(a) the provision and maintenance of plant and systems of work that are, so far as is reasonably practicable, 

safe and without risks to health; 

(b) arrangements for ensuring, so far as is reasonably practicable, safety and absence of risks to health in 

connection with the use, handling, storage and transport of articles and substances; 

(c)the provision of such information, instruction, training and supervision as is necessary to ensure, so far as 

is reasonably practicable, the health and safety at work of his employees; 

(d)so far as is reasonably practicable as regards any place of work under the employer’s control, the 

maintenance of it in a condition that is safe an d without risks to health and the provision and maintenance 

of means of access to and egress from it that are safe and without such risks; 

(e)the provision and maintenance of a working environment for his employees that is, so far as is reasonably 

practica ble, safe, without risks to health, and adequate as regards facilities and arrangements for their 

welfare at work. 

Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974 (legislation.gov.uk) 

US OSHA  OSH Act of 1970 

Furnish to each of his 

employees employment and 

a place of employment which 

SEC. 5. Duties 

Each employer --Annex A Scan on Overseas Regulations on Combustible Dust 

9 | P a g e 

Country  Act/Regulations  Extract of Act/Regulations on Duties of Employer 

are free from recognized 

hazards that are causing or 

are likely to cause death or 

serious physical harm to his 

employees & comply with 

occupational safety and 

health standards 

promulgated under this Act 

(1) shall furnish to each of his employees employment and a place of employment which are free from 

recognized hazards that are causing or are l ikely to cause death or serious physical harm to his employees; 

(2) shall comply with occupational safety and health standards promulgated under this Act. 

OSH Act of 1970 | Occupational Safety and Health Administration 

Australia  Work Health and Safety Act 

Employer/occupier must 

ensure, so far as reasonably 

practicable, the health and 

safety of persons at work 

19 Primary duty of care 

(1) A person conducting a business or undertaking must ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, 

the health and safety of: 

(a) workers engaged, or caused to be engaged by the person; and 

(b) workers whose activities in carrying out work are influenced or directed by the person; 

while the workers are at work in the business or undertaking. 

(2) A person conducting a business or undertaking must ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, 

that the health and safety of other persons is not put at risk from work carried out as part of 

the conduct of the business or undertaking. 

Work Health and Safety Act 2011 (legislation.gov.au) 

Hazardous area / atmosphere Annex A Scan on Overseas Regulations on Combustible Dust 

10 | P a g e 

Country  Act/Regulations  Extract of Act/ Regulations on Hazardous area / atmosphere 

UK HSE  Dangerous Substances and 

Explosive Atmospheres 

Regulations (DSEAR) 

Regulations applicable to: 

• any workplace where a 

potentially explosive 

atmosphere may 

occur. 

• Workplaces where 

dangerous substances 

are present, used or 

produced. 

Identification of hazardous 

zone for selection of 

equipment and protective 

systems to be used 

Places where explosive a tmospheres may occur 

7. —(1) Every employer shall classify places at the workplace where an explosive atmosphere may occur 

into hazardous or non -hazardous places in accordance with paragraph 1 of Schedule 2 and shall classify those 

places so classified as hazardous into zones in accordance with paragraph 2 of that Schedule; and that 

Schedule shall have effect subject to the notes at the end of that Schedule. 

(2) The employer shall ensure that the requirements specified in Schedule 3 are applie d to equipment and 

protective systems in the places classified as hazardous pursuant to paragraph (1). 

(3) Where necessary, places classified as hazardous pursuant to paragraph (1) shall be marked by the 

employer with signs at their points of entry in acco rdance with Schedule 4. 

(4) Before a workplace containing places classified as hazardous pursuant to paragraph (1) is used for the 

first time, the employer shall ensure that its overall explosion safety is verified by a person who is competent 

in the field of explosion protection as a result of his experience or any professional training or both. 

(5) The employer shall ensure that appropriate work clothing which does not give rise to electrostatic 

discharges is provided for use in places classified as hazar dous pursuant to paragraph (1). 

Note: 

Schedule 2 – Classification of places where explosive atmospheres may occur 

Schedule 3 - Criteria for the selection of equipment and protective systems 

Schedule 4 – Warning sign for places where explosive atmospheres may occur 

The Dangerous Substances and Explosive Atmospheres Regulations 2002 (legislation.gov.uk) Annex A Scan on Overseas Regulations on Combustible Dust 

11 | P a g e 

Country  Act/Regulations  Extract of Act/ Regulations on Hazardous area / atmosphere 

US OSHA  1910.307 Hazardous 

(classified) locations 

Requirements for electric 

equipment and wiring in 

locations that are classified 

depending on the properties of 

the flammable vapors, liquids 

or gases, or combustible dusts 

or fibers that may be present 

therein and the likelihood that 

a flammable or combust ible 

concentration or quantity is 

present. 

1910.307(a)(1) 

Applicability .

This section covers the requirements for electric equipment and wiring in locations that are classified 

depending on the properties of the flammable vapors, liquids or gases, or comb ustible dusts or fibers that 

may be present therein and the likelihood that a flammable or combustible concentration or quantity is 

present. Hazardous (classified) locations may be found in occupancies such as, but not limited to, the 

following: aircraft h angars, gasoline dispensing and service stations, bulk storage plants for gasoline or other 

volatile flammable liquids, paint -finishing process plants, health care facilities, agricultural or other facilities 

where excessive combustible dusts may be presen t, marinas, boat yards, and petroleum and chemical 

processing plants. Each room, section or area shall be considered individually in determining its classification. 

1910.307(c) 

Electrical installations . Equipment, wiring methods, and installations of equip ment in hazardous (classified) 

locations shall be intrinsically safe, approved for the hazardous (classified) location, or safe for the hazardous 

(classified) location. Requirements for each of these options are as follows: 

1910.307(c)(1) 

Intrinsically saf e. Equipment and associated wiring approved as intrinsically safe is permitted in any 

hazardous (classified) location for which it is approved; 

1910.307(c)(2) 

Approved for the hazardous (classified) location .

1910.307(c)(2)(i) Annex A Scan on Overseas Regulations on Combustible Dust 

12 | P a g e 

Country  Act/Regulations  Extract of Act/ Regulations on Hazardous area / atmosphere 

Equipment shall be approved not only for the class of location, but also for the ignitable or combustible 

properties of the specific gas, vapor, dust, or fiber that will be present. 

1910.307 - Hazardous (classified) locations. | Occupational Safety and Health Administration (osha.gov) 

Australia  Work Health and Safety 

Regulations 2011 

Workplace must manage risks 

to health and safety associated 

with a hazardous atmosphere 

Hazardous atmosphere 

includes condition where 

combustible dust is present in a 

quantity and form that would 

result in a hazardous area 

5 Definition 

hazardous area means an area in which: 

(a) an explosive gas is present in the atmosphere in a quantity that requires special precautions to be taken 

for the construction, installation and use of plant; or 

(b) a combustible dust is present, or could reasonably be expected to be present, in the atmosphere in 

a quantity that requires special precautions to be taken for the construction, installation and use of 

plant. 

51 Managing risks to health and safety 

(1) A person conducting a business or undertaking at a workplace must manage risks to health and 

safety associated with a hazardous atmosphere at the workplace, in accordance with Part 3.1. 

Note: WHS Act —section 19 (see regulation 9). 

(2) An atmosphere is a hazardous atmosphere if: 

(a) the atmosphere does not have a safe oxygen level; or 

(b) the concentration of oxygen in the atmosphere increases the fire risk; or 

(c) the concentration of flammable gas, vapour, mist or fumes exceeds 5% of the LEL for the gas, 

vapour, mist or fumes; or Annex A Scan on Overseas Regulations on Combustible Dust 

13 | P a g e 

Country  Act/Regulations  Extract of Act/ Regulations on Hazardous area / atmosphere 

(d) combustible dust is present in a quantity and form that would result in a hazardous area. 

Work Health and Safety Regulations 2011 (legislation.gov.au )

Control Measures to mitigate dust explosion 

Country  Act/Regulations  Extract of Act/Regulations on Control Measures to mitigate dust explosion 

UK HSE  • DSEAR + ACOP + 

Guidelines 

• The Fire Precautions 

(Workplace) 

Regulations 1997 

• The Provision and Use 

of Work Equipment 

Regulations 1998 

• The Workplace 

(Health, Safety and 

Welfare) Regulations 

1992 

• The Control of 

Substances Hazardous 

to Health Regulations 

1999 

• The Equipment and 

Protective Systems for 

Use in Potentially 

1) Where a dangerous substance is or is liable to be present at the workplace, the employer shall make a 

suitable and sufficient assessment of the risks to his employees which arise from that substance. 

(2) The risk assessment shall include consideration o f –

(a) the hazardous properties of the substance; 

(b) information on safety provided by the supplier, including information contained in any relevant 

safety data sheet; 

(c) the circumstances of the work including –

(i) the work processes and substances used and their possible interactions; 

(ii) the amount of the substance involved; 

(iii) where the work will involve more than one dangerous substance, the risk presented by 

such substances in combination; and 

(iv) the arrangements for the safe handling, storage and transport of dangerous substances 

and of wa ste containing dangerous substances; 

(d) activities, such as maintenance, where there is the potential for a high level of risk; Annex A Scan on Overseas Regulations on Combustible Dust 

14 | P a g e 

Country  Act/Regulations  Extract of Act/Regulations on Control Measures to mitigate dust explosion 

Explosive 

Atmospheres 

Regulations 1996 

(e) the effect of measures which have been or will be taken pursuant to these Regulations; 

(f) the likelihood that an explos ive atmosphere will occur and its persistence; 

(g) the likelihood that ignition sources, including electrostatic discharges, will be present and 

become active and effective; 

(h) the scale of the anticipated effects of a fire or an explosion; 

(i) any pla ces which are or can be connected via openings to places in which explosive atmospheres 

may occur; and 

(j) such additional safety information as the employer may need in order to complete the risk 

assessment. 

(3) The risk assessment shall be reviewed by the employer regularly so as to keep it up to date and 

particularly if –

(a) there is reason to suspect that the risk assessment is no longer valid; or 

(b) there has been a significant change in the matters to which the risk assessment relates including 

when the workplace, work processes, or organisation of the work undergoes sign ificant changes, 

extensions or conversions; 

and where, as a result of the review, changes to the risk assessment are required, those changes 

shall be made. 

(4) Where the employer employs five or more employees, the employer shall record the significant f indings 

of the risk assessment as soon as is practicable after that assessment is made, including in particular –

(a) the measures which have been or will be taken by him pursuant to these Regulations; Annex A Scan on Overseas Regulations on Combustible Dust 

15 | P a g e 

Country  Act/Regulations  Extract of Act/Regulations on Control Measures to mitigate dust explosion 

(b) sufficient information to show that the workplac e and work processes are designed, operated 

and maintained with due regard for safety and that, in accordance with the Provision and Use of 

Work Equipment Regulations 1998, adequate arrangements have been made for the safe use of 

work equipment; and 

(c) where an explosive atmosphere may occur at the workplace and subject to the transitional 

provisions in regulation 17(1) to (3), sufficient information to show –

(i) those places which have been classified into zones pursuant to regulation 7(1); 

(ii) equip ment which is required for, or helps to ensure, the safe operation of equipment 

located in places classified as hazardous pursuant to regulation 7(1); 

(iii) that any verification of overall explosion safety required by regulation 7(4) has been 

carried out ; and 

(iv) the aim of any co -ordination required by regulation 11 and the measures and 

procedures for implementing it. 

The Dangerous Substances and Explosive Atmospheres Regulations 2002 (legislation.gov.uk) 

US OSHA  OSHA Standards Regulations 

• Housekeeping and 

Related Standards 

• Equipment Standards 

Ap plicable to 

Combustible Dust 

• Electrical (Hazard) 

Class II Standards 

OSHA’s Grain Handling Facilities standard 29 CFR 1910.272 has requirements for limiting dust accumulations 

in grain handling facilities. 

29 CFR1910.272(j)(2)(ii) 

The employer shall immediately remove any fugitive grain dust accumulations whenever they exceed 1/8 

inch (0.32 cm) at priorit y housekeeping areas, pursuant to the housekeeping program, or shall demonstrate 

and assure, through the development and implementation of the housekeeping program, that equivalent 

protection is provided.” Annex A Scan on Overseas Regulations on Combustible Dust 

16 | P a g e 

Country  Act/Regulations  Extract of Act/Regulations on Control Measures to mitigate dust explosion 

Other OSHA Standards 

Applicable to Combustible 

Dust Inspections 

• 29 CFR 1910.132, 

Personal Protective 

Equipment General 

Requirements 

• 29 CFR 1910.178, 

Powered Industrial 

Trucks 

• 29 CFR 1910, Subpart 

Q, Welding, Cutting 

and Brazing 

• 29 CFR 1910.1200, 

Hazard 

Communication .

29 CFR 1910.272(j)(1) 

The employer shall develop and implement a written housekeeping program that establishes the frequency 

and method(s) determined best to reduce accumulations of fugitive grain dust on ledges, floors, equipment, 

and other exposed surfaces. 

1910.272 - Grain handling facilities. | Occupational Safety and Health Administration (osha.gov) 

29 CFR 1910.22, Walking -Working Surfaces General Requirements 

1910.22(a)(2) 

The floor of each workroom is maintain ed in a clean and, to the extent feasible, in a dry condition. When 

wet processes are used, drainage must be maintained and, to the extent feasible, dry standing places, such 

as false floors, platforms, and mats must be provided. 

1910.22(a)(3) 

Walking -work ing surfaces are maintained free of hazards such as sharp or protruding objects, loose boards, 

corrosion, leaks, spills, snow, and ice. 

1910.22 - General requirements. | Occupational Safety and Health Administration (osha.gov) 

1910.94 Ventilation 

1910.94(c) 

Spray finishing operations .

1910.94(c)(2) Annex A Scan on Overseas Regulations on Combustible Dust 

17 | P a g e 

Country  Act/Regulations  Extract of Act/Regulations on Control Measures to mitigate dust explosion 

Location and application . Spray booths or spray rooms are to be used to enclose or confine all operations. 

Spray -finishing operations shall be located as provided in sections 201 through 206 of the Standard for Spray 

Finishing Using Flammable and Combustible Materials, NFPA No. 33 -1969. 

29 CFR 1910.261, Pulp, Paper, and Paperboard Mills , applies to dust control for rag and old paper 

preparation, see (f)(5). This standard also has requirements for sulfur dust explosion hazards, see (g)(1)(i), 

(g)(1)(iii), and (a)(3)(viii). 

1910.261(f)(5) , Dust . Measures for the control of dust shall be provided, in accordance with American 

National Standards Z33.1 —1961, Z87.1 —1968, and Z88.2 —1969. 

1910.261(g)(1)(i) , Sulfur -burner houses shall be safely and adequately ventilated, and every precaution shall 

be taken to guard against dust explosion hazards and fires, in accordance with American National Standards 

Z9.2 —1960 and Z12.12 —1968. 

1910.261(g)(1)(ii) , Nonsparking tools and equipment shall be used in handling dry sulfur. 

1910.261(g)(1)(iii) , Sulfur storage bins shall be kept free of sulfur dust accumulation, in ac cordance with 

American National Standard Z9.2 —1960. 

1910.261 - Pulp, paper, and paperboard mills. | Occupational Safety and Health Administration (osha.gov) 

29 CFR 1910 .263, Bakery Equipment . See paragraph (k)(2) for sugar and spice pulverizer requirements. See 

paragraphs (d)(3)(v), (d)(6)(ii), (d)(7)(iii), (d)(8)(i) for fugitive dust emission prevention requirements for flour 

handling equipment. 

1910.263(k)(2) 

Sugar an d spice pulverizers. Annex A Scan on Overseas Regulations on Combustible Dust 

18 | P a g e 

Country  Act/Regulations  Extract of Act/Regulations on Control Measures to mitigate dust explosion 

1910.263(k)(2)(i) 

All drive belts used in connection with sugar and spice pulverizers shall be grounded by means of metal 

combs or other effective means of removing static electricity. All pulverizing of sugar or spice grinding shall 

be done in accordance with NFPA 62 -1967 (Standard for Dust Hazards of Sugar and Cocoa) and NFPA 656 -

1959 (Standard for Dust Hazards in Spice Grinding Plants), which are incorporated by reference as specified 

in Sec. 1910.6. 

1910.263(k)(2)(ii) 

Magnetic separators shall be provided to reduce fire and explosion hazards. 

1910.263(d)(3)(v) 

All dumpbin and blender hoods shall be of sufficient capacity to prevent circulation of flour dust outside the 

hoods. 

1910.263(d)(6)(ii) 

Storage bins shall be pro vided with gaskets and locks or latches to keep the cover closed, or other equivalent 

devices in order to insure the dust tightness of the cover. Covers at openings where an employee may enter 

the bin shall also be provided with a hasp and a lock, so locat ed that the employee may lock the cover in 

the open position whenever it is necessary to enter the bin. 

1910.263(d)(7)(iii) 

The covers of all screw conveyors shall be made removable in convenient sections, held on with stationary 

clamps located at proper i ntervals keeping all covers dust -tight. Where drop or hinged bottom sections are 

provided this provision shall not apply. Annex A Scan on Overseas Regulations on Combustible Dust 

19 | P a g e 

Country  Act/Regulations  Extract of Act/Regulations on Control Measures to mitigate dust explosion 

1910.263(d)(8)(i) 

Enclosures of all types of flour sifters shall be so constructed that they are dust -tight but readily accessible 

for interior inspection. 

1910.263 - Bakery equipment. | Occupational Safety and Health Administration (osha.gov) 

• 29 CFR 1910.265, Sawmills . See paragraphs (c)(20)(ii) through (vi) on collecting systems, exhaust and 

conveyor systems, and dust systems. 

1910.265(c)(20) 

Blower, collecting, and exhaust systems —

1910.265(c)(20)(i) 

Design, construction, and maintenance. Blower collecting, and exha ust systems should be designed, 

constructed, and maintained in accordance with American National Standards Z33.1 —1961 (For the 

Installation of Blower and Exhaust Systems for Dust, Stock, and Vapor Removal or Conveying) and Z12.2 —

1962 (R1969) (Code for the Prevention of Dust Explosion in Woodworking and Wood Flour Manufacturing 

Plants), which are incorporated by reference as specified in §1910.6. 

1910.265(c)(20)(ii) 

Collecting systems . All mills containing one or more machines that create dust, shavings, chi ps, or slivers 

during a period of time equal to or greater than one -fourth of the working day, shall be equipped with a 

collecting system. It may be either continuous or automatic, and shall be of sufficient strength and capacity 

to enable it to remove suc h refuse from points of operation and immediate vicinities of machines and work 

areas. Annex A Scan on Overseas Regulations on Combustible Dust 

20 | P a g e 

Country  Act/Regulations  Extract of Act/Regulations on Control Measures to mitigate dust explosion 

1910.265(c)(20)(iii) 

Exhaust or conveyor systems . Each woodworking machine that creates dust, shavings, chips, or slivers shall 

be equipped with an exhaust or conveyor system located and adjusted to remove the maximum amount of 

refuse from the point of operation and immediate vicinity. 

1910.265(c)(20)(v) 

Dust chambers . Exhaust pipes shall not discharge into an unconfined outside pile if uncontrolled fire or 

expl osion hazards are created. They may empty into settling or dust chambers, designed to prevent the dust 

or refuse from entering any work area. Such chambers shall be constructed and operated to minimize the 

danger of fire or dust explosion. 

1910.265(c)(20)( vi) 

Hand removal of refuse . Provision for the daily removal of refuse shall be made in all operations not required 

to have an exhaust system or having refuse too heavy, bulky, or otherwise unsuitable to be handled by the 

exhaust system. 

1910.265 - Sawmills. | Occupational Safety and Health Administration (osha.gov) 

• 29 CFR 1910.269, Electric Power Generation, Transmission, and Distribution , applies to combustible dust 

inspections at coal -fired electric power generating stations. This standard, see subparagraph 

1910.269(v)(11)(xii), should be used for Electrical (Hazard) Class II Considerations at coal -fired electric power 

generating stations. 

1910.269(v)(11)(xii) 

Where coal -handling operations may produce a combustible atmosphere from fuel sources or from 

flammable gases or dust, sources of ignition shall be eliminated or safely controlled to prevent ignition of Annex A Scan on Overseas Regulations on Combustible Dust 

21 | P a g e 

Country  Act/Regulations  Extract of Act/Regulations on Control Measures to mitigate dust explosion 

the combustible atmosphere. 

Note to paragraph (v)(11)(xii) : Locations that are hazardous because of the presence of combustible dust 

are classified as Class II hazardous locations. See § 1910.307. 

1910.269 - Electric power g eneration, transmission, and distribution. | Occupational Safety and Health 

Administration (osha.gov) 

Australia  • Work Health and 

Safety Regulations 

• Dangerous Goods 

Safety Act 

Work Health and Safety Regulations 

Regulation 51 -52: A person conducting a business or undertaking must manage the risk to health and safety 

associated with a hazardous atmosphere or an ignition source in a hazardous atmosphere at the workplace. 

Dangerous Goods Safety Act (Western Australia) 

Section 8 – Person involv ed in storing, handling or transporting DG must take all reasonably practicable 

measures to minimize risk to people, property and environment. 

Section 20 Codes of practice, approval of 

(1) For the purpose of providing practical guidance to persons engaged, d irectly or indirectly, in storing, 

handling, or transporting dangerous goods, the Minister may approve any code of practice as in 

force from time to time or as in force at a particular time. 

(2) A code of practice –

(a) may consist of any code, standard, rul e, specification or provision relating to the storage, 

handling or transport of dangerous goods published by a body recognised as having an 

expertise on the subject; and 

(b) may incorporate by reference any other such document as in force from time to time or as in 

force at a particular time. Annex A Scan on Overseas Regulations on Combustible Dust 

22 | P a g e 

Country  Act/Regulations  Extract of Act/Regulations on Control Measures to mitigate dust explosion 

https://www.slp.wa.gov.au/gazette/gg.nsf/gaz/B7ADFF1DA908CF46482582800004D23E?openDocume 

nt Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

23 | P a g e 

Annex B Singapore Regulat ions on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

Singapore Civil Defence Force (SCDF) 

Singapore Civil Defence Force (SCDF) implements licensing controls over petroleum and flammable materials (P&FM) that are listed under the Fire Safet y Act 

and the Fire Safety (Petroleum & Flammable Materials) Regulations. Companies are required to apply for a P&FM storage licenc e, which is renewable once 

every year. This is to help ensure fire safety compliance for the storage of P&FM, minimize fire safety risk through safe han dling of these substances and 

ensure that there are proper emergency response procedures put in place. T he current list of petroleum and flammable materials included metal powders 

such as aluminum, magnesium and zinc, which are combustible powders. 

For new built and buildings where works carried out will affect the fire safety works within the building, building plan approval has to be sought from SCDF 

and the fire safety measures are required to comply with the Fire Code requirements. This will also apply to buildings or pre mises that may use or store 

combustible powders. 

Singapore Food Agency (SFA) 

Singapore Food Agency (SFA) administers the Sale of Food Act and the Singapore Food Regulations to ensure that the food made available for sale in Singapore 

are safe for consumption. Part of SFA’s regime involves the implementation of controls on co mmercial food imports that enter Singapore including process 

food some of which are combustible dusts . Examples of processed food include: 

• Infant formula 

• Milk products (eg. cheese, milk powder, etc.) 

• Biscuits 

• Flour 

• Cereals 

• Coffee powder 

There are labell ing requirements for pre -packed food and the labels aim to provide consumers with basic information of the product such as the source, 

nature and contents, quantity and quality. Under the Food Regulations, these labels need to include details such as the i ngredients used. Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

24 | P a g e 

Ministry of Manpower (MOM) 

Under the Workplace Safety and Health Act and its subsidiary legislations, MOM ensures that workers’ safety and health is saf eguarded in workplaces. 

Currently, there are provisions under the WSH (General Provisi ons) Regulations on precautions and measures to be taken with regards to explosive, flammable 

dust, gas, vapour or substance. Combustible dust which could cause combustible dust explosion are also included under this cl ause. However, it was not 

explicitly stated in the clause that combustible dust is part of flammable dust. There is also no requirement for the occupier handling combustible dust to 

inform MOM or other agencies on the use of such material except for those flammable solids which are licensed u nder SCDF. 

The Workplace Safety and Health Act (WSHA) covers duties of manufacturer and supplier of hazardous substances prescribed in t he Fifth Schedule to provide 

information on the safe use of the hazardous substance. Additionally, the WSH (General Prov isions) Regulations also require seller or agent of the seller of 

the hazardous substances to provide Safety Data Sheet that conforms to Singapore Standard SS 586 Part 3: Preparation of Safet y Data Sheets (SDS), which 

conforms to the GHS. This is to ensure proper hazard communication to users of hazardous substances on the potential hazards and precautionary measures 

to take when handling and storing of these substances. As GHS classification does not include combustible dust hazard as one of the hazard cla ssifications, 

chemicals which are toxic substances and pose combustible dust hazard, the label for the product will only cover the toxicity hazard but not combustible dust 

hazard. In addition, food products such as milk powder, plain flour are not deemed a s hazardous substances, warning labels would not apply. 

Agency  Regulations  Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

Customs  Regulation of 

Imports and 

Exports Act 

Import  All goods entering Singapore goes through Customs 

Regulations for registration, regulation and control of importation and exportation, etc. 

3. —(1) The Minister may make regulations for the registration, regulation and control of all or any class 

of goods imported into, exported from, transhipped in or in transit through Singapore. 

[6/2003 wef 01/04/2003] 

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1), the Minister may make regulations —

(a) for prohibiting, absolutely or conditionally, or for regulating, in all cases or in any specified case 

or class of cases and subject to such exceptions as may be made by the regulations, the import Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

25 | P a g e 

Agency  Regulations  Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

or export or the carriage coastwise or the shipment as shi ps’ stores or the transhipment or transit 

of all goods or of goods of any specified class or description; 

(b) for imposing on such importers, exporters, agents, forwarding agents, common carriers, 

consignors or consignees of goods or on owners, agents, masters or persons in charge of a 

conveyance as may be prescribed in the regulations, the duty to furnish —

(i)  to the Director -General; or 

[6/2003 wef 01/04/2003] 

(ii)  to the owner, agent, master or person in charge of a conveyance, or to a railway 

station -master or to such other person as may be prescribed, 

such particulars, information or documents relating to goods imported into, exported from, 

transhipped in or in transit through Singapore as may be prescribed; 

(c) for permitting the Director -General to authorise, in such manner as may be prescribed, the 

importation, exportation, transhipment or transit of goods in regard to which the required 

particulars, information or documents have been furnished; 

[6/2003 wef 01/04/2 003] 

(d) for prohibiting the importation, exportation, transhipment or transit of goods, or the delivery of 

goods or of documents relating to such goods, except in compliance with the regulations or with 

the approval of the Director -General; 

[6/2003 wef 01/04/2003] 

(da ) for prohibiting the exportation of all goods or goods of any specified class or description except 

in compliance with such conditions as may be prescribed for the purpose of complying with any Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

26 | P a g e 

Agency  Regulations  Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

preferential ta riff arrangement or agreement between Singapore and a country or territory 

outside Singapore, including any condition that the goods exported are to be from a prescribed 

source or that the manufacture of such goods is to be carried out or procured by any p erson 

registered under regulations made under this Act; 

[28/2003 wef 01/01/2004] 

(e) for requiring the owner or agent of any conveyance to furnish particulars of coal, oil or other fuel 

or stores placed on board that conveyance in Singapore; 

(f) for dete rmining the form and manner in which the required particulars, information and 

documents shall be furnished; 

(g) for prescribing the time within which the required particulars, information and documents shall 

be furnished; 

(h) for requiring the master of any vessel to attend at an examination station or the office of the 

Port Master, and to furnish such particulars, information and documents, as may be prescribed; 

[6/2003 wef 01/04/2003] 

(i) for prohibiting the issue of a port clearance to the m aster of any vessel pending compliance with 

any provision of the regulations; 

(j) for the registration of all or such class of goods, as may be prescribed, imported into, exported 

from, transhipped in or in transit through Singapore; 

(k) for the registra tion of importers, exporters, common carriers of goods or any person making a 

declaration under this Act or any regulations made thereunder; 

[Act 3 of 2014 wef 01/04/2014] Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

27 | P a g e 

Agency  Regulations  Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(l) for the issue of certificates of entitlement to permits for the export or import of such classes of 

goods, as are prescribed, to successful applicants who submitted bids for the certificates; 

(m) for requiring fees and deposits to be paid for the submission of applications for the issue of 

certificates of entitlement under any regulations made under paragraph (l), and providing for the 

forfeiture of deposits for non -compliance with any of the conditions governing the submission 

of such applications; 

(n) for prescribing the levy, or the method or manner for determining the amoun t of the levy, 

payable for the import or export of different classes of goods or for a certificate of entitlement 

issued under any regulations made under paragraph (l) and for prescribing the manner or 

method in which such levy shall be paid; 

(na ) for req uiring security to be provided to secure compliance with this Act, any regulations made 

thereunder or any condition imposed under this Act or such regulations, and to make provision 

for the form, manner, amount, period and forfeiture of such security; 

[28/ 2003 wef 01/01/2004] 

(o) for prescribing the fees and charges, or the method or manner for determining the amount of 

the fees or charges, payable by virtue of any regulations made under this section, and for 

prescribing the manner or method in which such fees or charges shall be paid; 

(p) for prescribing the fees to be charged for services and facilities provided by the Director -General; 

[28/2003 wef 01/01/2004] 

[6/2003 wef 01/04/2003] 

(pa ) for the bringing of appeals to the Minister in respect of a ny matter referred to in this Act or any 

regulations made thereunder, and the procedure for such appeals; and Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

28 | P a g e 

Agency  Regulations  Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

[28/2003 wef 01/01/2004] 

(q) for prescribing anything which is required to be prescribed under this Act or which is necessary 

or expedient to be prescribed for carrying out or giving effect to the provisions of this Act. 

[6/2003 wef 01/04/2003] 

Customs  Regulation of 

Imports and 

Exports 

Regulations 

Import  Import permit/licence from respective agencies required in order to allow goods to enter Singapore 

Permit for import, export or transhipment 

3. —(1) Subject to paragraphs (2), (2A), (3) and (4) and regulation 5A, no goods shall be —

(a) imported into Singapore; 

(b) exported out of Singapore; or 

(c) transhipped in Singapore, 

except in accordance with a permit granted by the Director -General under this Part. 

[S 370/2013 wef 01/07/2013] 

[S 645/2017 wef 08/11/2017] 

(2) The requirement in paragraph (1) for a permit to import, export or tranship any goods shall not apply 

if such goods are not controlled imports, controlled exports or controlled transhipments and are —

(a) personal or household effects, other than motor vehicles, which —

(i)  accompany passengers, crew or employees of trans port undertakings by land, sea or 

air; Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

29 | P a g e 

Agency  Regulations  Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(ii)  are not being transported for sale but are intended for the personal or household 

use of such passengers, crew or employees of transport undertakings; and 

(iii)  in the case of such household effects, are being transported for the purpose of a 

transfer of residence of the owner to Singapore or to a place outside Singapore; 

(b) being imported, exported or transhipped by parcel post; 

(c) diplomatic correspondence; 

(d) being imported, exported or transhipped by —

(i)  the joint defence force, including the Singapore Armed Forces, the Singapore Police 

Force and the Singapore Civil Defence Force, including personal and household 

effects of its officers but excluding civilian motor vehicles; or 

(ii)  the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, including personal and household effects of its officers 

but excluding motor vehicles; 

(e) used motor vehicles covered by Carnet de Passage which are endorsed by the Automobile 

Association of Singapore; 

(f) trade samples, specimens for analysis or test, and gifts, the total value of which does not exceed 

$400; 

(g) commercial, shipping or airline documents, press photographs or negatives, news write -ups, 

news clippings, news films or news transcription tapes; Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

30 | P a g e 

Agency  Regulations  Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(h) human corpses, human remains, human bones or cremated ashes; or 

[S 370/2013 wef 01/07/2013] 

(i) human transplant materials. 

[S 370/2013 wef 01/07/2013] 

(2A) The requirement in paragraph (1) for a permit to import any goods shall not apply if such goods —

(a) are not controlled imports; 

(b) have a total value which does not exceed $400; and 

(c) are being imported by air. 

[S 370/2013 wef 01/07/2013] 

(3) The requirement in paragraph (1) for a permit to export any goods shall not apply if such goods —

(a) are not controlled exports; 

(b) have a total value which does not exceed $1,000; and 

[S 370/2013 wef 01/07/2013] 

(c) are being exported by air. 

[S 370/2013 wef 01/07/2013] 

(4) The requirement in paragraph (1) for a permit to tranship any goods shall not apply to goods —

(a) which are not controlled transhipments; and Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

31 | P a g e 

Agency  Regulations  Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(b) which —

(i)  are not transhipped from one free trade zone to another; or 

(ii)  are carried by air to and from Singapore during transhipment, and have a total value 

which does not exceed $1,000. 

Customs  Regulation of 

Imports and 

Exports 

Regulations 

Import 

Application for import certificate 

28. —(1) An application for the issue of an import certificate under this regulation shall be —

(a) made by an importer of goods, whether he is the end -user or not; 

(b) made in such manner as the Director -General may determine; 

(c) made in triplicate in such form as the Director -General may determine with particulars of —

(i)  the quantity, value and a complete description of the goods to be imported; 

(ii)  the name and address of the end -user of the goods; and 

(iii)  such undertaking or other information as the Director -General may require; and 

(d) accompanied by —

(i)  a declaration by the foreign exporter that the goods are subject to the export control 

of the exporting country; and 

(ii)  such information or document as the Director -General may require. Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

32 | P a g e 

Agency  Regulations  Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(2) An import certificate issued by the Director -General under this regulation shall be in duplicate and shall 

be valid for the period specified in the certificate and shall be subject to such conditions as the Director -

General may impose. 

(3) The Director -General may at any time vary or add to the conditions imposed under paragraph (2). 

(4) The validity of an import certificate may, on the application of the importer concerned before the 

expiry of the certificate, be extended for such period of time as the Director -General thinks fit. 

[S 170/2003 wef 01/04/2003] 

(5) Any person who breaches an undertaking given under paragraph (1)( c)(iii) or a 

condition imposed by this regulation shall be guilty of an offence. 

SCDF  Fire Safety Act  Import, 

distribution 

(transport) 

Import, transport licence for petroleum and flammable materials under the Act 

Import of petroleum and flammable materials 

35A. —(1) No person shall import any class of petroleum or any flammable material if —

(a) the regulations require the person importing such petroleum or flammable material to hold a 

licence from the Commissioner to import such petroleum or flammable material; and 

(b) the person does not hold such a valid licence. 

(2) No person shall import any class of petroleum or any flammable material unless the importation —Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

33 | P a g e 

Agency  Regulations  Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(a) is effected in accordance with the provisions of his licence and with every condition specified 

therein; and 

(b) is in such quantities and in such manner and in accordanc e with requirements prescribed in 

relation to such petroleum or flammable material. 

[Act 14 of 2013 wef 01/09/2013] 

[7/2004 wef 16/02/2005] 

Transport of petroleum and flammable materials 

35B. —(1) No person shall transport any class of petroleum or any flammable material (other than as a 

driver of a road vehicle) if —

(a) the regulations require the person transporting such petroleum or flammable material to hold 

a licence from the Commissioner to transport such petroleum or flammable ma terial; and 

(b) the person does not hold such a valid licence. 

(2) No person shall transport any class of petroleum or any flammable material (other than as a driver of 

a road vehicle) unless the transportation —

(a) is in accordance with the provisions of his licence and with every condition specified therein; 

and 

(b) is in such quantities and in such manner and in accordance with requirements prescribed in 

relation to such petroleum or flammable material. 

[Act 14 of 2013 wef 01/09/2013] Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

34 | P a g e 

Agency  Regulations  Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(3) No person shall drive any vehicle transporting any class of petroleum or any flammable material by 

road if —

(a) the regulations require the vehicle to be licensed to transport such petroleum or flammable 

material and the vehicle is not licensed by the Commissioner to carry such petroleum or 

flammable material; and 

(b) the regulations require the person to hold a permit from the Commissioner to drive a vehicle 

carrying such petroleum or flammable material and the person do es not hold such a valid 

permit. 

(4) No person shall drive any vehicle transporting any class of petroleum or any flammable material by 

road unless he does so in such manner and in accordance with requirements prescribed in relation to such 

petroleum or flammable material, and in accordance with the provisions of his permit and every condition 

specified therein. 

[Act 14 of 2013 wef 01/09/2013] 

(5) Nothing in this section shall apply to petroleum or any flammable material in the fuel tank o f a vehicle 

which is used or intended to be used as fuel for that vehicle. 

(6) Every permit issued by the Commissioner before the date of commencement of section 16 

of the Fire Safety (Amendment) Act 2004 authorising any person to drive any vehicle tran sporting 

any class of petroleum or any flammable material by road shall be deemed to have been issued 

under subsection (3)( b). 

[7/2004 wef 16/02/2005] Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

35 | P a g e 

Agency  Regulations  Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

SCDF  Fire Safety Act  Storage, Use 

Storage of petroleum and flammable materials 

35. No person shall store or keep, or cause to be stored or kept, any class of petroleum or any flammable 

material except —

(a) in or on licensed premises; 

[Act 14 of 2013 wef 01/09/2013] 

(b) in such quantities and in such manner and in accordance with requireme nts prescribed in 

relation to such petroleum or flammable material; and 

[Act 14 of 2013 wef 01/09/2013] 

(c) under the authority of and in accordance with the provisions of a storage licence from the 

Commissioner and every condition specified therein. 

[Act 14 of 2013 wef 01/09/2013] 

[7/2004 wef 16/02/2005] 

Pipelines for petroleum and flammable materials 

36A. No pipeline owner shall convey, or allow the conveyance of, any class of petroleum or any flammable 

material through any section of a relevant pipeline in relation to which he is the pipeline owner except under 

the authority of and in accordance with the provisions of a pipeline licence from the Commissioner and every 

condition specified therein. 

SCDF  Fire Safety 

(Petroleum 

and 

Flammable 

Distribution 

(Transport)  Application for licence to transport petroleum or flammable materials 

5. —(1) An application for a licence to transport any petroleum or flammable material or both in a vehicle 

shall be made by the person intending to transport the petroleum or flammable material or both. Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

36 | P a g e 

Agency  Regulations  Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

Materials) 

Regulations  (2) A separate application for a licence to transport any petroleum or flammable material or both shall be 

made in respect of each particular vehicle in which the petroleum or flammable material or both are to be 

transported; and each such application shall also be regarded as an application for a licence for that vehicle 

to transport the petroleum or flammable material or both. 

(3) Subject to parag raphs (4) and (5), every application for a licence to transport any petroleum or 

flammable material or both in a vehicle shall be accompanied by the following documents: 

(a) a test certificate on the roadworthiness of the vehicle issued by the Land Transport Authority of 

Singapore under section 90 of the Road Traffic Act (Cap. 276); 

(b) a copy of the Transport Emergency Response Plan for that vehicle; 

(c) a certificate of inspection of that vehicle from an approved inspector; 

(d) a list of drivers to be employed by the applicant to transport petroleum or flammable materials 

in that vehicle; 

[S 546/2013 wef 01/09/2013] 

(e) if required by the Commissioner, a quantitative risk assessment or any other risk analysis report 

on the transport of the petroleum or flammable materials in the vehicle from any person who 

in the view of the Commissioner is qualified to give such report; and 

[S 546/2013 wef 01/09/2013] 

(f) such other documents or particulars as the Commissioner may require in any particular case. 

[S 546/2013 wef 01/09/2013] 

(4) Where the application is for a licence to transport any petroleum or flammable material or both in 

bulk, the application shall be accompanied by the following additional documents: Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

37 | P a g e 

Agency  Regulations  Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(a) the manufacturer’s specifications and design plans of the tank to be used in the transport; 

(b) a hydrostatic test report or any equivalent test report, certified in accordance with an accepted 

code of practice by a professional engineer in the mechanical engineering discipline or by such 

other person acceptable to the Commissioner; 

[S 546/2013 wef 01/09/2013] 

(ba ) a radiographic test report or any equivalent test report of the tank, certified in accordance with 

an accepted code of practice by a professional engineer in the mechanical engineering discipline 

or by any other person acceptable to the Commissioner; and 

[S 546/2013 wef 01/09/2013] 

(c) a copy of the plan of the vehicle showing the following particulars: 

(i)  the location of the vehicle engine, fuel tank, exhaust system and pipe, batteries and 

pump or compressor (if any) and where any of these components are encased, the 

type of material used to encase them, and the type of material that is used to 

construct the rear portion of the drive r’s cab facing the tank; 

(ii)  the water capacity of the vehicle’s tank; 

(iii)  the location and nature of all openings, fittings, gauges, emergency shut -off valves, 

excess flow valves, or any other safety valves or devices and their means of closure 

and capacities, where applicable; and 

(iv)  the location, size and type of all fire extinguishers provided in the vehicle. Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

38 | P a g e 

Agency  Regulations  Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(5) Where the application is for a licence to transport petroleum or flammable materials in package, the 

application shall be accompanied by the following additional documents: 

(a) a letter from the applicant certifying that —

(i)  he has checked the vehicle which is to be used to transport the petroleum or 

flammable material; and 

(ii)  he is satisfied that the condition of the vehicle is in compliance with the Act and 

these Regulations; and 

(b) a letter of authorisation from the supplier of the petroleum to be transported, if the applicant 

is not a supplier. 

(6) Where the applicant for a licence to transport any petroleum or flammable material or both in any 

vehicle is not the owner of the vehicle, the application shall also be accompanied by the consent in writing of 

the owner of the vehicle or of the legal personal repres entative, if the owner is deceased. 

(7) Paragraph (4)( b) shall not apply to an application for the renewal of a licence to transport any 

petroleum or flammable material or both in a vehicle if, within the 5 years prior to that application, the 

applicant has complied with that provision on at least one occasion either when making an application for 

the licence or an application for the renewal of the licence. 

[S 546/2013 wef 01/09/2013] 

(8) Paragraph (4)( ba ) shall not apply to an application f or the renewal of a licence to transport any 

petroleum or flammable material or both in a vehicle if, within the 10 years prior to that application, the 

applicant has complied with that provision on at least one occasion either when making an application f or 

the licence or an application for the renewal of the licence. Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

39 | P a g e 

Agency  Regulations  Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

SCDF  Fire Safety 

(Petroleum 

and 

Flammable 

Materials) 

Regulations 

Import 

Import of petroleum or flammable materials in excess of Second Schedule quantity requires licence 

15. The import of any class of petroleum or any flammable material in excess of the respective quantities 

specified in the Second Schedule shall require a licence to import. 

SCDF  Fire Safety 

(Petroleum 

and 

Flammable 

Materials) 

Regulations 

Storage 

Application for licence to store or keep petroleum or flammable materials 

4. —(1) An application for a licence to store or keep any petroleum or flammable material or both at any 

premises shall be made by the person intending to store or keep the petroleum or flammable material or 

both. 

(2) A separate application for a licence to store or keep any petroleum or flammable material or both 

shall be made in respect of each particular premises at which the petroleum or flammable material or both 

are to be stored or kept; and each such application shall also be regarded as an application for a licence for 

those premises to store or keep that petroleum or flammable material or both. 

Application for pipeline licence 

4A. —(1) An application for a pipeline licence to convey any class of petroleum or flammable material 

through any section of a relevant pipeline shall be made by the pipeline owner of that section of the relevant 

pipeline. 

SCDF  Fire Safety Act  Use, Storage 

Prohibition of fire safety works without approval of plans 

24. —(1) A person must not carry out, or permit or authorise the carrying out of, any fire safety works —Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

40 | P a g e 

Agency  Regulations  Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(Building 

Work 

approval )

(a) before the Commissioner has approved all the plans of the fire safety works under section 23; 

or 

(b) otherwise than in accordance with the plans approved under section 23. 

[Act 22 of 2019 wef 14/09/2020] 

SCDF  Fire Safety 

(Building and 

Pipeline Fire 

Safety) 

Regulations 

Use, Storage 

(Building 

Work 

approval )

Application for approval of plans of fire safety works 

3. For the purposes of section 23(1) of the Act, an application for the approval of plans of any fire safety 

works shall be in such form as the Commissioner may provide and shall be accompanied by t he prescribed 

fees and by the following documents: 

(a) the following plans of fire safety works: 

(i)  building plans (where the fire safety works relate to any building) or relevant 

pipeline plans (where the fire safety works relate to any relevant pipeline ); 

[S 545/2013 wef 01/09/2013] 

(ii)  air -conditioning and mechanical ventilation plans; and 

(iii)  fire protection plans; 

(b) a notification signed by the applicant of the appointment of —

(i)  the qualified person who prepared the plans of fire safety works; and 

(ii)  where the plans of fire safety works contain any alternative solution, the fire safety 

engineer who prepared or supervised the preparation of the plans, Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

41 | P a g e 

Agency  Regulations  Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

[S 545/2013 wef 01/09/2013] 

and a confirmation of such appointment signed by the qualified person and, where applicable, 

the fire safety engineer; 

(c) the applicable declaration form set out on the website at https://www.scdf.gov.sg; 

[S 769/2020 wef 14/09/2020] 

(d) where the plans of fire safety works contain any alternative solution, the additional following 

documents: 

(i)  a fire safety engineering design brief; 

(ii)  a fire safety engineering report, including detailed specifications and drawings of the 

final design of fire safety works; 

(iii)  an operations and maintenance manual for the building or relevant pipeline, as the 

case may be, to which the fire safety works relate; 

[S 545/2013 wef 01/09/2013] 

(iv)  a notification signed by the applicant of the appointment of a peer reviewer and a 

confirmation of such appointment signed by the peer reviewer; and 

(v)  a peer reviewer’s report as to whether the alternative solution satisfies the fire 

performance requirements in the Fire Code; 

[S 545/2013 wef 01/09/2013] 

[S 769/2020 wef 14/09/2020] Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

42 | P a g e 

Agency  Regulations  Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(e) where the plans of fire safety works involve the use of any building materials or equipment not 

specified in the Fire Code — a description of the nature and type of all the building materials or 

equipment to be used in the fire safety works; 

[S 769/20 20 wef 14/09/2020] 

(f) other documentary evidence in support of any documents in paragraphs ( a) to ( e), and such 

other documents as the Commissioner may require to decide the application. 

SFA  Sale of Food 

Act 

Import, 

Distribution 

(Requires labelling based on food safety/quality considerations) 

Offences concerning labelling 

16. —(1) A person must not sell any food that is packaged or labelled in a manner that does not comply 

with all applicable requirements of this Act relating to identification and labelling of that food. 

SFA  Food 

Regulations 

Import, 

Distribution 

General requirements for labelling 

5. —(1) No person shall import, advertise, manufacture, sell, consign or deliver any prepacked food if the 

package of prepacked food does not bear a label containing all the particulars required by these 

Regulations. 

(2) Every package of prepacked food shal l, unless otherwise provided in these Regulations, bear a label, 

marked on or securely attached in a prominent and conspicuous position to the package, containing such 

particulars, statements, information and words in English as are required by the Act and these Regulations. Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

43 | P a g e 

Agency  Regulations  Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(3) The particulars, statements, information and words referred to in paragraph (2) shall appear 

conspicuously and in a prominent position on the label and shall be clearly legible. 

(4) The particulars referred to in paragraph (3) s hall include —

(a) the common name, or a description (in the case where a suitable common name is not available) 

sufficient to indicate the true nature of the food; 

(b) the appropriate designation of each ingredient in the case of food consisting of two o r more ingredients 

and unless the quantity or proportion of each ingredient is specified, the ingredients shall be specified in 

descending order of the proportions by weight in which they are present. For the purpose of this sub -

paragraph —

(i ) “appropriate designation” means a name or description, being a specific and not a generic name 

or description, which shall indicate to a prospective purchaser the true nature of the ingredient, 

constituent or product to which it is applied except as prov ided in the First Schedule; 

(ii) it shall not be necessary to state that the food contains water; and 

(iii) where a food contains an ingredient which is made from two or more constituents, the 

appropriate designations of those constituents shall be so sp ecified and it shall not be necessary to 

specify the appropriate designation of that ingredient; 

(c) either one of the following statements in specification of ingredients in the case of a food which contains 

the synthetic colouring, tartrazine: 

(i) tart razine; Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

44 | P a g e 

Agency  Regulations  Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(ii) colour (102); 

(iii) colour (FD&C Yellow #5) or other equivalent terms; 

(d) the net quantity of the food in the wrapper or container expressed in the following manner: (i) for liquid 

foods, by volume; 

(ii) for solid foods, by weight; 

(iii ) for semi -solid or viscous foods, either by weight or volume; and 

(iv) for a food packed in a liquid medium, by net weight of the food together with the liquid medium, and by 

drained weight of the food. 

SFA  Feeding Stuffs 

Act 

Use, Storage  Licence to import, manufacture, etc., animal feeds 

4.—(1) The Director -General may issue a licence to any person to import, manufacture, process for sale or 

sell simple feeds, feed concentrates or compound feeds upon an application made in the prescribed form 

and th e payment of such fees as may be prescribed. 

(2) A licence shall be subject to such conditions as may be prescribed and such other conditions as the 

Director -General may, in his discretion, impose. 

(3) The Director -General may, in his discretion, at an y time, revoke or suspend a licence. 

(4) No person shall import, manufacture, process for sale or sell simple feeds, feed concentrates or 

compound feeds without a licence issued by the Director -General. Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

45 | P a g e 

Agency  Regulations  Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

MOM  Workplace 

Safety and 

Health Act 

Use, Storage  Duty of occupier of workplace 

11. It shall be the duty of every occupier of any workplace to take, so far as is reasonably practicable, such 

measures to ensure that —

(a) the workplace; 

(b) all means of access to or egress from the workplace; and 

(c) any machinery, equipment, plant, article or substance kept on the workplace, 

are safe and without risks to health to every person within those premises, whether or not the person is at 

work or is an employee of the occupier. 

Duties of employers 

12. —(1) It shall be the duty of every employer to take, so far as is reasonably practicable, such measures as 

are necessary to ensure the safety and health of his employees at work. 

(2) It shall be the duty of every employer to take, so far as is reasonably pract icable, such measures as are 

necessary to ensure the safety and health of persons (not being his employees) who may be affected by any 

undertaking carried on by him in the workplace. 

(3) For the purposes of subsection (1), the measures necessary to ensure the safety and health of persons at 

work include —

(a) providing and maintaining for those persons a work environment which is safe, without risk to 

health, and adequate as regards facilities and arrangements for their welfare at work; 

(b) ensuring that adequate safety measures are taken in respect of any machinery, equipment, plant, 

article or process used by those persons; 

(c) ensuring that those persons are not exposed to hazards arising out of the arrangement, disposal, 

manipulation, organisation , processing, storage, transport, working or use of things —Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

46 | P a g e 

Agency  Regulations  Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(i) in their workplace; or 

(ii) near their workplace and under the control of the employer; 

(d) developing and implementing procedures for dealing with emergencies that may arise while those 

persons are a t work; and 

(e) ensuring that those persons at work have adequate instruction, information, training and 

supervision as is necessary for them to perform their work. 

Duties of manufacturers and suppliers of machinery, equipment or hazardous substances used at work 

16. —(1) Subject to this section, it shall be the duty of any person who manufactures or supplies any 

machinery, equipment or hazardous substance for use at work to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable 

—

(a) that the following information about the safe use of the machinery, equipment or hazardous 

substance is available to any person to whom the machinery, equipment or hazardous substance is 

supplied for use at work: 

(i) the precautions (if any) to be taken for the proper use and ma intenance of the machinery, 

equipment or hazardous substance; 

(ii) the health hazards (if any) associated with the machinery, equipment or hazardous 

substance; and 

(iii) the information relating to and the results of any examinations or tests of the machinery, 

equipm ent or hazardous substance under paragraph ( c) that are relevant to its safe use; 

(b) that the machinery, equipment or hazardous substance is safe, and without risk to health, when 

properly used; 

(c)  that the machinery, equipment or hazardous substance is examined and tested so as to comply with 

the obligation imposed by paragraph ( b). Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

47 | P a g e 

Agency  Regulations  Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

List of Hazardous Substances under WSHA 

The list of hazardous substances as specified in the Fifth Schedule of the WSH Act is as follow: 

PART II 

HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES 

1. Corrosive substances 

2. Flammable substances 

3. Explosives 

4. Oxidising substances 

5. Pyrophoric substances 

6. Gases under pressure 

7. Organic peroxides 

8. Self heating substances 

9. Self -reactive substances 

10. Substances which in contact with water, emit flammable gases 

11. Toxic substances 

12. Mutagens 

13. Carcinogens 

14. Teratogens Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

48 | P a g e 

Agency  Regulations  Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

15. Sensitizers 

16. Irritants 

17. Substances hazardous to aquatic environment. 

MOM  Workplace 

Safety and 

Health (Risk 

Management )

Regulations 

Use/Storage  3. Risk assessment 

(1) In every workplace, the employer, self -employed person and principal shall conduct a risk assessment 

in relation to the safety and health risks posed to any person who maybe affected by his undertaking 

in the workplace. 

(2) The Commissioner may determine the m anner in which the risk assessment referred to in paragraph 

(1) is to be conducted. 

MOM  Workplace 

Safety and 

Health 

(General 

Provisions) 

Regulations 

Use, storage  Precautions with regard to explosive or flammable dust, gas, vapour or substance 

26. —(1) Where any process in a plant used in a workplace gives rise to dust, gas, vapour or substance that 

may escape into any place of work and the dust, gas, vapour or subs tance that may escape is of such a 

character and is to such an extent as to be liable to explode on ignition —

(a) all reasonably practicable steps shall be taken to prevent such an explosion —

(i) by enclosure of the plant used in the process; 

(ii) by rem oval or prevention of accumulation of the dust, gas, vapour or  substance; 

(iii) by exclusion or effective enclosure of possible sources of ignition; or 

(iv) by the use of suitable flame -proof equipment; and 

(b) unless the plant in which the process is carr ied out is so constructed as to withstand the pressure 

likely to be produced by any such explosion, all reasonably practicable steps shall be taken to restrict 

the spread and effects of such an explosion by the provision of chokes, baffles and vents, or ot her 

equally effective appliances in the  plant. Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

49 | P a g e 

Agency  Regulations  Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(2)  Where any part of a plant in a workplace contains any explosive or flammable gas or vapour under 

pressure greater than atmospheric pressure, that part shall not be opened, unless it is positively isolated, 

de pressurised and vented to a safe location, and where necessary, purged to remove any residual gas or 

vapour. 

(3) No plant, tank or vessel in a workplace that contains, or has contained, any explosive or flammable 

substance shall be subjected to —

(a) any welding, brazing or soldering operation; 

(b) any cutting operation which involves the application of heat; or 

(c) any operation involving the application of heat for the purpose of taking apart or removing the 

plant, tank or vessel or any part of it, u ntil all reasonably practicable steps have been taken to remove 

the substance and any fumes, gas or vapour arising from it, or to render the substance and fumes 

non -explosive and non -flammable. 

Warning labels 

42. It shall be the duty of the occupier of a workplace in which there is any container of hazardous substances 

to ensure that, so far as reasonably practicable, every such container is affixed with one or more warning 

labels that conform with —

(a) any Singapore Standard relating to the classification and labelling of hazardous substances; or 

(b) such other standards, codes of practice or guidance relating to the classification and labelling of 

hazardous substances as is issued or approved by the Council. Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

50 | P a g e 

Agency  Regulations  Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

Safety data sheet 

43. —(1) Where any hazardous substance is used, handled or stored in a workplace, it shall be the duty of the 

occupier of the workplace to —

(a) obtain a safety data sheet of the substance; 

(b) assess the information in the safety data sheet and take precautionary measures to 

ensure the safe use of the substance; and 

(c) make available the safety data sheet to all persons at work in the workplace who are liable to be 

exposed to the substance. 

(2) Where any hazardous substance is sold to any person for use in a work place, it shall be the duty of the 

seller or any agent of the seller who caused or procured the sale to provide the buyer with a safety data sheet 

for the substance that —

(a) gives accurate and adequate information on the substance; and 

(b) conforms with any Singapore Standard relating to safety data sheets or such other standards, 

codes of practice or guidance as is issued or approved by the Council. 

“hazardous substance” means any hazardous substance specified in Part II of the Fifth Schedule to the Act 

MOM  Workplace 

Safety and 

Health (Major 

Hazard 

Installations) 

Regulations 

Use, Storage  Implementation of safety case 

6. Subject to regulation 11(4), the occupier of a major hazard installation or deemed major hazard installation 

must implement the safety case for the major hazard installation or deemed major hazard installation by 

doing all of the following: 

(a) implement the major accident prevention policy for the major hazard installation or deemed 

major hazard installation; Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

51 | P a g e 

Agency  Regulations  Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(b) ensure that the person mentioned in paragraph 1(b) of Part 2 of the Third Schedule carries out 

the roles and responsibilities specifie d in that paragraph; 

(c) implement the plan mentioned in paragraph 1(d) of Part 2 of the Third Schedule; 

(d) implement the safety and health management system in accordance with the Workplace Safety 

and Health (Safety and Health Management System and Audit ing) Regulations 2009 (G.N. No. S 

607/2009); 

(e) ensure that the necessary resources, mentioned in paragraph 3 of Part 2 of the Third Schedule, 

are available for implementing the major accident prevention policy; 

(f) implement the preventive measures menti oned in paragraph 5(a) of Part 2 of the Third Schedule; 

(g) ensure that the processes carried out in the major hazard installation or deemed major hazard 

installation are carried out in accordance with the description in paragraph 5(b) of Part 2 of the Thi rd 

Schedule; 

(h) operate the major hazard installation or deemed major hazard installation in accordance with the 

description mentioned in paragraph 6(f) of Part 2 of the Third Schedule; 

(i) implement the measures mentioned in paragraph 7 of Part 2 of the Third Schedule. 

NEA  Environmental 

Protection 

and 

Management 

Act 

Use, Storage 

(Development 

control )

Written permission for use of scheduled premises 

6. —(1) No person shall occupy or use any scheduled premises specified in the First Schedule without a 

written permission granted by the Director -General. 

(2) Any person who contravenes subsection (1) shall be guilty of an offence. 

(3) Any application for a written permission under this section shall be made to the Director -General giving 

details of —

(a) the trade, industry or process proposed to be carried in or on the premises; Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

52 | P a g e 

Agency  Regulations  Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(b) the measures the applicant undertakes to adopt to control air, water and noise pollution 

from the premises; and 

(c) the measures the applicant undertakes to adopt to manage h azardous substances and to 

treat and dispose of toxic substances originating from or stored within the premises. 

Permit for certain works on scheduled premises 

8. —(1) The owner or occupier of any scheduled premises shall not without a permit granted by th e

Director -General —

(a) alter the method of operation of any trade or industrial process, fuel burning equipment, 

control equipment, treatment plant or industrial plant in or on the scheduled premises; 

(b) install, alter or replace any fuel burning equip ment, control equipment, treatment plant or 

industrial plant in or on the scheduled premises; 

(c) erect or alter the height or dimension of any chimney through which air impurities may be 

emitted from the scheduled premises; or 

(d) use any fuel other than the type of fuel specified in writing by the Director -General. 

First Schedule 

Scheduled Premises 

Scheduled premises are any premises —

(a) being used for —

(i) cement works, being works for the manufacture or packing of portland cement, similar 

cement or pozzolanic materials; Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

53 | P a g e 

Agency  Regulations  Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(ii) concrete works, being works for the manufacture of concrete and of each batch capacity 

greater than 0.5 cubic metre; 

(iii) asphalt wor ks, being works for the manufacture of asphalt or tarmacadam; 

(iv) ceramic works, being works in which any products such as bricks, tiles, pipes, pottery goods, 

refractories or glass are manufactured in furnaces or kilns fired by any fuel; 

(v) chemical wor ks, being works in which acids, alkali, chemical fertilizer, soap, detergent, 

sodium silicates, lime or other calcium compounds, chlorine, chemicals or chemical products are 

manufactured; 

(vi) coke or charcoal works, being works in which coke or charcoal i s produced and quenched, 

cut, crushed or graded; 

(vii) ferrous and non -ferrous metal works, being works in which metal melting process for casting 

and/or metal coating are carried out; 

(viii) gas works, being works in which coal, coke, oil or other mixtures or derivatives are handled 

or prepared for carbonisation or gasification and in which such materials are subsequently 

carbonised or gasified; 

(ix) crushing, grinding and milling works, being works in which rock, ores, minerals, chemicals or 

natural grain products are processed by crushing, grinding, milling or separating into different sizes 

by sieving, air elutriation or in any other manner; 

(x) petroleum works, being works in which crude or shale oil or crude petroleum or other 

mineral oil is refined or reconditioned; 

(xi) scrap metal recovery works, being works in which scrap metals are treated in any type of 

furnace for recovery of metal irrespective of whether this is the primary object o f any specific 

premises or not; 

(xii) primary metallurgical works, being works in which ores are smelted or converted to metal 

of any kind; Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

54 | P a g e 

Agency  Regulations  Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(xiii) pulping works, being works in which wood or cellulose material is made into pulp; 

(xiv) abrasive blasting wor ks, being works in which equipment or structures are cleaned by 

abrasive blasting; 

(b) on which there is erected any boiler of steam generating capacity of 2,300 kilogrammes or more per 

hour, incinerator or furnace burning 500 kilogrammes or more of solid combustible material per hour or 220 

kilogrammes or more of liquid material per hour; or 

(c) being used or intended to be used for storing —

(i) more than 100 tonnes of one or more of the following substances: chemicals, chemical products, 

hydrocarbons or hydrocarbon products which are toxic or which produce toxic gases on burning or on 

contact with water or air; or 

(ii) more than 1,000 tonnes of one or more of the following substances: chemicals, chemical products, 

hydrocarbons or hydrocarbon products wit h a flash point lower than 55ºC. 

NEA  Environmental 

Protection 

and 

Management 

(Air 

Impurities) 

Regulations 

Use 

Standards of concentration of air impurities 

4. —(1) For the purposes of section 12 of the Act, the standards of concentration of air impurities that 

must be complied with in the conduct of any trade, industry or process or the operation of any fuel burning 

equipment or industrial plant shall be those specified in the Schedule. 

(2) The concentration of any substance specified in the first column of the Schedule shall be determined 

in accordance with such method as may be specified by or is acceptable to the Director -General. 

The Schedule Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

55 | P a g e 

Agency  Regulations  Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

STANDARDS OF CONCENTRATION OF AIR IMPURITIES 

1. The concentration of any substance specified in the first column emitted from any operation in any 

trade, industry, process, fuel burning equipment or industrial plant specified in the second column shall not 

at any point before admixture with air, smoke or ot her gases, exceed the limits specified in the third column. 

Substance 

Trade, industry, process, fuel 

burning equipment or industrial 

plant 

Emission limits 

(a) Ammonia and ammonium 

compounds 

Any trade, industry or process  30 mg/Nm 3 expressed as ammonia 

(b) Antimony and its 

compounds 

Any trade, industry or process  5 mg/Nm 3 expressed as antimony 

(c) Arsenic and its 

compounds 

Any trade, industry or process  1 mg/Nm 3 expressed as arsenic 

(d) Benzene  Any trade, industry or process  5 mg/Nm 3

(e) Cadmium and its 

compounds 

Any trade, industry or process  0.05 mg/Nm 3 expressed as 

cadmium 

(f) Carbon monoxide  Any trade, industry, process or 

fuel burning equipment 

250 mg/Nm 3Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

56 | P a g e 

Agency  Regulations  Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(g) Chlorine  Any trade, industry or process  32 mg/Nm 3

(h) Copper and its 

compounds 

Any trade, industry or process  5 mg/Nm 3 expressed as copper 

(i) Dioxins and furans  Any waste incinerator  (i)  1.0 ng TEQ/Nm 3 for waste 

incinerators commissioned 

before 1st January 2001 

(ii)  0.1 ng TEQ/Nm 3 for waste 

incinerators commissioned 

on or after 1st January 

2001 

(j) Ethylene oxide  Any trade, industry or process  5 mg/Nm 3

(k) Fluorine, hydrofluoric acid 

or inorganic fluorine 

compounds 

Any trade, industry or process  10 mg/Nm 3 expressed as 

hydrofluoric acid 

(l) Formaldehyde  Any trade, industry or process  20 mg/Nm 3

(m) Hydrogen chloride  Any trade, industry or process  200 mg/Nm 3

(n) Hydrogen sulphide  Any trade, industry or process  7.6 mg/Nm 3

(o) Lead and its compounds  Any trade, industry or process  0.5 mg/Nm 3 expressed as lead Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

57 | P a g e 

Agency  Regulations  Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(p) Mercury and its 

compounds 

Any trade, industry or process  0.05 mg/Nm 3 expressed as 

mercury 

(q) Oxides of nitrogen  Any trade, industry, process or 

fuel burning equipment 

400 mg/Nm 3 expressed as nitrogen 

dioxide 

(r) Particulate substances 

including smoke, soot, 

dust, ash, fly -ash, cinders, 

cement, lime, alumina, 

grit and other solid 

particles of any kind 

Any trade, industry, process, fuel 

burning equipment or industrial 

plant (except for any cold blast 

foundry cupolas) 

(i)  50 mg/Nm 3; or 

(ii)  where there is more than 

one flue, duct or chimney 

in any scheduled premises, 

the total mass of the 

particulate emissions from 

all of such flue, duct or 

chimney divided by the 

total volume of such 

emissions shall not exceed 

50 mg/Nm 3 and the 

particulate emissions from 

each of such flue, duct or 

chi mney shall not exceed 

100 mg/Nm 3 at any point 

in time. 

(s) Styrene monomer  Any trade, industry or process  100 mg/Nm 3Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

58 | P a g e 

Agency  Regulations  Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(t) Sulphur dioxide (non -

combustion sources) 

Any trade, industry or process  500 mg/Nm 3

(ta ) Sulphur dioxide 

(combustion sources) 

Any trade, industry or process  (i)  1,700 mg/Nm 3

(ii)  where there is more than 

one flue, duct or chimney 

in any scheduled premises, 

the total mass of the 

sulphur dioxide emissions 

from all of such flue, duct 

or chimney divided by the 

total volume of such 

emissions must not exceed 

1,700 mg/Nm 3 on a daily 

basis. 

(u) Sulphur trioxide and other 

acid gases 

The manufacture of sulphuric 

acid 

500 mg/Nm 3 expressed as sulphur 

trioxide. Effluent gases shall be 

free from persistent mist. 

(v) Sulphur trioxide or 

sulphuric acid mist 

Any trade, industry or process, 

other than any combustion 

process and any plant involving 

the manufacture of sulphuric 

acid 

100 mg/Nm 3 expressed as sulphur 

trioxide Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

59 | P a g e 

Agency  Regulations  Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(w) Vinyl chloride monomer  Any trade, industry or process  20 mg/Nm 3

[S 369/2015 wef 01/07/2015] 

NEA  Environmental 

Public Health 

Act 

Disposal 

Dangerous substance or toxic industrial waste not to be brought to disposal facility without permission 

29. —(1) No person who owns or is in possession of any dangerous substance or toxic industrial waste or the 

residue from the treatment thereof shall bring or cause to be brought such substance or waste to any disposal facility 

for disposal without the written permission of the Director -General. 

[2/96; 4/2002] 

Licensing of persons carrying on business of collecting, removing, etc., of refuse or waste 

31. —(1) No person shall carry on the business of collecting, removing, transporting, storing or importing refuse or 

waste of any description without a waste collector licence granted by the Director -General under this section. 

[2/96; 4/2002] 

(2) The Director -General may grant a licence authorising any person to carry on the business of collecting, removing, 

transporting, storing or importing refuse or waste of any description. 

[2/96; 4/2002] 

NEA  Environmental 

Public Health 

(Toxic Industrial 

Waste) 

Regulations 

Disposal 

No person to act as toxic industrial waste collector without licence 

9. No person shall —

(a) carry on or advertise, notify or state that he carries on or is willing to carry on the business of 

a toxic industrial waste collector; Annex B Singapore Regulations on Chemicals , Flammable or Hazardous Substances and Combustible Dusts 

60 | P a g e 

Agency  Regulations  Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(b) act as a toxic industrial waste collector; or 

(c) in any way hold himself out as ready to undertake for payment or other remuneration 

(whether monetary or otherwise) any of the functions of a toxic industrial waste collector, 

unless he is the holder of a toxic industrial waste collector’s licence. Annex C SCDF Circular on Implementation of SS 667: 2020 – Code of Practice for Handling, Storage and Processing of combustible dust 

61 | P a g e 

## Annex C SCDF Circular on Impleme ntation of SS 667: 2020 – Code of Practice for Handling, Storage and Processing of 

## combustible dust SCDF 

> circular---implementation-of-ss-667-2020-code-of-practice-for-handling-storage-and-processing-of-combustible-dust.pdf

Annex D US - Extracts from the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 and related legislations 

62 | P a g e 

## Annex D US - Extracts from the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 and related legislations 

Extract of US’s Act/Regulations 

Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 

https://www.osha.gov/laws -regs/oshact/toc 

Section 5 - Duties 

(a) Each employer –

(1) shall furnish to each of his employees employment and a place of employment which are free from recognized hazards that a re causing or are 

likely to cause death or serious physical harm to his employees; 

(2) shall comply with occupational safety and health standards promulgated under this Act. 

Subparts of Part 1910 of the Code of Federal Regulations – Occupational Safety and Health Standards 

https://www.osha.gov/laws -regs/regulations/standardnumber/1910 

Using 1910.212 - General requirements for all machines as an example: 

1910.212(a) Machine guarding. 

1910.212(a)(1) Types of guarding. 

One or more methods of machine guarding shall be provided to protect the operator and other employees in the machine area fro m hazards such as 

those created by point of operation, ingoing nip points, rotating parts, fly ing chips and sparks. Examples of guarding methods are -barrier guards, two -

hand tripping devices, electronic safety devices, etc. 

1910.212(a)(2) General requirements for machine guards. Annex D US - Extracts from the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 and related legislations 

63 | P a g e 

Extract of US’s Act/Regulations 

Guards shall be affixed to the machine where possible and sec ured elsewhere if for any reason attachment to the machine is not possible. The guard 

shall be such that it does not offer an accident hazard in itself. 

1910.212(a)(3) Point of operation guarding. 

1910.212(a)(3)(i) Point of operation is the area on a machine where work is actually performed upon the material being processed. 

1910.212(a)(3)(ii) The point of operation of machines whose operation exposes an employee to injury, shall be guarded. The guarding device 

shall be in conformity with any appr opriate standards therefor, or, in the absence of applicable specific standards, shall be so designed and 

constructed as to prevent the operator from having any part of his body in the danger zone during the operating cycle. 

1910.212(a)(3)(iii) Special h andtools for placing and removing material shall be such as to permit easy handling of material without the operator 

placing a hand in the danger zone. Such tools shall not be in lieu of other guarding required by this section, but can only b e used to supp lement 

protection provided. 

1910.212(a)(3)(iv) The following are some of the machines which usually require point of operation guarding: 

1910.212(a)(3)(iv)(a) Guillotine cutters. 

1910.212(a)(3)(iv)(b) Shears. 

1910.212(a)(3)(iv)(c) Alligator shears. 

1910.212(a)(3)(iv)(d) Power presses. 

1910.212(a)(3)(iv)(e) Milling machines. 

1910.212(a)(3)(iv)(f) Power saws. 

1910.212(a)(3)(iv)(g) Jointers. 

1910.212(a)(3)(iv)(h) Portable power tools. 

1910.212(a)(3)(iv)(i) Forming rolls and calenders. Annex E UK - Extracts from the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974 and related legislations 

64 | P a g e 

## Annex E UK - Extracts from the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974 and related legislations 

Extract of UK’s Act/Regulations 

Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974 

https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1974/37/contents 

Section 2 - General duties of employers to their employees. 

(1) It shall be the duty of every employer to ensure, so far as is rea sonably practicable, the health, safety and welfare at work of all his employees. 

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of an employer’s duty under the preceding subsection, the matters to which that duty extends include in particular —

(a) the provision and maintenance of plant and systems of work that are, so far as is reasonably practicable, safe and without risks to health; 

(b) arrangements for ensuring, so far as is reasonably practicable, safety and absence of risks to health in connection with the use, handling, storage 

and transport of articles and substances; 

(c) the provision of such information, instruction, training and supervision as is necessary to ensure, so far as is reasonab ly practicable, the health 

and safety at work of his employees ;

(d) so far as is reasonably practicable as regards any place of work under the employer’s control, the maintenance of it in a condition that is safe 

and without risks to health and the provision and maintenance of means of access to and egress from it th at are safe and without such risks; 

(e) the provision and maintenance of a working environment for his employees that is, so far as is reasonably practicable, sa fe, without risks to 

health, and adequate as regards facilities and arrangements for their welf are at work. 

Section 6 - General duties of manufacturers etc. as regards articles and substances for use at work 

(1) It shall be the duty of any person who designs, manufactures, imports or supplies any article for use at work or any artic le of fairground equipment —

(a) to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that the article is so designed and constructed th at it will be safe and without risks to health at all 

times when it is being set, used, cleaned or maintained by a person at work; Annex E UK - Extracts from the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974 and related legislations 

65 | P a g e 

Extract of UK’s Act/Regulations 

(b) to carry out or arrange for the carrying out of such testing and examination as may be necessary for the performance of t he duty imposed on 

him by the preceding paragraph; 

(c) to take such steps as are necessary to secure that persons supplied by that person with the article are provided with ade quate information 

about the use for which the article is designed or has been t ested and about any conditions necessary to ensure that it will be safe and without 

risks to health at all such times as are mentioned in paragraph (a) above and when it is being dismantled or disposed of; and 

(d) to take such steps as are necessary to se cure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that persons so supplied are provided with all such revisions 

of information provided to them by virtue of the preceding paragraph as are necessary by reason of its becoming known that an ything gives rise 

to a ser ious risk to health or safety. 

(2) It shall be the duty of any person who undertakes the design or manufacture of any article for use at work or of any arti cle of fairground equipment to 

carry out or arrange for the carrying out of any necessary research w ith a view to the discovery and, so far as is reasonably practicable, the elimination or 

minimisation of any risks to health or safety to which the design or article may give rise. 

(3) It shall be the duty of any person who erects or installs any article for use at work in any premises where that article is to be used by persons at work 

or who erects or installs any article of fairground equipment to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that nothing ab out the way in which the article 

is erected or installed makes it unsafe or a risk to health at any such time as is mentioned in paragraph (a) of subsection (1) or, as the case may be, in 

paragraph (a) of subsection (1) or (1A) above. 

Provision and Use of Work Equipment Regulations 1998 

https://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/1998/2306/contents/made 

PART II – General 

Suitability of work equipment 

4. 

(1) Every employer shall ensure that work equipment is so constructed or adapted as to be suitable for the purpose for which it is used or pro vided. 

(2) In selecting work equipment, every employer shall have regard to the working conditions and to the risks to the health an d safety of persons which exist 

in the premises or undertaking in which that work equipment is to be used and any additional risk posed by the use of that work equipment. Annex E UK - Extracts from the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974 and related legislations 

66 | P a g e 

Extract of UK’s Act/Regulations 

(3) Every employer shall ensure that work equipment is used only for operations for which, and under conditions for which, it is suitable. 

(4) In this regulation “suitable” means suitable in any respect which it is reasonably foreseeable will affect the health or safety of any person. 

Maintenance 

5. 

(1) Every employer shall ensure that work equipment is maintained in an efficient state, in efficient working order and in go od repair. 

(2) Every employer shall ensure that where any machinery has a maintenance log, the log is kept up to date. 

Inspection 

6. 

(1) Every employer shall ensure that, where the safety of work equipment depends on the installation conditions, it is inspec ted —

(a) after installation and before being put into service for the first time; or 

(b) after assembly at a new site or in a new location, 

to ensure that it has been installed correctly and is safe to operate. 

(2) Every employer shall ensure that work equipment exposed to condition s causing deterioration which is liable to result in dangerous situations is 

inspected —

(a) at suitable intervals; and 

(b) each time that exceptional circumstances which are liable to jeopardise the safety of the work equipment have occurred, 

to ensure tha t health and safety conditions are maintained and that any deterioration can be detected and remedied in good time. 

(3) Every employer shall ensure that the result of an inspection made under this regulation is recorded and kept until the ne xt inspection u nder this 

regulation is recorded. 

(4) Every employer shall ensure that no work equipment —

(a) leaves his undertaking; or Annex E UK - Extracts from the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974 and related legislations 

67 | P a g e 

Extract of UK’s Act/Regulations 

(b) if obtained from the undertaking of another person, is used in his undertaking, 

unless it is accompanied by physical evidence that the last inspection required to be carried out under this regulation has been carried out. 

(5) This regulation does not apply to —

(a) a power press to which regulations 32 to 35 apply; 

(b) a guard or protection device for the tools of such power press; 

(c) work equipment for lifting loads including persons; 

(d) winding apparatus to which the Mines (Shafts and Winding) Regulations 1993(1) apply; 

(e) work equipment required to be inspected by regulation 29 of the Construction (Health, Safety and Wel fare) Regulations 1996(2). 

Specific risks 

7. 

(1) Where the use of work equipment is likely to involve a specific risk to health or safety, every employer shall ensure tha t—

(a) the use of that work equipment is restricted to those persons given the task o f using it; and 

(b) repairs, modifications, maintenance or servicing of that work equipment is restricted to those persons who have been spec ifically designated 

to perform operations of that description (whether or not also authorised to perform other oper ations). 

(2) The employer shall ensure that the persons designated for the purposes of sub -paragraph (b) of paragraph (1) have received adequate training related 

to any operations in respect of which they have been so designated. 

Information and instructi ons 

8. 

(1) Every employer shall ensure that all persons who use work equipment have available to them adequate health and safety inf ormation and, where 

appropriate, written instructions pertaining to the use of the work equipment. 

(2) Every employer shall ensure that any of his employees who supervises or manages the use of work equipment has available to him adequate health 

and safety information and, where appropriate, written instructions pertaining to the use of the work equipment. Annex E UK - Extracts from the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974 and related legislations 

68 | P a g e 

Extract of UK’s Act/Regulations 

(3) Without prejudice to the generality of paragraphs (1) or (2), the information and instructions required by either of those paragraphs shall inc lude 

information and, where appropriate, written instructions on —

(a) the conditions in which and the methods by which the work eq uipment may be used; 

(b) foreseeable abnormal situations and the action to be taken if such a situation were to occur; and 

(c) any conclusions to be drawn from experience in using the work equipment. 

(4) Information and instructions required by this regulation shall be readily comprehensible to those concerned .

Training 

9. 

(1) Every employer shall ensure that all persons who use work equipment have received adequate training for purposes of healt h and safety, including 

training in the methods which m ay be adopted when using the work equipment, any risks which such use may entail and precautions to be taken. 

(2) Every employer shall ensure that any of his employees who supervises or manages the use of work equipment has received ad equate training for 

purposes of health and safety, including training in the methods which may be adopted when using the work equipment, any risks which such use may 

entail and precautions to be taken. 

Dangerous parts of machinery 

11. 

(1) Every employer shall ensure that meas ures are taken in accordance with paragraph (2) which are effective —

(a) to prevent access to any dangerous part of machinery or to any rotating stock -bar; or 

(b) to stop the movement of any dangerous part of machinery or rotating stock -bar before any part of a person enters a danger zone. 

(2) The measures required by paragraph (1) shall consist of —

(a) the provision of fixed guards enclosing every dangerous part or rotating stock -bar where and to the extent that it is practicable to do so, but 

where or to the extent that it is not, then 

(b) the provision of other guards or protection devices where and to the extent that it is practicable to do so, but where or to the extent that it is 

not, then Annex E UK - Extracts from the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974 and related legislations 

69 | P a g e 

Extract of UK’s Act/Regulations 

(c) the provision of jigs, holders, push -sticks or similar prot ection appliances used in conjunction with the machinery where and to the extent that 

it is practicable to do so, but where or to the extent that it is not, then 

(d) the provision of information, instruction, training and supervision. 

(3) All guards and pr otection devices provided under sub -paragraphs (a) or (b) of paragraph (2) shall —

(a) be suitable for the purpose for which they are provided; 

(b) be of good construction, sound material and adequate strength; 

(c) be maintained in an efficient state, in efficient working order and in good repair; 

(d) not give rise to any increased risk to health or safety; 

(e) not be easily bypassed or disabled; 

(f) be situated at sufficient distance from the danger zone; 

(g) not unduly restrict the view of the operating cycle of the machinery, where such a view is necessary; 

(h) be so constructed or adapted that they allow operations necessary to fit or replace parts and for maintenance work, restr icting access so that 

it is allowed only to the area where the work is to b e carried out and, if possible, without having to dismantle the guard or protection device. 

(4) All protection appliances provided under sub -paragraph (c) of paragraph (2) shall comply with sub -paragraphs (a) to (d) and (g) of paragraph (3). 

(5) In this re gulation —

“danger zone” means any zone in or around machinery in which a person is exposed to a risk to health or safety from contact w ith a dangerous part of 

machinery or a rotating stock -bar;“stock -bar” means any part of a stock -bar which projects beyond the head -stock of a lathe. 

Protection against specified hazards 

12. 

(1) Every employer shall take measures to ensure that the exposure of a person using work equipment to any risk to his health or safety from any hazard 

specified in paragraph (3) is eith er prevented, or, where that is not reasonably practicable, adequately controlled. 

(2) The measures required by paragraph (1) shall —Annex E UK - Extracts from the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974 and related legislations 

70 | P a g e 

Extract of UK’s Act/Regulations 

(a) be measures other than the provision of personal protective equipment or of information, instruction, training and supe rvision, so far as is 

reasonably practicable; and 

(b) include, where appropriate, measures to minimise the effects of the hazard as well as to reduce the likelihood of the haz ard occurring. 

(3) The hazards referred to in paragraph (1) are —

(a) any article or substance falling or being ejected from work equipment; 

(b) rupture or disintegration of parts of work equipment; 

(c) work equipment catching fire or overheating; 

(d) the unintended or premature discharge of any article or of any gas, dust, liquid, vapour or other substance which, in each case, is produced, 

used or stored in the work equipment; 

(e) the unintended or premature explosion of the work equipment or any article or substance produced, used or stored in it. 

(4) For the purposes of th is regulation “adequately” means adequately having regard only to the nature of the hazard and the nature and degree of 

exposure to the risk. 

(5) This regulation shall not apply where any of the following Regulations apply in respect of any risk to a perso n’s health or safety for which such Regulations 

require measures to be taken to prevent or control such risk, namely —

(a)the Ionising Radiations Regulations 1985(3); 

(b)the Control of Asbestos at Work Regulations 1987(4); 

(c)the Control of Substances Hazar dous to Health Regulations 1994(5); 

(d)the Noise at Work Regulations 1989(6); 

(e)the Construction (Head Protection) Regulations 1989(7); 

(f)the Control of Lead at Work Regulations 1998(8). Annex E UK - Extracts from the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974 and related legislations 

71 | P a g e 

Extract of UK’s Act/Regulations 

High or very low temperature 

13. Every employer shall ensure tha t work equipment, parts of work equipment and any article or substance produced, used or stored in work equipment 

which, in each case, is at a high or very low temperature shall have protection where appropriate so as to prevent injury to any person by bur n, scald or 

sear. 

Controls for starting or making a significant change in operating conditions 

14. 

(1) Every employer shall ensure that, where appropriate, work equipment is provided with one or more controls for the purpose s of —

(a) starting the work equ ipment (including re -starting after a stoppage for any reason); or 

(b) controlling any change in the speed, pressure or other operating conditions of the work equipment where such conditions a fter the change 

result in risk to health and safety which is gre ater than or of a different nature from such risks before the change. 

(2) Subject to paragraph (3), every employer shall ensure that, where a control is required by paragraph (1), it shall not be possible to perform any operation 

mentioned in sub -paragraph (a) or (b) of that paragraph except by a deliberate action on such control. 

(3) Paragraph (1) shall not apply to re -starting or changing operating conditions as a result of the normal operating cycle of an automatic device. 

Stop controls 

15. 

(1) Every employer shall ensure that, where appropriate, work equipment is provided with one or more readily accessible contr ols the operation of which 

will bring the work equipment to a safe condition in a safe manner. 

(2) Any control required by paragra ph (1) shall bring the work equipment to a complete stop where necessary for reasons of health and safety. 

(3) Any control required by paragraph (1) shall, if necessary for reasons of health and safety, switch off all sources of ene rgy after stopping the f unctioning 

of the work equipment. 

(4) Any control required by paragraph (1) shall operate in priority to any control which starts or changes the operating cond itions of the work equipment. Annex E UK - Extracts from the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974 and related legislations 

72 | P a g e 

Extract of UK’s Act/Regulations 

Emergency stop controls 

16. 

(1) Every employer shall ensure that , where appropriate, work equipment is provided with one or more readily accessible emergency stop controls unless 

it is not necessary by reason of the nature of the hazards and the time taken for the work equipment to come to a complete st op as a result o f the action 

of any control provided by virtue of regulation 15(1). 

(2) Any control required by paragraph (1) shall operate in priority to any control required by regulation 15(1). 

Controls 

17. 

(1) Every employer shall ensure that all controls for work equipment are clearly visible and identifiable, including by appropriate marking where necessary. 

(2) Except where necessary, the employer shall ensure that no control for work equipment is in a position where any person op erating the control is 

expos ed to a risk to his health or safety. 

(3) Every employer shall ensure where appropriate —

(a)that, so far as is reasonably practicable, the operator of any control is able to ensure from the position of that control that no person is in a place 

where he would be exposed to any risk to his health or safety as a result of the operation of that control, but where or to the extent that it is not 

reasonably practicable; 

(b)that, so far as is reasonably practicable, systems of work are effective to ensure that, when work equipment is about to start, no person is in a 

place where he would be exposed to a risk to his health or safety as a result of the work equipment starting, but where neith er of these is reasonably 

practicable; 

(c)that an audible, visible or oth er suitable warning is given by virtue of regulation 24 whenever work equipment is about to start. 

(4) Every employer shall take appropriate measures to ensure that any person who is in a place where he would be exposed to a risk to his health or safety 

as a result of the starting or stopping of work equipment has sufficient time and suitable means to avoid that risk. Annex E UK - Extracts from the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974 and related legislations 

73 | P a g e 

Extract of UK’s Act/Regulations 

Control systems 

18. 

(1) Every employer shall —

(a)ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that all control systems of work equipment are safe; and 

(b)are chosen making due allowance for the failures, faults and constraints to be expected in the planned circumstances of us e. 

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of paragraph (1), a control system shall not be safe unless —

(a)its operat ion does not create any increased risk to health or safety; 

(b)it ensures, so far as is reasonably practicable, that any fault in or damage to any part of the control system or the loss of supply of any source of 

energy used by the work equipment cannot r esult in additional or increased risk to health or safety; 

(c)it does not impede the operation of any control required by regulation 15 or 16. 

Isolation from sources of energy 

19. 

(1) Every employer shall ensure that where appropriate work equipment is provided with suitable means to isolate it from all its sources of energy. 

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of paragraph (1), the means mentioned in that paragraph shall not be suitable unless they are clearly identifiable 

and readily a ccessible. 

(3) Every employer shall take appropriate measures to ensure that re -connection of any energy source to work equipment does not expose any person 

using the work equipment to any risk to his health or safety. 

Maintenance operations 

22. Every em ployer shall take appropriate measures to ensure that work equipment is so constructed or adapted that, so far as is reasonab ly practicable, 

maintenance operations which involve a risk to health or safety can be carried out while the work equipment is shut down, or in other cases —

(a)maintenance operations can be carried out without exposing the person carrying them out to a risk to his health or safety; or Annex E UK - Extracts from the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974 and related legislations 

74 | P a g e 

Extract of UK’s Act/Regulations 

(b)appropriate measures can be taken for the protection of any person carrying out maintenance operat ions which involve a risk to his health or 

safety. 

Markings 

23. Every employer shall ensure that work equipment is marked in a clearly visible manner with any marking appropriate for r easons of health and safety. 

Warnings 

24. 

(1) Every employer shall ensure that work equipment incorporates any warnings or warning devices which are appropriate for reasons of health and safety. 

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of paragraph (1), warnings given by warning devices on work equipment shall not be appropriate unless they are 

unambiguous, easily perceived and easily understood. Annex F Australia - Extracts from the Work Health and Safety Act 2011 and related legislations 

75 | P a g e 

## Annex F Australia - Extracts from the Work Health and Safety Act 2011 and related legislations 

Extract of Australia’s Act/Regulations 

Work Health and Safety Act 2011 

https://www.legislation.gov.au/Details/C2011A00137 

Part 2 —Health and safety duties 

Division 3 —Further duties of persons conducting businesses or undertakings 

21 Duty of persons conducting businesses or undertakings involving management or control of fixtures, fittings or plant at workp laces 

(1) In this section, person with management or control of fixtures, fitti ngs or plant at a workplace means a person conducting a business or undertaking 

to the extent that the business or undertaking involves the management or control of fixtures, fittings or plant, in whole or in part, at a workplace, but 

does not include: 

(a) the occupier of a residence, unless the residence is occupied for the purposes of, or as part of, the conduct of a business o r undertaking; or 

(b) a prescribed person. 

(2) The person with management or control of fixtures, fittings or plant at a wor kplace must ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that the fixtures, 

fittings and plant are without risks to the health and safety of any person. 

22 Duties of persons conducting businesses or undertakings that design plant, substances or structure s

(1) This section applies to a person (the designer) who conducts a business or undertaking that designs: 

(a) plant that is to be used, or could reasonably be expected to be used, as, or at, a workplace; or 

(b) a substance that is to be used, or could reasonably be expected to be used, at a workplace; or 

(c) a structure that is to be used, or could reasonably be expected to be used, as, or at, a workplace. Annex F Australia - Extracts from the Work Health and Safety Act 2011 and related legislations 

76 | P a g e 

Extract of Australia’s Act/Regulations 

(2) The designer must ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that the plant, substance or structure is designed to be without risks to the health and 

safety of persons: 

(a) who, at a workplace, use the plant, substance or structure for a purpose for which it was designed; or 

(b) who handle the substance at a workplace; or 

(c) who store the p lant or substance at a workplace; or 

(d) who construct the structure at a workplace; or 

(e) who carry out any reasonably foreseeable activity at a workplace in relation to: 

(i) the manufacture, assembly or use of the plant for a purpose for which it was designed, or the proper storage, decommissioning, 

dismantling or disposal of the plant; or 

(ii) the manufacture or use of the substance for a purpose for which it was designed or the proper handling, storage or disposal o f the 

substance; or 

(iii) the manufacture, assembly or use of the structure for a purpose for which it was designed or the proper demolition or disposal of 

the structure; or 

(f) who are at or in the vicinity of a workplace and who are exposed to the plant, substance or structure at t he workplace or whose health or 

safety may be affected by a use or activity referred to in paragraph (a), (b), (c), (d) or (e). 

(3) The designer must carry out, or arrange the carrying out of, any calculations, analysis, testing or examination that may be necessary for the 

performance of the duty imposed by subsection (2). 

(4) The designer must give adequate information to each person who is provided with the design for the purpose of giving effect t o it concerning: 

(a) each purpose for which the plant, substance or structure was designed; and 

(b) the results of any calculations, analysis, testing or examination referred to in subsection (3), including, in relation to a substance, any 

hazardous properties of the substance identified by testing; and 

(c) any conditions necessary to ensure that the plant, substance or structure is without risks to health and safety when used for a purpose for 

which it was designed or when carrying out any activity referred to in subsection (2)(a) to (e). Annex F Australia - Extracts from the Work Health and Safety Act 2011 and related legislations 

77 | P a g e 

Extract of Australia’s Act/Regulations 

(5) The designer, on request, must, so far as is reasonably practicable, give current relevant information on the matters referred to in subsec tion (4) to a 

person who carries out, or is to carry out, any of the activities referred to in subsection (2)(a) to (e). 

23 Dutie s of persons conducting businesses or undertakings that manufacture plant, substances or structures 

(1) This section applies to a person (the manufacturer) who conducts a business or undertaking that manufactures: 

(a) plant that is to be used, or could r easonably be expected to be used, as, or at, a workplace; or 

(b) a substance that is to be used, or could reasonably be expected to be used, at a workplace; or 

(c) a structure that is to be used, or could reasonably be expected to be used, as, or at, a workplace. 

(2) The manufacturer must ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that the plant, substance or structure is manufactured to be without risks to the 

health and safety of persons: 

(a) who, at a workplace, use the plant, substance or struct ure for a purpose for which it was designed or manufactured; or 

(b) who handle the substance at a workplace; or 

(c) who store the plant or substance at a workplace; or 

(d) who construct the structure at a workplace; or 

(e) who carry out any reasonably foreseeable activity at a workplace in relation to: 

(i) the assembly or use of the plant for a purpose for which it was designed or manufactured or the proper storage, decommissioni ng, 

dismantling or disposal of the plant; or 

(ii) the use of the substanc e for a purpose for which it was designed or manufactured or the proper handling, storage or disposal of the 

substance; or 

(iii) the assembly or use of the structure for a purpose for which it was designed or manufactured or the proper demolition or disp osal of 

the structure; or Annex F Australia - Extracts from the Work Health and Safety Act 2011 and related legislations 

78 | P a g e 

Extract of Australia’s Act/Regulations 

Example: Inspection, operation, cleaning, maintenance or repair of plant. 

(f) who are at or in the vicinity of a workplace and who are exposed to the plant, substance or structure at the workplace or who se health or 

safety may be affected by a use or activity referred to in paragraph (a), (b), (c), (d) or (e). 

(3) The manufacturer must carry out, or arrange the carrying out of, any calculations, analysis, testing or examination that may be necessary for the 

performance of the duty imposed by subsection (2). 

(4) The manufacturer must give adequate information to each person to whom the manufacturer provides the plant, substance or stru cture concerning: 

(a) each purpose for which the plant, substance or structure was designed o r manufactured; and 

(b) the results of any calculations, analysis, testing or examination referred to in subsection (3), including, in relation to a substance, any 

hazardous properties of the substance identified by testing; and 

(c) any conditions necess ary to ensure that the plant, substance or structure is without risks to health and safety when used for a purpose for 

which it was designed or manufactured or when carrying out any activity referred to in subsection (2)(a) to (e). 

(5) The manufacturer, o n request, must, so far as is reasonably practicable, give current relevant information on the matters referred to in subsect ion (4) 

to a person who carries out, or is to carry out, any of the activities referred to in subsection (2)(a) to (e). 

24 Duties of persons conducting businesses or undertakings that import plant, substances or structures 

(1) This section applies to a person (the importer) who conducts a business or undertaking that imports: 

(a) plant that is to be used, or could reasonably be expected to be used, as, or at, a workplace; or 

(b) a substance that is to be used, or could reasonably be expected to be used, at a workplace; or 

(c) a structure that is to be used, or could reasonably be expected to be used, as, or at, a workplace. 

(2) The importer must ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that the plant, substance or structure is without risks to the health and safety of 

persons: 

(a) who, at a workplace, use the plant, substance or structure for a purpose for w hich it was designed or manufactured; or Annex F Australia - Extracts from the Work Health and Safety Act 2011 and related legislations 

79 | P a g e 

Extract of Australia’s Act/Regulations 

(b) who handle the substance at a workplace; or 

(c) who store the plant or substance at a workplace; or 

(d) who construct the structure at a workplace; or 

(e) who carry out any reasonably foreseeable activity at a workplace in relation to: 

(i) the assembly or use of the plant for a purpose for which it was designed or manufactured or the proper storage, decommissioni ng, 

dismantling or disposal of the plant; or 

(ii) the use of the substance for a purp ose for which it was designed or manufactured or the proper handling, storage or disposal of the 

substance; or 

(iii) the assembly or use of the structure for a purpose for which it was designed or manufactured or the proper demolition or disp osal of 

the s tructure; or 

Example: Inspection, operation, cleaning, maintenance or repair of plant. 

(f) who are at or in the vicinity of a workplace and who are exposed to the plant, substance or structure at the workplace or who se health or 

safety may be affected by a use or activity referred to in paragraph (a), (b), (c), (d) or (e). 

(3) The importer must: 

(a) carry out, or arrange the carrying out of, any calculations, analysis, testing or examination that may be necessary for the p erformance of the 

duty imposed b y subsection (2); or 

(b) ensure that the calculations, analysis, testing or examination have been carried out. 

(4) The importer must give adequate information to each person to whom the importer provides the plant, substance or structure co ncerning: 

(a) each purpose for which the plant, substance or structure was designed or manufactured; and 

(b) the results of any calculations, analysis, testing or examination referred to in subsection (3), including, in relation to a substance, any 

hazardous propertie s of the substance identified by testing; and 

(c) any conditions necessary to ensure that the plant, substance or structure is without risks to health and safety when used for a purpose for 

which it was designed or manufactured or when carrying out any ac tivity referred to in subsection (2)(a) to (e). Annex F Australia - Extracts from the Work Health and Safety Act 2011 and related legislations 

80 | P a g e 

Extract of Australia’s Act/Regulations 

(5) The importer, on request, must, so far as is reasonably practicable, give current relevant information on the matters referre d to in subsection (4) to a 

person who carries out, or is to carry out, any of the activities referred to in subsection (2)(a) to (e). 

25 Duties of persons conducting businesses or undertakings that supply plant, substances or structures 

(1) This section applies to a person (the supplier) who conducts a business or undertaking that supplies: 

(a) plant that is to be used, or could reasonably be expected to be used, as, or at, a workplace; or 

(b) a substance that is to be used, or could reasonably be expected to be used, at a workplace; or 

(c) a structure that is to be used, or could reasonably be expected to be used, as, or at, a workplace. 

(2) The supplier must ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that the plant, substance or structure is without risks to the health and safety of 

persons: 

(a) who, at a w orkplace, use the plant or substance or structure for a purpose for which it was designed or manufactured; or 

(b) who handle the substance at a workplace; or 

(c) who store the plant or substance at a workplace; or 

(d) who construct the structure at a wo rkplace; or 

(e) who carry out any reasonably foreseeable activity at a workplace in relation to: 

(i) the assembly or use of the plant for a purpose for which it was designed or manufactured or the proper storage, decommissioni ng, 

dismantling or disposal of the plant; or 

(ii) the use of the substance for a purpose for which it was designed or manufactured or the proper handling, storage or disposal of the 

substance; or 

(iii) the assembly or use of the structure for a purpose for which it was designed or manufactured or the proper demolition or disposal of 

the structure; or Annex F Australia - Extracts from the Work Health and Safety Act 2011 and related legislations 

81 | P a g e 

Extract of Australia’s Act/Regulations 

(f) who are at or in the vicinity of a workplace and who are exposed to the plant, substance or structure at the workplace or who se health or 

safety may be affected by a us e or activity referred to in paragraph (a), (b), (c), (d) or (e). 

(3) The supplier must: 

(a) carry out, or arrange the carrying out of, any calculations, analysis, testing or examination that may be necessary for the p erformance of the 

duty imposed by su bsection (2); or 

(b) ensure that the calculations, analysis, testing or examination have been carried out. 

(4) The supplier must give adequate information to each person to whom the supplier supplies the plant, substance or structure co ncerning: 

(a) eac h purpose for which the plant, substance or structure was designed or manufactured; and 

(b) the results of any calculations, analysis, testing or examination referred to in subsection (3), including, in relation to a substance, any 

hazardous properties of the substance identified by testing; and 

(c) any conditions necessary to ensure that the plant, substance or structure is without risks to health and safety when used for a purpose for 

which it was designed or manufactured or when carrying out any activi ty referred to in subsection (2)(a) to (e). 

(5) The supplier, on request, must, so far as is reasonably practicable, give current relevant information on the matters referre d to in subsection (4) to a 

person who carries out, or is to carry out, any of the activities referred to in subsection (2)(a) to (e). 

26 Duty of persons conducting businesses or undertakings that install, construct or commission plant or structures 

(1) This section applies to a person who conducts a business or undertaking that inst alls, constructs or commissions plant or a structure that is to be 

used, or could reasonably be expected to be used, as, or at, a workplace. 

(2) The person must ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that the way in which the plant or structure is installed, constructed or commissioned 

ensures that the plant or structure is without risks to the health and safety of persons: 

(a) who install or construct the plant or structure at a workplace; or 

(b) who use the plant or structure at a w orkplace for a purpose for which it was installed, constructed or commissioned; or Annex F Australia - Extracts from the Work Health and Safety Act 2011 and related legislations 

82 | P a g e 

Extract of Australia’s Act/Regulations 

(c) who carry out any reasonably foreseeable activity at a workplace in relation to the proper use, decommissioning or dismantlin g of the plant 

or demolition or disposal of the structure; or 

(d) who are at or in the vicinity of a workplace and whose health or safety may be affected by a use or activity referred to in p aragraph (a), (b) or 

(c). 

Work Health and Safety Regulations 2011 

https://www.legislation.gov.au/Details/F2020C00693 

Chapter 5 —Plant and structures 

Part 5.1 —General duties for plant and structures 

Division 2—Duties of persons conducting businesses or undertakings that design plant 

187 Provision of information to manufacturer 

A designer of plant must ensure, when the design of the plant is made available to the manufacturer of the plant, that the ma nufacturer is provided with: 

(a) information to enable the plant to be manufactured in ac cordance with the design specifications; and 

(b) if applicable, information about: 

(i) the installation, commissioning, decommissioning, use, handling, storage and, if the plant is capable of being dismantled, di smantling 

of the plant; and 

(ii) the haza rds and risks associated with the use of the plant that the designer has identified; and 

(iii) testing or inspections to be carried out on the plant; and 

(iv) the systems of work and competency of operators that are necessary for the safe use of the plan t; and 

(v) the emergency procedures (if any) that are required to be implemented if there is a malfunction of the plant. Annex F Australia - Extracts from the Work Health and Safety Act 2011 and related legislations 

83 | P a g e 

Extract of Australia’s Act/Regulations 

188 Hazard identified in design during manufacture 

If a manufacturer of plant advises the designer of the plant that there is a hazard in the design of plant for which the designer has not provided a control 

measure, the designer must: 

(a) revise the information originally supplied to the manufacturer to ensure that: 

(i) the risk is eliminated so far as is reasonably practicable; or 

(ii) if it is not reasonably practicable to eliminate the risk, the risk is minimised so far as is reasonably practicable; or 

(b) notify the manufacturer, in writing, that the designer is of the opinion that it is not necessary to revise the information originally supplied to 

the manufacturer to ensure compliance with this Part. 

189 Guarding 

(1) This regulation applies if a designer of plant uses guarding as a measure to control risk. 

(2) The designer must ensure, so far as is reasonab ly practicable, that the guarding designed for that purpose will prevent access to the danger point or 

danger area of the plant. 

(3) The designer must ensure that: 

(a) if access to the area of the plant requiring guarding is not necessary during operatio n, maintenance or cleaning of the plant —the guarding is 

a permanently fixed physical barrier; or 

(b) if access to the area of the plant requiring guarding is necessary during operation, maintenance or cleaning of the plant —the guarding is an 

interlocked p hysical barrier that allows access to the area being guarded at times when that area does not present a risk and prevents acc ess to 

that area at any other time; or 

(c) if it is not reasonably practicable to use guarding referred to in paragraph (a) or (b) —the guarding used is a physical barrier that can only be 

altered or removed by the use of tools; or Annex F Australia - Extracts from the Work Health and Safety Act 2011 and related legislations 

84 | P a g e 

Extract of Australia’s Act/Regulations 

(d) if it is not reasonably practicable to use guarding referred to in paragraph (a), (b) or (c) —the design includes a presence -sensing safeguarding 

syste m that eliminates any risk arising from the area of the plant requiring guarding while a person or any part of a person is in the area being 

guarded. 

(4) The designer must ensure that the guarding is designed: 

(a) to be of solid construction and securely mounted so as to resist impact or shock; and 

(b) to make bypassing or disabling of the guarding, whether deliberately or by accident, as difficult as is reasonably practicabl e; and 

(c) so as not to cause a risk in itself. 

(5) If the plant to be guarded contains moving parts and those parts may break or cause workpieces to be ejected from the plant, the designer must 

ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that the guarding will control any risk from those broken or ejected parts and w orkpiec es. 

(6) Despite anything to the contrary in this regulation, the designer must ensure: 

(a) that the guarding is of a kind that can be removed to allow maintenance and cleaning of the plant at any time that the plant is not in normal 

operation; and 

(b) if the guarding is removed, that, so far as is reasonably practicable, the plant cannot be restarted unless the guarding is re placed. 

190 Operational controls 

(1) A designer of plant must ensure that the design provides for any operator’s controls for th e plant to be: 

(a) identified on the plant so as to indicate their nature and function and direction of operation; and 

(b) located so as to be readily and conveniently operated by each person using the plant; and 

(c) located or guarded to prevent uninte ntional activation; and 

(d) able to be locked into the ‘off’ position to enable the disconnection of all motive power. Annex F Australia - Extracts from the Work Health and Safety Act 2011 and related legislations 

85 | P a g e 

Extract of Australia’s Act/Regulations 

(2) If the need for plant to be operated during maintenance or cleaning cannot be eliminated, the designer of the plant must ensu re tha t the design 

provides for operator’s controls that: 

(a) permit operation of the plant while a person is undertaking the maintenance or cleaning of the plant; and 

(b) while the plant is being maintained or cleaned, cannot be operated by any person other t han the person who is carrying out the maintenance 

or cleaning of the plant; and 

(c) will allow operation of the plant in such a way that any risk associated with the activities in relation to any person who is carrying out the 

maintenance or cleaning: 

(i) is eliminated so far as is reasonably practicable; or 

(ii) if it is not reasonably practicable to eliminate the risk, is minimised so far as is reasonably practicable. 

191 Emergency stop controls 

(1) If plant is designed to be operated or attended by more than one person and more than one emergency stop control is fitted, the designer of the 

plant must ensure that the design provides for the multiple emergency stop controls to be of the ‘stop and lock -off’ type so that the plant cannot be 

restarted after an emergency stop control has been used unless that emergency stop control is reset. 

(2) If the design of the plant includes an emergency stop control for the plant, the designer of the plant must ensure that the d esign provides :

(a) for the stop control to be prominent, clearly and durably marked and immediately accessible to each operator of the plant; an d

(b) for any handle, bar or push button associated with the stop control to be coloured red; and 

(c) that the stop contr ol cannot be adversely affected by electrical or electronic circuit malfunction. 

192 Warning devices 

(1) This regulation applies if the design of plant includes an emergency warning device or it is necessary to include an emergenc y warning device to 

min imise risk. Annex F Australia - Extracts from the Work Health and Safety Act 2011 and related legislations 

86 | P a g e 

Extract of Australia’s Act/Regulations 

(2) The designer of the plant must ensure that the design provides for the device to be positioned on the plant to ensure the dev ice will work to best 

effect. 

Division 3—Duties of persons conducting businesses or undertakings that manufacture plant 

193 Control of risk 

(1) A manufacturer of plant must ensure the following: 

(a) that the plant is manufactured and inspected having regard to the information provided to the manufacturer by the designer of the plant 

under the Act and these Regulations; 

(b) if the information provided to the manufacturer by the designer of the plant under the Act and these Regulations requires the plant to be 

tested —that the plant is tested in accordance with that information; 

(c) if, during the manufacturi ng process, any hazard is identified in the design of the plant for which the designer has not provided a control 

measure: 

(i) that the hazard is not incorporated into the manufacture of the plant; and 

(ii) that the designer of the plant is given written notice of the hazard as soon as practicable; and 

(iii) that all reasonable steps are taken to consult with the designer of the plant in relation to the alteration of the design to rectify the 

hazard. 

(2) A manufacturer of plant must ensure that, if it i s not possible to notify the designer of the hazard in accordance with subregulation (1): 

(a) the risk is eliminated, so far as is reasonably practicable; or 

(b) if it is not reasonably practicable to eliminate the risk, the risk is minimised so far as i s reasonably practicable. 

Note: WHS Act —section 23 (see regulation 9). 

(3) A manufacturer to whom paragraph (1)(c) applies must not manufacture the plant until: 

(a) the designer gives the manufacturer the revised information or written instructi on under regulation 188; or Annex F Australia - Extracts from the Work Health and Safety Act 2011 and related legislations 

87 | P a g e 

Extract of Australia’s Act/Regulations 

(b) the manufacturer eliminates or minimises the risk under subregulation (2). 

Note: WHS Act —section 23 (see regulation 9). 

(4) If the designer notifies a manufacturer of plant under regulation 188, the manufacturer may proceed in accordance with the designer’s original 

information. 

194 Guarding 

(1) A manufacturer of plant must ensure that guarding used as a control measure is of solid construction and securely mounted so as to resist impact or 

shock. 

(2) A manufacturer of plant must ensure: 

(a) that any guarding used as a control measure in relation to plant is of a kind that can be removed to allow maintenance and cl eaning of the 

plant at any time that the plant is not in normal operation; and 

(b) if the guarding is removed —that, so far as is reasonably practicable, the plant cannot be restarted unless the guarding is replaced. 

195 Information must be obtained and provided 

A manufacturer of plant must: 

(a) take all reasonable steps to obtain the information required to be provided to the manufacturer by the designer of the plant under 

paragraphs 22(4)(a) and (c) of the Act and regulations 187 and 188; and 

(b) ensure that a person to whom the manufacturer supplies the plant is, at the time of supp ly, provided with the information provided to the 

manufacturer by the designer under paragraphs 22(4)(a) and (c) of the Act and regulation 187; and 

(c) if the manufacturer acts in accordance with regulation 193(1)(c), ensure that a person to whom the manu facturer supplies the plant is 

provided with the information, applicable to the plant, that is required to be provided by the designer under sections 22(4)(a) and (c) of the Act 

and regulation 188. Annex F Australia - Extracts from the Work Health and Safety Act 2011 and related legislations 

88 | P a g e 

Extract of Australia’s Act/Regulations 

Division 4—Duties of persons conducting businesses or und ertakings that import plant 

196 Information to be obtained and provided by importer 

An importer of plant must: 

(a) take all reasonable steps to obtain: 

(i) the information that would be required to be provided by a manufacturer under paragraphs 23(4)(a) and (c) of the Act; and 

(ii) the information that would be required to be provided by the designer of the plant to the manufacturer under regulations 187 and 

188; and 

(b) give that information to any person to whom the importer supplies the plant. 

197 Control of risk 

An importer of plant must: 

(a) ensure that the plant is inspected having regard to the information provided by the manufacturer; and 

(b) if the information provided by the manufacturer requires the plant to be tested —ensure that the plant is tested in accordance with that 

information; and 

(c) if any hazards are identified: 

(i) ensure that the plant is not supplied until the risks have been eliminated so far as is reasonably practicable; and 

(ii) if it is not reasonably practicable to eliminate the risks, advise the person to whom the plant is supplied of the risks; and 

(d) take all reasonable steps to ensure that the designer and manufacturer of the plant are consulted in relation to any alterati on made to th e

plant to control the risk. Annex F Australia - Extracts from the Work Health and Safety Act 2011 and related legislations 

89 | P a g e 

Extract of Australia’s Act/Regulations 

Division 5—Duties of persons conducting businesses or undertakings that supply plant 

198 Information to be obtained and provided by supplier 

A supplier of plant must: 

(a) take all reasonable steps to obtain the information required to be provided by the manufacturer under paragraphs 23(4)(a) and (c) of the Act 

and these Regulations; and 

(b) ensure that, when the plant is supplied, the person to whom the plant is supplied is given the information obtained by the supplier under 

paragraph (a). 

199 Supply of second -hand plant —duties of supplier 

(1) A supplier of second -hand plant must ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that any faults in the plant are identified. 

(2) A supplier of second -hand plant must ensure that the person to whom the plant is supplied is, before the plant is supplied, given written notice: 

(a) of the condition of the plant; and 

(b) of any faults identified under subregulation (1); and 

(c) if appropriate, that the plant should not be used until the faults are rectified. 

(3) This regulation does not apply to plant to be used for scrap or spare parts. 

200 Second -hand plant to be used for scrap or spare parts 

A supplier of plant to be used for scrap or spare parts must, before the pl ant is supplied, inform the person to whom the plant is supplied, either in 

writing or by marking the plant, that the plant is being supplied for scrap or spare parts and that the plant in its current form is not to be used as plant. Annex F Australia - Extracts from the Work Health and Safety Act 2011 and related legislations 

90 | P a g e 

Extract of Australia’s Act/Regulations 

Division 6—Duties of persons conducting businesses or undertakings that install, construct or commission plant 

201 Duties of persons conducting businesses or undertakings that install, construct or commission plant 

(1) This regulation applies to a person who conducts a business or undertaking that installs, constructs or commissions plant that is to be used, or could 

reasonably be expected to be used, as, or at, a workplace. 

(2) The person must ensure that the plant is installed, constructed or commissioned having regard to: 

(a) the information provided by the designer, manufacturer, importer or supplier of the plant under the Act and these Regulations ; or 

(b) the instructions provided by a competent person to the extent that those instructions relate to health and safety. 

202 Duties of persons conducting businesses or undertakings that install, construct or commission structures 

(1) This regulation applies to a person who conducts a business or undertaking that installs, constructs or commis sions a structure that is to be used, or 

could reasonably be expected to be used, as or at, a workplace. 

(2) The person must ensure that the structure is installed, constructed or commissioned having regard to: 

(a) the information provided by the designe r, manufacturer, importer or supplier of the structure under the Act and these Regulations; or 

(b) the instructions provided by a competent person to the extent that those instructions relate to health and safety. 

Division 7—General duties of persons con ducting a business or undertaking involving the management or control of plant 

Note: A person with management or control of plant at a workplace is the person conducting a business or undertaking at the workpla ce to the 

extent that the business or undertaking involves the management or control of plant in whole or in part at the workplace. See the definition of person 

with management or control of plant at a workplace in subregulation 5(1) and section 21 of the Act. 

Subdivision 1—Management of ris ks 

203 Management of risks to health and safety Annex F Australia - Extracts from the Work Health and Safety Act 2011 and related legislations 

91 | P a g e 

Extract of Australia’s Act/Regulations 

A person with management or control of plant at a workplace must manage risks to health and safety associated with plant, in accordance with Part 3.1. 

Note: WHS Act —section 21 (see regulation 9). 

Subdivision 2—Additional control measures for general plant 

204 Control of risks arising from installation or commissioning 

(1) A person with management or control of plant at a workplace must not commission the plant unless the person has established that the plant is, so 

far as is reasonably practicable, without risks to the health and safety of any person. 

(2) A person with management or control of plant at a workplace must not decommission or dismantle the plant unless the decommiss ioni ng or 

dismantling can be carried out, so far as is reasonably practicable, without risks to the health and safety of any person. 

(3) A person with management or control of plant at a workplace must ensure that a person who installs, assembles, constructs, commissions or 

decommissions or dismantles the plant is a competent person. 

(4) A person with management or control of plant at a workplace must ensure that a person who installs, assembles, constructs, co mmissions or 

decommissions or dismantles the plant is provided with the available information for eliminating or minimising risks to health or safety. 

(5) A person with management or control of plant at a workplace must ensure that the processes for the installation, construction , com missioning, 

decommissioning and dismantling of plant include inspections that ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that risks ass ociated with these activities 

are monitored. 

205 Preventing unauthorised alterations to or interference with plant 

Th e person with management or control of plant at a workplace must, so far as is reasonably practicable, prevent alterations to or interference with the 

plant that are not authorised by the person. 

206 Proper use of plant and controls Annex F Australia - Extracts from the Work Health and Safety Act 2011 and related legislations 

92 | P a g e 

Extract of Australia’s Act/Regulations 

(1) The person with management or control of plant at a workplace must take all reasonable steps to ensure that plant is used only for the purpos e for 

which it was designed, unless the person has determined that the proposed use does not increase the risk to health or safety. 

(2) In determining whether or not a proposed use of plant increases the risk to health or safety, the person with management or c ontrol of the plant 

must ensure that the risk associated with the proposed use is assessed by a competent person. 

(3) The pe rson with management or control of plant at a workplace must take all reasonable steps to ensure that all health and safety f eatures and 

warning devices (including guarding, operational controls, emergency stops and warning devices) are used in accordance with the instructions and 

information provided by that person under regulation 39. 

207 Plant not in use 

The person with management or control of plant at a workplace must ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that plant th at is not in use is left in a 

state that does not create a risk to the health or safety of any person. 

208 Guarding 

(1) This regulation applies if guarding is used as a control measure in relation to plant at a workplace. 

(2) The person with management or control of the plant must ensure that: 

(a) if access to the area of the plant requiring guarding is not necessary during operation, maintenance or cleaning of the plant , the guarding is a 

permanently fixed physical barrier; or 

(b) if access to the area of the plant requiring guarding is necessary during operation, maintenance or cleaning of the plant, the guarding is an 

interlocked physical barrier that allows access to the area being guarded at times when that area does not present a risk and prevents access to 

that area at any other time; or 

(c) if it is not reasonably practicable to use guarding referred to in paragraph (a) or (b), the guarding used is a physical barrier that can only be 

altered or removed by the use of tools; or Annex F Australia - Extracts from the Work Health and Safety Act 2011 and related legislations 

93 | P a g e 

Extract of Australia’s Act/Regulations 

(d) if it is not reasonably pract icable to use guarding referred to in paragraph (a), (b) or (c), the guarding includes a presence -sensing 

safeguarding system that eliminates any risk arising from the area of the plant requiring guarding while a person or any part of a person is in the 

ar ea being guarded. 

(3) The person with management or control of the plant must ensure that the guarding: 

(a) is of solid construction and securely mounted so as to resist impact or shock; and 

(b) makes bypassing or disabling of the guarding, whether deli berately or by accident, as difficult as is reasonably practicable; and 

(c) does not create a risk in itself; and 

(d) is properly maintained. 

(4) If the plant to be guarded contains moving parts that may break or cause workpieces to be ejected from the plant, the person with management or 

control of the plant must ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that the guarding will control any risk from those bro ken or ejected parts and 

workpieces. 

(5) Despite anything to the contrary in this regulation, the person with management or control of the plant must ensure: 

(a) that the guarding is of a kind that can be removed to allow maintenance and cleaning of the plant at any time that the plant is not in normal 

operation; and 

(b) if guarding is removed, that, so far as is reasonably practicable, the plant cannot be restarted unless the guarding is replaced. 

209 Guarding and insulation from heat and cold 

The person with management or control of plant at a workplace must ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that any pipe or other part of the plant 

associated with heat or cold is guarded or insulated so that the plant is without risks to the health and safety of any perso n. 

210 Operational controls 

(1) The person with management or c ontrol of plant at a workplace must ensure that any operator’s controls are: 

(a) identified on the plant so as to indicate their nature and function and direction of operation; and Annex F Australia - Extracts from the Work Health and Safety Act 2011 and related legislations 

94 | P a g e 

Extract of Australia’s Act/Regulations 

(b) located so as to be readily and conveniently operated by each person using the plant; and 

(c) located or guarded to prevent unintentional activation; and 

(d) able to be locked into the ‘off’ position to enable the disconnection of all motive power. 

(2) If the need for plant to be operated during maintenance or cle aning cannot be eliminated, the person with management or control of the plant at a 

workplace must ensure that the operator’s controls: 

(a) permit operation of the plant while a person is undertaking the maintenance or cleaning of the plant; and 

(b) whil e the plant is being maintained or cleaned, either: 

(i) cannot be operated by any person other than the person who is carrying out the maintenance or cleaning of the plant; or 

(ii) if subparagraph (i) cannot be complied with because the plant must be ope rated by a person other than the person who is carrying 

out the maintenance or cleaning of the plant, cannot be operated except by a person authorised by the person with management or 

control of the plant for that purpose; and 

(c) will allow operation of the plant in such a way that any risk associated with the activities in relation to any person who is carrying out the 

maintenance or cleaning: 

(i) is eliminated so far as is reasonably practicable; or 

(ii) if it is not reasonably practicable to eliminat e the risk, is minimised so far as is reasonably practicable. 

211 Emergency stops 

(1) If plant at a workplace is designed to be operated or attended by more than one person and more than one emergency stop contr ol is fitted, the 

person with management o r control of plant at the workplace must ensure that the multiple emergency stop controls are of the ‘stop and lock -off’ type 

so that the plant cannot be restarted after an emergency stop control has been used unless that emergency stop control is res et. 

(2) If the design of plant at a workplace includes an emergency stop control, the person with management or control of the plant at the workplace must 

ensure that: 

(a) the stop control is prominent, clearly and durably marked and immediately accessible to each operator of the plant; and Annex F Australia - Extracts from the Work Health and Safety Act 2011 and related legislations 

95 | P a g e 

Extract of Australia’s Act/Regulations 

(b) any handle, bar or push button associated with the stop control is coloured red; and 

(c) the stop control cannot be adversely affected by electrical or electronic circuit malfunction. 

212 Warning devices 

(1) This regulation applies if the design of plant includes an emergency warning device or it is necessary to include an emergenc y warning device to 

minimise risk. 

(2) The person with management or control of the plant must ensure that the device is positioned on the plant to ensure that the device will work to 

best effect. 

213 Maintenance and inspection of plant 

(1) The person with management or control of plant at a workplace must ensure that the maintenance, inspection and, if necessary, testing of the plant 

is carried out by a competent person. 

(2) The maintenance, inspection and testing must be carried out: 

(a) in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations, if any; or 

(b) if there are no manufacturer’s recommendations, in accordance with the recommendations of a competent person; or 

(c) in relation to inspection, if it is not reasonably practicable to comply with paragraph (a) or (b), annually. Annex G Singapore - Extracts from the Workplace Safety and Health Act and related legislations 

96 | P a g e 

## Annex G Singapore - Extracts from the Workplace Safety and Health Act and related legislations 

Extract of Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

Workplace Safety and Health Act 

https://sso.agc.gov.sg/Act/WSHA2006 

Duty of occupier of workplace 

11. It shall be the duty of every occupier of any workplace to take, so far as is reasonably practicable, such measures to ensure that —

(a) the workplace; 

(b) all means of access to or egress from the workplace; and 

(c) any machinery, equipment, plant, article or substance kept on the workplace, 

are safe and without risks to health to every person within those premises, whether or not the person is at work or is an employee of the occupier. 

Duties of employers 

12. 

(1) It shall be the duty of every employer to take, so far as is reasonably practicable, such measures as are necessa ry to ensure the safety and health of his 

employees at work. 

(2) It shall be the duty of every employer to take, so far as is reasonably practicable, such measures as are necessary to e nsure the safety and health of 

persons (not being his employees) who m ay be affected by any undertaking carried on by him in the workplace. 

(3) For the purposes of subsection (1), the measures necessary to ensure the safety and health of persons at work include —

(a) providing and maintaining for those persons a work envi ronment which is safe, without risk to health, and adequate as regards facilities and 

arrangements for their welfare at work; 

(b) ensuring that adequate safety measures are taken in respect of any machinery, equipment, plant, article or process used b y th ose persons; Annex G Singapore - Extracts from the Workplace Safety and Health Act and related legislations 

97 | P a g e 

Extract of Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(c) ensuring that those persons are not exposed to hazards arising out of the arrangement, disposal, manipulation, organisati on, processing, 

storage, transport, working or use of things —

(i) in their workplace; or 

(ii) near their workplace and under the control of the employer; 

(d) developing and implementing procedures for dealing with emergencies that may arise while those persons are at work; and 

(e) ensuring that those persons at work have adequate instruction , information, training and supervision as is necessary for them to perform their 

work. 

(4) Every employer shall, where required by the regulations, give to persons (not being his employees) the prescribed inform ation about such aspects of 

the way in wh ich he conducts his undertaking as might affect their safety or health while those persons are at his workplace. 

Duties of principals 

14. 

(1) Subject to subsection (2), it shall be the duty of every principal to take, so far as is reasonably practicable, such measures as are necessary to ensure 

the safety and health of —

(a) any contractor engaged by the principal when at work; 

(b) any direct or indirect subcontractor engaged by such contractor when at work; and 

(c) any employee employed by such contractor or subcontractor when at work. 

(2) The duty imposed on the principal in subsection (1) shall only apply where the contractor, subcontractor or employee ref erred to in that subsection is 

working under the direction of the principal as to the manner in which the work is carried out. 

(3) It shall be the duty of every principal to take, so far as is reasonably practicable, such measures as are necessary to ensur e the safety and health of 

persons (other than a person referred to in subsection (1)(a), (b) or (c) working under the principal’ s direction) who may be affected by any undertaking 

carried on by him in the workplace. 

(4) For the purposes of subsection (1), the measures necessary to ensure the safety and health of persons at work include —Annex G Singapore - Extracts from the Workplace Safety and Health Act and related legislations 

98 | P a g e 

Extract of Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(a) providing and maintaining for those pe rsons a work environment which is safe, without risk to health, and adequate as regards facilities and 

arrangements for their welfare at work; 

(b) ensuring that adequate safety measures are taken in respect of any machinery, equipment, plant, article or p rocess used by those persons; 

(c) ensuring that those persons are not exposed to hazards arising out of the arrangement, disposal, manipulation, organisati on, processing, 

storage, transport, working or use of things —

(i) in their workplace; or 

(ii) near their workplace and under the control of the principal; 

(d) developing and implementing procedures for dealing with emergencies that may arise while those persons are at work; and 

(e) ensuring that those persons at work have adequate instruction, infor mation, training and supervision as is necessary for them to perform their 

work. 

(5) Every principal shall, where required by the regulations, give to persons (other than a person referred to in subsection (1)(a), (b) or (c) working under 

the principal’s direction) the prescribed information about such aspects of the way in which he conducts his undertaking as might affect thei r safety or 

health while those persons are at his workplace. 

Duties of manufacturers and suppliers of machinery, equipment or ha zardous substances used at work 

16. 

(1) Subject to this section, it shall be the duty of any person who manufactures or supplies any machinery, equipment or haz ardous substance for use at 

work to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable —

(a) that th e following information about the safe use of the machinery, equipment or hazardous substance is available to any person to w hom the 

machinery, equipment or hazardous substance is supplied for use at work: 

(i ) the precautions (if any) to be taken for the proper use and maintenance of the machinery, equipment or hazardous substance; 

(ii) the health hazards (if any) associated with the machinery, equipment or hazardous substance; and Annex G Singapore - Extracts from the Workplace Safety and Health Act and related legislations 

99 | P a g e 

Extract of Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(iii) the information rela ting to and the results of any examinations or tests of the machinery, equipment or hazardous substance under 

paragraph (c) that are relevant to its safe use; 

(b) that the machinery, equipment or hazardous substance is safe, and without risk to health, w hen properly used; 

(c) that the machinery, equipment or hazardous substance is examined and tested so as to comply with the obligation imposed b y paragraph (b). 

(2) The duties imposed on any person specified in subsection (1) shall —

(a) apply only if t he machinery, equipment or hazardous substance is manufactured or supplied in the course of trade, business, profession or 

undertaking carried on by the person, whether for profit or not; 

(b) apply whether or not the machinery, equipment or hazardous subs tance is exclusively manufactured or supplied for use by persons at work; 

and 

(c) extend to the supply of the machinery, equipment or hazardous substance by way of sale, transfer, lease or hire and wheth er as principal or 

agent, and to the supply of the m achinery, equipment or hazardous substance to a person for the purpose of supply to others. 

(3) The duties imposed on any person specified in subsection (1) shall not apply to a person by reason only that the person supplies the machinery or 

equipment u nder a hire -purchase agreement, conditional sale agreement or credit -sale agreement to another (referred to in this section as the customer) 

in the course of a business of financing the acquisition of the machinery or equipment by the customer from others. 

(4) Where a person (referred to in this subsection as the ostensible supplier) supplies any machinery or equipment for use a t work to a customer under a 

hire -purchase agreement, conditional sale agreement or credit -sale agreement, and the ostensible sup plier —

(a) carries on the business of financing the acquisition of goods by others by means of such agreements; and 

(b) in the course of that business acquired his interest in the machinery or equipment supplied to the customer as a means of financing it s

acquisition by the customer from a third person (referred to in this subsection as the effective supplier), 

the effective supplier shall be treated for the purposes of this section as supplying the machinery or equipment to the custo mer instead of the o stensible 

supplier, and any duty imposed by subsection (1) on a supplier shall accordingly apply to the effective supplier, and not to the ostensible supplier. 

(5) Where a person designs, manufactures or supplies any machinery, equipment or hazardous sub stance for use at work and does so for or to another on 

the basis of a written undertaking by that other to take specified steps sufficient to ensure, so far as is reasonably practi cable, that the machinery, Annex G Singapore - Extracts from the Workplace Safety and Health Act and related legislations 

100 | P a g e 

Extract of Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

equipment or hazardous substance will be safe an d without risk to health when properly used, the undertaking shall have the effect of relieving the first -

mentioned person from the duty imposed by subsection (1)(b) to such extent as is reasonable having regard to the terms of the undertaking. 

(6) Any p erson required under subsection (1)(c) to ensure that any machinery, equipment or hazardous substance is examined and tested so as to comply 

with the obligation imposed by subsection (1)(b) shall be regarded as having complied with subsection (1)(c) to the extent that —

(a) the examination or test has already been carried out otherwise than by, or on behalf of, the person; and 

(b) it is reasonable for the person to rely on that examination or test. 

(7) For the purposes of this section, an absence of saf ety, or a risk to health, shall be disregarded in so far as the case in or in relation to which it would 

arise is shown to be one the occurrence of which could not reasonably be foreseen. 

(8) In this section, “supplier”, in relation to any machinery, equ ipment or hazardous substance, does not include a manufacturer of those items when 

supplying, but includes an importer when supplying those items. 

(9) This section shall apply only to machinery, equipment or hazardous substances specified in the Fifth Sc hedule. 

Duties of persons who erect, install or modify machinery or equipment and persons in control of machinery for use at work 

17. 

(1) It shall be the duty of any person who erects, installs or modifies any machinery or equipment for use at work to ensure, so far as is reasonably 

practicable, that the machinery or equipment is erected, installed or modified in such a manner that it is safe, and without risk to health, when properly 

used. 

(2) The duty imposed on a person erecting, installing or modifying any machinery or equipment under subsection (1) shall apply only if the machinery or 

equipment is erected, installed or modified in the course of the person’s trade, business, profession or undertaking. 

(3) Any person required under subsecti on (1) to ensure that any machinery or equipment is erected, installed or modified in such a manner that it is safe, 

and without risk to health, when properly used shall be regarded as having complied with that subsection to the extent that —

(a) the perso n ensured, so far as is reasonably practicable, that the erection, installation or modification was in accordance with the in formation 

supplied by the designer, manufacturer or supplier of the machinery or equipment regarding its erection, installation or modification; and Annex G Singapore - Extracts from the Workplace Safety and Health Act and related legislations 

101 | P a g e 

Extract of Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(b) it is reasonable for the person to rely on that information. 

(4) Where any machinery moved by mechanical power is used in any workplace, then notwithstanding anything in this Act, it sh all be the duty of the owner 

of the machinery to ensure —

(a) so far as is reasonably practicable, that the machinery is maintained in a safe condition; and 

(b) that the precautions (if any) to be taken for the safe use of the machinery and the health hazards (if any) associated wi th the machinery ar e

available to any person using the machinery. 

(5) Where the owner of any machinery moved by mechanical power has entered into a contract of hire or lease with a hirer or lessee, the duty imposed 

under subsection (4) shall apply to the hirer or lessee o f the machinery instead of the owner. 

(6) Where the owner, hirer or lessee of any machinery moved by mechanical power has entered into a contract with another per son to maintain the 

machinery, the duty under subsection (4)(a) shall apply to that other pe rson instead of the owner, hirer or lessee of the machinery. 

(7) Subsections (1), (2) and (3) shall apply only to machinery or equipment specified in Part I of the Fifth Schedule. 

FIFTH SCHEDULE - MACHINERY, EQUIPMENT OR HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES 

PART I - MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT 

1. Scaffolds and any materials or components used to erect them 

2. All lifting equipment 

3. Forklifts 

4. Power presses 

5. Bar -benders 

6. Any equipment or piping intended for operation under pressure, including all statutory p ressure vessels 

7. Any equipment or piping intended to contain corrosive, toxic or flammable substances 

8. Welding equipment, including any accessory, apparatus or fitting necessary to enable its use 

9. Materials or components used for the construction of support structures Annex G Singapore - Extracts from the Workplace Safety and Health Act and related legislations 

102 | P a g e 

Extract of Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

10. Explosive powered tools 

11. Equipment used for abrasive blasting, including any accessory, apparatus or fitting necessary to enable its use and oper ation. Annex G Singapore - Extracts from the Workplace Safety and Health Act and related legislations 

103 | P a g e 

Workplace Safety and Health (General Provisions) Regulations 

https://sso.agc.gov.sg/SL/354A -RG1?DocDate=20110909 

Part III – General Provisions Relating to Safety 

Hoists and lifts 

19. 

(1) No hoist or lift shall be used in a workplace unless an authorised examiner has —

(a) tested and examined the hoist or lift after its installation; and 

(b) issued and signed a certificate of test and examination, specifying the safe working load of the hoist or lift. 

(2) The certificate of test and examination referred to in paragraph (1)(b) shall be kept available for inspect ion. 

(3) Subject to paragraph (10)(c), every hoist or lift used in a workplace shall be thoroughly examined by an authorised exam iner at least once every 6 

months or at such other intervals as the Commissioner may determine. 

Lifting gears 

20. 

(1) No lif ting gear of whatever material shall be used in a workplace unless an authorised examiner has —

(a) tested and examined the lifting gear; and 

(b) issued and signed a certificate of test and examination, specifying the safe working load of the lifting gear. 

(2) The certificate of test and examination referred to in paragraph (1)(b) shall be kept available for inspection. 

(3) Every lifting gear used in a workplace shall be thoroughly examined by an authorised examiner at least once every year o r at such oth er intervals as the 

Commissioner may determine. Electric generator, motor, transmission machinery, etc. 

Lifting appliances and lifting machines 

21. Annex G Singapore - Extracts from the Workplace Safety and Health Act and related legislations 

104 | P a g e 

(1) No lifting appliance or lifting machine shall be used unless an authorised examiner has —

(a) tested and examined the lifting appliance or lifting machine; and 

(b) issued and signed a certificate of test and examination, specifying the safe working load of the lifting appliance or lifting machine. 

(2) The certificate of test and examination referr ed to in paragraph (1)(b) shall be kept available for inspection. 

(3) Every lifting appliance and lifting machine shall be thoroughly examined by an authorised examiner at least once every y ear or at such other intervals 

as the Commissioner may determine. 

Conditions before steam boiler, steam receiver, air receiver or refrigerating plant pressure receiver may be used 

27. 

(1) Subject to paragraph (2), it shall be the duty of the owner of any steam boiler, steam receiver, air receiver or refrige rating plant pressure receiver 

(referred to in this regulation as relevant equipment) who intends to put the relevant equipment into use in a workplace to —

(a) obtain, in such form and manner as may be determined by the Commissioner, the approval of the Co mmissioner to use the relevant equipment; 

(b) ensure that such examination and test by an authorised examiner as may be specified by the Commissioner has been satisfactori ly carried out; 

(c) obtain from the authorised examiner a report of the examination a nd test referred to in sub -paragraph (b), specifying the safe working pressure 

of the relevant equipment and stating the nature of the tests to which the relevant equipment and its fittings have been subm itted; 

(d) keep the report referred to in sub -paragr aph (c) available for inspection; and 

(e) mark the relevant equipment so as to enable it to be identified as the relevant equipment to which the report refers. 

Steam boilers 

28. 

(6) Every —

(a) steam boiler referred to in paragraph (5), including all its fittings and attachments, shall be thoroughly examined by an authorised examiner 

at least once every 2 years and also after any extensive repair; and Annex G Singapore - Extracts from the Workplace Safety and Health Act and related legislations 

105 | P a g e 

(b) surface of the external shell of a steam boiler referred to in paragraph (5) shall be examined by an a uthorised examiner at least once every 

6 years, and for the purpose of such examination, the insulation on the shell shall be removed completely. 

Steam receivers 

29. 

(6) Subject to paragraph (7) and regulation 31A, every steam receiver shall be examined by an authorised examiner —

(a) at least once every 2 years; and 

(b) after any extensive repairs. 

Air receivers 

31. 

(5) Subject to paragraph (6) and regulation 31A, every air receiver shall be —

(a) thoroughly cleaned; and 

(b) examined by an authorised examiner at least once every 2 years. Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 202 1

## K-1 

# ANNEX K – CLOSING SUBMISSIONS INQUIRY UNDER SECTION 26 OF THE WORKPLACE SAFETY AND 

HEALTH ACT (CAP. 354A) 

INTO THE FATAL ACCIDENT 

AT STARS ENGRG PTE LTD’S WORKPLACE 

AT 32E TUAS AVENUE 11 

CLOSING SUBMISSIONS BY STATE COUNSEL 

Attorney -General's Chambers 

Ms Kristy Tan, SC 

Ms Ang Feng Qian 

Mr Sivakumar Ramasamy 

Ms Amanda Sum 

Filed this 10 th day of December 202 1i

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

I.  INTRODUCTION  ................................ ................................ .................. 1

A.  APPOINTMENT OF INQUIRY COMMITTEE  ................................ .................... 1

B.  TERMS OF REFERENCE  ................................ ................................ ............... 2

C.  MOM INVESTIGATION TEAM  ................................ ................................ .... 3

D.  INTERESTED PARTY  ................................ ................................ ................... 3

E.  HEARINGS  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 4

1.  First tranche: 20 September – 7 October 2021  ................................ .... 4

(a)  Factual witnesses  ................................ ................................ ............... 5

(b)  Expert witnesses  ................................ ................................ ................ 9

(c)  Investigation officers ................................ ................................ ....... 10 

2.  Second tranche: 15 – 16 November 2021 ................................ .......... 11 

F.  OUTLINE OF CLOSING SUBMISSIONS ................................ ........................ 14 

II.  BACKGROUND FACTS ................................ ................................ ..... 14 

A.  BACKGROUND INFORMATION ON STARS ................................ .................. 14 

B.  THE TUAS SITE ................................ ................................ ........................ 16 

C.  THE MIXER MACHINE ................................ ................................ ............. 20 

1.  Purchase and delivery of the Mixer Machine ................................ .... 20 

2.  The Mixer Machine’s parts and associated equipment ...................... 20 

3.  Installation of the Mixer Machine ................................ ..................... 26 

D.  THE FIRE WRAP PRODUCTION PROCESS ................................ .................... 27 

1.  Conveying of raw materials ................................ ............................... 28 ii 

2.  Operating the Mixer Machine to make fire clay ................................ 29 

3.  Assembling the fire wrap ................................ ................................ ... 31 

E. MAN POWER DEPLOYMENT AT THE TUAS SITE  ................................ ......... 32 

F.  WORKING CONDITIONS AT THE TUAS SITE WORKSHOP ............................ 35 

1.  Training to use the Mixer Machine ................................ ................... 36 

2.  Ventilation and dust conditions at the workshop ............................... 38 

3. Safety briefings  ................................ ................................ .................. 39 

4. Attire at t he workshop  ................................ ................................ ....... 40 

5. Workload and working hours  ................................ ............................ 41 

III.  CHRONOLOGY OF KEY EVENTS ................................ ................. 41 

A.  12 JUNE 2020 – STARS INSTALLED AND COMMISSIONED THE MIXER 

MACHINE ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 41 

B.  16 JUNE 2020 – STARS /C HUA XD PURCHASED 2 BUCKETS OF OIL FOR THE  

> OIL JACKET

................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 45 

C.  7 AUGUST 2020 – IMAM OBSERVED THAT OIL WAS RUNNING OUT IN THE OIL  

> JACKET AND RE PORTED IT TO

CHUA XD ................................ ........................... 45 

D.  8 AUGUST 2020 – IMAM REPLACED A BURNED HEATER ON CHUA XD’ S 

> INSTRUCTIONS

................................ ................................ ................................ ... 47 

E. 8 AUGUST 2020 – STARS /C HUA XD PURCHASED 4 BUCKETS OF OIL FOR THE  

> OIL JACKET

................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 50 

F. FROM 8 AUGUST 2020 ONWARDS – IMAM CLOSED THE FRONT PIPE AND 

BACK PIPE OF THE OIL JACKET ON CHUA XD’ S INSTRUCTIONS  ......................... 51 

G. 28 AUGUST 2020 – STARS ’ WORKERS OBSERVED SMOKE FROM THE OIL 

> JACKET

, BLACK OIL WITH SEDIMENTS AND DETERIORATED HEATER GASKETS , AND  

> THESE WERE REPORTED TO

MOE AND CHUA XD  ................................ ............... 52 

H. 21 SEPTEMBER 2020 – IMAM OBSERVED SMOKE FROM THE OIL JACKET AND  

> REPORTED IT TO

MOE  ................................ ................................ ........................ 54 iii 

I. 28 SEPTEMBER 2020: IMAM DISCOVERED A LEAK IN THE OIL JACKET AND  

> THE LEAK WAS REPORTED TO

MOE AND CHUA XD  ................................ ........... 55 

J.  1 OCTOBER 2020 – STARS ’ WORKERS OBSERVED DRAINED  BLACK OIL WITH  

> BLACK SEDIMENTS INSIDE

................................ ................................ ................. 59 

K.  12 OCTOBER 2020 – STARS ’ WORKERS OBSERVED OIL LEAKING FROM THE  

> OIL JACKET AGAIN AND THE LEAK WAS REPORTED TO

MOE AND CHUA XD ...... 61 

L.  8 JANUARY 2021 – MOE OBSERVED SMOKE FROM THE OIL JACKET ’S 

> BOTTOM CORNERS AND REPORTED IT TO

CHUA XD ................................ .......... 64 

M. 5 FEBRUARY 2021 – STARS /C HUA XD PURCHASED 4 BUCKETS OF OIL FOR  

> THE OIL JACKET

................................ ................................ ................................ . 67 

N. 6 FEBRUARY 2021 – STARS ’ WORKERS INSTALLED INSULATION OVER THE  

> OIL JACKET ON

CHUA XD’ S INSTRUCTIONS  ................................ ....................... 67 

O. 12 FEBRUARY 2021 – FIRE ON THE MIXER MACHINE  .............................. 69 

P. 12 FEBRUARY 2021 – MARIMUTHU EXPRESSED CONCERN FOR HIS SAFETY 

…………………………………………………………………………. 81 

Q. 13 FEBRUARY 2021 – STARS ’ WORKERS FOUND CRACKS ON THE OIL JACKET  

> AND REPORTED IT TO

CHUA XD  ................................ ................................ ........ 82 

R. 15 -16 FEBRUARY 2021 – NASIM PERFORMED WELDING REPAIRS ON THE 

MIXER MACHINE  ................................ ................................ .............................. 85 

S. 17 FEBRUARY 2021 – STARS ’ WORKERS INSTALLED NEW INSULATION ON  

> THE

MIXER MACHINE  ................................ ................................ ....................... 88 

T. 24 FEBRUARY 2021 – SMALL FIRE ON THE MIXER MACHINE IN THE EARLIER  

> PART OF THE MORNING

................................ ................................ ...................... 90 

U. 24 FEBRUARY 2021 – ACCIDENT AT THE TUAS SITE WORKSHOP  ........... 104 

V. AFTERMATH OF THE ACCIDENT  ................................ ............................. 109 

1. Property damage from the Accident  ................................ ................ 109 

2. Casualties from the Accident  ................................ ........................... 110 iv 

(a) Deceased persons  ................................ ................................ .......... 110 

(b) Injured persons  ................................ ................................ .............. 111 

IV.  TOR A – CAUSES AND CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE ACCIDENT 

115 

A.  THE PROXIMATE TECHNICAL CAUSES OF THE ACCIDENT ....................... 115 

1.  The explosion was chemical in nature caused by the ignition of thermic 

oil aerosols on a heated surface ................................ ............................ 117 

2.  The rupture of the oil jacket was caused by high pressures created from 

the overheating of thermic oil ................................ ............................... 121 

(a)  A physical rupture of the oil jacket is consistent with what was 

observed during operation of the Mixer Machine ......................... 123 

(i)  Deteriorated gaskets ................................ ....................... 124 

(ii)  Oil drained from the oil jacket was black ....................... 125 

(iii)  White smoke from the oil jacket ................................ ...... 125 

(iv)  Boiling sounds from the oil jacket ................................ .. 126 

(v)  Cracks on the oil jacket ................................ .................. 127 

(vi)  Discolouration of the Mixer Machine ............................. 128 

(b)  A physical rupture of the oil jacket is consistent with the 

investigations conducted by Matcor and its implications ............. 130 

(i)  Oil levels ................................ ................................ ......... 130 

(ii)  Dimples on welds ................................ ............................ 132 

(iii)  Grain growth on the used heating elements ................... 134 

(c)  A physical rupture of the oil jacket is consistent with the calculations 

on the temperature and pressure inside the oil jacket, and with 

observations on the strength of the welds ................................ ..... 137 

(d)  A physical rupture of the oil jacket is consistent with there being 

insufficient oxygen for a chemical explosion within the oil jacket 

................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 143 

(e)  Hawkins’ theory that a chemical explosion within the oil jacket 

caused its rupture rests on speculation that the heating ele ments were 

exposed within the oil jacket on 24 February 2021 and further, on the 

flawed assumption that that was the only occasion they were so 

exposed ................................ ................................ .......................... 146 v

(f)  A physical rupture of the oil jacket was capable of taking place 

regardless whether the Mixer Machine was actually in operation at 

the point of the Accident ................................ ............................... 150 

(g)  Summary of discussion on the physical rupture of the Mixer Machine 

................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 153 

3.  The subsequent flash fires were most likely caused by the ignition of 

the potato starch suspended by the initial deflagration ........................ 154 

(a)  Experts’ positions on the cause of the three flashes ...................... 155 

(b)  The lack of proper practices for combustible dusts at the Tuas Site 

created pockets of potato starch to be ignited ............................... 157 

(c)  The presence of potato starch in the samples analysed after the 

incident ................................ ................................ .......................... 158 

(d)  The ignition of smoke plumes from the incomplete combustion of the 

thermic oil is speculative and not in line with Maj Huang’s experience 

................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 160 

B.  THE ROOT CAUSES ................................ ................................ ................. 163 

1.  Stars failed to establish the safe working parameters for operating the 

Mixer Machine ................................ ................................ ..................... 164 

(a)  Stars operated the Mixer Machine with insufficient oil in the oil 

jacket ................................ ................................ ............................. 166 

(b)  Stars operated the Mixer Machine without monitoring the 

temperature of the oil in the oil jacket ................................ ........... 172 

(c)  Stars modified the Mixer Machine to operate as a closed system, and 

it did so without taking appropriate safety measures to guard against 

pressure build -up ................................ ................................ ........... 178 

2.  Stars failed to identify and respond appropriately to red flags and near -

misses indicating over -heating, pressure build -up, and the oil jacket 

giving way ................................ ................................ ............................ 186 

(a)  Burned heater on 8 August 2020 ................................ ................... 187 

(b)  Deteriorated gaskets ................................ ................................ ...... 188 

(c)  Oil drained from the oil jacket was black ................................ ...... 189 

(d)  White smoke from the oil jacket ................................ ................... 190 

(e)  Boiling sounds from the oil jacket ................................ ................ 194 vi 

(f)  Fire on 12 February 2021 ................................ .............................. 195 

(g)  Cracks on the oil jacket ................................ ................................ . 199 

(h)  Small fire in the earlier part of the morning of 24 February 2021 . 201 

3.  Stars failed to consult the manufacturer or a competent person before 

performing in -house repairs on the Mixer Machine ............................. 208 

4.  Stars failed to ensure that those working at the Tuas Site had adequate 

instruction, information, training and supervision ............................... 210 

5.  Stars failed to take prec autions for the use of potato starch powder at 

the Tuas Site workshop ................................ ................................ ........ 215 

V.  TOR E: POTENTIAL OFFENCES DISCLOSED ......................... 220 

A.  STARS IS POTENTIALLY LIABLE UNDER SECTION 11 AND /OR 12 OF THE 

WSHA .. ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 222 

B.  STARS IS POTENTIALLY LIABLE UNDER SECTION 17(4) OF THE WSHA .. 227 

C.  CHUA XD IS POTENTIALLY LIABLE UNDER SECTION 48(1) OF THE WSHA 

………………………………………………………………………... 228 

D.  MOE IS POTENTIALLY LIABLE UNDER SECTION 15(3A) OF THE WSHA .. 230 

E. MOE AND CHUA XD ARE POTENTIALLY LIABLE UNDER SECTION 204A OF  

> THE

PENAL CODE  ................................ ................................ ............................ 232 

VI.  TOR B: RECOMMENDATIONS TO PREVENT THE 

RECURRENCE OF SUCH AN ACCIDENT AT WORKPLACES ....... 238 

A.  REGULATION AND GUIDANCE ................................ ................................ 240 

1.  Improvements to regulatory regime ................................ ................. 240 

(a)  Industrial machinery safety ................................ ........................... 240 

(i)  Legislative review ................................ ........................... 240 

(ii)  Appro ved Codes of Practice (“ ACOP ”) and other guidance 

documents ................................ ................................ ....... 243 

(iii)  Certification of machinery ................................ .............. 247 

(b)  Mitigation of dust hazards ................................ ............................. 249 vii 

(i)  Legislative review ................................ ........................... 249 

(ii)  Gazetting SS 667 as an ACOP ................................ ........ 250 

2.  Guidance for small and medium enterprises (“SMEs”) .................. 251 

(a)  Publication or review of guidance documents .............................. 251 

(b)  Advisory panel ................................ ................................ .............. 252 

(c)  bizSAFE as guidance for safety processes ................................ .... 254 

B.  EDUCATION AND OUTREACH ................................ ................................ . 255 

1.  Current efforts ................................ ................................ .................. 256 

(a)  General safety outreach ................................ ................................ . 256 

(b)  Inspections for combustible dust hazards ................................ ...... 257 

2.  Proposed improvements ................................ ................................ ... 258 

(a)  General safety training and dissemination of information ............ 258 

(b)  Increasing awareness of combustible dust hazards ....................... 259 

C.  CULTURAL CHANGE AND OWNERSHIP ................................ .................... 260 

1.  Current observations ................................ ................................ ........ 261 

2.  Possible improvements ................................ ................................ .... 263 

D.  SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS ................................ ....................... 266 

VI I.  CONCLUSION ................................ ................................ ................... 267 1

I. INTRODUCTION 

1 On 24 February 2021, an explosion and fire at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd’s 

(“ Stars ”) workplace at 32E Tuas Avenue 11, Singapore 636854 (“ Tuas Site ”), 

claimed the lives of three workers and injured seven others (the “ Accident ”). The 

explosion and fire originated from an industrial kneader/mixer machine (“ Mixer 

Mach ine ”) installed at the workplace and led to secondary combustible dust flash 

fires. 

A. Appointment of Inquiry Committee 

2 In view of the severity of the Accident, the Minister for Manpower 

appointed an Inquiry Committee (“ IC ”) under section 26(1) of the Workplace 

Safety and Health Act (Cap . 354A, 2009 Rev Ed) (“ WSHA ”) on 5 March 2021, to 

inquire into the causes and circumstances that led to the Accident (“ Inquiry ”) .

3 The IC is chaired by the learned Senior District Judge Ong Hian Sun 

(“ SDJ ”), who is assis ted by two assessors: Er Lucas Ng Hong Kiang, General 

Manager of Plant, Petrochemical Corporation of Singapore (Private) Limited; and 

Dr Peter Nagler, A*Star Chief Innovation Officer and Executive Director of the 

Institute of Chemical and Engineering Scien ces (“ ICES ”). 2

B. Terms of Reference 

4 The Terms of Reference (“ TOR ”) issued to the IC are as follows: 1

(a) Inquire into and ascertain the causes and circumstances of the 

Accident (“ TOR A ”). 

(b) Make recommendations to prevent the recurrence of such an 

accident at wor kplaces (“ TOR B ”). 

(c) Consider the evidence put before the IC as led by State Counsel. 

(d) Make and submit a report of the IC’s proceedings, findings, 

recommendations and any other relevant observations related to the cause 

of the Accident to the Minister for M anpower. 

(e) If the SDJ is of the opinion that criminal proceedings ought to be 

instituted against any person in connection with the Accident, he shall also 

forward a copy of the report to the Public Prosecutor (“ TOR E ”).  

> 1Ministry of Manpower, Press Release, Annex B: “Terms of Reference for Inquiry
> Committee into the Fatal Accident at Stars Engrg on 24 February 2021, Appointed under
> Section 26 of the Workplace Safety and Health Act”, 5 March 2021.

3

C. MOM Investigation Team 

5 The investig ation into the Accident was led by an investigation team from 

the Ministry of Manpower (“ MOM ”) , Occupational Safety and Health Division 

(“ MOM Investigation Team ”), comprising: 2

(a) Chief Investigation Officer – Ms Lim Yin Yin Jaime (“ Ms Lim ”) ,3

who was then the Deputy Director (currently Director) of the Major Hazards 

Department; 

(b) Assistant Chief Investigation Officer – Mr Mohamed Haniffa 

Ibrahim, Assistant Director of the Occupational Safety and Health 

Inspectorate; and 

(c) Investigation Officer – Mr Lucas SH N g, Senior Investigation 

Officer of the Occupational Safety and Health Inspectorate. 

D. Interested party 

6 Stars was represented at the IC hearing as an interested party by counsel 

from Rajah & Tann Singapore LLP. Stars is a fire protection contractor and is i n

the business of providing design -built fire protection systems. 4     

> 2S-289 (MOM’s Investiga tion Report) , [1.3.1].
> 3SW -21.
> 4Statement of Agreed Facts (“ SOAF ”) ,[3].

4

7 The Accident took place at Stars’ workshop located on the ground floor of 

the Tuas Site (the “ workshop ”). At this workshop, Stars’ workers produced a fire -

rated insulation wrap (“ fire wrap ”). A key component of the fire wrap was a clay 

material (“ fire clay ”) which the workers made using the Mixer Machine. The fire 

clay would be wrapped with other materials to assemble the finished fire wrap 

product. We will elaborate on this background, which is material to appreciating 

the circumstances and causes of the Accident, at Section  II  of these submissions 

below. 

E. Hearings 

8 The IC hearings took place over two tranches in State Court no. 8A: 

(a) 20 September – 7 October 2021; and 

(b) 15 – 16 November 2021, 

with 15 December 2021 fixed for oral closing submissions by the parties. 

9 The first tranche of the IC hearing focused on TOR A, while the second 

tranche of the IC hearing addressed TOR B. 

1. First tranche: 20 September – 7 October 2021 

10 The first tranche of the hearing lasted 14 days. In total, the IC heard 

testimony from 22 witne sses in relation to the causes and circumstances of the 5

Accident. State Counsel called 21 witnesses, of which 15 were witnesses of fact, 

four were experts, and two were investigation officers. Stars called one expert 

witness. 

11 In addition, documentary evid ence was adduced by the parties. The 

documentary evidence tendered by State Counsel was marked “S” , and totalled 311 

exhibits, comprising 336 separate documents. 5 Stars tendered one expert report, 

which was marked “ST -1”. 

(a) Factual witnesses 

12 The testimony o f the factual witnesses was adduced by way of signed 

statements (“ witness statements ”), supplemented by oral evidence. These witness 

statements were marked “SS”, as were documents prepared by State Counsel . In 

total, there were 17 “SS” exhibits. 

13 State Cou nsel led evidence from these 15 factual witnesses: 6  

> 5Some related documents ( eg , attachments to emails) were given a single “ S” marking and
> given a sub -marking “A”, “B”, “C”.
> 6Listed in order of their assigned witness numbers.

6

(i) In relation to Stars 

(a) Mr Imam (“ Imam ”) 7 – worker involved in production at the 

workshop from around June to early October 2020, and end -December 2020 

to early January 2021. 

(b) Mr Mehedi (“ Mehedi ”) 8 – worker involved in production at the 

workshop from June 2020 to 24 February 2021. 

(c) Mr Molla Md N asim (“ Nasim ”) 9 – worker involved in production at 

the workshop in 2020; welder. 

(d) Mr Pandi Muruganantham (“ Murugan ”) 10 – Project Manager for 

projects at external worksites. 

(e) Mr Chua Xing Da (“ Chua XD ”) 11 – sole director and sole 

shareholder of Stars; over all -in -charge of production at the Tuas Site. 

(f) Mr Hossain Jitu (“ Jitu ”) 12 – working at the workshop on 24 

February 2021.        

> 7SW -1; Statement marked SS -2.
> 8SW -2; Statement (redacted) marked SS -3.
> 9SW -3; Statement marked SS -4.
> 10 SW -4; Statement marked SS -5.
> 11 SW -5; Statement marked SS -6.
> 12 SW -6; Statement (redacted) marked SS -9.

7

(g) Mr Molla Md Yousuf (“ Yousuf ”) 13 – working at the workshop on 

24 February 2021. 

(h) Mr Rahad Asfaquzzaman (“ Rahad ”) 14 – working at the workshop 

on 24 February 2021. 

(i) Mr Ahmmed Lizon (“ Lizon ”) 15 – working at the workshop on 24 

February 2021. 

(j) Mr Lwin Moe Tun (“ Moe ”) 16 – Project Engineer overseeing 

production at the Tuas Site. 

(k) Mr Sarkar Shibu (“ Shibu ”) 17 – Safety Coordinator. 

(l) Mr Chua Shi Yong Desmond 18 – company secretary and general 

manager.        

> 13 SW -7; Statement marked SS -10.
> 14 SW -8; Statement marked SS -11.
> 15 SW -9; Statement marked SS -12.
> 16 SW -12; Statement marked SS -7.
> 17 SW -13; Statement marked SS -15.
> 18 SW -14 ;Statement marked SS -16.

8

(ii) From P3 Project Pte Ltd 

(m) Mr Miah Md Azam (“ Miah ”) 19 – worker at P3 Pr oject Pte Ltd 

(“ P3 ”), which occupies units opposite Stars’ workshop; injured by the 

Accident. 

(n) Mr Zhao Jian Wang (“ Zhao ”) 20 – supervisor at P3; injured by the 

Accident. 

(iii) From Ming Hup Trading Pte Ltd 

(o) Ms Sharon Lee Sio Cheng (“ Sharon ”) 21 – Sales Manage r at Ming 

Hup Trading Pte Ltd (“ MHT ”), supplier of Idemitsu Daphne Thermic 32 -S

oil (“ thermic oil ” or “ oil ”) to Stars.     

> 19 SW -10; Statement marked SS -13.
> 20 SW -11; Statement marked SS -14.
> 21 SW -15; Statement marked SS -17. Sharon did not give oral evidence at the IC hearing as
> her attendance was dispensed with by consent.

9

(b) Expert witnesses 

14 The following experts submitted reports in relation to the causes of the 

Accident: 

(a) Matcor Technology & Services Pte Ltd (“ Matcor ”) submitted a 

report dated 10 September 2021 (the “ Matcor Report ”). 22 Matcor also 

tendered an addendum report dated 10 November 2021. 23 

(b) Dr Shaik Mohamed Salim (“ Dr Salim ”), 24 Principal Specialist 

A*STAR, ICES, tendered a report dated 13 September 2021 (“ Dr Salim’s 

Report ”), 25 and an addendum report dated 4 October 2021 (“ Dr Salim’s 

Addendum ”). 26 

(c) Emeritus Prof Chew Yong Tian (“ Prof Chew ”) 27 submitted a report 

dated 13 September 2021 (“ Prof Chew’s Report ”). 28        

> 22 S-279.
> 23 S-299.
> 24 SW -18.
> 25 S-283.
> 26 S-283A.
> 27 SW -19.
> 28 S-290.

10 

(d) Stars’ instructed expert, Dr David Rose (“ Dr Rose ”) 29 from 

Hawkins & Associates (Singapore) Pte Ltd (“ Hawkins ”), submitted a report 

dated 15 September 2021 (the “ Hawkins Report ”). 30 

15 The IC heard oral evidence from two of M atcor’s representatives , namely 

Mr Robert Shandro (“ Mr Shandro ”) 31 and Mr Ashley Ng (“ Mr Ng ”) 32 ; Dr Salim ;

Prof Chew ; and Dr Rose , as to the findings in their respective reports during the 

first tranche of the hearing. 

(c) Investigation officers 

16 In addition, two investigation reports were submitted to the IC: 

(a) Ms Lim submitted a report dated 4 October 2021 detailing the MOM 

Investigation Team’s findings on the Accident ( “MOM’s Investigation 

Report ”), and gave oral evidence on the same at the hearing. 33 

(b) The Singapore Civil Defence Force (“ SCDF ”), Fire Investigation 

Unit, tendered a report dated 14 September 2021 (“ SCDF’s Investigation      

> 29 STW -1.
> 30 ST -1.
> 31 SW -16.
> 32 SW -17.
> 33 S-289.

11 

Rep ort ”). 34 SCDF’s Investigation Report was supplemented by oral 

evidence at the hearing from Major Huang Weikang (“ Maj Huang ”). 35 

17 After the first tranche, the IC also received written answers from  the Chinese 

manufacturer of the Mixer Machine, Laizhou Keda Chemical Machinery Co., Ltd 

(“ Laizhou Keda ”), to written queries that had been posed by the MOM 

Investigation Team, Stars and the IC, all via email. 36 

2. Second tranche: 15 – 16 November 2021 

18 The second tranche of the hearing took place over the course of two days. 

In total, the IC received 17 sets of written representations on recommendations to 

prevent the recurrence of future similar accidents at workplaces, submitted by: 

(a) Dr Salim; 37 

(b) Singapore Manufacturing Federation (“ SMF ”); 38 

(c) Institution of Engineers (“ IES ”); 39         

> 34 S-288.
> 35 SW -20.
> 36 S-292 -S-298B, S -311A.
> 37 S-300.
> 38 S-301.
> 39 S-302.

12 

(d) Singapore Institution of Safety Officers (“ SISO ”); 40 

(e) SCDF; 41 

(f) Workplace Safety and Health Council (“ WSHC ”); 42 

(g) MOM; 43 

(h) Singapore Food Agency; 44 

(i) Singapore Welding Society; 45 

(j) Singapore National Employers Federation; 46 and 

(k) Members of the p ublic. 47  

> 40

S-303.  

> 41

S-304.  

> 42

S-305.  

> 43

S-306.  

> 44

S-307.  

> 45

S-308.  

> 46

S-309.  

> 47

The written representations from the members of the public (namely  TUV Rheinland 

Singapore, AllAlloy Dynaweld Pte Ltd, Mr Tang Teen Tuck, Mr Timothy Koh, Mr Au Lik 

Hang Terence, and Mr Lai Hong Yew Jeffrey ) were collectively marked S -310. 13 

19 The IC also heard oral evidence from the following seven representatives 

on their written representations: 

(a) Dr Salim; 

(b) Mr Ong Beng Yang, representative of SMF; 48 

(c) Mr Felipe Ong, representative of IES; 49 

(d) Mr Niranjan Masurekar, representative of SISO; 50 

(e) Col Ng Geok Meng, representative of SCDF; 51 

(f) Mr Christopher Koh, representative of WSHC; 52 and 

(g) Mr Silas Sng, representative of MOM. 53       

> 48 SW -22.
> 49 SW -23.
> 50 SW -24.
> 51 SW -25.
> 52 SW -26.
> 53 SW -27.

14 

F. Outline of Closing Submissions 

20 In these submissions, we will address the issues arising from the TOR as 

follows: 

(a) Section I : Introduction .

(b) Section II : Background Facts .

(c) Section III : Chronology of Key Events .

(d) Section IV : TOR A – Causes and Circumstances of the Accident .

(e) Section V : TOR E – Potential Offences Disclosed .

(f) Section V I: TOR B – Recommendations to Prevent the Recurrence 

of such an Accident at Workplaces .

(g) Section VII : Conclusion .

II. BACKGROUND FACTS 

A. Background information on Stars 

21  Stars is a private company (UEN:  201024323G) incorpo rated in November 

2010 , with its registered address at  15 Changi North Street 1, #01 -24 i -Lofts @ 15 

Changi, Singapore 498765 (“ Changi Site ”) . Stars’ sole director and only 

shareholder is Chua XD. 54 

22  There are three main business areas which Stars is involved in. Stars’ core 

business is the installation of fire protection systems.  These include mechanical 

systems ( eg , sprinklers, risers, hydrants) and electrical systems ( eg , fire alarm 

systems, emergency communication systems). 55  Stars’ clients are mai n contractors 

at external construction project sites. 56 

23  Stars also did works for mechanical and electrical systems, and has 

experience  in the operation, installation and maintenance of heavy motors and 

hydraulic machineries. 57 

24 In connection with its core business of providing fire protection systems, 

Stars sometimes uses a fire -rated insulation wrap ( ie , the “fire wrap”) under the 

brand name “Shield+” to wrap piping and ducting systems in building construction 

for its clients. This fire wrap is manufactur ed by Stars at the Tuas Site workshop. A 

separate company, Shield + Pte Ltd (“ Shield+ ”),  owns the wrap including the 

intellectual property in the wrap. 58  Chua XD is Shield+’s sole director. He  co -owns        

> 54 SOAF, [2].
> 55 SOAF, [3].
> 56 SS -6 ( Chua XD), [12].
> 57 SS -6 ( Chua XD), [12].
> 58 SOAF, [4].

16 

Shield+ with two other shareholders, Mr Alvin Loo and Mr Goh Yong Ping, who 

are not involved in the day -to -day operations of Shield+. 59 

25  The commercial arrangement between Stars and Shield+ was that  Shield+ 

engaged Stars to produce the fire wrap . Stars acco rdingly deployed its workers to 

produce the fire wrap at the Tuas Site and charged Shield+ for the provision of 

manpower, and the rental costs in respect of the Tuas Site for the production and 

storage of the fire wrap . As part of this arrangement, when St ars had any projects 

involving the use of the fire wrap , Shield+ would charge Stars a discounted price 

for the wrap. Stars also let Shield+ register the Tuas Site as Shield+’s corporate 

address. 60 

B. The Tuas Site 

26 Stars operates out of two locations – the Ch angi Site and the Tuas Site. 61 

27 The Tuas Site is in an industrial estate called Platinum@Pioneer at 32 Tuas 

Avenue 11, Singapore 639109. The development comprises two buildings housing 

terrace units. Stars rented the Tuas Site in June 2019. 62      

> 59 SOAF, [5].
> 60 SOAF, [6]; SS -6 ( Chua XD), [29].
> 61 SS -6 (Chua XD), [15].
> 62 SOAF, [7].

17 

28 To the left o f the Tuas Site (when facing its front from outside the 

workshop ), and sharing an adjoining wall, is Unit 32F which is leased by Alif -

Engineering Pte Ltd (“ Alif -E”). Opposite the Tuas Site workshop are two units 

(Units 32A and B) leased by  P3. 63 

29 The Tuas S ite has three floors. The ground floor is the workshop where the 

fire wrap is produced. The second floor is used to store materials. The third floor is 

a factory -converted dormitory at which some of Stars’ workers live. 64 

30 Upon receiving the keys to the Tuas Site in June 2019, Stars began 

renovations to convert the space  at the third floor into a dormitory. The renovation 

of the third floor took about eight months, from June 2019 to February 2020. 65 

31 Thereafter, the  ground a nd second floors of the Tuas Site were renovated by 

Stars’ workers between March and August 2020. The works continued over the 

‘Circuit Breaker’ period, which began on 7 April 2020. 66 

32 As part of the renovations, three of Stars’ workers – Lizon, Mehedi and 

Nasim, constructed a raised platform at the back of the workshop (the “ Platform ”).      

> 63 SOAF, [9].
> 64 SOAF, [8].
> 65 SS -6 ( Chua XD), [37].
> 66 SS -6 ( Chua XD), [37].

18 

The Platform was constructed sometime in April 2020, 67 based on a layout plan 

approved by a Professional Engineer from DP Engineers. 68 The Stars workers built 

the Platform by welding I -beams together and securing them with bolts and nuts, 

before installing an additional metal plate over the I -beams to reinforce the 

structure. 69 

33 Two roller machines were also placed in the workshop, which were used to 

flatten the fire clay for the assembly of the fire wrap (see fire wrap production 

process at [ 50 ] below). 

34 Below is a  2D sketch of  the Tuas Site workshop, showing, int er alia , the 

respective locations of the Platform, the Mixer Machine, the roller machines and 

the assembly tables during production in February 2021, when the Accident 

occurred:     

> 67 SS -6 ( Chua XD), [42].
> 68 SS -6 ( Chua XD), [42].
> 69 SS -4 (Nasim), [22] and [23].

19 

2D sketch  of  the Tuas Site workshop 70  

> 70

SOAF, [16]. 20 

C. The Mixer Machine 

1. Purchase and delivery of the Mixer Machine 

35  Chua XD purchased the Mixer Machine sometime in August 2019, from 

Laizhou Keda in China, via the ‘Alibaba’ online platform, 71 for USD11,700. 72 

36 The Mixer Machine was delivered to Stars in October or November 2019. 73 

It came rea dy assembled, with a one -year warranty from October 2019 to 

September 2020. 74 

2. The Mixer Machine’s parts and associated equipment 

37 The main body of the Mixer Machine comprised the following components 

relevant to this Inquiry :75 

(a) A motorised cover/lid at the top .

(b) Under the cover, a  mixing chamber  with sigma -shaped blades, 

which rotate d to mix the water and other raw materials used to make      

> 71 SOAF, [15].
> 72 SS -6 ( Chua XD), [46]; S -240.
> 73 SS -6 ( Chua XD), [51].
> 74 SS -6 ( Chua XD), [52].
> 75 SS -7 (Moe), [21].

21 

fire clay. When mixing was completed, the  mixing chamber  could 

be tilted forward for removal of the conten ts. 76 

(c) An outer “ oil jacket ” encasing the front, back and bottom of the 

mixing chamber . The oil jacket could be filled with thermic oil to 

act as a medium for heat transfer to the contents in the  mixing 

chamber .

(d) Nine heaters inserted into the bottom of the oil jacket. When turned 

on, the heaters heated the thermic oil in the oil jacket. Each heater 

comprised three U -shaped metal tubes/coils, the ends of which 

connected to six terminals on the heater flange. 77 The metal tubes of 

the heaters would be inserted into the bottom of the oil jacket 

through openings for the heaters. There were gaskets placed between 

the openings and the heater flanges. From the outside, the flanges 

would be bolted to the openings, to k eep the heaters in place. Yellow 

hub caps covered the heater terminals. These yellow caps protruded 

from the back of the machine. 78    

> 76 SS -7 (Moe), [22].
> 77 See S -127.
> 78 See S -59.

22 

(e) An elbow joint/pipe opening at the back of the machine (“ Back 

Pipe ”). Thermic oil was added to the oil jacket through a blu e funnel 

which was attached to the Back Pipe at the point of delivery .79 

(f) A joint/pipe opening at the front of the machine (“ Front Pipe ”). 

Stars used this opening to check on the thermic oil level using a 

dipstick but this opening would otherwise be closed with the end cap 

that came with the Mixer Machine (see [ 39(c) ] below) .

(g) A drain pipe at the underside of the front bottom right corner of the 

machine (“ Drain Pipe ”), from which the thermic oil in the oil jacket 

could be drained out. The Drain Pipe ha d a valve which was turned 

to open or close the Drain Pipe opening .

(h) Three fixtures on the Mixer Machine for fixing the temperature 

sensors that came with the Mixer Mach ine (see [ 39(d) ] below). 

38 Below is a 3D sketch of the front and back of the Mixer Machine with the 

relevant components labelled:  

> 79 SS -6 (Chua XD), [122(a)].

23 

3D sketch  of the front and back of the Mixer Machine 24 

39  The Mixer Machine also came with the following additional items :

(a) A control panel to operate the Mixer Machine. The control panel 

was connected to the Mixer Machine, and was placed on the 

Platform next to the back of the Mixer Machine ;

(b) Nine extra heaters; 

(c)  One end cap.  When the Mixer Machine is tilted (see [ 37(b) ] above ),

the Front Pipe would have to be closed to prevent oil in th e oil jacket from 

flowing out. The Mixer Machine was delivered with the end cap placed on 

the Front Pipe; and 

(d) Two resistance temperature detectors/sensors (“ RTD ” or 

“temperature sensor ”): 

(i) One temperature sensor was for measuring the oil jacket 

temperature and was labelled as such. 80 There were fixtures on the 

front and back of the oil jacket, to which one end of this temperature 

sensor could be attached. Readings from this temperature sensor 

would show up on the jacket temperature screen on the control 

panel. This temperature sensor operated on an interlock system – a 

> 80 Notes of Evidence (“ NE ”) 27 September 2021, pp. 6:23 -7:7 (Chua XD EIC).

25 

specific temperature could be pre -set, and once reached, the heaters 

would be automatically switched off. 81 

(e) The other temperature sensor was for measuring the temperature of 

the ma terial in the mixing chamber. There was a fixture on the side of the 

Mixer Machine (which was the exterior wall of the mixing chamber), to 

which one end of this temperature sensor could be attached. Readings from 

this temperature sensor would show up on th e material temperature screen 

on the control panel. 

It is undisputed, however, that when operating the Mixer Machine, Stars did 

not attach the temperature sensors to their respective fixtures on the Mixer 

Machine. Instead, Stars placed one of the temperature sensors (used 

interchangeably) into the mixing chamber to measure the temperature of the 

water being heated in there. The temperature of oil in the oil jacket was not 

measured or monitored (see [ 323 ]-[331 ] below). 82    

> 81 S-279 (Ma tcor Report), [2.2].
> 82 SS -6 ( Chua XD), [79]; NE 27 Septemb er 2021, p. 82:18 -21 (Chua XD XX).

26 

40  Chua XD also obtained a user guide for the Mixer Machine from Laizhou 

Keda (“ User Guide ”). 83 The User Guide stated the following in relation to the oil 

jacket: 84 

(a) Design temperature: 200°C; 

(b) Operating temperature: 70 -160°C; and 

(c) Working pressure: ≤0.2Mpa. 

3. Installation of the Mixer Machine 

41 The Mixer Machine was installed on the Platform on 12 June 2020 by Chua 

XD, Imam and some Stars workers. The Mixer Machine was lifted up from the 

ground by a lorry crane, and placed on the Platform. It was not bolted or welded to 

the Platform. An isolation pad was placed betwee n the Mixer Machine and the 

Platform, to dampen the vibrations when the motor of the Mixer Machine was 

running. 85 

42 After the Mixer Machine was placed on the Platform, the power cables, the 

nine heater cables, the oil pump cables and the hydraulic solenoid cables were 

connected according to the instructions from Laizhou Keda. Before the power was    

> 83 S-271.
> 84 S-271, p. 4, Section Eight.
> 85 SS -6 (Chua XD), [56].

27 

connected to the Mixer Machine, a Megger test was carried out on all the cables 

using a megohmmeter to test if any of the cables were damaged and to ensure that 

the re were no electricity leakages. 86 

43  Testing and commissioning of the Mixer Machine was done later that same 

day on 12 June 2020. We elaborate on the details of the testing and commissioning 

process, as well as the subsequent events that took place on 12 Jun e 2020, at Section 

III.A  below when we discuss the chronology of key events leading up to the 

Accident. 

D. The fire wrap production process 

44 From June 20 20, Stars began testing and doing trial runs for the production 

of fire clay using the Mixer Machine and the assembly of the fire wrap at the Tuas 

Site workshop. 87 

45 In gist, the fire wrap production involved adding a number of raw materials 

into the Mixer Machine to make fire clay. These raw ingredients were namely 

water, potato starch powder, boric acid, silicon oil, aluminium trihydrate and 

bentonite clay. 88 After the fire clay was ready, it would then be flattened and 

assembled with other layers of mater ial to make the fire wrap.    

> 86 SS -6 ( Chua XD), [57].
> 87 SOAF, [10].
> 88 SOAF, [13].

28 

46 The production of fire clay/fire wrap at the Tuas Site workshop took place 

over two broad periods of time: 

(a) Trial runs for production took place from June to October 2020. 89 

During this period, Stars made small pieces of fire wra p (measuring around 

50 -90cm wide x 1.2m long) 90 using smaller quantities of raw materials and 

fire clay .91 

(b) Actual production of fire wrap began in October 2020 and continued 

until the Accident on 24 February 2021. During this period, Stars made 

bigger fire wraps (measuring around 1.1m wide x 5m long). 92 At the height 

of production in January and February 2021, the Mixer Machine was used 

to mix around 800kg of fire clay per batch, twice a day. 93 

1. Conveying of raw materials 

47 The raw materials for ma king the fire clay were stored at the second floor 

of the Tuas Site. The workers would transport the raw materials down to the      

> 89 SS -2 (Imam), [21] -[22]; SS -3 (Mehedi), [18] -[19].
> 90 SS -3 (Mehedi), [18].
> 91 SS -7 (Moe), [28].
> 92 SS -3 (Mehedi), [74].
> 93 SS -7 (Moe), [27] -[28].

29 

workshop on the ground floor using a trolley and the lift, whenever a new batch of 

fire clay was going to be made. 94 

2. Operating th e Mixer Machine to make fire clay 

48 The quantities of raw materials used, and the mixing times, would change 

depending on the quantity of fire clay being produced. As mentioned at [ 46(b) ]

above, batches of around 800kg of fire clay were made in January and February 

2021, at the height of production. 

49 Based on the amounts of raw materials needed to make a batch of around 

800kg of fire clay, these were the steps for making the fire clay with the Mixer 

Machine: 95 

(a) First, the cover/lid at the top of the Mixer Machine was opened. 

About 176kg ( ie , 176L) of water was poured into the  mixing chamber  of the 

Mixer Machine and a temperature sensor would be dropped in to the same 

chamber. The cover/lid was then closed. 

(b) Second, the Mixer Machine ’s heaters were turned on to heat the 

water up to 80 to 90°C. This was done by turning on all three heater switches   

> 94 SS -3 (Mehedi), [23].
> 95 SS -7 (Moe), [27].

30 

on the control panel. 96 The heating of the water to the require d temperature 

usually took about 35 to 40 minutes. After that , the heaters were turned off 

manually and the temperature sensor would be removed from the  mixing 

chamber  of the Mixer Machine. 

(c) Third, 88kg of potato starch powder (about 3½ 25kg sacks ) was 

added into the  mixing chamber  of the Mixer Machine. The rotating blades 

were then turned on. During both the trial run and actual production phases, 

the required sacks of potato starch powder were manually carried up onto 

the Platform to be poured/em ptied into the Mixer Machine. 97 The Mixer 

Machine mixed the water and potato starch powder for about 10 -15 minutes. 

(d) Fourth, 32kg of boric acid powder (about 1 1/4 25kg bags) was added 

into the mixture. The bags of boric acid powder were also manually carrie d

up onto the Platform. The Mixer Machine continued mixing for another 10 -

15 minutes. 

(e) Fifth, 22kg of liquid silicon (slightly more than 1 20kg bucket) was 

added into the mixture. The Mixer Machine continued mixing for another 

10 -15minutes.    

> 96 NE 20 September 2021, pp. 119:15 -120:5 (Imam EIC); NE 21 September 2021, p. 58:18 -
> 21 (Mehedi EIC).
> 97 SS -3 (Mehedi), [77].

31 

(f) Sixth, about 30 0kg of ATH and 100kg of bentonite clay were added 

into the mixture using a large container bag and hoist/pulley system that was 

implemented in the workshop around October 2020 .98 The Mixer Machine 

continued mixing for another 15 minutes. 

(g) Thereafter, the fi re clay mixture (about 800kg of it) was ready. 

3. Assembling the fire wrap 

50  After the fire clay was ready, the next steps were to: 99 

(a) Tilt the Mixer Machine onto its side so that the fire clay could be 

scooped out, and transfer the fire clay to the ground floor of the workshop, 

near the rear of the workshop. 

(b) Once on the ground floor, cut the fire clay into smaller pieces and 

flatten the smaller pieces using roller machines on the ground floor. 

(c) Assemble the fire wrap at two assembly tables on the ground floor. 

Th is involved first placing a sheet of aluminium foil on the assembly table, 

followed by layers of various other materials :  

> 98 SS -3 (Mehedi), [75] and [76].
> 99 SS -7 (Moe), [29].

32 

(i) During the trial run phase from June to October 2020, the 

layers following the sheet of aluminium foil were: (1) ceramic fibre, 

(2) wire mesh; (3) fire clay; and (4) ceramic fibre. These layers were 

then wrapped up in the bottom -most sheet of aluminium foil and 

taped with aluminium tape. 100 These were the steps for making 

“Shield+” wrap for piping insulation. For fire wrap used for ducting 

insulation, there was an additional layer of ceramic fibre ( ie , a 

further step (5) after step (4)). 101 

(ii) Sometime around October 2020, adjustments were made to 

the assembly process for actual production – shrink wrap was now 

used to wrap the layers of material, and sealed using a fire torch, 

before the aluminium foil was used for the outer -most wrapping. The 

wire mesh was also substituted with fibre glass mesh. 102 

E. Manpower deployment at the Tuas Site 

51 As stated above at [ 44 ], Stars began testing the production of fire clay using 

the Mixer Machine and the assembly of the fire wrap at the Tuas Site workshop 

from around June 2020.    

> 100 SS -3 (Mehedi), [35].
> 101 SS -7 (Moe), [29(c)].
> 102 SS -3 (Mehedi), [80].

33 

52 Initially, t here were four workers deployed to make fire wrap at the Tuas 

Site workshop – Imam, Mr Shohel Md (“ Shohel ”), Nasim and Mehedi. Imam was 

in charge at the Tuas Site workshop during this time, with Moe overseeing the 

team /fire wrap production at the Tuas Site workshop. 

53 While Imam was at the workshop, he was in charge of operating the Mixer 

Machine, with Shohel and Mehedi assisting him. We discuss the details of the 

training given to these workers in respect of operating the Mixer Machine at [ 60 ]-

[62 ] below. 

54 Sometime in October 2020, Imam stopped working at the Tuas Site 

worksho p due to disagreements with Chua XD, and Mr Anisuzzaman MD (“ Anis ”) 

was deployed to take over Imam’s duties. 103 Imam returned to work at the workshop 

for a brief period in end -December 2020, before he was again asked to leave on 8 

January 2021, whereupon he was deployed to work at Stars’ project sites 

permanently. 104 

55 When Imam left in January 2021, Anis was in charge for about ten days, 

before Mr Subbaiyan Marimuthu (“ Marimuthu ”) was deployed to work at the   

> 103 SS -6 ( Chua XD), [89].
> 104 SS -6 (Chua XD), [90].

34 

workshop. Marimuthu was appointed by Chua XD as the supervisor of the Tuas 

Site that same month. 105 

56 From January 2021 to 17 February 2021, the fire wrap production team at 

the Tuas Site comprised four workers – Marimuthu, Shohel, Anis and Mehedi. 

During this time, Marimuthu was mainly in charge of the Mixer Machine, with 

Shohel assisting him. Anis was in charge of the roller machines, and Mehedi’s main 

task was to assemble the fire wraps at the assembly tables together with Shohel. 106 

All four workers would help each other out at the various stages of the fire wrap 

production process, such as carrying the raw materials down from the second floor 

store, weighing the raw materials, operating the Mixer Machine, flattening the fire 

clay, an d assembling the fire wraps. 

57 On 18 February 2021, four workers joined the fire wrap production team at 

the Tuas Site workshop – namely Jitu, Yousuf, Rahad, and Mr Rahman Mohammad 

Ashikur (“ Ashikur ”). Lizon subsequently replaced Ashikur and started working at 

the Tuas Site workshop on 22 February 2021. These extra workers were added to 

meet the increased demand for fire wrap during that time. 107     

> 105 SS -6(Chua XD), [91].
> 106 SS -3 (Mehedi), [85].
> 107 SS -6 (Chua XD), [93].

35 

58 From 22 February 2021, there were eight workers working at the Tuas Site 

workshop – Anis, Mehedi, Shohel, Marimut hu, Jitu, Yousuf, Rahad  and Lizon. 108 

During this time, the respective roles of the workers at the workshop became more 

fixed: 109 

(a) Marimuthu was in charge of operating the Mixer Machine to make 

the fire clay, with Shohel assisting him .

(b) Anis and Lizon cut the fire clay and flattened the pieces using the 

two roller machines .

(c) Marimuthu and Shohel sometimes also assisted Anis and Lizon to 

cut the fire clay into smaller pieces for flattening .

(d) Jitu, Rahad, Yousuf and Mehedi assembled the fire wraps at the two 

assembly tables. Yousuf and Rahad worked together at one table, while Jitu 

and Mehedi worked together at the other table. 

F. Working conditions at the Tuas Site workshop 

59 We set out below the workers’ accounts of their working conditions at the 

Tuas Site workshop.   

> 108 SOAF, [28].
> 109 SS -3 (Mehedi), [115].

36 

1. Training to use the Mixer Machine 

60 As stated at [ 53 ] abo ve, Imam was initially in charge of operating the Mixer 

Machine at the Tuas Site workshop, with Shohel and Mehedi assisting him. Imam 

had learned how to operate the Mixer Machine from Chua XD, who taught Imam 

how to make fire clay with the Mixer Machine by verbally telling Imam what to do. 

This teaching was done without any reference to a manual or other written 

instructions, 110 in the course of a three to four hour long session in a single day. 111 

Apart from Imam, Chua XD also taught Moe how to use the Mixer Machine, 

likewise without any reference to any user guide or other written manual. 112 

61 Chua XD had himself learned how to operate the Mixer Machine from a Ms 

Sherry Wang (“ Sherry ”) of Laizhou Keda over a phone call, sometime in June 

2020. Sherry had taught Chua XD that the Mixer Machine was basically operated 

by pressing the buttons on its control panel, and that he was to follow the User 

Guide. 113      

> 110 SS -2(Imam), [27].
> 111 SS -3 (Mehedi), [29].
> 112 SS -7 (Moe), [18].
> 113 SS -6 (Chua XD), [69].

37 

62 A number of other Stars workers were also taught later how to operate the 

Mixer Machine: 114 

(a) Mehedi (see [ 53 ] above) was taught by Imam how to open the 

cover/lid of the Mixer Machine, tilt the Mixer Machine, start and stop the 

mixing function, and switch on and off the heaters using the buttons on the 

control panel. Apart from that, he did not receive any other training in 

respect of how to operate the Mixer Machine. Mehedi did not know, for 

example, whether the Mixer Machine was supposed to be stopped when i t

reached a certain temperature. 115 

(b) When Anis took over Imam as the worker in -charge at the Tuas Site 

workshop (see [ 55 ] above), Moe shared the fire c lay formula with Anis and 

briefed him on how to use the Mixer Machine. 116 

(c) Moe also taught Marimuthu how to use the Mixer Machine and the 

formula for making fire clay when Marimuthu joined the Tuas Site 

workshop in January 2021 (see [ 55 ] above). Moe explained at the Inquiry 

hearing that he had taught Marimuthu the “practical steps” for operating the 

Mixer Machine, namely how to switch the heater s and the isolator on and    

> 114 SS -6 (Chua XD), [69].
> 115 SS -3 (Mehedi), [30].
> 116 SS -7 (Moe), [64].

38 

off, and to put water and the ingredients into the  mixing chamber .117 He did 

not, however, teach Marimuthu any safety checks in relation to the use of 

the Mixer Machine, such as checking the level of oil in the Mixer Machine’s 

oil jacket. 118 

2. Ventilation and dust conditions at the workshop 

63  The workers’ evidence was that when the Mixer Machine was in operation, 

the front shutters and back door were kept open for ventilation, while the windows 

were left partially open. The two fans at the worksh op (a wall fan and a standing 

fan) would be switched on during work, though the wall fan would be temporarily 

switched off when the workers were weighing out the powders. 119 The wall fan 

would blow air in the direction of the Platform and the standing fan would blow air 

in the direction of the assembly tables. 120 The workshop also had an exhaust vent, 

located near the ceiling. 121 The exhaust vent was not placed above the Mixer 

Machine and served only to facilitate general ventilation at the works hop. 122 It is 

not disputed that the exhaust vent was not used at the workshop before February 

2021 as it was not working until Murugan repaired it on 15 February 2021, on Chua        

> 117 NE 30 September 2021, p. 8:6 -22 (Moe EIC).
> 118 NE 30 September 2021, pp. 9:1 -10:1 (Moe EIC).
> 119 NE 21 September 2021, p. 68:7 -17 (Mehedi EIC).
> 120 NE 30 September 2021, pp. 13:20 -15:3 (Moe EIC).
> 121 SS -6(Chua XD), [35].
> 122 NE 30 September 2021, p. 16:3 -17 (Moe EIC).

39 

XD’s instructions. 123 After it was repaired, the exhaust vent was used at the 

work shop. 124 

64 The working areas at the workshop, including the area around the Mixer 

Machine, were generally dusty with powders on the floor. 125 At the end of each 

working day, the workers would do housekeeping. This primarily involved picking 

up and disposing of big items lying on the floors, and also sweeping with brooms. 126 

We comment further on the issue of dust at the workshop at [ 409 ]-[412 ] below. 

3. Safety briefings 

65 The workers testified that they were not given any specific safety briefings 

for their work at the Tuas Site workshop. 127 While they did undergo general safety 

briefin gs that were conducted for all Stars’ employees each month on salary 

collection day, these safety briefings covered safety measures to be adopted while 

working at clients’ project sites ( ie , construction sites) – for example, safety 

measures on working saf ely at height and carrying heavy objects. The workers thus            

> 123 SS -5 (Murugan), [37].
> 124 SS -3 (Mehedi), [111] and [117].
> 125 SS -10 (Yousuf), [52]; SS -11 (Rahad), [54]; SS -12 (Lizon), [47]; NE 21 September 2021,
> pp. 69:20 -70:12 (Mehedi EIC); NE 28 September 2021, pp. 32:17 -33:10 (Jitu EIC).
> 126 SS -10 (Yousuf), [54]; SS -11 (Rahad), [55]; SS -12 (Lizon), [49]; NE 21 Septembe r 2021,
> pp. 70 -71 (Mehedi EIC) ; NE 28 September 2021, pp. 34:1 -35:14 (Jitu EIC).
> 127 SS -10 (Yousuf), [55]; SS -11 (Rahad), [57]; SS -12 (Lizon), [51]; NE 21 September 2021,
> p. 72:12 -23 (Mehedi EIC); NE 28 September 2021, p. 20:10 -13 (Jitu EIC) .

40 

did not think that these safety briefings /measures were applicable to their work at 

the Tuas Site workshop, which was a factory environment /production workshop. 128 

4. Attire at the workshop 

66 While Imam, Anis, Shohel, Mehedi and Marimuthu were issued respirators 

for their work at the Tuas Site workshop, the additional workers who joined the fire 

wrap production team at the Tuas Site in February 2021 were not given respirators, 

and wore cloth fa ce masks instead. 129 

67 The workers’ evidence was that they were not given a specific dress code 

for work at the workshop, 130 apart from Chua XD’s instructions and reminders that 

they were to wear their safety shoes and respirators when making fire wrap. 131 

68  Th e workers mostly wore long -sleeved shirts to work at the Tuas Site 

workshop, and many of them wore slippers. Some also wore short -sleeved shirts 

and three -quarter pants. 132             

> 128 SS -10 (Yousuf), [56] ;SS -11 (Rahad), [58]; SS -12 (Lizon), [52]; NE 28 September 2021,
> pp. 20:14 -21:9 (Jitu EIC) .
> 129 SS -10 (Yousuf), [57] -[58]; SS -11 (Rahad), [62]; SS -12 (Lizon), [54].
> 130 SS -10 (Yousuf), [57] ; SS -11 (Rahad), [60]; SS -12 (Lizon), [53] .
> 131 SS -3 (Mehedi), [36] ; S S-11 (Rahad), [64]; SS -12 (Lizon), [57] .
> 132 NE 21 September 2021, p. 75:14 (Mehedi EIC) .

41 

5. Workload and working hours 

69 From 18 February 2021, the production target set by Chua XD was to 

produce 32 rolls of fire wrap per day, with each of the two assembly tables assigned 

a daily target of 16 rolls. To achieve this target, the workers would need to make 

two fresh batches of fire clay each day to use (taking into account also any leftover 

fire clay from the working day before). 133 The workers testified that they had to 

work from 8am in the morning until around 8 :30 -9:30 pm at night, with an hour -

long lunch break in between, to hit this target. 134 

III. CHRONOLOGY OF KEY EVENTS 

70 We now turn to the key events leading up to, and including, the Accident. 

A. 12 June 2020 – Stars installed and commissioned the Mixer Machine 

71 As explained above at [ 41 ], the Mixer Machine was installed at the Tuas 

Site workshop on 12 June 2020. 135 

72 Following installation, the Mixer Machine was turned on and allowed to run 

as part of Stars’ testing and commissioning of the Mixer Machine. 136 According to            

> 133 NE 2 1September 2021, p. 99: 10 -22 (Mehedi Re -ex).
> 134 SS -3 (Mehedi), [116] ;NE 2 8September 2021, p. 36:3 -14 (Jitu EIC); S -255 and S-285
> (Timesheets for Stars workers at the Tuas Site).
> 135 SS -6 ( Chua XD), [56]; SS -2 (Imam), [16].
> 136 SS -6 ( Chua XD), [58].

42 

Chua XD, t he testing and commissioning of the Mixer Machine involved checks on 

the following: 137 

(a) motor direction; 

(b) presence of vibrations; 

(c) presence of any unusual sounds; 

(d) proper working of the hydraulic arm (for the cover of the  mixing 

chamber  of the Mixer Machine), tilting function of the  mixing chamber ,

heating function, temperature sensor, emergency button and Drain Pipe; 

(e) the hydraulic oil and gear box oil; and 

(f) ensuring that there was no overloading of the voltage. 

73 As part of the commissioning on 12 June 2020, Stars also did one round of 

testing by making fire clay with a small amount of raw materials. 138 For this test 

round, Stars mistakenly used water in the Mix er Machine’s oil jacket. 139 According 

to Chua XD, he filled about “half ” of the oil jacket with water, corresponding to the      

> 137 SS -6 ( Chua XD), [58].
> 138 SS -6 ( Chua XD), [59].
> 139 SS -6 ( Chua XD), [60]; SS -2 (Imam), [20]; NE 3 0 September 2021, p. 27:20 -25 (Moe EIC).

43 

black marking made by Chua XD as shown in the photograph below .140 He claimed 

that his black marking in the photograph also represente d his understanding of 

“half -height” of the oil jacket, which was synonymous to him with the User Guide’s 

reference 141 to “ half the height of the cylinder ”. 142 

S-282: Copy of the  photograph at CXD -63 with Chua XD’s 

indication in black of half -height of the oil jacket, which is 

synonymous (to him) with half -height of the cylinder  

> 140

NE 23 September 2021, pp. 135:11 -137:9 (Chua XD EIC);  S-282.  

> 141

S-271, p. 5, Section Ten: The oil quantity in relation to the kneader jacket is stated as “ When 

refueling, you need to open one side vent hole and a dd it to half the height of the cylinder. ” 

> 142

NE 23 September 2021, pp. 138:1 -139:17 (Chua XD EIC). 44 

74 Chua XD explained that he chose to fill the oil jacket up to that level because 

the water he had poured into the mixing chamber had also come up to that level. 143 

On why he had filled the oil jacket with water, Chua XD said he assumed that water 

could be used as the heating medium in the oil jacket. 144 

75 Chua XD did not note any issues in the making of the fire clay when water 

was used in the oil jacket. 145 However, he noticed that there was a lot of steam 

generated when the Mixer Machine’s heaters were on. He was also concerned 

whether the water boiling temperature of only 100 C would mean a longer 

“cooking ” time when making a larger batch of fire clay. 146 This prompted Chua XD 

to check the User Guide 147 and he realised that oil should be used in the oil jacket. 148 

He then contacted Laizhou Keda (Sherry) via WhatsApp on 12 June 2020 afternoon 

asking whether he could use water instead of oil in the oil jacket. Laizhou Keda 

advised him that he should use heat transfer oil in the oil jacket as water could 

damage the heaters. 149        

> 143 NE 23 September 2021 pp. 141:10 -143:8 (Chua XD EIC).
> 144 SS -6 ( Chua XD), [60].
> 145 SS -6 ( Chua XD), [61].
> 146 SS -6 ( Chua XD), [61].
> 147 S-271.
> 148 SS -6 ( Chua XD), [61].
> 149 SS -6 ( Chua XD), [61]; S -2, IM#146 -152.

45 

76 During the commissioning on 12 June 2020, the Back Pipe was open, and 

the Mixer Machine was use d as an open system. 150 

B. 16 June 2020 – Stars/Chua XD purchased 2 buckets of oil for the oil 

jacket 

77 Following  Laizhou Keda ’s advice, Stars/Chua XD purchased 2 buckets of 

oil (20L each) from MHT on 16 June 2020. 151 Both buckets ( ie , 40L) were poured 

into the oil jacket that same day. 152 

78 Thereafter, the Mixer Machine was used to make fire clay at least three 

times from 16 June 2020 to before 7 August 2020. 153 

C. 7 Aug ust 2020 – Imam observed that oil was running out in the oil 

jacket and reported it to Chua XD 

79  At about 11pm on 7 August 2020, Moe instructed Imam to make a batch of 

fire clay in preparation for making fire wrap the next day. 154 While operating the 

Mixer Ma chine that night, Imam suspected that the oil in the Mixer Machine’s oil      

> 150 NE 24 September 2021 pp. 1:2 -3:8 (Chua XD EIC).
> 151 SOAF, [22(a)]; SS -17 (Sharon), [3(a)].
> 152 SS -6 ( Chua XD), [65].
> 153 SS -6 ( Chua XD), [121].
> 154 SS -6 (Chua XD) , [36].

46 

jacket was running out. 155 Slightly past midnight, Imam sent a WhatsApp message 

to Chua XD informing him that there was no more oil in the oil jacket. 156 Imam also 

sent a video to Chua XD of Nasim checking the oil level in the Mixer Machine’s 

oil jacket using a dipstick. 157 In the video, Imam can be heard explaining that  there 

was very little oil left in the oil jacket and that there was no more oil at the workshop 

to top up the oil jacke t. 158 The dipstick indicated the oil fill level to be about one 

and half inches from the bottom of the oil jacket. 159 

80 In response to Chua XD’s query on where all the oil had gone, Imam 

explained that all the oil had been used up after four times of making fi re clay using 

the Mixer Machine. 160 Chua XD then instructed Imam to close all the openings of 

the oil jacket ( ie , the Back Pipe and the Front Pipe), explaining “ [i]f not all the oil 

gone already ”. 161 In particular, the Mixer Machine had come with the Front Pipe 

closed with an end cap provided by Laizhou Keda (see [ 39(c) ]) and Chua XD 

wanted Imam to additionally close the Back Pipe. 162 Chua XD was concerned about 

the evaporation of the oil from the Front Pipe and Back Pipe. 163                   

> 155 SS -2 (Imam) , [36].
> 156 SS -2 (Imam) , [36]; SS -6 ( Chua XD), [120].
> 157 S-151.
> 158 SS -2 (Imam) , [37]; SS -6 ( Chua XD), [120].
> 159 NE 2 3September 2021 p p.159:2 -160:7 (Chua XD EIC) .
> 160 SS -2 (Imam) , [38]; SS -6 ( Chua XD), [121].
> 161 SS -2 (Imam) , [38]; SS -6 ( Chua XD), [122].
> 162 SS -6 ( Chua XD), [123].
> 163 NE 24 September 2021 pp. 32:14 -33:12 (Chua XD EIC).

47 

81 Shortly after, at 12:37am on 8 August 2020 , Chua XD made an order for  4

buckets of thermic oil (20L each)  from MHT via WhatsA pp. 164 

D. 8 August 2020 – Imam replaced a burned heater on Chua XD’s 

instructions 

82 Even though there  was very little oil left in the oil jacket the night before, 

Imam started making a batch of fire clay on the morning of 8 August 2020 with 

Shohel. 165 No one had instructed Imam not to use the Mixer Machine pending the 

addition of more oil .166  While the Mixer Machine was in operation that morning , a 

spark and smoke came out from Heater No. 1. 167 

83 Imam immediately turned off the Mixer Machine by pressing the red 

Emergency Stop button on the Mixer Machine's control panel and contacted Chua 

XD. 168 Following Chua XD’s instructions, Imam waited for the Mixer Machine to 

cool down. Shohel and he then drained out the used oil in the oil jacket, which came 

to about 1½ 20L buckets. 169 The colour of the used oil was observed to be reddish -

black. 170         

> 164 SS -6 (Chua XD), [ 65 ]; S -5, IM#38 -39.
> 165 SS -2 (Imam) , [42].
> 166 NE 20 September 2021, p. 124:11 -16 (Imam EIC).
> 167 SS -2 (Imam) , [42].
> 168 SS -2 (Imam) , [43].
> 169 SS -2 (Imam) ,[43(a)].
> 170 SS -2 (Imam) , [54].

48 

84 Over a video call, Chua XD gave Imam instructions on how to replace the 

damaged heater with one of the spare heaters that had come with the Mixer 

Machine. 171 Imam updated Chua XD after he had replaced the damaged heater and 

sent photo graph s of the damaged heater to Chua XD: 172 

S-6: Photograph of damaged Heater No. 1, sent by Imam to Chua 

XD on 8 August 2020, 9:30am 

S-6: Photograph of damaged Heater No. 1, s ent by Imam to Chua 

XD on 8 August 2020, 9:40am    

> 171 SS -6 ( Chua XD), [126].
> 172 SS -2 (Imam) , [44] -[45]; SS -6 ( Chua XD) , [127] -[129]; S -6.

49 

85 As shown in the photograph above of the heating rods of the damaged 

Heater No. 1, one of the heating rods had deformed from burning and was exposing 

the interior of the heating rod. 173 

86 Imam had also sent the p hotograph above of the heating rods of the damaged 

Heater No. 1 to Moe that same morning at 9:32am. 174 Moe did not get involved in 

the replacement of the damaged heater and he left it to Imam to discuss the matter 

directly with Chua XD. 175 

87 After Imam had replaced the damaged Heater No.1, Chua XD visited the 

Tuas Site workshop to check on the replace d heater. 176 According to Chua XD, 

when he was at the workshop, Imam checked the voltage, continuity, resistance, 

and earth leakage on all the heaters to ensure there was no earth leakage, and they 

also checked all the heaters and the cables with a megohmmeter. 177          

> 173 SS -2 (Imam) , [45]; SS -6(Chua XD) , [129].
> 174 SS -2 (Imam) , [47]; SS -7 (Moe) , [36].
> 175 SS -7 (Moe) , [37] -[39].
> 176 SS -2 (Imam) , [45]; SS -6 ( Chua XD) , [130].
> 177 SS -6 ( Chua XD) , [130].

50 

E. 8 August 2020 – Stars/Chua XD purchased 4 buckets of oil for the oil 

jacket 

88 As explained above at  [81 ], on 8 August 2020 , Stars/Chua XD purchased 4

buckets of thermic oil (20L each) from MHT .178 They were delivered to the Tuas 

Site that day, after the incident involving the damaged Heater No. 1. Imam then 

poured into the oil jacket 3 new buckets of oil and the 1½ buckets of used oil that 

had been drained out in the morning. 179 Imam was not given a ny instructions on 

how much oil to pour into the oil jacket. 180 

89 According to Imam, he added oil from the fourth new bucket into the oil 

jacket later in August 2020 .181 According to Chua XD, he added oil incrementally 

thereafter during his monthly maintenance checks of the Mixer Machine. 182 No new 

buckets of oil were purchased by Stars until 5 February 2021 183 (see [ 123 ] below).       

> 178 SOAF, [22(b)].
> 179 SS -2 (Imam) , [54].
> 180 SS -2 (Imam) , [54].
> 181 SS -2 (Imam) , [55].
> 182 SS -6 ( Chua XD) , [66].
> 183 SOAF, [22(c)].

51 

F. From 8 August 2020 onwards – Imam closed the Front Pipe and Back 

Pipe of the oil jacket on Chua XD’s instructions 

90 Pursuant to the instructions given by Chua XD in the wee hours of 8 August 

2020 (see [ 80 ] above) and further clarifications from Chua XD on how to close the 

Back Pipe, 184 Imam closed both the Front Pipe and Back Pipe o penings. Imam had 

initially closed the Front Pipe with the end cap that it had come with (see [ 39(c) ]

above) and the Back Pipe with a “Bush” pipe fit ting he had purchased. 185 Following 

further clarification from Chua XD, Imam subsequently closed the Back Pipe with 

another end cap he had sourced himself. 186 

91 Except for a few brief occasions when oil was added to the oil jacket through 

the Back Pipe, the F ront Pipe and Back Pipe remained closed thenceforth including 

during the operation of the Mixer Machine to make fire clay .187       

> 184 SS -2 (Imam) , [48] -[53]; SS -6 (Chua XD), [131] -[136].
> 185 SS -2(Imam) , [52].
> 186 SS -2 (Imam) , [53].
> 187 SS -6 (Chua XD), [137]; SS -7 (Moe), [25]; NE 20 September 2021, p. 149:20 -2 (Imam,
> questions from IC).

52 

G. 28 August 2020 – Stars’ workers observed smoke from the oil jacket, 

black oil with sediments and deteriorated heater gaskets, and these 

were reported to Moe and Chua XD 

92 In the morning of 28 August 2020, Imam noticed that the Mixer Machine 

was taking about an hour longer than usual to heat the water up to 90°C to make 

fire clay. 188 He also observed that there was smoke com ing out from the area where 

the Mixer Machine ’s heaters were located. Imam testified that this smoke had an 

“oil burning smell ”. 189 Imam turned off the Mixer Machine and checked on the 

heaters. 190 

93 Imam reported the matter to Moe but Moe told Imam to report the matter to 

Chua XD instead. 191 Imam tried to call Chua XD but was unable to reach him. 192 

94 Imam, Mehedi and Shohel drained out the oil from the oil jacket to check 

the Mixer Machine’s heaters. Imam took a video of the oil being drained and sent 

it to Moe. 193 About 6 buckets of oil were drained out. 194 The 4 white -coloured           

> 188 SS -2 (Imam) , [63].
> 189 NE 20 September 2021, pp. 127:12 -128:3 (Imam EIC).
> 190 SS -2 (Imam) , [63].
> 191 SS -2 (Imam) ,[63] -[64]; SS -7 (Moe), [41] -[42].
> 192 SS -2 (Imam), [65].
> 193 SS -2 (Imam) , [68]; SS -7 (Moe) , [45]; S-156.
> 194 SS -2 (Imam) , [68].

53 

buckets seen in the video were the original 20L buckets that the oil had come in. 195 

From the video, it can be seen that none of the 6 buckets (into which the oil was 

drained) was full. Mehedi observed that the drained oil was black in colour, and 

that there were black sediments in the oil. 196 Moe told Imam to send the video to 

Chua XD, 197 but Imam did not do so. During this time, Imam was checking the 

heaters by doing a visual check and performing a megger test. 198 

95 Imam and Mehedi also observed, when the heaters were removed, that the 

gaskets on the heater openings of the Mixer Machine ’s oil jacket were worn out. 199 

According to Imam, parts of the gasket were stuck to the heater openings and he 

had to peel them off. 200 According to Mehedi, some part of the gaskets had broken 

and fallen off, and he thought it could have been caused by the heat f rom the oil 

jacket surface s where the gaskets were attached .201 

96 Imam called Chua XD again and managed to reach him. Imam informed 

Chua XD about the issue involving the Mixer Machine and updated Chua XD about 

the old worn -out gaskets. 202 Chua XD told Imam to replace all the old worn -out            

> 195 SS -3 (Mehedi), [57].
> 196 SS -3 (Mehedi) , [57] and [61].
> 197 SS -2 (Imam) , [69]; SS -7 (Moe) , [45].
> 198 SS -2 (Imam) , [71].
> 199 SS -2(Imam) , [72]; SS -3 (Mehedi) , [58].
> 200 NE 20 September 2021, p. 128:4 -23 (Imam EIC).
> 201 NE 21 September 2021, p. 61:1 -12 (Mehedi EIC).
> 202 SS -2 (Imam), [72].

54 

gaskets with new gaskets 203 and instructed Imam to ask Nasim to make the new 

gaskets. 204 Mehedi and Shohel replaced the old gaskets with new ones that Nasim 

made that day at the workshop. 205 Thereafter, Imam r e-installed all the heaters. 206 

The drained oil, less the heavier black sediments which had settled at the bottom of 

the buckets, was poured back into the oil jacket. 207 According to Imam, he did not 

recall any issues with the heaters when he used the Mixer Machine the next day. 208 

H. 21 September 2020 – Imam observed smoke from the oil jacket and 

reported it to Moe 

97 When Imam was operating the Mixer Machine on 21 September 2020, he 

noticed something like smoke or oil vapour coming out from the bottom of the oil 

jacket at the back of the Mixer Machine (near the heaters). 209 Imam took a video of 

it and sent it to Moe that morning. 210 Imam checked with Moe via WhatsApp if he 

and Chua XD knew about the issue and if there were any concerns. 211 Moe replied 

that it was norm al for the smoke that Imam saw to come from the heaters and that                 

> 203 SS -2 (Imam) , [72]; NE 24 September 2021, pp. 112:24 -113:21 (Chua XD EIC).
> 204 SS -2 (Imam) , [72] .
> 205 SS -2 (Imam) , [72]; SS -3 (Mehedi) , [59]; SS -4 (Nasim), [47].
> 206 SS -2 (Imam) , [74]; SS -3 (Mehedi) , [59].
> 207 SS -3 (Mehedi) , [61].
> 208 SS -2 (Imam) , [74].
> 209 SS -2 (Imam) , [75].
> 210 SS -2 (Imam) , [76]; SS -7 (Moe) , [50]; S-157 .
> 211 SS -2 (Imam) , [76]; SS -7(Moe) , [50].

55 

this was not a problem. 212 According to Moe, Chua XD had previously told him 

that there was nothing to be concerned about as it was just hot vapour from the oil 

jacket’s hot surface. 213 

98 This wa s not the first or last time that smoke was seen coming from the oil 

jacket. Moe had first noticed the smoke sometime in August or September 2020. 

He had seen the smoke coming out from the bottom corners of the oil jacket when 

the heaters were turned on an d he observed that the smoke lasted for about five 

minutes, before it was time to switch off the heaters. 214 Subsequently, each time the 

heaters were turned on to heat the water, Stars’ workers would observe white smoke 

in the last five minutes before they switched off the heaters. 215 Moe explained that 

they observed this through to February 2021, although as explained below at [ 120 ], 

the white smoke became heavier from 8 January 2021. 216 

I. 28 September 2020: Imam discovered a leak in the oil jacket and the 

leak was reported to Moe and Chua XD 

99 On 28 September 2020, when Imam was operating the Mixer Machine, he 

heard boiling sounds from inside the oil jack et and saw oil leaking from what       

> 212 SS -2 (Imam) , [76]; SS -7 (Moe) , [50].
> 213 SS -7 (Moe) , [50].
> 214 SS -7 (Moe) , [49].
> 215 SS -7 (Moe) , [51].
> 216 SS -7 (Moe) , [51].

56 

appeared to be a small hole on the surface of the oil jacket. 217 This was at the front 

bottom left corner of the Mixer Machine. 218 

100 Imam took a photograph of the oil jacket, circled in blue the location of the 

small hole wher e oil was leaking and sent the photograph to Moe that morning with 

the accompanying messages: “ hole have small ” and “ need to welding bro ”:219 

S-52: Photograph sent by Imam to Moe on 28 September 2020, 10:25am       

> 217 SS -2 (Imam) , [79].
> 218 SS -2 (Imam) , [79].
> 219 SS -2 (Imam) , [79] -[80]; SS -7 (Moe) , [54] -[55]; S-11, IM#1358 and #1569; S -52.

57 

101  Moe’s instructions were to ask Nasim or Mehedi to do the welding, and 

Imam said he would keep Moe updated. 220 Moe had not yet checked with Chua XD 

when he gave these instructions, but Nasim was the company welder and Mehedi 

helped Nasim on occasion. 221 

102 Chua XD admitted that he was updated about t he leak by late September 

2020 ,222 and according to Moe, Chua XD had agreed with Moe that Nasim should 

do the welding. 223 

103 Mehedi had also seen the small hole and leak that day on 28 September 2020 

and he had been told by Imam that Moe had been updated. 224 Acc ording to Mehedi, 

Imam had asked him if he could weld the leak close, but he had told Imam that he 

did not know how to weld it. 225 Imam also asked Nasim to do the welding but 

according to Nasim, he had told Imam that he was unable to weld the Mixer 

Machine unless Chua XD expressly gave him instructions to do so. 226              

> 220 SS -7 (Moe) , [55].
> 221 SS -7 (Moe) , [55].
> 222 SS -6 ( Chua XD), [148]; NE 2 7September 2021 ,p. 158:3 -6(Chua XD EIC).
> 223 SS -7 (Moe) , [55].
> 224 SS -3 (Mehedi) , [62].
> 225 SS -3 (Mehedi) , [63].
> 226 SS -4 (Nasim), [49].

58 

104 On 30 September 2020, Imam updated Moe that Nasim was unable to help 

with the welding and that they should try to resolve the problem soon. They had the 

following exchange on WhatsApp regarding the issue: 227 

Imam: “need to welding bro nasim say can't ”

Imam: “now small. hole ”

Imam: “later big hole ”

Moe: “Just tell him ”

Imam: “ok ”

Moe: “If now no settle ”

Moe: “Later problem can u answer ”

Moe: “Said like this ”

Imam: “yesterday i talk to hin radet ”

Imam: “he say can't ”

Imam: “no problem ”

Imam: “tommrow mahadi welding ”

105 Notwithstanding the above exchange, neither Imam nor Moe spoke to 

Mehedi or Nasim again about the welding. 228    

> 227 S-11, IM#3591 -3602 .
> 228 SS -2 (Imam) , [83]; SS -7 (Moe), [57].

59 

106  On 2 October 2020, Chua XD carried out his monthly maintenance check 

on the Mixer Machine. Yet, he did not indicate the presence of the leak in the 

maintenance checklist (inaccurately dated 2 October 2020), 229 despite having been 

updated about the leak in late September 2020 (see [ 102 ] above). 

107 No welding was done on the Mixer Machine’s oil jacket until 12 October 

2020 when the leak became worse. 230 

J.  1 October 2020 – Stars’ workers observed drained  black oi l with black 

sediments inside 

108  On 1 October 2020, the oil in the oil jacket was drained out by Mehedi and 

Shohel on Imam’s instructions. 231  Mehedi and Shohel drained out oil that filled a 

total of 4 oil buckets (20L each), 1 plastic bucket, and 1 smaller metal bucket. 232      

> 229 NE 27 September 2021, pp. 77:22 -79:19 (Chua XD XX); S -245 (Maintenance checklist).
> 230 SS -3 (Mehedi) , [63]; SS -2 (Imam) , [83]; SS -7 (Moe), [57]; SS -6 (Chua XD), [149].
> 231 SS -3 (Mehedi), [64]; SS -2 (Imam), [85].
> 232 SS -3 (Mehedi), [65].

60 

109 Mehedi took a photograph of the oil that been drained and sent it to the 

WhatsApp group chat called “SHIELD+Daily reporting gp”, whose members 

included Anis, Nasim, Shohel, Imam, and Marimuthu :233 

S-284: Photograph of the oil drained out by Mehedi and Shohel on 

1 October 2020 

110 Shortly after, Imam forwarded the same photograph to the “SHIELD+ 

TEAM” WhatsApp chat group (“ Shield+ WhatsApp Chat ”), whose members 

included Moe and Chua XD. 234               

> 233 SS -3 (Mehedi), [65]; NE 2 1September 2021 ,p. 5:2 -14 (Mehedi EIC).
> 234 NE 30 September 2021 ,p. 40: 25 -42:4 (Moe EIC) .

61 

111 It was observed that there were black sediments in the drained oil. The 

drained oil, less the black sediments which settled at the bottom of the buckets, was 

eventually poured back into the oil jacket later that day. 235 

K. 12 October 2020 – Stars’ workers observed oil leaking from the oil 

jacket again and the leak was reported to Moe and Chua XD 

112 On 12 October 2020 morning, despite the oil jacket leak discovered on 28 

September 2020 not having been repaired, Stars’ workers op erat ed the Mixer 

Machine to make fire clay. 

113 When operating the Mixer Machine, Mehedi noticed smoke and oil coming 

out from the oil jacket. 236 The location was at the front bottom left of the oil jacket 

which was where oil had leaked from on 28 September 2020 (see [ 99 ] above). 237 

By this tim e, the area of the leak had grown. 238 

114  Mehedi took a video of the leak , circled in green the location of the leak and 

sent the video to Moe that morning at 8:55am and informed that oil was leaking     

> 235 SS -3 (Mehedi), [66].
> 236 SS -3 (Mehedi), [68] -[70].
> 237 SS -3 (Mehedi), [70].
> 238 SS -3 (Mehedi), [70]

62 

from the oil jacket .239 In the video, white smoke can be seen spurting out from the 

location of the leak, and a hissing and crackling sound can be heard. 240 

115 Moe thought that the white smoke seen in the video was oil vapour coming 

out of the crack in the oil jacket. 241 

116 Moe replied to Mehedi that Chua XD had asked Mehedi to weld the area of 

the leak. 242 Mehedi replied that Nasim would do the welding that day. 243 Chua XD 

had also seen Mehedi’s video that day and he also instructed Nasim to do the 

welding. 244 However, Chua XD did not visit the Tuas Site workshop to physi cally 

inspect the leak. 245 Chua XD also did not think of checking with Laizhou Keda on 

the leak. 246  

> 239

SS -3 (Mehedi), [71]; S -13; S -158.  

> 240

NE 24 September 2021 , pp. 42:8 -43:13  (Chua XD EIC) ; S -158.  

> 241

NE 30 September 2021, pp. 42:8 -43:15 (Moe EIC).  

> 242

SS -3 (Mehedi), [71]; SS -7 (Moe) , [60].  

> 243

SS -3 (Mehedi), [72].  

> 244

SS -6 (Chua XD), [150] -[151].  

> 245

SS -6 (Chua X D), [152];  NE 24 September 2021 , pp. 68:24 -70:19  (Chua XD EIC) . 

> 246

SS -6 (Chua XD), [152]. 63 

117 On the same day, Mehedi asked Nasim to do the welding. 247 On or about 12 

October 2020, Nasim did the welding with Mehedi’s help. 248 According to Nasim 

in his wi tness statement, he: 249 

(a) Ground away /removed the paint covering the leak area; 

(b) Ground away part of the manufacturer’s original weldment at the 

leak area; 

(c) Identified a 3mm long hairline crack on the manufacturer’s original 

weldment; 

(d) Ground a further groove al ong the hairline crack to create more 

space /depth to fill with fresh weld metal. The groove that he created was 

much larger than the 3mm hairline crack as the grinder he used had a fixed 

100mm diameter and was unable to grind anything shorter than around 

50mm; and 

(e) Finally, filled the groove with three to four layers of fresh welding. 

118 However, Nasim later walked back on this account, stating in oral evidence 

that all he did was to remove the paint before welding directly onto the old    

> 247 SS -3 (Mehedi), [72].
> 248 SS -3 (Mehedi), [73]; SS -4 (Nasim), [50].
> 249 SS -4 (Nasim) , [51] -[52].

64 

weldment .250 This is consistent with Matcor’s observations on the lack of 

preparation observed, and that the repair welds were done over the existing 

welds .251 

L. 8 January 2 021 – Moe observed smoke from the oil jacket’s bottom 

corners and reported it to Chua XD 

119 On 8 January 2021, Moe was at the Tuas Site workshop, when he noticed 

white smoke coming out from the bottom co rn ers of the Mixer Machine's oil jacket 

when the Mixer Machine's heaters were turned on to heat the water in the  mixing 

chamber .252 He sent photo graph s of the front bottom left corner and back bottom 

right corner of the oil jacket to Chua XD via WhatsApp at 1:56pm and suggested 

that welding should be done: 253      

> 250 NE 22 September 2021, p. 61:8 -17 (Nasim EIC).
> 251 NE 4 October 2021, p. 37:13 -22 (Matcor EIC).
> 252 SS -7 (Moe), [66].
> 253 SS -7 (Moe), [67]; S -14.

65 

S-14: Photographs sent by Moe to Chua XD on 8 January 2021 at 

1:56pm 

120 Moe observed that the white smoke was a lot heavier than on previous 

occasions (see [ 98 ] above), and lasted about ten minutes before it was time to switch 

off the hea ters. 254 Moe thought that the white smoke was oil vapour and that it was  

> 254 SS -7 (Moe), [67] .

66 

coming out from cracks in the oil jacket’s bottom corners. 255 Moe thought that the 

white smoke coming out from the oil jacket indicated that something was not safe 

about the Mixer Machi ne. 256 

121 Chua XD replied that Moe should ask Nasim to weld. 257 He also asked that 

Moe check whether the smoke was leaking from the heater flanges. 258 Moe checked 

and reported to Chua XD that the smoke was coming not from the heater flanges 

but from three corner s of the oil jacket (front bottom right corner, front bottom left 

corner and back bottom right comer). Moe took a video showing the smoke at all 

three corners and sent it to Chua XD at 1:57pm. 259 

122 Ultimately, no welding was done to the oil jacket until after the fire on 12 

February 2021 (see [ 150 ] below). 260 In the meantime, and until 12 February 2021, 

each time the Mixer Machine’s heaters were turned on to heat the water, the Stars 

workers would observe white smoke from the bottom corners of the Mixer 

Machine ’s oil jacket in the last ten minutes before it wa s time to switch off the 

heaters. 261              

> 255 NE 30 September 2021 ,pp.46:24 -48:3 (Moe EIC) ; SS -7 (Moe), [67].
> 256 NE 30 September 2021, pp. 49:17 -50:1 (Moe EIC).
> 257 SS -7 (Moe), [68].
> 258 SS -7 (Moe), [68].
> 259 SS -7 (Moe), [68]; S -159.
> 260 SS -7 (Moe), [70].
> 261 SS -7 (Moe), [70].

67 

M. 5 February 2021 – Stars/Chua XD purchased 4 buckets of oil for the oil 

jacket 

123 On 5 February 2021, Stars/Chua XD purchased  four buckets of oil (20L 

each) from MHT. 262  Of these, 2 unused buckets were found at the Tuas Site 

workshop on 27 May 2021, after the Accident. It is unknown to Chua XD what 

became of the other 2 buckets. 263 

N. 6 February 2021 – Stars’ workers installed insulation over the oil jacket 

on Chua XD’s instructions 

124 On 6 February 2021, Stars workers installed insulation over the oil jacket. 

Chua XD had instructed them to do so to protect the workers from the hot surface 

of the oil jacket. 264 

125 The insulation comprised ceramic fibre which was white in colour with a 

layer of aluminium foil encasing it and taped down by aluminium tape. 265 It was 

installed onto the surface of the oil jacket with small welding pins. 266 The welding 

pins were tacked onto the surface of the oil jacket without penetrating the surface. 267       

> 262 SOAF, [22(c)]; SS -17 (Sharon), [3(c)].
> 263 SS -6 (Chua XD), [67].
> 264 SS -6 (Chua XD), [157].
> 265 SS -6 (Chua XD), [157]; SS -7 (Moe), [90].
> 266 SS -6 (Chua XD), [157].
> 267 SS -6 (Chua XD), [157].

68 

126 In particular, the insulation was installe d over the oil jacket surfaces at the 

front of the Mixer Machine, the back of the Mixer Machine and underneath the 

Mixer Machine and covered the jacket temperature RTD fixtures: 268 

S-55: Photographs of the insulation on the oil jacket taken by 

Marimuth u on 6 February 2021  

> 268 S-55 .

69 

O. 12 February 2021 – Fire on the Mixer Machine 

127 On 12 February 2021, the first day of Chinese New Year, at about 4:50pm, 

a fire broke out at the Mixer Machine. 269 The fire was concentrated at the front 

bottom right corner of the Mixer Machine , and a flame front extended up the right 

side (when facing the front of the Mixer Machine) :270 

S-63: Photograph of the fire taken by  Marimuthu  on 12 February 

2021   

> 269 SOAF, [24].
> 270 S-63.

70 

128 According to Mehedi, Marimuthu was f irst to notice the fire as he was 

operating the Mixer Machine on the Platform. 271 Mehedi himself was heading up 

the Platform at the time and was midway up the stairs when he noticed the fire. 272 

He observed a red -orange flame measuring about 250 -300mm high a nd 150 -

250mm wide. 273 

129 Mehedi and Marimuthu put out the fire with a hose reel, before Marimuthu 

turned off the Mixer Machine by hitting the Emergency Stop button on the control 

panel. 274 When the fire had been put out, Mehedi noticed beads of black oil drippi ng 

down the front bottom right corner of the Mixer Machine and white smoke coming 

out from that same corner. 275 

130 Chua XD was not at the Tuas Site workshop that day, but he was updated 

via phone call at about 4:52pm. 276 Shortly after, between 4:56pm and 4:57pm , Chua 

XD also received some photo graph s and a video in the Shield+ WhatsApp Chat, 

which showed that the workshop at the Tuas Site was filled with smoke. 277 Mehedi 

had sent the photo graph s and video. 278           

> 271 SS -3 (Mehedi) , [88].
> 272 SS -3 (Mehedi) , [88].
> 273 SS -3 (Mehedi) , [88].
> 274 SS -3 (Mehedi) , [89].
> 275 SS -3 (Mehedi) , [89].
> 276 SS -6 (Chua XD), [160]; SS -3 (Mehedi) , [90].
> 277 SS -6 (Chua XD), [160]; S-18.
> 278 SS -3 (Mehedi) , [91].

71 

131 Chua XD subsequently sent, at 5:18pm, the following WhatsApp message 

to Marimuthu, Moe and the Shield+ WhatsApp Chat, instructing the workers on 

what to do: 279 

“1. All power & lighting off 

2. Clear the smoke With the ventilation fan 

3. Clean and wipe clean all water at level 1 and decking 

4. Take o ff all the ceramic wrapping at the oil tank 

5. Drain out all the oil when the machine cool down 

6. Access which part of the mixer spoilt 

7. Make sure the tank surface is cool then start full welding the oil 

leaking area ”

132 Chua XD said he was panicking and t hought that there was a crack on the 

Mixer Machine’s oil jacket, similar to the incident on 12 October 2020 (see [ 113 ]-

[114 ] above). 280 His immediate instinct was that oil was leaking out, which led to 

an oil fire on the oil jacket. 281 Hence, his instructions to weld the “ oil leaking area ”

on the oil jacket. 282 Chua XD separately told Moe (who was not at the workshop 

that day) to ask Nasim to do the welding and Moe passed on the message to           

> 279 S-17; S -19; S -18.
> 280 SS -6 (Chua XD), [163].
> 281 NE 24 September 2021 ,p. 91:4 -8(Chua XD EIC) .
> 282 SS -6 (Chua XD), [163].

72 

Marimuthu, explaining “ Muthu item no 7. ask nasim to do. Make sure all welding 

nicely ”. 283 Chua XD also instructed Moe to update him later, on which parts of the 

Mixer Machine were spoilt and said that he w ould visit the workshop later that night 

to take a look at the Mixer Machine. 284 Ultimately, however, Moe did not update 

Chua XD and Chua XD did not visit the workshop that night. 285 

133 Around this time, Chua XD also privately contacted Murugan (who was at 

Litt le India at that time) and asked him to go to the Tuas Site workshop to help the 

workers deal with the fire. 286 Chua XD also wanted Murugan to specifically check 

whether the exhaust vent at the workshop was working as it appeared from 

Mehedi’s video of the smoke -filled workshop (see [ 130 ] above) that the smoke was 

not being vented out of the workshop by the exhaust vent. 287 

134 Murugan arrived at the Tuas Sit e workshop at about 5:45pm. 288 He noticed 

that the entire workshop was filled with smoke. 289 The Stars workers had gathered            

> 283 SS -7 (Moe) , [80].
> 284 SS -7 (Moe) , [81]; SS -6 (Chua XD), [165].
> 285 SS -7 (Moe) , [81]; SS -6 (Chua XD), [191].
> 286 SS -5 (Murugan) , [12]; SS -6 (Chua XD), [164].
> 287 SS -6 (Chua XD), [164].
> 288 SS -5 (Murugan) , [14].
> 289 SS -5 (Murugan) , [14].

73 

in the back alley outside the rear of the workshop. 290 No one was hurt. 291 Murugan 

checked on the exhaust vent and found that it was not working. 292 

135 During this period, Chua XD was still texting Moe over WhatsApp about 

the incident. From 6:00pm to 6:09pm, Chua XD had the following exchange with 

Moe as Chua XD was concerned about the oil and the Mixer Machine: 293 

Chua XD: “Moe can u ask oo to check with the supplier? Tell 

her we use the thermal oil catch fire” 

Chua XD: “Do she have a better higher thermal grade oil?” 

Chua XD: “I already send the enquiry to China to buy the full 

sta inless steel mixer” 

Chua XD: “Also use water to heat up instead of oil” 

Chua XD: “U ask oo to check with the thermal oil supplier, we 

need high thermal flashpoint oil grade” 

Chua XD: “This oil grade cannot, the heat we use is too high 

for the oil” 

Moe: “M ixer machine supplier right?”      

> 290 SS -5 (Murugan) , [14].
> 291 SS -5 (Murugan) , [14].
> 292 SS -5 (Murugan) , [15].
> 293 SS -6 (Chua XD), [168]; SS -7 (Moe) , [83].

74 

Moe: “Ok” 

Moe: “I ask oo oo to check” 

Chua XD: “Mixer supplier I settle” 

Chua XD: “U ask oo settle the thermal oil supplier” 

Chua XD: “I need high thermal flash point grade oil” 

Moe: “Ok” 

136 As regards the Mixer Machine, given the earlier incidents that had taken 

place, Chua XD no longer knew whether the Mixer Machine was still operational, 

or whether the Mixer Machine was fit for purpose. 294 Chua XD considered that 

another mixer machine should be purchased as redundancy in case the Mixer 

Machine broke down again. 295   

> 294 SS -6 (Chua XD), [169].
> 295 SS -6 (Chua XD), [188].

75 

137 Around the same time, Chua XD gave instructions to Murugan to check on 

the condition of the Mixer Machine. 296 Following his checks, Murugan sent to Chua 

XD two photo graph s and a video of the Mixer Machine at 6:10pm. 297 Murugan 

observed that there was an oil stain at the front bottom right corner of the Mixer 

Machine ( ie , the location of the fire), reflected in one of the photo graph s he sent to 

Chua XD: 298 

S-116: Photograph of the front (bottom right corner) of the Mixer 

Machine with the location of the oil stain that Murugan observed on 

12 February 2021 outlined in orange colour    

> 296 SS -6 (Chua XD), [170].
> 297 SS -5 (Murugan) , [20] -[21].
> 298 SS -5 (Murugan) , [22]; S -116.

76 

138 Murugan also observed that the Mixer Machine and the oil inside the Mixer 

Machine were very hot because he could feel the heat and could hear oil boiling 

sounds from inside the oil jacket , which the video he sent to Chua XD also 

captured. 299 

139 Chua XD also ob served the oil stain and the boiling sounds from the 

photograph and video that Murugan had sent to him. 300 

140 Chua XD then received from Marimuthu three photographs at 6:17pm. 301 

The first two photographs showed that the edges of the insulation which was 

instal led on 6 February 2021 (see [ 124 ] above) were burned off. 302 The third 

photograph showed the fire which had taken place earlier, at the front bottom right 

corner of the Mixer Machine (see [ 127 ] above). 303 

141  Chua XD alleged that, u pon receiving these photo graph s, he formed the 

view that the aluminium tape used at the sides of the insulation installed on 6 

February 2021 had cau ght fire and it was not the case that oil had leaked from the 

oil jacket as he had previously thought (see [ 132 ] above). 304 Chua XD purported        

> 299 SS -5 (Murugan) , [21]; S -163.
> 300 SS -6 (Chua XD), [173].
> 301 SS -6(Chua XD), [174].
> 302 SS -6 (Chua XD), [174]; S -61 and S -62.
> 303 SS -6 (Chua XD), [174]; S -63.
> 304 SS -6 (Chua XD), [174].

77 

that if it were the case that  oil leaking from the Mixer Machine had caught fire, then 

dripping flames would have been (but were purportedly not) visible in the 

photo graph s. 305  He told Murugan, Moe and Marimuthu that “ The fire stay on the 

body, no drip flam e, so cannot be oil flame” .306 Chua claimed that photographs and 

a video which he subsequently received from Murugan of the burn marks on the 

insulation reinforced his view that it was just the aluminium tape that caught fire 

and that there had been no oil fire. 307 

142 Yet, Chua XD still maintained his instructions to weld the Mixer Machine .

According to him , this was because he did not know for sure whether there were 

new cracks on the Mixer Machine. 308 Chua XD called Murugan and instructed him 

to tell Nasim to carry out the welding. 309 He also explained to Murugan that an 

additional plate ought to be added to the bottom of the Mixer Machine. 310 Chua XD 

intended the additional bottom plate to catch any leakages , and for any leaked oil 

caught by the bottom plate to drain out from a hole wh ich was to be cut out of the 

plate around the Drain Pipe. 311         

> 305 SS -6 (Chua XD), [174].
> 306 SS -6 (Chua XD), [179].
> 307 SS -6 (Chua XD), [182] -[183].
> 308 SS -6 (Chua XD), [185].
> 309 SS -6 (Chua XD), [185].
> 310 SS -6 (Chua XD), [185].
> 311 SS -6 (Chua XD), [185].

78 

143 Murugan sought confirmation of the location where the additional plate 

ought to be added by taking a photograph of the underside of the Mixer Machine 

and sending it to Chua XD at 7:13pm. 312 While t aking the photograph, Murugan 

observed that there was a large oil stain on the underside of the Mixer Machine: 313 

S-117: Photograph of the underside of the Mixer Machine near its 

front with the location of the oil stain that Murugan observed on 12 

February 2021 outlined in orange colour 

144 Chua XD followed up at 7:14pm to 7:17pm by sending to Murugan four 

photographs of the Mixer Machine's exterior with various parts to be welded 

marked in green and instructing “ All the corner here leaking, so we overl ap slightly 

to cover the leak. Weld dead ”: 314    

> 312 SS -5 (Murugan) , [28].
> 313 SS -5 (Murugan) , [28]; S -117.
> 314 SS -6 (Chua XD), [187]; S -20.

79 

S-20: Screenshots from Murugan’s mobile phone (taken on 21 June 

2021) of his WhatsApp chat messages with Chua XD on 12 February 

2021 from 5:19pm to 7:27pm 80 

145 By his instructions, Chua XD meant that corner plat es should be added to 

all four bottom corners of the oil jacket, and that permanent welds were to be 

done. 315 Murugan also understood the same. 316 That evening, Murugan spoke to 

Nasim and Marimuthu at the workshop, regarding Chua XD’s instructions on 

welding the Mixer Machine. According to Murugan, he showed them the four 

photographs that Chua XD had sent and the accompanying message (see [ 144 ]

above), and told them to contact Chua XD for more details when performing the 

welding. 317 Murugan assumed that Nasim and Marimuthu understood that Chua XD 

wanted metal plates to be welded over the underside and at the four bottom corners 

of the Mixer Machine to cover oil leaks. 318 

146 Chua XD also sent to Moe at 7:26pm three photographs of parts of the Mixer 

Machine marked in green that he had sent to Murugan ea rlier (see [ 144 ] above) to 

keep Moe informed on what was going to be done to the Mixer Machine. 319      

> 315 SS -6 (Chua XD), [185] -[187].
> 316 SS -5 (Murugan) , [29].
> 317 SS -5 (Murugan) , [29].
> 318 SS -5 (Murugan) , [31].
> 319 SS -6 (Chua XD), [190].

81 

P. 12 February 2021 – Marimuthu expressed concern for h is safety 

147 In the aftermath of the fire on 12 February 2021, Marimuthu informed Moe 

that evening via WhatsApp that he was afraid to work at the workshop and that he 

was thinking about his young baby in India: 320 

Marimuthu: “this one finish I talk to you ”

Marimuthu: “better I no work ”

Marimuthu: “I very sect ”

Marimuthu: “still I no see baby ”

148 Moe responded by telling Marimuthu to not be scared but Marimuthu 

insisted that Moe ask Chua XD whether Marimuthu could stop work. 321 Moe 

forwarded Marimuthu’s Whats App messages at [ 147 ] above to Chua XD and asked 

Chua XD to speak to Marimuthu about it. 

149 Chua XD tried to call Marimuthu that evening but could not get him on the 

line. Chua XD then sent several text messages to Marimuthu, claiming that the fire 

was not actually from the Mixer Machine, the Mixer Machine was not dangerous ,

and that it was not t he oil that had caught fire. 322    

> 320 SS -7 (Moe) , [94].
> 321 SS -7 (Moe) , [94].
> 322 SS -6 (Chua XD), [193].

82 

Q. 13 February 2021 – Stars’ workers found cracks on the oil jacket and 

reported it to Chua XD 

150 On 13 February 2021, Nasim began work in relation to the welding of the 

Mixer Machine at the Tuas Site workshop. Marimuthu was still working at the 

workshop. 

151 According to Nasim, Marimuthu gave him specific instructions on 13 

February 2021 to weld all four bottom corners of the oil jacket, and weld additional 

reinforcement L -shaped plates at the front two bottom corners where oil was 

lea king. 323 By this time, all the oil from the oil jacket had already been drained 

out. 324 

152 As a preparatory step, Nasim ground the four bottom corners of the Mixer 

Machine, along the weld seams, to prepare those areas for welding. 325 He ground 

away the paint and the manufacturer’s original weldment on those areas. 326 

153 After Nasim completed the grinding, he observed that there was a hairline 

crack on each of the two front bottom corners of the Mixer Machine. 327 Mehedi also              

> 323 SS -4 (Nasim) , [63]; NE 22 September 2021 ,pp.48:10 -50:4 (Nasim EIC) , pp. 75:25 -76:4
> (Nasim XX).
> 324 SS -4 (Nasim) , [62].
> 325 SS -4 (Nasim) , [64].
> 326 SS -4(Nasim) , [64].
> 327 SS -4 (Nasim) , [65].

83 

observed the cracks and he noticed that the crack on the front bottom left corner 

was longer than the crack on the front bottom right corner. 328 One crack was about 

20mm long and the other was about 50mm long. 329 

154 On Nasim’s instructions, Mehedi took a photograph of the longer crack on 

the front bo ttom left corner and sent it to Chua XD at 1:49pm, with the 

accompanying message “ Boss see old welding crack ready ”.330 Mehedi had 

observed that the location of the “ old welding crack ” was the same location where 

Nasim had previously done the welding in Oct ober 2020 (see [ 117 ] above), and 

meant by his message “ old welding crack ready ” that Nasim’s previous welding 

(done in October 2020) had cracked 331 :         

> 328 SS -3 (Mehedi) ,[104].
> 329 SS -4 (Nasim) , [65].
> 330 SS -3 (Mehedi) ,[105] ; S -65.
> 331 SS -3 (Mehedi) ,[105]; cf. SS -6 (Chua XD), [200] and SS -4 (Nasim), [66].

84 

S-65: Photograph of the “old welding” on the bottom left front 

corner of the Mixer Machine, sent by Mehedi to Chua XD on 13 

February 2021 at 1:49pm via WhatsApp 

155 Chua XD replied between 2:49 pm -2:50pm, “ Ya la ” and “ Good, we will 

repair and the machine is go od to go again ”. 332 Chua XD also forwarded the   

> 332 SS -3 (Mehedi) ,[105]; SS -6 (Chua XD), [201].

85 

photograph of the “old welding crack” to Moe at 2:30pm with the accompanying 

message “ Old welding crack ”. 333 

156 Apart from the “old welding crack” on the front bottom left corner of the oil 

jacket, Chua XD was als o made aware of the other crack on the oil jacket on 13 

February 2021 or 15 February 2021. 334 

R. 15 -16 February 2021 – Nasim performed welding repairs on the Mixer 

Machine 

157 On 15 February 2021 Nasim returned to the workshop to carry out the 

welding on the Mixe r Machine :335 

(a) Nasim did four layers of welding to each of the four corners of the 

Mixer Machine, over the areas that he had previously ground on 13 February 

2021 (see [ 152 ] above). 336 

(b) Nasim welded a 90cm x 1m metal plate onto the base of the Mixer 

Machine, cutting a hole for the Drain Pipe. He attached the metal plate to 

the underside of the Mixer Machine by weld ing the two lengths of the metal 

plate to the corresponding two bottom edges of the front and back sides of           

> 333 SS -6 (Chua XD), [201].
> 334 SS -6 (Chua XD), [204]; NE 2 4September 2021 ,p. 119 :2-7(Chua XD EIC)
> 335 SS -4 (Nasim) , [72].
> 336 SS -4 (Nasim) , [72].

86 

the Mixer Machine. The plate was slightly wider than the Mixer Machine, 

and there was hence an excess of about 10mm of metal that stuck out from 

the right and left sides of the Mixer Machine. 337 

(c) Nasim then reinforced the front bottom right corner of the Mixer 

Machine with a metal plate, folded across the corner and welded the metal 

plate in place, forming an L -shaped plate over the corner. 338 

(d) Marimuthu sent two photo graph s of the Mixer Machine to the 

Shield+ WhatsApp Chat which showed the welding works done that day 

(namely, the L -shaped plate at the front bottom right corner of the Mixer 

Machine and the welding that had been done along the front bottom edge of 

the Mixer Machine): 339 

S-25: Screenshots from Chua XD’s mobile phone (taken on 23 June 

2021) of the messages from the Shield+ WhatsApp Chat from 15 

February 2021, 8.20pm to 17 February 2021, 8.52pm    

> 337 SS -4 (Nasim) , [75].
> 338 SS -4 (Nasim) , [76].
> 339 SS -4 (Nasim) , [76]; S -25.

87 

158 Also, on 15 February, Murugan returned to the Tu as Site workshop and 

repaired the exhaust vent. 340 

159 The next day, on 16 February 2021, Nasim completed the welding on the 

Mixer Machine: 341 

(a) Nasim added an additional layer of welding over the two lengths of 

the base plate which he had welded to the bottom edges of the front and 

back sides of the Mixer Machine on 15 February 2021 (see [ 157(b) ]

above). 342 

(b) He reinforced the front bottom left corner of the Mixer Machine by 

welding an L -shaped plate onto this corner, using the same method as 

described at [ 157(c) ] above. 343 

(c) He then used the hammer to fold the excess width of the base plate 

over the bottom edges of the right and left sides/faces of the Mixer Machine 

(see [ 157(b) ] above), and welde d the base plate to those faces. 344       

> 340 SS -5 (Murugan) , [37].
> 341 SS -4(Nasim) , [80].
> 342 SS -4 (Nasim) , [81].
> 343 SS -4 (Nasim) , [81].
> 344 SS -4 (Nasim) , [82].

88 

160 The welding was completed on 16 February 2021 at about 7pm. According 

to Nasim, Marimuthu did a visual inspection that evening and had no comments. 345 

S. 17 February 2021 – Stars’ workers installed new insulation on the 

Mixer Machine 

161 On 17 February 2021, Marimuthu poured oil back into the Mixer Machine’s 

oil jacket . Chua XD and Nasim claim that Marimuthu found no leaks. 346 

162 Chua XD visited the workshop on 17 February 2021. This was the first time 

Chua XD was back at the workshop since the fire on 12 February 2021. 347 At the 

workshop, he checked the welding done by Nasim and did a run through with the 

Mixer Machine to make a batch of fire clay. 348 

163 On the same day, new insulation consisting of only fibre glass, without 

alumin ium foil or aluminium tape, was installed on the Mixer Machine. 349 

Marimuthu sent three photo graph s that evening at 8:52pm to the Shield+ WhatsApp 

Chat which showed the new installation: 350                     

> 345 SS -4 (Nasim) , [82].
> 346 SS -4 (Nasim) , [84]; SS -6 (Chua XD), [206].
> 347 NE 2 4September 2021 ,p. 116 :6-8(Chua XD EIC) .
> 348 SS -6(Chua XD), [205(e)]; NE 2 4September 2021 ,p. 120 :3-18 (Chua XD EIC) ;SS -4
> (Nasim) , [85].
> 349 SS -4 (Nasim) , [86].
> 350 SS -4 (Nasim) , [87]; S -25.

89 

S-25: Screenshots from Chua XD’s mobile phone (taken on 23 June 

20 21) of the messages from the Shield+ WhatsApp Chat from 15 

February 2021, 8.20pm to 17 February 2021, 8.52pm 90 

T. 24 February 2021 – Small fire on the Mixer Machine in the earlier part 

of the morning 

164 As explained above at [ 58 ], a total of eight Stars workers were working at 

the Tuas Site workshop on 24 February 2021: Anis, Mehedi, Shohel, Marimuthu, 

Jitu, Yousuf, Rahad  and Lizon. 351 

165 At about 8:39am that morning, a small fire broke out at Heater No. 2 on the 

Mixer Machine: 352 

S-73: Photograph of the small fire on the Mixer Machine’s heater 

on the morning of 24 February 2021, sent by Anis to the 

Shield+Daily WhatsApp Chat on 24 February 2021 at 8:39am via 

WhatsApp     

> 351 SOAF, [28].
> 352 SOAF, [29]; [ SS -3 (Mehedi) , [123]; SS -6(Chua XD), [214]; S-73.

91 

166 Mehedi was working on the ground floor of the workshop when the fire 

broke out and he heard Marimuthu call out to him, “ Mehedi, fire ”. 353 Mehedi went 

up to the Platform and put out the fire using a fire extinguisher. 354 Mehedi observed 

that the isol ator for the Mixer Machine had already been turned off. 355 

167 After the fire was extinguished, Marimuthu asked Mehedi if the Heater No. 

2 that had caught fire could be replaced. 356 Mehedi told him that there were spare 

heaters in the store on the second floor of the Tuas Si te. 357 Mehedi also told 

Marimuthu to update Chua XD and Moe. 358 

168  At 8:40am, Marimuthu forwarded the photograph at [ 165 ] above to Moe. 359 

Moe observed that the photograph showed that the flange of one of the Mixer 

Machine’s heaters was glowing red. 360 Immediately after, also at 8:40am, 

Marimuthu sent Moe  three other photo graph s showing close -ups of Heater No. 2 

which showed that the heater was damaged: 361             

> 353 SS -3 (Mehedi) , [123].
> 354 SS -3 (Mehedi) , [125]; S -168.
> 355 SS -3 (Mehedi) , [125].
> 356 SS -3 (Mehedi) , [128].
> 357 SS -3 (Mehedi) , [128].
> 358 SS -3 (Mehedi) , [128].
> 359 SS -7 (Moe) , [113].
> 360 SS -7 (Moe) , [113].
> 361 SS -7 (Moe) , [113]; S-74 ;S-75 ;S-76.

92 

S-74, S -75 and S -76: Photographs of the damaged heater, sent by 

Marimuthu to Moe on 24 February 2021 at 8:40am via WhatsApp 93 

169 Marimuthu then followed up with two WhatsApp messages: “heater spoil”; 

“fire the heater”. 362 Moe noted that Heater No. 2 appeared to have been burnt by 

fire. 363 Moe then had the following exchange with Marimuthu between 8:41am to 

8:56pm: 364 

Moe: “Die ”

Moe: “Now machine can’t on? ”

Marimuthu: “yes ”

Marimuthu: “today morning like thet ”

Moe: “Machine can on ? ”

Marimuthu: “can but heater I change first ”

Marimuthu: “you chack boss ”

Moe: “You message to boss ready ? ”

Marimuthu: “no ”

Marimuthu: “I Meg you only ”

Moe: “You know how to change heater? ”

Marimuthu: “I tack rdy new one I and sohel change     

> 362 SS -7 (Moe) , [114].
> 363 SS -7 (Moe) , [114].
> 364 SS -7 (Moe) ,[114] -[119].

94 

170 Marimuthu then sent Moe a photograph of a spare heater that he and Shohel 

had retrieved from the second floor store. 365 Moe understood Marimuthu to be 

informing him that Marimuthu and Shohel were going to replace the damaged 

heater. 366 

171 Marim uthu then asked Moe whether he had informed Chua XD about the 

matter. 367 Moe had not, but he did not respond to Marimuthu’s query. 368 Marimuthu 

then messaged Moe again, informing he would be replacing the damaged heater 

after 10am, when the oil that was in t he Mixer Machine ’s oil jacket cooled down.      

> 365 SS -7 (Moe) , [119]; SS -3 (Mehedi) , [128]; S -77.
> 366 SS -7 (Moe) , [119].
> 367 SS -7 (Moe) , [120].
> 368 SS -7 (Moe) , [120].

95 

172 At 8:58am, Marimuthu called Moe but Moe did not pick up the call. 369 

According to Moe, he was driving at that time. 370 Marimuthu then sent two close -

up photo graph s of the burnt wiring connections of the damaged heater at 9:04am: 371 

S-78 and S -79: Photographs of the burnt wiring connections of the 

damaged heater, sent by Marimuthu to Moe on 24 February 2021 at 

9:04am via WhatsApp 

173 Marimuthu then messaged Chua XD at 9:09am asking whether Chua XD 

could sp eak over the phone. Chua XD did not respond.    

> 369 SS -7 (Moe) , [121].
> 370 SS -7 (Moe) , [121].
> 371 SS -7 (Moe) , [122]; S -78 and S -79.

96 

174  A short while later, at 9:21am, Moe finally updated Chua XD. Moe 

forwarded to Chua XD  all the photo graph s that Marimuthu had sent to Moe that 

morning and Marimuthu ’s earlier WhatsApp messages “ heater spoil ” and “fire the 

heater ”. 372 Moe followed up with the following three messages: “ I thinl we should 

go tuas ”; “Heater now muthu changing ”; “Wire joint may be fire ”. 373 Moe 

explained that his message “ Heater now muthu changing ” meant that Marimuthu 

was going to change the heater, 374 and that Chua XD would understand that 

changing the heater meant replacing it with a new heater as that was what the 

workers, Chua XD and Moe meant whenever they talked about changing a heater. 375 

Chua XD also admitted that his understa nding of Moe’s message “ Heater now 

muthu changing ” was that the workers were going to take out the damaged heater 

and put in a new spare heater. 376 Chua XD did not reply to these messages .377 

175  Chua XD gave Marimuthu a missed call at 9: 58am and Marimuthu retur ned 

the call at 9:59am. 378 According to Chua XD, o n this call, Marimuthu updated Chua 

XD about the matter ,379 and Chua XD told Marimuthu to send him photographs of          

> 372 SS -7 (Moe) , [123]; SS -6 (Chua XD), [214].
> 373 SS -7 (Moe) , [123]; SS -6 (Chua XD), [214].
> 374 SS -7 (Moe), [123].
> 375 NE 30 September 2021, pp. 79:22 -80:12 (Moe EIC).
> 376 NE 27 September 2021, p. 37:1 -14 (Chua XD EIC).
> 377 SS -7 (Moe) , [123].
> 378 SS -6 (Chua XD), [215].
> 379 SS -6 (Chua XD), [215].

97 

the damaged heater and that he would get back to Marimuthu .380 Marimuthu sent 

Chua XD the following two photographs at 10:06am: 381 

S-80 and S -81: Photographs sent by Marimuthu to Chua XD on 24 

February 2021 at 10:06am via WhatsApp 

176 Marimuthu called Chua XD at 10:07am after sending the above 

photographs .382 According to Chua XD, o n this call, Marimuthu gave Chua XD 

more information about the fire that morning. 383     

> 380 SS -6 (Chua XD), [215].
> 381 SS -6 (Chua XD), [216]; S -80 and S -81.
> 382 SS -6 (Chua XD), [216].
> 383 SS -6 (Chua XD), [216].

98 

177 At 10:09am, Marimuthu sent Chua XD another photograph of the damaged 

heater: 384 

S-82: Photograph sent by Marimuthu to Chua XD on 24 February 

2021 at 10:09am via WhatsApp 

178 Marimuthu and Chua XD spoke again at 10:10am. 385 According to Chua 

XD , on this call, he had asked Marimuthu whether Marimuthu knew how to change 

the heater. 386 Marimuthu sai d no. 387 Chua XD claimed that although he had used     

> 384 SS -6 (Chua XD), [217]; S -82.
> 385 SS -6 (Chua XD), [217].
> 386 SS -6 (Chua XD), [217].
> 387 SS -6 (Chua XD), [217].

99 

the words “ heater change ”, “ change heater ” when speaking to Marimuthu, his 

instructions to Marimuthu were only to drain out the oil from the oil jacket, unscrew 

the flange of the heater and take out the nut s, take out Heater No. 2, and wait for 

Chua XD to arrive at the Tuas Site workshop. 388 Yet, a t the same time that 

Marimuthu was speaking with Chua XD on this call, Marimuthu texted Moe 

contemporaneously at 10:10am that he was “now on line ” with Chua XD and “ boss 

[ie, Chua XD] say heater change ”. 389 Moe’s understanding of the message “ boss 

say heater change ” was that Chua XD had told Marimuthu to replace the damaged 

heater with a new heater. 390 

179 Chua XD and Marimuthu spoke for the last time at 10:13 am. Chua XD 

claimed that, in this call, he told Marimuthu to wait until the Mixer Machine cooled 

down, before the workers drained the oil from the Mixer Machine, and to wait for 

him to arrive at the Tuas Site. However, there is no corroboration of what tra nspired 

during this call, which lasted a good 1 minute and 6 seconds. 391 

180 What is clear is that, d espite the fire on the Mixer Machine earlier that 

morning, Chua XD gave no instructions to cease operations at the workshop 

altogether that day or any indication that the daily target of fire wrap rolls (which      

> 388 SS -6 (Chua XD), [217]; NE 27 September 2021, pp. 42:11 -43:14 (Chua Re -ex).
> 389 SS -7 (Moe) , [125].
> 390 NE 30 September 2021, p. 81:10 -19 (Moe EIC).
> 391 SS -6 (Chua XD), [217].

100 

required two batches of fire clay to be produced in the day 392 ) no longer needed to 

be met. 

181 We submit that the above evidence regarding the communications between 

Chua XD, Marimuthu and Moe clearly shows that Chua XD had told Marimuthu to 

replace the damaged Heater No. 2 with a new heater with the expect ation, which 

Marimuthu understood, that the workers should continue with that day’s production 

of fire clay using the Mixer Machine once the damaged heater was dealt with .

182 In any event, Mehedi saw Marimuthu and Shohel doing something near the 

Mixer Machine’s heaters on the Platform. 393 Lizon also saw Shohel and Marimuthu 

doing something near the Mixer Machine’s heaters. 394 

183 About half an hour before the explosion, Mehedi heard the Mixer Machine’s 

motor running, indicating that it was in the process of mixing and a few seconds 

later it st opped. 395 Jitu heard the sound of the Mixer Machine operating at about 

11am. 396 Lizon heard the sound of the Mixer Machine in operation just before the 

explosion. 397 Yousuf  heard the Mixer Machine running before the explosion  .398             

> 392 NE 2 1September 2021, p. 99:10 -22 (Mehedi Re -ex).
> 393 SS -3 ( Mehedi), [129].
> 394 SS -12 ( Lizon), [62].
> 395 SS -3 ( Mehedi), [130].
> 396 SS -9 ( Jitu), [75].
> 397 SS -12 ( Lizon), [63].
> 398 NE 28 September 2021, p. 116:11 -16 (Yousuf EIC).

101 

184 At 11:03am, Moe called Marimu thu and they spoke for 36 seconds. 399 It is 

disputed by Moe that Marimuthu had discussed the damaged Heater No. 2 with 

Moe during th is call. 400 

185 Yet, at 11:10am, Moe sent Marimuthu a message asking, “ How Muthu? 

Heater ok? ”, which by Moe’s own admission, meant that he wanted an update from 

Marimuthu on the damaged heater. 401 

186 In response, Marimuthu sent Moe a photograph at 11:13am, which Moe 

confirmed looked almost identical to a photograph taken by Marimuthu on 24 

February 2021 at 11:13am and ex tracted from Marimuthu’s phone by the Cyber 

Crime Response Team, Jurong Division, S ingapore Police Force (“ SPF ”) :402     

> 399 S-33, S/N 26.
> 400 NE 30 September 2021, pp. 95:12 -96:8 (Moe EIC).
> 401 SS -7 (Moe), [126].
> 402 SS -7 (Moe) , [127]; S -83.

102 

S-83: Photograph  taken by Marimuthu on 24 February 2021 at 

11:13am  showing  that the wiring of the damaged Heater No. 2 had 

been taped together with green tape,  extracted from Marimuthu’s 

mobile phone 

187 Moe knew, on seeing the photograph sent by Marimuthu at 11:13am, that 

the damaged Heater No. 2 was still in the oil jacket and had not been changed, and 103 

that the wiring of the damaged heater had been taped together with green tape. 403 

Moe purported ly thought at the time he was sent the photograph that Marimuthu 

was going to check the connectivity of the damaged heater with the wiring t aped 

together. 404 

188 Tellingly, Moe expressed no surprise on seeing the photograph of the taped 

damaged heater bolted into the oil jacket. Instead, Moe replied to Marimuthu at 

11:32 am saying “ Ok let me know ASAP ”. 405 Far from instructing Marimuthu and 

the workers not to try using the damaged heater in any way, we submit that Moe 

had clearly sanctioned the workers’ attempt s to check if the damaged heater could 

still be used. 

189 Moe deleted the photograph received from Marimuthu at 11:13am, as well 

as his message to Marimuthu at 11:32am, from his and Marimuthu’s mobile phones 

after the Accident (see [ 444 ]-[445 ] below). 406 

190 The damaged Heater No. 2 with the green taped -wiring was found still in 

the oil jacket, after the Accident. 407      

> 403 SS -7 (Moe) , [127].
> 404 SS -7 (Moe) , [127].
> 405 SS -7 (Moe) , [128].
> 406 SS -7 (Moe) , [127].
> 407 S-289 (MOM’s Investigation Report), [2.3.8].

104 

U. 24 February 2021 – Accident at the Tuas Site workshop 

191 CCTV footage from Alif -E408 showed that the Accident occurred at 11:22 

am .409 The CCTV footage indicated that  a large explosion first occurred at around 

11:22am, followed in the next few minutes by flash fires. 410 

192 When the explosion occurred, t he Stars workers were at various locations at 

in Tuas Site workshop, as plotted in the diagram below: 411  

> 408

S-175 –S-182.  

> 409

S-289 ( MOM’s Investigation Report ), [ 3.1.7 ].  

> 410

S-283 ( Dr Salim’s Report ), p. 12, Table 1; S -288 ( SCDF’s Investigation Report ), pp. 12 -

15, Screenshots 24, 31 and 33.  

> 411

SS -1 (State Counsel’s Opening Statement), [83]. 105 

193 They felt the large explosion. In particular: 

(a) Yousuf felt intense heat and an impact across his back, that caused 

him to fall about two metres forward to the ground; 412  

> 412 SS -10 (Yousuf), [68].

106 

(b) Rahad felt a huge push, that caused him to fly about two metres 

backwards to the ground; 413 

(c) Mehedi felt a gust of hot air pushing him, and causing him to fall; 414 

(d) Lizon felt as if something hot had fallen on the back of his neck; 415 

and 

(e) Jitu felt hot oil splashing on him and heard hot oil splashing on the 

wall above him. 416 He saw the whole workshop was on fire and filled with 

black smoke. 417 

194  Following the explosion, the Stars workers ran out of the workshop to the 

open field at the bac k of the industrial estate. 418 Other  workers from neighbouring 

units at the industrial estate came out and sprayed water on the injured Stars workers 

using a hose. 419        

> 413 SS -11 (Rahad), [68].
> 414 SS -3 (Mehedi), [132].
> 415 SS -12 (Lizon), [63], [66].
> 416 SS -9 (Jitu), [76].
> 417 SS -9 ( Jitu), [76].
> 418 SS -3 (Mehedi) , [131]; SS -11 (Rahad), [72].
> 419 SS -3 (Mehedi) , [132]; SS -11 (Rahad), [72].

107 

195 Two workers from P3,  Miah and  Zhao, who were working in the area 

outside and opposite of the Tuas Site workshop also felt the large explosion :

(a) Miah heard an explosion and felt a lot of wind. He also saw a big 

fire inside the Tuas Site workshop and flames coming out of the 

workshop; 420 and 

(b) Zhao first saw a fire measuring about two metres across inside the 

Tuas Site workshop where he knew the Mixer Machine was located, and 

then heard a loud explosion. He also saw flames coming out of the 

workshop. 421 

196  At about 11:23am, the SCDF Operations Centre received multiple c alls 

from members of public and the Police Operations Command Centre informing of 

the explosion and fire. 422  The first SCDF crew arrived at the Tuas Site at about 

11:30am. 423 The fire was eventually extinguished by the SCDF at about 11:46am. 424      

> 420 SS -13 (Miah), [6].
> 421 SS -14 (Zhao), [7]; NE 29 September 2021, p. 112:8 -19 (Zhao, questions by IC); p. 117:11 -
> 16 (Zhao Re -ex).
> 422 SOAF, [33].
> 423 SOA F, [33].
> 424 SOAF, [33].

108 

197 The SCDF observed, when it arrived at the Tuas Site workshop on 24 

February 2021, that the isolator for the Mixer Machine was in an “ON” state 425 and 

that the control panel switches for the Mixer Machine’s heaters were in an “ON” 

state. 426 During the SCDF’s further investigation on 25 February 2021, the SCDF 

observed that the Moulded Case Circuit Breaker (MCCB) of the Mixer Machine’s 

control panel w as also in an “ON” state. 427 These observations from the SCDF 

indicate that at the time of the explosion, electrical power was supplied to the Mixer 

Machine and its heaters were turned on. 428 

198 The SCDF was, however, unable to determine if the Emergency Stop button 

on the Mixer Machine ’s control panel was in an un -depressed state in the immediate 

aftermath of the explosion. 429 If, for example, the Emergency Stop button had been 

found in a depressed state, it would have indicated that electrical power to the Mix er 

Machine had been cut off and that the Mixer Machine was not in operation at the 

time of the explosion. 430 In this regard, the Licensed Electrical Worker (“ LEW ”) 

engaged by Matcor had subsequently found that the Emergency Stop button was in        

> 425 NE 7 October 2021, p. 68:1 -8 (Maj Huang EIC).
> 426 NE 7 October 2021, p. 68:9 -21 (Maj Huang EIC).
> 427 NE 7 October 2021, pp. 66:22 -67:21 (Maj Huang EIC).
> 428 S-288 ( SCDF’s Investigation Report ), [8(i)].
> 429 NE 7 October 2021, pp. 67:22 -68:8 (Maj Huang EIC).
> 430 NE 4 October 2021, pp. 27:16 -28:1 (Matcor EIC).

109 

a depressed st ate during the LEW’s examination 431 but this is inconclusive as the 

LEW’s examination was only conducted in March 2021. 432 

V. Aftermath of the Accident 

199 As a result of the Accident, there was property damage to the Tuas Site and 

two other surrounding units (leased by  Alif -E and  P3 respectively)  and there were 

several casualties. 

1. Property damage from the Accident 

200 The Tuas Site workshop sustained extensive property damage as a result of 

the Accident. The rear wall of the workshop had collapsed causing  debris to be 

scattered around the back lane of the workshop. 433 The front shutters of the 

workshop were damaged. 434  A portion of the workshop’s side wall (close to the 

ceiling) adjoining Alif -E’s unit had also collapsed 435 causing debris to be scattered 

inside Alif -E’s unit. Many of the equipment inside the Tuas Site workshop, 

including the Mixer Machine, were also damaged. 436 As regards the Mixer       

> 431 S-279 (Matcor Report) , p. 177.
> 432 NE 4 October 2021, pp. 30:12 -31:18 (Matcor EIC); NE 7 October 2021, p. 135:2 -23 (Ms
> Lim Re -ex).
> 433 S-87.
> 434 S-100.
> 435 S-88.
> 436 SOAF, [35].

110 

Machine, significa nt damage was observed at the lower portion of the back of the 

Mixer Machine’s oil jacket where it had ruptured open along its welding seams. 437 

201 In relation to the exterior of the Tuas Site,  three louvre panels from the 

second and third floors of the build ing had fallen off from the building. 438 A fourth 

louvre panel was observed to be hanging from the third floor of the building 439 and 

was subsequently brought down by Stars. 440 

202  The Accident also caused four rear window panels of P3’s Unit 38A to be 

blasted out of their frames. 441 

2. Casualties from the Accident 

203 A total of ten persons suffered injuries from the Accident. Three of them 

succumbed to their injuries. Details of the ten casualties are provided below. 

(a) Deceased persons 

204 Anis, Marimuthu and Shohel were pronounced dead at the Singapore 

General Hospital (“ SGH ”) on 24 February 2021 at 9:53pm, 24 February 2021 at      

> 437 S-279 ( Matcor Report), pp. 37 -38.
> 438 SOAF, [36].
> 439 S-91.
> 440 SOAF, [36].
> 441 S-136.

111 

10:46pm, and 25 February 2021 at 3:06am respectively. The findi ngs from their 

autopsies are as stated in their respective Autopsy Reports. 442 These include that 

each had approximately 90% of their total body surface area affected by burns, and 

that their cause of death was certified as “ SEVERE BURNS ”. 

(b) Injured persons 

205 Seven other persons suffered injuries from the Accident and were conveyed 

to the hospital to receive treatment. Five of them were the other Stars workers 

working at the Tuas Site workshop on the day of the Accident ( ie , Lizon, Jitu, 

Mehedi, Yousuf and Raha d). They suffered serious burn injuries and were treated 

at SGH. The remaining two injured persons were the two P3 workers working 

across the Tuas Site workshop ( ie , Miah and Zhao).  They were treated at Ng Teng 

Fong General Hospital. 

206 Their respective injuries are set out in their respective Medical Reports, and 

are summarised in the table below: 443     

> 442 S-213 ,S-215 and S-214 .
> 443 SOAF, [43].

112 

S/N  Injured 

Person 

Summary of Injuries Sustained  Exhibit 

Reference 

1 Lizon  (1) 37% Total Body Surface Area (TBSA) 

burns over the face, neck, scalp, bilateral 

upper limbs, back, abdomen, flank, left 

knee and foot. 

(2) Bilateral ocular thermal injury. 

(3) Left otomycosis. 

S-220 

2 Jitu  (1) 54% TBSA over the face, neck, anterior 

chest, back and bilateral upper and lower 

limbs. 

(2) Bilateral ocular thermal injury with high 

intraocular pressure. 

(3) Bilateral cicatrical ectropion. 

S-223 113 

S/N  Injured 

Person 

Summary of Injuries Sustained  Exhibit 

Reference 

3 Mehedi  (1) 58% TBSA burns over the face, neck, scalp, 

anterior chest, bilateral upper limbs, back, 

buttocks and left lower limb. 

(2) Bilateral ocular thermal injury with high 

intraocul ar pressure. 

(3) Bilateral otitis externa. 

(4) Cytomegalovirus and herpes simplex virus 

viraemia. 

S-219 

4 Yousuf  (1) 35% TBSA burns over the face, neck, scalp, 

bilateral upper limbs, chest/abdomen and 

right foot. 

(2) Bilateral ocular thermal injury. 

(3) Bilateral otitis externa. 

S-221 114 

S/N  Injured 

Person 

Summary of Injuries Sustained  Exhibit 

Reference 

5 Rahad  (1) 48.5% TBSA burns over the face, neck, 

scalp, bilateral upper limbs, chest/abdomen, 

back and left foot. 

(2) Bilateral ocular thermal injury with high 

intraocular pressure. 

(3) Bilateral otitis externa. 

(4) Sepsis with polymicrobial bacter aemia. 

S-222 

6 Zhao  Approximately 8% TBSA Superficial partial 

thickness burns over the left forearm, right forearm, 

head/face and neck. 

S-225 

7 Azam  Minor head injury from barotrauma.  S-224 115 

IV. TOR A – CAUSES AND CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE ACCIDENT 

207 Having set out the background facts and key events leading to the Accident 

on 24 February 2021, we now turn to discuss the causes of the Accident. We do so 

in two parts – we first look at the technical causes of the Accident, before going on 

to explore the underlying root causes giving rise to the series of events precipitating 

the Accident. 

A. The proximate technical causes of the Accident 

208 In respect of the technical causes of the Accident, we submit that there are 

three issues to determine: 

(a) What was the tec hnical cause(s) of the rupture of the oil jacket’s 

back bottom weld seams; 

(b) What was the technical causes(s) of the explosion; and 

(c) What was the technical cause(s) of the subsequent flash fires. 

209 As set out at [ 15 ] above, evidence was led from Matcor, Dr Salim, Prof 

Chew, SCDF, Ms Lim and Hawkins for this area. 116 

210  Parties agree that the primary explosion itself was chemical in nature, which 

was caused by the ignition of thermic oil aerosols on a heated surface. 444 However, 

parties differ on  the mechanics of how such a chemical explosion occurred –

whether it occurred following a physical rupture of the oil jacket due to internal 

overpressure ; or whether it occurred inside the oil jacket, and caused the physical 

rupture of the oil jacket. 

211 While Matcor, Dr Salim and SCDF consider that the oil jacket had first 

physically ruptured due to overpressures within the oil jacket caused by the 

overheating of thermic oil, Hawkins’ position is that the rupture of the oil jacket 

was caused by a chemical explosion within the oil jacket. 

212 Parties also diverge on the cause of the subsequent flash fires: while Dr 

Salim opines that the flash fires were caused by ignition of potato starch which 

became airborne from the initial explosion, Dr Rose opines that th e flash fires were 

caused by the ignition of smoke plumes which contain ed hydrocarbons from the 

incomplete combustion of the thermic oil.     

> 444 S-283 (Dr Salim’s Report), p. 58:8 -14; ST -1 (Hawkins Report), [6.1.12].

117 

213 The following areas will be addressed in turn: 

(a) The cause of the initial explosion, which parties agree was chemica l

in nature and caused by the ignition of thermic oil aerosols on a heated 

surface; 

(b) The cause of the rupture of the oil jacket, which we submit was 

physically caused by the pressures within the oil jacket from the overheating 

of the thermic oil; and 

(c) The ca use of the subsequent flash fires, which we submit were most 

likely caused by the ignition of the potato starch powder found at the Tuas 

Site. 

1. The explosion was chemical in nature caused by the ignition of thermic 

oil aerosols on a heated surface 

214 There is no dispute on the mechanism of the initial explosion itself – it was 

caused by the ignition of thermic oil aerosols and was chemical in nature. 

215 Dr Salim opined that the pressurised release of thermic oil from the rupture 

of the oil jacket likely “atomised the [thermic oil] to form a liquid aerosol that was 

then probably ignited by a hot surface . The ignited aerosol cloud resulted in the 

primary deflagration with estimated overpressures in the range of 2.1 kPa to 58 118 

kPa ”.445 Dr Salim compared the damage found at the Tuas Site and its surrounding 

units to the reference overpressures from the “Guidelines for evaluating the 

characteristics of vapor cloud explosions, flash fires, and BLEVES” issued by the 

Center for Chemical Process Safety 446 to obtain the peak ove rpressures generated 

during the primary deflagration. Thereafter, Dr Salim excluded the possibility of a 

purely physical explosion as the peak overpressures calculated for a physical 

explosion, which were between 0.42 and 5.3 kPa, 447 were too low to account for the 

extent of damage observed in the aftermath of the Accident. 

216 In contrast, industrially used liquids can be atomised by pressures only a 

few bars above atmospheric pressure and ignited by energy sources as low as 100 

mJ. 448 Heat transfer fluids (“ HTF s”) with flash points ranging from 149℃ to 260℃ 

have been shown to ignite at room temperature, 449 and there have been incidents 

involving the ignition of HTFs and other heavy hydrocarbons in the past. 450 The 

range of peak overpressures possible with thermic oil ignition was also consistent 

with the damage observed. 451                         

> 445 S-283 (Dr Salim’s Report), p. 8:3 -7.
> 446 S-283 (Dr Salim’s Report), p. 34, footnote 8.
> 447 S-283 (Dr Salim’s Report) , p. 36, Table 6.
> 448 S-283 (Dr Salim’s Report), p. 37:6 -8.
> 449 S-283 (Dr Salim’s Report) , p. 37:13 -14.
> 450 S-283 (Dr Salim’s Report), p. 37:27 –p. 38:10.
> 451 S-283 (Dr Salim’s Report), pp. 39 –43.

119 

217 Dr Salim initially posited that the heated flange of Heater No. 2 could have 

been a possible ignition source if the Mixer Machine was re -st arted in the morning 

of 24 February 2021. 452 However, he clarified on the stand that there were a lot of 

possible ignition sources, such as the circuits in the control panel of the Mixer 

Machine or its motors. 453 It was also possible for the heater coils ins ide the Mixer 

Machine to have been the ignition source after the oil jacket had split open ,

exposing the heater coils to the atomised thermic oil aerosols .454 

218 This is consistent with SCDF’s position that the thermic oil was the first fuel 

for the initial fire, 455 and that while the exact ignition source could not be 

conclusively determined, 456 it could be one or more of the following three sources, 

namely: 457 

(a) The hot surfaces of the overheated heating coils; 

(b) The autoignition of the thermic oil which r equired no spark or flame 

to be initiated; and/or 

(c) The arcing sparks at the terminal lugs of Heater No. 2.         

> 452 S-283 (Dr Salim’s Report), pp. 61:15 -19.
> 453 NE 5 October 2021, p. 135:6 -18 (Dr Salim, questions from IC).
> 454 NE 6 October 2021, p. 209:7 -17 (Dr Salim, questions from IC).
> 455 S-288 ( SCDF’s Investigation Report ), p. 18, [8(n)].
> 456 S-288 ( SCDF’s Investigation Report ), p. 19, [9(d)].
> 457 S-288 ( SCDF’s Investigation Report ), p. 18, [8(n)].

120 

219 Maj Huang explained that the only competent fuel in the vicinity of the 

Mixer Machine was the thermic oil, 458 and the plumes of black smoke captured by 

CCTV were indicative that thermic oil was likely involved for the fire. 459 He 

elaborated that each ignition source was possible once oxygen was not the limiting 

factor, 460 but the most probable ignition source were the heating coils after the 

rupture of the oil jacket, due to their higher temperatures. 461 

220 Hawkins also thought that the explosion was caused by the ignition of 

aerosolised thermic oil by exposed heating coils. Dr Rose indicated that the ignition 

of an oil mist would generate sufficient pressures to account for the damage that 

was observed at the Tuas Site and its surrounding units ,462 though he had not 

calculated whether the ignition of oil mist within the oil jacket as posited by him 

would have caused such sufficient pressure. 463 Dr Rose explained that the oil mist 

formed is very stable as the droplets are very small, and has a similar ignition energy 

and lower flammable limit than (oil) vapour, but can be ignited with a lower heat 

input. 464        

> 458 NE 7 October 2021, p. 89:20 -23 (Maj Huang EIC).
> 459 NE 7 October 2021, pp. 89:23 -90:2 (Maj Huang EIC).
> 460 NE 7 October 2021, pp. 91 -95 (Maj Huang EIC).
> 461 NE 7 October 2021, p. 97:1 -15 (Maj Huang EIC).
> 462 ST -1 (Hawkins Report), [6.1.12].
> 463 NE 6 October 2021, pp. 137:19 -138:23 (Dr Rose XX).
> 464 ST -1 (Hawkins Report), [6.1.12].

121 

221 While Dr Rose’s primary position was that the ignition of the oil mist by the 

heating elements inside the oil jacket caused the rupture of the oil jacket, 465 he 

acknowledged during the Inquiry hearing that oil mist released into the environment 

after rupture of the oil jacket could have come into contact with the (then) exposed 

heating elements and ignited .466 

222 The immediate cause of the primary deflagration, which resulted in the 

damage observed in the Tuas Site and its surrounding units, as well as the injuries 

sustained by the Stars workers, Miah and Zhao, is the refore not in doubt. The 

explosion itself was caused by the chemical ignition of aerosolised thermic oil on 

any hot surface within the Tuas Site, which could have included the hot heating 

coils once they were exposed to the atmosphere. 

2. The rupture of the oil jacket was caused by high pressures created from 

the overheating of thermic oil 

223 The main divergence in opinion on the proximate causes of the Accident on 

24 February 2021 relates to how the oil jacket had ruptured. Dr Salim and SCDF 

have taken the posi tion that the oil jacket had ruptured first, before the subsequent 

ignition of the thermic oil which caused the primary deflagration. 467 Matcor and Dr       

> 465 ST -1 (Haw kins Report), [6.1.12].
> 466 NE 6 October 2021, pp. 201:8 -203:16; p. 205:8 -16 (Dr Rose, questions from IC).
> 467 S-283 (Dr Salim’s Report), p. 8:3 -7; NE 7 October 2021 pp. 73:14 -74:11 (Maj Huang EIC).

122 

Salim assessed that t he rupture was due to the high pressures created by the 

overheating of thermic oil ov er time, which were retained in the oil jacket from the 

closing of all the vents of the Mixer Machine. 468 Matcor also opined that the 

situation was compounded by the poor welding repairs done on the Mixer Machine, 

which weakened the strength of the welds on the Mixer Machine. 469 

224 Hawkins, in contrast, has posited that the rupture of the oil jacket was caused 

by a chemical explosion within the oil jacket itself, and that overheating of the 

heating elements occurred only on 24 February 2021. 470 Hawkins has also asserted 

that the weld repairs done by Nasim had no effect on the explosion .471 

225 The position taken by Matcor, Dr Salim and SCDF should be preferred over 

Hawkins’ position, for the following reasons: 

(a) A physical rupture of the oil jacket is consistent with what was 

observed during operation of the Mixer Machine; 

(b) A physical rupture of the oil jacket is consistent with the 

investigations conducted by Matcor and its implications;      

> 468 S-279 (Matcor Report), pp. 24:29 -26:15; S -283 (Dr Salim’s Report), p. 8:2 -4.
> 469 S-279 (Matcor Report), p. 27:4 -10.
> 470 ST -1 (Hawkins Report), [6.1.12] -[6.1.14].
> 471 ST -1 (Hawkins Report), [7.7].

123 

(c) A physical rupture of the oil jacket is consistent with the calcul ations 

on the temperature and pressure inside the oil jacket, and with observations 

on the strength of the welds; 

(d) A physical rupture of the oil jacket is consistent with there being 

insufficient oxygen for a chemical explosion within the oil jacket; 

(e) Hawki ns’ theory that a chemical explosion within the oil jacket 

caused its rupture rests on speculation that the heating elements were 

exposed within the oil jacket on 24 February 2021 and further, on the flawed 

assumption that that was the only occasion they were so exposed ; and 

(f) A physical rupture of the oil jacket was capable of taking place 

regardless whether the Mixer Machine was actually in operation at the point 

of the Accident. 

226 We now go on to address each of these reasons in turn. 

(a) A phys ical rupture of the oil jacket is consistent with what was 

observed during operation of the Mixer Machine 

227 There were multiple observable signs between August 2020 and February 

2021 that the Mixer Machine was experiencing significant stresses caused by the 

high temperatures and pressures within the oil jacket. Several of these observable 

signs are examined in greater detail below at [ 350 ]-[392 ] to demonstrate Stars’ 124 

failure to respond appropriately to red flags and near -misses. In this Section, 

however, we highlight these observable signs for the particular purpose of 

demonstrating that, when viewed cumulatively, they support the conclusion that 

there was a physical rupture of the Mixer Machine due to overpressure. This runs 

counter to Hawkins’ assertion that the Mixer Machine was operating at relatively 

low tempera tures, and at close to atmospheric pressure throughout its lifespan. 472 

(i) DETERIORATED GASKETS 

228 First, as stated above at [ 95 ]-[96 ], the gaskets of the Mixer Machine were 

worn out by 28 August 2020 and had to be changed. When Matcor examined the 

replaced gaskets, these were hard and brittle, and Mr Shandro commented that this 

was likely due to high temperatures and accelerated aging of the gaskets during the 

whole period of operation. 473 When shown a photograph of the deteriorated gaskets 

taken on 28 August 2020, 474 Dr Rose acknowledged that the temper ature of the oil 

could have been much higher than 250℃ for the gaskets to have deteriorated in that 

fashion, but sought to qualif y his answer by saying that it was not the clearest 

photograph, and that there was unburnt paint on the flanges as well. 475     

> 472 ST -1 (Hawkins Report), [2.4.13].
> 473 NE 4 October 2021, pp. 87:10 -89:20 (Matcor XX).
> 474 S-113.
> 475 NE 6 October 2021, pp. 102:16 -103:12 (Dr Rose XX).

125 

(ii) OIL DRAINED FROM THE OIL JACKET WAS BLACK 

229 Second, the colour of the used thermic oil drained from the Mixer Machine 

on each occasion was close to black, and there were sediments found in the drained 

oil (see [ 94 ] and [ 111 ] above). This was a clear indication that the oil was being 

subjected to high temp eratures beyond its operating range. Chua XD acknowledged 

that this showed that the thermic oil was subject to temperatures higher than 

300℃. 476 Mr Shandro stated that the thermic oil was subject to temperatures above 

its boiling point, such that there was burning of the thermic oil, and the sediments 

reveal that there was burning of the thermic oil, such that coke, or concentrated 

carbons, were created. 477 Dr Salim stated that the oil turning black in colour was 

indicative of a chemical reaction happening wi thin the oil due to high 

temperature. 478 The pressures created by operating the oil jacket at such 

temperatures as to result in the oil turning almost black would have been significant, 

as was the case after 8 August 2020, when the vents of the oil jacket w ere plugged. 

(iii) WHITE SMOKE FROM THE OIL JACKET 

230 Third, from 28 August 2020 onwards, white smoke was observed from the 

area where the Mixer Machine’s heaters were located (see [ 98 ] and [ 12 2] above).     

> 476 NE 27 September 2021, p. 179:4 -7 (Chua XD, questions from IC).
> 477 NE 4 October 2021, pp. 52:10 -54:11 (Matcor EIC).
> 478 NE 5 October 2021, pp. 60:11 -61:2 (Dr Salim EIC).

126 

In relation to the video sent by Moe to Chua XD on 8 January 2021 showing white 

smoke from the oil jacket (see [ 121 ] above), 479 Dr Salim commented that the white 

smoke could be aerosols formed either by condensation of oil vapours, or ejection 

of the oil directly via very small holes in the oil jacket . He explained that pressures 

of a few bars were required to atomise industrially used liquids. 480 Dr Rose accepted 

that cracks and leaks were indicative of pressures greater than atmospheric within 

the oil jacket , though he chose not to comment on the precise pressures attained. 481 

(iv) BOILING SOUNDS FROM THE OIL JACKET 

231 Fourth, there were boiling sounds from the oil jacket that were heard by 

those at the workshop, including Chua XD. 482 Other Stars workers have also 

reported hearing such boiling sounds (see [ 99 ] and [ 138 ] above). When Dr Salim 

was asked to comment, he stated that the sounds could be due to boiling, or 

alternatively due to the decomposition of the thermic oil, 483 both of which would 

have been ca used by high temperatures and resulted in pressure increase within the 

oil jacket.        

> 479 S-159.
> 480 NE 5 October 2021, pp. 58:9 -60:4 (Dr Salim EIC).
> 481 NE 6 October 2021, pp. 145:19 -148:11 (Dr Rose XX).
> 482 SS -6 (Chua XD), [173]; NE 28 September 2021, p. 22:2 -18 (Jitu EIC); see also [99 ] and
> [138 ] above.
> 483 NE 5 October 2021, p. 63:3 -20 (Dr Salim EIC).

127 

(v) CRACKS ON THE OIL JACKET 

232 Fifth, there were cracks seen on the welds of the Mixer Machine on 28 

September 2020 (see [ 100 ] above), 12 October 2020 (see [ 113 ] above) and 13 

February 2020 following the fire on 12 Februa ry 2021 (see [ 153 ] above). The fire 

on 12 February 2021 was due to the ignition of oil vapours from one of the cracks 

found on the oil jacket, as opin ed by Dr Salim 484 and Maj Huang. 485 The cracks 

necessitated welding repairs made by Nasim, which did not look even in 

appearance. 486 Even the welds from October 2020 had cracked by February 2021, 

as testified by Mehedi, 487 and acknowledged by Nasim as possible .488 When shown 

the video taken by Mehedi of the hairline crack and leak on 12 October 2020, 489 Dr 

Salim and Dr Rose agreed that the pressure inside the oil jacket must have been 

higher than atmospheric pressure to result in the thermic oil “weeping” from the 

Mixer Machine, 490 though Chua XD purported to disagree that the video showed 

the thermic oil spraying or spurting out of the oil jacket 491 (as we submit the            

> 484 NE 5 October 2021, pp. 67:7 -68:14 (Dr Salim EIC).
> 485 NE 6 October 2021, pp. 99:10 -102:6 (Dr Rose XX).
> 486 S-279 (Matcor Report), p. 8:26.
> 487 SS -3(Mehedi), [105].
> 488 NE 22 September 2021, p. 55:1 -13 (Nasim EIC).
> 489 S-158.
> 490 NE 5 October 2021, p. 66:1 -9 (Dr Salim EIC); NE 6 October 2021, p p. 145:15 -146:3 (Dr
> Rose XX) .
> 491 NE 24 September 2021, p. 37:1 -21 (Chua XD EIC); NE 27 September 2021, p. 98:15 -20
> (Chua XD XX).

128 

objective videographic evidence clearly shows). In relation to the photo graph of the 

fire on 12 February 2021 sent by Marimuthu to Chua XD, 492 Maj Huang also 

commented that the outward directio n of the fire indicated that it was caused by 

pressure inside the oil jacket. 493 

233 When asked what the presence of cracks show about the pressures reached 

in the oil jacket, Mr Shandro succinctly commented that as pressure increases and 

the welded joints are working in tension, there would be some voids created by the 

tensile stress, linking together to form cracks. 494 Mr Shandro also opined that after 

the repairs in February 2021, these cracks may have been welded closed, but this 

resulted in the pressures alw ays being high 495 from the boiling/cracking/evaporation 

of the thermic oil, which was sufficient to cause the rupture of the oil jacket on its 

own. 496 

(vi) DISCOLOURATION OF THE MIXER MACHINE 

234 Finally, there was paint discolouration at the lower parts of the Mixer 

Machine, which according to Dr Rose, would reflect that the air within the oil jacket      

> 492 S-63.
> 493 NE 7 October 2021, pp. 100:10 -103:10 (Maj Huang EIC).
> 494 NE 4 October 2021, p. 109:19 -24 (Matcor Re -ex).
> 495 NE 4 October 2021, pp. 50:18 -51:15 (Matcor EIC).
> 496 NE 4 October 2021, p. 77:16 -20 (Matcor EIC).

129 

was at least 333℃. 497 He also agreed that the location where the paint 

discolouration took place would reflect where temperatures of 333℃ and above 

were reached within th e Mixer Machine. 498 

235 When shown the photograph  Imam took of the oil jacket on 28 September 

2020 (see [ 100 ] above), 499  Dr Rose agreed that there was already discolouration of 

the paint by then, and agreed that the inside of the oil jacket must have reached such 

temperatures by then. 500 This is an ind ication that the temperatures reached within 

the oil jacket exceeded the temperature at which there would have been significant 

boiling /evaporation /cracking of the thermic oil, and this was already the case by 28 

September 2020, almost half a year before t he explosion. 

236 As seen above, there were multiple signs that the Mixer Machine was 

operating at high temperatures and pressures throughout its lifespan, namely: (a) 

rapid wearing out of gaskets; (b) colour of used thermic oil and presence of 

sediments; (c) presence of wh ite smoke emanating from the oil jacket; (d) boiling 

sounds during operation; (e) cracks on weld joints of the Mixer Machine; and (f) 

paint discolouration on the Mixer Machine. While each of these signs could 

possibly be explained away via other means, cum ulatively they point to the     

> 497 NE 6 October 20 21, p. 93:9 -20 (Dr Rose XX).
> 498 NE 6 October 2021, p. 94:11 -22 (Dr Rose XX).
> 499 S-52.
> 500 NE 6 October 2021, pp. 94:23 -95:22 (Dr Rose XX).

130 

conclusion that the Mixer Machine was subject to temperature and pressure stresses 

far beyond its operating capacity. The physical rupture of the oil jacket on 24 

February 2021 is consistent with this conclusion. 

(b) A physical rupt ure of the oil jacket is consistent with the 

investigations conducted by Matcor and its implications 

237 The Matcor Report yields findings in three additional areas which lend 

credence to the position that there was a physical rupture of the oil jacket arising 

from high temperatures and build -up of pressures over time – namely, (a) oil jacket 

levels over time, (b) the dimples found within the welds, and (c) grain growth being 

detected on the used heating elements. Each of these will be addressed in turn. 

(i) OIL LE VELS 

238 First, based on the purchase history of thermic oil, 501 and the dimensions of 

the Mixer Machine as measured, Matcor had created a 3D Model of the Mixer 

Machine, to calculate the oil fill levels for different amounts of thermic oil, as 

shown at Appendix G and Table 4 502 of the Matcor Report. We elaborate on the 

various oil fill levels of the Mixer Machine throughout its operating life at [ 311 ]-

[321 ] below.       

> 501 See Section III ab ove .
> 502 S-279 (Matcor Report) , p. 23.

131 

239 For now, we would simply observe that the oil fill level at any point i n time 

could not have been more than 160L, and this would have been insufficient for good 

heat conduction. Even if we were to assume that there was no loss of thermic oil 

(ie , there were 160 L of thermic oil in the oil jacket) at the time of the explosion, the 

thermic oil still would not have been in contact with the W -shaped base of the 

mixing chamber of the Mixer Machine. 503 As explained by Mr Shandro, when the 

level of thermic oil was low, heat transfer would be through the air that is between 

the oil leve l and the bottom of the W -shaped mixing chamber, and air is a very bad 

conductor. 504 This would require the equipment to heat up a lot, and the oil would 

have been overheated, before the temperatures required in the mixing chamber were 

reached via convectio n taking place. 505 

240 Consequently, the thermic oil within the oil jacket would therefore have 

been overheated throughout the entire period of operation of the Mixer Machine, 

resulting in the pressures within the sealed oil jacket being correspondingly high a s

well. 

241 Hawkins was aware of the purchase history of the thermic oil, as this was 

reflected in the Hawkins Report at [2.4.2] 506 and [3.5]. 507 Hawkins was also given      

> 503 NE 4 October 2021, p. 73:16 -24 (Matcor EIC).
> 504 NE 4 October 2021, p. 73:1 -5 (Matcor EIC).
> 505 NE 4 October 2021, p. 73:5 -11, p. 75:3 -10 (Matcor EIC).
> 506 ST -1 (Hawkins Report), p. 11.
> 507 ST -1 (Hawkins Report), p. 20.

132 

the 3D modelling for some of the oil levels on 6 July 2020 via email .508 However, 

Hawkins failed to account for the actual oil levels (which it could have objectively 

derived ) in its opinion – it asserted that the oil level within the oil jacket would 

nominally be about 300mm above the base of the mixing chamber and that the 

heaters would be fully submerged within normal conditions .509 When asked to 

explain this, Dr Rose accepted that the oil levels were as modelled by Matcor, and 

could only say that the precise difference in temperatures between the surface of 

the thermic oil a nd the mixing chamber depends on the clearance levels in 

between .510 It is evident that the part of Hawkins’ opinion which asserts that the 

operating temperatures within the oil jacket were lower than the boiling point of 

water within the mixing chamber 511 must be rejected. 

(ii) DIMPLES ON WELDS 

242 Matcor had conducted macroscopic, metallographic /microscopic and 

fractographic examination on the welds of the Mixer Machine. The fractographic 

examination revealed that the Mixer Machine was subject to high pressures for an 

extended period. This is consistent with the position that the Mixer Machine had 

ruptured physically, and is inconsistent with Hawkins’ view that it was an       

> 508 S-289 (MOM’s Investigation Report) , pp. 115, 132 -137.
> 509 ST -1 (Hawkins Report), [5.4].
> 510 NE 6 October 2020, p. 96:13 -24 (Dr Rose XX).
> 511 ST -1 (Hawkins Report), [6.1.4] and [6.1.10].

133 

instantaneous chemical explosion which ruptured the oil jacket of the Mixer 

Machine. 

243 The fractogr aphic examination of the welds showed that there were both 

equiaxed and elongated dimples on the fracture surfaces, 512 which reveal how the 

Mixer Machine had ruptured. As stated in the Matcor Report, the high pressure had 

resulted in the deformation of the wall, void nucleation and cracks, as evidenced by 

the equiaxed dimples which were perpendicular to the fracture surface. The final 

rupture was evidenced by the elongated dimples which were adjacent to the external 

side. 513 Mr Shandro further explained that these dimples show that at the beginning 

there was just tensile stress applied on the part that was under pressure, which 

created some voids and reduced the “section” of welds, such that with time and 

overpressure the explosion took place. 514 

244 This runs dir ectly counter to Hawkins’ position that it was an instantaneous 

chemical explosion which caused the rupture of the Mixer Machine, as the equiaxed 

dimples would not have been observed if that was so. The photographs showing the 

presence of equiaxed and elon gated dimples had been provided to Hawkins on 1 

June 2021, even before Hawkins asked to inspect the Mixer Machine and conduct      

> 512 S-279 (Matcor Report) , pp. 14:26 -15:22.
> 513 S-279 (Matcor Report) , pp. 14:26 -15:22.
> 514 NE 4 October 2021, pp. 118:15 -119:6 (Matcor, questions from IC).

134 

tests on it. 515 Dr Rose acknowledged after extensive questioning that this was out 

of his area of expertise, and he was prepared to accept Mr Shandro’s opinion, as Mr 

Shandro is a materials scientist. 516 

245 The detailed examinations by Matcor on the welds therefore show that the 

Mixer Machine was subject to high pressures over time resulting in the Mixer 

Machine eventually giving way physically, which was not challenged by Hawkins. 

(iii) GRAIN GROWTH ON THE USED HEATING ELEMENTS 

246 The presence of grain growth on the used heating elements, as well as 

another heating element retrieved from the Tuas Site, when compared to new 

heating elements, al so supports the position that the oil jacket was operating under 

very high temperatures during operation. 

247 As explained by Mr Ng, grain growth takes place whenever low carbon 

steels are heated to temperatures beyond 700℃, with time, so that austenite grains 

are observed. 517 Mr Shandro added that it is not possible for grain growth to just 

take place in the course of one explosion as was observed on 24 February 2021, as 

it is a long process which happens when low carbon steels are heated for a long     

> 515 S-289 (MOM’s Investigation Report) , pp. 48, 99 -103.
> 516 NE 6 October 2021, pp. 150:13 -151: 9 (Dr Rose XX).
> 517 NE 4 October 2021, pp. 61:9 -62:20 (Matcor EIC).

135 

time. Grain growth is therefore an indication of the high temperatures at which the 

heaters were operati ng .518 

248 Matcor had examined Heaters No. 2, 5, and 8 from the Mixer Machine, 

another heater which was found on site with blisters which was handed to MOM by 

Chua XD on 31 May 2021, 519 and a new/unused spare heater. Heater No. 2 was 

chosen as there was an earlier fire involving it on 24 February 2021, whilst Heaters 

No. 5 and 8 were chosen to reflect one heater from each group of three heaters 

controlled by a different switch, and to give a good sampling size of 33 percent of 

the number of heaters in operation. 520 

249 Matcor found that the average grain size in the new/unused spare heater was 

smaller, at ASTM numbers 9 to 10. 521 In contrast, Heaters No. 2, 5 and 8 had shown 

av erage grain sizes which were larger, between ASTM numbers 0 and 5. 522 The 

difference in grain sizes showed that there was grain growth taking place, where 

Heaters No. 2, 5, and 8 had been exposed to temperatures above 700℃, such that 

the grain sizes in the used heaters were larger than those in the new/unused spare 

heater. 523 Also, when a heater was bolted into the oil jacket, some of its metal tubes         

> 518 NE 4 October 2021, pp. 63:11 -64:8 (Matcor EIC).
> 519 SS -6 (Chua XD), [230].
> 520 NE 4 October 2021, pp. 60:3 -61:8 (Matcor EIC).
> 521 S-279 (Matcor Report) , p. 19:13 -14.
> 522 S-279 (Matcor Report) , p. 19:23 -41.
> 523 NE 4 October 2021, pp. 64:9 -65:9 (Matcor EIC).

136 

would be in a higher position (from the base of the oil jacket) relative to other metal 

tubes of that heater. As the metal tubes higher up in Heater s No. 2 and 8 generally 

showed larger grain sizes than those which were lower, it meant that the metal tubes 

higher up in each heater likely sustained higher heating temperatures than those 

located lower down. 524 

250 Simila rly, the average grain size for the heater with blisters was found to be 

between ASTM numbers 3 and 4, which show s that it had been used and had 

experienced grain growth. 525 

251 Matcor had then correlated the grain sizes found on the used heaters with a 

table exhibited at page 25 of the Matcor Report. This exercise showed that the 

heaters had been exposed to temperatures from 830℃ to 1095℃ previously. 526 

Such temperatures were far above the recommended operating temperatures of the 

Mixer Machine, which were stat ed as between 70℃ and 160℃ in its User Guide. 

They were also far in excess of the design temperature of 200℃ .527 This definitively 

shows that the heaters, and by connection the thermic oil, were exposed to 

temperatures far beyond its operating capacity, and this would have resulted in the 

boiling/evaporation/cracking of the thermic oil within the oil jacket.        

> 524 S-279 (Matcor Report) , p. 19:42 -46.
> 525 S-279 (Matcor Report) , p. 20:4 -8.
> 526 S-279 (Matcor Report) , p. 25.
> 527 S-271, p. 4, Section Eight.

137 

252 Matcor’s photographs showing grain growth were shared with Hawkins 

through Stars’ counsel on 6 July 2021. 528 Dr Rose stated that he did not dispute 

these findings but asserted that heaters we re meant to get hot, 529 and made no effort 

to compare the design temperature of the oil jacket with the temperatures reflected 

by the grain growth observed on the used heaters in the Hawkins Report. Dr Rose 

acknowledged that he is not a materials scientist or metallurgist, and Mr Graham 

Cooper, who was one, may not have had the opportunity to review the photographs 

showing grain growth in detail. 530 Hawkins had evidently not taken grain growth in 

the heaters into account in their opinion. The assertion that the Mixer Machine was 

operating within its designed operating temperature before 24 February 2021 531 

should therefore be rejected. 

(c) A physical rupture of the oil jacket is consistent with the 

calculations on the temperature and pressure inside the oil jacket, 

and with observations on the strength of the welds 

253 To cause the physical rupture of the oil jacket from overpressures within the 

oil jacket, the pressures reached within the oil jacket would need to significantly 

exceed 2 bar, which is the maximum working pressure of the Mixer Machine as      

> 528 S-289 (MOM’s Investigation Repo rt) , pp. 115 -131.
> 529 NE 6 October 2021, pp. 98:21 -100:20 (Dr Rose XX).
> 530 NE 6 October 2021, pp. 140:21 -144:17 (Dr Rose XX).
> 531 ST -1 (Hawkins Report), [2.4.14].

138 

stated in its User Guide. 532 This would require the operating temperatures within 

the oil jacket to exceed 320 -350℃, which are the temperatures beyond which 

significant decomposition of the thermic oil takes place as tested by A*Star. 533 The 

calculations on the temperatures and pressu res which could be attained within the 

oil jacket during operation show that the oil jacket sustained pressures far beyond 

what it was designed to work with. This was exacerbated by the poor quality of the 

repair welding done by Nasim, which reduced the pr essures that the oil jacket could 

withstand. 

254 Finite Element Analysis (“ FEA ”) was performed by Dr Salim, to estimate 

the temperatures reached within the oil jacket when the fill volume of the thermic 

oil was 230L. Based on the assumption of moderate convect ion and 45kW heat 

source , where the mixing chamber of the Mixer Machine wa s filled with liquid 

which was not agitated, the maximum temperature reached by the thermic oil within 

the oil jacket ranged between 427℃ and 714℃ .534 This would already have been 

suf ficient for the thermic oil to undergo decomposition. 

255 As explained further in Dr Salim’s Report, the conditions when the actual 

176L of water was heated in the mixing chamber of the Mixer Machine fell within 

the FEA modelling range of 5 to 500 W/m 2K, such that the temperatures of 427℃       

> 532 S-271, p. 4, Section Eight.
> 533 S-283 (Dr Salim’s Report), pp. 29 -32.
> 534 S-283 (Dr Salim’s Report) , p. 23:14 -18.

139 

to 714℃ could be taken as a reasonable base -case representation. The presence of 

insulation on the external surfaces of the Mixer Machine, and the actual levels of 

thermic oil used being far below 230L at all times, would have resulted in the 

temperatures of the thermic oil being higher than the base -case, which could result 

in phase changes and potential decomposition of the thermic oil. 535 

256 The consequences of operating the Mixer Machine while the temperatures 

of the thermic oi l were above 427℃ to 714℃ are severe. As shown in Figure 11 of 

Dr Salim’s Report, when the temperature was held at 350℃ during one of the test 

runs, the pressure increased from 2 bar to 6 bar, which is already one to three times 

the maximum working pressur e of the Mixer Machine. When the experimental 

temperature was extended to 450℃, which is at the lower range of the base -case 

representations without accounting for the presence of insulation and low fill levels 

of thermic oil, the pressure exponentially in creased to 103 bar, which resulted in 

the termination of the experiment for safety reasons. 536 

257 It is evident that the Mixer Machine was not designed to be operated at 

pressures above 100 bar, which would be 50 times its maximum working pressure. 

258 This was c ompounded by the welds being weakened by the poor quality of 

the repair welds by Nasim. The macroscopic analysis by Matcor showed that the     

> 535 S-283 (Dr Salim’s Report) , pp. 25:14 -26:4.
> 536 S-283 (Dr Salim’s Report) , pp. 30 and 31.

140 

repair welds had weld caps that were uneven in appearance and without the paint 

coating. 537 Mr Shandro stated that the repair welds were not of good quality, and 

that they were not uniform to the naked eye. 538 He further explained that the speed 

of movement of the electrode, 539 weld procedures and cleanliness of surface, 540 

quality of weld metal an d filler metal 541 were factors which could affect the quality 

of welding. He opined that the poor quality of repairs in this case was due to there 

being no preparation, with the repair welds being done over the existing welds 

without cleaning. 542 This is con sistent with what Nasim admitted during the Inquiry 

hearing , in that he had merely removed the paint before conducting welding without 

removing the weld metal, 543 and he was aware that proper preparation of the area 

to be welded by cleaning and grinding was key to ensuring smooth and even 

welding. 544 

259 The microscopic/metallographic examination confirmed that the repair 

welds were of poor quality, with cracks, porosities and discontinuities at multiple 

locations. 545 This reduced the integrity and strength of the oil jacket, as the presence              

> 537 S-279 (Matcor Report) , p. 8:22 -27.
> 538 NE 4 October 2021, p. 34:19 -20 (Matcor EIC).
> 539 NE 4 October 2021, p. 34:23 -24 (Matcor EIC).
> 540 NE 4 October 2021, p. 36:16 -17 (Matcor EIC) .
> 541 NE 4 October 2021, p. 36:17 -18 (Matcor EIC).
> 542 NE 4 October 2021, p. 37:13 -22 (Matcor EIC).
> 543 NE 22 September 2021, p. 61:11 -17 (Nasim EIC).
> 544 SS -4 (Nasim), [6].
> 545 S-279 (Matcor Report) , p p. 17:1 -18:33.

141 

of weld porosities and poor weld roots act as stress raisers and promoted 

cracking. 546 Mr Shandro also explained that the resistance of the weld overall would 

be affected by having the repair welds over the original welding, as the structure of 

the weld would have been modified and coarsened with gross grains, such that this 

affects the hardness and resistance of the welding material. 547 Nasim agreed that his 

welds were not of good quality, after being shown the microscopic examin ation 

photographs within the Matcor Report. 548 While there were porosities found in the 

original welding as well, there was no opinion that the original welds were poor in 

quality 549 by either Matcor or Hawkins in their reports. There is also a distinct 

diff erence in the number of cracks, discontinuities and voids between the original 

and the repair welds as shown in the Matcor Report. 

260 In contrast, while the Hawkins Report stated that the repair welds were of 

poor quality visually, 550 Hawkins asserted that th e welding repairs did not have an 

effect, as the oil jacket had failed along the original welded joints, 551 without 

accounting for the effect of the poor repairs on the strength of the welds as a whole. 

It is evident that Hawkins’ focus was on whether the o il jacket ruptured at a different        

> 546 S-279 (Matcor Report) , p. 27:4 -10.
> 547 NE 4 October 2021, p. 40:5 -16 (Matcor EIC).
> 548 NE 22 September 2021, p. 68:2 -6 (Nasim EIC).
> 549 NE 4 October 2021, p. 84:2 -8 (Matcor XX).
> 550 ST -1 (Hawkins Report), [5.2].
> 551 ST -1 (H awkins Report), [6.4.1].

142 

location due to the repairs, than on whether the strength of the welds w as affected 

by the repairs done. 

261 The quantitative effect of having weak welds is significant . Mr Shandro had 

calculated that based on the resistance o f the area, and the strength of the material 

of the Mixer Machine which was low carbon steel, the pressure limit with poor 

quality welds would only be half of when there were good weldings. 552 This would 

have reduced the maximum working pressure of the Mixer Machine to 1 bar, which 

is atmospheric pressure, and the possible pressures reached being more than 100 

times that of the pressures the Mixer Machine could sustain. 

262 In such operating environments, it is not surprising that the eventual 

outcome was the physical rupture of the oil jacket along its welds, which were 

comparatively weaker than the rest of the Mixer Machine. 

263 When confronted with the pressures which could be reached at the 

temperatures which the thermic oil were subject to within the oil jacket, Dr Rose 

made the bare assertion that he did not know the details of the tests so that he could 

not replicate them if he wanted to, and claimed that there were gaps in the ava ilable 

information such as the condition of the thermic oil tested. 553 After it was pointed 

out to Dr Rose that the test runs were conducted on fresh thermic oil, and that the   

> 552 NE 4 October 2021, pp. 45:23 -46:16 (Matcor XX).
> 553 NE 6 October 2021, pp. 106:8 -107:24 (Dr Rose EIC).

143 

SDT tests were conducted on both fresh thermic oil and thermic oil samples 

retrie ved from the Tuas Site, he qualified his acknowledgement of the pressure 

trends observed during the test runs by stating that this was obtained using the test 

conditions in the test equipment. 554 He eventually acknowledged that at the 

temperature of 350℃, w hich would be below the base -case representation of the 

temperatures within the oil jacket, that decomposition of the thermic oil would have 

taken place, such that there would be pressure build -up. 555 

(d) A physical rupture of the oil jacket is consistent with there being 

insufficient oxygen for a chemical explosion within the oil jacket 

264 For a fire to take place, all three elements of the fire triangle need to be 

satisfied – namely, there must be sufficient fuel, oxygen, and heat. 556 However, 

there was insufficie nt oxygen within the sealed oil jacket, such that it was 

impossible for a chemical explosion to have taken place within it. 

265 As shown in Dr Salim’s Addendum quantitatively, assuming that there was 

no thermic oil in the oil jacket, the volume of air inside t he oil jacket would have 

been around 300L, which yields the amount of oxygen available for combustion as 

around 0.0026 mol. 557 If the TNT -equivalent approach was used in estimating the     

> 554 NE 6 October 2021, p. 108:13 -24 (Dr Rose XX).
> 555 NE 6 October 2021, pp. 108:25 -109:23 (Dr Rose XX).
> 556 NE 5 October 2021, p. 127:6 -11 (Dr Salim Re -ex).
> 557 S-283A (Dr Salim’s Addendum), p. 2:5 -15.

144 

amount of oxygen required for alkanes with between 5 and 40 carbon atoms , beyond 

which the hydrocarbon would likely be in a solid state at room temperature, the 

minimum amount of oxygen required, which would be for the incomplete 

combustion of C40 hydrocarbons to carbon, would be 0.0119 mol, almost five times 

the amount of oxy gen present in the completely empty oil jacket. 558 Using the oil 

mist concentration method to estimate the minimum amount of oxygen required for 

combustion yields a similar result of 0.0109 mol for the incomplete combustion of 

C40 hydrocarbons to carbon, wh ich is also more than four times the amount of 

oxygen present in the completely empty oil jacket. 559 

266 This was confirmed by Maj Huang qualitatively as well. He explained that 

under normal conditions, before the rupture of the oil jacket, everything was seale d

and intact, and oxygen would have been a limiting factor for combustion. 560 He 

further explained that oxygen is always critical in supporting combustion, such that 

combustion would not have taken place if any of the elements was a limiting factor 

or was n ot in the correct proportion. 561 Once the oil jacket has ruptured, oxygen 

would then be introduced to the environment, facilitating combustion. 562      

> 558 S-283A (Dr Salim’s Addendum), p. 5.
> 559 S-283A (Dr Salim’s Addendum), p. 8.
> 560 NE 7 October 2021, pp. 73:23 -74:11; pp. 91:16 -92:7 (Maj Huang EIC).
> 561 NE 7 Octob er 2021, pp. 94:23 -95:1 (Maj Huang EIC).
> 562 NE 7 October 2021, p. 95:2 -6 (Maj Huang EIC).

145 

267 When asked to comment on the calculations, Dr Rose made the sweeping 

statement that the calculations done were “gross oversimplifications ”.563 He 

claimed that only sufficient burning was required to rupture the vessel, and the rest 

of the overpressures generated could have taken place outside after the oil jacket 

ruptured. 564 He also claimed , disingenuously, that the re was “ no difference ”

whether the chemical explosion occurred inside and/or outside the oil jacket as the 

bottom line was that the oil level was low. 565 He acknowledged that he had not done 

any modelling or calculations in coming to this position, instead relying on an 

example of a fire involving a gearbox in a warship which purportedly had a very 

small enclosure about the size of the oil jacket 566 to asse rt that combustion was 

possible within the oil jacket. He eventually capitulated, saying that he had not 

thought that the amount of oxygen present in the oil jacket would be a contentious 

issue .567 This excuse is difficult to comprehend when the presence of sufficient 

oxygen is one of the elements required for combustion to occur. 

268 In contrast, a physical rupture of the oil jacket does not require any oxygen 

to be present: the evaporation/boiling/thermal decomposition of the thermic oil does 

not require oxyge n to be present, merely requiring heat and the presence of thermic       

> 563 NE 6 October 2021, p. 65:17 -18 (Dr Rose EIC).
> 564 NE 6 October 2021, p. 66:10 -19 (Dr Rose EIC).
> 565 NE 6 October 2021, p. 66:20 -24 (Dr Rose EIC).
> 566 NE 6 October 2021, p. 138:1 -11 (Dr Rose EIC).
> 567 NE 6 October 2021, p. 139:1 -9 (Dr Rose XX).

146 

oil, both of which were present in abundance within the oil jacket when the Mixer 

Machine was in operation. The low level of oxygen within the oil jacket is therefore 

a factor which strengt hens the position that it was a physical rupture of the oil jacket 

caused by the build -up of pressure, and militates against the position that it was a 

chemical explosion taking place within the oil jacket. 

(e) Hawkins’ theory that a chemical explosion within the oil jacket 

caused its rupture rests on speculation that the heating elements 

were exposed within the oil jacket on 24 February 2021 and 

further, on the flawed assumption that that was the only occasion 

they were so exposed 

269 An essential plank of the Haw kins opinion (that a chemical explosion inside 

the oil jacket caused its rupture) is that the heating elements were exposed within 

the oil jacket on 24 February 2021, and further, that that was the only occasion on 

which the heaters were so exposed. 

270 As st ated in the Hawkins Report, a fire inside the oil jacket would occur 

only if the oil level were low and the heating elements exposed (even partly) to the 

air. 568 As confirmed by Dr Rose during the Inquiry hearing, his theory would  

> 568 ST -1 (Hawkins Report), [6.1.11] -[6.1.12].

147 

require one or more of the heaters to be glowing red hot, which requires oil levels 

to be too low such that the heaters were exposed. 569 

271 Going by Hawkins’ theory, however, it would mean that there was the 

possibility of a chemical explosion within the Mixer Machine whenever the heaters 

were exposed such that they could glow red hot. Seeking to exclude this possibility, 

it was asserted in the Hawkins Report that the oil level within the oil jacket would 

“nominally be about 300 mm above the base of the mixing chamber ” and that “the 

heaters would be fully submerged under normal conditions ”.570 

272 It was also postulated that there was an oil leak at Heater No. 2 on 24 

February 2021, caused by the fire earlier that morning, or that oil had leaked out 

from the flange of Heater No. 1 due to the removal of two nuts from it prior to the 

Accident, such th at the oil levels dropped sufficiently to partially expose the heating 

elements as an ignition source within the oil jacket, only right before the Accident 

on 24 February 2021. 

273 Hawkins’ theory is however not in line with the oil levels within the Mixer 

Mac hine over time (see [ 316 ]-[318 ] below).   

> 569 NE 6 October 2021, p. 35:6 -12 (Dr Rose EIC).
> 570 ST -1 (Hawkins Report), [5.4].

148 

274 Wh en asked for an explanation on why the Mixer Machine did not rupture 

between 16 June 2020 to 8 August 2020 when only 40L of oil were used, Dr Rose 

claimed that the oil level was so low that it did not get “super -heated”, 571 and that 

the situation on 24 Febr uary 2021 was different as part of the heaters were exposed 

while part of the heaters were submerged, 572 such that Stars “ just got lucky ” between 

16 June 2020 to 8 August 2020. 573 However, this explanation would not pass muster 

for the period after 8 August 202 0, when 3 buckets of fresh thermic oil were added 

to the 1½ buckets of thermic oil drained from the Mixer Machine, making 90L of 

thermic oil within the oil jacket, and someti me after, when at least 10L from the 

fourth bucket of thermic oil was added (see [ 88 ]-[89 ] above). During this period, 

based on professional modelling done by Matcor, part of the heater coils would still 

have been exposed, and there would have been sufficient oil to be in contact with 

the heating elements directly as well. 574 Such a situation would have been identical 

to what was speculated by Hawkins to have caused the chemical explosion within 

the oil jacket on 24 February 2021. There is no satisfactory explanation for why the 

explosion did not ta ke place any earlier on Hawkins’ theory. 

275 Second, the loss of significant amounts of thermic oil on 24 February 2021 

itself is highly speculative, and not in line with what was observed at the Tuas Site.     

> 571 NE 6 October 2021, p. 154:8 -13 (Dr Ros e XX).
> 572 NE 6 October 2021, p. 154:14 -18 (Dr Rose XX).
> 573 NE 6 October 2021, p. 155:2 -13 (Dr Rose XX).
> 574 S-279 (Matcor Report), pp. 160 -161.

149 

As explained by Mr Shandro, the lustrous rings around the two rightmost bolts on 

Heater No. 1 suggest that the two nuts were only removed after the Accident on 24 

February 2021. This is confirmed by the photograph at S -84, which was taken of 

Heater No. 1 on 24 February 2021, which showed that the two bolts i n question 

were still there when the MOM first responders attended at the Tuas Site. 575 Upon 

questioning, Dr Rose finally acknowledged that it did not look that possible that 

such significant amounts of thermic oil would have leaked out from Heater No. 2 

af ter the first fire on 24 February 2021. 576 Dr Rose was left to suggest that the 

amount of oil used was less than 120L to begin with .577 

276 As such, the evidence does not support Hawkins’ position that there were 

significant leakages and the heating coils were only exposed on 24 February 2021, 

resulting in the chemical explosion within the oil jacket. This further bolsters the 

position that it is a physical rupture of the oil jacket, with the weakening of the 

welds over time caused by the increased pressures wit hin the oil jacket which was 

operated as a closed system.    

> 575 NE 4 October 2021, pp. 74:11 -76:24 (Matcor EIC).
> 576 NE 6 October 2021, p. 134:4 -8 (Dr Rose XX).
> 577 NE 6 Octobe r 2021, p. 133:11 -22 (Dr Rose XX).

150 

(f) A physical rupture of the oil jacket was capable of taking place 

regardless whether the Mixer Machine was actually in operation at 

the point of the Accident 

277 Finally, the physical rupture of the oil jacket could have taken place on 24 

February 2021, even if the Mixer Machine was not in operation at the point of the 

Accident. This is unlike a chemical explosion within the oil jacket, which Dr Rose 

indicated was premised on the Mixer Machine being turne d on again after the first 

instance when it was turned off at 8:40am, 578 such that the heaters were red hot 

during operation. 

278 No such difficulty arises with the physical rupture of the oil jacket due to 

pressure build -up. Such physical rupture of the oil jacket could take place as long 

as the thermic oil was heated to temperatures beyond 320℃ for some time, such 

that there is dec omposition of the thermic oil resulting in a great increase in the 

pressures within the oil jacket. 579 As explained by Dr Salim, the decomposition of 

the thermic oil used in the oil jacket was a net exothermic reaction .580 Once the 

temperature for onset of d ecomposition of the oil was exceeded, a certain amount 

of heat would be released, and that heat can then be used by the reaction itself to    

> 578 NE 6 October 2021, p. 198:9 -14 (Dr Rose, questions from IC).
> 579 NE 5 October 2021, pp. 45:13 -46:25 (Dr Salim EIC).
> 580 NE 5 October 2021, pp. 54:24 -56:6 (Dr Salim EIC); see also Appendix D of S -273.

151 

break more bonds and crack more or decompose more molecules ,581 so the oil jacket 

may not cool down and reduce in pres sure that quickly after the heaters were turned 

off. Additionally, even after the oil jacket cools down, the pressure may not return 

to 1 bar because the lighter fragments created by the decomposition of the thermic 

oil could remain in the gaseous phase. 582 As such, the oil jacket may continue to 

experience increased pressures which would serve to exert stress on the welds of 

the Mixer Machine. 

279 As explained by Mr Shandro, the heating coils would have taken some time 

to cool down on 24 February 2021 as well , and there was insulation installed on the 

Mixer Machine, such that the pressures attained during the operation of the Mixer 

Machine before 8:40am could be maintained at almost the same level. 583 

280 As stated above at [ 278 ], Dr Salim had explained that the decomposition of 

the thermic oil used in the oil jacket was a net exothermic reaction .584 The 

temperatures reached in the oil jacket during the operation of the oil jacket between 

8:15am and 8:40am on 24 February 2021 would have been bet ween 400 -500℃, 

which was sufficient for decomposition of thermic oil to take place. 585 Even if the 

Mixer Machine was turned off between 8:40am and 11:22am on 24 February 2021        

> 581 NE 5 October 2021, p. 51:5 -18.
> 582 NE 5 October 2021, pp. 50:6 -51:2 (Dr Salim EIC).
> 583 NE 4 October 2021, pp. 133:2 -134:17 (Matcor Re -ex).
> 584 NE 5 October 2021, pp. 54:24 -56:6 (Dr Salim EIC); see also Appendix D of S -273.
> 585 NE 5 October 2021, pp. 70:8 -73:23 (Dr Salim EIC).

152 

when the explosion took place, pressures could continue to increase in the 

intervening period, as long as temperatures were above 320℃, and the 

decomposition of thermi c oil created more heat within the closed system of the oil 

jacket, aided by the presence of insulation on the oil jacket. 586 Such an increase in 

pressure could be significant: as explained by Dr Salim, maintaining the 

temperature at 350℃ during the laborat ory tests conducted resulted in the pressures 

increasing from 2 to 6 bar, 587 which would be three times the working pressure of 

the Mixer Machine. 588 

281 This is important, especially when there is some doubt on whether the 

heating elements in the Mixer Machine were in operation when the Accident took 

place. As rightly observed by the IC, and as we have summarised the evidence at 

[183 ] above, Mehedi stated that he had heard the Mixer Machine’s motor stop for 

a while after the first fire on 24 February 2021, which shows that the Mixer Machine 

was no longer in the mixing mode. 589 In contrast, Lizon stated that he thought the 

Mixer Machine was in operation when the explosion occu rred, Jitu noticed that the 

Mixer Machine was turned on again around 11am, 590 Yousuf said that he heard the      

> 586 NE 5 October 2021, p. 74:2 -24 (Dr Salim EIC).
> 587 NE 5 October 2021, pp. 75:7 -76:18 (Dr Salim EIC).
> 588 S-271, p. 4, Section Eight.
> 589 SS -3 (Mehedi), [130].
> 590 SS -9 (Jitu), [75].

153 

Mixer Machine running before the explosion, whereas Rahad was not even aware 

of any issue concerning the Mixer Machine in the morning of 24 February 2021. 591 

282 Hawkins’ theory requires the heating elements to have been turned on at the 

time of the incident. However, if the Mixer Machine was not in operation at the 

time of the incident, the ignition for a chemical explosion within the oil jacket could 

not have taken place, but a physical rupture of the oil jacket due to built -up pressure 

within could still have happened. This is another reason to find that the physical 

rupture of the oil jacket due to built -up pressure within was the most likely 

mechanism for the weld failures .

(g) Summary of discussion on the physical rupture of the Mixer 

Machine 

283 To summarise the discussion above, what was plainly observable during 

operation of the Mixer Machine, the investigations by Matcor, and the calculations 

on the tempera tures and pressures in the oil jacket , and observations on weld 

strength support the position that the rupture of the Mixer Machine was physical in 

nature, caused by the build -up of pressure in the Mixer Machine due to the 

overheating and decomposition of thermic oil within the oil jacket of the Mixer 

Machine. The low levels of oxygen in the oil jacket, the speculative nature of 

Hawkins’ theory which requires the heating elements to be come exposed only on  

> 591 SS -11 (Rahad), [66].

154 

24 February 2021 after the first fire in the morning , and the need to account for the 

possibility that the Mixer Machine was not in operation when the explosion took 

place, militate against the far -fetched possibility that the rupture of the Mixer 

Machine was caused by a chemical explosion wi thin its oil jacket. The evidence of 

Matcor, Dr Salim and SCDF should therefore be accepted. 

3. The subsequent flash fires were most likely caused by the ignition of the 

potato starch suspended by the initial deflagration 

284 As observed in the CCTV footage retri eved from Alif -E, there were three 

flashes observed some time after the initial deflagration, as summarised in Dr 

Salim’s Report, 592 and referred to in SCDF’s review of the footage: 593 

Timestamp  Event 

Original  Adjusted 

22 -2-21 Mon 

23:17:05 

24 Feb 2021 Wed 

11:23:53 

Flash (Camera 8) 

22 -2-21 Mon 

23:17:45 

24 Feb 2021 Wed 

11:24:33 

Flash (Camera 8) 

22 -2-21 Mon 

23:18:15 

24 Feb 2021 Wed 

11:25:03 

Flash (Camera 7)    

> 592 S-283 (Dr Salim’s Report) , p. 12, Table 1.
> 593 S-288 ( SCDF’s Investigation Report ), pp. 12 -15, Screenshots 24, 31 and 33.

155 

285 Cameras 7 and 8 were located within Unit 32E belonging to Alif -E, as 

shown in Annex H of SCD F’s  Investigation  Report. 594 

(a) Expert s’ positions on the cause of the three flashes 

286 Dr Salim has opined that the flashes were indicative of three flash fires 

without significant overpressures. The fires were likely to be caused by potato 

starch powder found at the Tuas Site, which was the only known combustible 

material 595 present in significant quantities apart from the thermic oil. 596 Dr Salim 

further indicated that the analysis of samples taken from various locations in the 

Tuas Site showed that starch was present in all these samples .597 This pointed to the 

likelihood that significant quantities of potato starch may have accumulated on 

various surfaces throughout the Tuas Site and on the surfaces of the Platform .598 

287 SCDF has opined that these flashes wer e most likely dust cloud explosions 

caused by the ignition of potato starch powder that was suspended in the air after 

the rupture of the Mixer Machine and the initial fire, as there were no other          

> 594 S-288 ( SCDF’s Investigation Report ), Annex H, p. H -3.
> 595 S-283 (Dr Salim’s Report) , p. 45.
> 596 S-283 (Dr Salim’s Report) , p. 13:6 -11.
> 597 S-283 (Dr Salim’s Report) , p. 49, Table 10.
> 598 S-283 (Dr Salim’s Report) , p. 51:20 -24.

156 

competent fuels within the vicinity which could have result ed in the flash 

fires /explosions seen. 599 

288 Hawkins initially indicated that there was no evidence that there had been 

multiple explosions, 600 though this was before Dr Rose had an opportunity to see 

the CCTV footages from Alif -E. Dr Rose asserted that there was no evidence to 

suggest that there was an accumulation of dust inside the unit, and that horizontal 

surfaces and inaccessible areas /corn ers inside the Tuas Site were free from 

significant deposits 601 during Hawkins’ inspection of the Tuas Site on 15 March 

2021. 602 Photographs 7 to 9 in the Hawkins Report were produced to support the 

position that the production area at the Tuas Site was gene rally dust -free. 603 

289 During the Inquiry hearing , Dr Rose stated that the flashes were indicative 

of ignition of smoke plume s instead. 604 Dr Rose explained that oils and heavy 

hydrocarbons are difficult to burn till completion, and the resultant smoke plume 

co uld be 500℃ and above. 605 The turbulence could result in pockets of air and fuel        

> 599 S-288 ( SCDF’s Investigation Report ), p. 19, [8(o)].
> 600 ST -1 (Hawkins Report), [6.1.1].
> 601 ST -1 (Hawkins Report), [4.3.5].
> 602 ST -1 (Hawkins Report), [1.5].
> 603 ST -1.
> 604 NE 6 October 2021, p. 70:10 -11 (Dr Rose EIC).
> 605 NE 6 October 2021, p. 70:17 -23 (Dr Rose EIC).

157 

mixture which are perfect for combustion, resulting in localised combustion of the 

smoke plumes within Alif -E’s unit. 606 

290 The IC should find that the flash fires were most likely caused by the 

ignition of potato starch from the Tuas Site, for the following reasons: 

(a) This is consistent with the lack of proper practices for dealing with 

combustible dusts at the Tuas Site workshop; 

(b) There was potato starch found in all the samples anal ysed after the 

incident; and 

(c) The ignition of smoke plumes from the incomplete combustion of 

the thermic oil is speculative and not in line with Maj Huang’s experience. 

(b) The lack of proper practices for combustible dusts at the Tuas Site 

created pockets of p otato starch to be ignited 

291 SS667: “The Code of Practice for the handling, storage and processing of 

combustible dust” (“ SS 667 ”) states that dust flash fire or explosion hazards exists 

in areas where the dust accumulation is greater than 0.8mm in depth. 607    

> 606 NE 6 October 2021, pp. 70:24 -71:16 (Dr Rose EIC).
> 607 S-283 (Dr Salim’s Report) , p. 46:11 -13.

158 

292 There was a lack of proper dust -control measures and practices 

implemented at the Tuas Site workshop. In particular, the exhaust ventilation 

deployed at the workshop was woefully inadequate to deal with dust, and the 

workers’ housekeeping routine, which pr imarily involved sweeping with brooms 

and using an air compressor gun to spray dust off table -tops and surfaces, would 

have tended to create more dispersion s of dust particles. 608 The inadequacy of the 

ventilation measures at the Tuas Site and the housekeep ing practices which were 

not suitable for dust control gave rise to ample opportunit ies for pockets of potato 

starch to accumulate, such that it became a flash fire or explosion hazard. We return 

to this at [ 409 ]-[411 ] below. 

(c) The presence of potato starch in the samples analysed after the 

incident 

293 As stated above at [ 286 ], the analysis of samples taken from various 

locations in the Tuas Site showed that starch was present in all these samples .609 

This pointed to the likelihood that significant quantities of pot ato starch may have 

accumulated on various surfaces throughout the Tuas Site and on the surfaces of 

the Platform. 610      

> 608 S-233, p. 2.
> 609 S-283 (Dr Salim’s Report) , p. 49, Table 10.
> 610 S-283 (Dr Salim’s Report) , p. 51:20 -24.

159 

294 Dr Rose has attempted to minimise the relevance of these analyses, in 

stating that he had not seen accumulations of dust during his site vis it, 

notwithstanding the fact that there were piles of powdery substances throughout the 

Tuas Site. Dr Rose has also asserted that evidence of dust should be taken from 

“nooks and crannies ” further away from the areas affected by the explosion, 611 as 

the gen eral surfaces would be affected by sprinklers and subsequent human 

traffic. 612 

295 MOM and Dr Salim had in fact taken this into account, in the choice of 

locations to take samples from. As explained by Ms Lim, one of the samples was 

taken from an area right out side the toilet of the Tuas Site, underneath a pallet. 613 

This was because this was an area which would be untouched by people, and largely 

unaffected by firefighting responses, hence satisfying the criterion of being a “ nook 

and cranny ” in Dr Rose’s words. 614 

296 Ms Lim confirmed that starch was found in this sample collected ,615 and that 

the starch found at this location would have reflected the starch being there before 

the Accident , and not disturbed by subsequent post -Accident measures taken .616 Ms        

> 611 NE 6 October 2021, p. 17:1 -18:3 (Dr Rose EIC).
> 612 NE 6 October 2021, p. 170:10 -171:15 (Dr Rose EIC).
> 613 S-289 (MOM’s Investigation Report) , p. 30.
> 614 NE 7 October 202 1, p. 121:12 -21 (Ms Lim EIC).
> 615 NE 7 October 2021, p. 121:16 -24 (Ms Lim EIC).
> 616 NE 7 October 2021, pp. 122:24 -124 -7 (Ms Lim EIC).

160 

Lim further opined that the presence of starch in all the samples taken, as shown in 

Table 10 of Dr Salim’s Report ,617 even after the fire (which would have consumed 

starch) , and after firefighting efforts, reflects th at there was clearly potato starch 

pres ent around the workshop prior to the Accident. 618 

(d) The ignition of smoke plumes from the incomplete combustion of 

the thermic oil is speculative and not in line with Maj Huang’s 

experience 

297 Finally, the ignition of smoke plumes from the incomplete combustion of 

thermic oil is highly speculative, and not in line with the experience of Maj Huang 

in dealing with industrial fires. 

298 As explained by Dr Salim, while it was potentially possible for smoke 

plumes to ignite, 619 there was no evidence or data to support the ignition of smoke 

plumes during the Accident, as one does not know the composition of the smoke 

plumes, such that he would be speculating. 620 There wa s no sample available, and 

no information on the amount, and the duration of materials in the smoke plume f or 

him to make a conclusive determination on whether it was likely for the smoke       

> 617 S-283 (Dr Salim’s Report) , p. 49.
> 618 NE 7 October 2021, p. 122:5 -19 (Ms Lim EIC).
> 619 NE 5 October 2021, pp. 126:24 -127:2 (Dr Salim Re -ex).
> 620 NE 5 October 2021, p. 127:2 -5 (Dr Salim Re -ex)

161 

plumes to have ignited, since combustibility wa s highly dependent on the material 

itself. 621 

299 This is supported by the evidence of Maj Huang during the Inquiry hearing. 

When ask ed to comment on Photographs 7 to 9 in the Hawkins Report, Maj Huang 

candidly stated that he was unable to tell what the level of dust was within the Tuas 

Site from these photographs. 622 Maj Huang also opined that while there wa s no 

distinctive burn pattern for flash fires, there could be surfaces or easily combustible 

materials that w ould have melting, charring or signs of heat damage in pockets 

around the room, and this was observed in both the Tuas Site and Alif -E’s unit. 623 

300  Maj Huang confirmed that potat o starch, being a known combustible 

powder, when suspended in air could ignite once the fuel /air mixture reaches the 

right mixture and is in contact with an ignition source, hence the flashes of fire as 

shown on the CCTV footage occurring at random times. 624 Depending on where the 

right fuel/air mixture is located and ignited vis -à-vis the location of the relevant 

CCTV camera , and depending on whether there are any visual obstructions such as 

thick smoke , it is possible that one CCTV camera capture s only one flash fire and 

another CCTV camera captures only a different flash fire. 625 According to Maj      

> 621 NE 5 October 2021, pp. 127:23 -128:6 (Dr Salim Re -ex).
> 622 NE 7 October 2021, pp. 87:6 -88:11 (Maj Huang EIC).
> 623 NE 7 October 2021, pp. 85:8 -86:9 (Maj Huang EIC).
> 624 NE 7 Oct ober 2021, pp. 110:18 -111:20 (Maj Huang, questions from IC).
> 625 NE 7 October 2021, pp. 80:7 -81:11 (Maj Huang EIC).

162 

Huang, this could explain why on 24 February 2021 , the first two flash fires were 

only captured by Camera 8 and not Camera 7 and the third flash fire was ca ptured 

only by Camera 7 and not Camera 8 (see [ 284 ] above). 626 Maj Huang explained that 

it was possible that the flash fires captured on Camera 7 and Camera 8 were the 

result of potato starch travelling from the Tuas Site workshop into  Unit 32E 

belonging to Alif -E and igniting at different locations close to Camera 7 or Camera 

8 (as the case may be). 627 It was equally possible that there were other flash fires 

inside the Tuas Site workshop that were not captured by either Camara 7 or Camera 

8. 628 

301 As regards the possibility of the ignition of smoke plumes inside Alif -E’s 

Unit 32E, Maj Huang explained that in his experience as a fire investigator, and as 

a commander of a fire station dealing mostly with industrial fires, 629 he has not seen 

any fire wi thin a building where the smoke catches fire again, as the smoke would 

usually leave the affected premises and be dispersed, such that it would be much 

harder to form the right mixture again to ignite. 630 

302 The IC is faced with two competing theories: one inv olving a known 

combustible dust in the form of potato starch, which was found throughout the Tuas      

> 626 NE 7 October 2021, pp. 80:7 -81:11 (Maj Huang EIC).
> 627 NE 7 October 2021, pp. 83:12 -85:4 (Maj Huang EIC).
> 628 NE 7 October 2021, pp. 86:10 -87:5 (Maj Huang EIC).
> 629 S-288A, NE 7 October 2021, p. 62:13 -21 (Maj Huang EIC).
> 630 NE 7 October 2021, p. 112:5 -11 (Maj Huang, questions from IC).

163 

Site, including an undisturbed area beneath a pallet right outside Stars’ toilet, and a 

speculative theory proffered by Hawkins only during the Inquiry hearin g itself, 

which is not supported by any data or the practical observations by an experienced 

firefighter and fire investigator. It is most likely that the re were subsequent flash 

fires caused by the suspension of potato starch powders around the Tuas Site 

workshop, than by hydrocarbons within the smoke plumes created by the 

incomplete combustion of thermic oil. Such a finding would be consistent with the 

inadequat e ventilation and housekeeping measures at the workshop by Stars for dust 

control (see [ 410 ]-[412 ] below), which created the environment for potato starch to 

accumulate throughout the workshop. 

B. The root causes 

303 The proximate technical causes discussed above describe the Accident 

triggers on 24 Februa ry 2021. These triggers were present on 24 February 2021 due 

to a series of failures by Stars from as early June 2020 when the Mixer Machine 

was commissioned. These failures go to the root causes of the Accident and are 

described below in turn. 164 

1. Stars faile d to establish the safe working parameters for operating the 

Mixer Machine 

304 Stars failed to establish the safe working parameters for operating the Mixer 

Machine. Stars should have done this at the very beginning when commissioning 

the Mixer Machine. 

305  Chua XD explained that throughout the many months Stars was producing 

fire clay with the Mixer Machine, the workers were continually experimenting with 

the temperature settings to heat the contents of the mixing chamber. 631 And even as 

the temperature settings w ere being experimented with, the oil jacket temperature 

was never monitored and the pressure within the oil jacket was also not monitored 

(see [ 39(d) ] above). This was unsafe. 

306  Prof Chew explained, at the Inquiry hearing, the importance of the 

machinery commissioning stage: 632 

“…if [the operator] does a proper calibration of the machine during 

the commissioning stage he will know exactly how the machine 

should behave, okay. Set at what temperature, wait for how long, the          

> 631 SS -6 (Chua XD), [144]; NE 2 3September 2021 ,p. 189:10 -21 (Chua XD EIC ).
> 632 NE 7 October 2021, p. 35:14 -22 (Prof Chew XX).

165 

content temperature will be able to reach the temperature required, 

maybe 80 or 90 degrees, he should know all this data beforehand. 

So after he had this type of thing, if anything abnorm al, he should 

be able to pick up straightaway. ”

307 It is envisaged that by the end of the commissioning stage, the operator of 

the machine would have understood the various functionalities of the machine, how 

to operate the machine to achieve the intended out come, and what circumstances 

would be considered abnormalities that require investigation. 

308 However, in Stars’ case, Chua XD took the commissioning of the Mixer 

Machine as completed on 12 June 2020 (see [ 72 ]-[73 ] above). This was even though 

water, and not oil, had been used in the oil jacket , and the following issues had not 

yet been determined: 

(a) The volume of oil required in the oil jacket; 

(b) The temperature setting for the oil jacket; and 

(c) The indicative timing for the required oil and water temperatures to 

be reached .166 

309 Chua XD also had a poor grasp of/cavalier attitude towards: 

(a) The functionality of both RTDs; and 

(b) The functionality of the Back Pipe/vent port. 

310 It is telling that none of the issues above feature in Stars’ Safe Work 

Procedure (“ SWP ”) for making fire wrap. 633 If the above issues had been properly 

determined at the commissioning stage and incorporated into Stars’ SWP for 

making fire wrap, and shared with the Stars workers, Stars would have established 

safe working parameters for operating the Mixer Machine. Ins tead, as described 

below, Stars made three critical missteps as regards the operation of the Mixer 

Machine. 

(a) Stars operated the Mixer Machine with insufficient oil in the oil 

jacket 

311  The impact of not using sufficient oil on temperature and pressure within 

the oil jacket has been described above at [ 239 ]. The consequences are severe where 

less than 222L ( ie , where there will be  void space between the oil’s surface and the 

W-shaped mixing chamber base ) is used. 634   

> 633 S-264.
> 634 S-283 (Dr Salim’s Report), pp. 23:22 -24:4.

167 

312  Chua XD understood  that the oil in the oil jacket needed to be in contact 

with the surfaces of the mixing chamber. This was so that the heat energy from the 

oil would be transferred through con tact with the mixing chamber’s surfaces to heat 

the contents in the mixing chamber .635 He understood this on 12 June 2020, when 

commissioning and testing the Mixer Machine, without having to read the User 

Guide. 636 This is consistent with  Prof Chew’s  view th at  it is common sense that 

minimally, the user should fill enough oil to cover the heaters and have the oil 

contact a significant part of the mixing chamber’s surfaces. 637 

313  On 12 June 2020, Chua XD had used water as the heat transfer medium in 

the jacket. He felt that something was not right with his use of water, and read the 

User Guide very shortly thereafter, around 12 June 2020. 638  He claimed that he 

understood the User Guide’s reference to adding fuel to “ half the height of the 

cylinder ”639 to be synonymous with “half -height” of the oil jacket and to correspond 

to his black marking on the photograph of the Mixer Machine (S -282). 640 

314 However, after learning that oil should be used in the oil jacket, Chua XD 

chose to only purchase 2 buckets of oil (20L each) for use in the oil jacket on 16                  

> 635 NE 2 3September 2021 ,pp.134 :18 -135:6 (Chua XD EIC) .
> 636 NE 2 3September 2021 ,p. 135:7 -10 (Chua XD EIC) .
> 637 S-290 ( Prof Chew’s Report), [3.2.2].
> 638 NE 23 September 2021, p. 131:9 -25 (Chua XD EIC).
> 639 S-271, p. 5, Section Ten.
> 640 NE 23 September 2021, pp. 138:1 -139:17 (Chua XD EIC).

168 

June 2020 (see [ 77 ] above). This was notwithstanding Chua XD’s own allegation 

that at least 6 buckets o f water (20L each) had been used in the oil jacket on 12 June 

2020 ,641 and his own purported understanding of where the “half -height” of the 

cylinder/oil jacket (up to which oil should be added) came up to (as seen in S -282). 

315 Chua XD admitted that a simple back of envelope calculation (which he 

could have done for himself a t the time 642 ) would have shown that to fill even just 

the vertical section of the oil jacket ’s base (before the curvature of the oil jacket 

begins) would require 152L of oil ,643 and that even more would be required to fill 

the oil jacket to what he himself had purportedly considered to be its half -height. 644 

Instead, Chua XD chose to use only 40L of oil on 16 June 2020. There wa s no 

explanation for this other than 40L being a “ random figure [he] landed on ”. 645                              

> 641 NE 2 7September 2021 ,p. 184:2 -22 (Chua XD Re -ex ).
> 642 NE 2 3September 2021 ,p. 153:1 -4(Chua XD EIC) .
> 643 NE 2 3September 2021 ,p. 152:1 -20 (Chua XD EIC) .
> 644 NE 2 3September 2021 ,p. 153:5 -12 (Chua XD EIC) .
> 645 NE 2 3September 2021 ,p. 148:8 -11 (Chua XD EIC) .

169 

316 As regards the 40L of oil used on 16 June 2020, professional modelling by 

Matcor showed that it was patently in adequate – the oil would have barely touched 

the base of the heaters: 646 

317 After 16 June 2020, Stars similarly never used sufficient oil in the Mixer 

Machine’s oil jacket. For example: 

(a) When 80L of oil was purchased on 8 August 2020 (see [ 88 ] above), 

the best -case scenario (assuming the full 80L were added to the full 40 L

from 16 June 2020) is 120L of oil in the oil jacket; and 

(b) When another 80L of oil was purchased on 5 February 2021 (see 

[123 ] above), the best -case s cenario (assuming 40L were added to the full    

> 646 S-279 ( Matcor Report), p. 158 –Figure 212.

170 

120L assumed at [ 317 (a) ] above – bearing in mind that 2 buckets (20L each) 

were unused) is 160L of oil in the oil jacket. 

318 Having regard to the back of envelope calculation (see [ 315 ] above), 120L 

of oil would not  fill the vertical section of the oil jacket and 160L would be barely 

enough to fill the vertical section of the oil jacket. Neither scenario would see the 

oil level reach what Chua XD considered to be “half -height ” of the oil jacket. 647 

This wa s confirmed by  professional modelling done by Dr Salim of various oil fill 

levels: 648         

> 647 NE 2 3September 2021 ,p. 158:12 -18 (Chua XD EIC) .
> 648 S-283 (Dr Salim’s Report), p. B.8, Figure B.6.

171 

319 Based on Dr Salim’s professional modelling, more than 222L of oil wa s

required to ensure full  contact with the surfaces of the mixing chamber .649 This 

coheres with the guidance in the User Guide that oil should be filled up to “ half th e

height of the cylinder ”, 650 which Matcor estimated to come up to at least 245L of 

oil. 651 

320 A simple check on the oil fill level in the oil jacket at any point in time 

between 16 June 2020 to 24 February 2021 would have revealed to Chua XD that 

there was insufficient oil. Prof Chew explained that a simple check using a dipstick 

that touched the bottom of the oil jacket would do the trick. 652 

321 Chua XD admitted that Stars in fact had such a dipstick which Stars used to 

check on the oil level. 653 Nasim used it on 7 August 2020, when it showed that the 

oil fill level was about one and a half inches from the bottom of the oil jacket (see 

[79 ] above). In fact, Chua XD admitted on examination that he had already known 

then that the amount shown on the dipstick on 8 August 2020 was showing the 

amount left in the oil jacket from the very bottom of the oil jacket. 654 Chua XD also 

used the dipstick occasionally during his monthly maintenance checks, when it            

> 649 S-283 (Dr Salim’s Report), pp. 23:22 -24:4.
> 650 S-271, p. 5, Section Ten.
> 651 S-279 (Matcor Report), p. 23:10 -18.
> 652 NE 7 October 2020 p. 17:5 -18 (Prof Chew XX).
> 653 NE 2 3September 2021 ,pp.163:6 -164:4 (Chua XD EIC) .
> 654 NE 23 September 2021, p. 163:6 -14 (Chua XD EIC).

172 

usually showed that the oil fill level was about four to five inches from the bottom 

of the oil jacket. 655 It is undisputed that even at five inches, the oil level would not 

be sufficient to make contact with the  mixing chamber  surfaces. 656 

322 There is no explanation why Chua XD chose to purchase so little oil and use 

even less in the oil jacket. Chua XD had the m eans to ascertain how much oil was 

needed in the oil jacket and to ensure the same. But he failed to do so. 

(b) Stars operated the Mixer Machine without monitoring the 

temperature of the oil in the oil jacket 

323 As stated above at [ 39(d) ], Stars did not monitor the temperature of the oil 

in the oil jacket. Chua XD did not think it was required for production of the fire 

clay. 657 

324 Chua XD was aware that the oil jacket had an operating temperature range 

of 70 C to 160 C and a design temperature of 200 C, as stated in the User Guide. 658 

He was also aware that the Mixer Machine came with two RTDs, one for the oil 

jacket temperature and one for the mixing chamber. 659 He was aware which fixtures                      

> 655 SS -6 (Chua XD), [72]; NE 2 3September 2021 ,pp.164:9 -165:7 (Chua XD EIC) .
> 656 NE 2 3September 2021 ,p. 165:8 -15 (Chua XD EIC) .
> 657 SS -6 (Chua -XD), [82].
> 658 NE 2 3September 2021 ,pp.171:15 -173:23 (Chua XD EIC) ; S -271, p. 4, Section Eight.
> 659 SS -6 (Chua -XD), [82].

173 

on the Mixer Machine the RTDs could be attached to. 660 He claimed that he was 

unaware that only th e RTD for the oil jacket  operated on an interlock system . He 

assumed that both RTDs operated on an interlock system but that the interlock 

system did not work all the time, which led him to instruct the workers to manually 

turn off the heaters when the req uired temperature for the contents of the mixing 

chamber was reached. 661 

325 Chua XD accepted that to ensure that the oil jacket temperature wa s kept 

within the operating and design temperature range s, the temperature of the oil in 

the oil jacket ought to be me asured. 662 He was also aware that measuring the 

temperature of the contents in the mixing chamber alone would not give an 

indication of the temperature of the oil in the oil jacket, especially if the oil in the 

oil jacket was not making good contact with th e surface of the mixing chamber. 663 

And as explained above at [ 315 ]-[321 ], Chua XD ought to have known that there 

was never sufficient oil in the oil jacket to make good contact with the surface of 

the mixing chamber. Yet, Chua XD did not require Stars’ workers to monitor the 

temperature of the oil in the oil jacket. Chua XD provided two explanations for this.                         

> 660 NE 2 3September 2021 ,pp.184:21 -185:7 (Chua XD EIC) .
> 661 NE 2 3September 2021 ,pp.187:20 -189:8 (Chua XD EIC) .
> 662 NE 2 3September 2021 ,p. 174:4 -20 (Chua XD EIC) .
> 663 NE 2 3September 2021 ,pp.175:18 -176:22 (Chua XD EIC) .

174 

326 The first explanation wa s that he assumed that the oil in the oil jacket could 

only ever be heated up to a temperature of 160 C as he always had the perception 

that this was the upper limit of the Mixer Machine’s heating capacity. 664 However, 

there wa s no basis for Chua XD to have assumed this. When queried by counsel for 

Stars on why he assumed this, Chua XD referred to the User Guide: 665 

Examination of Chua XD by Counsel for Stars 

Q. This g oes to what you have said several times so  far, that you 

believed that there would be the  presence of this 

controller or a fail safe, so to  speak, in the mixer machine 

ensuring that the  operating temperature would not go 

beyond 160  degrees , yes? 

A. Yes, y our Honour. 

Q. In fact, based on my understanding of what you ’ve  said so 

far, it appears that it is this belief of  yours that determined 

how you operated the mixer  machine. Is that a fair statement? 

A. Yes, your Honour. 

Q. I need to ask you this: what made you think that  such a fail 

safe or controller existed in the mixer  machine? 

A. According to the user guide, section 5, so this,  they 

actually state this machine come with a temperature --

digital temperature controller fo r the process .       

> 664 NE 2 3September 2021 ,p. 172:6 -23; p. 184:6 -11 (Chua XD EIC) .
> 665 NE 27 September 2021, pp. 83:24 -84:19 (Chua XD XX).

175 

Q. Is that all? 

A. Yes. Yes, your Honour. 

(emphasis in added) 

327 But the User Guide simply states that the Mixer Machine came with a 

“digital display temperature control ”666 – plainly a reference to the digital display 

panels on the control panel which displayed the temperatures of the oil jacket and 

the mixing chamber as measured by their respective RTDs. The very fact that the 

Mixer Machine came with equipment to measure an d monitor the temperatures of 

the oil jacket and the mixing chamber should have made it clear that both 

temperatures ought to have been measured and monitored during operation. 

328 The second explanation wa s that Chua XD had monitored the temperature 

of the wa ter in the oil jacket on 12 June 2020 (by dropping an RTD into the oil 

jacket through the Front Pipe) and was satisfied that the water would not be heated 

up beyond 160 C. 667 However, the obvious issue, accepted by Chua XD, wa s that 

the temperature measurement on 12 June 2020 was of water , which would give a 

different reading as compared to oil .668 Moreover, it does not follow that a one -time 

reading on 12 June 2020 can confirm that the temperature would never go above 

160 C. In fact, Chua XD conceded that the safe way to operate the Mixer Machine              

> 666 S-271, p. 3, Section Five.
> 667 NE 2 3September 2021 ,pp.180:5 -182:20 (Chua XD EIC ).
> 668 NE 2 3September 2021 ,pp.182:21 -183:2 (Chua XD EIC) .

176 

would require that the oil jacket temperature be monitored each time the Mixer 

Machine was used. 669 

329  Chua XD could have easily monitore d the oil jacket temperature using the 

RTD for the oil jacket that came with the Mixer Machine. Dr Rose from Hawkins 

accepted that the RTD for the oil jacket was one way of monitoring the oil 

temperature though he noted that the location of its fixtures on the Mixer Machine 

were above the oil level in the oil jacket. 670 But this is no reason not to monitor the 

oil temperature. On the contrary, it would have been easy to monitor the oil 

temperature: 

(a) It was always open to Stars to fill the oil jacket up to the relevant 

fixture locations, to obtain more accurate oil temperature readings. 671 

(b) Dr Salim also explained that even if oil was not filled up to the 

relevant fixture locations but at least until there was full contact with the 

surface of the mixing chamber ( eg , 230L), the RTD for the oil jacket would 

have been able to adequately register high temperatures and could trigger 

the interlock system when beyond -safe temperatures were reached. 672           

> 669 NE 2 3September 2021 ,p. 183:13 -19 (Chua XD EIC) .
> 670 NE 6 October 2021, pp. 111:21 -112:25 (Dr Rose XX).
> 671 NE 7 October 2021, p. 16:10 -18 (Prof Chew EIX).
> 672 S-283 (Dr Salim’s Report), p. 17:12 -21.

177 

(c) If the oil level was far too low, Stars could have dropped the RTD 

for the oil jacket directly into the oil jacket through the Back Pipe or Front 

Pipe (as Chua XD did on 12 June 2020). Stars could also have used a 

commercially available infrared temperature gun to measure the 

temperature at the desired location of the oil jac ket, which according to Dr 

Rose from Hawkins could have been easily done. 673 

330  Notwithstanding all of the above, Chua XD decided to close the Back Pipe 

and Front Pipe (see [ 90 ] above), and install insulation over the oil jacket (see [ 124 ]

and [ 163 ] above), effectively removing the ability to measure the temperature of 

the oil in the oil jacket. 

331  If Stars had instead monitored the temperature of the oil in the oil jacket, it 

would have realised that the temperatures within were so high that there was a risk 

of pressure building up within the oil jacket.  

> 673 NE 6 October 2021, pp. 113:22 -114:5 (Dr Rose XX).

178 

(c) Stars modified the Mixer Machine to operate as a closed system, 

and it did so without taking appropriate safet y measures to guard 

against pressure build -up 

332 As explained above at [ 39(c) ], when the Mixer Machine was delivered, only 

the Front Pipe was closed wit h an end cap. The Back Pipe was fitted with the blue 

funnel that came with the Mixer Machine, for the pouring in of oil. 

333  However, Chua XD instructed his workers to close both the Front Pipe and 

the Back Pipe. 674 He told Imam to do so in the wee hours of 8 August 2020 after 

being informed that the oil in the oil jacket had run out (see [ 80 ] above). Chua XD 

wan ted both the Front Pipe and Back Pipe closed as he  was concerned about the 

evaporation of the oil from the pipes if they were left open. 675 Chua XD was acutely 

aware of the cost considerations if the evaporation of oil led to Stars needing to 

purchase oil m ore frequently. When he contacted MHT (Sharon) on 8 August 2020 

via WhatsApp to make an order for oil (see [ 81 ] above), he expressed concerns 

about t he price of the oil: 676 

Chua XD: “Pls give me better price ”

Chua XD: “I will need to buy these oil Long term, as I keep 

using for my production ”   

> 674 SS -7 (Moe) , [25].
> 675 NE 24 September 2021, pp. 32:14 -33:12 (Chua XD EIC).
> 676 S-5, IM#40 -53.

179 

…

Chua XD: “4 bucket can cheaper? ”

Sharon Lee: “Already reduced for you.. ”

Chua XD: “Very expensive leh sister , can give better price ? ”

Sharon Lee: “130 reduced to 125 ”

Chua XD: “Every 1 mth I need to buy 1 time ”

(emphasis added) 

334 Ultimately, Chua XD did not buy oil every month. Stars operated the Mixer 

Machine as a closed system ( ie , with the Front Pipe and Back Pipe closed) 

henceforth, and the next purchase of oil was almost six months later on 5 February 

2021 (see [ 123 ] above). 

335 In his witness statement, Chua XD stated that he thought that the Mixer 

Machine was supposed to be operated as a closed system. At the Inquiry hearing, 

however, Chua XD conceded that he thought the Mixer Machine could be operated 

either as an open system or a closed system, and that he chose to operate it as a

closed system. 677 

336 However, there was no basis for Chua XD to have thought that th e Mixer 

Machine could have been operated as a closed system.  

> 677 NE 24 September 2021, pp. 35:10 -36:2 (Chua XD EIC).

180 

337 First, as explained above, the Mixer Machine only came with one end cap 

for the Front Pipe. The User Guide 678 gave no instructions on closing the Back Pipe 

Pipe. On the contrary, the User Guide st ates that there is “ an oil vapor vent… 

provided at the highest point behind the machine ”, 679 which suggests strongly that 

the Back Pipe is to be kept open to allow venting. 

338 Second, Chua XD claimed that page 5 of the User Guide 680 which states 

“When refueling, you need to open one side vent hole and add [oil] ... ” is guidance 

that the Back Pipe is to be closed. 681 But those instructions simply illustrate that oil 

is to be added through the open vent hole ( ie , the Back Pipe). Importantly, insofar 

as Chu a XD associated the “ vent hole ” with the Back Pipe, he would have known 

that it was intended to be open to allow venting of oil vapours (see [ 337 ] abo ve). 

When this was put to Chua XD , he inconsistently attempted to deny that he had 

associated the “ vent hole ” with the Back Pipe .682 

339 Third, Prof Chew’s expert opinion is that the design of the Mixer Machine 

is not meant for operating as a closed system. He explained that the Back Pipe 

should be opened to allow oil vapours to escape to prevent the building of pressure      

> 678 S-271.
> 679 S-271, p. 4, Section Eight.
> 680 S-271.
> 681 SS -6 (Chua XD), [124].
> 682 NE 24 September 2021, p. 25:7 -23 (Chua XD EIC).

181 

in the oil jacket. 683 Further, Prof Chew saw no reason to operate the Mixer Machine 

as a closed system given that a closed system would not enh ance the heat transfer 

from the oil in the oil jacket to the contents of the mixing chamber. 684 

340 Fourth, Chua XD and Dr Rose of Hawkins state that the oil jacket ’s working 

pressure of ≤0.2Mpa as stated in the User Guide (see [40(c) ] above) 685 suggested 

that the Mixer Machine could operate under pressure as a closed system. 686 But this 

is no more than an indication of the uppe r limit of pressure that the oil jacket can 

withstand. It should not be construed as an instruction to operate the oil jacket at a 

pressure of 0.2Mpa. 

341 Fifth, Chua XD attempted to explain at the Inquiry hearing that the Mixer 

Machine ought to be operated as a closed system to prevent oxidisation of the oil in 

the oil jacket given guidance in the oil specification sheet that there is a greater risk 

of oil oxidation in open systems. 687 But this was a belated attempt that had no 

foundation. Chua XD had read the oil specifications as early as 16 June 2020 yet 

gave no instructions to close the Back Pipe between 16 June 2020 to 8 August 

2020. 688 Moreover, the oil specifications sheet provided that the recommended       

> 683 S-290 (Prof Chew’s Report), [3.3.2] -[3.3.5].
> 684 S-290 (Prof Chew’s Rep ort), [3.3.8]; NE 7 October 2021, pp. 19:13 -21:5 (Prof Chew EIC).
> 685 S-271, p. 4, Section Eight.
> 686 SS -6 (Chua XD), [124]; NE 6 Oct 2021, p. 118:7 -23 (Dr Rose EIC).
> 687 NE 24 September 2021, p. 10:12 -21 (Chua XD EIC); S -53.
> 688 NE 24 September 2021, p. 12: 6-16 (Chua XD EIC).

182 

operating temperature range was 200 C in an open syste m, 689 which was in any 

event within the operating range of the Mixer Machine. 

342 Finally, the manufacturer of the Mixer Machine, Laizhou Keda, has 

explained that the Mixer Machine is not intended to be operated as a closed system 

and that the Back Pipe should be kept open. 690 

343 Having decided to operate the Mixer Machine as a closed system, Chua XD 

compounded the error by failing to take adequate measures to ensure the safe 

operation of the Mixer Machine in a closed setting. 

344 It is undisputed that if operating the Mixer Machine a s a closed system, it is 

critical to monitor and manage the pressure inside the oil jacket. Prof Chew 

explained that if the Mixer Machine was to be used as a closed system, the user 

would need to monitor the pressure and/or rely on a pressure relief valve. 691 

Otherwise there would be a risk of explosion from a build -up of pressure within the 

oil jacket. 692 Dr Rose of Hawkins explained that if the Mixer Machine was a closed 

system, one would expect the Back Pipe to have a pressure relief valve. 693 Chua XD 

admitted that by operating the Mixer Machine as a closed system he had created a      

> 689 S-53.
> 690 S-293A (Laizhou Keda’s answers), [11] -[16(b)].
> 691 NE 7 October 2021, p. 21:5 -11 (Prof Chew EIC).
> 692 NE 7 October 2021, pp. 24:8 -26:11 (Prof Chew EIC).
> 693 NE 6 October 2021, p. 120:14 -23 (Prof Chew EIC).

183 

pressure vessel and that as a result, it was important to monitor the pressure inside 

the oil jacket. 694 Yet, Stars failed to do so when operating the Mixer Machine. 695 

345 Chua XD had no good reason for Stars’/his failure to monitor the pressure 

inside the oil jacket :

(a) His first reason was that the Mixer Machine did not come with a 

pressure gauge. 696 However, it was open to Stars to purchase a commercially 

available pressure gauge and attach it to the Back Pipe. Chua XD accepted 

that it would have been easy to do. 697 

(b) His second reason was that he expected that there would be no 

pressure build up within the oil jacket as he assumed that that the oil in the 

oil jacket would never be heated up beyond the oil’s recommended 

operating temperature of 300 C (as stated in the oil specifications 

she et 698 ). 699 However, as demonstrated at [ 326 ] above , Chua XD had no 

basis to make such an assumption about the temperatures inside the oil 

jacket.       

> 694 NE 24 September 2021, p. 36:3 -12 (Chua XD EIC).
> 695 SS -6 (Chua XD), [124].
> 696 NE 24 September 2021, p. 36:23 -24 (Chua XD EIC).
> 697 NE 24 September 2021, p. 38:5 -9 (Chua XD EIC).
> 698 S-272.
> 699 NE 24 September 2021, pp. 38:10 -40:16 (Chua XD EIC).

184 

(c) His th ird reason was that he never saw any physical signs that there 

was pressure building up within the oil jacket ( eg , no oil spraying out from 

the oil jacket; no bulging or deformation on the oil jacket). 700 This is plainly 

untrue. There were several red flags that should have alerted Chua XD to 

pressure building up within the oil jacket and these are discussed in detail 

below at [ 350 ]-[391 ]. 

(d) His fourth reason was that the 0.2 bar maximum working pressure 

of the Mixer Machine came from Laizhou Keda, a nd was not Stars’ 

manufacturing requirement. 701 But this is no excuse for irresponsibly failing 

to check that the maximum working pressure stipulated by the manufacturer 

was not exceeded during Stars’ operation of the Mixer Machine. 

346 Ultimately, there is no good explanation for Stars’ failure to monitor the 

pressure inside the oil jacket after having closed the Back Pipe, especially in the 

light of Chua XD’s own admission that Stars was obliged to do so: 702 

Examination of Chua XD by State Counsel 

Q So, Mr Chu a, I am just going to say to you – you can tell me 

if you agree or disagree -- if someone tells you that these 

are the safe limits within which your machine should be 

operated, then you should take the steps to check that    

> 700 NE 24 September 2021, p. 37:2 -8 (Chua XD EIC).
> 701 SS -6 (Chua XD), [124].
> 702 NE 24 September 2021, pp. 45:23 -46:14 (Chua XD EIC).

185 

you ’re operating within those safe limits. Agree or 

disagree? 

A. Yes, your Honour, I agree .

Q. Therefore, when you operate the oil jacket as a closed system 

and you have accepted earlier already that that creates a 

pressure vessel in the oil jacket, for safety reasons, you 

should be monitoring the pressure inside to make sure it 

is within the limits specified by your manufacturer. 

Agree or disagree? 

A. Yes, your Honour. 

Q. Agree, right? 

A. Agree, your Honour. 

(emphasis added) 

347 Dr Rose of Hawkins opined that Stars’ action of modifying the Mixer 

Machine to operate as a closed system made no difference to the outcome of the 

Accident. 703 However, this wa s premised on Hawkins’ theory that the rupture of the 

oil jacket was caused by the chemical explosion within the oil jacket and n ot due to 

overpressures within the oil jacket caused by the overheating of thermic oil (see 

[224 ] above). As explained above at [ 225 ]-[282 ], we disagree with Hawkins’ 

theory . Stars’ action of modifying the Mixer Machine to operate as a closed system 

did contribute to the overpressures within the oil jacket which eventually led to its 

rupture.  

> 703 ST -1 (Hawkins Report), [6.3.1].

186 

348  If Stars had not modified the Mixer Machine to operate as a closed system, 

it is unl ikely that there would have been such severe pressure build -up within the 

oil jacket. Nevertheless, having so modified the Mixer Machine, if Stars had 

monitored the pressure within oil jacket, it would have realised that pressure was in 

fact building up wi thin the oil jacket. 

2. Stars failed to identify and respond appropriately to red flags and near -

misses indicating over -heating, pressure build -up, and the oil jacket 

giving way 

349 Even if Stars did not, at the very outset, appreciate that their failures listed 

above gave rise to the risk of overheating and overpressure, there were a series of 

red flags and near -misses that should have alerted Stars to the risk. As explained 

above at [ 227 ], there were multiple observable signs between August 2020 and 

February 2021 that the Mixer Machine was operating at high temperatures and 

pressures , and that the oil jacket was giving way . It was obvious that a serious 

acci dent involving the Mixer Machine was a likely result. There w ere ample 

opportunit ies for Stars to review how it was operating the Mixer Machine before 

the occurrence of such an accident. But Stars simply failed to do so. We describe 

the various red flags a nd near -misses below. 187 

(a) Burned heater on 8 August 2020 

350 Following the incident on 8 August 2020 involving the burned heater (see 

[82 ]-[87 ] above), Chua XD instructed Imam to replace the burned heater. Chua XD 

assumed the heater had burned due to an electrical fault 704 and considered t he matter 

resolved following the replacement. There was no further investigation as to why 

the heater had burned. 

351 The Mixer Machine had only been installed and commissioned less than 

two months ago. In that time the Mixer Machine had only been used about five 

times (including on 12 June 2020). This was a red flag that ought to have been 

investigated. 

352 Chua XD explained that he did not investigate whether the heater had 

overheated due to high temperatures within the oil jacket. 705 He allegedly 

considered that this was unlikely given his baseless assumption that the oil in the 

oil jacket could only ever be heated up to a temperature of 160 C (see [ 326 ] abo ve). 

However, even a simple investigation would have revealed that the burning of the 

heater had coincided with the oil running out in the oil jacket the night before. The 

consequences of not having enough oil in the oil jacket were apparent.           

> 704 NE 2 4September 2021 ,pp.53: 20 -54:2 (Chua XD EIC).
> 705 NE 2 4September 2021 ,pp.54:3 -55:16 (Chua XD EIC).

188 

353 Moe was also informed of the burned heater on 8 August 2020, and he too 

did not investigate the issue. He was content to leave the matter with Chua XD. 706 

(b) Deteriorated gaskets 

354 On 28 August 2020, Imam informed Chua XD via telephone that the Mixer 

Machine’s gaskets were worn out, and Chua XD instructed Imam to replace the 

gaskets (see [ 96 ] above). According to Chua XD, he thought that the gaskets may 

have already aged by the time they were supplied by the manufacturer. 707 But the 

reality wa s that Chua XD did not personally check the deteriorated gaskets before 

asking for them to be replaced. It also does not appear that Chua XD knew what the 

original condition of the gaskets were. No meaningful investigation was conducted 

into why the gaskets had deteriorated so soon. As explained above, Mr Shandro’s 

view was that this was likely due to high temperatures and accelerated aging of the 

gaskets during the whole time of ope ration (see [ 228 ] above). Mehedi , for example ,

considered that the gaskets had been exposed to high heat from the oil jacket (see 

[95 ] above). This was another red flag indicating over -heating in the oil jacket .  

> 706 NE 30 September 2021, pp. 36:24 -38:12 (Moe EIC).
> 707 NE 24 September 2021, p. 113:9 -21 (Chua XD EIC).

189 

(c) Oil drained from the oil jacket was black 

355 There were numerous occasions where the oil inside the oil jacket had 

turned black in colour (see [ 94 ], [ 109 ], and [129 ] above ). Chua XD and Moe were 

aware of this (see [ 361 ] below and [ 110 ] above), yet there was no investigation into 

whether this was a normal occurrence. In fact, Moe explained that he was concerned 

about the oil turning black in colour 708 but it appears he did nothing to follow -up 

on his concern. 

356 It would have been easy to check with MHT on whether it was normal for 

the oil to turn black. If Chua XD or Moe had done so, they would have realised that 

it was not normal. As explained above, Dr Salim stated the oil turning black in 

colour was indicative of a chemical reaction happening within the oil due to high 

temperature s (see [ 229 ] above). In fact, when Chua XD took a moment’s pause to 

consider the phenomenon at the Inquiry hearing, he acknowledged that this showed 

that the thermic oil was subject to temperatures higher than 300℃. 709    

> 708 NE 30 September 2021, pp. 50:13 -51:18 (Moe EIC).
> 709 NE 27 September 2021, p. 179:4 -7 (Chua XD, questions from IC).

190 

(d) White smoke from the oil jacket 

357 From as early as August /September 2020 to February 2021, there were 

reports of white smoke coming from the oil jacket when the oil in the oil jacket was 

being heated (see [ 97 ]-[98 ] and [ 119 ]-[122 ] above). 

358 On 8 January 202 1, Moe thought that it was oil vapours escaping from 

hairline cracks on the oil jacket and considered it a safety risk. 710 He reported the 

matter to Chua XD via WhatsApp and they agreed to do weld ing repairs on the 

hairline cracks immediately (see [ 120 ]-[121 ] above). 

359 The emanation of oil vapours from the oil jacket was a red flag indicating 

temperature and pressure issues within the oil jacket. Yet, t he decision to perform 

welding repairs was taken almost immediately before any investigation into the root 

cause. Indeed, welding would not address the root problems which had caused the 

escape of oil vapours from the oil jacket to begin with. The fundamen tal issue as to 

why hairline cracks were appearing on the oil jacket was not considered. Chua XD 

did not even visit the Tuas Site workshop to physically observe the white smoke 

before coming to a decision on next steps – the decision was taken via WhatsApp .

360 In any event, no welding repairs were done until after the incident on 12 

February 2021. The matter was also not under any investigation in the interim. Chua  

> 710 NE 30 September 2021, pp. 46:20 -49:20 (Moe EIC).

191 

XD tried to downplay the incident by contending that he subsequently discovered 

that what Moe ha d seen w ere not oil vapours escaping from hairline cracks but 

innocuous water vapour. 711 But Chua XD’s reasons do not add up. 

361 First, Chua XD claimed that the white smoke could not have been oil 

vapours, as the smoke was white and not black. 712 Chua XD premis ed this on the 

fact that the oil inside the oil jacket was black in colour. 713 Leaving aside the issue 

of why the oil was black (see [ 355 ] above), Chu a XD’s logic here is difficult to 

follow. In any event, Chua XD admitted at the Inquiry hearing that it was possible 

that the white smoke could have been oil vapours. 714 

362 Second, Chua XD claimed that the water vapour was a result of fire clay 

from the top of the Mixer Machine dripping onto the hot oil jacket surface. 715 

However, after being played the video taken by Moe on 8 January 2021 at the 

Inquiry hearing, Chua XD conceded that , contrary to his claim, no smoke (or water 

vapour, as alleged ) c ould be seen coming from the fire clay material on the Mixer 

Machine. 716        

> 711 SS -6 (Chua XD), [155].
> 712 SS -6 (Chua XD), [155].
> 713 NE 24 September 2021, p. 76:4 -7 (Chua XD EIC).
> 714 NE 24 September 2021, p. 75:18 -23 (Chua XD EIC).
> 715 SS -6 (Chua XD), [155].
> 716 NE 24 September 2021, pp. 77:13 -78:11 (Chua XD EIC).

192 

363 Third , Chua XD claimed that the water vapour was a result of water from 

loose gland packing at the sides of the Mixer Machine. 717 According to C hua XD, 

the issue resolved itself after he tightened the gland packing on a subsequent date. 718 

This was contrary to Moe’s witness statement where he explained that the white 

smoke was observed until after the fire on 12 February 2021 when welding repairs 

were done to the Mixer Machine. 719 At the Inquiry hearing, Moe stated for the first 

time that Chua XD had told him on 17 February 2021 that the issue of the white 

smoke had been resolved after the gland packing was tightened. 720 However, these 

claims are not credible: 

(a) The video taken by Moe on 8 January 2021 721 show s the white 

smoke coming out only from the bottom corners of the oil jacket and does 

not show any water dripping from the gland packing onto the oil jacket; 

(b) If the white smoke had indeed been a resul t of dripping water or fire 

clay, Moe would have certainly noted so on 8 January 2021 itself; and      

> 717 SS -6 (Chua XD), [155].
> 718 NE 24 September 2021, p. 73:11 -21 (Chua XD EIC).
> 719 SS -7 (Moe), [70].
> 720 NE 30 September 2021, pp. 50:13 -51:18 (Moe EIC).
> 721 S-159.

193 

(c) Chua XD wa s unable to provide any details on when exactly he 

tightened the gland packing. 722 Although Moe says Chua XD did so on 17 

February 2021, Chua’s own a ccount of what he did when he visited the Tuas 

Site workshop on 17 February 2021 omits any reference to tightening the 

gland packing. 723 

364 It is more likely that Chua XD and Moe were aware of the issue of oil 

vapours coming out from the oil jacket on 8 January 2021. White smoke was also 

seen in the video taken by Mehedi on 12 October 2020 of the hairline crack and 

leak on the front bottom left corner of the oil jacket (see [ 114 ] above). 724 Both Moe 

and Chua XD had seen Mehedi’s video 725 and would have known that the white 

smoke was coming from inside the oil jacket. This explains why Moe and Chua XD 

were quick to pick the same remedy as in the 12 October 2020 incident – welding. 

365 The reality is that Stars simply did not take any urgent steps to resolve the 

matter, let alone investigate the matter. As explained above, Moe’s video on 8 

January 2021 was shown to Dr Salim, and his opinion was that the white smoke 

could be aerosols formed either by condensation of oil vapours, or ejection of the 

oil directly via very small holes, likely due to pressure inside the oil jacket (see     

> 722 NE 24 September 2021, p. 84:1 -10 (Chua XD EIC).
> 723 SS -6 (Chua XD), [205(e)].
> 724 S-158.
> 725 SS -7 (Moe), [59]; SS -6 (Chua XD), [150].

194 

[230 ] above). If Stars had investigated the matter, they would have realised that 

pressure was building up within the oil jacket. 

(e) Boiling sounds from the oil jacket 

366 Chua XD explained that he heard oil boiling sounds from the oil jacket 

whenever the Mixer Machine was in operation during the production of fire clay. 726 

Other Stars workers have also reported hearing such boiling sounds (see [ 99 ] and 

[138 ] above). According to Jitu, he could hear the boiling sounds from the ground 

floor of the wo rkshop where he was working. 727 When Murugan and Chua XD 

heard the boiling sounds on 12 February 2021, the Mixer Machine had already been 

turned off for more than an hour (see [ 138 ]-[139 ] above). 

367 If Chua XD had paid attention to the above -described phenomenon, and 

paused to consider what the boiling sounds indicated, he would have realised, as he 

acknowledged at the Inquiry he aring, that oil vapour and pressure were building up 

inside the closed oil jacket. 728     

> 726 SS -6 (Chua XD), [173].
> 727 NE 28 September 2021, p. 22:2 -18 (Jitu EIC)
> 728 NE 24 September 2021, pp. 108:24 -109:16 (Chua XD EIC).

195 

(f) Fire on 12 February 2021 

368 The incident on 12 February 2021 was a near -miss in that it was fortunate 

that casualties /injuries had not occurred . Viewed cumulatively with earl ier red flags 

and the subsequent discovery of cracks on the Mixer Machine on 13 February, it 

would have become clear that a serious and urgent review of the Mixer Machine ’s 

condition and operating procedure was necessary. 

369 Yet, Chua XD contrived to treat th e fire on the Mixer Machine on 12 

February 2021 as isolated from the cracks and oil stains found on the Mixer 

Machine (see [ 141 ] above). He purported to take the view that the oil in the oil 

jacket was not involved in the fire. This is inexplicable. 

370 On 12 February 2021, Chua XD purportedly concluded that oil was not 

involved in the fire for two reasons, neither of which are sound: 

(a) Chua XD’s first reason was that he had not observed a dripping 

flame from the Mixer Machine (see [ 141 ] above). However, at the Inquiry 

hearing, Chua XD accepted that the lack of a dripping flame was not a 

reason to rule out an oil fire, especially if the oil stayed on the body of the 

Mixer Mac hine , as evidenced by the ensuing oil stains on the exterior of the 

oil jacket .729  

> 729 NE 24 September 2021, pp. 94:13 -96:14 (Chua XD EIC).

196 

(b) Chua XD’s second reason was that only the aluminium tape on the 

insulation on the Mixer Machine had caught fire (see [ 141 ] above). But there 

is no logical basis for thinking that the aluminium tape catching fire rules 

out an oil fire. It is equally possible that the burnt aluminium tape was a 

consequence of an oil fire. 

371 In any event, it is clear that notwithstanding his purported views about a 

“tape” fire, Chua XD had not ruled out that oil was leaking from the oil jacket , as 

seen from his instructions for welding to be done on multiple locations o n the 

bottom of the oil ja cket .

372 Even if one were to ignore past red flags, a reasonable response to the fire 

on 12 February 2021 as a stand -alone incident would have been to call a safety 

time -out and conduct a fresh risk assessment of the Tuas Site workshop, including 

a thorough i nspection of the Mixer Machine. This was a fire that halted production 

on 12 February 2021 and filled the workshop with smoke (see [ 130 ] above). It led 

to at least one Stars worker expressing fear for his safety (see [ 147 ]-[149 ] above). 

It was plainly a significant near -miss event. Instead, Chua XD did not even visit the 

Tuas Site workshop until after the in -house repairs by Nasim were completed days 

later (see [ 162 ] above). 

373  The relevant Code of Practice on risk management (applicable at the 

material time) require d Risk Assessment (“ RA ”) entries to be reviewed upon any 197 

accident, incident, near miss or dangerous occurrence. 730 Yet, Chua XD did not 

initiate a review of the  RA form in respect of the production at the Tuas Site 

workshop. 731 In fact, the RA had never been reviewed since its first preparation on 

30 March 2020. Chua XD explained that he took some precautionary measures on 

the ground and gave practical advice to his workers. 732 However, what is clear is 

that Chua XD was keen to r estart production at the Tuas Site workshop as soon as 

possible. On 15 February 2021 evening, he messaged in the Shield+ WhatsApp chat 

that he needed the welding repairs to finish the next day, and that they w ould start 

making fire clay again the day after next. 733 

374  Chua XD claimed that following the 12 February 2021 fire, he had given 

the Mixer Machine an “ ultimatum ”. 734 Due to various problems with the Mixer 

Machine, he had decided that if there were any more problems with the Mixer 

Machine, he would stop us ing the Mixer Machine :735        

> 730 “Code of Practice on Workplace Safety and Health Risk Management” published in 2015
> (Second Revision) by the WSHC , [6.1.4].
> 731 S-266; SS -6 (Chua XD), [207].
> 732 SS -6 (Chua XD), [207].
> 733 SS -6 (Chua XD), [205(b)] -[205(c)].
> 734 NE 24 September 2021, p. 131:13 -15 (Chua XD EIC).
> 735 NE 24 September 2021, pp. 131:13 -132:23 (Chua XD EIC).

198 

Examination of Chua XD by State Counsel 

Q. I have -- at that point of time, right, I ’m actually having the 

ultimatum of these existing mixer, that means, I have -- I had 

enough of this mixer. 

Q. You had enough of it, you were fed up with it? 

A. Yes. 

Q. So many problems occurring with it, right? 

A. This is -- I’m just stating the facts, the truth. 

…

A. My thinking is if I have any more problems coming up, I 

will change or stop using this -- this – this mixer . This is my 

thinking at that moment. 

Q. Okay. So you ’re saying -- and I ’m trying to quote your exact 

words: “If I have any more problems coming up, I will change 

or stop using this mixer.” Correct? 

A. Yes, your Honour. 

Q. Actually, to change the mixer, you have to stop using it. So 

can I just say your position at that point in time was, “If I 

have any more problems coming up , I'm going to stop 

using this mixer” , correct? 

A. Yes, your Honour .

(emphasis added) 

375  What the above exchange shows is that Chua XD was himself aware that 

the Mixer Machine was no longer reliable. Chua XD had seen and appreciated the 199 

significance of this red flag. This wa s confirmed by the various measures he 

required in place in the event of another fire ( eg , placing fire blankets and extra wet 

type fire extinguishers at the workshop). 736  Having decided for himself that the 

Mixer Machine was no longer reliable, the only reasonable course of action would 

be to stop Stars’ workers from using the Mixer Machine. Yet, Chua XD decided to 

give the Mixer Machine one more chance. 

(g) Cracks on the oil jacket 

376 Cracks were identified on the Mixer Machine on 28 September 2020 (see 

[100 ] above), 12 October 2020 (see [ 113 ] above) , and 13 February 2020 following 

the fire on 12 February 2021 (see [ 153 ] above). These were obvious red flags. As 

explaine d above, Mr Shandro commented that the cracks were a result of pressure 

increases causing tensile stress (see [ 233 ] above). According to Dr Salim, su ch 

cracks were indicative of pressure within the oil jacket. 737 

377 Chua XD was made aware of the cracks: 

(a) As regards the 28 September 2020 crack, Chua XD simply failed to 

respond. Chua XD was notified about the crack by late September 2020 738 

but he did not investigate the matter or give any instructions until the crack    

> 736 SS -6 (Chua XD), [207].
> 737 NE 5 October 2021, pp. 65:14 -66:8 (Dr Salim EIC).
> 738 NE 27 September 2021, p. 158:3 -6 (Chua XD EIC).

200 

became bigger on 12 October 2020. 739 Instead, Chua XD appears to have 

overlooked the crack altogether when he performed his maintenance check 

on the Mixer Machine for the month of October ,740 and when he gave the 

workers instructions to use the Mixer Machine to make fire clay on 12 

October 2020 .741 Chua XD accepted, in this regard, that it was very 

dangerous for the workers to have operated the Mixer Machine in such 

circumstances a s it was a potential fire hazard .742 

(b) When the same crack was observed to be bigger on 12 October 2020, 

Chua XD gave instructions to weld the crack (see [ 116 ] above). Similarly, 

Chua XD gave instructions to weld the cracks that were observed on 13 

February 2021 (see [155 ] above ). However, on neither o ccasion did Chua 

XD physically inspect the cracks or investigate as to their root cause before 

giving the instructions to weld .743 

378 Moe was also made aware of the cracks, but he never personally 

investigated the matter. As regards the 28 September 2020 /12 Oc tober 2020 crack, 

he limited his involvement to instructing Imam and Mehedi to have Nasim perform      

> 739 NE 24 September 2021, p. 59:15 -19 (Chua XD EIC) .
> 740 S-245; NE 24 September 2021, p. 58:8 -25 (Chua XD EIC).
> 741 NE 24 September 2021, pp. 62:25 -63:7 (Chua XD EIC).
> 742 NE 24 September 2021, p. 63:8 -16 (Chua XD EIC).
> 743 NE 24 September 2021, pp. 69:23 -70:19; p. 119:8 -14 (Chua XD EIC).

201 

welding repairs (see [ 101 ]-[104 ]; [ 116 ] above) ,744 but never checked if the repairs 

had been performed. In relation to the 13 February 2021 cracks, Moe simply did 

not get involved and was content to let Chua XD handle the matter. 

379 The presence of cracks should ha ve caused serious concern to Stars. By 13 

February 2021, it should have been clear that the previous attempt to repair the 28 

September 2020 /12 October 2020 crack was in vain. It was futile and foolhardy to 

undertake similar repairs without investigating t he root cause of the cracks. If Stars 

had undertaken such an investigation, it would have realised that the pressure build -

up within the oil jacket was the root cause and that welding was only a temporary 

solution. 

(h) Small fire in the earlier part of the mor ning of 24 February 2021 

380 The incident on the morning of 24 February 2021 was another near -miss 

event. This was the second fire involving the Mixer Machine in a span of about two 

weeks. According to Chua XD’s “ ultimatum ” (see [ 374 ] above), he should have 

abandoned thought of further using the Mixer Machine and called a halt to fire clay 

production for that day . However, as it turned out, Chua XD was not prepared to 

carry out his “ultimatum ”. This was a serious failure.  

> 744 NE 30 September 2 021, pp. 69:9 -71:11 (Moe EIC).

202 

381 We submit that, following the small fire on the morning of 24 February 

2021, the evidence shows that Chua XD told Marimuthu to change the damage d

Heater No. 2 (see [ 178 ]-[181 ] above). Chu a XD contended that he only meant for 

Marimuthu to take out the damaged heater and wait for Chua XD to arrive at the 

workshop. 745 However, according to Moe, he understood from Marimuthu’s 

messages to him at that time that Chua XD had told Marimuthu to repla ce the 

damaged heater. 746 

382 Chua XD insist ed that he himself had no intention to replace the damaged 

heater when he arrived at the workshop; his only intention was to remove the 

damaged heater. 747 Chua XD’s claim that his intention was only to remove the 

“threat ” of the damaged heater 748 is not credib le. Marimuthu had already informed 

Chua XD that the Mixer Machine had been stopped and that the cables had been 

disconnected. 749 Chua’s XD own position is that if the Mixer Machine had remained 

switched off, there would be no risk of an explosion – “there ’s no power, no 

movement and you see everything is in off mode, so I don ’t think it will explode ”. 750 

Given this, there wa s simply no reason for Chua XD to have instructed Marimuthu 

to remove the damaged heater for any purported safety reasons. In line with C hua        

> 745 NE 27 September 2021, pp. 42:11 -43:14 (Chua XD Re -ex).
> 746 NE 30 September 2021, p. 81:4 -19 (Moe EIC).
> 747 NE 27 September 2021, p. 44:18 -23 (Chua XD Re -ex).
> 748 NE 27 September 2021, p. 46:14 -22 (Chua XD Re -ex).
> 749 SS -6(Chua XD), [216].
> 750 NE 27 September 2021, p. 66:14 -24 (Chua XD XX).

203 

XD’s “ ultimatum ” (see [ 374 ] above), Chua XD should have simply told the workers 

to get off the Platform and leave the Mixer Machine alone. But he did not do so. 

383 Instead, the more likely explanation is that Chua XD intended to replace the 

damaged heater, and see if the Mixer Machine could work and production could 

carry on. This had been done before on 8 August 2020 when Imam changed the 

damaged Hea ter No. 1 (see [ 87 ] above). 

384 Even if (which is denied) Chua XD had not wanted Marimuthu to change 

the heater before Chua XD arrived at the Tuas Site workshop , Chua XD had, 

minimally, intended to replace the damaged heater and carry on with fire clay 

production and had communicated the same to Marimuthu. Marimuthu would have 

accordingly felt pressure to get the Mixer Machine up and running again as soon as 

possible, so that the workers could complete making the required rolls of fire wrap 

by the end of the work day. 

385 In this regard, Mehedi gave evidence that if fire clay production had stopped 

abruptly for any reason, the workers would not have been able to complete the day’s 

target of 32 rolls of fire clay set by Chua XD (see [ 69 ] above). 751 Marimuthu would 

have felt pressure because by February 2021 , Stars had more orders for fire wrap to  

> 751 NE 21 September 2021, p. 99:16 -22 (Mehedi Re -ex).

204 

meet. 752 He was the type of worker who would push to meet targets. 753 This 

explained why Marimuthu may have attempted his own fix  with green tape around 

the damaged wiring of Heater No. 2 (see [ 184 ] above) and why the Mixer Machine 

was turned on again on 24 February 2021 (see [ 182 ] above). Such an in -house fix 

would also have been in keeping with Stars’ prevailing practice of performing in -

house repairs on the Mixer Machine (see [ 117 ] and [ 150 ]-[160 ] above). 

386 Moe was aware that Marimuthu had attempted his own fix  with green tape 

around the damaged heater’s wires. Moe received a photograph of the fix from 

Marimuthu (see [187 ] above). Moe did not express any surprise or query 

Marimuthu on what he was doing. Moe claimed that he assumed Marimuthu and 

Shohel was chec king the “ continuity ” of the heater cables and that by this, Moe 

envisaged that they were checking on the condition of the heater wires after they 

had been taped up. 754 

387  Moe contends that he did not think that Marimuthu was checking whether 

the damaged heater could still work. 755 This is despite the fact that the wires with 

the green tape were connected to the damaged heater. 756 There would have been no        

> 752 SS -6 (Chua XD), [93]; NE 24 September 2021, pp. 141:23 -142:5 (Chua XD EIC); SS -7
> (Moe), [108].
> 753 NE 27 September 2021, p. 142:6 -19 (Chua XD EIC).
> 754 NE 30 September 2021, p. 85:3 -23 (Moe EIC).
> 755 NE 30 September 2021, p. 85:24 -86:1 (Moe EIC).
> 756 NE 30 September 2021, p. 86:13 -17 (Moe EIC).

205 

reason for the workers to tape up the damaged heater and/or to test its cables unless 

they were intending to use the damaged heater, and Moe must have clearly 

understood this. 

388 Further, Moe claimed that his knowledge of needing to check the heater 

cables came from the 8 August 2020 incident when Imam changed the damaged 

Heater No. 1. 757 However, on 8 A ugust 2020, Imam had done his checks, including 

a “continuity” check, on the new heater after the damaged heater had been replaced 

(see [ 87 ] above). W hen it was put to Moe that he knew from his experience that 

“continuity” checks were only done on a heater intended for use , he evaded the 

obvious conclusion :758 

Examination of Moe by State Counsel 

Q. Mr Moe, if you had really thought back to 8 August you 

would know that checking continuity comes only after you 

replace the heater unless you intend to use precisely the 

heater you ’re checking the continuity of, agree? 

A. I’m not sure. 

389 Accordingly, Moe’s account that he was unaware that Marimuthu  was 

checking whether the damaged heater could still work is not believable. Instead, the         

> 757 NE 30 September 2021, p p.127 :1 8-128 :6(Moe XX ).
> 758 NE 30 September 2021, p. 136:12 -17 (Moe Re -ex ).

206 

more likely explanation is that Moe knew that  Marimuthu  was checking whether 

the damaged heater could still work. Moe would have felt pressure to ensure that 

productio n could carry on at the workshop that day to fulfil the orders for fire wrap. 

Handling sales for fire wrap and ensuring that production ran smoothly were 

precisely Moe’s duties. 759 Hence, Moe was content to let Marimuthu try his  own 

fix  with green tape arou nd the damaged heaters wires. Moe was plainly ambivalent 

as to the precise steps Marimuthu and Shohel were going to take, and did not 

consider their safety when leaving them to their own devices. 

390  Given the earlier fire involving the heater, Moe ought to ha ve known that 

any further attempt to use the same heater carried safety risks. In fact, Moe’s own 

position at the Inquiry hearing was that he had thought at that time that the workers 

should have stopped using the Mixer Machine after the small fire  on 24 F ebruary 

2021: 760 

Examination of Moe by State Counsel 

Q. Do you agree that the safe thing to do on 24 February 2021 

morning, especially after this fire that had occurred early in 

the morning, is to just stop using the mixer machine 

altogether, decommission? 

A. I followed my boss’ instructions to change the heater.   

> 759 SS -7 (Moe), [32(a)] and [32(e)].
> 760 NE 30 September 2021, pp. 101:11 -102:1 (Moe EIC)

207 

Q. That is not quite my question, Mr Moe. I am asking for your 

own view. Did you think, on 24 February 2021 morning, 

especially given the fire that had already occurred early 

in the morning, that the workers just shouldn ’t be using 

the mixer machine anymore? 

A. Yes, yes, should not be using. Yes. 

Q. You thought that at that time? 

A. (In English) Yes. Yes. 

(emphasis added) 

391  Yet, Moe did nothing to stop Marimuthu and Shohel on the morning of 24 

February 2021. In fact, having seen the photograph from Marimuthu, Moe asked 

Marimuthu for an update (see [ 188 ] above) although by that time, the Accident had 

already occurred – Moe was unaware that the safety risk had eventuated. 

392  This explain s why Moe chose to delete the WhatsApp messages containing 

the photograph that Marimuthu sent him and his request to Marimuthu for an update 

(see [189 ] above). Following the Accident, it would have dawned on Moe that he 

should not have allowed Marimuthu and Shohel to attempt to use the damaged 

heater when it was unsafe to do so . As the Production Engineer and someone who 

knew what Marimuthu and Shohel we re doing, it would have behoved Moe to stop 

them. Hence, Moe felt compelled to get rid of the evidence that implicated him. 208 

3. Stars failed to consult the manufacturer or a competent person before 

performing in -house repairs on the Mixer Machine 

393 To deal with the cracks observed on the Mixer Machine, Stars resorted to 

having Nasim perform in -house welding repairs on the Mixer Machine following 

each of the incidents on 12 October 2020 and 12 February 2021 (see [ 117 ] and [ 150 ]

above). 

394 Nasim is a welder at Stars and has the relevant certification to perfo rm 

welding works. 761 However, Matcor explained that the resistance of welds overall 

would be affected by having the repair welds over the original welding and that the 

repair welding done by Stars were of poor quality (see [258 ]-[259 ] above). 

Ultimately, as explained above at [ 261 ], poor welding repairs weakened the strength 

of the welds on the Mixer Machine which in turn contributed to the eventual rupture 

of the Mixer Machine. 

395  The guidance on machinery maintenance and repair is clear:  machines must 

be maintaine d and repaired according to manufacturer’s specifications or, in the 

absence of such specifications, in accordance with a competent person’s 

recommendations. 762 However, Chua XD was content to proceed with welding 

repairs on the Mixer Machine without consul ting Laizhou Keda. As regards the   

> 761 SS -4 (Nasim), [2] and [7].
> 762 “Workplace Safety and Health Guidelines, Safe Use of Machinery” published in 2014 by
> th e Workplace Safety and Health Council and which was applicable at the material time.

209 

incident on 12 October 2020, Chua XD did not contact Laizhou Keda (see [ 116 ]

above). 763 As for the incident on 12 February 2021, Chua XD had contacted 

Laizhou Keda but only for the limited purpose of obtaining a quote for a new mixer 

machine. 764 Chua XD was also well aware that by performing in -house welding 

repairs, he had voided the terms o f the warranty provided by Laizhou Keda. 765 

396 Stars also did not obtain any independent advice regarding the appropriate 

repairs from a competent person. 

397 If Stars had consulted Laizhou Keda or obtained independent advice, Stars 

would not have had to resort t o in -house welding repairs which ultimately  weakened 

the strength of the welds on the Mixer Machine . Stars may have received advice 

that the Mixer Machine was no longer fit for use or it may have experienced down -

time waiting for the Mixer Machine to be pr ofessionally repaired and certified fit 

for use. Either scenario would have been a safer course of action and would have 

prevented the loss of lives .

398  Another repair /modification that Stars performed on the Mixer Machine 

without consultation was the in -hous e installation of insulation over the surface of 

the oil jacket (see [ 124 ] and [ 163 ] above). Chua XD accepted that this had the effect    

> 763 SS -6 (Chua XD), [152].
> 764 SS -6 (Chua XD), [208] -[209].
> 765 SS -6 (Chua XD), [208].

210 

of trapping heat within the oil jacket 766 and Dr Salim opined that the trapped heat 

would increase the temperature of the oil inside the jacket. 767 This would in turn 

have had an impact on the overall pressure build -up within the oil jacket which led 

to the Accident. 

4. Stars fail ed to ensure that those working at the Tuas Site had adequate 

instruction, information, training and supervision 

399 Stars had al so failed to ensure that those working at the Tuas Site had 

adequate instruction, information, training and supervision. 

400 It is recognised that the Stars workers played different roles in fire wrap 

production, hence they would not have been given equivalent training for each of 

their roles. However, it is evident that the instruction, information, training and 

supervision for each Stars worker was insufficient for the roles they played within 

the Tuas Site workshop. 

401 For the operation of the Mixer M achine, it was claimed that Chua and Moe 

personally trained the workers in how the Mixer Machine was to be operated. 

However, the training was patchy at best. Chua had conducted training on the Mixer 

Machine for Imam and Moe without an adequate understandi ng of how the Mixer             

> 766 NE 2 7September 2021 ,p. 182:13 -21 (Chua XD, questions from IC).
> 767 NE 5October 2021 ,pp.41:19 -42:1 (Dr Salim EIC).

211 

Machine worked, and had done so without even reading the User Guide on 12 June 

2020 itself. 768 Evidence of the alleged training conducted, in the form of videos 

recorded on 12 June 2020, 769 revealed no actual instructions on how the Mixer 

Machine was to be operated. 

402 This resulted in the workers operating the Mixer Machine having little 

knowledge on the actual operation of the Mixer Machine. Moe, who was the 

production engineer in charge of the Tuas Site workshop, and had supposedly 

traine d Marimuthu on how to use Mixer Machine ,770 had merely taught Marimuthu 

the processes involved, without teaching any of the checks required (see [ 62(c) ]

above). 771 Moe did not even know how much oil needed to be in the oil jacket or 

why the oil level must be checked, and had left the matters relating to the Mixer 

Machine to Chua XD. 772 

403 The same could be said for Imam, who subsequently taught Mehedi how t o

operate the Mixer Machine (see [ 62(a) ] above). He was merely taught the steps on 

how to operate the Mixer Machine by Chua XD, without any reference to the User 

Guide, and was not taught anything on the maintenance of the Mixer Machine. 773       

> 768 NE 23 September 2021, p. 131 (Chua XD EIC).
> 769 S-149 and S -150.
> 770 NE 30 September 2021, pp. 7:24 -8:5 (Moe EIC).
> 771 NE 30 September 2021, pp. 8:6 -9:25 (Moe EIC).
> 772 NE 30 September 2021, pp. 9:1 -10:1 (Moe EIC ).
> 773 SS -2 (Imam), [27] -[30].

212 

By the time Imam trained Mehedi on the use of the Mixer Machine, the only 

information conveyed was how to open the cover /lid of the Mixer Machine, how to 

start and stop the mixing function, and how to switch on and off the heaters using 

the control panel. 774 While Imam and Mehedi were of the opinion that such training 

was adequate, because they were able to operate the Mixer Machine for their 

work, 775 the training, ins truction, supervision and instruction was objectively 

insufficient for the safe operation of the Mixer Machine. 

404 There was also inadequate instruction and training for the workers in charge 

of other aspects of the production process. Moe claimed that he had trained the 

workers personally when they first started work at the Tuas Site, and had referred 

to the RA and SWP documents when doing so. 776 This was not supported by the 

evidence of the Stars workers, who informed that they were shown what to do by 

the ot her workers already working at the Tuas Site. 777 Even on Moe’s account, the 

parts of the SWP referred to in training the workers only related to the 

manufacturing steps for the fire wrap, and did not refer to any safety aspects in      

> 774 SS -3 (Mehedi), [30].
> 775 NE 20 September 2021, p. 136:1 -8 (Imam XX), NE 21 September 2021, p. 82:6 -25
> (Mehedi XX).
> 776 SS -7 (Moe), [110] and [137].
> 777 SS -11 (Rahad), [22]; SS -12 (Lizon), [43]; NE 28 September 2021, p. 29:1 -5(Jitu EIC).

213 

relation to the work at th e Tuas Site. 778 Chua XD’s assumption that Moe had 

adequately briefed the workers on the RA 779 was therefore misplaced. 

405 Stars has attempted to portray that the general briefings by Shibu would 

have been applicable to the work at the Tuas Site. However, the br iefings by Shibu 

generally related to the work at the project sites .780 Shibu did not even have any 

knowledge of the processes at the Tuas Site, as he had not been to the Tuas Site 

before the Accident. 781 While there was a briefing given on hazardous materia ls on 

16 June 2019, Shibu explained that it related to the oil used when threads were cut 

on pipes, and to paints used, and did not relate to any of the processes at the Tuas 

Site workshop, which was not in operation then. 782 There was also no reason for th e

workers to think that the requirements for attire at the project sites, which were 

construction sites, would be equally applicable to the Tuas Site, which was in effect 

a production workshop. 

406 This was compounded by there being no safety supervisor appoin ted at the 

Tuas Site. Chua XD confirmed that there was no specific appointment for a safety 

supervisor at the Tuas Site, and he could not recall if he had told Moe, Imam or         

> 778 SS -7 (Moe), [137]; S -264 –see [3.4] -[3.8] on what Moe supposedly briefed for operation
> of the Mixer Machine, and [3.10] -[3.18] for what was supposedly briefed by Moe for fire
> wrap production.
> 779 SS -6 (Chua XD), [112].
> 780 SS -15 (Shibu), [ 6(c)].
> 781 SS -15 (Shibu), [8] and [10].
> 782 NE 1 October 2021, pp. 30:7 -32:8 (Shibu EIC).

214 

Marimuthu that they were responsible for safety issues at the Tuas Site. 783 He had 

therefore assumed that these supervisors would escalate any safety issues to him. 

This assumption , however, was not reasonable – Imam did not see himself as 

responsible for safety issues, 784 and Moe purported not to see safety as part of his 

portfolio at the Tuas Site workshop. 785 The workers were therefore not supervised 

for safety aspects when working at the Tuas Site. 

407 Lastly, none of the workers were told anything about the risks involved 

when handling potato starch, which is a combustible dust. While the M OM Circular 

on the Hazards and Controls of Combustible Dusts (the “ Combustible Dust 

Circular ”) requires training and refresher courses to be provided on combustible 

dust hazards and its controls, and to communicate clearly the combustible dust 

hazards and its physical properties, safe handling practices and precautions to be 

taken, 786 there wa s no evidence that the workers at the Tuas Site were told anything 

about the hazards involved when dealing with potato starch at the Tuas Site. 

408 The end result was that the workers at the Tuas Site were not given sufficient 

training, supervision, instruction and information on the processes they were to 

perform, the risks and hazards involved on the Tuas Site, and the precautions they     

> 783 SS -6 (Chua XD), [116].
> 784 SS -2 (Imam), [41].
> 785 SS -7 (Moe), [32].
> 786 S-233, p. 3.

215 

had to take. It was reasonably pract icable for Stars to have taken additional steps to 

ensure these were done: assumptions on Chua’s part that his subordinates would 

take care of these aspects, when his subordinates were not even told they were in 

charge, were clearly unreasonable. 

5. Stars fail ed to take precautions for the use of potato starch powder at the 

Tuas Site workshop 

409  It is clear that the RA form in respect of the production at the Tuas Site 

workshop 787 did not even identify  potato starch powder  as a potential combustible 

dust hazard, 788 let alone prescribe any safety measures to address the risks 

associated with t his hazard . Stars had failed to take precautions for the use of potato 

starch powder at the Tuas Site, in failing to take reasonably pr acticable steps to 

prevent a dust explosion on site in the following areas: 

(a) enclosure of the Tuas Site workshop and taking reasonable steps to 

restrict the spread and effect of a dust explosion should it occur; 

(b) dust control; 

(c) exclusion /enclosure of possible sources of ignition;   

> 787 S-266.
> 788 NE 30 September 2021, pp. 20:2 -21:19 (Moe EIC).

216 

(d) use of suitable explosion -proof equipment; and 

(e) use of suitable PPE on site. 

410 No steps had been taken to enclose the Tuas Site workshop, or to restrict the 

spread and reach of a dust explosion should it occur. The Tuas Site workshop wa s

entirely open to the neighbouring units and the other levels, where the raw materials 

were kept and the Stars workers were staying in, such that the potato starch used at 

the Tuas Site could have flown to the other areas. There were no signs of any vents 

to redirect energy from an explosion to a safe location , or other equally effective 

measures at the Tuas Site to restrict the spread and effect of a dust explosion should 

it occur – the Tuas Site workshop was one contiguous working area. The placement 

of the Mixer Machine on the Platform was not done to restrict the spread and effect 

of a dust explosion with potato starch should such an explosion occur: as explained 

by Chua XD, it was done so that it would be easier to transfer the heavy fire clay 

produced from the Mixer Machine to the extruder machine beneath it. 789 

411 For dust control, the ventilation measures taken by Stars (see [ 63 ] above) 

did not sati sfy what was required in the Combustible Dust Circular .790 Chua XD 

was aware of this Circular, having read it sometime in 2019, and was aware that it   

> 789 SS -6 (Ch ua XD),[42].
> 790 S-233.

217 

applied to fire wrap production at the Tuas Site workshop. 791 However, the available 

measures were either not used or not working for significant periods or ineffective 

for dust control (eg, the exhaust vent , which , as explained above at [ 63 ],  was not 

placed above the Mixer Machine and served only to facilitate general ventilation at 

the workshop instead of effectively suck ing up dust ); or served to disperse the dust, 

including the potato starch around the Tuas Site workshop instead ( eg , sweeping ;

fans which, as explained above at [ 63 ], blew  in the direction of the Platform and the 

assembly tables and would serve to spread dust there ; blowing dust off tables with 

compressed air gun s). 

412 Possible sources of ignition were not enclosed or excluded within the Tuas 

Site workshop. While Chua XD has attempted to explain that gas torches were only 

used arou nd the production tables for the sealing of the fire wrap, and “ no potato 

starch ” was present there, 792 this was clearly untenable, as the workers have 

explained that the entire working area was dusty (see [ 64 ] above), and the 

production tables must have been the same to necessitate the use of the compressed 

air gun. Likewise, the tipping of bags of potato starch directly into the  mixing 

chamber  of the Mixer Machine that was placed on a raised platform, would have 

resulted in powders and dust flying up, 793 and the Mixer Machine itself had multiple    

> 791 SS -6 (Chua XD), [105].
> 792 SS -6 (Chua XD), [87].
> 793 NE 21 September 2021, pp. 69:20 -70:12 (Mehedi EIC).

218 

heated surfaces. There was therefore airborne potato starch in the entire Tuas Site 

workshop, within which there were multiple possible sources of ignition. 

413 There were no steps taken to use explosion -proof equipment at the Tuas 

Site. The Mixer Machine itself was not explosion -proof. 794 Neither were the lights, 

power switches, fans or other electrical equi pment. 795 Chua XD had explained that 

he took no steps to use explosion -proof equipment as he had determined that the 

quantity of potato starch was not high, and that the surroundings were “ intrinsically 

safe ”. 796 However, bearing in mind that a layer of only 0.8mm of combustible dust 

was required to create a dust explosion or flash fire hazard, 797 Stars’ failure to utilise 

any explosion -proof equipment within the Tuas Site was clearly not reasonable. 

414 Lastly, Stars did not take measures to ensure that the worke rs on site wore 

suitable PPE, such as fire retardant clothing or static dissipative safety shoes, as was 

suggested in the Combustible Dust Circular .798 Chua XD did not issue fire retardant 

clothing to any of the Stars workers, and had only asked Marimuthu t o put on a 

welding jacket when operating the Mixer Machine after the 12 February 2021 fire ,

to calm Marimuthu down. 799 The workers who joined the Tuas Site workshop after         

> 794 SS -6 (Chua XD), [48].
> 795 SS -6 (Chua XD), [107].
> 796 SS -6 (Chua XD), [107].
> 797 S-283 (Dr Salim’s Report) , p. 46:11 -13.
> 798 S-233, p. 3.
> 799 NE 24 September 2021, pp. 138:4 -139:11 (Chua XD EIC).

219 

Chinese New Year were not issued respirators, even when they asked for one. 800 

Neither were protective eyeglasses or chemical safety googles, which were 

suggested in the safety data sheet for bentonite clay received by Stars on 23 October 

2020, 801 made mandatory in the Tuas Site workshop. 

415 While it was claimed that safety shoes were required on site, there were no 

steps taken when it was clear that Stars workers were wearing slippers during fire 

wrap production . Chua XD did not take any steps in this regard after seeing the 

videos on 12 February 2021 that some of the workers were wear ing slippers at the 

Tuas Site, as he claimed that he depended on Marimuthu to remind the workers of 

such matters. 802 Rahad had also stated that Chua XD and Moe had seen some of the 

workers and him wear shorts and slippers at the Tuas Site workshop, but did not 

say anything about it. 803 

416 Stars evidently failed to take reasonable precautions for the use of potato 

starch powder at the Tuas Site workshop. The measures stated above were 

reasonably practicable, being specifically addressed in the Combustible Dust 

Circular or required in regulation 26 of the Workplace Safety and Health (General 

Provisions) Regulations (“ WSH (GP) Regs ”) . Following the fire on 12 February     

> 800 NE 24 September 2021, pp. 138:4 -139:11 (Chua XD EIC).
> 801 SS -6 (Chua XD), [109].
> 802 SS -6 (Chua XD), [191].
> 803 SS -11 (Rahad), [60].

220 

2021, Stars should have become acutely aware of the risk of a combustible dust 

explosion in the wo rkshop. Yet, no special measures were taken to mitigate the risk. 

This contributed to the Accident, in terms of the availability of potato starch powder 

for combustion, and the spread of flash fires beyond Stars to the neighbouring Alif -

E unit. 

417 Having expl ored the causes, both technical and underlying, that led to the 

Accident, we now go on to consider TOR E on the potential offences disclosed .

V. TOR E: POTENTIAL OFFENCES DISCLOSED 

418  Sectio n 26(6) of the WSHA states :

“If the District Judge [appointed to the IC] is of the opinion that 

criminal proceedings ought to be instituted against any person in 

connection with the accident … he shall also forward a copy of the 

[IC’s] report to the Public Prosecutor. ”

419 The IC’s TOR E m irrors Section 26(6) above.  Hence, although the 

discretion to bring criminal proceedings as a result of the Accident lies with the 

Public Prosecutor, TOR E (as statutorily envisaged) requires the learned IC 

Chairman to consider whether any such criminal pr oceedings ought to be instituted. 

In this regard, the IC had directed that State Counsel assist by highlighting in these 

written submissions the possible criminal proceedings that may arise from the 221 

Accident .804  Accordingly, we set out in this Section our p reliminary views on the 

potential offences disclosed for the learned IC Chairman’s consideration. 

420 We clarify at the outset, that our views in this Section are subject to the 

following provisos: 

(a) First, our views on potential offences disclosed are based purely on 

the facts and evidence adduced over the course of the Inquiry; 

(b) Second, our views relate only to potential offences arising from 

matters directly related to the Accident itself; 805 

(c) Third, even in respect of matters directly related to t he Accident, our 

views , in our capacity as State Counsel in this Inquiry, on potential offences 

are not intended to be definitive or exhaustive; and 

(d) Fourth, there are significant overlaps in the elements of the possible 

offences disclosed, such that it wou ld be a matter of prosecutorial discretion 

on the most appropriate offence(s) to prefer against each identified party.   

> 804 NE 16 November 2021, p. 146:11 -25 (H ousekeeping).
> 805 Purely by way of illustration, we have not considered the legality or regulatory compliance
> of, for instance, the actions of building the raised Platform or the workers working at the
> workshop during the Circuit Breaker.

222 

A. Stars is potentially liable under section 11 and/or 12 of the WSHA 

421 Stars is potentially liable under section 11 (as occupier) and/or sect ion 

12(1) -(2) (as employer) of the WSHA for failing to take, so far as is reasonably 

practicable, such measures as are necessary to ensure the safety and health of  the 

relevant persons /workers .

422 Section 11 of the WSHA provides: 

Duty of occupier of workplace 

11. It shall be the duty of every occupier of any workplace to 

take, so far as is reasonably practicable , such measures to 

ensure that —

(a) the workplace ;

(b) all means of access to or egress from the workplace; 

and 

(c) any machinery, equipment, plant, article or 

substance kept on the workplace ,

are safe and without risks to health to every person within 

those premises, whether or not the person is at work or is an 

employee of the occupier. 

(emphasis added) 223 

423 The relevant parts of section 12 of the WSHA provide: 

Duties of employers 

12(1) It shall be the duty of every employer to take, so far as is 

reasonably practicable , such measures as are necessary to 

ensure the safety and health of his employees at work. 

(2) It shall be the dut y of every employer to take, so far as is 

reasonably practicable , such measures as are necessary to 

ensure the safety and health of persons (not being his 

employees) who may be affected by any undertaking 

carried on by him in the workplace .

(3) For the pu rposes of subsection (1), the measures necessary to 

ensure the safety and health of persons at work include —

(a) providing and maintaining for those persons a work 

environment which is safe, without risk to health ,

and adequate as regards facilities and a rrangements 

for their welfare at work; 

(b) ensuring that adequate safety measures are taken in 

respect of any machinery, equipment, plant, article 

or process used by those persons; 

(c) ensuring that those persons are not exposed to 

hazards arising out of the arrangement, disposal, 

manipulation, organisation, processing, storage, 

transport, working or use of things —

(i) in their workplace; or 

(ii) near their workplace and under the control of 

the employer; 224 

(d) developing and implementing procedures for dealing 

with emergencies that may arise while those persons 

are at work; and 

(e) ensuring that those persons at work have adequate 

instruction, information, training and supervision as 

is necessary for them to perform their work. 

(emphasis a dded) 

424 As Stars is both occupier and employer in relation to the workplace at the 

Tuas Site workshop, both provisions are relevant. 

425 An assessment under section 11 / section 12(1) -(2) of the WSHA requires a 

consideration of: 

(a) Whether there were foreseeable r isks to safety and health arising 

from the operations at the Tuas Site workshop; 806 and 

(b) If yes, whether there was a failure to take, so far as was reasonably 

practicable, such measures as were necessary to ensure the safety and health 

of the relevant perso ns /workers against the reasonably foreseeable risks.                 

> 806 Whilst reasonable foreseeability of a risk is not stated explicitly as an element in the duty
> of safety in section 11/ section 12 of the WSHA, English case law makes clear that the duty
> is to guard against reasonably foreseeable risks ( Baker v Quantum Clot hing Group L td
> [2011] 4 All ER 223 at [68], per Lord Mance; RvTangerine Confectionery Ltd [2011]
> EWCA Crim 201 5at [36]). Our local courts also consider reasonable foreseeability of the
> risk when considering the reasonable practicability of taking measure s(Public Prosecutor
> v Underwater Contractors Private Limited and another [2020] SGDC 299 at [195]).

225 

426 In our view, the following risks to safety and health arising from the 

operations at the Tuas Site workshop were reasonably foreseeable: 

(a) The risk of a fire or other accident involving the Mixer Machine at 

the workshop : The risk was objectively foreseeable in the light of all the red 

flags and near misses that had surfaced in relation to the Mixer Machine, 

including two prior fires involving the Mixer Machine (see [ 349 ]-[391 ]

above). Additionally: 

(i) At the very least, f ollowing the fire on 1 2 February 2021, 

Chua XD subjectively appreciated the risk of continuing to use the 

Mixer Machine; and 

(ii) At the very least, f ollowing the small fire on 24 February 

2021 morning , Moe subjectively appreciated the risk of continuing 

to use the Mixer Machine. 

(b) Th e risk of a fire involving potato starch powder at the workshop :

Insofar as there was a risk of a fire at the workshop (see [ 426 (a) ] above) 

which would be an obvious ignition source, there was an objectively 

foreseeable corresponding risk of a fire involving potato starch powder. 

Chua XD was aware that potato starch powder was a combustible dust, 807  

> 807 SS -6 (Chua XD), [105].

226 

and he was aware of the hazards posed by combustible dust. He had read 

the Combustible Dust Circular and was aware that it applied to fire wrap 

production at the Tuas Site (see [ 411 ] above). 

427 We further consider that Stars failed to take, so far as was reasonably 

practicable, such measures as were necessary to ensure the safety and health of the 

relevant persons /workers against the abovementioned reasonably foreseeable risks: 

(a) As regards risk of a fire or other accident involving the Mixer 

Machine: 

(i) Stars could have ensured the safe operation of Mixer 

Machine if it had used sufficient oil in the oil jacket, monitor ed the 

temperature of the oil and used the Mixer Machine as an open system 

as intended (see [ 311 ]-[348 ] above). It is undisputed that it would 

have been simple and uncostly for Stars to take these steps .

(ii) Moreover, following the fire on 12 February 2021, the safest 

course would have been to stop using the Mixer Machine until it was 

professionally inspected, and if possible, repaired and certified fit 

for use. Stars did not even entertain this thought, and chose to 

perform in -house welding repairs instead. 227 

(iii) At the very latest, by the time of t he small fire on 24 February 

2021, all the workers should have been instructed to stay clear of the 

Mixer Machine. No such instructions were given. Instead, the 

workers were given the impression that the damaged heater could be 

replaced and that use of the Mixer Machine would continue .

(b) As regards risk of a fire involving combustible dust, Stars failed to 

take several reasonably practicable steps as set out in  the Combustible Dust 

Circular (see [ 409 ]-[416 ] above). 

B. Stars is potentially liable under section 17(4) of the WSHA 

428 Stars is po tentially liable under section 17(4)(a) of the WSHA (as owner of 

the Mixer Machine) for failing to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that 

the Mixer Machine was maintained in a safe condition. 

429 Section 17(4) of the WSHA provides: 

Where any machine ry moved by mechanical power is used in any 

workplace, then notwithstanding anything in this Act, it shall be the 

duty of the owner of the machinery to ensure —

(a) so far as is reasonably practicable, that the machinery is 

maintained in a safe condition ; and 228 

(b) that the precautions (if any) to be taken for the safe use of the 

machinery and the health hazards (if any) associated with the 

machinery are available to any person using the machinery. 

(emphasis added) 

430 As Stars is the owner of the Mixer Machine, Stars’ failure to adopt the 

reasonably practicable measures discussed at [ 427(a) ] above (in the context of the 

risk of a fire or other accident invol ving the Mixer Machine) also apply in the 

context of section 17(4)(a) of the WSHA .

C. Chua XD is potentially liable under section 48(1) of the WSHA 

431 Chua XD is potentially liable under section 48(1) of the WSHA (as Stars’ 

sole director) for the offences commi tted by Stars as outlined above at [ 421 ]-[430 ]. 

432 Section 48(1) of the WSHA provides: 

Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a body 

corporate, an officer of the body corporate shall be guilty of the 

offence and shall be liabl e to be proceeded against and punished 

accordingly unless he proves that —

(a) the offence was committed without his consent or 

connivance ; and 229 

(b) he had exercised all such diligence to prevent the 

commission of the offence as he ought to have exercised 

having regard to the nature of his functions in that capacity 

and to all the circumstances. 

(emphasis added) 

433 It is undisputed that Chua XD is overall in charge at Stars. 808 It is also clear 

that the workers at the Tuas Site workshop and Moe reported to, and took 

instructions from, Chua XD. Chua XD made decisions on matters which go to the 

heart of the offences potentially committed by Stars , such as :

(a) How much oil to purchase and use in the oil jacket; 

(b) Whether to measure the temperature of the oil in the oil jacket; 

(c) Whether to use the Mixer Machine as a closed system; 

(d) Whether to measure the pressure inside the oil jacket; 

(e) Whether to perform welding repairs on the Mixer Mach ine; 

(f) Whether to continue using the Mixer Machine; and  

> 808 SS -6 (Chua XD), [16].

230 

(g) What precautions to take for the use of potato starch powder at the 

Tuas Site workshop. 

434  In the circumstances, Stars’ offences were committed at least with Chua 

XD’s consent. 809 He was also the “boss” beh ind Stars’ failure to take reasonable 

steps to ensure the workers’ safety and cannot be said to have exercised any 

diligence to prevent such failure/offences. 

D. Moe is potentially liable under section 15(3A) of the WSHA 

435 Moe is potentially liable under sectio n 15(3A) of the WSHA (as a person at 

work) for  doing a negligent act which endangers the safety or health of others. 

436  Section 15(3A) of the WSHA provides: 

Any person at work who, without reasonable cause, does any 

negligent act which endangers the safety or health of himself or 

others shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable upon 

conviction to a fine not exceeding $30,000 or to imprisonment for a 

term not exceeding 2 years or to both .      

> 809 In AG’s Reference (No 1 of 1995) [1996] 4 All ER 21 at 27 , the English Court of Appeal
> held that to prove consent, it must be shown that the accused person “[knew] the material
> facts which constitute the offence by the body corporate and … [had] agreed to its conduct
> of its business on the basis of those facts ”.

231 

437  The test for negligence is objective and involves a consideration of whether 

a reasonable person in the same circumstances would have been aware of the 

likelihood of damage or injury to others. 810 

438  In this regard, focussing alone on Moe’s actions after the small fire 

involving Heater No. 2 on 24 February 2021 (see [ 386 ]-[392 ] above), Moe’s 

conduct was plainly negligent. A reasonable person would have been aware that 

any further attempt to use the same heater carried a likelihood of damage or injury 

to others. 

439 Instead, Moe failed to stop Marimuthu and Shohel from attempting to use 

the same heater on 24 Februar y 2021. He was content to let Marimuthu try his  own 

fix  with green tape around the damaged heaters wires. There is no reasonable cause 

for Moe’s failure . Even if Moe thought that Marimuthu and Shohel were acting on 

Chua XD’s instructions, this would not co nstitute reasonable cause. As stated by 

the High Court in  Nurun Novi at [58]: 

“Parliament intended to effect a “cultural change” by expanding the 

liability framework to render even rank -and -file workers 

responsible for unsafe work practices. This responsibility is not             

> 810 Nurun Novi Saydur Rahman v P ublic Prosecutor [2019] 3 SLR 431 (“ Nurun Novi ”) at
> [50] -[51]. Th elegal position is that it is only necessary to show an appreciation of the risk
> to safety and not of the Accident.

232 

“diminished or affected” by the acts of another employee or 

superior. In my view, it would be inconsistent with this 

parliamentary intention to find that an employee would be 

completely exonerated from liability under s 15(3A) of the WSHA, 

merely because the employee was following work orders. This is 

especially the case when the work orders in question were patently 

unsafe, and the employee in question knew that the work orders were 

patently unsafe. ”

(emphasis added) 

E. Moe and Chua XD are potentially liable under section 204A of the 

Penal Code 

440 Moe and Chua XD are potentially liable under section 204A of the Penal 

Code (Cap. 224 , 2008 Rev Ed)  (“ Penal Code ”) for  obstructing the course of justice. 

441  Section 204A of the Penal Code provide s: 

Whoever does an act that has a tendency to obstruct, prevent, 

pervert or defeat the course of justice —

(a) knowing that the act is likely to obstruct, prevent, pervert 

or defeat the course of justice; or 233 

(b) intending to obstruct, prevent, pervert or defeat the course 

of justice, 

shall be guilty of an offence and shall on conviction be punished 

with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 7 years, or with 

fine, or with both. 

(emphasis added) 

442  As explained above at [ 187 ]-[189 ], after the Accident, Moe deleted the 

following items from his mobile phone and Marimuthu’s mobile phone: 

(a)  The photograph  which showed that the wiring of the damaged 

Heater No. 2 had been taped together with green tape (sent by Marimuthu 

to Moe on 24 February 2021 at 11:13am) (the “ 11:13am Photograph ”); 

and 

(b)  The message in response to the photograph which stated: “ Ok let me 

know ASAP ” (sent by Moe to Marimuthu on 24 February at 11:32am) ( the 

“11: 32am Message ”). 

443 Moe also deleted a third item, a message which stated “ Fuck leh ” (sent by 

Moe to Marimuthu on 24 February at 12:09am). 811  

> 811 SS -7 (Moe), [132].

234 

444 Moe first deleted the above messages and photograph from his mobile 

phone on 25 February 2021. Moe had shown Chua XD the messages and 

photograph on 25 February 2021 and asked whether he could delete them from his 

mobile phone. 812 Chua XD had said yes. 813 Moe had also briefly described the 

contents of the messages to Chua XD by explaining that there was one message 

from him to Marimuthu stating “ heater ok or not ”, to which Marimuthu replied “ he 

was checking ”. 814 

445 Moe then deleted the same messages and photograph from Marimuthu’s 

mobile phone the next day, on 26 February 2021. Moe had Marimuthu’s mobile 

phone because it was ha nded to him at the Tuas Site by an officer in the evening of 

24 February 2021. 815 Moe had first tried to turn on Marimuthu’s mobile phone on 

25 February 2021 but could not do so. 816 On 26 February 2021, Moe managed to 

charge Marimuthu’s mobile phone in Chua XD’s car. 817 Moe came across the 

messages and photograph that he had earlier deleted from his mobile phone, and 

asked Chua XD whether he could likewise delete the messages and photograph 

from Marimuthu’s phone. 818        

> 812 SS -7 (Moe), [133]; SS -6 (Chua XD), [223].
> 813 SS -7 (Mo e), [133]; SS -6 (Chua XD), [223].
> 814 SS -6 (Chua XD), [223].
> 815 SS -7 (Moe), [134]; SS -6 (Chua XD), [225].
> 816 SS -7 (Moe), [134].
> 817 SS -7 (Moe), [134].
> 818 SS -7 (Moe), [134]; SS -6 (Chua XD), [225].

235 

446 At that time, Chua XD had just dropped Moe off at a canteen near Star’s 

Changi Site while Chua XD went back to the Changi Site to meet MOM 

investigators regarding the incident. 819 Chua XD told Moe to wait for him to return 

and not to delete the messages and photograph in the meantime. 820 

447 When Chua X D met the MOM investigators at the Changi Site, he was 

asked to hand over, inter alia , Marimuthu’s mobile phone. 821 Instead of informing 

the investigators that Marimuthu’s mobile phone was with Moe at the time and that 

Moe was considering making deletions f rom Marimuthu’s mobile phone, Chua XD 

lied to the investigators that he was checking on the whereabouts of Marimuthu’s 

phone. 822 

448 Around the same time, before Chua XD returned to meet Moe, Moe deleted 

the messages and photograph from Marimuthu’s mobile phone. 823 Moe called Chua 

XD and told him that he had deleted the messages and photograph from        

> 819 SS -7 (Moe), [134]; SS -6 (Chua XD), [225]; S-289 ( MOM’s Investigation Report ),
> [5.1.5( a)].
> 820 SS -7 (Moe), [134]; SS -6 (Chua XD), [225].
> 821 S-289 ( MOM’s Investigation Report ), [5.1.5( a)] ; NE 27 September 2021, p. 143:11 -17
> (Chua XD Re -ex).
> 822 S-289 ( MOM’s Investigation Report ), [5.1.5( a)] ; NE 27 September 2021, pp. 142:23 -
> 143:10 (Chua XD Re -ex).
> 823 SS -7 (Moe), [134].

236 

Marimuthu’s mobile phone. 824 According to Moe, he made the call to Chua XD at 

about 5:30pm or 6pm. 825 

449 Moe subsequently passed Marimuthu’s phone to Chua XD on 27 February 

2021. 826 Chua XD handed over the mobile phone to the SPF on 1 March 2021, but 

did not mention that Moe had made deletions from the mobile phone. 827 

450 Subsequently, at Moe’s first interview with the MOM investigators on 4 

March 2021, Moe was reque sted to export selected WhatsApp chat threads 

(including the photo graph s and videos within) from his mobile phone and send them 

to the investigators. 828 Moe accordingly exported and sent the selected WhatsApp 

chat threads but he did not mention that he had made deletions from his WhatsApp 

chat with Marimuthu. 829 It was only at his second interview with the investigators 

on 13 April 2021 that Moe disclosed the deletions. 830 

451 The  11:13am Photograph and the 11:32am Message which Moe deleted 

pertained to evidence relating to the contemporaneous acts and knowledge of Moe 

and Marimuthu just before the Accident. Although Chua XD claim s not to have         

> 824 SS -7 (Moe), [134]; SS -6 (Chua XD), [226].
> 825 NE 30 September 2021, pp. 104:20 -105:12 (Moe Re -ex).
> 826 SS -7 (Moe), [134]; SS -6 (Chua XD), [227].
> 827 NE 27 September 2021, p. 146:18 -23 (Chua XD Re -ex).
> 828 S-289 ( MOM’s Investigation Report ), [5.1.5(b)].
> 829 S-289 ( MOM’s Investigation Report ), [5.1.5(b)].
> 830 S-289 ( MOM’s Investigation Report ), [5.1.5]; SS -7 (Moe), [135].

237 

seen clearly the c ontents of what exactly Moe proposed to delete, 831 he was at least 

aware that they were  messages between Moe and Marimuthu regarding the Mixer 

Machine on the day of the Accident.  These constitute important information 

regarding the circumstances surrounding the Accident. It goes without saying that 

without this evidence, investigations may be impeded. 

452 Having regard to the above, Moe’s act of deleting the 11:13am Photograph 

and the 11:32am Message, and Chua XD’s act of lying to MOM investigators about 

the wh ereabouts of Marimuthu’s phone and his further omission to inform the 

MOM and SPF investigators about Moe’s deletions, are potentially caught by 

section 204A of the Penal Code. 

453 As regards their respective mens rea :

(a) Moe claims that he was panicked and scar ed that he was the last 

person to communicate with Marimuthu before the Accident, and so he 

deleted his last few messages with Marimuthu. 832 However, it is telling that 

Moe only deleted selective messages from his conversation with Marimuthu 

and in fact did not delete his very last message to Marimuthu. 833 Even if 

Moe was panicked or scared at the time of the deletions as claimed, it was     

> 831 SS -6 (Chua XD), [223].
> 832 NE 30 September 2021, pp. 129:6 -130:12 (Moe XX).
> 833 S-30, IM #267.

238 

more likely to be a panic or fear that investigators would uncover Moe’s 

involvement in the lead -up to the Accident. Moe plainly intended to impede 

investigations. In this regard, it is immaterial that Moe subsequently 

informed the MOM investigators of his deletions – Moe’s intention is to be 

adjudged at the time he made the deletions. 

(b) Chua XD claims that he ha d no intention to hide anything and that 

he considered that it was up to Moe to decide what he wanted to do 

regarding the deletions he made. 834 In this regard, even if Chua XD may not 

have intended to impede investigations, he would have known that his 

fail ure in not disclosing the deletions were likely to impede investigations 

(as envisaged by section 204(A)(a) of the Penal Code). 

VI. TOR B: RECOMMENDATIONS TO PREVENT THE 

RECURRENCE OF SUCH AN ACCIDENT AT WORKPLACES 

454 Finally, we consider TOR  B on recommendation s to prevent the recurrence 

of such an accident at workplaces. 

455 The IC had invited written representations to prevent the recurrence of such 

an accident at workplaces, on the following areas which are of particular interest to 

the IC:     

> 834 NE 27 September 2021, pp. 138:21 -139:13 (Chua XD XX) ;pp. 142:23 -144:11; p. 147:15 -
> 19 (Chua XD Re -ex).

239 

(a) Measures to ensure the safe commissioning, operation, maintenance, 

and repair of industrial machines operating in a similar manner as that 

involved in the incident; and 

(b) Measures to ensure the safe supply, storage, and handling of 

combustible dust or powders at workplace setting s similar to that involved 

in the incident. 

456 As stated above at [ 18 ]-[19 ], a total of 17 organisations and individuals 

submitted written representations, of which seven representatives from various 

organisations were invited to share their views before the IC. 

457 The recommendations made can be broadly divided into the following three 

categories: 

(a) Regulation and guidance; 

(b) Education and outreach; and 

(c) Cultural c hange and ownership. 

458 We summarise the recommendations presented to the IC for each of the 

above categories in turn. 240 

A. Regulation and guidance 

1. Improvements to regulatory regime 

459 There are improvements which can be made to the regulatory regime for 

both the safe operation of machinery and the mitigation of dust hazards. We will 

address these two areas in turn. 

(a) Industrial machinery safety 

(i) LEGISLATIVE REVIEW 

460 Under the current regulatory framework, Stars is already subject to certain 

duties under the WSHA to ens ure safety and health in relation to the use of all 

machines, including the Mixer Machine. In this regard, MOM’s position is that the 

existing obligations under the WSHA are adequate to address Stars’ lapses in 

relation to the Mixer Machine. 835 This view wa s shared by SISO, which stated that 

the current regulatory landscape and support structure for Chemical Process 

Industry is not only adequate, but on par with requirements in other parts of the 

developed world. 836   

> 835 S-306, [4.5.1], S -306A, slide 15.
> 836 S-303, p. 2.

241 

461 It is however opportune to review whether c ertain categories of machinery 

should be subject to increased regulation. MOM recommended that the Fifth 

Schedule of the WSHA could be reviewed and expanded to cover additional 

categories of machinery , such as those powered by mechanical, hydraulic, or 

pne umatic energy. 837 This suggested amendment is broader than , and thus 

encompasses , Dr Salim’s suggestion to include heated equipment or equipment 

with energy inputs into closed systems that could result in overheating or 

overpressure, in the WSHA. 838 

462 MOM’s p roposed expansion of the Fifth Schedule would impose more 

stringent duties under section 16 of the WSHA on manufacturers, suppliers, 

installers and persons who modify these additional categories of machinery 

(including machines similar to the Mixer Machine ), to ensure that they are safe to 

use when operated properly , and that relevant information about their installation, 

commissioning, use, repair and modification are supplied to the buyer. 839 

463 MOM acknowledge d that overseas manufacturers and suppliers woul d not 

be caught by section 16 of the WSHA unless they had a local agent or engaged a 

local third party to commission the machine. 840 However, in MOM’s view, it would      

> 837 S-306, [4.8.2].
> 838 NE 16 November 2021, pp. 90:19 -91:9 (MOM EIC).
> 839 S-306, [4.8.2].
> 840 NE 16 November 2021, pp. 138:21 -139:19 (MOM, questions from IC).

242 

be too onerous to impose the requirements for statutory equipment such as pressure 

vessels and lifting equipment on all machines. 841 There are no prevailing standards 

available against which to assess machines such as the Mixer Machine, 842 whose 

main components can be found in a wide spectrum of industrial machines in various 

configurations, on different scales and for different applications. 843 It was therefore 

preferable to impose the duty on companies to ensure that equipment purchased is 

safe and of a certain integrity, such that they realise that they should take certain 

measures, such as certifying the equipment, or engaging an engineer or other 

competent persons for advice. 844 

464 Separately , Dr Salim had proposed that reg ulation 26 of the WSH (GP) Regs 

be amended, such that the terms “combustible liquid aerosols” and “flammable 

gases and vapours arising from material decomposition” be included and made 

explicit. 845 To this, MOM stated that it would review the actual text to ascertain if 

the current language already covers these substances, and include them if they are 

not already covered. 846           

> 841 NE 16 November 2021, p. 140:3 -13 (MOM, questions from IC).
> 842 NE 16 November 2021, p. 140:3 -13 (MOM, questions from IC).
> 843 S-306, [4.8.1].
> 844 NE 16 November 2021, pp. 140:16 -141:7 (MOM, questions from IC); S -306, [4.5.7].
> 845 S-300, p. 18, Table 1.
> 846 NE 16 November 2021, p. 94:9 -23 (MOM EIC).

243 

465 MOM recognised that these proposed changes to the law would not make a 

difference in terms of incident reporting obligations. 847 For example, there is 

currently an obligation to report a “dangerous occurrence”, 848 but MOM explained 

that near -misses such as the fire on the Mixer Machine would not come under that 

obligation. 849 MOM explained that it would be overly onerous to require all near -

misses to b e reported, given the broad scope of what constitutes a “near miss”. 

Nevertheless, this was something MOM was prepared to look into. 850 

(ii) APPROVED CODES OF PRACTICE (“ ACOP ”) AND OTHER GUIDANCE 

> DOCUMENTS

466 It was highlighted by various organisations that the lis t of ACOPs would 

need to be updated, and that the current ACOPs and guidance documents would 

need to be reviewed, to account for technological developments and changes in 

practice in relation to the safe operation of machinery .

467 It was stated by SMF that SS 537: Part 1:2008, which is the “Code of 

practice for the safe use of machinery” (“ SS 537:1 ”) should be reviewed and 

updated, 851 because there are new challenges in terms of how machinery is      

> 847 NE 16 November 2021, p. 134:14 -18 (MOM, questions from IC)
> 848 Regulation 5(1) of the Workplace Safety and H ealth (Incident Reporting) Regulations
> (Cap. 354A, Rg 3).
> 849 NE 16 November 2021, p. 136:2 -24 (MOM, questions from IC).
> 850 NE 16 November 2021, p. 136:21 -14 (MOM, questions from IC).
> 851 S-301, [2.2].

244 

purchased from overseas, SS 537:1 was published back in 2008 and n eeds to be 

updated, and it primarily deals with mechanical hazards only. 852 Dr Salim opined 

that SS 537:1 would need to be reviewed to cover heated equipment, with particular 

attention given to guidance on “Information for Use”, 853 and the “Code of Practice 

on Workplace Safety and Health Risk Management” published by the WSHC 

(“ RMCP ”) would also need to be reviewed to include guidance and examples to 

enable better identification of process related hazards, such as overpressure and 

thermal decompositi ons. 854 WSHC agreed that SS 537:1 should be reviewed and 

updated with growing awareness of hazards over time, 855 and the RMCP was in fact 

just reviewed and re -issued recently, 856 and that the PHA guidelines already 

addressed process -related hazards. 

468 Separatel y, while SMF had recommended that ISO 45001, which relates to 

“Occupational health and safety management systems – Requirements for guidance 

for use”, be implemented in the workplace, 857 it has already been made an ACOP 

and was published in 2018. 858        

> 852 NE 15 November 2021, pp. 63:14 -65:11 (SMF EIC).
> 853 S-300, p. 10:10 -14.
> 854 S-300, p. 10:19 -24.
> 855 NE 16 November 2021, p. 44:12 -23 (WSHC EIC).
> 856 NE 16 November 2021, p. 47:7 -12 (WSHC EIC).
> 857 S-301, [2.8] -[2.9].
> 858 WSH (Approved Codes of Practice) Notification 2021, The Schedule S/N 81.

245 

469 Dr Salim had initially suggested that some other parts of the WSHA should 

be amended to enhance the regulatory regime in respect of industrial machinery. 

However, there was eventual agreement between MOM and Dr Salim that 

supplementing or reviewing the current ACO Ps and other relevant guidelines would 

also be a viable solution to address the same concerns: 

No  Provision  Dr Salim ’s proposed 

amendment 859 

Alternative to 

proposed 

amendment 

Dr Salim ’s views on 

alternative 

1 Section 

17, 

WSHA 

To enhance by including 

key commissioning 

components such as 

equipment/process design 

and information review, 

determination of system 

boundary limits, 

inspection and acceptance 

testing, safe start -up and 

documentation. 

To have the key 

commissioning 

components included 

in an ACOP such as 

the RMCP instead of 

within the WSHA. 

This allows faster 

updates to keep up 

with technological 

changes. 860 

This will be 

acceptable, as 

commissioning is 

already implied in 

the current 

WSHA. 861     

> 859 S-300, p. 18, Table 1.
> 860 NE 16 November 2021, p. 93:2 -14 (MOM EIC).
> 861 NE 15 November 2021, p. 34:8 -15 (Dr Salim EIC).

246 

No  Provision  Dr Salim ’s proposed 

amendment 859 

Alternative to 

proposed 

amendment 

Dr Salim ’s views on 

alternative 

2 WSH (GP) 

Regs 

To include suitable control 

measures and maintenance 

requirements. 

To be addressed 

through enhancing 

risk assessment 

protocol 

requirements, and to 

review the RMCP 

and Workplace 

Safety and Health 

Guidelines on 

Process Hazard 

Analysis published 

by the WSHC 

(“ PHA guidelines ”) 

in stead. 862 

The RMCP, being an 

ACOP, is of very 

general applicability 

and hence may 

overlook particular 

process -related 

hazards. 863 On the 

other hand, the PHA 

guidelines, while 

attuned to processes, 

may be too onerous 

for a majority of 

companies and 

industries .864 

It would be good to     

> 862 NE 15 November 2021, pp. 38:4 -40:22 (Dr Salim EIC).
> 863 NE 15 November 2021, p. 41:1 -16 (Dr Salim EIC).
> 864 NE 15 November 2021, pp. 41:17 -43:11 (Dr Salim EIC).

247 

No  Provision  Dr Salim ’s proposed 

amendment 859 

Alternative to 

proposed 

amendment 

Dr Salim ’s views on 

alternative 

incorporate elements 

from the two for a 

middle -ground RA 

guide that is general 

enough for most 

companies, while 

simultaneously 

allowing process -

related hazards to be 

more easily 

identified. 865 

(iii) CERTIFICATION OF MACHINERY 

470 It was reco mmended by IES that equipment like the Mixer Machine should 

be reviewed by at least one competent third party, and that owners/operators should 

have to appoint a qualified engineer, technologist or technician to operate the  

> 865 NE 15 November 2021, p.42:10 -17 (Dr Salim EIC).

248 

machine. 866 SMF took a similar vi ew, in stating that machines which are sourced 

outside Singapore could be subjected to third party inspection services before 

shipment to Singapore, and that machines shall be subjected to field safety tests at 

the point of installation. 867 SISO also sugges ted that the idea of having a “safety 

mark accreditation” for dust/powder handling related equipment and machinery 

could be explored. 868 

471 While MOM has recommended encouraging buyers of industrial equipment 

to have it certified to SS 537:1 standards, it did not recommend mandating third -

party certification of after -sales for all types of machines, as it would be too onerous 

and impractical, and the industry must take ownership to ensure the safety of the 

machinery and the equipment that they use. 869 MOM indica ted that it was willing 

to work with Enterprise Singapore (“ ESG ”) to develop such a certification 

regime. 870 MOM further explained that this could involve MOM working with the 

Singapore Accreditation Council once the scheme is put in place, such that the 

bodies responsible for certifying equipment as compliant with SS 537:1 standards 

are accredited. 871        

> 866 S-302, p. 2.
> 867 S-301, [3.1] and [4.4].
> 868 S-303, p. 7.
> 869 NE 16 November 2021, p. 82:7 -13 (MOM EIC).
> 870 NE 16 November 2021, p. 83:3 -13 (MOM EIC).
> 871 NE 16 November 2021, pp. 88:13 -89:12 (MOM EIC).

249 

(b) Mitigation of dust hazards 

472 Having considered how the regulatory regime for industrial machinery 

safety may be enhanced, we next turn to the regulatory framework in respect of the 

safe handling of combustible dusts. 

(i) LEGISLATIVE REVIEW 

473 As discussed at [ 292 ] above , the secondary combustible dust explosions 

were attributable to the inadequate ventilation conditions at the Tuas Site workshop, 

coupled with the workers’ unsuitable housekeeping routin e. As explained at [ 411 ]

above, this was a result of Stars’ failure to comply with the measures specified in 

the Combustible Dust Circular .

474 MOM acknow ledges that more can be done to enhance the regulatory 

regime with regard to the import and supply, bulk storage, and usage of combustible 

dusts. To that end, MOM has suggested that labelling requirements could be 

imposed for a prescribed list of combustib le dusts ( eg. those with Kst value > 100) 

that are packed in quantities over a prescribed limit ( eg. >25 kg) . R egistration ,

reporting and notification requirements could also be imposed on companies which 

use a prescribed amount of combustible dusts , and t hese companies could be 250 

ascertained via the sharing of information between agencies which currently 

regulate combustible dusts. 872 

475 SCDF had initially suggested that all workplaces which handle combustible 

dusts should be subject to the workplace safety and health management system and 

audit regime which is currently in place for selected workplaces ( eg, shipyards, 

factories engaged in manufacturing of petroleum/petrochemical products). 873 When 

asked whether MOM’s tiered approach based on the K st value of the dust, which 

measures combustibility, and the quantity of combustible dusts used or stored, and 

imposing notification requirements, would address this concern, SCDF stated that 

the broad concept of a risk -based approach sounds correct, 874 and that this 

suggestion was made without drilling down to the specific implementation 

details. 875 

(ii) GAZETTING SS 667 AS AN ACOP 

476 It was recommended by Dr Salim, 876 IES 877 and SMF 878 that the SS 667 

should be made an ACOP, to provide practical guidance with regard to the        

> 872 S-306, [3.5] -[3.8], S -306A, slide 9.
> 873 S-304, [11].
> 874 NE 16 November 2021, p. 26:7 -22 (SCDF EIC).
> 875 NE 16 November 2021, p. 24:16 -20 (SCDF EIC).
> 876 S-300, p. 18, Table 1.
> 877 S-302, p.5, [2].
> 878 S-301, p . 2, [2.7].

251 

requir ements of the WSHA relating to safety, health and welfare at work. 879 SCDF 

has already incorporated SS 667 into its processes, in issuing a Circular on 1 June 

2021 stating that SS 667 would apply to all new buildings and buildings undergoing 

fire safety wor ks that store flammable powders. 880 This is in line with MOM and 

WSHC’s stated intention to have SS 667 gazetted as an ACOP, 881 which has been 

done on 19 November 2021. 882 

2. Guidance for small and medium enterprises (“SMEs”) 

477 One issue of concern raised during the Inquiry was that, while large 

corporations are able to readily navigate and comply with the various industry 

guidelines and ACOPs such as the SS 667 and SS 537:1, it may not be as easy for 

SMEs like Stars, with typically limited resources, to effective ly digest and 

implement these guidelines at their workplaces. 

(a) Publication or review of guidance documents 

478 There is room for more guidance documents, in particular those targeted / 

catered to wards SMEs, to be published or reviewed. Dr Salim had recommended 

that a guidance document be developed on commissioning best practices for      

> 879 Section 40B of the WSHA.
> 880 S-304, [8].
> 881 S-306, [3.4.6] ;NE 16 November 2021, p. 44:3 -11 (WSHC EIC).
> 882 WSH (Approved Codes of Practice) Notification 2021, The Schedule S/N 76.

252 

SMEs .883 SISO had recommended that guides be issued for SMEs covering aspects 

such as safe operation, commissioning, maintenance and repair, management of 

change, training, risk asses sment, and various aspects relating to combustible 

dust. 884 SISO further opined that the WSH guidelines for the safe use of machinery 

need to be amended to include handling of materials. 885 WSHC agreed that the 

guidelines for the safe use of machinery need to be updated to include unauthorised 

maintenance and repla cement of parts. 886 

479 WSHC additionally agreed that the guidelines should be updated to take into 

account the dust -safety measures in SS 667. 887 SMF also indicated that it was open 

to developing such guidance documents with WSHC. 888 

(b) Advisory panel 

480 It was reco mmended by SISO that an advisory panel can also be set up for 

SMEs, modelled after the panel which reviews major hazard installations, so that 

there could be a single window with all regulatory bodies and stakeholders 

represented, possibly within the WSHC, to guide the SMEs during set -up and        

> 883 S-300, p. 11:7 -12.
> 884 S-303.
> 885 NE 15 November 2021, p. 154:18 -22 (SISO EIC).
> 886 NE 16 November 2021, pp. 44:24 -45:8 (WSHC EIC).
> 887 NE 16 November 2021, p. 45:14 (WSHC EIC).
> 888 NE 16 November 2021, p. 72:6 -13 (MOM EIC).

253 

operations. 889 SISO explained that the intent behind this recommendation was not 

to increase regulation, but to have guidance available. 

481 SMF agreed that such a panel would be useful, and SMF could even 

organise training courses if SMEs would like to be trained on how to conduct 

explosion protection or machinery evaluation risk assessments properly. 890 SCDF 

opined that it was open to the idea, though whether this is an entirely new panel or 

rides upon existing pane ls or committees needs to be studied further. 891 

482 WSH indicated that it was always looking at how it could enhance its 

outreach and messaging, and that having individuals from SMEs who are influential 

and well -networked in its industry committees would be a good idea. 892 However, 

WSHC opined that it may be better to have SME outreach via its industry 

committees than to go through the Association for Small and Medium Enterprises 

or to set up a dedicated SME panel, because there are procurement linkages within 

the industry, and the risks and control measures are industry -specific for the type of 

operations and equipment used. 893 This view was shared by MOM, which also 

opined that it was more sustainable to have a hub -and -spoke model, as it would be       

> 889 S-303, p. 2.
> 890 NE 15 November 2021, p. 71:7 -16 (SMF EIC).
> 891 NE 16 November 2021, pp. 18:18 -19:12 (SCDF EIC).
> 892 NE 16 November 2021, p. 42:8 -13 (WSHC EIC).
> 893 NE 16 November 2021, pp. 41:2 -42:21 (WSHC EIC).

254 

a herculean tas k to ensure that a standalone panel for SMEs is sufficiently sized, 

resourced, and competent to take care of the diverse needs of SMEs. 894 

(c) bizSAFE as guidance for safety processes 

483 In terms of safety processes, SISO proposed that high hazard process SMEs 

sho uld be required to have a minimum of bizSAFE Level 3 certification, before 

they are allowed to start. 895 

484 In response, WSHC stated that bizSAFE, which it administers, is not meant 

to be used as a regulatory tool, as it is meant to be used for capability dev elopment 

and training. As what is prescribed is the outcome of having a safety and health 

management system, WSHC does not prescribe the means by which workplaces 

attain this, and bizSAFE is one of the available pathways. 896 This is especially since 

there a re other frameworks, such as overseas practices and ISO documents 

available. 897 WSHC has instead worked with companies to promote bizSAFE, by 

encouraging big players to expect bizSAFE 3 standards from their subcontractors, 

and having government procurement agencies requiring bizSAFE 3, to promote 

bizSAFE adoption among SMEs. 898      

> 894 NE 16 November 2021, pp. 114:19 -116:11 (MOM EIC).
> 895 S-303, p. 2.
> 896 NE 16 November 2021, pp. 35:13 -36:25 (WSHC EIC).
> 897 NE 16 Nove mber 2021, p. 37:1 -9 (WSHC EIC).
> 898 NE 16 November 2021, p. 38:7 -23 (WSHC EIC).

255 

485 MOM was of a similar view, in that it agreed with the conceptual thrust of 

SISO’s recommendation to have some sort of certification showing a company’s 

ability to manage the risk of hi gh hazard processes, but that it need not necessarily 

be bizSAFE. 899 MOM added that making bizSAFE mandatory may have the 

opposite effect in having companies comply with it without internalising the 

concept and intent of managing risks behind it, which goes against the idea of 

having a culture of ownership by the industry to manage its own risks. 900 

B. Education and outreach 

486 It was recognised by various organisations that education plays a key role 

in propagating safety practices through industry. SMF had encapsulated it 

succinctly, in stating that safety is a mindset, one can only regulate that much, but 

eventually workplace safety and health (WSH) is attained through awareness and 

education. 901 While there have been comprehensive efforts to reach out to 

em ployers and employees across various platforms, there is still more which can be 

done.    

> 899 NE 16 November 2021, pp. 113:22 -114:18 (MOM EIC).
> 900 NE 16 November 2021, p. 113:1 -21 (MOM EIC).
> 901 NE 15 November 2021, p. 69:8 -11 (SMF EIC).

256 

1. Current efforts 

(a) General safety outreach 

487 One of WSHC’s main roles is to educate employers and employees on how 

to improve WSH, through industry events, promotional materi al and resources. The 

WSHC has carried out extensive efforts in this area. As stated in its submission, it 

administers the safety orientation course for workers in high -risk environments, and 

the settling -in programme for workers in the construction, manuf acturing, marine 

and process industries. 902 In both these courses, workers are told to contact MOM 

or the Migrant Workers Centre if they see any unsafe work practices. 903 

488 There are 56 other courses accredited by WSHC, which attracted over 

300,000 workers in 2019. 904 WSHC works with industry associations and unions to 

disseminate WSH guidelines and other information, and uses its WSH Bulletin to 

inform its 75,000 subscribers. 905 It issues circulars to inform all employers when 

there are critical updates. 906 It has also started using the FWMOMCare app to send 

all 600,000 work permit holders WSH education in their native languages. 907       

> 902 S-305, pp. 1 -2.
> 903 S-305, pp. 1 -2.
> 904 S-305, pp. 1 -2.
> 905 S-305, p. 3.
> 906 S-305, p. 3.
> 907 S-305, p. 3.

257 

489 Apart from these formal channels, WSHC also utili ses its Facebook page 

which has 33,000 followers, 908 and engages social media platforms that are popular 

within the migrant worker community, such as influencers or certain Facebook 

pages in their native languages, so that safety messages can be disseminate d. 909 

(b) Inspections for combustible dust hazards 

490 For MOM, it has conducted special enforcement operations in March 2021 

codenamed “Operation Bullfinch 2” to assess the adequacy of safety measures to 

address risks associated with dust explosion hazards in the manufacturing industry. 

This involved the inspection of approximately 500 companies that potentially deal 

with combustible dust, with a specific focus on SMEs. 910 

491 MOM found that most companies showed low awareness of combustible 

dust hazards, as evident fr om the lack of identification of combustible dust hazards 

in their risk assessments. 911 This is despite the issuance of the Combustible Dust 

Circular on 23 July 2015. 912 Larger companies, in contrast, generally had identified       

> 908 NE 16 November 2021, p. 33:20 -21 (WSHC EIC).
> 909 NE 16 November 2021, pp. 34:18 -35:2 (WSHC EIC).
> 910 S-306, p. 6, [2.2.1].
> 911 S-306, p. 6, [2.2.2].
> 912 S-233.

258 

combustible dust hazards in thei r risk assessments, and had the necessary control 

measures in place. 913 

2. Proposed improvements 

(a) General safety training and dissemination of information 

492 In its submission, WSHC has recognised that the training currently available 

is front -loaded, and the lessons may not be reinforced throughout the workers’ 

career. WSHC therefore suggests that workers in higher -risk industries should be 

required to attend refresher WSH training at regular milestones. 914 

493 WSHC elaborated at the hearing on further efforts to reach out to workers 

and SMEs. WSHC would ramp up and more deliberately and consciously think 

about messaging and outreach to the SME segment within each industry. 915 WSHC 

also stated that it has been thinking about translating worker -level communications 

into their native languages, and even utilising videos, which workers are more 

amenable to consuming. 916 WSHC ultimately aims to get as pervasive an outreach 

as possible, even though it would be challenging to reach 100% coverage. WSHC     

> 913 S-233.
> 914 S-305, p. 4.
> 915 NE 16 November 2021, p. 41:12 -15 (WSHC EIC).
> 916 NE 16 November 2021, p. 53:1 -12 (WSHC EIC).

259 

is keen to explore goo d ways to increase coverage, especially among the 

comparatively “less touched” group. 917 

494 This can be complemented by the efforts of other institutions. SMF has 

indicated its willingness to work with MOM, and key organisations such as ESG, 

SISO, National Saf ety Council of Singapore, and WSHC to further promote and 

create awareness of safety standards and culture in the workplace. 918 It also 

suggested that one possible way to reach out to the workers would be to have a third 

party to speak to the workers period ically, so that they have a means to whistle blow 

on unsafe practices. 919 

(b) Increasing awareness of combustible dust hazards 

495 As regards awareness of combustible dust hazards, WSHC stated that there 

was the intention to produce infographics and simplified col laterals summarising 

the key points in SS 667, 920 for SMEs to more easily digest and implement the 

relevant measures at their workplaces. 

496 IES suggested tapping on the list of companies inspected under Operation 

Bullfinch 2 to train the owners and superviso rs on the safe use of combustible      

> 917 NE 16 November 2021, p. 51:14 -23 (WSHC EIC).
> 918 S-301, [1.3].
> 919 NE 15 November 2021, pp. 90:20 -91:14 (SMF, questions from IC).
> 920 NE 16 November 2021, pp. 49:15 -51:1 (WSHC EIC).

260 

dust. 921 IES also suggested that the IECEx certification scheme could be tapped 

upon to train competent personnel on dust explosion risks .922 

497 SISO has indicated that it will review its career progression pathway, 923 and 

focu s on approaching SMEs so that they will receive the collaterals which SISO 

produces. 924 

C. Cultural change and ownership 

498 It was recognised by multiple institutions that safety was ultimately a way 

of thinking, and that a sense of ownership was required over health and safety on 

the part of both the employers and employees before the current situation would 

improve. As stated by SMF, safety is always about three things, namely people, 

processes and policies, with the key being people. 925 SISO took the same view, in 

stating that culture is ultimately habits repeated, 926 and that there can be thought on 

how a cultural programme like what the Singapore Chemical Industry Council has, 

but is fit for SMEs, could be implemented. 927        

> 921 NE 15 November 2021, p. 137:5 -18 (IES, questions from IC).
> 922 S-302, p. 4.
> 923 NE 15 November 2021, p. 159:19 -24 (SISO EIC).
> 924 NE 15 November 2021, p. 162:4 -17 (SISO EIC).
> 925 NE 15 N ovember 2021, p. 72:8 -13 (SMF EIC).
> 926 NE 15 November 2021, p. 159:16 (SISO EIC).
> 927 NE 15 November 2021, p. 165:1 -14 (SISO EIC).

261 

499 Strengthening WSH ownership is ac cordingly one of the central planks of 

the WSH 2028 national strategy, to make WSH more salient in business decisions, 

align company directors and top management to WSH ownership, and strengthen 

WSH ownership of workers. 928 It is evident from current observ ations that there is 

still much to be done, however, there are levers which can be utilised to make WSH 

financially viable for companies. 

1. Current observations 

500 It can be seen by this Accident that WSH has not been ingrained as part of 

Stars’ culture. Within Stars itself, as stated above at [ 65 ], there was little training 

given for safety within the Tuas Site. The employees did not raise t he alarm in 

respect of what they observed to the authorities, despite having attended the safety 

orientation course, and hence being aware of the avenues to report red flags. Even 

when Marimuthu raised his concerns to Chua XD, he was persuaded to continue 

working. Having three persons trained as safety supervisors on the Tuas Site did 

not result in the issues with the Mixer Machine being picked up and addressed 

adequately, which ultimately resulted in three deaths and seven others injured. 

501 Stars is a prime example of a company which had complied with safety 

requirements on paper, being bizSAFE Star 929 qualified, and personnel trained in   

> 928 S-306A, slide 4.
> 929 SS -6 (Chua XD), [13].

262 

risk management and safety, but did not implement health and safety measures 

adequately in practice. This supports the view of MOM that it would not do to have 

companies comply with regulatory practices for the sake of compliance without 

having a sense of ownership. 930 

502 The same can be said of SMEs in general. The reasons for SMEs not 

prioritising WSH are manifold. As stated by SMF, SMEs would not put WSH as a 

priority if there was no regulatory motivation to do so, and there is a trade -off 

between increasing regulation and the (financial) burden on their existing 

business. 931 IES opined that SMEs may not be fully aware of guidel ines and 

requirements, thus more is needed to be done to educate and motivate smaller 

factory operators to comply with existing regulatory requirements. 932 SISO shared 

this view, in that no worker starts off wanting to have an accident, but they lack the 

kn owledge and competence. 933 For employees, apart from requiring the knowledge 

and competency to identify problems, the other issue to be addressed is the general 

power imbalance between the employer and the employee, particularly for migrant 

workers. 934      

> 930 NE 16 November 2021, p. 113:8 -21 (MOM EIC).
> 931 NE 15 November 2021, pp. 72:20 -73:12 (SMF EIC).
> 932 NE 15 November 2021, p. 99:14 -20 (IES EIC).
> 933 NE 15 November 2021, p. 156:12 -19 (SISO EIC).
> 934 NE 16 November 2021, p. 132:10 -24 (MOM, questions from IC).

263 

2. Possi ble improvements 

503 Unfortunately, there is no ready solution to issues of culture and ownership. 

As stated candidly by WSHC, its push in creating information to be disseminated 

has to be complemented by willingness on the part of companies to want to consume 

this information. 935 It is also very difficult to legislate for “sins of omission”, which 

WSH issues tend to fall under, because much of it is dependent on the internal 

motivation of companies to want to do their best in the area, and not merely meet 

legis lative minimum standards. 936 

504 There are three main areas to consider focussing on to prevent recurrences 

of similar accidents. The first is to foster a culture of trust and care in the workplace. 

As stated by SISO, it is not just about hard competence but th e softer skills as well, 

and gave the example of some industries which carry out listening tours, where they 

find out how the workers are doing without speaking about work, 937 so that workers 

feel cared for. This was echoed by MOM: while whistleblowing mech anisms are 

available, the first response by the worker upon sight of unsafe practices should be 

to flag them to the boss, rather than calling MOM, as the latter would set up a very 

unhealthy workplace dynamic. 938 What is needed is for the employer and emplo yee      

> 935 NE 16 November 2021, p. 54:2 -5 (WSHC EIC).
> 936 NE 16 November 2021, pp. 58:12 -59:8 (WSHC EIC).
> 937 NE 15 November 2021, p. 168:13 -20 (SISO, questions form IC).
> 938 NE 16 November 2021, p. 125:6 -14 (MOM, questions from IC).

264 

to work together, trust each other and look after each other’s back, 939 and this could 

be one of the building blocks towards building a safer culture. 

505 Second, the competencies and accountability of senior leadership within the 

workplace need to be addre ssed. Many stakeholders, including safety officers, had 

provided feedback during a consultation exercise on the WSH 2028 national 

strategy that convincing and influencing the leadership to allocate sufficient 

resources and time to safety is crucial. 940 Whil e competencies are important, with 

the WSHC having training programmes and dialogues with industry to foster 

this, 941 accountability also needs to be fostered. In this respect, MOM is working 

on a Code of Practice for company leadership and directors, which would set out 

what is reasonably practicable and expected at the leadership level, so that safety 

and health would be part of the agenda in board discussions, resources and time for 

WSH are adequately allocated, and internal processes for discussing and l earning 

from accidents and near -misses are instituted. 942 

506 Third , there can be financial and regulatory levers to motivate compliance, 

so that companies realise that it is in their financial interest to institute safe 

processes in the workplace. Apart from e ncouraging large players to make bizSAFE      

> 939 NE 16 November 2021, p. 125:15 -21 (MOM, questions from IC).
> 940 NE 16 November 2021, p. 62:11 -18 (WSHC, questions from IC).
> 941 NE 16 November 2021, pp. 62:19 -63:15 (WSHC, questions from IC).
> 942 NE 16 November 2021, pp. 63:6 -64:13 (WSHC, questions from IC).

265 

a requirement in contracting as addressed at [ 484 ] above, SMF suggested that going 

for safety training could be made a requirement before contracts are awarded. 943 

IES also suggested that the ecosystem could allow for returns on the safety training 

investment, by working with insurance companies, such that premiums are reduced 

if the equipment is certified by the insurer. 944 This is mutually beneficial as the 

insurers are aware that the equipment has been certified to their standards, while 

the company benefits from having other costs reduced due to their compliance with 

safety. 

507 The authorities have already started moving in this direction. The Work 

Injury Compensation Act 2019 was recently amended to require all work injury 

compensation insurers to share their claims data with other insurers, so that insurers 

have a more complete track record. 945 This allows safer firms to ben efit from 

cheaper premiums and vice versa, 946 and also enables IES’ suggestion on reduction 

of premiums to be implemented, as companies are no longer able to switch insurers 

and make false declarations on their accident record. 947      

> 943 NE 15 November 2021, p. 82:11 -16 (SMF EIC).
> 944 NE 15 Novem ber 2021, p. 132:8 -23 (IES EIC).
> 945 NE 16 November 2021, pp. 54:20 -55:6 (WSHC EIC).
> 946 NE 16 November 2021, p. 55:7 -13 (WSHC EIC).
> 947 NE 16 November 2021, p. 56:3 -15 (WSHC EIC).

266 

508 Ultimately, as stated by MOM, there is no panacea to the issues of 

ownership and culture. 948 MOM has been working for the past 20 years to put in 

place the outcome -based laws, providing guidance, getting industry to take 

leadership and ownership. 949 However, top management must also be interested 

enough to utilise these resources given. 950 It is a continuous journey to build a safety 

culture, 951 and the work is not done if such accidents still occur and there is that one 

company which does not take ownership and does not take health and safety 

seriously. 952 

D. Summary of recommendations 

509 To summarise , there is room for the law to be amended so that there is 

greater oversight of the use and storage of combustible dusts, and to include more 

types of machines in the Fifth Schedule to the WSHA, such that the safe installation, 

supply and maintenance of such machines would also come under regulatory 

control. It is also time for the ACOPs to be updated, and more guidance materials 

which cater to the needs of the workers to be produced an d disseminated. The 

authorities continue to explore new ways of reaching all employees and industries, 

with a focus on SMEs which are not currently subject to increased regulation. The       

> 948 NE 16 November 2021, p. 122:2 -25 (MOM, questions from IC).
> 949 NE 16 November 2021, p. 123:7 -10 (MOM, questions from IC).
> 950 NE 16 November 2021, p. 124:10 -17 (MOM, questions from IC).
> 951 NE 16 November 2021, p. 123:17 -18 (MOM, questions from IC).
> 952 NE 16 November 2021, p. 123:11 -16 (MOM, questions from IC).

267 

work to build up a safety culture and instil a sense of WSH ownership i n both 

employers and employees is not complete, and efforts will continue, in line with 

what has been stated in the WSH 2028 national strategy. 

VII. CONCLUSION 

510 This tragic Accident was an unfortunate and needless loss of li ves . It is a 

sober reminder that no wo rkplace is inherently safe. Employers and employees alike 

are duty bound to make and keep the workplace safe for everyone. 

511 In this case, Stars failed its workers. First, Stars made several misguided 

assumptions about the safe use of the Mixer Machine. Sec ond, even in the face of 

red flags and near -misses involving the Mixer Machine, Stars continued to hold on 

to its misguided assumptions. Third, even as the Mixer Machine was plainly 

beginning to fail, Stars was content to stick on band -aids and persist in using the 

Mixer Machine, simply waiting for the next accident to occur. Fourth, this was 

compounded by Stars’ failure to take all necessary precautions against combustible 

dust hazards , despite being in the know of the  Combustible Dust  Circular .

512 Ultimatel y, Stars and its management are squarely to blame for the 

Accident. The workers, and their families, have had their lives forever changed as 

a result. The deaths and injuries suffered by these migrant workers, who left their 

friends and loved ones back home to pursue their livelihoods, were entirely and 

easily preventable. 268 

513  There will no doubt be many important lessons to learn from this tragic 

accident, to ensure it is never again repeated. The IC’s report will be invaluable in 

this regard. 

Dated this 10 th day of December 2021 .

Kristy Tan, SC / Ang Feng Qian / Sivakumar Ramasamy / Amanda Sum 

State Counsel, Attorney -General ’s Chambers IN THE STATE COURTS OF THE REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE 

INQUIRY UNDER SECTION 26 OF 

THE WORKPLACE SAFETY AND HEALTH ACT (CAP. 354A) 

INTO THE FATAL ACCIDENT AT STARS ENGRG PTE LTD’S WORKPLACE 

AT 32E TUAS AVENUE 11 

________________________________________________________________ 

INTERESTED PART Y’S WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS 

TO THE INQUIRY COMMITTEE 

________________________________________________________________ 

Attorney -General ’s Chambers  Solicitors for the Interested Party 

Ms Kristy Tan, S.C. / Mr Thong Chee Kun / 

Ms Ang Feng Qian /  Ms Josephine Chee / 

Mr Sivakumar Ramasamy /  Ms Zheng Yirong 

Ms Amanda Sum 

Rajah & Tann Singapore LLP 

9 Straits View 

1 Upper Pickering Street  #06 -07 Marina One West Tower 

Singapore 058288  Singapore 018937 

Dated this 10 th day of December 202 12

> TABLE OF CONTENTS

I.  INTRODUCTION  ................................ ................................ ............. 3

II.  THE INQUIRY PROCEEDINGS  ................................ ...................... 7

III.  VERACITY OF THE MANUFACTURER’S EVIDENCE ................ 12 

A. Minimal weight, if any, should be accorded to the 

Manufacturer’s email responses ................................ ..... 12 

B. There are inconsistencies between the Manufacturer’s 

responses and the objective evidence ........................... 14 

C. The Ma nufacturer’s responses are self -serving and 

unreliable ................................ ................................ ........... 14 

IV.  THE CAUSES AND CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE ACCIDENT ..... 15 

A. Whether the explosion occurred inside or outside the 

Mixer Machine ................................ ................................ ... 15 

B. There is no reliable evidence of secondary deflagrations 

................................ ................................ ............................ 18 

C. Other technical aspects of the Accident ........................ 23 

V.  CONCLUSION ................................ ................................ .............. 27 3

I. INTRODUCTION 

1. These are Stars Engrg Pte Ltd’s (“ Stars Engrg ”) written submissions to the 

Inquiry Committee for the purpose of the Inquiry convened under section 

26 of the Workplace Safety and Health Act (Cap. 354A) (“ WSHA ”) into the 

fatal accident (“ Accident ”) that occurred at its workplace at 3 2E Tuas 

Avenue 11 (“ Workplace ”) on 24 February 2021 (“ Inquiry ”) .

2. On 24 February 2021 at about 11.25 am, an explosion occurred at the 

Workplace that was occupied by Stars Engrg. At the material time, 

employees of Stars Engrg were working at the Workplace . Preliminary 

investigations by the authorities revealed that the se employees were 

working on sigma kneader mixer machine (“ Mixer Machine ”) when the 

explosion occurred. 

3. As a result of the accident, eight Stars Engrg employees suffered burns 

and were taken to the Singapore General Hospital. Three workers 

eventually succumbed to their injuries. 

4. On 2 March 2021, the Minister for Manpower, Mrs. Josephine Teo, 

appointed an Inquiry Committee under the WSHA to examine the causes 

and circumstances that led to the Accident .

5. The parties to this Inquiry include (a) a team of State Counsel from the 

Attorney -General’s Chambe rs (“ AGC ”) led by Ms Kristy Tan, S.C.,4

appointed to assist the Inquiry Committee by leading evidence under the 

Terms of Reference (“ ToR ”) ; and (b) Stars Engrg, appearing only as an 

interested party . The Accident occurred at the Workplac e and the workers 

involved were employed by Stars Engrg . At the time of the Inquiry, neither 

Stars Engrg, its officers nor its employees were named as potential 

defendants to any criminal proceedings. 

6. Bearing in mind that the primary objective of the Inq uiry is to ascertain the 

causes and circumstances of the Accident (as set out at paragraph (a) of 

the Terms of Reference), we respectfully highlight that the nature of the 

proceedings is a fact -finding one, as opposed to fault -finding. 

7. To this end, based on our instructions, our participation in the Inquiry and 

these submissions are strictly confined to the following selected issues for 

the sole purpose of assisting the Inquiry Committee in this fact -finding 

process :

a. Our broad observations on the nature of these Inquiry proceedings; 

b. Minimal weight, if any, should be accorded to Laizhou Keda’s ( the 

“Manufacturer ”) evidence ; and 

c. The technical causes and circumstances of the Accident .5

8. At this juncture, it bears mentioning that the Ministry of Manpower (“ MOM ”) 

and the AGC appear to have already determined the issue of liability , even 

well before the Inquiry Committee’s determination of the issues set out in 

the ToR . This is evident from the following events: 

a. The adversarial approach of the State Counsel at the Inquiry, very 

plainly pinning liability on Stars Engrg and/or its officers from the 

start. 

b. Mr Chua Xing Da (“ Mr Chua ”), the owner and sole director of Stars 

Engrg, was placed under arrest by the police on 30 November 2021: 

i. Mr Chua informed the police of his inten tion to travel to 

Vancouver, Canada, from 2 December 2021 to 17 

December 202 1. Although Mr Chua was not on bail or under 

any travel restrictions then, he informed the police about his 

impending trip for good order. 

ii. Pursuant to Mr Chua’s instructions, his solicitors, Rajah & 

Tann Singapore LLP (“ R&T ”) sent a letter enclosing his 

travel itinerary to the police on 17 November 2021. In R&T’s 

letter, the police were informed that the purpose of this 

overseas trip was two -fold – first, to source for products and 

materials for his business , and second, to co ncurrently take 6

a short holiday with his wife. The police did not reply to R&T’s 

letter dated 17 November 2021 .

iii. Just two days before Mr Chua’s intended departure date, he 

was arrested by the police in the morning of 30 November 

2021 and placed on bail. Mr Chua was informed that he is 

presently investigated for an alleged offence of obstruction 

of justice under section 204A of the Penal Code (Cap. 48). 

We believe that the arrest relates to the deleted messages 

in Mr Marimuthu’s mobile phone, which the polic e had 

known well before the commencement of the Inquiry. 

Consequently, he was asked to surrender his passport to the 

police. 

iv. In the afternoon of 30 November 2021 , R&T wrote to the 

police and the AGC requesting for the temporary return of 

Mr Chua’s passport for his trip. The police replied to R&T’s 

letter on the following day on 1 December 2021 to deny Mr 

Chua’s request even though there is no evidence that Mr 

Chua is a flight risk .

c. On 3 December 2021, Stars was informed that the MOM would be 

preparing conditioned statements for the five workers involved in 

the Accident before these workers depart from Singapore. We 

believe that additional statements from the workers are being 7

prepared in anticipation of further proceedings. We have written to 

the MOM to inform that Stars Engrg and/or its officers will object to 

the admission of any evidence under section 32 of the Evidence Act 

(Cap. 97) and that the MOM should put in all effort s to secure their 

attendance at any proceedings to be initiate d. 

9. For the avoidance of doubt, Stars Engrg, its officers and/or its employees 

do not admit to any of the allegations made by the AGC during the Inquiry 

proceedings . Further , nothing should be construed as an admission 

especially where allegations that may be raised by the AGC against Stars 

Engrg, its officers and/or its employees are not specifically addressed in 

these submissions. 

10. Stars Engrg, its officers and/or its employ ees reserve their rights to make 

further arguments and adduce additional evidence in response to all 

allegations , as well as the particulars of any charges that may be brought, 

during any subsequent proceedings that may be brought at a different 

forum for a different purpose .

II. THE INQUIRY PROCEEDINGS 

11. Having regard to the capacity of Stars Engrg as an interested party, we 

make the following broad observations in respect of these proceedings 8

without prejudice to further submissions to be made by Stars Engrg at any 

subsequent forum, if necessary. 

12. First, while the evidentiary rules as to the conduc t of the Inquiry are flexible 

and subject to the discretion of the Inquiry Committee, the proceedings 

should nonetheless accord with the fundamental tenets of natural justice 

and due process. However, several aspects of the inquiry proceedings 

were troubli ng :

a. As part of the investigations arising from the Accident, the police 

and the MOM interviewed the officers and workers from Stars Engrg 

who were eventually listed as factual witnesses to give oral 

evidence during the first tranche of the Inquiry . Prior to the 

commencement of the Inquiry , members of the State Counsel team 

also interviewed these factual witnesses (including Mr Chua) for the 

purposes of preparing written witness statements to be tendered 

during the proceedings. 

b. In the interest of time and expense, and bearing in mind the primary 

objective of the Inquiry, Stars Engrg did not object to the majority of 

the witness statements being tendered in evidence. 1    

> 1Save for Stars Engrg’s request for selected paragraphs of the five witness statements to
> be excluded from the written statements, and for the evidence contained in those
> paragraphs to be led by oral evidence instead. The Inquiry Committee acceded to Stars
> Engrg’s request (see e mail from Secretariat dated 16 September 2021) despite State
> Counsel’s objections (see AGC’s letter dated 15 September 2021). 9

c. During the Inquiry proceedings, as the State Counsel team 

presented all the evidence, the factual witnesses whose witness 

statements were tendered in evidence were subject to cross -

examination twice by the State Counsel team. 

d. If the AGC had determined the liability of Stars Engrg and/or its 

officers, they should appropriately be named as potential 

defendants for the purposes of the Inquiry as a matter of procedural 

fairness, with their evidence led by their counsel. 

13. Second, it is at odds with procedural fairness that several witn esses who 

gave evidence on the technical causes of the explosion during the first 

tranche of the Inquiry were also asked to give evidence at the second 

tranche, which was meant to focus on industry stakeholders making 

recommendations or observations relating to the cause of the accident. 2 As 

an interested party in these proceedings, Stars Engrg had neither the 

standing nor the basis to object to the witnesses called during the second 

tranche of the Inquiry. 

14. In the absence of any specific allegation or charg e preferred against Stars 

Engrg and/or its officers, the Inquiry was also not the appropriate forum to 

make full submissions on the relevance of, or weight to be accorded to, the 

evidence of these witnesses. Examples of witnesses who gave evidence in 

both tranches of the Inquiry are:   

> 2Paragraph (b) of the ToR to the Inquiry Committee.

10 

a. For the first tranche of the Inquiry, Dr Shaik Mohamed Salim ( “Dr 

Salim ”) prepared a report on the technical causes o f the explosion 3

and gave oral evidence on behalf of A* Institute of Chemical and 

Engineering Science (“ A* STAR ”). During the second tranche, Dr 

Salim was also asked to prepare a “ Recommendations Report ”4

that was premised on Dr Salim’s technical findings (which have not 

been adjudged on by the Inquiry Committee) in his first report. 5

When Dr Salim gave oral evidence during the second tranche of the 

proceedings, he referred to the “ improper risk assessments ” and 

“poor SOPs ” that were “noted during the previous tranche ”. 6

However, no such findings of facts were made by the Inquiry 

Committee. Dr Salim’s “Recommendations Report” is undoubtedly 

self -serving in advancing his views. 

b. During the first tranche of the Inquiry, the Singapore Civil Defence 

Force (“ SC DF ”) gave evidence as the first responders at the scene 

and prepared a Fire Investigation Report dated 14 September 

2021 7 for these purposes. For the second tranche of the 

proceedings, SCDF were asked to prepare a written representation  

> 3

A*STAR’s Accident Investigation Report dated 13 September 2021 (“ A*STAR’s 

Report ”) : S -283.  

> 4

A*STAR’s Recommendations Report dated 3 November 2021 (“ A*STAR’s 

Recommendations Report ”): S -300.  

> 5

See “Background and Introduction” at p 7 of A*STAR’s Recommendations Report that 

sets the parameters for Dr Salim’s recommendations to be ba sed on his view that “ This 

primary deflagration event was followed up by up to three secondary deflagrations in the 

form of flash fires. These flash fires were likely the result of potato starch within the Stars 

Engrg factory unit that were initially agita ted and suspended by the overpressure from the 

primary deflagration to form a combustible dust cloud” : S -300.  

> 6

Transcript dated 15 November 2021, p 12 at ln 13 to p 13 at ln 4.  

> 7

SCDF’s Fire Investigation Report dated 14 September 2021 : S -288. 11 

with “ a focus on the measures to ensure the safe supply, storage 

and handling of combustible dust or powders at workplace settings 

similar to that involved ” in the accident. 8

c. MOM representatives were asked to give evidence for both 

tranches of the Inquiry. For the second tranche, the divisional 

director of the MOM’s Occupational Safety and Health Division, Mr 

Silas Sng (“ Mr Sng ”), testified on behalf of the MOM. In the course 

of giving evidence, Mr Sng opined on how Mr Chua “ made a series 

of errors…and as a result d id not manage the risks and that caused 

the accident ”. 9 Given the MOM’s role in the second tranche of the 

Inquiry, it was inappropriate for Mr Sng to comment as such 

especially when the Inquiry Committee has not made any findings 

of fact. Such comments were likewise self -serving, premature and 

only served to prejudice Stars Engrg and/or its officers. Bearing in 

mind that neither Stars nor its officers were fac ing any criminal or 

regulatory charges, the intention behind the litany of such opinions 

is clearly to undermine the position of Stars and/or its officers.    

> 8See SCDF’s Written Representation to the Inquiry Committee for the Fatal Accident at
> Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 February 2021 at [ 1]: S -304.
> 9Transcript dated 16 November 2021 , p 125 at lns 3 -6. 12

III. VERACITY OF THE MA NUFACTURER’S EVIDENCE 

15. At the heart of the accident was the Mixer Machine that Stars Engrg 

purchased directly from the Manufactu rer. In the course of the Inquiry , the 

MOM investigation team corresponded by email with the Manufacturer and 

a series of responses from the Manufacturer by various emails were 

received. The email responses received from the Manufacturer have been 

admitted into evidence. 

A. Minimal weight, if any, should be accorded to the 

Manufacturer’s email responses 

16. We submit that the evidence from the Manufacturer as disclosed in the 

proceedings has limited value and should be accorded with minimal weight, 

if any. In this regard, we are not aware of any attempt by the State Counsel 

or the MOM to secure the attendance (whether physical or virtually) of any 

representative of the Manufacturer to give oral evidence before the Inquiry 

Committee. This was unsatisfactory, especially since the Manufacturer 

would be a material witness. 

17. All the email responses by the Manufact urer were admitted into evidence 

without the calling of a representative of the Manufacturer to be present .

The veracity and credibility of the Manufacturer’s evidence were therefore 13 

untested by the usual rigours of open court proceedings including cross -

examination. 

18. Without the opportunity to cross -examine any representative from the 

Manufacturer, Stars Engrg and/or its officers were unable to question the 

Manufacturer on the material contradictions between its email responses 

to the MOM and the objectiv e evidence. As the learned author of Evidence 

and the Litigation (LexisNexis, 2017) rightly point s out at [20.001] ,

“Reliability can only be assessed if the parties are able to challenge each 

other’s evidence so that weaknesses may be exposed … Cross 

examination has a fundamental role in ascertaining the truth of facts. ”

Accordingly, the evidence of a witness who is not cross -examined may 

carry insignificant weight or be wholly disregarded. Taking into account the 

fundamental principles of natural justice and procedural fairness, we submit 

that the Manufacturer’s evidence in the form of email response s must only 

be accorded with minimal weight, if any. 

19. Notwithstanding the above, and in the light of the capacity in which Stars 

Engrg is participating in th e Inquiry proceedings, Stars Engrg had placed 

on record that it should not otherwise be construed to have agreed to any 

position taken and/or taken to accept all the responses by the Manufacturer 

to be truthful and accurate. Stars Engrg reserves all its rights to make the 

appropriate submi ssions with the regard to the Manufacturer’s responses 

at the appropriate juncture and forum. 14 

B. There are inconsistencies between the Manufacturer’s 

responses and the objective evidence 

20. The Manufacturer’s lack of credibility is further underscored by several 

inconsistencies between the Manufacturer’s email responses to the MOM 

and the objective evidence. For ease of reference, we have summarised 

the material inconsistencies in a table enc losed hereto at Annex A .

C. The Manufacturer’s responses are self -serving and unreliable 

21. Based on an objective review of the Manufacturer’s email on 6 November 

2021 requesting for responses from the MOM, it is both immediately and 

instinctively clear that the earlier responses provided by the Manufacturer 

were self -serving in nature. Having re ad the extensive media coverage over 

the explosion (as acknowledged by the Manufacturer), 10 the 

Manufacturer’s responses were crafted to negate all liability on their part. 

In turn, the Manufacturer’s approach and inconsistent responses must raise 

serious questions concerning the operational reliability of the Mixer 

Machine in the first place. 

22. In the absence of any cross -examination of the Manufacturer, we submit 

that it would be wholly unreliable to rely on the Manufacturer’s responses,  

> 10 See email from the Manufacturer on 6 November 2021, Question 7. 15

especially when the Manufacturer has a vested interest in distancing itself 

from the cause of the explosion. 

IV. THE CAUSES AND CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE ACCIDENT 

23. In relation to the cause and circumstances of the Accident, we set out below 

Stars Engrg’s position .

A. Whether the explosion occurred inside or outside the Mixer 

Machine 

24. The fact that the initial event (i.e. the primary deflagration / explosion) was 

caused by pressure build -up within the Mixer Machine’s oil jacket is 

common ground between the parties. Howe ver, the parties differ on 

whether the explosion occurred inside or outside the oil jacket. In this 

regard, Stars Engrg ’s position is that the explosion occurred inside the oil 

jacket. 

25. Dr David Rose from Hawkins & Associates (“ Dr Rose ”) , Stars Engrg’s 

technical expert, opined that the explosion occurred inside the oil jacket. 

His view was that the explosion was caused by the accumulation and 

subsequent ignition of an oil mist inside the reservoir. The ignition of an oil 

mist would thereby generate sufficient pressure to rupture the oil jacket of 16 

the machine’s mixing chamber , project burning droplets of oil around the 

unit and result in a pressure wave sufficient to displace the internal walls, 

windows, doors, and roller shutters of units 32 E and 32F. He also 

concluded that t he ignition source was a heating element that caught fire 

(heating element number 2), which was damaged because of the fire that 

took place earlier in the morning of 24 February 2021. 11 

26. On the other hand, Dr Salim from A*STAR , one of the AGC’s technical 

expert s, opined that the root cause of the Accident was likely due to the low 

amounts of heat transfer fluid used in the Mixer Machin e, which led to the 

excessive heating of the heat transfer fluid and in tu rn a pressure build -up 

in the oil jacket. As a result, the heating jacket ruptured and released hot, 

pressurised heat transfer fluid into the environment that formed an ignited 

aerosol cloud which caused the chemical explosion outside of the oil 

jacket. 12 

27. It is vital to note that Dr Salim’s views are premised on A*STAR’s 

calculations of the peak overpressures arising from the chemical explosion, 

relying on an explosion efficiency of 1%. A*STAR then used the 

calculations to show that the damage caused by the Accident correlates to 

overpressure from a chemical explosion involving a heat transfer fluid       

> 11 Hawkins’ Investigation into the Cause of the Explosion that Occurred at 32E Tuas
> Avenue 11, Singapore on 24 February 2021 dated 15 September 2021 (“ Hawkins’ Report ”)
> at [ 6.1.12] -[6.1.14] : S T-1; Transcript dated 6 October 2021 ,p 33 ln 24 to p 34 at ln 6 at ln
> 8.
> 12 A*STAR’s Report, p 8 at lns 1 to 7 : S -283 ;Addendum to A*STAR’s Accident Investigation
> Report dated 4 October 2021 (“ A*STAR’s Addendum ”) ,p 3 at lns 13 to 17 : S -283A .17

volume o f 40 litres. 13 Accordingly, Dr Salim concluded that there would 

have been insufficient oxygen in the heating jacket for either complete or 

incomplete combustion to take place within the heating jacket that would 

generate sufficient overpressures to cause the damage observed after the 

Accident. 14 

28. Dr Salim’s analysis is flawed in two aspects. 

29. First, not all the oil had to be burned in order to raise the internal pressure 

sufficiently to rupture the oil jacket. 

30. Second and more importantly, Dr Salim’s reliance on an explosion 

efficiency of 1% is misplaced , as he had fa iled to take into consideration 

the first law of thermodynamics (i.e. energy cannot be created or destroyed). 

In a stationary closed system, the energy would be transferred by the 

combustion of the oil to the metal of the oil reservoir in the form of heat and 

pressure .

31. Consequently, this would increase the internal pressure of the closed 

system as the volume remained constant while the temperature would 

increase due to the combustion process. Following the first law of 

thermodynamics, the total amount of energy in the closed system must 

remain unchanged , with the reaction efficiency being 100%. Based on this    

> 13 A*STAR’s Report ,p 39 at ln 13 to p 43 at ln 11 : S -238 .
> 14 A*STAR’s Addendum , p 5 at lns 5 to 11; p 8 at lns 4 to 10 : S -283 A.18

analysis , there would be sufficient oxygen in the oil jacket to ignite the oil 

mist and cause the explosion. 

B. There is no reliable evidence of secondary deflagrations 

32. Dr Salim also concluded that in addition to the primary deflagration that 

caused the Accident, up to three other flash fires followed after the initial 

event (i.e. secondary deflagrations). 15 In his opinion, the secondary 

deflagrat ions were likely the result of the potato starch at the Workplace 

that were initially agitated and suspended by the overpressure from the 

primary deflagration to form a combustible dust cloud. 16 

33. In reaching this conclusion, Dr Salim relied only on the following: 17 

a. The CCTV video footages retrieved from the neighbouring unit 

occupied by Alif Engineering Pte Ltd (“ Alif Enginering ”) , which 

showed that there were up to three secondary deflagration events 

recorded by Cameras 8 and 7 at about 85 seconds, 125 seconds 

and 155 seconds after the primary deflagrations. 18       

> 15 A*STAR’s Report , p 44 at lns 3 to 6 : S -283 .
> 16 A*STAR’s Report, p 61 at ln 25 to p 62 at ln 2 : S -283 .
> 17 Transcript dated 5 Octobe r 2021, p 117 at lns 1 to 19.
> 18 A*STAR’s Report, p 12 at ln 16 to p 13 at ln 3 : S -283 .19

b. Analytical results showing that starch was present in trace 

quantities on the surfac es sampled in the immediate vicinity of the 

mixer. 19 

34. However, the above cannot conceivably be considered as reliable evidence 

of secondary deflagrations . We explain. 

i. CCTV video footages 

35.  It was posited during the hearing that the  three flashes caught on the CCTV 

footages were in fact dense smoke plumes instead of secondary 

deflagrations. To explain, the smoke plumes, which are essentially unburnt 

fuel, caused by primary deflagration had entered the neighbouring unit 

through the blast hole. These smoke plumes had burned and ignited when 

mixed with fresh air and were eventually caught by the CCTV footages as 

flashes. 20 

36. We respectfully submit that this explanation ought to be preferred over Dr 

Salim’s characterisation of the flashes as secondary deflagrations in view 

of the objective evidence that was captured on the CCTV footages .   

> 19 A*STAR’s Report, pp 48 to 51 : S -283 .
> 20 Transcript dated 5 October 2021, p 120 at lns 13 to 24. 20

37. If Stars Engrg is right to say that the flashes were smoke plumes, this would 

explain why flashes number 1 and 2 were captured by camera 8, but not 

camera 7, and flash number 3 was captured by camera 7, but not camera 

8. This is because the flash picked up by each individual camera would 

depend on the movement and location of the smoke pl ume, as well as the 

perspective of the camera. 21 

38. On the contrary, Dr Salim was unable to explain why two different cameras 

captured different flashes .22 Moreover, he also conceded that “ flash fires 

are potentially difficult to ascertain ” and he did n ot notice any physical signs 

of the secondary deflagrations. 

39. Further and in any event , neither Dr Salim 23 nor Major Huang 24 sought to 

refute this proposition which was presented to them during the hearing. It 

therefore stands to reason that Dr Salim and Major Huang must have 

conceded this to be a plausible alternative explanation to the flashes caught 

on the CCTV footage. Indeed, Major Huang acknowledged that “ [this] was 

possible ”. 25 

40. For completeness, there is n o evidence to suggest that other secondary 

deflagrations occurred in Stars Engrg’s unit. On Major Huang ’s account,      

> 21 Transcript dated 5 October 2021, p 120 at lns 13 to 24.
> 22 Transcript d ated 5 October 2021, p 121 at lns 2 to 3.
> 23 Transcript dated 5 October 2021, p 121 at lns 2 to 3.
> 24 Transcript dated 7 October 2021, p 107 at lns 10 to 18.
> 25 Transcript dated 7 October 2021, p 107 at lns 10 to 18. 21

these flashes occurred in Alif Engineering’s unit only, and both cameras 7 

and 8 did not capture any video footages within Stars Engrg’s unit .26 

ii. Trace quantities of starch 

41. The analytical results showing the presence of starch in trace quantities is 

unreliable for the following reasons. 

42. First, it bears highlighting that Table 10 of A*STAR’s Report reflected 

inconclusive FTIR analysis results and for most of the samples . 27 

Accordingly, such results cannot be regarded as indicative of starch being 

present. 

43. Second , even if starch was found to present, Dr Salim does not explain 

whether the starch was found in the fireclay. For instance, trace starch was 

present in the sample o btained from under the pallet at S/N 4 of Table 10. 

One explanation for this could be due to the workers dropping the fireclay 

from the platform (where the Mixer Machine was located) to the ground 

level / floor area ,28 which would have led to fine particles being ejected 

sideways and onto the floor. If the pallet was then placed on the floor 

thereafter, starch would inevitably be picked up by the pallet. Moreover, as 

the pallet was close to the epicentre of the primary explosion, the shock      

> 26 Transcript dated 7 October 2021, p 107 at ln 22 to p 108 at ln 5.
> 27 A*STAR’s Report, pp 49 to 50: S -283.
> 28 Mr Hossain Jitu’s Conditioned Stated at [47] : SS -922

wave generated by the explosion could have blasted some potato starch 

from the open bag next to the machine to under the pallet. 

44. Third, Dr Salim failed to consider the high likelihood of the accident scene 

being contaminated and/or t ampered with, particularly as the samples were 

collected more than three weeks after the Accident on 17 March 2021. 29 

Apart from the initial response team, eight other site visits by various parties, 

including the MOM Investigation Team, the Inquiry Committee, the 

technical experts from Matcor Technology & Services Pte Ltd (“ Matcor ”) 

and A*STAR, and the representatives from Stars Engrg, were arranged. 

Nothing in the MOM’s Report on the Investigation Process dated 4 October 

2021 (“ MOM Report ”) described how the Workplace was secured from 

contamination and/or movement of the debris by the individuals who visited 

the Workplace. 

45. Indeed, it became apparent during Dr Rose’s testimony tha t the nuts 

securing heating element number 2 were removed after the Accident 

occurred and prior to his inspections of the Workplace on 15 March 2021 

and 24 March 2021 under the MOM’s supervision. 30 It was also stated in 

the MOM’s Report that the two spanners initially found close to the 

additional heater during their first response on 24 February 2021 were 

subsequently moved and placed on the Mixer Machine, by the time Dr Rose 

inspected the Workplace. 31 Th e removal of the nuts and the m ovement of       

> 29 MOM’s Report at [3.9]: S -289 .
> 30 Transcript dated 6 October 2021, p 45 at lns 8 to 17.
> 31 MOM’s Report at [2.3.3]: S -289 .23

the spanners were presumably done without authorisation, given that even 

the MOM itself was unable to explain who removed the nuts and moved the 

spanners, and why they did so .32 

46. The security of the scene of the accident left much to be desire d and Stars 

Engrg and/or its officers reserve their rights to ventilate the associated 

issues at the appropriate forum. 

C. Other technical aspects of the Accident 

47. Stars Engrg’s position in relation to the other technical aspects of the 

Accident are as follows. 

a. The Mixer Machine was designed to operate as a closed system; 

b. The low level of oil could not have caused the accident; and 

c. There is no conclusive proof that the welding carried out by Mr Moll a

Mohammad Nasim (“ Mr Nasim ”) , an employee of Stars Engrg, 

contributed to the explosion of the Mixer Machine. 

48. We address each of them in turn . 

> 32 Transcript dated 7 October 2021, p 69 at ln 9 to p 71 at ln 9. 24

i. The Mixer Machine was designed to operate as a closed system 

49. It is undisputed between the parties t hat the oil jacket of the Mixer Machine 

operated as closed system at the material time, given that both the access 

port and the vent port were sealed. 

50. That said, Dr Rose opined that the operation of the oil jacket as a closed 

system made no difference to the outcome of the explosion .33 As the User 

Guide stated that the oil reservoir was designed to be operated as a sealed 

system and had an operating pressure of 0.2 MP a (2 bar) (i.e. twice the 

atmospheric pressure) , it therefore follows that t he oil jacket was designed 

to operate at a pressure higher than that of its surroundings, which includes 

a closed system. 

51. Critically, Dr Rose gave evidence that the Mixer Machine was unable to 

withstand the pressure build -up arising from the ignition of the oil mist in 

any event , whether it was “ vented or unvented ”.34 This is because the oil 

mist explosion would have generated “ about 10 to 20 bar [s] pressure ”,35 

which far exceeded the Mixer Machine’s operating pressure of 0.2 MPa (2 

bar) .

52. Moreover, he also pointed out that although the Contract of Sale dated 28 

August 2019 indicated the thickness of the oil jacket to be 6 mm, the Mixer        

> 33 Hawkins’ Report at [7.6]: ST -1.
> 34 Transcript dated 6 October 2021, p 54 at lns 15 to 16.
> 35 Transcript dated 6 O ctober 2021, p 5 4at lns 1 1to 14 .25

Machine failed to meet the standard claimed in the Contract of Sale as the 

wall of the oil reservoir was in fact only 4 mm thick. This considerably 

reduced the strength of the Mixer Machin e such that it was more likely to 

only withstand an operating pressure of 0.17 MPa, ra ther than the 0.2 MPa 

stated in the User Guide, thereby rendering it more susceptible to failures. 36 

ii. The low level of oil could not have directly caused the accident 

53. While is undisputed between the parties that the Mixer Machine was 

operating with low levels oil, we respectfully highlight that this in itself could 

not have solely and directly caused the accident. 

54. Pertinently, since June 2020, the employees of Stars E ngrg had always 

operated the Mixer Machine with low levels of oil, and in some cases, as 

little as 40 litres of oil. Yet, up until February 2021, the operation of the 

Mixer Machine with low levels of oil neither caused a fire nor an explosion.  

> 36 Hawkins’ Report at [6.3.6] : ST -1; Transcript dated 6 October 2021, p 56 at lns 1 to 6. 26

iii. There is no conclusive proof that the welding carried out by Mr 

Nasim, an employee of Stars Engrg, contributed to the explosion of 

the Mixer Machine 

55. Contrary to the position taken by the State’s technical experts , the welding 

carried out by Mr Nasim, would n ot have contributed to explosion of the 

Mixer Machine. At the outset, we highlight that Mr Nasim was a certified 

welder .37 

56. It is pertinent to note that Mr Nasim had to carry out welding works in 

October 2020 only because there was a crack of about 3 mm long on the 

manufacturer’s original welds 38 that had to be repaired. Indeed, Dr Shandro 

observed that “ the lack of root penetr ation with wide root opening (up to 

about 5.5 mm wide) at the repair welds of the oil jacket edges strongly 

suggested that the original welds at had ruptured open before repair weld 

and reinforcement plates were added ” (emp hasis added) .39 

57. While Dr Shandro goes on to note that the “ weld repairs… reduced the 

integrity and strength of the oil jacket ”, there is simply no credible evidence 

to suggest that the weld repairs, even if they were of poor quality, 

contributed to the explosion of the Mixer Machine.             

> 37 Mr Nasim’s Conditioned Statement dated 12 August 2021 ( “Mr Nas im ’s Conditioned
> Statement ”), MMN -1: SS -4, p 24
> 38 Mr Nasim’s Conditioned Statement, [48] -[53] : SS -4.
> 39 Matcor’s Technical Report dated 10 September 2021 , p 26, lns 23 to 25 : S -279. 27

58. In any case, as the weakest points of the structure were the original weld 

lines, the oil reservoir would have failed at the original weld lines ,

regardless of whether the repair welds were eventually carried out as well 

as the quality of the repair welds . This is particularly so as the pressure 

created by the ignition of the oil mist would have far exceeded the design 

pressure of 0.2 MPa , thereby causing the original weld lines to rupture and 

fail. 

59. Even on Dr Salim’s case, the elevated temperature of the heat transfer fluid 

would cause a build -up in the pressure within the jacket of 6 to 1 03 bar g, 40 

clearly in excess of the Mixer Machine’s heating jacket which was rated to 

operate at a pressure of less than 2 bar . It therefo re follows that the original 

weld lines would inevitably to rupture abruptly as well .41 

V. CONCLUSION 

60. Stars Engrg deeply regrets this incident and remains committed in its 

continuous efforts to support the families of the deceased and the surviving 

employees who were injured since the Accident. This includes paying the 

families the salary of the deceased on a monthly basis since February 2021, 

as well as reimbursing the full medical expenses incurred by the injured 

workers. 42     

> 40 A*STAR’s Report, p 30 at lns 4 to 8: S -283.
> 41 A*STAR’s Report , p 61 at lns 7 to 13 : S -283.
> 42 Transcript dated 27 September 2021, p 140 at ln 12 to p 141 at ln 14. 28

61. What is indisputable and amply clear is that the Accident would have been 

avoided if the workers had followed Mr Chua’s instructions to stop work and 

wait for him at the Workplace after the initial fire in the morning of 24 

February 2021. 43 As the AGC had adopted an adversarial approach to the 

Inquiry to pin blame on Stars Engrg and/or its officers, the State Counsel 

had advanced a case theory that the workers were placed under pressure 

to complete the production for the day, and hence decided to ignore Mr 

Chua’s instructions. There is no evidence to support the AGC’s case theory. 

More importantly, the AGC’s case theory acknowledges the truth that Mr 

Chua had asked the workers to cease production and not operate the Mixer 

Machine. 

Dated this 10 th day of De cember 2021 

_____ _____________________ ______ ______ 

SOLICITORS FOR THE INTERESTED PARTY 

Rajah & Tann Singapore LLP  

> 43 Transcript dated 27 September 2021, p 61 at lns 9 to 24.

1

Annex A 

S/N  Query  The Manufac turer ’s Response  Objective Evidence 

A. Certification of the Manufac turer and the Mixer Machine 

1.  Stars Engrg’s Clarification Question for Query (2): …

Assuming the machine is a customised product, would the 

machine still have to meet the CE and ISO standards /

certifications as stated by the manufacturer when provided to 

the customer? If so, did this kneader machine provided to Stars 

meet the CE and I SO standards/certification? 

… Our order contract with the customer does not 

mention CE and ISO standards/certifications .

The printout from Alibaba.com 

showing information on the Mixer 

Machine and the Manufacturer at 

CXD -21 (“ Printout ”) indicates the 

following: 

• It is stated under the 

“Overview” section that the 

machine has the certification 

of “ ce iso ”.1

• The “Certifications” section 

shows various certifications 

obtained by the 

Manufacturer .2

• It is stated under the “FAQ” 

section that the M an ufacturer 

had passed the ISO9001 

certification, and most of their 

products had passed the CE 

certification .3 

> 1

Mr C hua Conditioned Statement dated 27 August 2021 ( “Mr Chua ’s Conditioned Statement ”), p 23 3: SS -6.  

> 2

Mr Chua’s Conditioned Statement , p 2 42 : SS -6.  

> 3

Mr Chua’s Conditioned Statement , p 2 45 : SS -6. 2

S/N  Query  The Manufac turer ’s Response  Objective Evidence 

B. The Manufactu rer ’s reference to the Mixer Machine as an “atmospheric machine” 

2.  Query (5): What would happen if the thermal jacket was 

operated beyond 0.2 MPa? 

… This model is an atmospheric machine ….  None of the documents provided 

by the Manufactu rer states that 

the Mixer Machine is an 

“atmospheric machine ”. 

If anything, the documents 

suggest that the Mixer Machine 

operates under a pressurised 

system. 

• The Printout at CXD -21 states 

“[the machine is] designed for 

pressure, vacuum or inert gas 

operation ” as one of the Mixer 

Machine ’s main features .4

• The User Guide for the Mixer 

Machine (“ User Guide ”) at 

CX D-25 states “pressure type” 

as one of the machine’s 

technical parameters, and a

pressure level of 0.45 MPa as 

its technical specification .5

3.  Stars Engrg’s Clarification Question for Query (5): What 

does “atmospheric machine” mean? Was the customer 

provided information about the model of the machine being an 

“atmospheric machine”? 

Atmospheric pressure machine means that no 

part of the machine can produce pressure during 

the working process. The fuel filler port of this 

machine is an open design, which will not 

generate pressure. The picture has been 

provided to stars company .

C. The Manufactu rer ’s assertion that all the openings, in particular port “X” must be kept open 

4.  Query (11): There are 3 pipe/port openings on the thermal 

jacket (see markings “X”, “Y” and “Z” in the two photos attached 

below). What are each of the openings designed to be used 

for? 

“X” is the heat -conducting oil filling and exhaust 

port, and the top of the “X” i s equipped with a 

funnel (picture attached). Make sure that the 

user blocks the “X” privately, without permission; 

the Y port is the exhaust port while filling the oil, 

None of the documents pr ovided 

by the Manufacturer , in particular 

the User Guide at CXD -25 , state 

that port “X” was meant to be 

open, and that its function was to  

> 4

Mr Chua’s Conditioned Statement , p 23 8: SS -6.  

> 5

Mr Chua’s Conditioned Statement , p 2 71: SS -6. 3

S/N  Query  The Manufac turer ’s Response  Objective Evidence 

in order to fill the oil smoothly, “Z” is the oil drain 

port. 

ensure that the operating pressure 

inside the Mixer Machine does not 

exceed 0.2 MPa. These are also 

not evident from Item 2 under 

Section 8 of the User Guide .

Importantly, Section Ten of the 

User Guide at CXD -25 states that 

“when refueling, you need to open 

one side vent hole and add it to 

half the height of the cylinder ”

(emphasis add ed) .6 This therefore 

contemplates the closing of the 

vent holes, especially since the 

Mixer Machine was delivered with 

port “X” open. 

5.  MOM’s Clarification Question for Query (11): Please clarify 

what you mean by “ Make sure that the user blocks the “X” 

privately, without permission ”. 

The X port is an open design, and this place is 

open when the machine is delivered. The picture 

you provided shows that port X is blocked. Keda 

did not provide any information to ask the 

customer to block the X port .

6.  Qu ery (12): Are any of the openings mentioned at question 11 

above (i.e. “X”, “Y” or “Z”) meant to be closed when the kneader 

machine is in operation? 

“X” needs to be kept in its original state when 

working, “Y” and “Z” are closed (refer to the 

photos in Art icle 11) .

7.  Query (13): Is the kneader machine / thermal jacket intended 

to operate as a closed system? If yes, how is the user informed 

of this? 

No, it isn’t .

8.  Stars Engrg’s Clarification Question for Query (13): Was 

there any indication in the User Guide or any written 

corre spondence with the customer, Stars, that the machine was 

intended to operate as an open system? If yes, please provide 

us with the reference and supporting documents. 

The pictures and videos provided by Keda to 

stars can explain this, and they are clearly 

shown as open .

9.  IC’s Clarification Question for Query (13): Was Stars 

informed that the kneader machine / thermal jacket was 

intended to operate with “X” in an open state? 

Yes. Because the state of the machine is correct 

and normal when the machine is delivered, the 

pictures sent to the customer also shows that 

the X port is open. It can also be found and 

verified in item Eight - 2 of the 4 th page of the 

USER’S GUIDE. “2. This system uses heat 

conduction oil electric heating tube for heating, 

which has high requirements for the quality and 

material of heat conduction oil. It is 

recommended to use HD series high  

> 6

Mr Chua’s Conditioned Statement , p 2 71 : SS -6. 4

S/N  Query  The Manufac turer ’s Response  Objective Evidence 

temperature heat conduction oil. Generally, the 

heat conduction oil should be preheated before 

being injected into the jacket of the mi xing tank 

to facilitate the evaporation of the moisture of the 

oil. An oil vapor vent is provided at the highest 

point behind the machine, and the oil vapor vent 

is directly connected to the vent Pool. Care 

should be taken in the heating process, and 

avoid using hands to detect whether the pipes 

and the outside of the mixing tank are heated. 

It’s easy to get burned. ”

10.  Query (14): Does the reference at page 4 of the User Guide, 

under “Design of thermal jacket”, to “Working pressure of:  ≤

0.2 Mpa” mean? 

No, it cannot be closed. Pressure will be 

generated in the case of poor exhaust in the 

jacket, and the pressure that the equipment c an 

withstand does not exceed 0.2Mpa .

11.  Query (15): How is the user supposed to ensure that the 

working pressure within the thermal jacket remains  ≤0.2 Mpa 

during operation. 

“X” must be kept connection to the outside air 

and unblocked .

12.  Stars Engrg’s Cla rification Question for Query (14): With 

reference to your answer to Query 14 above that “the pressure 

that the equipment can withstand does not exceed 0.2Mpa”, 

please advise how the user is able to know that the exhaust is 

poor and the pressure is buildin g up in the jacket? Please 

advise if there is any safety feature provided in the machine to 

prevent such a situation? 

According to design of Keda, if the exhaust is 

poor or the pressure builds up, there will be gas 

volatilization at the funnel. 

The machine is provided with a related safety 

device, which is the funnel at the X port to keep 

the jacket unblocked. The description or 

explanation can be found in item eight -2, page 4 

of the USER’S GUIDE. 

13.  Query (22): At page 5 of the User Manual it is stated: ” When 

refueling, you need to open one side vent hold and add it to half 

“Open one side vent hole” means opening the 

“Y”, which is used to re move the air in the 

The function of “Y” is not explained 

in the User Guide at CXD -25 and 

the labelled diagram in the 5

S/N  Query  The Manufac turer ’s Response  Objective Evidence 

the height of the cylinder”. What does “ open one side vent hole ”

and “ half the hight of the cylinder ” mean? 

cylinder when filling oil, and used to check the 

volume, needs to be closed after operation… 

Printout at CXD -21 does not show 

“Y” as the “side vent hole” .7

D. The Manufactu rer ’s assertion that HD320 -350# high temperature heat transfer oil should be used inside the thermal jacket 

14.  Query (18): What liquid(s) are meant to be used inside the 

thermal jacket? What liquid does Laizhou Keda recommend be 

used in the thermal jacket, and why? 

… Keda recommends to refer to HD320 -350# 

high temperature heat transfer oil in the USER’S 

GUIDE (and we have introduced the 

characteristics and uses of the hat transfer oil to 

users by WeChat), because of the requirements 

of working temperature, it is recommended to 

choose .

The Manufacturer ha d indicated 

that water can also be used inside 

the thermal jacket: 

• Section Four of the User 

Guide at CXD -25 states “Hot 

Water in Jacket” as one 

method of heating .8

• In Sherry’s messages to Chua 

at CXD -22 , she stated that “ if 

the temperature in the jacket 

is lower than 100 degrees, it 

can be filled with water, but in 

this case, the heating rod will 

be easily damaged ”

(IM#147) .9 

> 7

Mr Chua’s Conditioned Statement , p 23 4: SS -6.  

> 8

Mr Chua’s Conditioned Statement , p 2 71 : SS -6.  

> 9

Mr Chua’s Conditioned Statement , p 2 60 : SS -6. 6

S/N  Query  The Manufac turer ’s Response  Objective Evidence 

E. The Manufactu rer ’s assertion that instructions on how to use the temperature sensors were given to Stars 

15.  Query (30)(i): Were instructions on how to use the temperature 

sensors given to Stars? 

Yes, Keda has instructions for material 

temperature and oil temperature on the electric 

control cabinet, and also informs customers how 

to use it through online communication .

The v eracity of the Manufacturer ’s

evidence is questionable, 

particularly as the messages that 

they purportedly sent to Mr Chua 

on 12 June 2020 at 14:25 and 

14:42 are absent from the same 

set of WeChat messages 

extracted by the Cyber Crim e

Response Team (Jurong Division, 

SPF) at CXD -22 . 10 In fact, our 

client denies receiving these 

messages. 

Moreover, it is also telling that the 

Manufacturer failed to provide a 

copy of all its communications with 

Stars / Mr Chua Xing Da despite 

MOM ’s reque st , and did not 

explain why they failed to do so. 

16.  MOM’s Clarification Qu estion for Query (30)(i)(ii): Can 

Laizhou Keda indicate when the online communication 

response shown in the screenshot was provided to Mr Chua 

Xing Da and how was this provided? 

It was provided in June, 2020, through the 

WeChat . 

> 10

Mr Chua’s Conditioned Statement , p 320 : SS -6. 7

S/N  Query  The Manufac turer ’s Response  Objective Evidence 

17.  MOM’s Clarification Question for Query (30)(i)(iii): 

According to Mr Chua Xing Da, he had called you to ask where 

the temperature sensors should be placed in the kneader 

It is not correct. Mr CHUA’s question has been 

clearly answered, as shown in the above 

answer .

Paragraph 83 of Mr Chua’s 

Conditioned Statement at SS -6

states, “ I had once asked Sherry 8

S/N  Query  The Manufac turer ’s Response  Objective Evidence 

machine, but you did not provide him with any instructions and 

instead referred him to the U ser Guide. Could you please 

confirm if this account of your conversation with Mr Chua Xing 

Da is accurate? 

via WeChat on 12 June 2020 at 

12:45 pm “… which location can I 

put the thermocouple”, as shown 

in the WeChat messages between 

Sherry and me from 12 June 2200 

to 24 February 2021, which were 

extracted from my mobile phone 

by the CCRT , annexed as CXD -40 

(IM#54). However, she did not 

reply. When I called Sherry via 

either WhatsApp or WeChat, she 

told me to refer to the User Guide. 

However, the User Guide did not 

specify where the temperature 

sensors were to be placed .” 11 

18.  IC’s Clarifica tion Question for Query (30)(i): Did Laizhou 

Keda advise Mr Chua Xing Da on how the kneader machine 

worked such that it would turn off the heaters automatically after 

reaching a certain temperature? 

Laizhou Keda provided the guidance in the 

telephone consu ltation .

Based on Mr Chua’s recollection, 

there was no such telephone 

conversation and/or telephone 

consultation. 

F. The Manufactu rer ’s denial that Stars Engrg had never contacted them regarding the repairs to the Mixer Machine 

19.  Query (43): Has Stars contacted you before regarding repairs 

to the kneader machine? 

They never contacted the problem of repairing 

the kneader. But they contacted to buy a new 

machine again on February 12, 2021, and 

prepared to place another order with us. 

Stars En grg and/or its officers do 

not accept the Manufacturer’s 

position and reserve their right to 

make full arguments at the 

appropriate juncture and any 

subsequent forum. 

In any case, Mr Chua’s position 

has been set out at paragraphs 

20.  MOM’s Clarification Question for Query (43): According to 

Mr Chua Xing Da, you had said in response that you could not 

help and that he should have purchased a better machine 

It is very inaccurat e. I have never received such 

a call, and I did not elaborate on the response to 

such a statement. This is totally inconsistent with 

the facts . 

> 11

Mr Chua’s Conditioned Statement , p 23 : SS -6. 9

S/N  Query  The Manufac turer ’s Response  Objective Evidence 

instead. Could you please confirm if this account of your 

conversation with Mr Chua Xing Da is accurate? 

208 and 20 9 of his Conditioned 

Statement .12 

G. The Manufacturer ’s assertion that they provided technical guidance to their customers 

21.  Query (44): Apart from the User Guide, were any other 

operating instructions on how to use the machine given to Stars 

Engrg? 

Before shipment, we provided the test video and 

completed pictures of the machine. After 

shipment, we provide technical guidance to 

customers through telephone and online 

service, including preparations before starting 

the machine, precautions, etc., and asked the 

customer if they have any questions about the 

machine, looking forward to customer feedback .

It is not apparent from the 

extracted messages at CXD -22 

and CXD -40 that the Manufacturer 

provided technical guidance on 

preparations before starting the 

machine and precautions. 

From the messages at CXD -22 ,

apart from checking whether Mr 

Chua had any questions 

(IM#93 ), 13 as well as whether he 

had started using the machine and 

had any problems (IM#105 ), 14 th e

Manufacturer did not voluntarily 

provide any guidance , and only 

responded to Mr Chua ’s questions 

(see IM#110 -138 and IM#145 -

166 )15 

22.  MOM’s Clarification Question for Query (44): May we have 

a copy of the test video? Please also indicate w hen the test 

video was provided to Stars, and how it was provided. 

Sure, enclosed the video in this email. By 

WhatsApp and Email .

Mr Chua is unable to recall 

whether he had received the video 

titled “ testing video ”.

In any case , the video does not 

provide any guidance on how the 

Mixer Machine should be  

> 12

Mr Chua’s Conditioned Statement , p p 60 to 61 : SS -6.  

> 13

Mr Chua’s Conditioned Statement , p 252 : SS -6.  

> 14

Mr Chua’s Conditioned Statement , p 253 : SS -6.  

> 15

Mr Chua’s Conditioned Statement , p p 254 to 258, 260 to 264 : SS -6. 10 

S/N  Query  The Manufac turer ’s Response  Objective Evidence 

operated, in particular where the 

thermocouple should be placed. Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 202 1

## L-1 

# ANNEX L – EXTRACTS FROM THE WORKPLACE SAFETY AND HEALTH ACT Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 202 1

## L-2 

Duty of occupier of workplace 

11. It shall be the duty of every occupier of any workplace to take, so far as is reasonably practicable, such measures to ensure that — (a) the workplace; (b) all means of access to or egress from the workplace; and (c) any machinery, equipment, plant, article or substance kept on the workplace, are safe and without risks to health to every person within those premises, whether or not the person is at work or is an employee of the occupier. 

Duties of employers 

12—(1) It shall be the duty of every employer to take, so far as is reasonably practicable, such measures as are necessary to ensure the safety and health of his employees at work. (2) It shall be the duty of every employer to take, so far as is reasonably practicable, such measures as are necessary to ensure the safety and health of persons (not being his employees) who may be affected by any undertaking carried on by him in the workplace. (3) For the purposes of subsection (1), the measures necessary to ensure the safety and health of persons at work include — (a) providing and maintaining for those persons a work environment which is safe, without risk to health, and adequate as regards facilities and arrangements for their welfare at work; (b) ensuring that adequate safety measures are taken in respect of any machinery, equipment, plant, article or process used by those persons; (c) ensuring that those persons are not exposed to hazards arising out of the arrangement, disposal, manipulation, organisation, processing, storage, transport, working or use of things — (i) in their workplace; or (ii) near their workplace and under the control of the employer; (d) developing and implementing procedures for dealing with emergencies that may arise while those persons are at work; and (e) ensuring that those persons at work have adequate instruction, information, training and supervision as is necessary for them to perform their work. (4) Every employer shall, where required by the regulations, give to persons (not being his employees) the prescribed information about such aspects of the way in which he conducts his undertaking as might affect their safety or health while those persons are at his workplace. 

Duties of principals 

14. (1) Subject to subsection (2), it shall be the duty of every principal to take, so far as is reasonably practicable, such measures as are necessary to ensure the safety and health of — (a) any contractor engaged by the principal when at work; Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 202 1

## L-3 

(b) any direct or indirect subcontractor engaged by such contractor when at work; and (c) any employee employed by such contractor or subcontractor when at work. (2) The duty imposed on the principal in subsection (1) shall only apply where the contractor, subcontractor or employee referred to in that subsection is working under the direction of the principal as to the manner in which the work is carried out. (3) It shall be the duty of every principal to take, so far as is reasonably practicable, such measures as are necessary to ensure the safety and health of persons (other than a person referred to in subsection (1)(a), (b) or (c) working under the principal’s direction) who may be affected by any undertaking carried on by him in the workplace. (4) For the purposes of subsection (1), the measures necessary to ensure the safety and health of persons at work include — (a) providing and maintaining for those persons a work environment which is safe, without risk to health, and adequate as regards facilities and arrangements for their welfare at work; (b) ensuring that adequate safety measures are taken in respect of any machinery, equipment, plant, article or process used by those persons; (c) ensuring that those persons are not exposed to hazards arising out of the arrangement, disposal, manipulation, organisation, processing, storage, transport, working or use of things — (i) in their workplace; or (ii) near their workplace and under the control of the principal; (d) developing and implementing procedures for dealing with emergencies that may arise while those persons are at work; and (e) ensuring that those persons at work have adequate instruction, information, training and supervision as is necessary for them to perform their work. (5) Every principal shall, where required by the regulations, give to persons (other than a person referred to in subsection (1)(a), (b) or (c) working under the principal’s direction) the prescribed information about such aspects of the way in which he conducts his undertaking as might affect their safety or health while those persons are at his workplace. 

Persons at Work 

15.—(3A) Any person at work who, without reasonable cause, does any negligent act which endangers the safety or health of himself or others shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding $30,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years or to both. Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 202 1

## L-4 

Duties of manufacturers and suppliers of machinery, equipment or hazardous substances used at work 

16.—(1) Subject to this section, it shall be the duty of any person who manufactures or supplies any machinery, equipment or hazardous substance for use at work to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable (a) that the following information about the safe use of the machinery, equipment or hazardous substance is available to any person to whom the machinery, equipment or hazardous substance is supplied for use at work: (i) the precautions (if any) to be taken for the proper use and maintenance of the machinery, equipment or hazardous substance; (ii) the health hazards (if any) associated with the machinery, equipment or hazardous substance; and (iii) the information relating to and the results of any examinations or tests of the machinery, equipment or hazardous substance under paragraph (c) that are relevant to its safe use; (b) that the machinery, equipment or hazardous substance is safe, and without risk to health, when properly used; (c) that the machinery, equipment or hazardous substance is examined and tested so as to comply with the obligation imposed by paragraph (b). (2) The duties imposed on any person specified in subsection (1) shall (a) apply only if the machinery, equipment or hazardous substance is manufactured or supplied in the course of trade, business, profession or undertaking carried on by the person, whether for profit or not; (b) apply whether or not the machinery, equipment or hazardous substance is exclusively manufactured or supplied for use by persons at work; and (c) extend to the supply of the machinery, equipment or hazardous substance by way of sale, transfer, lease or hire and whether as principal or agent, and to the supply of the machinery, equipment or hazardous substance to a person for the purpose of supply to others. (3) The duties imposed on any person specified in subsection (1) shall not apply to a person by reason only that the person supplies the machinery or equipment under a hire-purchase agreement, conditional sale agreement or credit-sale agreement to another (referred to in this section as the customer) in the course of a business of financing the acquisition of the machinery or equipment by the customer from others. (4) Where a person (referred to in this subsection as the ostensible supplier) supplies any machinery or equipment for use at work to a customer under a hire-purchase agreement, conditional sale agreement or credit-sale agreement, and the ostensible supplier — (a) carries on the business of financing the acquisition of goods by others by means of such agreements; and (b) in the course of that business acquired his interest in the machinery or equipment supplied to the customer as a means of financing its acquisition by the customer from a third person (referred to in this subsection as the effective supplier), Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 202 1

## L-5 

the effective supplier shall be treated for the purposes of this section as supplying the machinery or equipment to the customer instead of the ostensible supplier, and any duty imposed by subsection (1) on a supplier shall accordingly apply to the effective supplier, and not to the ostensible supplier. (5) Where a person designs, manufactures or supplies any machinery, equipment or hazardous substance for use at work and does so for or to another on the basis of a written undertaking by that other to take specified steps sufficient to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that the machinery, equipment or hazardous substance will be safe and without risk to health when properly used, the undertaking shall have the effect of relieving the first-mentioned person from the duty imposed by subsection (1)(b) to such extent as is reasonable having regard to the terms of the undertaking. (6) Any person required under subsection (1)(c) to ensure that any machinery, equipment or hazardous substance is examined and tested so as to comply with the obligation imposed by subsection (1)(b) shall be regarded as having complied with subsection (1)(c) to the extent that — (a) the examination or test has already been carried out otherwise than by, or on behalf of, the person; and (b) it is reasonable for the person to rely on that examination or test. (7) For the purposes of this section, an absence of safety, or a risk to health, shall be disregarded in so far as the case in or in relation to which it would arise is shown to be one the occurrence of which could not reasonably be foreseen. (8) In this section, “supplier”, in relation to any machinery, equipment or hazardous substance, does not include a manufacturer of those items when supplying, but includes an importer when supplying those items. (9) This section shall apply only to machinery, equipment or hazardous substances specified in the Fifth Schedule. 

Duties of persons who erect, install or modify machinery or equipment and persons in control of machinery for use at work 

17.—(1) It shall be the duty of any person who erects, installs or modifies any machinery or equipment for use at work to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that the machinery or equipment is erected, installed or modified in such a manner that it is safe, and without risk to health, when properly used. (2) The duty imposed on a person erecting, installing or modifying any machinery or equipment under subsection (1) shall apply only if the machinery or equipment is erected, installed or modified in the course of the person’s trade, business, profession or undertaking. (3) Any person required under subsection (1) to ensure that any machinery or equipment is erected, installed or modified in such a manner that it is safe, and without risk to health, when properly used shall be regarded as having complied with that subsection to the extent that — (a) the person ensured, so far as is reasonably practicable, that the erection, installation or modification was in accordance with the information supplied by the designer, manufacturer or supplier of the machinery or equipment regarding its erection, installation or modification; and Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 202 1

## L-6 

(b) it is reasonable for the person to rely on that information. (4) Where any machinery moved by mechanical power is used in any workplace, then notwithstanding anything in this Act, it shall be the duty of the owner of the machinery to ensure — (a) so far as is reasonably practicable, that the machinery is maintained in a safe condition; and (b) that the precautions (if any) to be taken for the safe use of the machinery and the health hazards (if any) associated with the machinery are available to any person using the machinery. (5) Where the owner of any machinery moved by mechanical power has entered into a contract of hire or lease with a hirer or lessee, the duty imposed under subsection (4) shall apply to the hirer or lessee of the machinery instead of the owner. (6) Where the owner, hirer or lessee of any machinery moved by mechanical power has entered into a contract with another person to maintain the machinery, the duty under subsection (4)(a) shall apply to that other person instead of the owner, hirer or lessee of the machinery. (7) Subsections (1), (2) and (3) shall apply only to machinery or equipment specified in Part I of the Fifth Schedule. 

Offences by bodies corporate, etc. 

48.— (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a body corporate, an officer of the body corporate shall be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly unless he proves that — (a) the offence was committed without his consent or connivance; and (b) he had exercised all such diligence to prevent the commission of the offence as he ought to have exercised having regard to the nature of his functions in that capacity and to all the circumstances. 

FIFTH SCHEDULE MACHINERY, EQUIPMENT OR HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES PART I MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT 

1. Scaffolds and any materials or components used to erect them 2. All lifting equipment 3. Forklifts 4. Power presses 5. Bar-benders 6. Any equipment or piping intended for operation under pressure, including all statutory pressure vessels 7. Any equipment or piping intended to contain corrosive, toxic or flammable substances 8. Welding equipment, including any accessory, apparatus or fitting necessary to enable its use 9. Materials or components used for the construction of support structures 10. Explosive powered tools Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 202 1

## L-7 

11. Equipment used for abrasive blasting, including any accessory, apparatus or fitting necessary to enable its use and operation. 

PART II HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES 

1. Corrosive substances 2. Flammable substances 3. Explosives 4. Oxidising substances 5. Pyrophoric substances 6. Gases under pressure 7. Organic peroxides 8. Self heating substances 9. Self-reactive substances 10. Substances which in contact with water, emit flammable gases 11. Toxic substances 12. Mutagens 13. Carcinogens 14. Teratogens 15. Sensitizers 16. Irritants 17. Substances hazardous to aquatic environment. Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 202 1

## M-1 

# ANNEX M – EXTRACTS FROM THE WORKPLACE SAFETY AND HEALTH (RISK MANAGEMENT) REGULATIONS Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 202 1

## M-2 

Risk assessment 

3.—(1) In every workplace, the employer, self-employed person and principal shall conduct a risk assessment in relation to the safety and health risks posed to any person who may be affected by his undertaking in the workplace. (2) The Commissioner may determine the manner in which the risk assessment referred to in paragraph (1) is to be conducted. 

Elimination and control of risk 

4.—(1) In every workplace, the employer, self-employed person and principal shall take all reasonably practicable steps to eliminate any foreseeable risk to any person who may be affected by his undertaking in the workplace. (2) Where it is not reasonably practicable to eliminate the risk referred to in paragraph (1), the employer, self-employed person or principal shall implement — (a) such reasonably practicable measures to minimise the risk; and (b) such safe work procedures to control the risk. (3) The measures referred to in paragraph (2)(a) may include all or any of the following: (a) substitution; (b) engineering control; (c) administrative control; (d) provision and use of suitable personal protective equipment. (4) The employer, self-employed person or principal shall specify the roles and responsibilities of persons involved in the implementation of any measure or safe work procedure referred to in paragraph (2). (5) In this regulation — “administrative control” means the implementation of any administrative requirement which includes a permit-to-work system; “engineering control” — (a) means the application of any scientific principle for the control of any workplace hazard; and (b) includes the application of physical means or measures to any work process, equipment or the work environment such as the installation of any barrier, enclosure, guarding, interlock or ventilation system; “safe work procedure” means any procedure for carrying out work safely, and includes any procedure which is to be taken to protect the safety and health of persons in the event of an emergency; “substitution” means the replacement of any hazardous material, process, operation, equipment or device with less hazardous ones. Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 202 1

## N-1 

# ANNEX N - EXTRACTS FROM THE WORKPLACE SAFETY AND HEALTH (GENERAL PROVISIONS) REGULATIONS Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 202 1

## N-2 

Part III – General Provisions Relating to Safety Hoists and lifts 

19.(1) No hoist or lift shall be used in a workplace unless an authorised examiner has — (a) tested and examined the hoist or lift after its installation; and (b) issued and signed a certificate of test and examination, specifying the safe working load of the hoist or lift. (2) The certificate of test and examination referred to in paragraph (1)(b) shall be kept available for inspection. (3) Subject to paragraph (10)(c), every hoist or lift used in a workplace shall be thoroughly examined by an authorised examiner at least once every 6 months or at such other intervals as the Commissioner may determine. 

Lifting gears 

20.(1) No lifting gear of whatever material shall be used in a workplace unless an authorised examiner has — (a) tested and examined the lifting gear; and (b) issued and signed a certificate of test and examination, specifying the safe working load of the lifting gear. (2) The certificate of test and examination referred to in paragraph (1)(b) shall be kept available for inspection. (3) Every lifting gear used in a workplace shall be thoroughly examined by an authorised examiner at least once every year or at such other intervals as the Commissioner may determine. Electric generator, motor, transmission machinery, etc. 

Lifting appliances and lifting machines 

21. (1) No lifting appliance or lifting machine shall be used unless an authorised examiner has — (a) tested and examined the lifting appliance or lifting machine; and (b) issued and signed a certificate of test and examination, specifying the safe working load of the lifting appliance or lifting machine. (2) The certificate of test and examination referred to in paragraph (1)(b) shall be kept available for inspection. (3) Every lifting appliance and lifting machine shall be thoroughly examined by an authorised examiner at least once every year or at such other intervals as the Commissioner may determine. 

Precautions with regard to explosive or flammable dust, gas, vapour or substance 

26. —(1) Where any process in a plant used in a workplace gives rise to dust, gas, vapour or substance that may escape into any place of work and the dust, gas, vapour or substance that may escape is of such a character and is to such an extent as to be liable to explode on ignition — (a) all reasonably practicable steps shall be taken to prevent such an explosion — Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 202 1

## N-3 

(i) by enclosure of the plant used in the process; (ii) by removal or prevention of accumulation of the dust, gas, vapour or substance; (iii) by exclusion or effective enclosure of possible sources of ignition; or (iv) by the use of suitable flame-proof equipment; and (b) unless the plant in which the process is carried out is so constructed as to withstand the pressure likely to be produced by any such explosion, all reasonably practicable steps shall be taken to restrict the spread and effects of such an explosion by the provision of chokes, baffles and vents, or other equally effective appliances in the plant. (2) Where any part of a plant in a workplace contains any explosive or flammable gas or vapour under pressure greater than atmospheric pressure, that part shall not be opened, unless it is positively isolated, depressurised and vented to a safe location, and where necessary, purged to remove any residual gas or vapour. (3) No plant, tank or vessel in a workplace that contains, or has contained, any explosive or flammable substance shall be subjected to — (a) any welding, brazing or soldering operation; (b) any cutting operation which involves the application of heat; or (c) any operation involving the application of heat for the purpose of taking apart or removing the plant, tank or vessel or any part of it, until all reasonably practicable steps have been taken to remove the substance and any fumes, gas or vapour arising from it, or to render the substance and fumes non-explosive and non-flammable. 

Conditions before steam boiler, steam receiver, air receiver or refrigerating plant pressure receiver may be used 

27. (1) Subject to paragraph (2), it shall be the duty of the owner of any steam boiler, steam receiver, air receiver or refrigerating plant pressure receiver (referred to in this regulation as relevant equipment) who intends to put the relevant equipment into use in a workplace to — (a) obtain, in such form and manner as may be determined by the Commissioner, the approval of the Commissioner to use the relevant equipment; (b) ensure that such examination and test by an authorised examiner as may be specified by the Commissioner has been satisfactorily carried out; (c) obtain from the authorised examiner a report of the examination and test referred to in sub-paragraph (b), specifying the safe working pressure of the relevant equipment and stating the nature of the tests to which the relevant equipment and its fittings have been submitted; (d) keep the report referred to in sub-paragraph (c) available for inspection; and (e) mark the relevant equipment so as to enable it to be identified as the relevant equipment to which the report refers. Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 202 1

## N-4 

Steam boilers 

28. (6) Every — (a) steam boiler referred to in paragraph (5), including all its fittings and attachments, shall be thoroughly examined by an authorised examiner at least once every 2 years and also after any extensive repair; and (b) surface of the external shell of a steam boiler referred to in paragraph (5) shall be examined by an authorised examiner at least once every 6 years, and for the purpose of such examination, the insulation on the shell shall be removed completely. 

Steam receivers 

29. (6) Subject to paragraph (7) and regulation 31A, every steam receiver shall be examined by an authorised examiner — (a) at least once every 2 years; and (b) after any extensive repairs. 

Air receivers 

31. (5) Subject to paragraph (6) and regulation 31A, every air receiver shall be — (a) thoroughly cleaned; and (b) examined by an authorised examiner at least once every 2 years. 

Warning labels 

42. It shall be the duty of the occupier of a workplace in which there is any container of hazardous substances to ensure that, so far as reasonably practicable, every such container is affixed with one or more warning labels that conform with — (a) any Singapore Standard relating to the classification and labelling of hazardous substances; or (b) such other standards, codes of practice or guidance relating to the classification and labelling of hazardous substances as is issued or approved by the Council. 

Safety data sheet 

43. —(1) Where any hazardous substance is used, handled or stored in a workplace, it shall be the duty of the occupier of the workplace to — (a) obtain a safety data sheet of the substance; (b) assess the information in the safety data sheet and take precautionary measures to ensure the safe use of the substance; and (c) make available the safety data sheet to all persons at work in the workplace who are liable to be exposed to the substance. Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 202 1

## N-5 

(2) Where any hazardous substance is sold to any person for use in a workplace, it shall be the duty of the seller or any agent of the seller who caused or procured the sale to provide the buyer with a safety data sheet for the substance that — (a) gives accurate and adequate information on the substance; and (b) conforms with any Singapore Standard relating to safety data sheets or such other standards, codes of practice or guidance as is issued or approved by the Council. “hazardous substance” means any hazardous substance specified in Part II of the Fifth Schedule to the Act Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 2021 

## O-1 

# ANNEX O – EXTRACTS OF COMBUSTIBLE DUST-RELATED LEGISLATION Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 2021 

## O-2 

Singapore Civil Defence Force 

Singapore Civil Defence Force (SCDF) implements licensing controls over petroleum and flammable materials (P&FM) that are listed under the Fire Safety Act and the Fire Safety (Petroleum & Flammable Materials) Regulations. Companies are required to apply for a P&FM storage licence, which is renewable once every year. This is to help ensure fire safety compliance for the storage of P&FM, minimize fire safety risk through safe handling of these substances and ensure that there are proper emergency response procedures put in place. The current list of petroleum and flammable materials included metal powders such as aluminum, magnesium and zinc, which are combustible powders. For new built and buildings where works carried out will affect the fire safety works within the building, building plan approval has to be sought from SCDF and the fire safety measures are required to comply with the Fire Code requirements. This will also apply to buildings or premises that may use or store combustible powders. 

Singapore Food Agency 

Singapore Food Agency (SFA) administers the Sale of Food Act and the Singapore Food Regulations to ensure that the food made available for sale in Singapore are safe for consumption. Part of SFA’s regime involves the implementation of controls on commercial food imports that enter Singapore including process food some of which are combustible dusts. Examples of processed food include: 

 Infant formula 

 Milk products (eg. cheese, milk powder, etc.) 

 Biscuits 

 Flour 

 Cereals 

 Coffee powder There are labelling requirements for pre-packed food and the labels aim to provide consumers with basic information of the product such as the source, nature and contents, quantity and quality. Under the Food Regulations, these labels need to include details such as the ingredients used. 

Ministry of Manpower Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 2021 

## O-3 

Under the Workplace Safety and Health Act and its subsidiary legislations, MOM ensures that workers’ safety and health is safeguarded in workplaces. Currently, there are provisions under the WSH (General Provisions) Regulations on precautions and measures to be taken with regards to explosive, flammable dust, gas, vapour or substance. Combustible dust which could cause combustible dust explosion are also included under this clause. However, it was not explicitly stated in the clause that combustible dust is part of flammable dust. There is also no requirement for the occupier handling combustible dust to inform MOM or other agencies on the use of such material except for those flammable solids which are licensed under SCDF. The Workplace Safety and Health Act (WSHA) covers duties of manufacturer and supplier of hazardous substances prescribed in the Fifth Schedule to provide information on the safe use of the hazardous substance. Additionally, the WSH (General Provisions) Regulations also require seller or agent of the seller of the hazardous substances to provide Safety Data Sheet that conforms to Singapore Standard SS 586 Part 3: Preparation of Safety Data Sheets (SDS), which conforms to the GHS. This is to ensure proper hazard communication to users of hazardous substances on the potential hazards and precautionary measures to take when handling and storing of these substances. As GHS classification does not include combustible dust hazard as one of the hazard classifications, chemicals which are toxic substances and pose combustible dust hazard, the label for the product will only cover the toxicity hazard but not combustible dust hazard. In addition, food products such as milk powder, plain flour are not deemed as hazardous substances, warning labels would not apply. 

Agency Regulations Stage of supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

Customs Regulation of Imports and Exports Act Import All goods entering Singapore goes through Customs Regulations for registration, regulation and control of importation and exportation, etc. 3.—(1) The Minister may make regulations for the registration, regulation and control of all or any class of goods imported into, exported from, transhipped in or in transit through Singapore. 

[6/2003 wef 01/04/2003] 

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1), the Minister may make regulations — (a) for prohibitin g, absolutely or conditionally, or for regulating, in all cases or in any specified case or class of cases and subject to such exceptions as may be made by the regulations, the import or export or the carriage coastwise or the shipment as ships’ Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 2021 

## O-4 

Agency Regulations Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

stores or the transhipment or transit of all goods or of goods of any specified class or description; (b) for imposing on such importers, exporters, agents, forwarding agents, common carriers, consignors or consignees of goods or on owners, agents, masters or perso ns in charge of a conveyance as may be prescribed in the regulations, the duty to furnish — (i) to the Director-General; or 

[6/2003 wef 01/04/2003] 

(ii) to the owner, agent, master or person in charge of a conveyance, or to a 

railway station-master or to such other person as may be prescribed, such particulars, information or documents relating to goods imported into, exported from, transhipped in or in transit through Singapore as may be prescribed; 

(c) for permitting the Director-General to authorise , in such manner as may be prescribed, the importation, exportation, transhipment or transit of goods in regard to which the required particulars, information or documents have been furnished; 

[6/2003 wef 01/04/2003] 

(d) for prohibiting the importation, exportation, transhipment or transit of goods, or the delivery of goods or of documents relating to such goods, except in compliance with the regulations or with the approval of the Director-General; 

[6/2003 wef 01/04/2003] 

(da ) for prohibiting the export ation of all goods or goods of any specified class or description except in compliance with such conditions as may be prescribed for the Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 2021 

## O-5 

Agency Regulations Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

purpose of complying with any preferential tariff arrangement or agreement between Singapore and a country or territory outside Singapore, including any condition that the goods exported are to be from a prescribed source or that the manufacture of such goods is to be carried out or procured by any person registered under regulations made under this Act; 

[28/2003 wef 01/01/2004] 

(e) for requiring the owner or agent of any conveyance to furnish particulars of coal, oil or other fuel or stores placed on board that conveyance in Singapore; (f) for determining the form and manner in which the required particulars, information and documents shall be furnished; (g) for prescribing the time within which the required particulars, information and documents shall be furnished; (h) for requiring the master of any vessel to attend at an examination station or the office of the Port Master, and to furnish such particulars, information and documents, as may be prescribed; 

[6/2003 wef 01/04/2003] 

(i) for prohibiting the issue of a port clearance to the master of any vessel pending compliance with any provision of the regulations; (j) for the registration of all or such class of goods, as may be prescribed, imported into, exported from, transhipped in or in transit through Singapore; (k) for the registration of importers, exporters, common carriers of goods or any person making a declaration under this Act or any regulations made thereunder; Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 2021 

## O-6 

Agency Regulations Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

[Act 3 of 2014 wef 01/04/2014] 

(l) for the issue of certificates of entitlement to permits for the export or import of such 

classes of goods, as are prescribed, to successful applicants who submitt ed bids for the certificates; (m) for requiring fees and deposits to be paid for the submission of applications for the issue of certificates of entitlement under any regulations made under paragraph ( l), 

and providing for the forfeiture of deposits for non- compliance with any of the conditions governing the submission of such applications; (n) for prescribing the levy, or the method or manner for determining the amount of the levy, payable for the import or export of different classes of goods or for a c ertificate of entitlement issued under any regulations made under paragraph ( l) and for 

prescribing the manner or method in which such levy shall be paid; (na ) for requiring security to be provided to secure compliance with this Act, any regulations made thereunder or any condition imposed under this Act or such regulations, and to make provision for the form, manner, amount, period and forfeiture of such security; 

[28/2003 wef 01/01/2004] 

(o) for prescribing the fees and charges, or the method or manner for determining the amount of the fees or charges, payable by virtue of any regulations made under this section, and for prescribing the manner or method in which such fees or charges shall be paid; Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 2021 

## O-7 

Agency Regulations Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(p) for prescribing the fees to be charged for services and facili ties provided by the Director-General; 

[28/2003 wef 01/01/2004] 

[6/2003 wef 01/04/2003] 

(pa ) for the bringing of appeals to the Minister in respect of any matter referred to in this Act or any regulations made thereunder, and the procedure for such appeals; and 

[28/2003 wef 01/01/2004] 

(q) for prescribing anything which is required to be prescribed under this Act or which is necessary or expedient to be prescribed for carrying out or giving effect to the provisions of this Act. 

[6/2003 wef 01/04/2003] 

Customs Regulation of 

Imports and Exports Regulations Import Import permit/licence from respective agencies required in order to allow goods to enter Singapore Permit for import, export or transhipment 3.—(1) Subject to paragraphs (2), (2A), (3) and (4) and regulation 5A, no goods shall be — (a) imported into Singapore; (b) exported out of Singapore; or (c) transhipped in Singapore, except in accordance with a permit granted by the Director-General under this Part. 

[S 370/2013 wef 01/ 07/2013] [S 645/2017 wef 08/11/2017] Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 2021 

## O-8 

Agency Regulations Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(2) The requirement in paragraph (1) for a permit to import, export or tranship any goods shall not apply if such goods are not controlled imports, controlled exports or controlled transhipments and are — (a) personal or household effects, other than motor vehicles, which — (i) accompany passengers, crew or employees of transport und ertakings by land, sea or air; (ii) are not being transported for sale but are intended for the personal or household use of such passenge rs, crew or employees of transport undertakings; and (iii) in the case of such household effects, are being transported for the purpose of a transfer of residence of the owner to Singapore or to a place outside Singapore; 

(b) being imported, exported or transhipped by parcel post; (c) diplomatic correspondence; (d) being imported, exported or transhipped by — (i) the joint defence force, including the Singapore Armed Forces, the Singapore Police Force and the Singapore Civil Defence Force, including p ersonal and household effects of its officers but excluding civilian motor vehicles; or Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 2021 

## O-9 

Agency Regulations Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(ii) the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, including personal and household effects of its officers but excluding motor vehicles; 

(e) used motor vehicles covered by Carnet de Passage which are endorsed by the Automobile Association of Singapore; (f) trade samples, specimens for analysis or test, and gifts, the total value of which does not exceed $400; (g) commercial, shipping or airline documents, press photographs or negatives, news write-ups, news clippings, news films or news transcription tapes; (h) human corpses, human remains, human bones or cremated ashes; or 

[S 370/2013 wef 01/07/2013] 

(i) human transplant materials. 

[S 370/2013 wef 01/07/2013] 

(2A) The requirement in paragraph (1) for a permit to import any goods shall not apply if such goods — (a) are not controlled imports; (b) have a total value which does not exceed $400; and (c) are being imported by air. 

[S 370/2013 wef 01/07/2013] Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 2021 

## O-10 

Agency Regulations Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(3) The requirement in paragraph (1) for a permit to export any goods shall not apply if such goods — (a) are not controlled exports; (b) have a total value which does not exceed $1,000; and 

[S 370/2013 wef 01/07/2013] 

(c) are being exported by air. 

[S 370/2013 wef 01/07/2013] 

(4) The requirement in paragraph (1) for a permit to tranship any goods shall not apply to goods — (a) which are not controlled transhipments; and (b) which — (i) are not transhipped from one free trade zone to another; or (ii) are carried by air to and from Singapore during transhipment, and have a total value which does not exceed $1,000. 

Customs Regulation of Imports and Exports Regulations Import Application for import certificate 28.—(1) An application for the issue of an import certificate under this regulation shall be — (a) made by an importer of goods, whether he is the end-user or not; (b) made in such manner as the Director-General may determine; Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 2021 

## O-11 

Agency Regulations Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(c) made in triplicate in such form as the Director-General may determine with particulars of — (i) the quantity, value and a complete description of the goods to be imported; (ii) the name and address of the end-user of the goods; and (iii) such undertaking or other information as the Director-General may require; and 

(d) accompanied by — (i) a declaration by the foreign exporter that the goods are subject to the export control of the exporting country; and (ii) such information or document as the Director-General may require. 

(2) An import certificate issued by the Director- General under this regulation shall be in duplicate and shall be valid for the period specified in the certificate and shall be subject to such conditions as the Director-General may impose. (3) The Director-General may at any time var y or add to the conditions imposed under paragraph (2). (4) The validity of an import certificate may, on the application of the importer conce rned before the expiry of the certificate, be extended for such period of time as the Director- General thinks fit. 

[S 170/2003 wef 01/04/2003] Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 2021 

## O-12 

Agency Regulations Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(5) Any person who breaches an undertaking given under paragraph (1)( c)(iii) or a condition imposed by this regulation shall be guilty of an offence. 

SCDF Fire Safety Act Import, distribution (transport) Import, transport licence for petroleum and flammable materials under the Act Import of petroleum and flammable materials 35A.—(1) No person shall import any class of petroleum or any flammable material if — (a) the regulations require the person importing su ch petroleum or flammable material to hold a licence from the Commissioner to import such petroleum or flammable material; and (b) the person does not hold such a valid licence. (2) No person shall import any class of petroleum or any flammable material unless the importation — (a) is effected in accordance with the provisions of his licence and with every condition specified therein; and (b) is in such quantities and in such manner and in accordance with requirements prescribed in relation to such petroleum or flammable material. 

[Act 14 of 2013 wef 01/09/2013] 

[7/2004 wef 16/02/2005] 

Transport of petroleum and flammable materials Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 2021 

## O-13 

Agency Regulations Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

35B.—(1) No person shall transport any class of petroleum or any flammable material (other than as a driver of a road vehicle) if — (a) the regulations require the person transporting such petroleum or flammable material to hold a licence from the Commissioner to transport such petroleum or flammable material; and (b) the person does not hold such a valid licence. (2) No person shall t ransport any class of petroleum or any flammable material (other than as a driver of a road vehicle) unless the transportation — (a) is in accordance with the provisions of his licence and with every condition specified therein; and (b) is in such quantities and in such manner and in accordance with requirements prescribed in relation to such petroleum or flammable material. 

[Act 14 of 2013 wef 01/09/2013] 

(3) No person shall drive any vehicle transporting any class of petroleum or any flammable material by road if — (a) the regulations require the vehicle to be licensed to transport such petroleum or flammable material and the vehicle is not licensed by the Commissioner to carry such petroleum or flammable material; and (b) the regulations require the person to hold a permit from the Commissioner to drive a vehicle carrying such petroleum or flammable material and the person does not hold such a valid permit. Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 2021 

## O-14 

Agency Regulations Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(4) No person shall drive any vehicle transporting any class of petroleum or any flammable material by road unless he does so in such manner and in accordance with requirements prescribed in relation to such petroleum or flammable material, and in accordance with the provisions of his permit and every condition specified therein. 

[Act 14 of 2013 wef 01/09/2013] 

(5) Nothing in this section shall apply to petroleum or any flammable material in the fuel tank of a vehicle which is used or intended to be used as fuel for that vehicle. (6) Every permit issued by the Commi ssioner before the date of commencement of section 16 of the Fire Safety (Amendment) Act 2004 authorising any person to drive any vehicle transporting any class of petroleum or any flammable material by road shall be deemed to have been issued under subsection (3)( b). 

[7/2004 wef 16/02/2005] 

SCDF Fire Safety Act Storage, Use Storage of petroleum and flammable materials 35. No person shall store or keep, or cause to be stored or kept, any class of petroleum or any flammable material except — (a) in or on licensed premises; 

[Act 14 of 2013 wef 01/09/2013] 

(b) in such quantities and in such manner and in accordance with requirements prescribed in relation to such petroleum or flammable material; and 

[Act 14 of 2013 wef 01/09/2013] Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 2021 

## O-15 

Agency Regulations Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(c) under the authority of and in accordance with the provisions of a storage licence from the Commissioner and every condition specified therein. 

[Act 14 of 2013 wef 01/09/2013] 

[7/2004 wef 16/02/2005] 

Pipelines for petroleum and flammable materials 36A. No pipeline owner shall convey, or allow the conveyance of, any class of petroleum or any flammable material through any section of a relevant pipeline in relation to which he is the pipeline owner except under the authority of and in accordance with the provisions of a pipeline licence from the Commissioner and every condition specified therein. 

SCDF Fire Safety (Petroleum and Flammable Materials) Regulations Distribution (Transport) Application for licence to transport petroleum or flammable materials 5.—(1) An application for a licence to transport any petroleum or flammable material or both in a vehicle shall be made by the person intending to transport the petroleum or flammable material or both. (2) A separate application for a licence to transport any petroleum or flammable materia l or both shall be made in respect of each particular vehicle in which the petroleum or flammable material or both are to be transported; and each such application shall also be regarded as an application for a licence for that vehicle to transport the petroleum or flammable material or both. (3) Subject to paragraphs (4) and (5), every application for a licence to transport any petroleum or flammable material or both in a vehicle shall be accompanied by the following documents: (a) a test certificate on the roadworthiness of the vehicle issued by the Land Transport Authority of Singapore under section 90 of the Road Traffic Act (Cap. 276); Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 2021 

## O-16 

Agency Regulations Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(b) a copy of the Transport Emergency Response Plan for that vehicle; (c) a certificate of inspection of that vehicle from an approved inspector; (d) a list of drivers to be employed by the applicant to transport petroleum or flammable materials in that vehicle; 

[S 546/2013 wef 01/09/2013] 

(e) if required by the Commissioner, a quantitati ve risk assessment or any other risk 

analysis report on the transport of the petroleum or flammable materials in the vehicle 

from any person who in the view of the Commissioner is qualified to give such report; 

and 

[S 546/2013 wef 01/09/2013] 

(f) such oth er documents or particulars as the Commissioner may require in any particular case. 

[S 546/2013 wef 01/09/2013] 

(4) Where the application is for a licence to transport any petroleum or flammable material or 

both in bulk, the application shall be accompanied by the following additional documents: (a) the manufacturer’s specifications and design plans of the tank to be used in the transport; (b) a hydrostatic test report or any equivalent test report, certified in accordance with an accepted code of pra ctice by a professional engineer in the mechanical engineering discipline or by such other person acceptable to the Commissioner; 

[S 546/2013 wef 0 1/09/2013] Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 2021 

## O-17 

Agency Regulations Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(ba ) a radiographic test report or any equivalent test report of the tank, certified in accordanc e with an accepted code of practice by a professional engineer in the mechanical engineering discipline or by any other person acceptable to the Commissioner; and 

[S 546/2013 wef 01/09/2013] 

(c) a copy of the plan of the vehicle showing the following part iculars: 

(i) the location of the vehicle engine, fuel tank, exhaust system and pipe, batteries and pump or compressor (if any) and where any of these components are encased, the type of material used to encase them, and the type of material that is used to construct the rear portion of the driver’s cab facing the tank; (ii) the water capacity of the vehicle’s tank; (iii) the location and nature of all openings, fittings, gauges, emergency shut- off valves, excess flow valves, or any other safety valves or devices and their means of closure and capacities, where applicable; and (iv) the location, size and type of all fire extinguishers provided in the vehicle. 

(5) Where the application is for a licence to transport petroleum or flammable materials in package, the application shall be accompanied by the following additional documents: (a) a letter from the applicant certifying that — Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 2021 

## O-18 

Agency Regulations Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(i) he has checked the vehicle which is to be used to transport the petroleum or flammable material; and (ii) he is satisfied that the condition of the vehicle is in compliance with the Act and these Regulations; and 

(b) a letter of authorisation from the supplier of the petroleum to be transported, if the applicant is not a supplier. 

(6) Where the applicant for a licence to transport any petroleum or flammable material or both in any vehicle is not the owner of the vehicle, the application shall also be accompanied by the consent in writing of the owner of the vehicle or of the legal personal representative, if the owner is deceased. (7) Paragraph (4)( b) shall not apply to an application for the renewal of a licence to transport 

any petroleum or flammable material or both in a vehicle if, within the 5 years prior to that 

application, the applicant has complied with that provision on at least one occasion either when making an application for the licence or an application for the renewal of the licence. 

[S 546/2013 wef 01/09/2013] 

(8) Paragraph (4)( ba ) shall not apply to an application for the renewal of a licen ce to transport 

any petroleum or flammable material or both in a vehicle if, within the 10 years prior to that 

application, the applicant has complied with that provision on at least one occasio n either when making an application for the licence or an application for the renewal of the licence. Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 2021 

## O-19 

Agency Regulations Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

SCDF Fire Safety (Petroleum and Flammable Materials) Regulations Import Import of petroleum or flammable materials in excess of Second Schedule quantity requires licence 15. The import of any class of petroleum or any flammable material in excess of the respective quantities specified in the Second Schedule shall require a licence to import. 

SCDF Fire Safety (Petroleum and Flammable Materials) Regulations Storage Application for licence to store or keep petroleum or flammable materials 4.—(1) An application for a licence to store or keep any petroleum or flammable material or both at any premises shall be made by the person intending to store or keep the petroleum or flammable material or both. (2) A se parate application for a licence to store or keep any petroleum or flammable material or both shall be made in respect of each particular premises at which the petroleum or flammable material or both are to be stored or kept; and each such application shal l also be regarded as an application for a licence for those premises to store or keep that petroleum or flammable material or both. Application for pipeline licence 4A.—(1) An application for a pipeline licence to convey any class of petroleum or flammable material through any section of a relevant pipeline shall be made by the pipeline owner of that section of the relevant pipeline. 

SCDF Fire Safety Act Use, Storage (Building Work approval) Prohibition of fire safety works without approval of plans 24.—(1) A person must not carry out, or permit or authorise the carrying out of, any fire safety works — Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 2021 

## O-20 

Agency Regulations Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(a) before the Commissioner has approved all the plans of the fire safety works under section 23; or (b) otherwise than in accordance with the plans approved under section 23. 

[Act 22 of 2019 wef 14/09/2020] 

SCDF Fire Safety (Building and Pipeline Fire Safety) Regulations Use, Storage (Building Work approval) Application for approval of plans of fire safety works 3. For the purposes of section 23(1) of the Act, an application for the approval of plans of any fire safety works shall be in such form as the Commissioner may provide and shall be accompanied by the prescribed fees and by the following documents: (a) the following plans of fire safety works: (i) building plans (where the fire safety works relate to any building) or relevant pipeline plans (where the fire safety works relate to any relevant pipeline); 

[S 545/2013 wef 01/09/2013] 

(ii) air -conditioning and mechanical ventilation plans; and 

(iii) fire protection plans; 

(b) a notification signed by the applicant of the appointment of —

(i) the qualified person who prepared the plans of fire safety works; and (ii) where the plans of fire safety works contain any alternative solu tion, the fire safety engineer who prepared or supervised the preparation of the plans, Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 2021 

## O-21 

Agency Regulations Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

[S 545/2013 wef 01/09/2013] 

and a confirmation of such appointment signed by the qualified person and, where applicable, the fire safety engineer; 

(c) the applicable declaration form set out on the website at https://www.scdf.gov.sg; 

[S 769/2020 wef 14/09/2020] 

(d) where the plans of fire safety works contain any alternative solution, the additional following documents: (i) a fire safety engineering design brief; (ii) a fire safety engineering report, including detailed specifications and drawings of the final design of fire safety works; (iii) an operations and maintenance manual for the building or relevant pipeline, as the case may be, to which the fire safety works relate; 

[S 545/2013 wef 01/09/2013] 

(iv) a notification signed by the applicant of the appointment of a pee r reviewer and a confirmation of such appointment signed by the peer reviewer; and (v) a peer reviewer’s report as to whether the alternative solution satisfies the fire performance requirements in the Fire Code; 

[S 545/2013 wef 01/09/2013] [S 769/2020 wef 14/09/2020] Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 2021 

## O-22 

Agency Regulations Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(e) where the plans of fire safety works involve the use of any building materials or equipment not specified in the Fire Code — a description of the nature and type of all the building materials or equipment to be used in the fire safety works; 

[S 769/2020 wef 14/09/2020] 

(f) other documentary evidence in support of any documents in paragraphs ( a) to ( e), and 

such other documents as the Commissioner may require to decide the application. 

SFA Sale of Food Act Import, Distribution (Requires labelling based on food safety/quality considerations) Offences concerning labelling 16.—(1) A person must not sell any food that is packaged or labelled in a manner that does not comply with all applicable requirements of this Act relating to identification and labelling of that food. 

SFA Food Regulations Import, Distribution General requirements for labelling 5.—(1) No person shall import, advertise, manufacture, sell, consign or deliver any prepacked food if the package of prepacked food does not bear a label containing all the particulars required by these Regulations. (2) Every package of prepacked food shall, unless otherwise provided in these Regulations, bear a label, marked on or securely attached in a prominent and conspicuous position to the package, containing such particulars, statements, information and words in English as are required by the Act and these Regulations. (3) The particulars, statements, information and words referred to in paragraph (2) shall appear conspicuously and in a prominent position on the label and shall be clearly legible. Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 2021 

## O-23 

Agency Regulations Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(4) The particulars referred to in paragraph (3) shall include — (a) the common name, or a description (in the case where a suitable common name is not available) sufficient to indicate the true nature of the food; (b) the appropriate designation of each ingredient in the case of food consisting of two or more ingredients and unless the quantity or proportion of each ingredient is specified, the ingredients shall be specified in descending order of the proportions by weight in which they are present. For the purpose of this sub-paragraph — (i) “appropriate designation” means a name or description, being a specific and not a generic name or description, which shall indicate to a prospective purchaser the true nature of the ingredient, constituent or product to which it is applied except as provided in the First Schedule; (ii) it shall not be necessary to state that the food contains water; and (iii) where a food contains an ingredient which is made from two or more constituents, the appropriate designations of those constituents shall be so specified and it shall not be necessary to specify the appropriate designation of that ingredient; (c) either one of the following statements in specification of ingredients in the case of a food which contains the synthetic colouring, tartrazine: (i) tartrazine; (ii) colour (102); (iii) colour (FD&C Yellow #5) or other equivalent terms; (d) the net quantity of the food in the wrapper or container expressed in the following manner: (i) for liquid foods, by volume; (ii) for solid foods, by weight; (iii) for semi-solid or viscous foods, either by weight or volume; and Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 2021 

## O-24 

Agency Regulations Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(iv) for a food packed in a liquid medium, by net weight of the food together with the liquid medium, and by drained weight of the food. 

SFA Feeding Stuffs Act Use, Storage Licence to import, manufacture, etc., animal feeds 4.—(1) The Director-General may issue a licence to any person to import, manufacture, process for sale or sell simple feeds, feed concentrates or compound feeds upon an application made in the prescribed form and the payment of such fees as may be prescribed. (2) A licence shall be subject to such conditions as may be prescribed and such other conditions as the Director-General may, in his discretion, impose. (3) The Director-General may, in his discretion, at any time, revoke or suspend a licence. (4) No person shall import, manufacture, process for sale or sell simple feeds, feed concentrates or compound feeds without a licence issued by the Director-General. 

MOM Workplace Safety and Health (Major Hazard Installations) Regulations Use, Storage Implementation of safety case 6. Subject to regulation 11(4), the occupier of a major hazard installation or deemed major hazard installation must implement the safety case for the major hazard installation or deemed major hazard installation by doing all of the following: (a) implement the major accident prevention policy for the major hazard installation or deemed major hazard installation; (b) ensure that the person mentioned in paragraph 1(b) of Part 2 of the Third Schedule carries out the roles and responsibilities specified in that paragraph; (c) implement the plan mentioned in paragraph 1(d) of Part 2 of the Third Schedule; (d) implement the safety and health management system in accordance with the Workplace Safety and Health (Safety and Health Management System and Auditing) Regulations 2009 (G.N. No. S 607/2009); (e) ensure that the necessary resources, mentioned in paragraph 3 of Part 2 of the Third Schedule, are available for implementing the major accident prevention policy; Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 2021 

## O-25 

Agency Regulations Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(f) implement the preventive measures mentioned in paragraph 5(a) of Part 2 of the Third Schedule; (g) ensure that the processes carried out in the major hazard installation or deemed major hazard installation are carried out in accordance with the description in paragraph 5(b) of Part 2 of the Third Schedule; (h) operate the major hazard installation or deemed major hazard installation in accordance with the description mentioned in paragraph 6(f) of Part 2 of the Third Schedule; (i) implement the measures mentioned in paragraph 7 of Part 2 of the Third Schedule. 

NEA Environment al Protection and Management Act Use, Storage (Developmen t control) Written permission for use of scheduled premises 6.—(1) No person shall occupy or use any scheduled premises specified in the First Schedule without a written permission granted by the Director-General. (2) Any person who contravenes subsection (1) shall be guilty of an offence. (3) Any application for a written permission under this section shall be made to the Director-General giving details of — (a) the trade, industry or process proposed to be carried in or on the premises; (b) the measures the applicant undertakes to adopt to control air, water and noise pollution from the premises; and (c) the measures the applicant undertakes to adopt to manage hazardous substances and to treat and dispose of toxic substances originating from or stored within the premises. Permit for certain works on scheduled premises 8.—(1) The owner or occupier of any scheduled premises shall not without a permit granted by the Director-General — Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 2021 

## O-26 

Agency Regulations Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(a) alter the method of operation of any trade or industrial process, fuel burning equipment, control equipment, treatment plant or industrial plant in or on the scheduled premises; (b) install, alter or replace any fuel bur ning equipment, control equipment, treatment plant or industrial plant in or on the scheduled premises; (c) erect or alter the height or dimension of any chimney through which air impurities may be emitted from the scheduled premises; or (d) use any fuel other than the type of fuel specified in writing by the Director-General. First Schedule Scheduled Premises Scheduled premises are any premises — (a) being used for — (i) cement works, being works for the manufacture or packing of portland ce ment, similar cement or pozzolanic materials; (ii) concrete works, being works for the manufacture of concrete and of each batch capacity greater than 0.5 cubic metre; (iii) asphalt works, being works for the manufacture of asphalt or tarmacadam; (iv) cera mic works, being works in which any products such as bricks, tiles, pipes, pottery goods, refractories or glass are manufactured in furnaces or kilns fired by any fuel; (v) chemical wor ks, being works in which acids, alkali, chemical fertilizer, soap, dete rgent, sodium silicates, lime or other calcium compounds, chlorine, chemicals or chemical products are manufactured; Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 2021 

## O-27 

Agency Regulations Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(vi) coke or charcoal works, being works in which coke or charcoal i s produced and quenched, cut, crushed or graded; (vii) ferrous and non- ferrous metal works, being works in which metal melting process for casting and/or metal coating are carried out; (viii) gas works, being works in which coal, coke, oil or other mixture s or derivatives are handled or prepared for carbonisation or gasificat ion and in which such materials are subsequently carbonised or gasified; (ix) crushing, grinding and milling works, being works in which rock, ores, minerals, chemicals or natural grain products are processed by crushing, grinding, milling or separating into different sizes by sieving, air elutriation or in any other manner; (x) petroleum works, being works in which crude or shale oil or crude petroleum or other mineral oil is refined or reconditioned; (xi) scrap metal recovery works, being works in which s crap metals are treated in any type of furnace for recovery of metal irrespective of whether this is the primary object of any specific premises or not; (xii) primary metallurgical work s, being works in which ores are smelted or converted to metal of any kind; (xiii) pulping works, being works in which wood or cellulose material is made into pulp; (xiv) abrasive blasting works, being works in which equipment or structures are cleaned by abrasive blasting; (b) on which there is erected any boiler of steam g enerating capacity of 2,300 kilogrammes or more per hour, incinerator or furnace burning 500 kilogrammes or more of solid combustible material per hour or 220 kilogrammes or more of liquid material per hour; or (c) being used or intended to be used for storing — Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 2021 

## O-28 

Agency Regulations Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(i) more than 100 tonnes of one or more of the following substances: chemicals, chemical products, hydrocarbons or hydrocarbon products which are toxic or which produce toxic gas es on burning or on contact with water or air; or (ii) more than 1,000 tonnes of one or more of the following substances: chemicals, chemical products, hydrocarbons or hydrocarbon products with a flash point lower than 55ºC. 

NEA Environment al Protection and Management (Air Impurities) Regulations Use Standards of concentration of air impurities 4.—(1) For the purposes of section 12 of the Act, the standards of concentration of air impurities that must be complied with in the conduct of any trade, industry or process or the operation of any fuel burning equipment or in dustrial plant shall be those specified in the Schedule. (2) The concentration of any substance specified in the first column of the Schedule shall be determ ined in accordance with such method as may be specified by or is acceptable to the Director-General. The Schedule STANDARDS OF CONCENTRATION OF AIR IMPURITIES 1. The concentration of any substance specified in the first column emitted from any operation in any trade, industry, process, fuel burning equipment or industrial plant specified in the sec ond column shall not at any point before admixture with air, smo ke or other gases, exceed the limits specified in the third column. Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 2021 

## O-29 

Agency Regulations Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

Substance 

Trade, industry, process, fuel burning equipment or industrial plant 

Emission limits 

(a) Ammonia and 

ammonium compounds 

Any trade, industry or process 30 mg/Nm 3 expressed as 

ammonia 

(b) Antimony and its compounds 

Any trade, industry or process 5 mg/Nm 3 expressed as antimony 

(c) Arsenic and its 

compounds 

Any trade, industry or process 1 m g/Nm 3 expressed as 

arsenic 

(d) Benzene Any trade, industry or process 5 mg/Nm 3

(e) Cadmium and its compounds 

Any trade, industry or process 0.05 mg/Nm 3 expressed as cadmium 

(f) Carbon monoxide Any trade, industry, process or 

fuel burning equipment 

250 mg/Nm 3

(g) Chlorine Any trade, industry or process 32 mg/Nm 3

(h) Copper and its 

compounds 

Any trade, industry or process 5 mg/Nm 3 expressed as 

copper Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 2021 

## O-30 

Agency Regulations Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(i) Dioxins and furans Any waste incinerator (i) 1.0 ng TEQ/Nm 3 for waste incinerators commissioned before 1st January 2001 

(ii) 0.1 ng TEQ/Nm 3 for waste incinerators commissioned on or after 1st January 2001 

(j) Ethylene oxide Any trade, industry or process 5 mg/Nm 3

(k) Fluorine, hydrofluoric 

acid or inorganic fluorine compounds 

Any trade, industry or process 10 mg/Nm 3 expressed as 

hydrofluoric acid 

(l) Formaldehyde Any trade, industry or process 20 mg/Nm 3

(m) Hydrogen chloride Any trade, industry or process 200 mg/Nm 3

(n) Hydrogen sulphide Any trade, industry or process 7.6 mg/Nm 3

(o) Lead and its 

compounds 

Any trade, industry or process 0.5 mg/Nm 3 expressed as lead 

(p) Mercury and its 

compounds 

Any trade, industry or process 0.05 mg/Nm 3 expre ssed as 

mercury Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 2021 

## O-31 

Agency Regulations Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(q) Oxides of nitrogen Any trade, industry, process or 

fuel burning equipment 

400 mg/Nm 3 expressed as nitrogen dioxide 

(r) Particulate substances including smoke, soot, dust, ash, fly-ash, cinders, cement, lime, alumina, grit and other solid particles of any kind 

Any trade, industry, process, 

fuel burning equipment or industrial plant (except for any cold blast foundry cupolas) 

(i) 50 mg/Nm 3; or 

(ii) where there is more 

than one flue, duct or chimney in any scheduled premises, the total mass of the particulate emissions from all of such flue, duct or chimney divided by the total volume of such emissions shall not exceed 50 mg/Nm 3 and the particulate emissions from each of such flue, duct or chimney shall not exceed 100 mg/Nm 3 at any point in time. 

(s) Styrene monomer Any trade, industry or process 100 mg/Nm 3Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 2021 

## O-32 

Agency Regulations Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(t) Sulphur dioxide (non-combustion sources) 

Any trade, industry or process 500 mg/Nm 3

(ta ) Sulphur dioxide 

(combustion sources) 

Any trade, industry or process (i) 1,700 mg/Nm 3

(ii) where there is more than one flue, duct or chimney in any scheduled premises, the total mass of the sulphur dioxide emissions from all of such flue, duct or chimney divided by the total volume of such emissions must not exceed 1,700 mg/Nm 3 on a daily basis. 

(u) Sulphur trioxide and other acid gases 

The manufacture of sulphuric 

acid 

500 mg/Nm 3 expressed as 

sulphur trioxide. Effluent gases 

shall be free from persistent mist. Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 2021 

## O-33 

Agency Regulations Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(v) Sulphur trioxide or sulphuric acid mist 

Any trade, industry or process, other than any combustion process and any plant involving the manufacture of sulphuric acid 

100 mg/Nm 3 expressed as sulphur trioxide 

(w) Vinyl chloride monomer 

Any trade, industry or process 20 mg/Nm 3

[S 369/2015 wef 01/07/2015] 

NEA Environment al Public Health Act Disposal Dangerous substance or toxic industrial waste not to be brought to disposal facility without permission 29.—(1) No person who owns or is in possession of any dangerous substance or toxic industrial waste or the residue from the treatment thereof shall bring or cause to be brought such substance or waste to any disposal facility for disposal without the written permission of the Director-General. 

[2/96; 4/2002] 

Licensing of persons carrying on business of collecting, removing, etc., of refuse or waste 

31.—(1) No person shall carry on the business of collecting, removing, transporting, storing or importing refuse or waste of any description without a wa ste collector licence granted by the Director-General under this section. 

[2/96; 4/2002] Report of the Inquiry Committee for the accident at Stars Engrg Pte Ltd on 24 Feb 2021 

## O-34 

Agency Regulations Stage of 

supply chain 

Extract of Relevant Singapore’s Act/Regulations 

(2) The Director-General may grant a licence authorising any person to carry on the business of collecting, removing, transporting, storing or importing refuse or waste of any description. 

[2/96; 4/2002] 

NEA Environment al Public Health (Toxic Industrial Waste) Regulations Disposal No person to act as toxic industrial waste collector without licence 9. No person shall — (a) carry on or advertise, notify or state that he carries on or is willing to carry on the business of a toxic industrial waste collector; (b) act as a toxic industrial waste collector; or (c) in any way hold himself out as ready to undertake for payment or other remuneration (whether monetary or otherwise) any of the functions of a toxic industrial waste collector, unless he is the holder of a toxic industrial waste collector’s licence.
