Title: The Blue / Red Divide in the United States:                                                             Would a Breakup be better than a new Civil War?

URL Source: http://leiss.ca/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/The-Blue-Red-Divide-V5.pdf

Published Time: Fri, 02 Jul 2021 18:03:45 GMT

Markdown Content:
0

# THE BLUE / RED DIVIDE IN THE 

# UNITED STATES :

# WOULD A BREAKUP BE BETTER 

# THAN A NEW CIVIL WAR ?

#  A CANGRANDE LITTLE BOOK 

# WILLIAM LEISS 

> WILLIAM .LEISS @GMAIL .COM
> WWW .LEISS .CA 1

# COPYRIGHT NOTICE 

# ©W ILLIAM LEISS 202 1 ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 

# LIBRARY AND ARCHIVES CANADA CATALOGUING IN PUBLICATION 

## Leiss, William 1939 –

## The Blue/Red Divide in the United States 

## “A Cangrande Little Book”. 

## ISBN 978 -0-9738283 -9-90

# Contents 

Update May 2021 2

Preface 4

Introduction 8

Section 1: The Compromise of 1850 10 

Section 2: The Enduring Legacy of Slavery 13 

Section 3: The P residential Electoral Map, 1964 –2016 16 

Section 4: Just How Close is the Blue/Red Divide? 20 

Section 5: The Post –Trumpian Divide 23 

Section 6: The Compromise of 2030: A Political Fantasy 30 

Section 7: First Scenario: The Four New Nations in North America 31 

Section 8: Second Scenario: Two New Nation s in North America 37 

Section 9: Would Any Breakup Help the USA? 40 

Section 10: African -Americans in an Independent South 45 

Section 11: Conclusions 48 

Appendix 1 : Constitutional Changes for the Four -Nation Breakup 49 

Appendix 2: 2020 Presidential Election 52 

Appendix 3: Presidential Elections 1964 to 2020 56 

Appendix 4: Presidential Elections 1964 to 2020 (Regions) 57 

Appendix 5: The Red/Blue Divide 2004 –2016 58 

References and Acknowledgments 59 

About the Author 61 

## .1

# List of Figures and Tables 

Figure 1: The Four New Nations  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................... 6

Figure 2: The Two New Nations  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................... 7

Figure 3: Free and Slave States and Territories in 1860 (National Geographic) ...................... 10 

Figure 4: Regions in the USA (U. S. Census Bureau) ................................ ................................ ............. 16 

Figure 5: Brookings Institution, Racial Profile of U.S. Population in 2045 ................................ .. 23 

Figure 6: Map of the Four New Sovereign States ................................ ................................ ................... 31 

Figure 7: Election 2020, ©The American Presidency Project ................................ .......................... 33 

TABLE 1: PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION RESULTS BY STATES AND REGIONS , 1964 TO 20 20 …............ .. ............ 13

TABLE 2: SUMMARY OF PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION NATIONAL RESULTS , 1964 TO 20 20 ........................ ..... ..36

TABLE 3: 2020 PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION RESULTS BY STATES AND REGIONS AND % BLUE /RED .. .. ... ........ 37

TABLE 4: PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION RESULTS BY POPULAR VOTE , 1964 TO 20 20 ,,,,,,,,,,,,………,,,,, .......... ... 52 

TABLE 5: PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION RESULTS BY STATE , 1964 TO 20 20 ………………………………………..53 2

## Update May 2021 

## There is a high probability that the United States will experience a full -blown 

## constitutional crisis during and shortly after the presidential election in 2024. 

## As of this month concerned citizens have three -and -a-half years to prepare for 

## it and seek to forestall it. If anyone becomes concerned but does not know 

## what to do, she or he should consult the website of the U. S. organization 

## Protect Democracy and sign on. 

Donald Trump lost the popular vote count in the 2016 election by almost 3 million 

votes and promptly claimed that “millions of people voted illegally” for his opponent and 

that otherwise he would have won that count . This turned out to be an omen of worse 

things to come. He had won the Electoral College tally by 306 –232 in an election i n which 

78,000 votes in three states (Pennsylvania, Michigan, and Wisconsin) , out of a total of 

almost 137 million votes cast nationwide (.059%), was the margin of victory. For Hillary 

Clinton this was a case of “close but no cigar.” In 2020 Joe Biden won the popular vote by 7 

million votes. But in the only tally that counts, the Electoral College one, his own 306 –232 

victory occurred in an election in which a mere 48,000 votes in three states (Arizona, 

Georgia, and Wisconsin), out of a total of almost 158 million votes cast nationwide (.027%), 

was the margin of victory. For Donald Trump this was a case of “ ver y close but no cigar,” 

and we all know what transpired thereafter. There would have been no claims about a 

“stolen” election if Trump had pulled off a win in the Electoral College despite losing the 

nationwide popular vote by 7 million , al though it would t hen have been said that many, 

many unspecified persons had voted illegally for his opponent .

Most modern democracies avoid such co mplexitie s in their national elections . In 

parliamentary systems such as Britain’s or Canada’s the voter chooses a local can didate 

and the party system does all the rest, determining a national victor and installing an 

executive and cabinet. One step and it’s done; in Canada, the single system even selects its 

Senate. Like the USA these are also federal states, but unlike the U SA their subnational units 

have no role in choosing a national government. The complexities in the U. S. constitutional 3

system are no accident: They were quite deliberately put there by the Founders who feared 

full -throated democracy. The states were given broad powers over how voting is done for 

federal elections , including control ling the geography of electoral districts, allowing 

dominant interests to indulg e themselves in gerrymandering on racial, ethnic, or other 

bases; even today the Supreme Court all ows partisan gerrymandering . T he state -based 

Electoral College system makes the national popular -vote total irrelevant. And 

representation in the Senate (where California’s 40 million residents have the same 

number of senators as Wyoming’s 570.000) skews a bsurdly the “power” of the people. 

(Until the 17 th Amendment, ratified in 1913, senators were elected by state legislatures.) 

Taken together these gross undemocratic slights make a mockery of the principle of “one 

person, one vote.” 1

Furthermore, t he events of January 6, 2021 demonstrated that the complex , archaic 

constitutional provisions for U. S. presidential elections are an invitation to mischief or 

worse : a

coup d’ état . Following those events , the trumpified Republican Party bega n

setting the stage for its victor ies in 2022 and 2024, come what may, no matter what the 

winning margin in the popular vote by an opponent might be. They intend do this by 

manipulating both the right to vote and the vote tallying processes in key “battleg round” 

states and the certification procedures in the Congress. (As of March 2021, as tabulated by 

the Brennan Center for Justice, the astonishing total of 361 bills intended to restrict voting 

had been introduced in 47 states.) In other words, the Republ icans intend to steal th ose 

election s if that is what is required in order to take power . And if they succeed, the 20 24

exercise will likely be the last “free and fair election” for some time to come. To be sure, 

many citizens will try to defeat this attempt to create an authoritarian regime in the United 

States. Should they fail, the USA will face a grim future, possibly marked by a suspension of 

civil liberties, recurrent violence, racial oppression, and mass incarceration. Many will then 

start to th ink seriously about alternative arrangements, including whether their 

dysfunctional nation, l ike dysfunctional families, would be better off divid ing the ir assets 

and liabilities and split ting up.    

> 1Sanford Levinson, “How the United States Constitution Contributes to the Democratic Deficit i n America,” Drake
> Law Review , vol. 55 (2007), 859 -878: https://lawreviewdrake.files.wordpress.com/2015/07/lrvol55 -4_levinson.pdf

4

## Preface 

In 2019 a news organization poll found that one -qu arter of Americans believed that “God 

wanted Donald Trump to become president.” In that same year some white southern 

evangelicals in the United States warned their fellow Americans that President Trump 

embodied the only force on earth which could head off the long -feared End of Days and the 

Apocalypse, the Final Battle leading to the destruction of the world. The only detail missing 

in this prognostication was the identity of the Antichrist; b ut among some of the 

evangelicals themselves this figure has lon g had a name: Barack Obama. In September 

2019, President Trump retweeted a passage from an evangelical megachurch pastor who 

predicted “a Civil War like fracture in this Nation from which our Country will never heal” if 

the President were to be successfully impeached ; during Trump’s first impeachment trial 

Senator Lamar Alexander (R –Tenn) agreed, saying that a conviction “ would just pour 

gasoline on cultural fires that are burning out there .” Since 2015 , when candidate Trump 

referred to members of a n immigrant racial minority as criminals and rapists, there has 

been a resurgence of racial and ethnic hatred. Finally, in 2018 a report o f the Brookings 

Institution, using U. S. Census Bureau data, noted that the population of the country is 

projected to become majority non -white by 2045. Shades of Armageddon. Shades of 1860. 

In the fifty years stretching from 1970 to 2020, the conviction that the people of the 

United States of America were divided into two bitterly -opposed political camps had 

beco me more and more widely and deeply entrenched . The fundamental issues underlying 

this div ision a re race, immigration, economic inequality , and the politicization of morality. 

For both sides it seeme d that this division had grown sharper and more fundamental with 

each passing year. Even worse, each side had become convinced that the other represented, 

not merely an honest difference of opinion, but rather a betrayal of the founding principles 

of the r epublic , something that was characteristic of the decade of the 1850s . The normal, 

habitual and well -practiced accommodations of democratic politics were fast vanishing, 

replaced by vitriol and ris ing anger , even hatred , and tactic s of permanent obstructio nism 

across all three branches of the federal government, executive, legislative, and judicial. 5

As a result, by early 2020 it appeared likely that the bitterness and sense of 

irreconcilable diff erences between the two sides we re set to intensify no matter what the 

outcome o f t he 2020 presidential race turn ed out to be . Sure enough, t he divide began to 

worsen considerabl y after the election, since it seems, paradoxically, that Donald Trump ’s 

“base” w as capable of being further energized whether he w on or los t the 2020 election .

The reason is that the former president has come to embody this divide, and therefore 

either one side or the other would enter the coming decade convinced that the Republic 

was doomed. How long w ill it take for a nation of citizens armed to the teeth with military -

grade weapons to conclude that the time had come to employ them in the service of their 

political beliefs? 

Beginning in 1991, the country now known as the former Yugoslavia disintegrate d

in an orgy of civil strife, property destruction, murder, and mass rape. Seven new small 

nations emerged from the ashes: Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Kosovo, Montenegro, 

North Macedonia, Serbia, and Slovenia. The dissolution of the former Union of So viet 

Socialist Republics, heir to the Russian Empire (1721 -1917), into fifteen separate sovereign 

states at the end of 1991 ha s been far more consequential, although one need not agree 

with Vladimir Putin that this was the “greatest geopolitical tragedy of the [twentieth] 

century.” The suddenness of this breakup of the second -largest continental empire in world 

history has had a great many unfortunate results, especially the persistence of 

authoritarian regimes, financial fraud, quasi -criminal control over the economic sector, 

political murders, and naked territorial aggression against Ukraine. For a regime that had 

long boasted of the superiority of its “planned economy,” this outcome was ironic indeed. 

Now i t is time for the citizens of the United States to begin considering whether a 

peaceful breakup of their own far larger and richer nation would be much more preferable 

in comparison with the possible alternatives. Careful p lanning and a clear sense of this 

nation’s past history will be essential to securing a favorable outcome from these 

deliberations. One way this could be done is shown below: With two exceptions it mimics 6

the actual presidential election outcome of 2020. This option is referred to here as “The 

Creation of Four New Nations ,” and it is discussed fully in Section 7 below. 

## Figure 1: The Four New Nations 

The purpose of this proposal for the dissolution of the United States of America into four 

new independent nations is simple: It is to avoid any resort to widespread violence and 

oppression , or even civil war, in view of the sharp political divide between “Blue” and “Red” 

that has been formi ng for over half a century. (For example, the extensive Red block across 

the Midwest and South has been very consistent since the election of 2000. )

To be sure, there are other dissolution and rebuilding options. For one thing, the 

Red block might be str ongly motivated to form a single unified nation rather that two 

separate ones, Central and Southern. In addition, there is the larger reality of the relation 

between Canada and the United States, which is unlikely to be affected by the turmoil south 7

of its border that would result in the breakup of the USA. This option, discussed in Section 

8, is called “Two New Nations, where the rebuilding following the breakup scenario 

combines the Pacific and Northeastern blue state groups into a brand -new nation called 

“The Republic of North America”: 

## Figure 2: The Two New Nations 8

# Introduction 

The sense of profound trouble that is roiling American national politics at this time has 

some clear historical antecedents. At times a sense of estrangement and poorly -articulated 

gri evances infects a segment within a population which is unable to express clearly what it 

feels. Then a figure e merges who gives powerful voice to their concerns; i n Ameri can 

history, for example, this has occurred fai rly often in the appearance of third -party 

challengers in national presidential elections. Almost always the political establishment 

respond s to successfully defeat the uprising – but not always. There are occasions when the 

figure in question has special talents which enable him to reach deeply into the wellsprings 

of discontent and to rouse the passions of the disaffected, to such an extent that a major 

part of the political establishment surrenders to the challenger in the hope that it too will 

benefit f rom the outcome. Generally speaking, these scenarios do not end well. 

This essay begins (Sectio n 1) by relating the story of the Missouri Compromise of 

1820 and the Compromise of 1850, two political deals in American history that were driven 

by th e future of slavery in the expanding United States and were important factors in the 

coming of the Civil War, during which as many American soldiers died as occurred in the 

nation’s all other wars . Section 2 discusses the ongoing legacy of slavery in America n

politics down to the present day. Section s 3 and 4 present the results from a first look at 

the Blue/Red divide in the popular vote among states in the USA over the course of 

fourteen presidential elections from 1964 to 2016. During the first half of tha t period 

(seven elections, 1964 –1988), the Blue/Red split was 29%/71%; in the second half (seven 

elections, 199 2–2016), the Blue/Red split was 51 %/49%. This was a quite extraordinary 

shift and to some extent it was masked by the intensity of the Blue/Red p olarization that 

has occurred in that second half , the origins of which are appropriately identified with 

Newt Gingrich ’s crusade in the mid -1990s .

Section 5 discusses the four key areas of national policy and development which 

have been the constituents of this steadily -growing divide: race and “white anxiety ,”9

immigration, the economy, and the politicization of morality. The most telling statistics in 

those areas deal with the racial composition of the American population, in the process of 

changing from o ne in which W hites represented 80% of the total in the 1990 census to one 

projected to 2060, when the expected composition will be : W hites 44%, Hispanics 29 %, 

and Blacks 18%. The many changes taking place in these four areas provide a good 

explanation for the growing polarization of attitudes and beliefs , as well as the rise of more 

extreme viewpoints, in the nation as a whole. Section 6 (plus Appendix 1) tri es to imagine 

what kinds of political negotiations and constitutional revisions might take place in the 

second half of the decade of the 2020s in order to bring about a peaceful dissolution of the 

United States and the creation of four new independent sove reign countries on its territory. 

Section s 7 & 8 have two map s showing alternative versions of two sets of new countries 

and some of their key characteristics, especially their economic clout in t he world: The 

members of both sets of new countries would rank among the Top 10 nations in terms of 

their GDP. Section 9 ask s whether any breakup might provide a high degree of long -term 

political stability for an alignment of new countries, based on a strong majority consensus 

of political belie fs in all of them. 

Section 10 takes up, once again, the legacy of slavery in terms of the large share 

(43%) of the black population in the former United States who would now be residing in 

the new nation called the Southern States of America. It discusses the need for a legal and 

political agreement among the citizens of the USA as a whole, made in the course of 

negotiations preceding its dissolution, to protect that subp opulation from further 

discrimination. Section 10 also briefly raises the issue of the fast -growing population of 

Hispanics in the USA and the contrasting situation of Hispanics and African -Americans, 

especially in terms of the persistent and growing incom e and wealth inequality in the USA. 

The conclusions, in Section 10 , argue that among the valuable and lasting benefits of 

dissolution, by far the most important will be putting an end to the destructive polarization 

of viewpoints among the citizenry which has been inexorably leading to extremism and, 

perhaps, political violence .10 

# Section 1: The Compromise of 1850         

> Figure 3:Free and Slave States and Territories in 1860 (National Geographic )

The defining political issues for the United States in the period from 1820 to 1860 were 

slavery and expansion to the West, and both were deeply intertwined. Western expansion 

meant deciding whether or not ne w states, carved out of various territories, would be 

legally slaveholding or not. A complicating factor was the existence of the “three -fifths 

clause” in the Constitution, whereby each of the enslaved African -Americans in the South 

was counted as three -fi fths of a person for the purpose of determining any state’s total 

population, and thus its entitlement to a certain number of members in the national 

government’s House of Representatives : The particular ugliness of the “three -fifths clause” 11 

— under which white slaveowners benefited in political terms from the numbers of their 

tormented and oppressed blacks — cannot be overemphasized. And since each state was 

entitled to two senators, maintaining a balance of states as between free and slaveholding 

was a pr iority. 

An informal border between the two types of states had been established by the 

Mason -Dixon Line, a line originally surveyed to fix the borders of Pennsylvania, Maryland, 

Delaware, and Virginia , resulting in t he Missouri Compromise of 1820 . When Alabama was 

adm itted to the Union in late 1819, the number of slave and “free ” states became equal; 

soon, however, pressure began building to add Missouri, also as a slave state. A

compromise was reached when Maine was admitted as a free state and, at the same time, 

the parallel 36°30 ′ north (at the southern boundary of Missouri) was recognized as the new 

line between free and slave domains by making Missouri the only exception which was 

permitted. But the pressures of Western expansion would prove to be relentless. 

The trigger for further political conflict was the seizure of Mexican territory and 

creation of the independent Republic of Texas in 1836 , followed by the admission of Texas 

as a slave state in 1845 and the territorial gains achiev ed by the United States following the 

ending of the Mexican –American War in 1848 (the “Mexican Cession”). Co ntinuing 

territorial claims made by Texans , to enlarge the northern and western borders of their 

state, and other issues, led to the Compromise of 1 850, largely the work of Kentucky’s 

Senator Henry Clay, a package of seven bills designed to be voted on as a totality. An 

important part of the deal was the admission of California as a free state, which among 

other things ended the hopes of slave states to extent their peculiar institution to the west 

coast and the Pacific Ocean . But perhaps its most fateful component was the Fugitive Slave 

Act of 1850, which compelled all the citizens of free states, on pain of jail and huge fines for 

disobedience, to take part in the recapt ure of escaped slaves anywhere o n the territory of 

the United States. Since by 1850 bot h the abolitionist movement and the Underground 

Railroad were gaining strength day by day in the Nor th, this Act enraged many of the 12 

citizens there and among other things led to the huge popularity of Harriet Beecher Stowe’s 

novel, Uncle Tom’s Cabin ; or, Life Among the Lowly (1852). 

The Compromise of 1850 is sometimes said to have postponed the onset of the Civil 

War by a decade. I t is more accurate to claim that, by includi ng the Fugitive Slave Act in its 

package of bills, it made the Civil War inevitable . By forbidding all citizens from assist ing 

escaped slaves and indeed requiring their active participation in recapturing them, i n all 

the towns , villages, cities, and country side where p eople lived, the Act brought all 

northerners face -to -face with the ugly reality of human bondage and oppression , otherwise 

a distant reality of far -off places, at a time when travel outside one’s local area was 

uncommon. Undoubtedly the result was a rapid hardening of attitudes among the people of 

the North, hastening the arrival of the moment when the two sides would be compelled to 

go to war in order to settle the matter once and f or all. 

As a new decade dawns in the year 2020, the peop le of the United States may be 

arriving at the time when they must begin to consider whether there are other and better 

options for resolving the deep f ractures in their polity than the possibility o f taking up arms 

against each other once again .13 

# Section 2: The Enduring Legacy of Slavery 

For most of the nineteenth century, the constitutional history of the United States was 

dominated by a single overriding issue, namely, the enslavement of African -Americans. On 

the eve of the Civil War, the census of 1860 counted a little over 31 million c itizens in total, 

of whom 9 million lived in the eleven states which were soon to secede from the Union and 

form the Confederate States of America. Left entirely forgotten in that census was the 

astonishing number of 4 million souls in the South who were s laves, living in the fifteen 

states of the Union which then permitted this lawful abomination — a huge national 

minority of disenfranchised, racially -distinct , and unfree persons who were denied all of 

the constitutional protections of law and justice. 

The first slave ship from Africa destined for the British colonies in North America, 

holding 20 blacks in chains, showed up in Virginia in 1619 ; eventually 600,000 other 

captives would follow . The Unit ed States passed an Act prohibiting the overseas slave trade 

in 1808, following the lead of the United Kingdom , which had done so the previous year ,

although some individual states had taken this step earlier ; however, thousands of slaves 

were smuggled int o the South for many years thereafter. (It should be noted that 

Americans were also very active in the slave trade into other countries, such as Cuba and 

Brazil.) Shortly th ereafter, the 1810 Census indicated that there were about 1.2 million 

slaves in th e country out of a total population of 7.2 million ( 16% ). Therefore, most of the 

very large increase in the population of slaves between 1808 and 1860 is attributable to 

the fact that all the offspring of slaves were automatically enslaved themselves : In o th er 

words, the breeding of human infants served to replace new importations . A lso, after 1808 

a large domestic slave trade arose; the historian Michael Tadman estimates that over a 

million blacks were bought and sold on the soil of the United States. When the Texas 

Revolution enabled that territory to secede from Mexico in 1836, the new entity’s first 

constitution legalized slavery. 14 

The Thirtee nth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth A mendments to the Constitution , all 

adopted between 1865 and 1870, finally gr anted citizenship and equality before the law to 

the former slaves. The Reconstruction Era , a period extending from the 1863 Em ancipation 

Proclamation to 1877, when the last Northern troops were withdrawn from the South, 

sought to implement and consolidate the new freedoms for black men and women. It failed, 

thorou ghly and catastrophically. I mmediately there after the resurgent white power in the 

former Confederacy began to revoke those gains throug h murder and mayhem, in what 

would beco me the longest, cruelest and most widespread campaign of domestic terrorism 

in the history of the United States. Moreover , an entire ly new set of practices was invented 

in those years to control and oppress blacks. 

These practices included convict leasing, peonage, and sharecropping. Southern 

states did not build new prisons; rather, they leased out convicts to private employers. 

They also invented an entire set of new crimes which mostly blacks were suited to commit ,

but these proved unnecessary, because blacks were often simply arrested for no crime at 

all and forced to work without pay. More incredibly still, these forced laborers were bought 

and sold by leaseholders. Sharecroppers were compelled to remain on the l and they 

worked and were whipped for disobedience. Peonage (debt slavery) was another form of 

involuntary servitude, in this case used agains t poor whites as well as blacks : Arrested for 

minor crimes, when they could not pay the outrageous court fees and f ines imposed 

through the proceedings, they were forced to work for employers who paid these charges. 

Although slavery and involuntary servitude were outlawed together by the Thirteenth 

Amendment, which was ratified in 1865 (having been first rej ected by s ome states), 

peonage persisted widely until the early 1940s. Only just after the Japanese attack on Pearl 

Harbor in 1941 did President Franklin Delano Roosevelt instruct his Attorney General of 

the time to insist that fede ral prosecutors put an end to thes e ugly practices . Some six 

months earlier , Roosevelt had issued an Executive Order guaranteeing equality of 

employment for blacks in defense industries. It took the reality of a world war to bring 

about these modest gains. 15 

One of the great and enduring tr agedies of American history has been that t he 

legacy of slavery was neve r fully confronted and resolved. No secure means of livelihood 

for the population of former slaves as a whole was devised and implemented once the Civil 

War had ended . No compensation of any kind was offered for their long suffering and 

brutal treatment, extending over a period of almost 250 years , a quarter of a millennium .

When after 1877 the white majority in the South effectively revoked equal treatment under 

the law fo r black s, no remedy was supplied by those states whose young men had fought 

and died , or had suffered horrendous injuries , in great numbers to liberate them. There 

was no Truth and Reconciliation Commission, no congressional inquiry, no ringing 

condemnatio n of past evils in a national forum , nor much attention paid to the litany of new 

crimes against black citizens committed after the end of the Civil War in the name of white 

democracy and freedom. Blacks would have to make do with the collection of insipid 

legislative apologies for the history of slavery issued around th e year 2007, some of which 

explicit ly stated that such apologies would not under any circumstances lay the 

groundwork for the payment of compensation to the contemporary descendants of slave s.

And all the while, the corrosive attitudes of racism spread and persisted. The 

denigration of the intellectual capacities of black people had originated in the need of white 

oppressors to justify the domination and exploitation of their slaves. Christi ans all, their 

theology took pains to prove that all this was perfectly consistent with the teachings of a 

just and benevolent deity. When terror, discrimination and segregation replaced slavery, 

the grounds had already been prepared whereby the new forms of injustice too could rest 

comfortably within the moral and religious beliefs of the privileged white majority. And 

there they have remained, widely albeit not universally held, down to the present day. 16 

# Section 3: The P residential Electoral Map, 1964 –20 16 

The prospects for the possibility of an amicable breakup of the United States of America are 

to a large extent dependant on the stability of the Blue/Red political divide across an 

extended period of time. One easy way to look at this situation is to examine the electora l

map for the fourteen presidential elections held during the period from 1964 to 20 16 ,

somewhat over half -a-century. The results , offered below in Table 1, are summarized in 

terms of the states allocated to the four regions used by the U. S. Census Bureau (since 

1984): Northeast, South, Midwes t, and West:  

> Figure 4: Regions in the USA (U. S. Census Bureau)

17 

The divisions among t he se four regions are shown graphically in Figure 2. Quite 

obviously, any scheme that imposes a sense of regional unity on the disparate and ever -

changing demographic and social dynamics of the various U. S. states is somewhat 

arbitrary. But such an effort can be rewarding when one seeks to overlay a longer -term 

political alignment onto the four -part collection of regions used by the Census Bureau. The 

political alignment referred to here is contained in the results of the fourteen presidential 

elections for th e two major parties, in all 50 states plus the District of Columbia, held 

between 1964 and 2016, as given in Table 1. (For the sake of consistency, in constructing 

this database I have equated “Blue” with the Democratic Party and “Red” with the 

Republican Party for the entire period under discussion .) 

TABLE 1: PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION RESULTS BY STATES AND U. S. CENSUS 

BUREAU REGIONS , 1964 TO 20 16 (INCL D.C.) 

YEARS  ALL 

BLUE 

ALL 

RED 

NORTHEAST 

B R

SOUTH 

B R

MIDWEST 

B R

WEST 

B R

1964 to 

1988 (7) 

105 

29% 

252 

71% 

24 39  39 80  21 49  21 84 

1992 to 

2016 (7) 

181 

51% 

176 

49% 

61 2 39 80  36 34  45 60 

2020  25  26 9 0 4 13  4 8 8 5

TOTALS  311 

41%

454 

59 %

94 41  82 173  61 91  74 149 

In Ameri can politics the years from the early 1960s to 2016 included notable 

milestones in terms of presidential elections. But the changing political landscape also 

reflected the beginnings of strong and occasionally violent divisions among the citizenry, 

first in the episode of the civil -rights “Freedom Riders” and then in the opposition to the 

Vietnam War. The election in 19 64 was marked by the decisive victory of Lyndon Johnson 18 

over Barry Goldwater; then, during his single full term of office, President Johnson forged 

the most progressive social legislation since the days of FDR’s New Deal (Civil Rights Act, 

Medicare and Med icaid, and other elements of the “Great Society” package). But then he 

was gone, undone by the Vietnam War, replaced by the utterly different one -and -one half 

terms of Richard Nixon. The brief interlude with Jimmy Carter ended with the two 

sweeping success es by Ronald Reagan, followed by – after another single -term presidency 

– the offsetting strong two -term electoral results achieved first by Bill Clinton and then by 

George W. Bush. It is noteworthy that t he twenty -five years between 1973 and 1998 was 

also marked by two impeachment s, one threatened and another actual, something tha t had 

not happened since 1868. 

These contrasting results were less remarkable than the next set of decisive public 

policy reversals, during which the largely unexpected Trump success in 2016 came on the 

heels of two impressive Obama victories. The radical shifts in public policy from Johnson to 

Nixon in 1968, and then again from Obama to Trump in 2016, constitute remarkably 

similar book ends for the entire period of 50 -som e years under discussion. But the complete 

election -by -election data set on which Table 1 is based rev eals another underlying pattern: 

(1) Northeast: 

Almost consistently Blue except for the two Reagan elections; 

(2) South: 

Almost consistently Red except for Johnson, Carter, and 2 Clinton elections 

(all Southerners) ; but Gore failed to win any states in the South, even his 

home state of Tennessee , in 2000. 

(3) Midwest: 

This Region appears to have the most inconsistency from election to election 

during this period ;

(4) West: 

The configuration of states in this Census Bureau Region masks a strong 

divide between the rest of the Midwest (generally Red) and the Far West 

(Blue). 

THE UNDERLYING PATTERN :

(5) In the first 7 elections (1964 –1988) the split across states was: B105 (29%), R252 

(71%); in the last 7 (199 2–2016), the split was: B181 (51 %), R176 (49%). 19 

The dramatic change in the Blue/Red divide over the course of these two epochs of 

twenty -eight years each — fr om 29%/71% to 51%/49% — is remarkable. One could 

plausibly see this as good evidence that the electorate as a whole has become significantly 

more liberal in the second half of this period. This is precisely the understanding of the 

most dogmatic segment of the Republican -leaning electorate at the present time, and thus 

it provides a reasonable explanation for the growing level of anger and anxiety in that 

segment. This subgroup is also overwhelmingly white, and to some extent the actual roots 

of this anxiety are concealed by raci sm and anti -immigrant attitudes, as discussed in 

Section 5, below. 20 

# Section 4: Just How Close is the Blue/Red Divide? 

In terms of U. S. presidential elections in the period from 1964 to 20 20 , the popular vote 

totals are most relevant evidence which reveals the true depth of the Blue/Red divide in 

American politics : As Table 4 (Appendix 3) shows, the popular vote totals are effectively 

50 -50 from 1964 to 2016 . To get an other idea of how close this divide has been, consider 

three contingencies: (1) What if the popular vote totals had determined the outcomes of 

these elections? (2) What if some third -party candidacies on both sides of the divide had 

not determined the outcome o f all three of the elections of 1992, 2000, and 2016? (3) What 

if Richard Nixon had had not become ensnared by the Watergate caper and had finished his 

second term? Allowing for just these three contingencies, the results in electoral -college 

terms would have been first, a solidly Red presidency from 1968 through 1996, and a 

solidly Blue presidency from 1996 to 2020. On the other hand, it is no less important to 

realize that in many cases, over this entire period of time, the margin of victory in popular 

vote terms was extremely narrow. 

The truth of the matter is that, for the last 5 6 years, the American public has often 

been – in terms of popular votes for the presidency – almost equally divided between Blue 

and Red factions. Consider this set of both fa cts and contingencies: 

• In 1976, Carter defeated Ford by a margin of 2% in the popular vote; assuming that 

Nixon had still been in office in 1976, either Ford or Reagan might well have won 

the election; 

• Only the third -party candidacy of Ross Perot prevente d George H. W. Bush from 

being re -elected in 1992 (the combined vote totals for Bush and Perot exceeded 

those for Bill Clinton by a large margin); 

• In 1996, the vote for the two sides was almost even (Bill Clinton beat the Dole/Perot 

popular vote by a litt le more than 100,000 out of almost 95 million votes cast); 

• In 2000, Gore’s popular vote total exceeded George W. Bush’s by one -half of one 

percent, but the third -party votes for Nader in Florida cost Al Gore the victory. 

• Assuming that Gore had been elect ed in 2000, he might well have been re -elected in 

2004; 21 

• In 2016, combining the votes for Hillary Clinton and Jill Stein (Blue), and the votes 

for Donald Trump and Gary Johnson (Red), the Red vote exceeded the Blue by a little 

over 200,000 out of a total o f over 136 million votes cast, a margin of victory 

amounting to a small fraction of 1% (.0015); 

• In each of the key states which gained Trump his victory in 2016 (Michigan, 

Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin), his margin of victory over Clinton was less than the 

votes for Jill Stein .

• In 2020, three states (Arizona, Georgia, and Wisconsin) were won by Biden with 

extremely narrow margins and were the margin of victory for him in the Electoral 

College. The margin in Arizona (11 EV) was 10,457 (.03% of all votes cast .; In 

Georgia (16 EV) it was 11,779 (.02%), and in Wisconsin (10 EV), 20, 682 (.06%), for 

a total vote margin for all three states together of just under 43,000, i.e., .027% of 

the 158 million votes cast. 

• In each of the key states which gained Biden his victory in 2020 (Arizona, Georgia, 

and Wisconsin ), his margin of victory over Trump was far less than the votes for the 

right -wing Libertarian party. 

Thinking of the long -term and dramatic changes in the racial composition of the U.S. 

population, disc ussed earlier, under established voting patterns there will be a gradual but 

decisive shift to what might be a permanent Blue dominance from 2020 onwards. Under 

“normal” circumstances, this shift would result in the Blue control of the presidency as well 

as both the House and Senate in the Congress, at the national level, and predominance in 

the two Blue regions at the state level. Over time, Blue predominance at the federal level 

would be reflected in major public policy domains. 

However, with the electi on of Donald Trump in 2016 , circumstances began to be no 

longer normal. He greatly energized the Red “base” and accepted the complete surrender of 

the Republican Party to his leadership – ironically so, given the intraparty hatreds 

expressed during the 201 6 Republican primary campaign . He nearly won re -election in 

2020 (in where it counts, the Electoral College) , but in his losing the polarization of Blue 

and Red w as greatly exacerbated, with presently unknowable future consequences. In a 

real and truly ominous sense, the United States is steadily moving closer to the broader 

trend that now encompasses virtually all of Europe. In the United Kingdom, France, 22 

Germany, Austria, Italy, Poland, and Hungary, if not elsewhere, right -wing popular 

movements, fueled by anti -immigration politics, have been gaining strength . The bitter 

divisiveness which characterizes this situation is replicated as far away as India, where it is 

based on the Hindu/Muslim conflict. These divides, now lodged firmly in so many of the 

world’s once relatively well -functioning democracies, create a kind of political paralysis in 

both national and international terms; and against those nations, now paralyzed, the 

powerful, active dictatorships of Russia and China are arrayed. 

Events have already moved beyond the point in time when the champions of 

democracy ought to have begun assessing all the ramifications of this situation and trying 

to work out in detail some plausible responses to it. 23 

# Section 5: The Post –Trumpian Divide 

Here we examine the four most decisive issues in social policy – race, immigration, the 

economy , and the polarization of morality – in which the sharp Blue/Red divide has played 

out. It is assumed that these issues would continue to be salient due to the continuing 

influence of Donald Trump on the Republican Party after 2020. 

I. RACE 

Figure 5: Brookings Institution, Racial Profile of U.S. Population in 2045 24 

The Brookings Institution attracted a huge amount of media attention when it produced 

this graphic in a report published in March 2018 (as noted, the projection is from the U.S. 

Census Bur eau). This projection may be contrasted with the Bureau’s actual population 

estimates as of 1 July 2018 (when the total population of the country was estimated at 

327.2 million):        

> Black or African American alone, percent 13.4%
> American Indian and Alaska Native alone, percent 1.3%
> Asian alone, percent 5.9%
> Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone, percent 0.2%
> Hispanic or Latino, percent 18.3%
> White alone, not Hispanic or Latino, percent 60.4%

According to these numbers, the proportion of the “white alone” population in the U.S. will 

decline fro m over 60% in 2018 to just below 50% twenty -seven years later in 2045 . But 

already in 2015 the Census Bureau had given 2014 population racial composition numbers 

and projected them to 2 060. Those results are truly remarkable: 

RACE  2014  2060 

WHITE  62%  44% 

HISPANIC  17%  29% 

BLACK  14%  18% 

ASIAN  6%  9% 

In one sense, this is all one needs to know about the increasingly dire political anxieties in 

many parts of the nation, and especially among its Red -state peoples. 25 

II. IMMIGRATION .

The long and troubled history of immigration politics in the United States is well -known 

and will be only briefly recapitulated here. At 1790 the U .S. population was 4 million 

(excl uding indigenous peoples), of whom about 750,000 were slaves; all were the 

descendants of “immigrants,” of course. There was relatively little immigration from 1770 

to 1830, during which time population growth was almost entirely internally -generated; 

ther efore as of 1830, when the total stood at 13 million, virtually all citizens were native -

born. But then large numbers began arriving again, mostly from the United Kingdom 

(especially Ireland) and Northern Europe: During the decade from 1830 to 1840, the 

number of immigrants more than quadrupled, and by 1850 it had tripled again; in the latter 

part of that period, it was the terrible famine in Ireland that caused the numbers to grow. 

It was the coming of the Irish, in particular, who were largely unskilled and now 

(unlike earlier immigrants from Ireland) Catholic, which set off the very first wave of ethnic 

discrimination, known as “nativism,” initiating a pattern that would be repeated many 

times thereafter. But they kept coming, 3.5 million British and 4. 5 million Irish from 1820 

to 1930, and 5 million Germans between 1850 and 1930; midway through that great 

migration, the second wave of nativism appeared in the 1890s. The patterns of 

disparagement had been set and were reproduced in the reactions of the n ative -born to 

successive waves of desperate people from southern and eastern Europe and then Asia 

(and only much later from Central and South America). 

The litany of complaints was always pretty much the same: “T hey” were filthy and 

lazy, carriers of infectious diseases, speakers of incomprehensible languages, petty 

criminals or worse, often Catholics, their children unschooled, undisciplined and clothed in 

rags, the men habitually drunk and fit only for menial la bor, the women of loose morals, 

and so on. Discrimination and unequal treatment in employment, housing, access to public 

services, justice and incarceration, education, political inf luence, and other advantages 

were the means by which the native -born, larg ely British and Protestant majority 

expressed its displeasure at their arrival. 26 

But for almost all of these immigrants there was one important difference between 

them and the h uge number of native -born slaves and then former slaves : Almost all of them 

(except only for some swarthy southern Europeans) were not black. They may have been 

kept underfoot for the first decades after they had passed through Ellis Island, but they 

were relatively soon freed from the chains of unequal treatment and social discri mination 

and allowed to make their way up th e social ladder. Not so for African -Americans, either 

before the Emancipation Proclamation or a full one hundred years later, until the passage 

of the Civil Rights Act in 1964 . Even thereafter, down to the presen t day, discrimination and 

unequal treatment persisted, as the white majority invented one new technique after 

another to ensure that blacks would be “kept in their place.” 

The only parallel to this story was the earlie r treatment of Asian immigrants . The 

first federal legislation restricting the arrival of this group dates from 1875, and a long 

series of such acts followed: the Page Act (1875), the Chinese Exclusion Act (1882), the 

Emergency Quota Act (1921), and the Immigration Act (1924). But even here t he contrast 

with American blacks stands out. Increasingly, in the decades after the end of the Vietnam 

War, Asian immigrants have been welcomed more openly, and as of the present day they 

and their descendants rarely experience the kinds of persistent disc rimination inflicted on 

African -Americans , at least until the COVID -19 epidemic appeared . The final chapter of the 

story to date has to do with the enormous influx of Hispanic immigrants: By 2014 Hispanic -

Latino people had passed no n-Hispanic whites as the largest population group in California 

(40% of the total), itself by far the most populous state in the Union; they are also the 

majority in New Mexico. 

Not for a very long time, perhaps not since the 1920s, had a leading U.S. political 

figure attacked a racial minority i n this country as criminals and rapists. But it happened in 

2015 and racial and ethnic tension has been seething ever since. 

III. ECONOMY .

The economic history of the United States for the period 1964 to 20 20 has played an 

important role in the changing political sphere. It is a history of collapsing fortunes on the 27 

lower end of the socio -economic scale and increasing extravagance on the upper end. In a 

2018 report the economists John Schmitt, Elise Gould, and Josh Bivens summarized the 

long, sad story about the undermining of the lifestyles of low - and middle -class people in 

the United States over the preceding forty years: 

For the last four decades, the United States has been experiencing a slow -

motion wage crisis. From the end of World War II through the late 1970s, the 

U.S. economy generated rapid wage growth that was widely shared. Since 

1979, however, average wage growth has decelerated sharply, with the 

biggest declines in wage growth at the bottom and t he middle. The same 

pattern of slow and unequal growth continues in the ongoing recovery from 

the Great Recession. 

For the entire period 1947 to 1979, real wages grew at the rate of 2.2% per year; when the 

increase is compounded, the result is a doubling of real incomes over that 32 -year period. 

Since 1979, that rate has been cut by fully two -thirds; worse, during almost all of that latter 

period , “for the large majority of workers over the last four decades, wages were essentially 

flat or falling apart from a few short bursts of growth .” At the other (upper) end of the 

socioeconomic scale, both the concentration of wealth and also shares of national income, 

aided by the steady reduction in income tax rates in this sector, are nothing short of 

stunn ing. The period 1937 –1967, known as the “Great Compression,” was an era of relative 

equality when compared with the epo chs preceding and following it; the U.S. Census 

Bureau reported in 2019 that income inequality had reached the highest level in fifty yea rs. 

As for shares of wealth, it was widely reported recently that inequality in this domain at 

present had reached levels not seen since the 1920s. 

Important data on these issues, including excellent charts showing changes over 

time, will be found in the article in the New York Times of 10 April 2020, by David 

Leonhardt and Yaryna Serkez (see URL), “America will struggle after Coronavirus: These 

charts s how why.” For example: 

G.D.P. measures a country’s total output. In the U.S., it has risen 79 perce nt 

since 1980, after adjusting for inflation and population growth. Over the 

same 40 years, the after -tax income of the bottom half of earners has risen 

only 20 percent. The after -tax income of earners near the middle has also 

badly trailed G.D.P., rising only 50 percent. But for the very wealthy, the story 28 

is completely different. Their after -tax incomes have risen much faster than 

G.D.P. – up 420 percent since 1980. 

To dramatize this point, Leonhardt and Serkez describe a scenario which assumes today’s 

GDP but with the same income distribution as the1980 levels of inequality: “In effect, each 

household in the bottom 90 percent of income would be earning about $12,000 more – not 

just this year, but permanently. In effect, each household in this bottom 90 p ercent … has 

effectively given the rich $110,268.60.” 

Of the four socially -divisive issues discussed in this section, that of structural 

changes in the economy is perhaps the hardest for citizens to understand. For the lower 

and middle classes, the great period of progress during the Second World War and the 

following quarter -century has faded from memory. It had been the time of better -paying 

and secure unionized jobs, of dramatic increases in home ownership, consumer credit, and 

more secure retirements, of fairly easy access to higher education and the profe ssions, and 

reasonable hopes for additional gains in the future. (My four brothers and I lived through 

this era and benefited greatly from it . But it should be remembered that these gains were 

much less available to blacks.) Almost every aspect of this pro gress has subsequently 

vanished, and there is no indication that it will return. It is impossible to imagine, for 

example, that large numbers of the good jobs that have been sent overseas will ever return. 

The acute levels of despair that now exist in the hollowed -out zones of economic decay in 

the United States are indicated by the opioid crisis – something it is impossible to imagine 

might have happened in the 1950. Rising death rates from suicide, alcohol ism, and drug use 

among non -Hispanic whites in their 40s and 50s are called “deaths of despair” by the 

economists Anne Case and Angus Deaton (see David Leonhardt and Stuart A. Thompson ,

“How Working -Class Life is Killing Americans, in Charts,” The New York Times of 6 March 

2020) . Many people are easily led to believe that there are simple solutions for changing 

what has happened to them. The sad truth is that no such solutions are available. 

IV. THE POLARIZATION OF MORALITY .29 

The single most important issue in this sphere is, of course, the long -running attempts by 

religious groups opposed to abortion to re -criminalize these medical procedures. Tactics 

have included, among others : seeking to have federal courts overturn Roe v. Wade , reducing 

the availability of clinics and doctors willing to provide these services, collapsing the 

timeframe within which abortions are allowed , abusing those who wish to access these 

services in clinics, and simply by murdering doctors. Over the decades attitudes h ave 

hardened and increasingly restrictive measures have been adopted in states where the 

majority of voters are opposed to abortion. Where state governments have been willing to 

provide administrative and legislative support for these tactics, they have be en 

overwhelmingly in the Red column, although of course in every such state there would 

have been some political divide on all of this. In general, Blue states have been willing to 

adhere to the practices permitted under Roe v. Wade. 

Strong, persistent differences in views among citizens on these four issues and some 

others are causing the Blue/Red divide to become cemented in place. The polarization of 

opinion around the four -year Trump presidency is aggravating the trend that w as alr eady 

evident before the 2016 election and has been gathering strength ever since. Trump’s 

political hold on his base after 2020 guarantees that the divide will widen and deepen. I 

contend that it is time to consider seriously a scenario under which it is p referable to 

contemplate the dissolution of the United States and a separation of the Union into four 

new sovereign nations, two Red and two Blue. Section 6 reviews quickly the kind of 

administrative changes and political negotiations that might bring this new alignment into 

being. Section 7 describes the outcome. 30 

# Section 6: The Compromise of 2030 : A Political Fantasy 

It is expected that negotiations leading to a collection of new laws, containing all 

authorizations required to create fou r new successor sovereign nations , and to conclude 

the required set of Agreements among the parties, will commen ce not later than 30 June 

2025 with a n anticipated completion date of 30 June 203 0 (see further Appendix 1). 

• An Agreement to ratify a set of new amendments to the Constitution of the United 

States and to divid e the national debt on the basis of population ;

• A new national census to be completed by 30 June 20 25 ;

• An Agreement apportioning the military authority of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, together 

with all serving members of the armed forces, their equipment and facilities (including 

nuclear weapons) , among the successor nations ;

• An Agreement to apportion all federal non -military civil service personal, their facilities 

and equipment, among the several successor nations ;

• An Agreement to have all existing federal legislation , as well as all official personal 

identity documents, remain in force until modified by the several successor nations ;

• An Agreement for a process to deal with existing international treaties and how to 

occupy the seat on the U.N. Security Council now reserved for the USA; 

• An Agreement for providing dispute resolution for conflicts over access to resources, 

especially water, and environmental pollution; 

• An A greement establishing citizenship and permanent residency for the citizens of the 

four new nations; 

• An Agreement to create a set of internal continental “soft” borders between the 

territories of the four successor nations ; to create a continent -wide custom s zone, 

assuring free movement of goods and persons; and to apportion responsibility for 

maintaining the two continental hard borders (Canada and Mexico); 

• Any other agreements required to assure the uninterrupted functioning of government, 

laws, and secur ity on the territori es of the four successor nations ;

• Any and all matters not covered in this set of agreements will be regarded as being 

within the sole jurisdiction of each of the four successor nations .31 

# Section 7: First Scenario: The Four New Nations in North America   

> Figure 6: Map of the Four New Sovereign States

## I. THE BREAKUP OF THE USA CREATES FOUR NEW NATIONS AS OF 2031: 

## (1) The Southern States of America (13 former states): 

Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Indiana, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, South 

Carolina, Nor th Carolina, Ohio, Tennessee, and West Virginia . Capita l: Atlanta 

Comparison with its historical antecedent: 

The Confederate States of America (1861, secession, 11 states): Florida, South 

Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, Arkansas, Tennessee, North 

Carolina, Texas, and Virginia. (In the 1860 census, the population of the Confederacy 32 

was 29% of the total population of the United Stat es [ 9 million out of 31 mi llion ].

The Confederacy was never recognized as a sovereign nation by any foreign power. )

Based on the 2010 cen sus, the population for the new nation in the South would be 

about 75 million (out of a U.S. total of 309 million), a 24% share . The projected 

po pulation i n the 2020 census ( an 8% increase) is 81 million. 

## (2) Northeaster n United States of America (16 former states plus DC ): 

New England (12 plus DC): Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, New York, 

Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, 

Maryland, Virginia, plus Dis trict of Columbia . Plus Illinois , Michigan, Minnesota and 

Wisconsin . Capita l: District of Columbia. 

Total population (2010 census) was 91 million; projected in th e 2020 census 

(8% increase), 98 million. 

## (3) Cent ral United States of America (1 2 former states): 

Idaho, Montana, Utah, Wyoming, North Dakota, South Dakota, Nebraska, Kan sas ,

Oklahoma, Texas, Iowa, and Missouri . Capital: Austin 

Total population (2010 census) was 85 million; projected in t he 2020 census 

(8% increase), 92 million. 

## (4) Pacific States of American [Pacifica] ( 9 former states): 

Hawaii, Alaska, Washington, Oregon, California, Nevada , Arizona, New Mexico, and 

Colorado Capita l: Portland 

Total population (2010 census) was 58 million; projected in the 2020 census 

(8% increase), 63 million. 33 

## II. THE BREAKUP OF THE USA MIMICS THE ELECTION RESULTS O F 2020 

The map below is ©The American Presidency Project, a website created by John Woolley 

and Gerhard Peters at the University of California, Santa Barbara .  

> Figure 7: Election 2020, ©The American Presidency Proje ct

Table 5 (Appendix 4) shows the state (and thus Electoral College) victories from 1964 to 

2020, now distributed among the hypothetical four new nations. Both the Northeast (Blue) 

and Midwest (Red) are solidly one color. Only a mere 1 1,500 votes in Georgia i n 2020 

prevented the South from being solidly Red. Only the geographical artifact of adding Alaska 

to the Pacific prevent s that region from being solidly Blue. In other words, with two small 

exceptions, this actual map of the 2020 presidential election is exactly the same as 

the imaginary four -nation one (Figure 4) shown just above. The two exceptions are 

Alaska and Georgia, and in the imaginary map they are reversed (from Red to Blue and vice 

versa) in order to cre ate the requisite geographical continuities for the breakup of the USA 

into four new nations. (Although it is colored reddish in Figure 5 , Maine’s 4 EC votes in 

2020 were 3 -1 Blue.) 34 

## II I. ISSUES OF THE PLACEMENT OF STATES IN THE NEW SOVEREIGN ENTITIES .

Quite obviously, this four -part proposed regional configuration contains some few but 

important, and undoubtedly controversial, decisions about sorting various states into one 

grouping or another. These and other political battles would have taken place in the lead -

up to the final version of the Compromise of 20 30. 

1) THE SOUTH .

• Without a doubt, winning the adherence of Texas will be the great prize in the 

competition between the South and the Central ( Midwes t) Regions , and Texas will 

be the acknowledged political leader of whatever region it chooses to join . The 

South will call upon historical precedent from 1861; but Texas was a relatively new 

player at that time with a population of only about 125,000 , whereas now it is an 

industrial powerh ouse, rivalling New York and California in terms of its economic 

clout. There will be a hard -fought battle between the South and the Central for its 

allegiance, but almost certainly the latter will win in the end. Additionally, for the 

Central as a whole, the inclusion of Texas guarantees direct access to the oceans. 

• Following a long Republican majority from 1952 to 2004, Virginia turned 

Democratic in the next four elections, and seems likely to stay that way for the 

foreseeable future, and therefore it wil l join the Northeast. This placement of 

Virginia creates a slightly ragged southern border between the Northeast and the 

South, but it is workable. 

• Delaware and Maryland ( both consistently Blue since 1992 ) will insist on inclusion 

with the Northeast. 

• The N ortheast will insist on retaining the District of Columbia as its capitol. 

2) THE NORTHEAST .35 

• By far the most significant issue is the expected placement of Ohio and India na in 

the Southern Region, which disrupts the land -based territorial contiguity of the 

Northeast. This is because Ohio has been Red nine times since 1968, although in 

more recen t times voted twice for Obama, and Indiana has been consistently Red 

since 1968 except for the single Blue in 2008 . However, since Illi nois has been 

consistently Blue since 1992 , it will certainly opt for inclusion in the Northeast. 

• Three Northeast states helped to give Trump his victory by narrow margins in 2016: 

Pennsylvania (Blue since 1992 except for 2016) , Michigan (also Blue since 1 992 

except for 2016) , and Wisconsin (Blue since 1988 except for 2016). In the election 

for governor in 2018, e.g., the Democratic victor won over the Republican with a 

10% margin (55% to 45%) out of a total of over 4 million votes cast for both. The 

presidential results reverted to their earlier pattern in 2020, although narrowly so 

in the case of Wisconsin. 

• Minnesota has been staunchly Blue for all but a single election (1972) since 1964 

and even earlier. It too will have strong motivation to join th e Northeast. 

3) THE CENTRAL (M IDWEST ): 

• All t hirteen states allocated to the Midwest have very consistent records of voting 

Red over recent decades. 

• If Texas were a sovereign country on its own, its economy would ra nk tenth in the 

entire world in the present global set of nations. 

4) THE WEST (P ACIFIC ): 

• New Mexico has been Blue since 1992 except for 2004; Colorado has been Blue 

since 2008 ; Arizona (Red since 1952 except only for 1996) flipped to Blue in 2020 

by a very small margin. 

• Alaska has been consistently Red since 1968, an outlier in this otherwise solidly 

Blue major region; but it has a small population and no real alternative options in 

the breakup scenario in geographical terms. 36 

• If California were a sovereign country on its own, its $3 trillion economy would rank 

fifth in the en tire world, just behind Germany, at present. 

• Some further insight into the changing Blue/Red dynamic can be gained by studying 

the interesting Wikipedia map shown in Appendix 2, based on the combined 

presidential elections of 2004, 2008, 2012, and 2016. 

## III. GDP IN THE FOUR NEW SOVEREIGN NATIONS 

In a new configuration based on the second allocation, the four new nations in North 

America would still all rank in the Top 10 in the world in terms of Nominal GDP: The 

Northeast would rank second, after only China; the Pacific would rank fourth and the S outh, 

fifth (after China, Northeast, and Japan); and the Central would rank seventh, after 

Germany. The second allocation would then look as follows: 

## GDP IN THE FOUR NEW SOVEREIGN NATIONS (AS OF 2018 )

2018 2010 2020** 

GDP* POPULATION POPULATION 

THE 9 PACIFIC STATES : $4.923 TRILLION 72 MILLION 78 MILLION 

THE 12 CENTRAL STATES : $3.229 TRILLION 71 MILLION 77 MILLION 

THE 16 NORTHEAST STATES : $7.425 TRILLION 91 MILLION 98 MILLION 

THE 13 SOUTHERN STATES : $4.844 TRILLION 75 MILLION 81 MILLION 

TOTALS $20.421 TRILLION 309 MILLION 334 MILLION 

*U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis 

** projected 

In this new configuration, the four new nations in North America would all rank in the Top 

10 in the world in terms of GDP: The Northeast would rank second, after only China; the 

South would rank fourth (after China, Northeast, and Japan); and the Central and Pacific 

would rank sixth and seventh, after Germany. 37 

# Section 8: Second Scenario: Two New Nations in North America 

It is fair to say that few pairs of nations have such a close economic, cultural, and social 

affinity as do Canada and the United States. Troubles during the American Revolutionary 

War, the War of 1812, the Underground Railroad and the U. S. Civil War, the displacement 

of the native American tribes, as well as Canada’s place in the British Empire and the later 

Commonwealth, have been remarkably inconsequential over the longer term. In recent 

time s, against irritations over Cuba and the Vietnam War, instances such as NATO, NORAD, 

NAFTA, and many others show the close cooperation in many vital areas. On the other 

hand, Canada has long had a potentially troublesome dependence on external trade with i ts 

neighbor, recently accounting for three -quarters of its exports and half of its imports. 

The downside of these longstanding close ties is that Canada inevitably would feel 

quickly the impact s of any serious disintegration of the U. S. political system . The other 

main issue has a short name: water. Canada has 20% of the world’s freshwater resources 

and 7% of the world’s renewable supply of freshwater, along with the world’s second -

largest landmass and the third -smallest population among G20 countries. Already in 2020 

fully 75% of the American West was in the throes of a megadrought, the second -driest 

period in that region in the last 1200 years. And climate change, the worst effects of which 

are only just beginning, will make that drought, and accompany ing wildfires, more severs 

and more persistent. The population of the region far exceeds the natural carrying -capacity 

of the landscape : For many decades already cities and farms in the West have depended on 

water sourced from far away , and in the Midwest the massive underground Ogallala (High 

Plains) Reservoir is rapidly being depleted. S oon enough the tens of millions of residents 

there will be looking farther afield and farther north. 

Three -quarters of the freshwater in Canada’s major rivers naturally flows north into 

either Hudson’s Bay or the Arctic Ocean. Thus it is no simple matter for anyone to suggest 

that Canada could “solve” the drought in the U. S. West by shipping huge amounts of its 

water south. Nevertheless there would be strident demands to create pipelines to carry 38 

Canada’s water to the U. S. West and Midwest. Canada would be unable to resist this 

pressure on its own. To avoid complete political and military subjugation Can ada’s only 

realistic choice would be to amalgamate with the Blue states of the USA, which would have 

for those two groups of states, East and West, the huge advantage of creating a continuous 

linkup across the continent and predominant control over the Gre at Lakes: 

In this configuration, the only “political” outlier is Alaska, because it has been Red in every 

election, since being admitted as a state in 1959, with the sole exception of 1964; it has 39 

nowhere else to go, except maybe back to Russia. Like the other scena rio of four new 

nations, this one assumes that, one way or another, Republicans will engineer the return of 

Georgia to the Red column. Both of the two new nations would be economic powerhouses: 

## GDP IN THE TWO NEW SOVEREIGN NATIONS 

2018 2010 2020 

GDP POPULATION POPULATION 

THE REPUBLIC OF NORTH AMERICA * $14.921 TRILLION 197 MILLION 214 MILLION 

THE 25 STATES OF THE USA $8.073 TRILLION 146 MILLION 158 MILLION 

In terms of world GDP ranking, the Republic of North America would rank 1 st and the new 

USA would rank 3 rd (after China). 

*Breakdown: 

THE 25 BLUE STATES $13.348 TRILLION 163 MILLION 176 MILLION 

CANADA (PROVINCES /TERRITORIES ) 1.573 TRILLION 34 MILLION 38 MILLION 

The Republic of North America would still rival China as the world’s most influential nation 

and would wield authority over three oceans (Atlantic, Pacific, and Arctic). 

Canada has become so intertwined with the United States in econ omic and social 

terms that the only significant hurdle to the amalgamation would be finding agreement in 

political and constitutional terms. If the 25 Blue states were to think clearly on this matter, 

they w ould jettison the U. S. Constitution, relegating it to the rump USA, so as to be rid of 

the stench of slavery that clings to Article 1, Section 2 (the “three -fifths clause”); rid of the 

wholly absurd Second Amendment; and rid of the undemocratic “Electoral College” and the 

allocation of Senate seats. If they think clearly, they will adopt the elegant parliamentary 

model of governance, which requires only a single national electoral contest to create 

control over legislature and executive representing the majority of citizens. And if they 

think clearly, th ey will welcome Canada’s sanity and contemporary achievements in 

tolerance, social welfare, Medicare, and women’s rights, and its coming commitments to 

minimum income. Perhaps Canada could solicit some help from its new compatriots in 

areas of ongoing defi ciency, particularly racism and the condition of aboriginal peoples. 40 

# Section 9: Would Any Breakup Help the USA ?

Introductory Note: This section deals primarily with issues relevant to the first breakup 

scenario (the four new nations within the territory of the United States). 

In Table 2 , the Blue/Red divide for all three categories of outcomes is here based on the 

regional makeup of states allocated to the four new countries in Section 7, whereas Table 1 

had used the U.S. Census Bureau regional map. It is interesting to see that the differences 

between the two tables in this category are relatively small. Table 2 shows the substantia l

shift from Red to Blue in all three dimensions from Phase I (1964 to 1988) to Phase II 

(1992 to 2016), a result that is masked by the outcome of the 2016 election. 

TABLE 2: SUMMARY OF PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION NATIONAL RESULTS BY POPULAR 

VOTE , STATES , AND ELECTORAL COLLEGE FOR THE BLUE /R ED DIVIDE 

YEARS  OUTCOMES BY POPULAR 

VOTE 

BLUE RED 

OUTCOMES BY STATES 

BLUE RED 

OUTCOMES BY ELECTORAL 

COLLEGE 

BLUE RED 

1964 

to 

1988  45.7% 54.3%  26.6% 73.4%  31% 69% 

1992 

to 

2016  50.2% 49.8%  49% 51%  58% 42% 

# 2020  51.8% 48.2%*  50% 50%  57% 43% 

*Adjusted for estimated shares of third -party vote, mostly Libertarian (Red) & Green (Blue) 

First, Phase I (1964 –1988) considered by itself shows a marked disparity between the 

proportion of popular vote when contrasted with both outc ome by states and by the 41 

Electoral College. This indicates that the Red vote was more concentrated in many states 

and that the Blue vote was much more dispersed across the nation as a whole. However, in 

the minds of citizens, the outco me s of both state and electoral –college voting patterns 

would be more evident and easily recalled in the popular imagination than would national 

totals for the popular vote. (In fact, the change in the Blue/Red popular vote totals was 

quite gradual over time : See the details i n Table 4 .) Therefore, in the traditionally Red 

states, there would be a strong perception that that nation as a whole had been solidly Red 

since 1968 and might be expected to remain so indefinitely. Second, in both of those more 

easily recalled dimension s (state and Electoral C ollege), the change from Phase I to Phase II 

(1992 –2016) is nothing short of dramatic. We can see more clearly what has been 

happening in this shift when we break down these results in regional terms, based on the 

breakup of the former United States of American into the four new independent nations as 

described in Section 7. The regional breakdown has two visible features: (1) the longer -

term shift towards the predominance of Blue in the Northeast and West; (2) the 

increasingly sharp divide between two regions that have become co nsistently Red and two, 

consistently Blue. 

TABLE 3: 2020 PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION BY STATE AND REGION AND % BLUE /RED (S UMMARY )

[S EE STATE -BY -STATE RESULTS IN APPENDIX 2]

REGION /S TATE  % BLUE  % RED  % GAP  3RD PARTY 

NORTHEAST  59.10%  38.93%  20.73%  1.97% 

SOUTH  40.86%  57.51%  16.69%  1.52% 

CENTRAL  37.63%  59.81%  22.23%  2.59% 

PACIFIC  54.83%  42.52%  14.55%  2.64% 42 

OBSERVATIONS :

1. In 2020 t he three West Coast states plus Hawaii have an average Blue % Gap of 

23.5% , but the margin for Blue in Arizona was extremely narrow (0.3%). 

2. The South likely has a lower Red advantage than does the Central on account of the 

much higher % of Black residents. The extremely narrow 2020 Blue margin for 

Georgia (0.24%) and a small Red one in North Carolina (1.34 %) are problematic for 

any breakup scenario. 

3. In the 2020 election in the Northeast, there were very narrow margins for Blue in 

the cases of Pennsylvania (1.17%) and Wisconsin (0.63%), and of course both 

flipped from 2016. This is a major problematic aspec t to the entire concept of a 

breakup. 

4. The Central Region has a strong consistency across the board with one major 

exception. Texas is the second -largest state by population (over 29 million) and had 

a % Blue/Red Gap of only a little more than 5% in 2020. This fate of this state in any 

breakup scenario would be problematic and, given its size and economic clout, 

would affect greatly the outcome for all parties. 

5. The average margins in voting share for all of the four Regions are substantial. 

6. It must be noted that the average voting share for t he “losing” side across all four 

Regions is 40%, which is also substantial. If the breakup were to occur, it is likely 

that population movements would increase the % Gap for all four Regions. 

However, i n some other important ways, the proposed four -part d ivision of U.S. states 

reflects well the longer -term Blue/Red divide and thus could be expected to provide 

political stability and a marked reduction in the intensity of polarized viewpoints ( but not 

eliminating them entirely, of course). For the most rece nt period, considering the last four 

presidential elections together (2008, 2012, 2016 , 2020 ), these are the results: 

• The West was consistently Blue except for Alaska ’s very small population; 

• The Central was overwhelmingly Red; in 2020, 15/15 ;

• The Northeast was consistently Blue, almost entirely so, except for the 2016 

results in Michigan, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin, all involving small or 

vanishingly small margins of victory, which was reversed in 2020 ;

• In the South, 12 + out of 13 states voted Red in 2020 .

A detailed discussion on these points, as well as a state -by -state breakdown of the 2020 

election results . will be found in Appendix 2. 43 

Will the polarization continue or even worsen in the future? 

The m ain reason to think that the divide will c ontinu e or even worsen is the projection of 

the future racial composition of the U.S. population. In March 2015, a report from the U.S. 

Census Bureau entitled Projections of the Size and Composition of the U.S. Population: 2014 

to 2060 , previously referred to in Section 4, made this observation: 

A much smaller percentage of the child population is non -Hispanic White 

alone, as compared with the total population. In 2014, 52 percent of children 

are projected to be non -Hispanic White alone, compared with 62 percent of 

the total population. Thus, amon g those under age 18, the United States is 

already nearly a majority minority nation. The percentage of the 

population in this group is projected to decrease to only 36 percent by 2060. 

Put another way, by 2060, 64 percent of children will belong to racial 

and ethnic minorities , compared with 56 percent for the total population. 

This is nothing short of appalling news for all those among the white subpopula tion in the 

United States, who represented 80% of the total popula tion as late as the 1990 census and 

who continue to believe that maintaining white “supremacy” in a political sense is 

fundamental to their well -being. But t he underlying changes in the racial composition of 

the populati on of the USA have become increasingly rapid and inexorable: By 2018, a little 

over only a quarter -century after 1990, the white subpopulation had fallen from 80% to 

60% of the total, an astonishing (and, for some, devastating) rate of change. There is sim ply 

no stopping the ongoing changes that will, it is projected, result in the following population 

shares by 2060: white 44%, Hispanic 29%, and black 18%. Moreover, just given the other 

underlying structural change, namely, in the under -18 population, as i ndicated in the 

passage quoted above, those trends will inevitably result in a further shrinking of the share 

for the white population after 2060. 

In my opinion, the combination of the “race and ethnicity” plus “immigration” 

themes is and will remain , fo r the foreseeable future, the most intensely divisive political 

issues in the USA. They underpin the likely intensification of the struggle of some among 

the ever -decreasing white majority to maintain their perceived political supremacy .

Beginning in mid -2015 , this struggle ha d crystallized in the “base” exploited by Donald 44 

Trump , and it will not soon disintegrate and disappear again. It may over time stretch the 

institutional bulwarks of “normal politics” in the American republic to the breaking -point. 

Th ere are some lessons to be drawn from the history of the twentieth century which 

suggest that, once a bitter divide within a n important country has been allowed to fester 

and grow over a sufficient period of time, the appearance of a ny sudden new global cr isis of 

whatever kind could cause one side of the divide to seek a regressive “solution,” a

resolution which cannot easily be reversed thereafter and which eventually brings about 

dreadful consequences. 45 

# Section 10 : African -Americans in an Independent South 

Introductory Note: This section is relevant to both of the breakup scenarios (the four new 

nations and the two new nations) described in Sections 7 & 8. 

Considering together twelve of the thirteen states which would be collected into the new 

sovereign entity call ed the Southern States of America (excluding only West Virginia), the 

percentage of blacks in the se states in the population listed in the 2010 census ranged from 

8% to 37%, with North and S outh Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana all 

in the upper part of that range. The total black population in all thirteen of those states 

numbered almost 18 million in 2010 , representing about 43% of all blacks in the United 

States . the n umber might be close to 20 million by 2030. 

What are known as the “Jim Crow” laws appeared in the Southern states during the 

late 19 th and early 20 th centuries and were used to enforce racial segregation of public 

facilities; some of them were in force until outlawed by the federal Civil Rights Act of 1964 

and the Voting Rights Act of 1965. As note d earlier, Jim Crow laws accompanied the other, 

more severe discrimin ations and injustices represented by the legally -approved practices 

of convict leasing, sharecropping, voter suppression, as well as peonage, the last of which 

applied either exclusively or predominantly to black people. (See Jamelle Bouie , “The 

Authoritar ian Stamp of Jim Crow,” The New York Times, 21 February 2020 , and David W. 

Blight, “Trump reveals the truth about Voter Suppression,” The New York Times, 11 April 

2020 ). Thus a full century of systematic mistreatment was piled atop two -and -a-half 

centuries of brutal slavery, altogether three -and -a-half centuries of uninterrupted oppression 

and injustice. A fundamental questio n about the creation of the four new sovereign nations 

is: Would the predominantly Red Southe rn States of America – or, conceivably, both it and 

the Central States – seek to revive any of those practices? Although it might appear 

outrageous to even pose this question, what is actually outrageous is how long those 

practices endured after Reconstruction, and how uniformly they were openly supported 

and enforced by the majority white population in much of the South and tacitly accepted in 

some of the rest of the country. 46 

Earlier it was argued that the legacy of slavery hangs over the entir e history of the 

United States of America, down to the present day, like the Sword of Damocles. A recent 

Pew Research Report (2019) states that “most U.S. adults say the legacy of slavery 

continues to have an impact on the position of black people in American society today”; 

among blacks, 84% believe that this is the case either “a great deal” or “a fair amount.” 

This legacy has never been confronted and resolved at all adequately: The stain of bondage, 

oppression, chains, whippings, murder, sexual e xploitation, and families torn apart on the 

auction block is this nation’s original sin, impossible to wipe away. Furthermore, the 

appalling treatment of African -Americans also fuels the racism lurking behind anti -

immigrant attitudes more generally. Theref ore i t is useless to pretend t hat this broad 

legacy of racism would simply vanish of its own accord upon creation of the four new 

sovereign nations . It is unlikely that the project of peaceful dissolution, which has many 

notable advantages for the future, can possibly succeed if there is no explicit recognition 

and no effective resolution of the issue. Nor are there any easily -formulated proposals 

which could reliably accomplish what may be needed. 

A solution must be found. One possibility is to include in the set of Agreements 

among the citizens of the proposed four new states one that would require protections 

from discrimination on racial grounds in all of the constitutions of the new republics. An 

immediate objection would be that this is exactly what was sought in the three 

amendments (Thirteenth, Fourteenth, Fifteenth), and they failed miserably to accomplish 

that objective. On the other hand, anti -discrimination provisions in any new constitution s

could incorporate concepts and wording from the later laws and jurisprudence which 

sought to overcome the earlier deficiencies. As an added protection, the set of Agreements 

could grant dual citizenship to all members of the racial minorities in the new s tates; or an 

automatic right for anyone to exchange citizenship among the four new nations for a period 

of five or ten years. Or better alternatives might exist which could be suggested by others. 47 

One complicating factor is the astonishing and relatively recent rise in the Hispanic –

Latino population in the USA. Even more remarkable is that, in the U.S. Census Bureau 

projection of U.S. population growth between 2014 and 2060, the largest growth by fa r is 

expected to be among the Hispanic population. As compared with the share for blacks 

(growing from 14% to 18%), Hispanics are projected to increase from a 17% to a 29% 

share over the same period. The complication is that in the wealth divide (income an d

wealth inequality) in this country, blacks are steadily falling behind both whites and 

Hispanics. A 2019 report from the U.S. Institute for Policy Studies states: “Between 1983 

and 2016, the median Black family saw their wealth drop by more than half after adjusting 

for inflation, compared to a 33 percent increase for the median White household.” But by 

2016 median wealth for black families was also close to only hal f of that of Hispanics. The 

authors of that report then projected the current trends into the future: 

If the trajectory of the past three decades continues, by 2050 the median 

White family will have $174,000 of wealth, while Lat ino median wealth will 

be $8 ,600 and Black median wealth will be $600 . The median Black family is 

on track to reach zero wealth by 2082. 

As more recent an d mostly lighter -skinned immigrants , Hispanic –Latinos appear to be 

positioned to achieve the kind of upward mobility that has bee n characteristic of most 

European and Asian immigrants over the course of U.S. history. This is partly reflected in 

the voting patterns in the 2020 presidential election: Whereas 12% of Blacks voted for 

Trump, some 34% of Hispanics did. 

But, as has been the case since the beginning of the European invasion of North 

America, blacks are still condemned to suffer from a unique set of disadvantages in terms 

of social and economic mobility. At least over the coming shorter term, the set of 

ant agonistic issues surrounding race and immigration likely wil l force the Blue/Red divide 

further and further apart. 48 

# Section 11: Conclusions 

At the global level, a number of contradictory tendencies are visible at the present time. On 

the one hand, the possession of devastating nuclear weapons by the major powers, and 

so me others, serves to inhibit among all parties the traditional resort to large -scale 

warfare, without limit ing the scope of regional conflicts. At the same time, and owing to this 

reality , modes of unconventional and asymmetric warfare become increasingly important. 

This requires nimbleness and innovation in response, and not just reliance on large 

standing arm ies. There is no reason to think, therefore, that the dissolution of the United 

States of American into four separate but economically -powerful and nuclear -armed 

republics (all of which would rank among the Top 10 global economies in terms of GDP) 

would ma ke a material difference in the prevailing level of international security. 

Many believe that climate change will be the single most problematic global social 

and environmental issue in the coming decades . Ever since 1997, when the U.S. Senate 

passed the Byrd –Hagel Resolution by a 95 –0 vote, the USA has been an obstacle to securing 

meaningful international agreement on climate change. During this time, China has become 

by far the world’s leading emitter of greenhouse gases, em issions which are still risin g as of 

202 1. However, after the dissolution of the USA two powerful new nations (the 

Northeastern and Western States of America ) would likely support more effective action on 

climate change on the world stage. 

Almost certainly there will be other sources of serious global instability in the 

future. The Russian Federation has already breached the international consensus against 

the violent rearrangement of national borders that had existed since the end of World W ar 

II. China, the emerging superpower, also will test the limits of this consensus. Year 2008 

showed how a global crisis can appear suddenly. If the destructive polarization of 

viewpoints among the U.S. citizenry , which has been inexorably leading to great er 

extremism, is not overcome , some unanticipated type of serious international disruption 

might possibly push this polarization into truly dangerous and damaging waters. 49 

## Appendix 1: Constitutional Changes for the Four -Nation Breakup 

ARTICLE V OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES 

“T he Congress, whenever two thirds of both Houses shall deem it necessary, shall propose 

Amendments to this Constitution, or, on the Application of the Legislatures of two thirds of 

the several States, shall call a Convent ion for proposing Amendments, which, in either Case, 

shall be valid to all Intents and Purposes, as Part of this Constitution, when ratified by the 

Legislatures of three fourths of the several States, or by Conventions in three fourths 

thereof, as the one or the other Mode of Ratification may be proposed by the Congress;…” 

The plan to create a set of four proposed new nations would be formulated within 

the terms of a master agreement among the 50 states of the Union, which would be 

converted into a single, unified set of amendments (beginning with Amendment XXVIII) to 

the U. S. Constitution. This then requires ratification by three -quarters of the 50 states, 

amounting to 38 states, allowing for a maximum of 12 not ratifying. It may be regarded as 

highly unl ikely that more than half -a-dozen states at most would refuse both entreaties and 

various sweeteners from the others and decline to ratify; but the deal would be 

constitutionally valid once the threshold of 38 ratifications was passed. A nominal 

descriptio n of the amendments follows. Undoubtedly, this account will be found to be 

naïve, perhaps laughably so, by established constitutional authorities, who are hereby 

invited to provide the proper wording to operationalize the political pact in legal terms. 

A. THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES .

• An Amendment to create four new successor sovereign nations. 

• An Amendment to end the terms of all Representatives and Senators, and the 

President and Vice -President, on 31 December 2030. 

• An Amendment to dissolve the S upreme Court of the United States. 

• An Amendment to recognize the legal validity of all Agreements concluded under 

the auspices of the Compromise of 2030. 50 

• Any other amendments required to assure the uninterrupted functioning of 

government, laws, and securit y on the territories of the four successor nations. 

B. THE CONSTITUTIONS OF THE FOUR SUCCESSOR SOVEREIGN NATIONS .

• Each of the four new nations will have drafted and ratified, as of 31 December 2030, 

a new constitution (to a substantial degree, adopting many of the various articles 

and amendments of the historical U. S. documen t, with variations as required). 

• Each of the four will schedule elections for the members of the Congress and the 

Executive to be held on 1 January 2031. 

• One provision of the U.S Constit ution that is certain to be contentious as this process 

unfolds is the functioning of the Electoral College in the election of presidents. Like 

the original provision for the indirect election of senators (where senators were 

chosen by state legislatures), the Electoral College was designed by those influential 

men among the founders who thought it important to erect constitutional barriers 

to the expression of the popular will, by preventing some elections from being 

decided by a simple majority of voters. It is virtually certain that at least the new 

Blue -dominated sovereign nations, the Northeast and the West, will do away with 

the Electoral College; perhaps all four of them will do so. 

• It is certain that the Northeast and West nations will eliminate state control over 

federal elections and create representation -by -population for the Senate. 

• The breakup may bring serious involvement in the major environmental issue of the 

present age, climate change, from important segments of the North Ameri can polity. 

The West especially, but also the Northeast, are likely to be participants on the 

world stage. No effective international agreement on climate change is likely to be 

successful without them. 

• The breakup may make it far easier for at least the t wo Blue segments to introduce 

much -needed changes in health -care coverage to the United States, where medical 

bills are the leading ca use of personal bankruptcy . There are better options now 

functioning elsewhere, including Canada’s single -payer system and the many 51 

combined public/private schemes, in Europe and elsewhere, that provide universal 

coverage for basic needs. 

• It is expected that two of the four new nations will criminalize abortion and the 

other two will not. Thus women living in the former who s eek abortions will have to 

travel to one of the neighboring nations for medical assistance, just as Irish women 

did for many years, traveling to the United Kingdom. 

• Similarly, it is expected that two of the four new nations will enact strict gun control 

la ws and the other two will not. Assuming open borders among all of them, these 

arrangements will create an ongoing dilemma for all those who seek to limit the 

slaughter of innocents. 

• Trans -border agreements on water supply will be extremely important. Calif ornia 

and Arizona, for example, have been dependent on long -distance aqueducts for 

many years: the Los Angeles Aqueduct (1913); Hetch Hetchy Aqueduct, delivering 

water from Yosemite to San Francisco (1934); the Colorado River Aqueduct (1939); 

and many othe rs. 

• The five permanently inhabited territories of the United States are Puerto Rico and 

the U.S. Virgin Islands (Caribbean Sea) and Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, and 

American Samoa (North and South Pacific Ocean). They would be distributed among 

the four new nations according to a negotiated formula. 52 

## Appendix 2 :

## 2020 Presidential Election by State AND REGION AND % BLUE /RED 

REGION/STATE  % BLUE  % RED  % GAP  3rd PARTY 

NORTHEAST 

Connecticut  59.24%  39.21%  20.03%  1.55% 

Delaware  58.78%  39.80%  19.98%  1.42% 

D. C.  92.15%  5.40%  86.75%  2.45% 

Illinois  57.54%  40.55%  16.99%  1.90% 

Maine  53.09%  44.02%  9.07%  2.89% 

Maryland  65.36%  32.15%  33.21%  2.49% 

Massachusetts  65.60%  32.14%  33.46%  2.26% 

Michigan  50.62%  47.84%  2.78%  1.54% 

Minnesota  52.40%  45.28%  7.12%  2.32% 

New Hampshire  52.71%  45.36%  7.35%  1.94% 

New Jersey  57.33%  41.40%  15.93%  1.27% 

New York  60.86%  37.75%  23.11%  1.39% 

Pennsylvania  50.01%  48.84%  1.17%  1.15% 

Rhode Island  59.39%  38.61%  29.22%  2.00% 

Vermont  66.09%  30.67%  35.42%  3.24% 

Virginia  54.11%  44.00%  10.11%  1.89% 

Wisconsin  49.45%  48.82%  0.63%  1.73% 

AVERAGE (17)  59.10%  38.93%  20.73%  1.97% 

SOUTH 

Alabama  36.57%  62.03%  25.46%  1.40% 

Arkansas  34.78%  62.40%  27.62%  2.83% 

Florida  47.85%  51.22%  3.37%  0.92% 

Georgia  49.50%  49.26%  0.24%  1.25% 53 

Kentucky  36.15%  62.09%  25.94%  1.76% 

Indiana  40.96%  57.02%  16.06%  2.02% 

Louisiana  39.85%  58.46%  18.61%  1.69% 

Mississippi  41.06%  57.60%  16.54%  1.34% 

North Carolina  48.59%  49.93%  1.34%  1.48% 

Ohio  45.24%  53.27%  8.03%  1.49% 

South Carolina  43.43%  55.11%  11.68%  1.46% 

Tennessee  37.45%  60.66%  23.21%  1.89% 

West Virginia  29.70%  68.63%  38.93%  1.67% 

AVERAGE (13)  40.86%  57.51%  16.69%  1.52% 

CENTRAL 

Idaho  33.07%  63.84%  30.77%  3.10% 

Iowa  44.89%  53.09%  8.20%  2.02% 

Kansas  41.56%  56.21%  14.65%  2.23% 

Missouri  41.41%  56.80%  15.39%  1.79% 

Montana  40.55%  56.92%  16.37%  2.53% 

Nebraska  39.36%  58.51%  19.15%  2.13% 

North Dakota  31.76%  65.11%  33.35%  3.13% 

Oklahoma  32.29%  65.37%  33.08%  2.34% 

South Dakota  35.61%  61.77%  26.16%  2.63% 

Texas  46.84%  52.06%  5.22%  1.46% 

Utah  37.65%  58.13%  20.48%  4.22% 

Wyoming  26.55%  69.94%  43.39%  3.51% 

AVERAGE (12)  37.63%  59.81%  22.23%  2.59% 

PACIFIC 

Alaska  42.77%  52.83%  10.06%  4.39% 

Arizona  49.36%  49.06%  0.3%  1.58% 54 

California  63.48%  34.32%  29.16%  2.20% 

Colorado  55.40%  41.90%  13.50%  2.70% 

Hawaii  63.73%  34.27%  29.46%  2.00% 

Nevada  50.06%  47.67%  2.39%  2.28% 

New Mexico  54.29%  43.50%  10.79%  2.21% 

Oregon  56.45%  40.37%  16.08%  3.18% 

Washington  57.97%  38.77%  19.20%  3.26% 

AVERAGE (9)  54.83%  42.52%  14.55%  2.64% 

Taking the last four presidential elections together (2008, 2012, 2016 , 2020 ), these are the 

results: 

• The West was consistently Blue except for Alaska ’s very small population; 

• The Central was overwhelmingly Red; in 2020, 15/15 (see Note 1); 

• The Northeast was consistently Blue, almost entirely so, except for the 2016 

results in Michigan, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin, all involving small or 

vanishingly small margins of victory, which was reversed in 2020 (see Note 2); 

• In the South, 12 + out of 13 states voted Red in 2020 (see Note 3). 

NOTE 1: 

Iowa was Blue in 2008/2012 and Red in 2016; it was Red from 1968 to 1984, then 

Blue from 1988 to 2000. The other two exceptions are Colorado (Blue for the last 

three, but consistently Red for many previous elections) and New Mexico (Blue for 

all but one election since 1992). 

NOTE 2: 

In 2016, Trump won Michigan, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin by very narrow 

margins: For the three states taken together, the total of all votes cast for both 

Clinton and Trump was 13,233,376; the total margin between the two was 77,744, 

or .059%, that is, little more than half a percentage -point overall. In Pennsylvania, 

the margin was 44,292 ou t of 5,897,174 votes cast for both candidates (.0075%); in 

Wisconsin, 22,748 out of 2,787,820 (.0082%); in Michigan, 10,704 out of 4,548,382 

(.0024%.) The 46 electoral -college votes for these three states together were the 

margin of victory for Trump. Both Michigan and Pennsylvania had been Blue from 

1992 to 2012; in 2012, the margin for Obama over Romney in these two states was 

9.5% and 5.4%, respectively; Wisconsin had been Blue from 1988 to 2012, and in 

2012 the Blue margin was 6.8%. 

In 2020 , three sta tes (Arizona, Georgia, and Wisconsin) were won by Biden with 

extremely narrow margins and were the margin of victory for him in the Electoral 55 

College. The margin in Arizona (11 EV) was 10,457 (.03% of all votes cast.; In 

Georgia (16 EV) it was 11,779 (.02% ), and in Wisconsin (10 EV), 20, 682 (.06%), for 

a total vote margin for all three states together of just under 43,000, i.e., .027% of 

the 158 million votes cast. (This represented about half of the national margin that 

put Trump in office in 2016.) These three states were Red for Trump in 2016, and 

had they stayed Red in 2020, the Electoral College votes would have tied 269 –269. 

In such a case the election is thrown into the House of Representatives under the 

rule that each state has one vote, and at that time a majority of states (26) were 

controlled by Republicans. 

In 2020 43,000 out of over 158 million popular votes were the margin of 

victory in the presidential election when translated into Electoral College 

votes. In both 2016 and 2020, the state -by -state margins of the national 

popular vote were vanishingly small in the key states which determined the 

Electoral College outcomes (where the EC margin, 306 – 232, was identical in 

both cases). 

NOTE 3: 

Both Ohio and Florida were Blue in 2008 and 2012 before becoming Red in 2016 

and remained so in 2020 . Georgia had been Red since 1996 and its flip to Blue in 

2020 was by a very small margin. 56 

## Appendix 3:

TABLE 4: PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION RESULTS BY POPULAR VOTE PERCENTAGE (OOO ), 

1964 TO 20 20 , FOR THE BLUE /R ED DIVIDE IN THE FOUR NEW NATIONS 

YEAR  ALL 

BLUE 

ALL RED  NORTHEAST 

B R

SOUTH 

B R

CENTRAL 

B R

WEST 

B R

1964  43,345  27,186  21,959/11,316  6,152/5,849  9,495/6,265  5,739/3,756 

1968  30,970  41,764  16,094/17,211  4,262/9,396  6,455/9,789  4,159/5,368 

1972  29,162  46,643  14,430/20,115  4,020/9,572  6,074/11,440  4,638/5,516 

1976  41,084  39,452  18,096/17,302  8,588/7,165  9,167/9,520  5,233/5,465 

1980  35,589  49,477  15,315/20,137  8,004/9,487  7,734/12,423  4,536/7,430 

1984  37,582  53,457  16,562/20,125  7,302/11,847  8,151/13,768  5,567/7,717 

1988  40,813  48,885  16,772/18,600  7,727/11,090  9,664/12,192  6,650/7,003 

Total  258,545 

45.7% 

306,864 

54.3% 

119,228/124,806 

48.9% 51.1% 

46,055/64,406 

41.7% 58.3% 

56,740/75,397 

42.9% 57.1% 

36,522/42,255 

46.4% 53.6% 

1992  43,905  58,966  18,677/21,669  9,360/12,578  8,687/12,067  7,181/12,652 

1996  47,305  47,311  19,843/16,889  10,060/11,578  9,920/12,876  7,482/5,968 

2000  53,875  50,571  23,008/16,946  10,810/12,709  10,998/13,918  9,059/6,998 

2004  59,028  60,243  24,505/20,313  12,154/15,847  12,431/16,647  9,938/7,436 

2008  69,516  59,939  28,119/19,347  13,800/15,921  15,514/16,713  12,083/7,958 

2012  64,905  60,936  26,798/19,302  12,582/17,092  13,758/16,907  11,767/7,635 

2016  67,194  65,027  26,237/21,342  14,494/17,568  13,692/18,319  12,771/7,798 

Total  405,728 

50.2% 

402,993 

49.8% 

167,187/135,808 

55.2% 44.8% 

83,260/103,23 

44.6% 55.4% 

85,000/107,47 

44.2% 55.8% 

70,281/56,445 

55.5% 44.5% 

2020  81,589 *

51.8% 

76,788 

48.2%  60.1% 39.9%  41.7% 58.3%  39.0% 61.0%  54.8% 42.5% 

*Blue (Biden plus Green Party); Red (Trump plus Libertarian Party) 57 

## Appendix 4:

TABLE 4: PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION RESULTS BY STATES AND REGIONS ,

1964 TO 20 20 , WITH REGIONS REALLOCATED TO FOUR NEW NATIONS 

YEAR  ALL 

BLUE 

ALL 

RED 

NORTHEAST 

B R

SOUTH 

B R

CENTRAL 

B R

WEST 

B R

1964  38  13  17 0 8 5 8 7 5 1

1968  13  38  10 7 1 (N.1) 12  0 15  2 4

1972  2 49  2 15  0 13  0 15  0 6

1976  22  29  9 8 12 1 0 15  1 5

1980  7 44  4 13  2 11  0 15  1 5

1984  2 49  2 15  0 13  0 15  0 6

1988  11  40  6 11  1 12  0 15  4 2

95 

26.6% 

262 

73.4% 

52 69  24 67  8 97  13 29 

1992  31  20  16 1 7 6 3 12  5 1

1996  30  21  16 1 7 6 2 13  5 1

2000  20  31  15 2 0 13  1 14  4 2

2004  20  31  16 1 0 13  0 15  4 2

2008  28  23  17 0 4 9 2 13  5 1

2012  26  25  17 0 2 11  2 13  5 1

2016  21  30  14 3 0 13  2 13  5 1

176 

49% 

181 

51% 

111 8 20 71  12 93  33 9

TOTALS  271  443  163 77  44 138  20 190  46 38 

% 38%  62% 

2020  25  26  17 0 1 12  0 12  1 8

Note 1: District of Columbia makes 51 in total 

Note 2: Wallace 5 counted as R. 58 

## Appendix 5: The Red/Blue Divide 2004 –2016 

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Red_states_and_blue_states :

Summary of results of the  2004 , 2008 , 2012  and  2016  presidential elections 

States carried by the Republicans in all four elections 

States carried by the Republicans in three of the four elections 

States carried by each party twice in the four elections 

States carried by the Democrats in three of the four elections 

States carried by the Democrats in all four elections 59 

# References and Acknowledgments 

## Acknowledgments: 

The d ata on the votes in the presidential elections from 1964 to 2016, used in this essay, is 

taken from the website for “The American Presidency Project,” University of California, 

Santa Barbara, directed by John Woolley and Gerhard Peters : 2020 | The American 

Presidency Project (ucsb.edu) 

## References (S ample of Internet URLs ): 

Note on the sources : All of the information referred to in these pages, without exception, is 

freely available from trustworthy entries on the Internet. But users can only trul y benefit 

from this astonishing resource if they are willing to use their brains for something other 

than a sponge. It is simply astonishing how much has changed in this regard during the past 

30 years: Information formerly buried in bewildering hard -copy public library resources 

can now be accessed in mere milliseconds without leaving one’s desk. But Internet 

information search which serves to broaden and deepen the seeker’s knowledge is not free 

of charge, however odd this may sound. That type of search r equires the diligent 

application of a critical and questioning mind, rather than the naive quest for opinions 

which will reinforce the beliefs someone already holds. (This is known as “confirmation 

bias.”) Learning how to evaluate the trustworthiness of in formation sources may be, these 

days, the single most valuable les son educator s can instill in their pupils . Genuinely new 

knowledge is expensive to acquire in terms of time and effort, and it is only admitted to a 

mind that has been trained to experience the joy of encountering a well -reasoned 

argument. Here are a few quick specific suggestions :

• Seek “hard information” (data, graphs, etc.) and actually work with it . For example, 

for this essay I searched for detailed information on U.S. presiden tial e lections and 

then reformatted what I found to suit my specific objectives. I am not skilled in 

statistical analysis, so I relied on simple addition and division , using a cheap 

hand held calculator !

• Avoid all opinions of others, even of your friends an d acquaintances, especially 

“anecdotal” accounts (reports of personal experiences), unless they are supported 

by hard evidence which you can verify from another source. 

• Don’t believe everything you hear or read; don’t even necessarily believe everything 

yo u think you see with your own eyes (in many criminal cases, eyewitne ss reports 

have turned out to be thoroughly unreliable )! 

• Always interrogate yourself about why you are inclined to believe any source of 

information you happen to encounter on the Internet .60 

Update May 2021: 

• Michelle Goldberg, “How the Republicans could steal the 2020 election,” The New 

York Times 13/05/2021:  https://www.nytimes.com/2021/05/13/opinion/cheney -

2024 -election.html?searchResultPosition=1 

• Protect Democracy:  https://protectdemocracy.org 

Preface: 

• https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dissolution_of_the_Soviet_Union 

Section 1: 

• https://www.nationalgeographic.org/photo/union -confederacy/ 

• https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compromise_of_1850 

• https://www.govtrack.us/congress/bills/110/hres194/text 

Section 2: 

• https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slavery_in_the_United_States 

• htt ps://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2019/08/14/magazine/1619 -america -

slavery.html?searchResultPosition=1 

Section 3: 

• https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_o f_United_States_presidential_election_results_by_state 

• https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jesusland_map 

Section 4: 

• https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Race_and_ethnicity_in_the_United_States 

• https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/publications/2015/demo/p25 -

1143.pdf 

• https://www.brookings.edu/blog/the -avenue/ 2018/03/14/the -us -will -become -minority -

white -in -2045 -census -projects/ 

• https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_immigration_to_the_United_States 

• https://www.epi.org/publication/americas -slow -motion -wage -crisis -four -decades -of -

slow -and -unequal -growth -2/ 

• https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Income_inequality_in_the_United_States 

• http s://www.forbes.com/sites/taxnotes/2019/11/20/interview -gabriel -zucman -on -taxes -

and -inequality -in -america/#2f9da35179c5 

• David Leonhardt & Stuart A. Thompson: 

https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/03/06/opinion/working -class -death -

rate.html?action=click&module=Opinion&pgtype=Homepage 

• David Leonhardt & Yaryna Serkez: 

https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/04/10/opinion/coronavirus -us -economy -

inequality.html?acti on=click&module=Top%20Stories&pgtype=Homepage 

Section 6: 

• https://apps.bea.gov/iTable/iTable.cfm?reqid=99&step=1#reqid=99&step=1 

• https://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/statistics/elections/2020 

• https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Red_states_and_blue_states 

Section 8:

• https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Race_and_ethnicity_in_the_United_States 

• https://www.census.gov/prod/ cen2010/briefs/c2010br -06.pdf 

• https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jim_Crow_laws 

• Jamelle Bouie : https://www.nytimes.com/2020/02/21/opinion/trump -authoritarian -jim -

crow.html?action=click&module=Opinion&pgtype=Homepage 

• https://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2019/04/09/race -in -america -2019/ 61      

> •http://www.equality -of -op portunity.org/assets/documents/race_paper.pdf
> •https://www.prri.org/wp -content/uploads/2019/02/Democracy -in -Crisis -3-Pluralism -
> 1.pdf
> •https://ips -dc.org/wp -content/uploads/2019/01/IPS_RWD -Report_FINAL -1.15.19.pdf
> •David W. Blight: https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/11/opinion/sunday/republicans -
> voter -suppression.html?action=click&module=Opinion&pgtype=Homepage

Section 9:  

> •https://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/statistics/elections/2020

Section 10 :  

> •https://www.congress.gov/bill/105th -congress/senate -resolution/98
> •https://unfccc .int/process -and -meetings/the -paris -agreement/the -paris -agreement

Appendix 1: 

> •https://www.archives.gov/founding -docs/constitution -transcript

Appendix 2:

• Timothy Egan:  https://www.nytimes.com/2020/02/14/opinion/california -revenge 

> trump.html?searchResultPosition=1

## About the Author 

WILLIAM LEIS S was born in New York City and grew up in ru ral Pennsylvania. He completed 

his B. A. undergraduate major in American History at Fairleigh Dickinson University , a M.A. 

in the history of ideas at Brandeis, and a Ph.D. in philosophy at the University of Cali fornia, 

San Diego. In 1968 he emigrated to Canada and taught there in varied academic programs 

at seven universities before retiring as Emeritus Professor in the School of Policy Studies at 

Queen’s University. He is author, co -author, editor, or contributo r for twenty books 

(www.leiss.ca ) as well as journal articles and consulting reports. The author is grateful to 

his friend, Dr. Michael Tyshenko of Ottawa, for preparing Figure 4 . Note that this Figure 

was created in February 2020. 

The author welcomes comments on this little book : william.lei ss@gmail.com . Also, offers of 

collaboration for further work on it, and suggestions for publication in electronic and/or 

print format, would be appreciated.
