Title: Jones won't take death lying down

URL Source: https://www.goerie.com/story/entertainment/columns/2015/09/10/jones-won-t-take-death/24940387007/

Published Time: 2015-09-10T04:01:00Z

Markdown Content:
The booming voice, familiar to practically everyone, delivered an unmistakable message: "Reports of my death have been greatly exaggerated."

A week earlier, James Earl Jones had been declared dead by a parody website. The news quickly went viral, but it was only the latest in a series of celebrity death hoaxes. Gene Hackman died six times on the website, Macaulay Culkin was bumped off a dozen times, and Wayne Knight, who played Newman on "Seinfeld," met his maker 15 times.

Jones explained that not only is he alive and thriving at 84, he's about to star on Broadway in "The Gin Game." It opens Sept. 23.

After that, he will also reprise one of his signature roles -- Mufasa, or "Daddy Lion," as he calls the character -- in a TV movie sequel to the "Lion King." Mufasa will appear in flashback scenes in "The Lion Guard: Return of the Roar," which will later become a TV series.

"I'll be a busy dead man," Jones joked.

I've had a soft spot for Jones dating back to his 2004 appearance at Edinboro University of Pennsylvania. After he spent 30 minutes responding to students' questions, Jones was introduced to a young girl who had a severe stutter.

"Welcome to the club," Jones said, kneeling before the child to speak face to face. He told her that he stuttered so severely as a child that, from age 6 to 14, he was virtually mute. "Only when a caring teacher worked to bring me out of my shell did I respond," he said.

Jones shared painful memories of his childhood, recalling that when his mother in Mississippi, who had been abandoned by James' father, sent him to live with his grandparents on a farm in Michigan, it triggered an emotional crisis.

Not until Jones' English teacher, Donald Crouch, persuaded him to read aloud from a poem did the 14-year-old find his voice. "I also found my identity," he said.

He finished by telling the little girl that she was lucky to be surrounded by such a loving and supportive family. "You will find your voice," he said in a commanding tone, not unlike Darth Vader's. "It might take some time and some practice, but you will find it."

Jones later told me that when he's extremely stressed, his stutter will return. "But the stutter has also worked to my advantage a couple of times over the years," he said.

He recalled a 1996 film, "A Family Thing," with Robert Duvall, when he stuttered during the read-through. "The director, Richard Pearce, asked me to let my character stutter during a couple of exchanges with Bob's character. He thought it made me seem more vulnerable."

Jones, who said he's most remembered for Darth Vader's voice and for playing an embittered Salinger-like author in "Field of Dreams," said he's never quite sure what will resonate with people.

"I've had a long, happy career, and I'm still surprised that so many people know me for Darth Vader and a cartoon lion," he said with good humor.

"People tell me that my voice is calming, but I don't buy it," he continued. "Kids respond well to it, but dogs freak out and think I'm the enemy."

After a spate of poor health, Jones said he's felt good the last couple of years. "I'm way too healthy to be buried by these nuts on the Internet," he said.

Meanwhile, his many fans are grateful that 1) he found his voice, and 2) he's still around to use it so authoritatively.
