Title: Using cleaning products may raise women’s risk of asthma, respiratory conditions | Harvard T.H. Chan School

URL Source: https://hsph.harvard.edu/news/using-cleaning-products-may-raise-womens-risk-of-asthma-respiratory-conditions/

Published Time: 2024-08-13T17:21:43-04:00

Markdown Content:
August 13, 2024 – Frequent use of household cleaning products that contain hazardous chemicals may be raising women’s risk of health harms including asthma and other respiratory conditions, as well as allergic reactions, according to recent studies.

Experts quoted in an August 9 Healio article noted that women tend to spend more time than men doing housework such as cooking and cleaning and are therefore likely to face higher exposures to substances such as volatile organic compounds (VOCs) that are found in products including air fresheners, aerosol sprays, detergents, oven cleaners, and even products marketed as “green.” Such chemicals can worsen chronic respiratory issues and trigger allergic reactions, according to studies cited in the article.

Mary Margaret Johnson, principal research scientist in Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health’s Department of Environmental Health, noted that even otherwise healthy women can face increased risk of new-onset asthma if they frequently use cleaning sprays. “Anyone who’s inhaling or exposed to the chemicals would be at increased risk,” she said. “Occupational exposure to cleaning and disinfectant products are linked to asthma and rhinitis and exposure is linked to asthma onset.”

She advised limiting the use of cleaning products whenever possible. “You could use air purifiers or a mask, but ideally you just wouldn’t use those substances,” Johnson said. “If they get on your skin, wash your skin right away.”

She said she’d like to see physicians push for stronger regulations, such as preventing companies from leaving certain ingredients off of product labels and from using misleading language on the products. She added that medical professionals “should be educating all women probably starting with pregnant women … to be careful with what they’re using.”

Read the Healio article: Women may face greater allergy, respiratory risks from household cleaning product use

_Photo: iStock/PeopleImages_

* * *

Last Updated
------------

November 22, 2024
