Title: What on Earth Is Happening to This Chinese Bridge?

URL Source: https://www.popularmechanics.com/science/a32415472/humen-bridge-waving-video-explained/

Published Time: 2020-05-08T16:27:18.624516Z

Markdown Content:
This content is imported from youTube. You may be able to find the same content in another format, or you may be able to find more information, at their web site.

This content is imported from Third party. You may be able to find the same content in another format, or you may be able to find more information, at their web site.

*   A Chinese bridge waved in a strong wind and was immediately closed by officials.
*   Harmonic resonance can harm bridges, but there's often something else at play.
*   The bridge in Guangdong recently had a wind-obstructing retaining wall installed.

* * *

The viral video above shows the Humen Pearl River Bridge in China that’s waving like the surface of the ocean—even when the bridge is crowded with cars. How much can a suspension bridge oscillate before it’s a danger to the public? This complex question has puzzled engineers since the invention of the suspension bridge.

The footage is terrifying, and officials closed the bridge as soon as they could clear the cars. We were reminded of the catastrophic Tacoma Narrows bridge collapse of 1940, where a suspension bridge with a history of “wobbling” (gulp) waved itself into pieces that fell into the water below.

While popular imagination blames harmonic resonance for that disaster—a phenomenon where naturally occurring wavelengths match up and magnify one another—the real cause of the Tacoma Narrows collapse is likely a combination of faulty (but well-meaning) engineering and the incentive of saving money on “extra” (not extra) steel.

“To be fair to [the engineers], the phenomenon of aerodynamic instability wasn't well understood at the time,” Alex Pasternack wrote at _Vice_ in 2015.

All bridges must tolerate flexion. Virtually _all_ structures, period, must have flexibility to settle and move at least a little bit. Skyscrapers would wave in the wind, mostly harmlessly, if not for careful engineering to ensure the comfort of people inside. And suspension bridges in particular have a high tolerance for swaying.

China’s state media released an account of what happened (translated):

> “It is reported that the Humen Bridge is under maintenance, and a 1.2-meter-high retaining wall has been added to the bridge deck, destroying the streamline of the section and causing vortex vibration. At present, the retaining wall is being demolished.”

What does this mean? Well, part of the reason suspension bridges are wind tolerant is because they’re “streamlined,” meaning they present as little resistance to the through-flowing wind as possible. When engineers added a new four-foot wall to the suspension portion of the Humen Bridge in Guangdong, China, which opened over 20 years ago, they added what amounts to a wind-capturing sail.

Wind rushes over the wall and creates an air vacuum that pulls the surface of the bridge up and down. This might not be noticeable in a typical day’s wind, but a strong, powerful wind exacerbated the effect and caused the bridge to shake and wave up and down. Since the suspension portion of the bridge is over half a mile long, the effect of the “vortex vibration” is able to magnify.

Officials closed the bridge and are making plans to remove the retaining wall, and it sounds like that will solve the problem. But it might take longer for drivers to decide to take the bridge again.

Caroline Delbert is a writer, avid reader, and contributing editor at Pop Mech. She's also an enthusiast of just about everything. Her favorite topics include nuclear energy, cosmology, math of everyday things, and the philosophy of it all.
