Title: 

URL Source: https://www.faa.gov/sites/faa.gov/files/about/office_org/headquarters_offices/ang/2019_Biographies_Final_09_20_2019.pdf

Published Time: Fri, 12 Nov 2021 23:10:24 GMT

Markdown Content:
Verification and Validation Summit 2019 September 25-26, 2019 Speaker Biographies  

> Page 1 of 13
> Note: This document is a compilation of biographies received from the Summit speakers. Modifications to the biographies were intentionally kept to a minimum.
> Biographies are in Alphabetical Order.

Richard Abbott is Director of Safety for Objectstream, Inc., a small business headquartered in Oklahoma City, OK with offices in Washington, D.C. and Nashville, TN. He serves as a member of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) accredited U.S. Unmanned Aircraft Systems Technical Advisory Group to the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) responsible for developing world-wide UAS standards. In that role, he is currently a member of the UAS Traffic Management (UTM) workgroup tasked with developing international UTM guidelines and standards. He is a long-time member of the International System Safety Society and the International Society of Air Safety Investigators. Richard is a former FAA Aviation Safety Inspector and served as Program Manager for the FAA System Approach to Safety Oversight (SASO) program office. After his 25 + year FAA career, he studied at Lund University in Lund, Sweden where he received his MSc in Human Factors and System Safety. Prior to becoming Director of Safety at Objectstream, Richard provided safety management consulting and training services to airlines, maintenance repair organizations, and civil aviation authorities world-wide. 

Melchor J. Antuñano, M.D., M.S. was born in Mexico City and is a graduate of the National Autonomous University of Mexico School of Medicine. He completed the Residency Program in Aerospace Medicine at Wright State University in Dayton, Ohio. He was awarded a post-doctoral research associateship by the U.S. National Research Council of the National Academy of Sciences at the USAF School of Aerospace Medicine in San Antonio, Texas. 

He is currently the Director of the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Civil Aerospace Medical Institute (CAMI) in Oklahoma City. He is credited with 862 professional presentations and invited lectures at national and international conferences in aerospace medicine in 41 countries, and with 63 scientific publications covering a variety of aerospace medicine topics. 

Dr. Antuñano is Past-President of the International Academy of Aviation and Space Medicine, the Aerospace Medical Association, the Space Medicine Association, and the Iberoamerican Association of Aerospace Medicine. He is a Fellow of the Aerospace Medical Association and the Aerospace Human Factors Association. 

He is Honorary Member of the Austrian, Brazilian, Colombian, Greek, Mexican, Peruvian, Slovanian and Turkish Societies of Aviation/Aerospace Medicine. He is a member of the International Academy of Astronautics. 

He is a faculty member at the University of Texas Medical Branch in Galveston and the National University of Colombia School of Medicine. He is a former faculty member at Wright State Verification and Validation Summit 2019 September 25-26, 2019 Speaker Biographies  

> Page 2 of 13
> Note: This document is a compilation of biographies received from the Summit speakers. Modifications to the biographies were intentionally kept to a minimum.
> Biographies are in Alphabetical Order.

University School of Medicine. Dr. Antuñano has received 85 awards and recognitions for his academic, administrative, and research achievements. 

He is a private pilot, scuba diver and parachutist. 

Dr. Nidhal Carla Bouaynaya received the B.S. degree in Electrical and Computer Engineering from the National School of Electrical Engineering, Computer Science and Telecommunications (ENSEA), France, in 2002 along with the M.S. degree in Electrical and Computer Engineering from the Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, IL, in 2002, the M.S. diploma (DEA) in Signal and Image Processing from ENSEA, France, in 2003, the M.S. degree in Mathematics and the Ph.D. degree in Electrical and Computer Engineering from the University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, in 2007. From August 2007 till August 2013, she was an Assistant then Associate Professor with the Department of Systems Engineering at the University of Arkansas at Little Rock, Little Rock, USA. In September 2013, she joined the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at Rowan University, New Jersey, USA, where she is currently a Professor and Associate Dean of Research and Graduate Studies with the Henry M. Rowan College of Engineering. Her research interests are in signal, image and video processing, machine learning and optimization. Dr. Bouaynaya won the Best Student Paper Award at SPIE Conference on Visual Communication and Image Processing (SPIE VCIP'06) in 2006, the Best Paper Award at the IEEE International Workshop on Genomic Signal Processing and Statistics in 2013 (GENSIPS’13), the Runner-up Best Paper Award at the IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine in 2015 (BIBM'15) and Top algorithm at the 2016 Multinomial Brain Tumor Segmentation Challenge (BRATS). She is also the winner of the UALR Faculty Excellence Award in Research in 2013 and the Rowan Excellence Award in Research in 2017. Her research is funded by the National Science Foundation (NSF), The National Institutes of Health (NIH), New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJ DoT), US. Department of Agriculture (USDA) and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). She is also interested in entrepreneurial endeavors. In 2017, she Co-founded and is Chief Technology Officer (CTO) of MRIMATH, LLC, a start-up company in medical imaging. 

Pete D’Amico graduated from Rowan University in 2013 with a Bachelor’s in Electrical and Computer engineering and in 2018 reenrolled at his alma mater to pursue a Master’s in Engineering Management. He joined the Federal Aviation Administration as a Computer Engineer for the Verification & Validation Strategies and Practices Branch in 2015 after working as a contractor for the FAA at the National Airport Pavement Test Facility for two years. At the Pavement Test Verification and Validation Summit 2019 September 25-26, 2019 Speaker Biographies  

> Page 3 of 13
> Note: This document is a compilation of biographies received from the Summit speakers. Modifications to the biographies were intentionally kept to a minimum.
> Biographies are in Alphabetical Order.

Facility he performed research & development for new non-destructive testing technologies and procedures for airport pavements. Pete has a passion for understanding how things work and a habit for tearing them down to their basic components, often to the point of disrepair, to better understand the world around him. He is thankful to be a part of the NAS Storyboard team because it offers a unique opportunity to see and understand the breadth and depth of many of the FAA’s new systems and capabilities. Bridging the gap between highly technical and non-technical audiences is a particularly satisfying challenge to Pete and, as of late, he has been working on storyboarding the transformational NextGen concept known as Trajectory-Based Operations (TBO). He also has worked with subject matter experts to create storyboards that explain the Airport Surveillance Detection Equipment – Model X program and Terminal Sequencing and Spacing capability. 

Along with his full-time job at the FAA he is vice-chair of Southern NJ IEEE, part-time mechanic, part-time photographer, part-time landlord and full-time activist in saying “yes” to any good opportunity or experience. 

Jon Damush is the Senior Director of new business ventures for Boeing NeXt, a business division building the ecosystem that will define the future of urban, regional and global mobility. He is responsible for collaboration with third parties to advance Boeing’s future mobility initiatives, including oversight of the SkyGrid joint venture that is developing a software platform for the safe integration of unmanned and autonomous vehicles into the global airspace. 

Jon was formerly the chief growth officer for Insitu, Inc., a Boeing subsidiary whose unmanned products have more than 1.3 million operational flight hours. During his tenure at Insitu, he established the commercial business unit and oversaw the strategy and marketing functions of the company. Damush came to Insitu through Boeing’s acquisition of 2d3 Sensing, where he was president and CEO. 

He holds a Bachelor of Science degree in mechanical and aerospace engineering and a Master’s degree in business administration from the University of California, Irvine. He is also a licensed commercial, multi-engine and instrument pilot and certified flight instructor. 

George Emilio is a senior aviation analyst for Serco North America where he conducts research on next generation aviation initiatives. He is a professional pilot with over 25 years of global flying experience in various aircraft, including T-38, C-5, DC-9, B737 and Gulfstream aircraft. He previously served as Chief Pilot for a Fortune 500 company and as pilot for senior government Verification and Validation Summit 2019 September 25-26, 2019 Speaker Biographies  

> Page 4 of 13
> Note: This document is a compilation of biographies received from the Summit speakers. Modifications to the biographies were intentionally kept to a minimum.
> Biographies are in Alphabetical Order.

officials, including the Vice President, Secretary of State and the First Lady. George is a former FAA SE-2020 PM and holds degrees in Electrical Engineering, Aviation Management, and Management Sciences. 

As one of the world’s largest providers of aviation services, Serco has expertise in a full range of air transportation solutions including air traffic control and management, airport management, and aviation-related technology and equipment. We have a bench of experts in air traffic control, air traffic engineering, safety, training and simulation, strategic planning and program management, IT services, aeronautical information management, and communication, navigation, surveil-lance/air traffic management (CNS/ATM). 

John Frederick is a graduate from Drexel University (Philadelphia) with a BS in Computer Systems Management. Mr. Frederick has over 33 years of Test and Evaluation (T&E) experience with Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) systems. In the early part of his career, as both a support contractor and FAA employee, Mr. Frederick has worked as a National Airspace System (NAS) programmer, test engineer, simulations developer, and Operational Test and Evaluation (OT&E) lead on Air Traffic Control automation systems. Mr. Frederick has supported and led T&E efforts on over 12 major FAA automation programs. A large portion of his career in the FAA was dedicated to working as an FAA Test Director and Test Program Manager on major FAA acquisitions of En Route Air Traffic Control (ATC) automation systems. As Chief Test Engineer and Subject Matter Expert (SME), Mr. Frederick has consulted with the Department of Defense (DOD) and international agencies on T&E and provided guidance on FAA investment programs. He has served as the Test Standards Board Chairman to establish test standards in the FAA and provide quality T&E oversight for the agency. Mr. Frederick is currently leading the way for quality verification and validation methods and standards in the FAA as the Manager for the Verification and Validation Strategies and Practices Branch at the FAA William J. Hughes Technical Center. Every year Mr. Frederick conducts the annual Verification and Validation (V&V) Summit that he started in 2006. At the V&V Summit he gathers speakers and participants from across the FAA, other government organizations, industry, and academia to address innovative methods for complex problems and to promote a quality V&V culture. He is also the International Test and Evaluation Association (ITEA) South Jersey Chapter President and serves as the T&E representative for the FAA on the Acquisition System Advisory Group and Joint Resources Council. John is a graduate of the Federal Executives Institute with a Certificate of Mastery in Leadership for a Democratic Society. Verification and Validation Summit 2019 September 25-26, 2019 Speaker Biographies  

> Page 5 of 13
> Note: This document is a compilation of biographies received from the Summit speakers. Modifications to the biographies were intentionally kept to a minimum.
> Biographies are in Alphabetical Order.

A. Larry Gurule is the President of CMPIC, LLC (a global Configuration Management training organization) and i-infusion, Inc. (an operational efficiency engineering consulting group). Mr. Gurule is also the Principle Author and Project Sponsor for the Global Configuration Management standard SAE/EIA-649C and has a continuing and growing presence in the Configuration Management (CM) community. As a consulting engineer, Mr. Gurule has decades of experience on hundreds of government and commercial projects including the DOD, tier 1 and sub tier aerospace/defense suppliers, electronic developers/manufactures, medical developers/manu-factures, automotive developers/manufactures, and industrial equipment developers/manu-factures, as well as numerous sustainment and service/process industry technology implemen-tations. Mr. Gurule’s work spans industry segments that include Aerospace & Defense, Automotive, Distribution, Medical Devices, Electronics, Heavy Equipment, Consumer Products and Energy Trading. Mr. Gurule has successfully architected, orchestrated, implemented and deployed process based enterprise software technology for Product Lifecycle Management (PLM) and Material/Enterprise Resource Planning (MRP/ERP) initiatives essential to the local and global operations of his clients. In 2018 Mr. Gurule was awarded the James M. Crawford Technical Standards Board Outstanding Achievement Award which recognizes individuals for outstanding service in the technical committee activities of SAE International. 

Rebecca Guy is the Deputy Director for Air Traffic Systems (AJM-2) within the Program Management Organization (PMO). She is charged with managing approximately 650 employees responsible for the acquisition and second-level engineering for automation, decision support and agency support systems that support operations of the National Airspace System (NAS). Ms. Guy brings approximately 18 years of FAA experience with deploying programs for the FAA in the en route, oceanic and terminal environments to the organization. Prior to being the Deputy Director for AJM-2, she was responsible for managing and leading the multi-agency Spectrum Efficient National Surveillance Radar (SENSR) Program, Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) and Commercial Space. 

She has also served as the Decision Support Manager which included managing the following programs: Traffic Flow Management System (TFMS), the Time Based Flow Management System (TBFM) and the Terminal Flight Data Manager (TFDM). These systems’ primary goal is to provide users with more accurate predictive information to ensure an efficient NAS. Ms. Guy also served as the Program Manager of the TBFM Program and as an engineer on the Advanced Verification and Validation Summit 2019 September 25-26, 2019 Speaker Biographies  

> Page 6 of 13
> Note: This document is a compilation of biographies received from the Summit speakers. Modifications to the biographies were intentionally kept to a minimum.
> Biographies are in Alphabetical Order.

Technologies & Oceanic Procedures (Ocean21 System), where she was involved in the design, development, integration, testing and deployment of the system. 

Rebecca Guy is a graduate of the University of Mary Washington where she obtained her Bachelor of Science Degree in Computer Science and has her Masters Certificate in Systems Engineering from Stevens Institute of Technology. She is a certified Program Management Professional (PMP). 

Gene Hayman is a Vice President, FAA Account Executive for CACI International Inc. In this position, he is responsible for the company’s portfolio within the FAA market. Mr. Hayman brings almost thirty years of experience in the aviation industry serving in several key executive positions throughout his career. 

He possesses a global perspective on aviation. During his career, he has worked on many policy, operational, and technical issues around developing and executing advanced air traffic management concepts with the FAA and other Air Navigation Service Providers around the world. 

Mr. Hayman came to CACI from the acquisition of L-3’s services division. There he served as Vice President of the federal civilian market with a primary focus on aviation. Along with P&L responsibility for his division, he successfully led the company-wide aviation strategy supporting the FAA, DOD, and airline customers. 

Prior to L-3 he worked at Boeing. Here he and his organization supported the development and execution of Boeing’s global air traffic management strategy. Before joining Boeing, he held multiple executive positions leveraging his expertise in aviation and strategic planning to develop comprehensive strategies focused on the aviation market. 

Mr. Hayman is very active in the aviation community serving in different leadership positions, committees, and contributing to critical initiatives, including: 

• ATCA Tech Symposium, Blue Skies, Annual Conference Planning Committees 

• Served as Vice Chair & Chair for AIA’s Air Transportation System Committee 

• Held various board positions for companies in the aviation market 

• Participated on Blue Ribbon Panels, such as FAA’s Global Leadership Initiative 

• Worked with aviation organizations on ATC/ATM modernization, such as 

FAA, Eurocontrol, ICAO, CANSO, NATO, CAAC/ATMB 

Kerianne Hobbs is an aerospace engineer in the Autonomous Control Branch at the Air Force Research Laboratory in Dayton, Ohio. Her research focuses on development of rigorous Verification and Validation Summit 2019 September 25-26, 2019 Speaker Biographies  

> Page 7 of 13
> Note: This document is a compilation of biographies received from the Summit speakers. Modifications to the biographies were intentionally kept to a minimum.
> Biographies are in Alphabetical Order.

specification, analysis, and bounding techniques to enable certification of autonomous controllers for aircraft and spacecraft applications. Her previous experience includes work in automatic collision avoidance for F-16s. Kerianne has a BS in Aerospace Engineering from Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University, an MS in Astronautical Engineering from the Air Force Institute of Technology, and anticipates completing her PhD in Aerospace Engineering from Georgia Tech at the end of this academic year. 

Natesh Manikoth is the Federal Aviation Administration's (FAA) Chief Data Officer (CDO) responsible for managing and exploiting the information assets of the agency. Prior to his role as the CDO, Mr. Manikoth was the FAA’s Chief Scientific and Technical Advisor (CSTA) for the National Airspace System (NAS) Software in the Next Generation Air Transportation System (NextGen) organization, providing expert technical guidance in all software related areas of the FAA system acquisition and development process. As such, Mr. Manikoth’s primary focus areas were the sustainable acquisition practices for software intensive systems and cybersecurity. 

Prior to joining FAA in 2012, Mr. Manikoth was the Chief Technology Officer for the Transportation, Central and Local Government Sector for Xerox services. He has over 30 years of experience with the development and deployment of large scale systems. He is an electrical engineer with a Masters in Industrial Engineering and an MBA. 

Lieutenant Colonel Mark Massaro serves as the Chief, Air Force Test and Evaluation Policy, Programs, and Resources Division on the United States Air Force Headquarters Staff at the Pentagon, Washington D.C. He is responsible for leading a division of 22 military, civilian and contractor personnel. The division is responsible for developing, updating, and promulgating Air Force Test and Evaluation policy and guidance, overseeing all Air Force T&E activities in support of acquisition, acting as the Air Force office of primary responsibility for the OSD Joint T&E program, and performing all program element monitor responsibilities for seven test and evaluation infrastructure and support program elements totaling over $1 billion dollars annually. 

Lt Col Massaro received his commission in 1998 as a distinguished graduate from ROTC Detachment 165 at the Georgia Institute of Technology. He served as an adjutant and scheduler at the 81st Fighter Squadron Spangdahlem AB, Germany, and deployed in support of Operation ALLIED FORCE. He then attended pilot training at Vance AFB, Oklahoma, with a follow-on operational assignment in the F-16 at Mountain Home AFB, Idaho, where he served as a flight lead and conducted operations during Operations SOUTHERN WATCH and IRAQI FREEDOM. Verification and Validation Summit 2019 September 25-26, 2019 Speaker Biographies  

> Page 8 of 13
> Note: This document is a compilation of biographies received from the Summit speakers. Modifications to the biographies were intentionally kept to a minimum.
> Biographies are in Alphabetical Order.

He then served as an Instructor and Evaluator Pilot at Luke AFB, Arizona. In 2007, Lt Col Massaro completed his education at the U.S. Air Force Test Pilot School (TPS). 

Following TPS, he was assigned to the 40th Flight Test Squadron (FLTS) as an F-16 Experimental Test Pilot during which time he served at Central Command headquarters supporting Operation ENDURING FREEDOM and then was assigned to Headquarters Air Combat Command as the Chief of F-35 Test and Mission System Requirements. He then served at Edwards AFB as the 461 FLTS Director of Operations leading and executing F-35 flight test operations and then as the 412 Operations Support Squadron Commander leading a squadron of over 150 personnel and executing a $14M annual budget in support of the Edwards AFB flight test mission. Following his command tour Lt Col Massaro attended the Eisenhower School for National Resource Strategy at the National Defense University, Fort McNair in Washington D.C. Upon completion of his year at the Eisenhower School, he served as the Deputy Chief Air Force Test and Evaluation Policy, Programs, and Resources division at the Pentagon before moving to his current position. 

Lt Col Massaro is a Command Pilot with over 2,100 flight hours, including 110 combat hours, in more than 30 aircraft. 

Ann McDonald is a Program Analyst in the Aviation Systems Engineering Division at the US DOT / Volpe Center in Cambridge Massachusetts. She has been engaged with the FAA since 2010, initially conducting independent verification and validation of NextGen systems and then as a primary contributor to the requirements management (RqM) process improvement initiative within the PMO. She conducted initial RqM assessments across the PMO, assisted in the drafting of RqM governance, and co-developed an RqM education platform. Additionally, Ann engages with other FAA entities to ensure process alignment across lines of business. 

Prior to working at the Volpe Center, Ann worked in the semiconductor equipment manufacturing industry as a systems test manager and software configuration manager. Additionally, she has been an interoperability manager in the security and building systems field, as well as a software quality manager and internal auditor for defense systems. 

Ann McDonald is an American Society for Quality (ASQ) Certified Software Quality Engineer (CSQE), a Certified ISO:9001-2000 Internal Auditor, and a Six Sigma Green Belt. She is a graduate of Emmanuel College with a BSBA in Business Management and obtained her MBA from Endicott College where her Master’s Thesis was “Software Process Improvement: Factors for Success.” Ann is also a Certified Scrum Master® (CSM) having been trained by Agile Verification and Validation Summit 2019 September 25-26, 2019 Speaker Biographies  

> Page 9 of 13
> Note: This document is a compilation of biographies received from the Summit speakers. Modifications to the biographies were intentionally kept to a minimum.
> Biographies are in Alphabetical Order.

Manifesto architect and co-creator of Scrum, Dr. Jeff Sutherland. She continues to be an advocate for agile systems development and is committed to right-sized process. 

Jennafer (Naffer) Miller is the Principal for Community Engagement at Evans Incorporated in Falls Church, Virginia and began her work with the FAA in 2015. She has over 25 years of combined experience as an administrator, program manager, and educator, in both traditional and experiential environments, and has a personal and professional commitment to working to effect positive change. She has facilitated and delivered workshops and trainings in a variety of settings, and she has been recognized for her incorporation of innovative methods and materials. She has also worked with organizations to address needs in order to grow their businesses and advance their missions. 

In her work with the FAA, Naffer has supported a variety of programs and initiatives in the FAA’s Program Management Office (PMO) and Air Traffic Operations (ATO) System Operations Services (SysOps) Operational Readiness (AJR-X). She works with the PMO Requirements Management Board (PRMB) and has co-developed the Requirements Management (RqM) workshops and overviews. She co-developed an ongoing series, TEAM Talks, which are given by PMO leaders, employees from other FAA organizations, and industry partners. She has also worked with FAA programs on drafting program governance documents, facilitation, and communications and outreach. 

Jennafer has her BA from Duke University and her MA in Teaching English to Speakers of Other Languages (TESOL) from Columbia University Teachers College. She is also a Project Manage-ment Professional (PMP), a Life Member of the Bethesda-Chevy Chase Rescue Squad (BCCRS), where she was an active volunteer as an EMT-B and first-string emergency driver of ambulances and medic units, and a CPR and First Aid instructor with the National Safety Council. 

Matthew Monaco leads the Noblis Aerospace Mission Services Division, an organization focused on delivering innovation to civilian aerospace missions. Our core areas of focus are engineering, technology forecasting, and advisory services for air traffic systems and new entrants. Previously, Matt held several technical and leadership positions within Noblis in the areas of computer vision, software development, and cybersecurity. He holds BS and MS degrees in electrical engineering from West Virginia University and an MBA from Northwestern University. 

Cuong Nguyen started his career in 2014 as a Pathways Program intern at the Federal Aviation Administration’s William J Hughes Technical Center. As an intern, he created a database query Verification and Validation Summit 2019 September 25-26, 2019 Speaker Biographies  

> Page 10 of 13
> Note: This document is a compilation of biographies received from the Summit speakers. Modifications to the biographies were intentionally kept to a minimum.
> Biographies are in Alphabetical Order.

tool and report generator for the Verification & Validation Strategies and Practices Branch Test Standards Board’s fiscal year performance analysis. In addition, Cuong helped support the early building blocks of the NAS Animated Storyboard project by designing the ERAM Detailed Storyboard, one of the first animations for the project. 

After graduating with a bachelor’s degree in Computer Science from Stockton University in 2015, Cuong converted to full-time employment with the Verification and Validation branch. He continues to support the Storyboard project in many different capacities, such as developing more animations for NAS programs, serving as the team’s Intern Coordinator, and is the website’s Release Engineer. 

Cuong received the Southern New Jersey Professional Societies “Outstanding Contributions to Test and Air Traffic Control” 2016 award for the Storyboard project’s success, and made a presentation at a SNJPS monthly gathering titled, “NAS Storyboarding and the Benefits of Cultivating a Knowledge Community.” 

Praveen Raju is an engineer in the in the NextGen Technology Development and Prototyping Division as a project manager. He joined the FAA in November 2015 with The NAS Lifecycle Planning Division as the portfolio analyst for the Separation Management, Time Base Flow Management (TBFM), and Surface portfolios. He also was the Portfolio Manager for Cross Agency Interagency Planning portfolio. 

He now works on the Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) Traffic Management (UTM). He holds an Aerospace Engineering degree with a concentration in Astronautics from Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University. He is currently pursuing his Master’s degree in Business Administration in Aviation with a concentration in Leadership from the Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University. 

Jon D. Schleifer is the Acting Manager for the Outreach and Partnerships of the Federal Aviation Administration’s William J. Hughes Technical Center (WJHTC). 

In his role, Mr. Schleifer brings awareness of the work accomplished at the Tech Center by com-municating its capabilities and showcasing its work. Additionally, he builds and sustains effective and productive global relationships with industry, academia, and other government agencies. 

In his previous assignment, Mr. Schleifer served as the Chief of Staff for the Technical Center. His responsibilities included providing strategic guidance and executive support to the Director and Deputy Director. Prior to that, he led the Atlantic City Field Office for Flight Inspection Verification and Validation Summit 2019 September 25-26, 2019 Speaker Biographies  

> Page 11 of 13
> Note: This document is a compilation of biographies received from the Summit speakers. Modifications to the biographies were intentionally kept to a minimum.
> Biographies are in Alphabetical Order.

Services after serving as Pilot in Command. He amassed over 5,500 flight hours and was instrumental in commissioning and maintaining the National Airspace System. 

Throughout his career with the FAA, Mr. Schleifer was also a Colonel in the U.S. Marine Corps Reserve. He retired in September 2015. He was awarded the Legion of Merit for exceptionally meritorious conduct in the performance of his duties. 

Mr. Schleifer holds a Bachelor's degree from Evangel University. Additionally, he attended the U.S. Air Force Air War College, the U.S. Marine Corps Command and Staff College and attended the Federal Executive Institute Leadership for a Democratic Society Program and other course work from OPM. 

During his personal time, he is the Chairman of the Board for IHS Deliveries, a not-for-profit entity that disseminates donations from U.S. benefactors to missionaries in South Africa and Burma. He is an avid weightlifter, reader and moviegoer. Jon is married to the former Ana Palacios of Laredo, TX. They currently reside in Mays Landing, NJ. 

James H. Washington is the CEO of JJW & Associates, LLC. As an independent management consultant, his domain expertise is government acquisition and aviation operations. In his prior position as Chief Operating Officer of B3 Solutions, LLC, he provided executive direction for 65 contracts supporting 24 defense and civilian government clients. 

Mr. Washington served more than 32 years at the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), where he retired from the position of Chief Acquisition Officer (CAO). As CAO, he had oversight responsibility for the $4 billion annual capital portfolio. His previous positions included Deputy Director of Air Traffic, where he provided executive oversight and direction for 15,000 air traffic controllers and staff. He also held the role of acting Associate Administrator of Airports, with responsibility for the $4 billion grants-in-aid program. He was appointed as the FAA Administrator’s senior representative to the White House Commission on Aviation Safety & Security during the Clinton administration. He was a member of the Senior Executive Service for the last 12 years of his federal career. During his FAA career he was known for his strong leadership, focus on professional development, and program management certification. He was also a member of the senior executive team responsible for the FAA’s air traffic modernization program release from the General Accountability Office (GAO) High Risk List. Additionally, Mr. Washington co-founded the federal surveillance council, which helped reshape the Verification and Validation Summit 2019 September 25-26, 2019 Speaker Biographies  

> Page 12 of 13
> Note: This document is a compilation of biographies received from the Summit speakers. Modifications to the biographies were intentionally kept to a minimum.
> Biographies are in Alphabetical Order.

NORAD/NORTHCOMM mission following the 9-11 terrorist attacks. He was selected as a charter member of the Presidential Management Intern Program during the Carter administration. 

Mr. Washington served as Chairman of the Board of the Air Traffic Control Association (ATCA) from 2012-2014, and is a past member of the Executive Advisory Council for the National Contract Management Association (NCMA). He is an active member of the Aero Club of Washington. He is also a member of the Board of Directors for Hearts and Homes for Youth in Maryland. 

He received his Master’s degree in Public Administration from Syracuse University (Maxwell School), and a Bachelor’s degree from Dartmouth College. 

Soncere’ W. Woodford has 28 years of experience working on Acquisition, Research & Development and Operations programs as a Computer Scientist for the FAA. Ms. Woodford currently serves as the Functional Manager of Test for AJM-25 Second Level Engineering where she provides leadership to a large test team. Her team provides exemplary system testing for En Route, Oceanic and Decision support programs, systems and capabilities. She leads the team to provide requirements verification, regression, operational evaluation, enterprise, integration and risk reduction testing for second level. Ms. Woodford has held many roles from software developer to Manager in her many years at the William J. Hughes Technical Center. Ms. Woodford has a Master’s degree in Aeronautical Science from Embry-Riddle University and a Dual Bachelor of Science degree in Math and Computer Science from Delaware State University. 

Shelley J. Yak is the Director of the FAA William J. Hughes Technical Center, within the NextGen Organization. Ms. Yak serves as principal advisor and is responsible for managing, operating, and maintaining world class aviation laboratories; planning and coordinating FAA’s research and development program; conducting applied research and development; testing, evaluating, verifying, and validating current national airspace system and future next generation air transportation systems; providing facility maintenance, engineering support, support services for all properties located at the William J. Hughes Technical Center. 

Ms. Yak has extensive operational experience in leading organizations through change, building cross-organizational teams, leveraging strong project management and leadership capabilities to build effective business processes and deliver technology solutions. Her prior positions within the FAA included Deputy Director of the Technical Center, supporting the previous director in making the Technical Center the nation’s premier aviation and air traffic management federal laboratory. Ms. Yak was also the Division Manager of the Center Operations team where she was responsible Verification and Validation Summit 2019 September 25-26, 2019 Speaker Biographies  

> Page 13 of 13
> Note: This document is a compilation of biographies received from the Summit speakers. Modifications to the biographies were intentionally kept to a minimum.
> Biographies are in Alphabetical Order.

for the operation, maintenance, and sustainment of the Technical Center facilities, which provide support and technical services. During her tenure in this position, she also acted in the position of Director of NextGen Performance and Reporting and was responsible for defining and establishing this newly formed organization and Director of Operational Evolution Partnership Planning. Previously, Ms. Yak held the position of Division Manager of Information Technology (IT) responsible for the management and security of the Technical Center IT network and telecommunications infrastructure, help desk and desktop support services, and software application development and support. 

Prior to joining the FAA in 1997, Ms. Yak was the Superintendent of Power Delivery Dispatch and Support for Atlantic City Electric where she oversaw the dispatch of personnel responsible for the investigation and restoration of power during normal and emergency conditions and the technical staff responsible for maintaining, operating and supporting the Energy Management and Power Distribution Management computer systems. 

Ms. Yak holds a Bachelor of Science degree in Information and System Science from Stockton University and a Masters in Engineering Management from Rowan University. She has received numerous internal and industry leadership and excellence awards throughout her career.
