Title: The interplay of hypoxic and mental stress: Implications for anxiety and depressive disorders - ScienceDirect

URL Source: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S014976342200207X

Markdown Content:
The interplay of hypoxic and mental stress: Implications for anxiety and depressive disorders - ScienceDirect

===============

Skip to main content Skip to article

*   Journals & Books

*      
*    

*   View**PDF**
*   Download full issue

Search ScienceDirect 

Outline
-------

1.   Highlights
2.   Abstract
3.   Graphical Abstract
4.   Keywords
5.   1. Introduction: the fear of suffocation
6.   2. Chronic stress, anxiety, and depressive disorders
7.   3. Oxygen sensors and adaptations/maladaptations to hypoxia
8.   4. Epidemiological associations of hypoxia with stress, anxiety and depressive disorders
9.   5. Mechanistic links between hypoxia and anxiety and depressive disorders
10.   6. Modulating hypoxia adaptations to counteract anxiety and depressive disorders
11.   7. Conclusions and perspectives
12.   Submission declaration and verification
13.   Declaration of interest
14.   Data Availability
15.   References

Show full outline

Cited by (62)
-------------

Figures (5)
-----------

Tables (9)
----------

1.   Table
2.   Table
3.   Table
4.   Table 1
5.   Table
6.   Table

Show all tables

Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews
------------------------------------

Volume 138, July 2022, 104718

The interplay of hypoxic and mental stress: Implications for anxiety and depressive disorders
=============================================================================================

Author links open overlay panel Johannes Burtscher a b, Martin Niedermeier c, Katharina Hüfner d, Erwin van den Burg e, Martin Kopp c, Ron Stoop e, Martin Burtscher c, Hannes Gatterer f, Grégoire P.Millet a b

Show more

Outline

Add to Mendeley

Share

Cite

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2022.104718 Get rights and content

Under a Creative Commons license

Open access

Highlights
----------

*   •Hypoxic and mental stress elicit overlapping physiological responses. 
*   •Numerous molecular pathways are activated as a result of hypoxia and of mental stress or anxiety and depressive disorders. 
*   •Specific brain circuits are involved in hypoxia sensing/adaptations and in the etiopathogenesis of stress-related diseases. 
*   •Methods targeting hypoxia adaptations are promising strategies for chronic stress and anxiety/depressive disorders. 

Abstract
--------

Adequate oxygen supply is essential for the human brain to meet its high energy demands. Therefore, elaborate molecular and systemic mechanism are in place to enable adaptation to low oxygen availability. Anxiety and depressive disorders are characterized by alterations in brain oxygen metabolism and of its components, such as mitochondria or hypoxia inducible factor (HIF)-pathways. Conversely, sensitivity and tolerance to hypoxia may depend on parameters of mental stress and the severity of anxiety and depressive disorders. Here we discuss relevant mechanisms of adaptations to hypoxia, as well as their involvement in mental stress and the etiopathogenesis of anxiety and depressive disorders. We suggest that mechanisms of adaptations to hypoxia (including metabolic responses, inflammation, and the activation of chemosensitive brain regions) modulate and are modulated by stress-related pathways and associated psychiatric diseases. While severe chronic hypoxia or dysfunctional hypoxia adaptations can contribute to the pathogenesis of anxiety and depressive disorders, harnessing controlled responses to hypoxia to increase cellular and psychological resilience emerges as a novel treatment strategy for these diseases.

Graphical Abstract
------------------

1.   Download: Download high-res image (187KB)
2.   Download: Download full-size image

*   Previous article in issue
*   Next article in issue

Keywords
--------

Anxiety

Depression

Hypoxia inducible factor

Adaptation

Mitochondria

1. Introduction: the fear of suffocation
----------------------------------------

The fear of suffocation is rooted deeply in the human mind. While fundamental for survival, it can become a debilitating symptom of anxiety and depressive disorders, including panic disorders. Accordingly, the suffocation false alarm theory by DF Klein (Klein, 1993) postulates that spontaneous panic attacks may generally be a result of the (inappropriate) activation of “an evolved physiologic suffocation alarm system”.

Respiratory symptoms like shortness of breath and a feeling of suffocation are common symptoms of anxiety disorders, which furthermore are frequent comorbidities of respiratory diseases (Maurer et al., 2008). Conversely, mood changes and panic attacks due to low oxygen supply, such as at high altitude, are also well-recognized (Bahrke and Shukitt-Hale, 1993). Humans dispose of elaborate systems to detect dysregulations of oxygen supply, both on the cellular and on the systemic level. It is not surprising that the involved pathways overlap substantially with molecular and systemic mechanisms related to anxiety and depressive disorders, as well as to chronic stress, a major risk factor to develop these disorders. Hereafter, the term anxiety and depressive disorders will be used to collectively describe depressive disorders, anxiety or fear-related disorders (including Generalized anxiety disorder, 6B00), and disorders specifically associated with stress (including Post traumatic stress disorder, 6B40) following the International classification of diseases (ICD-11) (WHO, 2018). These disorders are among the most important contributors to the global burden of disease within the group of “Mental, behavioral or neurodevelopmental disorders” of the ICD-11 (WHO, 2018; Whiteford et al., 2013).

Emerging evidence indicates that the modulation of hypoxia adaptations may be a novel, non-pharmacological and safe therapeutic strategy for related diseases. Many intervention approaches have already been shown to have great potential for athletic performance enhancement and prevention of a number of pathological conditions and thus are ripe to be explored in the context of anxiety and depressive disorders.

The aim of the present article is to summarize the complex interplay between hypoxia, mental stress, anxiety and depressive disorders. To this end, epidemiological evidence for a role of hypoxia in the pathogenesis of these diseases will be discussed. Physiological and anatomical overlaps of sensing and adaptations to hypoxia with anxiety and depressive disorders are presented with a special focus on central mechanisms of stress responses as well as the sympathetic nervous system and HPA (hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal)-axis. In addition, an overview on the current knowledge on the reciprocal relationship of mental stress, anxiety states and traits as well as depression-linked conditions on oxygen physiology and in particular on responses to hypoxia will be provided. Finally, we highlight how systemic and molecular mechanisms of hypoxia adaptation may provide protection for anxiety and depressive disorders.

| **Key questions** |
| --- |
| →Are physiological responses to hypoxia linked with mechanisms related to chronic mental stress, anxiety and depressive disorders? |
| →Can the modulation of hypoxia adaptations be harnessed as treatment strategies for these disorders? |

2. Chronic stress, anxiety, and depressive disorders
----------------------------------------------------

Given the presence of multiple stressors in our lives, both an efficient coping of the human organism with these stressors and effective recovery from stress is important to avoid negative consequences, an ability termed resilience. Stress is often referred to as allostatic load, deﬁned as the “wear-and-tear on the body and brain promoting ill health, involving not only the consequences of stressful experiences themselves, but also the alterations in lifestyle that result from a state of chronic stress” (McEwen and Gianaros, 2010). Physiological stress regulation (or achievement of allostasis) is complex and involves a variety of systems (McEwen, 1998).

While acute responses are desirable to protect and to best prepare the human body to deal with the stressor (McEwen, 1998), it is the chronic exposure to stress and insufficient recovery from stressors that play an important role in the development of anxiety and depressive disorders (de Kloet et al., 2005). If experienced over a longer period of time without sufficient recovery, the term chronic stress is used (Radley et al., 2015). Chronic stress is an important factor in the pathogenesis of many mental, behavioral and neurodevelopmental disorders, including anxiety and depressive disorders (de Kloet et al., 2016, McGonagle and Kessler, 1990, Sandi and Richter-Levin, 2009). Similar to stress responses, anxiety is a life-sustaining physiological reaction in order to cope adequately with difficult and/or dangerous situations. It increases alertness, caution and mental and physical concentration. Anxiety is also the primary symptom of disorders such as generalized anxiety, panic disorders or specific phobias and can occur in post-traumatic stress disorders (PTSD) or depressive disorders. High anxiety traits are also risk factors for the development of depression (Sandi and Richter-Levin, 2009). In the following, we firstly aim to describe relevant physiological pathways and secondly aim to connect these pathways to findings on dysregulations in people with anxiety and depressive disorders.

### 2.1. Neural pathways and the sympatho-adrenomedulary axis

Stressors, such as pain or hypoxia, are detected by specific sensors that induce a stress response. The sympatho-adrenomedulary (SAM) axis mediates fast but often short term effects (Godoy et al., 2018). SAM-effects are mediated by catecholamines, with epinephrine and norepinephrine (secreted from the adrenal medulla and sympathetic nerves) activating sympathetic signaling pathways that amongst others modulate the function of blood vessels, glands, visceral organs and smooth muscles and leads to increased heart rate, dilated pupils, and elevated blood pressure (Tank and Lee Wong, 2015). This enhances alertness and the metabolic and cardiovascular changes prepare the organisms for exercise or “fight or flight” situations (Godoy et al., 2018). In addition, noradrenergic brain regions, in particular the locus coeruleus, are important players in acute stress regulation, also due to their regulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis (Godoy et al., 2018). The chronic activation of the locus coeruleus is also involved in pathological consequences of stress, as discussed below. The complex interplay of the central stress response regulation has been reviewed by Godoy and colleagues (Godoy et al., 2018) and also involves in particular the nucleus of the solitary tract, pre-frontal cortex (prelimbic area) and limbic structures, including the amygdala and hippocampus.

### 2.2. The hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, glucocorticoids, and cortisol

The HPA axis is initiated by the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus. Compared to the SAM axis, effects along the HPA axis take longer to appear (minutes), but also last for a longer duration (Sapolsky et al., 2000). Stressors induce the release of oxytocin, vasopressin, and corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF). The latter stimulates the anterior pituitary to produce adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) (Vale et al., 1981), which – delivered by the blood stream to the adrenal gland – leads to the release of glucocorticoids, the most prominent being cortisol (corticosterone in rodents) (De Kloet, 2013). Cortisol enables the organism to deal more efficiently with stressful situations (e.g., by increasing glucose concentration in the blood), but at the same time exerts a negative feedback loop effect on both the hypothalamus and pituitary to avoid over-production of corticotropin-releasing and adrenocorticotropic hormone. Glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid receptors are parts of the negative feedback loops (de Kloet et al., 2005).

The regulation mechanisms of the HPA and SAM axes synergistically enhance dealing with acute stress and are well balanced in health (Godoy et al., 2018). Chronic stress, however, can disrupt this balance and thereby can contribute to the pathogenesis of anxiety and depressive disorders.

### 2.3. Stress regulation in the context of anxiety and depressive disorder development

Dysfunctional stress regulation in the context of anxiety and depressive disorder development is best understood for the HPA axis. Various disturbances of the HPA axis were reported in people with anxiety and depressive disorders, including increased levels of CRF and ACTH (Holsboer, 2003), increased levels of cortisol (Vreeburg et al., 2009) and other glucocorticoids (Spijker and van Rossum, 2012), increased size of adrenal glands (Rubin et al., 1995), as well as increased activity of the pituitary, specifically associated with depressive disorders (Pariante and Lightman, 2008). Chronic mental stress leads to impaired control of glucocorticoid secretion by the HPA axis and may result in elevated cortisol levels. High cortisol levels are also characteristic for depression (Carroll et al., 1976) and they have been reported to be resistant to the normal negative feedback regulation of glucocorticoids by the HPA axis (Carroll et al., 1968). Glucocorticoid resistance further modulates the immune system and can induce a proinflammatory state (Perrin et al., 2019, Silverman and Sternberg, 2012).

Increased glucocorticoid levels may be neurotoxic, in particular in brain regions importantly linked to anxiety and depressive disorders, such as the hippocampus (Sapolsky, 1996). Accordingly, reduced hippocampal volume was reported in people with prolonged depressive disorders (Sapolsky, 1996). In rats, glucocorticoids were shown to decrease neuronal excitability and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) levels (Schaaf et al., 1998). Lower expression of BDNF is also a hallmark of depressive disorders (Dwivedi, 2009).

Notably, beside a hyperactivation of the HPA axis and increased glucocorticoid levels, a _reduced_ glucocorticoid production caused by adrenal fatigue can be observed in various disorders, e.g., post-traumatic stress disorder, atypical/seasonal depression, or chronic fatigue syndrome (Agorastos and Chrousos, 2021).

With regard to SAM, there is evidence that chronic stress may lead to an enhanced expression of noradrenaline (Ulrich-Lai and Herman, 2009). Findings in animal models suggest a connection with anxiety disorders and the dysregulation of the locus coeruleus due to chronic stress (Morris et al., 2020). Chronic stress might be associated with an increased reactivity of the locus coeruleus at the occurrence of subsequent stressors. This effect has been linked to pathological anxiety-like behaviors in rodents (Morris et al., 2020). Persistent activity of the locus coeruleus is discussed in the pathophysiology of posttraumatic stress disorder (Southwick et al., 1999). Effects of chronic stress also include an up-regulation of the amygdala baseline activity in rats (Kavushansky and Richter-Levin, 2006). The amygdala is an important structure in the emotional and motivational drivers of human behavior and likely involved in the etiopathogenesis of anxiety disorders (Janak and Tye, 2015).

In the following section, we summarize how hypoxic stress is sensed and how the organism deals with it.

| Key points |
| --- |
| → Acute mental stress responses can increase management of stressful situations, while chronic mental stress can be detrimental |
| → The catecholamine-mediated sympatho-adrenomedulary (SAM) axis mediates fast but often short term mental stress responses |
| → The hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis mediates longer-lasting mental stress responses via the release of glucocorticoids, including cortisol |
| → Chronic mental stress interferes with the coordination of SAM and HPA axes and is associated with anxiety and depressive disorders |

3. Oxygen sensors and adaptations/maladaptations to hypoxia
-----------------------------------------------------------

A variety of pathological conditions can cause regional hypoxia (including stroke or cancer) or impaired oxygen supply to tissues (e.g. respiratory diseases). Here, we focus on environmental hypoxia, as it occurs for example in high altitudes, where the reduced barometric pressure leads to reduced inspired oxygen-levels (hypobaric hypoxia). In laboratory environments, hypoxia can be simulated in various ways, besides the artificial reduction of the barometric pressure, also by reducing the concentration of oxygen using normobaric hypoxic chambers or tents or modulating inspired oxygen concentrations through face masks (both approaches resulting in normobaric hypoxia).

### 3.1. Molecular oxygen sensing, hypoxia adaptations and metabolic consequences

Oxygen-levels are sensed by a number of molecular mechanisms in the cell triggering physiological responses during hypoxia in order to increase either oxygen supply or reduce oxygen demand. Biochemical reactions requiring oxygen will be initially affected, in particular the reactions catalyzed by NADPH oxidase, nitric oxide synthases (NOS) and heme oxygenase (Terraneo and Samaja, 2017). In addition, lower oxygen availability reduces oxidative phosphorylation at mitochondria (Burtscher et al., 2022). All these effects result in the formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), important signaling molecules for hypoxia adaptations. They are also involved in the induction of another line of responses to hypoxia that is mediated by powerful transcription factors, most notably hypoxia inducible factors (HIFs), nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (NRF2) and NF-κB. Their involvement in human hypoxia adaptations has recently been reviewed (Burtscher et al., 2022, Pham et al., 2021). Here, a short summary on the effects of HIFs is provided, with particular emphasis on aspects that play central roles also in chronic stress, anxiety and depressive disorders.

α-subunits of HIFs are the ubiquitous HIF-1α and tissue-specific HIF-2α and HIF-3α (Pan et al., 2007). In normoxia, the oxygen-dependent enzymatic modification by prolyl hydroxylases (PHDs) and subsequent polyubiquitination by the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) protein effectuate the continuous degradation of these HIF α-subunits. In hypoxia, the α-subunits stabilize, heterodimerize with β-subunits and activate hypoxia response elements (HRE) to orchestrate a plethora of adaptations to reduced oxygen levels, including the regulation of proteins mediating oxygen supply to tissues and antioxidant defense (Ratcliffe et al., 1998).

HIFs are also involved in metabolic remodeling, that includes the upregulation of glycolytic pathways, leading to decreased oxygen utilization by oxidative phosphorylation and increased glycolysis and associated lactate production (Burtscher and Millet, 2021). Hypoxia is further associated with inflammation and this interaction is bidirectional: inflammation activates HIF pathways – even in the absence of hypoxia - (McGettrick and O’Neill, 2020) but HIFs also modulate inflammatory signaling (Pham et al., 2021). Accordingly, severe hypoxia has been demonstrated to upregulate markers for neuroinflammation, such as microglial inflammatory gene expression in rats (Smith et al., 2013).

Taken together, the metabolic remodeling following hypoxia leads to cross-modulation of hypoxia-adaptations and inflammatory processes that are protective against acute hypoxic stress. But these effects can also result in maladaptations and neuroinflammation, which are integral in the pathogenesis of many neuropsychiatric diseases, including anxiety and depressive disorders.

### 3.2. Systemic adaptations to hypoxia

Peripheral chemoreceptors (mainly the carotid bodies) are in charge for monitoring arterial blood oxygenation (PO 2) levels. They initiate a hypoxic ventilatory response (HVR) that increases ventilation and sympathetic activity, for example leading to increased heart rate (Marshall, 1998a).

While hyperventilation improves oxygenation, it also results in hypocapnia (i.e., reduced arterial pressure of CO 2). CO 2 is an intracellularly generated metabolic byproduct, which is conveyed by the blood circulation to the lungs and exhaled to the ambient air. Increasing CO 2 levels stimulate the respiratory drive, decrease blood pH and the affinity of hemoglobin. The arterial partial pressure of CO 2 (PaCO 2) is maintained at a very narrow range. Various chemosensory feedback mechanisms ensure the maintenance of homeostasis despite changing environmental conditions (e.g., hypoxia, hypercapnia). Respiratory chemosensitivity represents an important ability of the brain to detect changes in CO 2 and to initiate regulatory processes (e.g., via changes in the breathing activity) (Huckstepp and Dale, 2011). Reflex chemostimulation by CO 2 causes dyspnea (shortness of breath). Only small elevations in the PaCO 2 provoke large increases in breathing (hypercapnic ventilatory response), e.g., 1 mmHg increase in the PaCO 2 results in a 20–30% increase in ventilation. Central chemoreceptors are particularly important for this response (Nattie, 1999, Wilson and Teppema, 2016), but recent research suggests that tonic carotid activity also impinges on the centrally mediated hypercapnic ventilatory response (Forster and Smith, 2010). Carotid body chemosensing activates the nucleus tractus solitaries (NTS) and/or through NTS projections to the parafacial respiratory group (pFRG)/ retrotrapezoid nucleus (RTN) (Forster and Smith, 2010). CO 2 levels above or below the narrow physiological range, resulting in hyper- or hypocapnia, may represent “normal” conditions in hypoxia/at high altitude or during exercise, but may become hazardous to the health in conditions like chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, asthma, cystic fibrosis, obesity hypoventilation or congenital central hypoventilation syndrome (Cummins et al., 2020).

The systemic adaptations to hypoxia have been reviewed in greater detail elsewhere (Burtscher et al., 2022). A summary of the most important other physiological responses and the expected time frames at altitudes of about 4000 m are depicted in Fig. 1. These responses include alterations in blood oxygen saturation, cognitive and physical performance, cardiac output, heart rate, blood pressure and hematocrit. The emphasis in the following sections is on the activation of systemic stress responses following hypoxia exposure due to their relevance for anxiety and depressive disorders.

1.   Download: Download high-res image (323KB)
2.   Download: Download full-size image

Fig. 1. High altitude responses. Selected parameters of physiological changes at high altitude (A) and timelines of these changes (in percent to low altitude baselines of the respective studies) at high altitude exposures (B-D). Data from the referenced sources were re-drawn at the indicated altitudes: (B) 4300 m (Muza et al., 2010), (C) 4111 m (Gaur et al., 2020), (D) 4300 m _(_ Horstman et al., 1980 _)._

### 3.3. The sympathetic nervous system in acute hypoxia

Acute hypoxemia (low blood oxygen) increases sympathetic nervous activity mediated by stimulation of arterial chemoreceptors, primarily those of the carotid bodies. Hypoxia causes glomus cells to depolarize, provoking the release of neurotransmitters (e.g., acetylcholine, ATP, serotonin) and inducing afferent impulses to the medulla by the carotid sinus nerve (Marshall, 1998b, Schultz et al., 2007). Sympathetic responses to chemoreflex activation are closely associated with elevated phrenic nerve activity and pulmonary ventilation (in order to counteract hypoxemia) (Taylor et al., 1999). Central respiratory areas (see below) interact with pre-sympathetic neurons in the medulla, thereby modulating sympathetic effects on the cardiovascular system (Taylor et al., 1999). Sympathetic nerve activity changes during the respiratory cycle, peaking during early expiration, and is more pronounced with higher breathing rates and diminished during slow breathing and with increasing tidal volumes (Narkiewicz et al., 2006). In humans, activation of the arterial chemoreceptors increases cardiac sympathetic activity (with elevation of heart rate, contractility and cardiac output) and the sympathetic vasoconstrictor outflow to skeletal muscle, renal and splanchnic beds (Marshall, 1994). However, sympathetic vasoconstriction is counteracted by hypoxia-induced nitric oxide release, causing vasodilation in most vascular beds (except in the lung) (Kulandavelu et al., 2015), thus complicating the prediction of individual systemic blood pressure responses to acute hypoxia. Moreover, sympathetic and parasympathetic responses to the cardiovascular system occur concomitantly, that may help to limit sympathetic vasoconstriction of coronary and cerebral vessels (Marshall, 1994, Schultz et al., 2007). Whereas cardiovascular functions are primarily mediated by norepinephrine, metabolic effects like hyperglycemia, hyperlactatemia, hyperlipemia, and increased oxygen consumption are mediated by epinephrine (Bravo, 1989). Hypoxia-induced sympathoadrenal activation is associated with increased glycogenolysis and glycolysis, and increased blood lactate levels during any given level of submaximal exercise (Kayser, 1996). With acclimatization, a tighter metabolic control may result in lowering of exercising lactate levels (Green et al., 1992).

### 3.4. The HPA axis in hypoxia exposure

In response to hypoxic stress also the HPA axis gets rapidly activated and contributes to hypoxia adaptations. The HPA axis is important already in fetal adaptations to low oxygen levels. Hypoxia can occur in the developing fetus during gestation, especially during periods of placental insufficiency, high altitude exposure or when the mother is smoking. Studies with pregnant ewes that were kept at an altitude of 3820 m to induce long-term hypoxic conditions in the fetuses (maternal arterial PO 2 of approximately 60 Torr) showed elevated plasma ACTH concentrations in fetal blood and increased CRF receptor 1 expression in the fetal pituitary gland when compared with fetal samples from ewes kept at an altitude of 300 m (maternal arterial PO 2 of approximately 100 Torr) (Myers et al., 2005). Interestingly, these markers of increased HPA axis activity were accompanied by increased vasopressin expression in the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus, whereas CRF expression was statistically similar in the hypothalamus of hypoxic and normoxic fetuses (Myers et al., 2016). Vasopressin is a known secretagogue of ACTH in sheep (Liu et al., 1994) and, during chronic stress, in rats (Aguilera and Rabadan-Diehl, 2000, Aguilera et al., 2008). It could therefore be an important neuropeptide in the control of cortisol or corticosterone release during hypoxia alongside CRF. Whether this applies to humans is not known, although elevated vasopressin levels in blood of people exposed to high altitude have been observed (Loeppky et al., 2005). These high vasopressin levels have been linked to direct effects of vasopressin on respiration through its actions in brainstem nuclei that control breathing (Proczka et al., 2021), and altered water retention during hypoxia (Loeppky et al., 2005).

Studies in rats have further confirmed the activation of the HPA axis during hypoxia. Severe chronic intermittent hypoxia (8 h per day of continuous hypoxia, FiO2 = 10% for 7 days) has been demonstrated to sensitize HPA axis and noradrenergic stress reactivity in rats (Ma et al., 2008). In this study hypoxia activated brain regions (as indicated by increased protein levels of the immediate early gene Fos) related to HPA axis regulation (paraventricular nucleus, bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, amygdala and noradrenergic neurons in the locus coeruleus) similar to immobilization stress (Ma et al., 2008). Another study in rats ascribed decreased cognitive function during chronic hypoxia (induced by simulated altitude of 7620 m for seven days) to a surge of corticosterone release as the corticosterone inhibitor metyrapone improved their memory impairments (Baitharu et al., 2012).

One of the interesting effects of the enhanced cortisol signaling that is mediated through its glucocorticoid receptor (GR) is an increase of HIF-1α levels, as demonstrated in vitro in HeLa cells (Kodama et al., 2003), and in vivo in genetically modified zebrafish larvae (Marchi et al., 2020, Vettori et al., 2017). The enhanced GR signaling does not seem to directly upregulate HIF-1α but rather inhibit VHL, leading to HIF-1α stabilization (Marchi et al., 2020). Conversely, HIF-1α modulates GR signaling although the underlying mechanisms are not fully elucidated. In cultures of HeLa cells, human proximal tubular epithelial cells and mouse pituitary AtT-20 cells, HIF-1α upregulated GR expression (Kodama et al., 2003, Leonard et al., 2005). Such stimulatory effects were not found in transgenic zebrafish larvae with constitutively high HIF-1α levels. Rather, it seems that in these fish HIF-1α reduces cortisol levels and GR signaling (Marchi et al., 2020), suggesting that HIF-1α inhibits HPA axis activity and GR signaling intracellularly. This result has been recapitulated in transgenic mouse lines. Mice deficient in HIF-1α in adrenal cortical cells showed enhanced levels of enzymes involved in corticosterone production and blood corticosterone levels. When HIF-1α was overexpressed, corticosterone synthesis was impaired and circulating corticosterone levels were correspondingly low (Watts et al., 2021). It should be noted, however, that the zebrafish and mouse transgenic animal models have not yet been studied in hypoxic conditions.

A recent study in mice, however, has revealed interactions between HIF-1α and GR signaling in vivo during hypoxia. Hypoxia increased the expression of HIF-1α and HIF-2α, which in turn activated the HPA axis: enhanced transcription of HIF-controlled genes in the hypothalamus that are also expressed during stress (Vanderhaeghen et al., 2022). Corticosterone/GR signaling appears to modulate a different set of genes in normoxia as compared to hypoxic conditions, in which lipolysis and ketogenesis are notably promoted (Vanderhaeghen et al., 2022). The reprogramming of GR-signaling towards transcription of hypoxia target genes requires a remodeling of gene transcription regulation. This has indeed been found in HeLa and HEK cells, in which hypoxia resulted in upregulated microRNAs 103 and 107. Both repressed the zinc-finger transcription factor KLF-4 that otherwise binds to the GR responsive element in the promoter region of normoxic target genes. The reduced binding of KLF-4 and other co-modulators of GR-mediated transcription therefore could prevent the transcription of these genes, but not of hypoxia target genes such as HIF-1α (Yang et al., 2020).

In summary, recent studies on the HPA activation under hypoxic conditions demonstrate intimate interactions between corticosterone / cortisol and GR signaling on the one hand, and HIF-signaling on the other hand. Together, these pathways bring about metabolic and gene expression changes that are necessary to adapt to low ambient oxygen levels but are also involved in stress regulation (Fig. 2). Dysregulation of this interplay therefore may be involved in the pathogenesis of stress-related pathologies, such as anxiety and depressive disorders.

1.   Download: Download high-res image (165KB)
2.   Download: Download full-size image

Fig. 2. Differential functioning of the HPA axis during normoxia and hypoxia. During normoxia, CRF from the hypothalamus is in most cases the primary secretagogue of pituitary ACTH. Cortisol released from the adrenals binds to glucocorticoid receptors (GR), leading to the activation of normoxic genes and the stabilization of HIF-1α through inhibition of its degrading protein, the Von Hippel-Lindau protein (VHL). HIF-1α is thought to provide negative feedback to the HPA axis (dashed line), as evidenced by low blood cortisol levels in animal models overexpressing HIF-1α. Under hypoxic conditions, hypothalamic vasopressin (VP) contributes to the stimulation of ACTH release, the GR switches from normoxic to hypoxic gene targets, and HIF-1α provides positive feedback to the HPA axis (dashed line), as inferred from increased expression of genes that are both HIF-responsive and stress-sensitive. HIF-1α may also promote the expression of GR to enhance responses of cells and tissues to glucocorticoid signaling during hypoxia. See text for references _._

Both the HPA and the SAM axes are involved in the development of acute mountain sickness (AMS), a maladaptive adaptation to hypoxia. Therefore, the connection between stress regulation and AMS development will be discussed in more detail.

### 3.5. The vulnerability to acute mountain sickness and its potential connection to stress and anxiety

The influence of hypoxic environments on mood (Bahrke and Shukitt-Hale, 1993, Shukitt-Hale et al., 1998) and – conversely – the impact of stress, mood, anxiety and depression-related characteristics on the tolerance to hypoxic stress are still poorly understood. Here, we will focus on a common condition associated with exposure to hypoxia that has recently been controversially discussed in the context of stress (Berger et al., 2020, Estoppey et al., 2019, Gatterer et al., 2019, Gatterer et al., 2020) and anxiety, namely AMS.

AMS frequently affects non-acclimatized persons exposed to altitudes of more than 2500 m (Roach et al., 2018) and includes symptoms such as headache, nausea, anorexia, gastrointestinal distress, generalized malaise and lassitude (Swenson, 2015). While AMS is not usually associated with severe health consequences, in some cases potentially fatal high altitude pulmonary or cerebral edema can ensue (Hackett and Roach, 2001). The precise etiology of AMS remains to be elucidated but it appears to be a consequence of cerebral hypoxia and resulting compensatory mechanisms. Genetic predisposition, impaired cerebrovascular coupling, changes in cerebral blood flow, increased intracranial pressure, altered redox status and/or disruption of the blood brain barrier all play roles in the development of AMS (Bailey et al., 2009, Gatterer et al., 2019, Lawley et al., 2016, Swenson, 2015). There are, however, also associations of AMS with anxiety- and stress-related parameters, including HPA axis modulation (Boos et al., 2018b, Missoum et al., 1992, Taylor et al., 2008).

As discussed, chronic stress can disrupt HPA and SAM axes balance and thereby contributes to the pathogenesis of anxiety and depressive disorders. Conversely, the HPA and SAM balance may also be involved in the tolerance to hypoxic stress. An important component of the HPA axis that is regulated by hypoxia is corticosterone, as demonstrated in rat studies (Hwang et al., 2017, Zoccal et al., 2007). We recently found an association of pre-ascent cortisol levels with AMS (Gatterer et al., 2019), as well as divergent cortisol awakening responses between persons with and without AMS (Estoppey et al., 2019). It was suggested that - for unknown reasons - AMS-sensitive persons show a stronger stress response to altitude exposure, secreting higher levels of CRF, which leads to greater ACTH release and in turn to higher cortisol levels. Besides, research suggests that CRF and the CRF receptor 1 may be involved in AMS and high altitude cerebral edema (HACE), by activation of aquaporin-4 (AQP4) in cortical astrocytes (Chen et al., 2014).

In addition to the involvement of the HPA axis, sympathetic responses to hypoxia also appear to be implicated in AMS susceptibility (Loeppky et al., 2003, Spliethoff et al., 2013). Sympatho-excitation due to stress and feelings of anxiety was supposed to exert effects on AMS development. In fact, some studies suggest significant associations of trait and state anxiety with AMS (Bian et al., 2016, Boos et al., 2018a, Missoum et al., 1992) whereas others do not (Niedermeier et al., 2017). In addition, it has been shown that, particularly in AMS-sensitive individuals and those prone to mental stress, exposure to hypoxia increases sympathetic tone, leading for example to fluid retention, which has been associated with the development of AMS (Gatterer et al., 2013, Loeppky et al., 2003). The discussed effects of vasopressin levels in hypoxia and their effects on respiration (Proczka et al., 2021) water retention (Loeppky et al., 2005) and the HPA axis are further indications for the intimate link between hypoxic and mental stress responses. Interestingly, the most popular drug used to prevent AMS is acetazolamide, which modulates water fluxes on the systemic and cellular level (Swenson, 2015). As a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, it produces mild diuresis, metabolic alkalosis, increased ventilation and thereby improves arterial oxygen content. But also, acetazolamide’s inhibitory action on aquaporin channels and the resulting reduction of water flux into the brain may be favorable for AMS. Additionally, acetazolamide reduces inflammation and oxidative stress and upregulates heat shock proteins (Swenson, 2015).

The first line drug to treat mountain illnesses is the synthetic glucocorticoid dexamethasone, one of the most efficient drugs to treat AMS (Johnson et al., 1984, Tang et al., 2014). Glucocorticoid administration (e.g., dexamethasone), provokes an increase in blood glucose concentration due to its stimulation of hepatic gluconeogenesis and the inhibition of glucose uptake by peripheral tissues. Glucocorticoids are highly effective drugs eliciting anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressant effects, but especially with chronic administration they cause serious side effects, including hypertension, steroid diabetes, osteoporosis and muscle atrophy, adrenal gland depression and immunosuppression (Bordag et al., 2015). Dexamethasone has also been long known for its preventive effects on symptoms of AMS (Rock et al., 1987), and its administration may protect against increases in vascular endothelial and blood-brain barrier permeability, suppresses inflammatory cytokines and reactive oxygen species production, and causes sympatholysis (Swenson, 2016). It furthermore reduces cortisol levels in healthy humans possibly by decreasing CRF secretion through negative feedback (Joyce et al., 2018). Based on this effect, it has also been argued that AMS may be associated with decreased cortisol levels (Panesar, 2004), which is probably not the case. As mental stress has been suggested to stimulate the sympathetic nervous system through dexamethasone-insensitive pathways (Seematter et al., 2002), beneficial physiological hypoxia adaptations likely involve other pathways than those associated with dexamethasone effects as well.

### 3.6. The influence of stress and anxiety on adaptations to hypoxia

A paucity of data is available on whether mental stress and anxiety affect adaptations to hypoxia that include maintaining oxygen and energy supply to tissues. Acute altitude adaptations are characterized by hyperventilation, hemoconcentration and initiation of erythropoiesis to increase total oxygen carrying capacity (Burtscher et al., 2018) (Fig. 1). Furthermore, adjustments of metabolic pathways aimed to maintain adequate ATP levels take place (Burtscher et al., 2018, Hochachka, 1986). The question arises whether stress and anxiety may affect these responses and thus adaptations.

Chronic stress and feelings of anxiety are clearly linked to the disruption of the HPA and SAM axes balance. Adding a further stressor (i.e., hypoxia) to an already unbalanced body, may negatively influence adaptations to hypoxia, by for instance exacerbating noradrenalin and cortisol levels as well as inflammation. Furthermore, it seems reasonable to speculate that the bidirectional link between glucocorticoids and HIF-signaling may interfere with HIF-regulated altitude adaptations (e.g., ventilatory acclimatization (Moya et al., 2020), metabolic adaptations (Seagroves et al., 2001), etc.). It could also be assumed that mood changes during high altitude exposure may interfere with recovery/adaptation of cerebral functions at altitude by negatively affecting various cognitive capacities (Bolmont et al., 2000).

A better understanding of the associations between stress, anxiety and depression on adaptations to hypoxia may open up new avenues not only for the risk assessment of hypoxia (e.g. high altitude) exposure but possibly also for the development of new treatment strategies for anxiety and depressive disorders (see chapter 6).

| Key points |
| --- |
| → On the molecular level, the transcription factors hypoxia inducible factors (HIFs) and nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (NRF2) are important coordinators of the hypoxic response |
| → Systemically, hypoxia induces respiratory and cardiovascular responses that are regulated by peripheral and central chemoreceptors |
| → Both the sympatho-adrenomedulary axis and the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis are activated by hypoxia and intricately tangled with hypoxia responses |
| → It is thus not surprising that mental stress and anxiety appear to modulate the susceptibility to high altitude sicknesses |
| → How mental stress and anxiety concretely interfere with hypoxia adaptations is largely unexplored |

4. Epidemiological associations of hypoxia with stress, anxiety and depressive disorders
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Acute exposure to hypoxia exerts pronounced mental effects. This has been shown in real altitude (hypobaric hypoxia) as well as in normobaric hypoxia settings. For example, Nelson reported changes in paranoia, obsessive-compulsiveness, depressive symptoms and hostility at altitudes of > 5000 m (Nelson, 1982). Shukitt and Banderet observed transiently reduced friendliness but increased happiness at an altitude of 4300 m (Shukitt and Banderet, 1988). More pronounced emotional and mental changes with increasing altitude suggest a hypoxia-dose dependent effect (Shukitt-Hale et al., 1998). Normobaric hypoxia simulating an altitude of 4500 m for 24 h increased depressive mood, anger and fatigue as well (de Aquino Lemos et al., 2012). On the other hand, well prepared and motivated mountaineers during the ascend of Mount Everest did not experience reduced mood or increased anxiety or psychological inflexibility (Karinen and Tuomisto, 2017). The authors of another study showed that in particular a monotonous environment and reduced social interactions, increased depressive feelings in well-acclimatized young adult lowlanders that were exposed to high altitude (4500–4800 m) for 8 months (Das et al., 2018). There is also increasing evidence from rodent models that severe hypoxia can cause anxiety-like behavior, for example repeated exposure of severe hypoxia (15 min in an air-tight cage) cause anxiety- and depressive like behavior in mice (Olugbemide et al., 2021). In rats, severe hypobaric hypoxia (up to a simulated altitude of 7620 m) induced anxiety-like symptoms and fear extinction deficits (Kumari et al., 2020).

In general, high inter-individual differences and a strong effect of acclimatization seem to characterize emotional and mental effects following hypoxia exposure. The next sections are dedicated to epidemiological evidence of long-term hypoxia exposure, such as for altitude residents, on anxiety and depressive disorders.

### 4.1. Hypoxia and anxiety disorders

The increased risks of anxiety in people with respiratory diseases and the association of spirometry results with anxiety symptoms (Spitzer et al., 2011) suggest a link between anxiety and hypoxia. An increased prevalence of different anxiety syndromes such as generalized anxiety disorder (adjusted odds ratio (AOR): 11.0); panic disorder (AOR: 7.1) and specific phobia (AOR: 3.7) has indeed been reported for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients compared to non-COPD participants (Ohayon, 2014). These reports are confirmed by a systematic review on anxiety and COPD (Willgoss and Yohannes, 2013). The occurrence of anxiety may also be higher in respiratory diseases than in other pathological (e.g. chronic orthopedic) conditions (Vögele and von Leupoldt, 2008).

Furthermore, symptoms of anxiety can be caused by hypobaric hypoxia and have been reported to increase in severity and frequency with increasing altitude (Table 1). Most studies on symptoms of anxiety at high altitude have been performed in individuals who were previously healthy, and in several studies, anxiety scores remain below a cutoff indicating clinical relevance. However, some studies report the appearance of clinically relevant symptom severity in a subset of participants (Shah et al., 2020). Reports on de novo or relapses of anxiety disorders, especially panic attacks, following visits to high altitude clinics further indicate an increased incidence at higher altitude (Fagenholz et al., 2007, Sracic et al., 2014), although this association may be underestimated. High altitude exposure can induce somatic symptoms triggered by hypoxia, such as breathlessness, palpitations, dizziness, headache, and insomnia, which are similar to those reported in panic attacks or severe anxiety, often rendering the distinction difficult (Roth et al., 2002).

Table 1. Association of altitude with anxiety symptoms in humans.

| Investigated population | Standardized instruments | Main results | Reference |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 2939 civil servants (~50% female) high (1500–3500 m) or very high (>3500 m) altitude long term residence; individuals with severe mental illness excluded | GAD-7 | - for every 100 m increase in altitude, anxiety severity increased by 0.042 points (p < 0.001) - significantly higher GAD-7 scores at very high compared to high altitude | (Wang et al., 2021) |
| 40 healthy adults, 10 females, the study included apnea training, ascent to an altitude of 5100 m over 14 days | GAD-7 | - mean GAD-7 scores within normal range. Day 14 (5100 m): 28/40 subjects no significant anxiety, 8/40 mild anxiety; 4/40 moderate anxiety - significant effect of altitude on GAD-7 scores | (Shah et al., 2020) |
| 668 healthy males, measurements at sea level and 3700 m (after 24, 72, and 168 h) | SAS | - individual SAS scores increased significantly within 24 h at 3700 m – decrease to above baseline levels at 72 and 168 h. Mean SAS scores within normal limits | (Bian et al., 2019) |
| 426 young males without somatic diseases, ascend from low altitude to 3600 m over 40 days (data collection after acclimatization), before ascending to 4400 m (data collection at arrival) | SAS | - at 3600 m 49/426 and at 4400 m 51/329 were diagnosed with anxiety according to SAS | (Dong et al., 2013) |
| 850 subjects ascended by plane from 500 m to 3700 m over a period of 2 h, data collection within 24 h after arrival at 3700 m | SAS | - significant increase in mean SAS ratings from 500 m to 3700 m: from mean (IQR) 21 (3) to 24 (6), means still within normal range | (Bian et al., 2013) |
| 80 healthy adults, 67.5% men, measurements at baseline (848 m) and at 9 consecutive altitude levels during a progressive trek to 5140 m | STAI Y-1 STAI Y-2 | - STAI Y-1 scores fell from 848 m to 3619 m - significant increase to above baseline scores at ≥ 4072 m - significant main effect for sex (higher STAI Y-1 scores in women) and altitude - baseline STAI Y-2 scores independently predicted future severe AMS and STAI Y-1 scores at high altitude | (Boos et al., 2018a) |
| 3731 medical students (51% male) at low (<900 m) or high (>900 m) altitude | GAD-7 | - moving from low to high altitude significantly increased GAD-7 total score (OR = 1.40, 95% CI = 1.0040–1.95), no association with residence at altitude per se | (Kious et al., 2019) |
| 44 participants (57% male) with no uncontrolled medical condition (2 prior diagnosis of anxiety, 3 depression) 19-day expedition to 5372 m | Adapted and shortend STAI Y-1 | - anxiety symptoms significantly increased with altitude - 42/43 (98%) experienced anxiety symptoms at some point during the expedition - the peak incidence of anxiety was 33/43 at 4670 m (day 2) - the average length of illness was 11.3 (9.6–13.0) days. | (Oliver et al., 2012) |
| 129 military volunteers (gender not specified) without previous psychiatric diagnosis, working at 4572 − 5486 m | HADS | - HADS Anxiety mean 7.93 + SD 5.1 27/129 21% Mild anxiety 27/129 21% Moderate anxiety 6/129 5% Severe anxiety | (Ahmad and Hussain, 2017) |
| Nationwide cross-sectional study representative sample of Nepalese adults aged 18–65 years (N = 2100), selected by multistage random cluster | HADS | - age- and gender-adjusted point prevalences of HADS-A: 16.1%, and HADS-cAD (combined anxiety depression) 5.9% - in a multivariate model: HADS-A no association with altitude, HADS-cAD was positively associated with living at altitude ≥ 2000 m (AOR = 2.32) | (Risal et al., 2016) |
| 110 soldiers (gender not specified); lowlanders and native Tibetans stationed at Shangri-La (3800 m) for 3 months; no prior psychiatric condition | HAMA | - 30/209 were rated positive for anxiety (14.35%) and were excluded from the study | (Kong et al., 2015) |

The presented references in Table 1 were derived from a systematic PubMed search using the search terms " anxiety " and " high altitude ". Of the identified 86 articles, only articles on adult humans, including more than 10 participants and using standardized psychometric instruments were included. The following standardized instruments were used in the identified studies:

- Self-Rating Anxiety Scale (SAS)

- GAD-7: anxiety scale from patient health questionnaire

- HADS: hospital anxiety and depression scale, HADS-A anxiety subscale

- HADS cDA: combined scoring for depression and anxiety

- STAI: Spielberger state trait anxiety inventory

- HAMA: Hamilton Anxiety Scale

### 4.2. Hypoxia, depressive disorders and suicide

Hypoxia may also be involved in the etiology of depressive disorders. Thus, short- or long-term exposure to hypoxia has been associated to increased probabilities of depression and elevated suicide rates, although this remains debated.

Depression and suicide rates are intimately linked (Möller, 2003) and have both been associated with living at altitude; this has been reported for depression (DelMastro et al., 2011, Gamboa et al., 2011, Wang et al., 2019, Zaeh et al., 2016) and suicide (Alameda-Palacios et al., 2015, Betz et al., 2011, Bezerra Filho et al., 2012, Brenner et al., 2011, Haws et al., 2009, Kim et al., 2011). Already moderate altitudes of about 600 – 900 m may affect both depression and suicide rates (Brenner et al., 2011, Kious et al., 2019, Sabic et al., 2019). For suicide, Haws and colleagues (Haws et al., 2009) observed increased rates in US counties at higher altitude with altitude remaining an independent risk factor after inclusion of gun ownership rates and population density in a multiple regression model (Kim et al., 2011). These authors also report a strong positive correlation of altitude of residence with suicide in South Korea (Kim et al., 2011).

A big limitation of epidemiological studies on suicide and altitude of residence is obviously the influence of numerous potentially confounding factors. Betz and colleagues (Betz et al., 2011) confirm increased suicides at higher altitudes of residence but emphasize that factors not related to oxygen levels likely play an important role in this effect. These factors may include meteorological, sociodemographic or other peculiarities of mountainous regions such as reduced access to psychiatric care (Betz et al., 2011, Burtscher, 2014, Reno et al., 2018). More specifically, the association between depression and altitude residence could be mediated also by the availability of Lithium (Helbich et al., 2013), antidepressant use and material deprivation (Alameda-Palacios et al., 2015). In support of a dependence of altitude-related suicide rates on sociodemographic factors, we and others did not find elevated suicide mortality with increasing altitude of residence (Burtscher et al., 2021c, Selek, 2013). Whether altitude of residence - and especially hypoxia – is an independent risk factor for suicide and depression therefore remains debated (Honigman et al., 2020).

Increased rates of depressive symptoms, major depression and suicide have also been reported for patients of chronic respiratory diseases, again more than in patients of chronic diseases unrelated to hypoxemia (Druss and Pincus, 2000, Goodwin, 2011, Goodwin et al., 2012, Goodwin et al., 2003, van den Bemt et al., 2009, Webb et al., 2012, Zaeh et al., 2016). Also hypoxemia due to smoking is associated with higher suicide rates (Aubin et al., 2011). Notably, the severity of respiratory diseases is positively correlated with suicide attempts and mortality (Chung et al., 2014, Kuo et al., 2010).

Animal experiments further support the relation of depressive-like behavior and hypoxia. Exposure of rats to 1 week of hypobaric hypoxia (simulating an altitude of 3048 m) for example resulted in depressive-like phenotypes (however, only in females), as assessed by forced swim tests, which was accompanied by cerebral metabolic changes (Bogdanova et al., 2014). Interestingly, most selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs; fluoxetine, paroxetine and escitalopram, but not sertraline) were not able to rescue depressive symptoms induced in such manner (Kanekar et al., 2018). Whether this is due to differential modes of pharmacological action of different SSRIs that may help to elucidate the link between hypoxia and depressive disorders remains to be investigated, especially since nothing is known about the situation in humans. However, the oxygen-dependence of serotonin metabolism may be a reason for reduced efficiencies of SSRIs, as outlined below. Importantly, the adoption of a more energy-saving approach by females (that may not be related to depressive-like symptoms) is an alternative explanation for these effects and would also explain the ineffectiveness of most SSRIs.

In summary, hypoxia exerts prominent effects on psychological states, and responses to hypoxic and mental stress are inter-related. As a consequence, high altitude residence is expected to be associated with differences in the susceptibility to anxiety and depressive disorders. Living in hypoxic conditions imposes specific metabolic and physiological strains on individuals that may alter the propensity of mental homeostasis to be disturbed. Small, in normoxia sub-harmful, allostatic loads may then suffice to prevent restoration, or establishing a new, equilibrium. While these relationships are incompletely understood and modulated by many factors (such as socio-economic characteristics above all access to specialized care, individual predispositions, physical activity and nutritional status), the here presented data are in favor for the postulated link (Fig. 3).

| **Key points** |
| --- |
| → Hypoxia exposure can alter mood and emotions |
| → Since respiratory diseases and high altitude exposures are frequently associated with anxiety symptoms, a link between hypoxia and anxiety disorders is possible |
| → Although high (but not moderate) altitude of permanent residence may be associated with increased risk for depression and suicide, potential confounding factors remain difficult to extract |
| → Chronic hypoxia may represent an additional stressor, facilitating the development of stress related diseases |

1.   Download: Download high-res image (269KB)
2.   Download: Download full-size image

Fig. 3. Effects of acute and chronic exposures to altitude/hypoxia on anxiety and depression-related symptoms. Various individual and situational parameters, as well as the hypoxic dose (severity, duration, frequency of the exposure) may influence the outcome. See text for references _._

5. Mechanistic links between hypoxia and anxiety and depressive disorders
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

As hypoxia acutely alters mood (see above), can induce panic attacks (Beck et al., 1999) and like chronic stress may increase inflammation (see below), it could be involved in the development of anxiety or depressive disorders. If overlapping physiological and pathological adaptations to hypoxia and chronic stress play roles in the pathogenesis of these diseases, it seems plausible to speculate that these mechanisms can be targeted to prevent or ameliorate anxiety and depressive disorders. In this section some common patterns of adaptive and maladaptive effects of hypoxia and of chronic stress, anxiety and depressive disorders are discussed.

### 5.1. Inflammation

Chronic social-environmental stress is a major risk factor for anxiety and depressive disorders and is associated with increased inflammation (Slavich and Irwin, 2014). Inflammation and pro-inflammatory cytokines are also involved in the pathogenesis of anxiety and depressive disorders (Miller and Raison, 2016, Slavich and Irwin, 2014) and therefore may link chronic stress to increased vulnerability for these disorders. The upregulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines due to acute or chronic hypoxia exposure therefore could impact on the development of these diseases.

For example, Fan and colleagues demonstrated that chronic hypoxia (10% FiO 2 for 23 h/day over 2 weeks) induced anxiety-like behavior in mice, which was mediated by pro-inflammatory NF-κB activation in hippocampal microglia (Fan et al., 2016). In a recent study, Nguyen and colleagues (Nguyen et al., 2021) exposed rats to moderate altitude (1655 m) and observed increased levels of inflammation markers (increased granulocyte-to-lymphocyte and monocyte-to-lymphocyte ratios, increased levels of circulating monocytes) and depressive-like behaviors.

While inflammation has emerged as an important factor in the pathogenesis of stress-related diseases (Ravi et al., 2021), information on the overlaps with pathways of hypoxia-adaptations are sparse.

### 5.2. Serotonin

Hypoxia obviously leads to reduced oxygen dependent brain processes, including of tryptophan hydroxylase, the rate-limiting enzyme in serotonin synthesis (Kious et al., 2018). The potential role of hypoxia-mediated biogenic amine synthesis, including serotonin, in affective disorders has been suggested almost 40 years ago (Katz, 1982). Inflammation maybe an integral player also from this point of view. Psychoneuroimmunology describes the concept that mental stress-induced alterations in an individual´s immunometabolic signature leads to physical and/or mental disease. The best evidence is available for depressive symptoms but similar mechanisms are also applicable for anxiety (Costello et al., 2019, Strasser et al., 2017). When neurotransmitter precursor amino acid levels are used as markers for anxiety and depressive disorders, the serotonin and catecholamine pathways are most relevant. Data from various studies indicate that inflammation has a significant impact on neurotransmitter precursor amino acids and related biogenic amines as well as neurotransmitters such as serotonin and dopamine (Miller et al., 2013). Specifically, the serotonin pathway can be influenced by cytokines which enhance the activity of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase or stress hormones which can activate tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase (Oxenkrug, 2010). This leads to a degradation of tryptophan and shunting of the metabolic processing in favor of the tryptophan catabolite pathway, such as kynurenine, kynurenic and quinolonic acid, rather than serotonin production. Elevated kynurenine-to-tryptophan ratios have been described to mediate anxiety (Hüfner et al., 2015, Lapin, 1996). The catecholamine pathway with its precursors phenylalanine and tyrosine is also influenced by inflammatory reactions and an association of phenylalanine-to-tyrosine ratio with depressive symptoms has been described (Hüfner et al., 2021, Hüfner et al., 2015). Apart from inflammation the reduced availability of oxygen can directly influence neurotransmitter precursor amino acid levels since the conversion of tryptophan to serotonin by tryptophan hydroxylase, requires molecular oxygen (Katz, 1980). The availability of the enzyme co-factor tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) which is essential for phenylalanine catabolism involving phenylalanine hydroxylase and also for serotonin synthesis, is reduced in the presence of ROS (Neurauter et al., 2008, Sperner-Unterweger et al., 2014). A deficiency in BH4 can thus lead to systemic deficiencies of serotonin, dopamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine.

Changes in brain metabolism of serotonin have been found at altitude in animal models (Prioux-Guyonneau et al., 1982, Ray et al., 2011) and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI) are largely ineffective in hypobaric hypoxia in an animal model possibly due to a hypoxia induced serotonin deficit (Kanekar et al., 2018). Effects of gender with females being more vulnerable to the effects of hypoxia in the animal model have also been described (Kanekar et al., 2021). Impaired serotonin synthesis at low oxygen levels has furthermore been proposed as a mechanism for elevated suicide rates (Young, 2013) and would be in line with the well-established negative association of serotonin levels with suicide probability (Joiner et al., 2005, Mann, 2003) and involvement in depression (Köhler et al., 2016).

### 5.3. Neuropeptides

Hypoxia has both stimulatory and inhibitory effects on the release of numerous neuropeptides, including oxytocin, vasopressin, orexin and angiotensin-II. Oxytocin and vasopressin are nine amino acid neuropeptides that are produced in the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus (PVN). They are traditionally known for their peripheral effects, oxytocin for the stimulation of birth and milk letdown, vasopressin for water retention and blood pressure regulation. However, both also exert multiple central actions in the brain; oxytocin is known for its prosocial, anxiolytic and fear-reducing effects, in a delicate balance with the opposing effects of vasopressin (Neumann and Landgraf, 2012). Importantly, receptors for both peptides are expressed in the amygdala, the fear center of the brain, as well as in the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST), which is thought to play a major role in regulating anxiety. Both nuclei project to a large number of brain stem targets whose activation underlies the various physiological responses that are important for the expression of anxiety and fear. In the amygdala, an interesting mechanism has been described through which vasopressin and oxytocin can oppositely modulate the fear response: Vasopressin receptors have been found on the brainstem projecting neurons in the amygdala, whereas oxytocin receptors are expressed on local GABAergic neurons, that can, in turn, inhibit these vasopressin receptor expressing, brainstem projecting neurons (Huber et al., 2005). It is possible that a similar mechanism in the BNST may allow for an opposite modulation by vasopressin and oxytocin on anxiety.

Importantly, central release of oxytocin and vasopressin is affected by oxygen levels. In the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus (DMNV), oxytocin release was found to be blunted in a rat model, of chronic intermittent hypoxia-hypercapnia, modeling obstructive sleep apnea (Jameson et al., 2016). This decrease in endogenous oxytocin release in the DMNV could be rescued by optogenetic activation of oxytocinergic fibers that descend from the PVN and in the DMNV restore oxytocin release, as assessed by calcium imaging in brain slices. Interestingly, in this rat model a corresponding chemogenetic stimulation of these descending projections in vivo prevented hypoxia-induced hypertension (Jameson et al., 2016). As vasopressin release is increased under hypoxic conditions (see chapter 3.4) potential opposite regulation of oxytocin and vasopressin release during hypoxia in the BNST and amygdala could contribute to the anxiety and fear responses resulting from hypoxia.

Oxytocinergic neurons further project to the NTS, which - like the DMNV – is a part of the vagal nucleus. These neurons express CRF receptor 2 on their terminals and are thought to modulate hypoxia-induced CRF signaling in the NTS but the physiological underpinnings and outcomes of such putative interactions between CRF and oxytocin signaling remain to be determined (Ruyle et al., 2018). In general, oxytocin may influence peripheral physiology through the modulation of different parts of vagal nerve activity. Oxytocin has also been reported to exert neuroprotective effects during hypoxia: in hippocampal slices that were maintained in hypoxic and low glucose conditions to mimic neonatal hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy, oxytocin prevented cell death by enhancing GABAergic signaling as assessed by electrophysiological recordings (Wu et al., 2021).

Also the neuropeptide orexin seems to be activated by hypoxia and hypercapnia. This peptide is also known as hypcretin-1 or orexin-A, - and like oxytocin is produced in the hypothalamus. It exerts similar mechanistic effects on the vagal and GABAergic systems but with opposite physiological outcome. Orexin-1 enhances GABAergic signaling to neurons controlling cardiac neurons in the nucleus ambiguus, another cell group of the vagal nucleus. It likely acts presynaptically on GABAergic axon terminals descending from the lateral paragigantocellular nucleus that is located in the ventral medulla, to increase both heart rate and blood pressure (Dergacheva et al., 2011). The activation of orexinergic neurons by hypoxia and hypercapnia (Du et al., 2016, Williams et al., 2007) (and possibly orexin-1 signaling in the nucleus ambiguous) together with the inhibition of oxytocin release in vagal nuclei (preventing rises in blood pressure and heart rate) thus may be involved in the regulation of oxygen supply to cells in a low oxygen environment.

In addition, orexin receptor agonists may protect neurons from hypoxia via HIFs. Exogenous orexin-1 induced HIF-1α mediated neuroprotective effects from cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury in rats (Yuan et al., 2011). In SH-SY5Y human neuroblastoma cells, orexin induces the expression of the HIF 1α target genes vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and erythropoietin (EPO) and thereby promotes cell survival (Feng et al., 2014).

The reduced oxytocinergic and enhanced orexinergic activity during hypoxia could also have consequences on mood and cognition. As mentioned above, oxytocin has profound anxiolytic fear-reducing effects in many parts of the brain, among which the amygdala and BNST (for review see (Triana-Del Río et al., 2018)) and promotes social behavior, in both animals and humans (Lukas and Neumann, 2013, Parker et al., 2014). Orexin-1, on the other hand, increases wakefulness and alertness, especially during stress and possibly also during hypoxia, considering that hypoxic stress activates the HPA axis (Guyenet, 2014) (see also chapter 3.4). However, it is currently not known whether mood and cognition changes during hypoxia are directly mediated by oxytocin and orexin-1.

Angiotensin II, through its effects on blood pressure, may also play an important role during hypoxia. This was found in animal models of hypoxemia associated with sleep apnea, including a sustained hypertension that is maintained during normoxia. It was found that angiotensin II, the most active component of the renin-angiotensin system with both peripheral and central effects, contributes to the increase of blood pressure (Grobe et al., 2008). Angiotensin II signals from the periphery to the brain through angiotensin II type 1 A receptors in the subfornical organ (Saxena et al., 2015), and from there to the PVN, the ventral medulla and the vagal nuclei, as recently reviewed (Marciante et al., 2021). Therefore, it could be that angiotensin II signaling is upstream of oxytocin and orexin-1 signaling under hypoxic conditions and induces hypertension through, amongst others, these neuropeptides, but this hypothesis remains to be tested.

The hypertension as a result of chronic intermittent hypoxia can trigger cognitive decline. Indeed, sleep apnea is a common comorbidity of cognitive decline and Alzheimer’s disease (Andrade et al., 2018, Bubu et al., 2020), and it has been suggested that central angiotensin II signaling through angiotensin II type 1 A receptors is enhanced in Alzheimer’s patients (Cosarderelioglu et al., 2021). However, the precise links between hypoxia, angiotensin II signaling and neurodegenerative diseases still have to be established.

### 5.4. Bioenergetics

Hypoxia disrupts cerebral energy metabolism in many ways, most obviously by reduced availability of the final electron acceptor in mitochondrial aerobic respiration, oxygen. In addition, reduced efficiency of the creatine system (Raman et al., 2005), as well as impaired mitochondrial dynamics (Jain et al., 2015) have been demonstrated in rats after chronic hypoxic exposure. Cerebral energy metabolism has been suggested to be involved in the development of depressive disorders and creatine supplementation has been shown to improve depressive-like phenotypes (Allen et al., 2010) as assessed by the forced swim test. Similar to the sex-effects of hypoxia on depression-like behavior in rats (Bogdanova et al., 2014) this was also only the case in female rats. Creatine is also associated with beneficial effects in human depression patients, an overview on these results has been recently provided (Kious et al., 2018). It is also becoming increasingly acknowledged that mitochondria are integral players in stress adaptations and behavioral consequences (Picard et al., 2018), as well as in anxiety (Filiou and Sandi, 2019) and depressive disorders, although clear cellular specificities, mechanistic underpinnings and variations within patient populations remain to be elucidated (Brasanac et al., 2022). Chronic stress is linked to disturbances of mitochondrial functions (van der Kooij, 2020) and mitochondria have been demonstrated to be altered in highly anxious rodents but also mitochondrial disease is associated with higher rates of anxiety, as recently reviewed (Filiou and Sandi, 2019). The impairment of mitochondria in chronic stress may therefore be a link to the development of anxiety (Daviu et al., 2019). With regard to anxiety, impaired mitochondrial respiration, dynamics and disposal of damaged mitochondria (mitophagy) have been reported in the ventral tegmental area (Gebara et al., 2020, Hollis et al., 2015) and in the amygdala (Duan et al., 2021) of rodents, both brain regions with major roles in anxiety disorders. Furthermore, emerging evidence also implicates mitochondrial dysfunction in the immune system in the pathogenesis of anxiety and depressive disorders, as for example recently shown for T-cells (Gamradt et al., 2021) and in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (Scaini et al., 2021) in patients with major depressive disorder.

How stress can impair mitochondrial functions via the immune and endocrine system has recently been reviewed in more detail (Daniels et al., 2020).

### 5.5. Glucose metabolism

Hypoxia induces energy-metabolism re-programming, importantly including an upregulation in glucose metabolism to fuel glycolysis in the absence of sufficient oxygen for oxidative phosphorylation. This acutely includes reduced allosteric repression of glycolysis by phosphofructokinase and subsequent HIF-mediated upregulation of glucose transporters and glycolytic enzymes (Kierans and Taylor, 2021). Importantly, also stress alters glucose energy metabolism. Chronic stress in mice has been shown to lead to blood and brain hyperglycemia, increased markers of glucose demand but reduced glucose delivery to the brain (Carneiro-Nascimento et al., 2020, van der Kooij et al., 2018). Hyperglycemia in turn induces a dysregulation of HIF-1α (Catrina et al., 2004) and therefore of adaptations to hypoxia.

Increased glycolysis is associated with higher levels of lactate. Notably, lactate can induce panic attacks in panic disorder patients (Liebowitz et al., 1984). Conversely, visual stimulation in humans has been shown to result in higher lactate accumulations in the visual cortex in patients with panic disorders, further supporting the association of lactate and panic disorders (Maddock et al., 2009).

### 5.6. Chemoreceptors

Molecular mechanisms of oxygen sensing, stress, anxiety and depressive disorders are profoundly connected. Indeed, chemoreceptors for CO 2 or oxygen not only modulate respiratory control but also can induce a sensation of dyspnea in the absence of variations of CO 2 or oxygen (Buchanan and Richerson, 2009).

Acute hypoxia is sensed by chemoreceptors that regulate breathing and modulate respiratory neuroplasticity (Navarrete-Opazo and Mitchell, 2014). The major peripheral oxygen sensor (carotid body) is also responsive to inflammatory signals and importantly regulates sympathetic (and parasympathetic) nervous system and neural regulation of immunity (Katayama et al., 2021) and therefore may mediate hypoxia-induced effects on mental stress and the pathogenesis of anxiety and depressive disorders. The sympathetic effects following peripheral oxygen sensing are importantly mediated by the nucleus of the solitary tract in the brain stem (Iturriaga et al., 2021). Other brain regions activated by changes in oxygen levels sensed by the carotid bodies include various hypothalamic nuclei as reviewed for animal studies (Horn and Waldrop, 1998) and recently confirmed in humans by functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) (Gerlach et al., 2021), potentially linking consequences of peripheral oxygen sensing to the HPA.

The main brain structure generating breathing rhythm is the preBötzinger complex in the brainstem (Del Negro et al., 2018), which is strongly connected to respiration-associated brainstem nuclei, including the NTS, and less strongly to forebrain regions, but likely is involved in behavioral and emotional control, in particular by innervating thalamic and hypothalamic areas (Yang and Feldman, 2018). Interestingly, the NTS expresses abundant glucocorticoid receptors that have been demonstrated to be fundamentally involved in endocrinal and behavioral stress responses (Ghosal et al., 2014).

The retrotrapezoid nucleus on the ventral medullary surface is a CO2-sensing brain region importantly involved in breathing automatic and directly connected to the preBötzinger complex (Guyenet et al., 2019).

Furthermore, signals for impending suffocation, such as carbon dioxide inhalation or hypoxia, induce the robust activation of anxiety networks in the brain. For CO 2 for example the chemo-sensitive murine acid-sensing ion channel ASIC1a has been demonstrated to mediate induction of anxiety in the amygdala (Coryell et al., 2007, Ziemann et al., 2009), a central brain region in the regulation of anxiety. In line with these findings, the human version of ASIC1a, ACCN2, is a risk gene for anxiety (Smoller et al., 2014). Given the chemosensitivity of the amygdala, its potential involvement in the etiology of AMS is not surprising (Feddersen et al., 2007).

Notably, many other brain regions that have been shown to be chemo-sensitive to CO 2 are important players also in anxiety and depressive disorders; this includes for example serotonergic (and non- serotonergic) neurons in the raphe nucleus (Teran et al., 2014) and noradrenergic neurons in the locus coeruleus (Buchanan and Richerson, 2009). Recently, Batistela and colleagues showed that hypoxia induced robust expression of the immediate early gene c-Fos in non-serotonergic cells in the lateral wings of the dorsal raphe and dorsomedial periaqueductal grey, indicating their activation in response to hypoxia (Batistela et al., 2021). These brain regions are also known to mediate panic-like escape responses in rodents.

While there is evidence for central O 2 sensing from animal models (Buchanan and Richerson, 2009), the absence of a hypoxic ventilatory response in humans with resected carotid bodies (Honda, 1992) indicates a minor role of central O 2 sensing in humans. However, a serotonergic activation (from the raphe nuclei) of the oxygen-sensitive retrotrapezoid nucleus (Mulkey et al., 2007) is a further link between chemosensitivity and anxiety/depression-related serotonergic pathways.

Chemo-sensing is further involved in the regulation of cerebral blood flow (Feddersen et al., 2015, Ogoh et al., 2021) and blood brain barrier integrity (Halder and Milner, 2019), both of which may be impaired by stress and in anxiety (Hasler et al., 2007) and depressive disorders (Dudek et al., 2020).

In conclusion, stress responses overlap with adaptations to hypoxia at different levels, as depicted in Fig. 4.

| **Key points** |
| --- |
| → Adaptations to hypoxia and mental stress partially overlap |
| → These overlapping mechanisms may be targeted to treat anxiety and depressive disorders |
| → Classical (e.g., serotonin) and peptidergic (e.g., oxytocin and orexin) neurotransmitters mediate both mental and hypoxic stress responses |
| → Bioenergetics and glucose metabolism are altered by chronic mental stress and hypoxia and are impaired in anxiety and depressive disorders. |
| → Chemosensitive brain regions are involved in (mental and hypoxic) stress-responses and also the regulation/development of anxiety and depression |

1.   Download: Download high-res image (327KB)
2.   Download: Download full-size image

Fig. 4. Hypoxia affects the stress response on multiple levels. Hypoxia or resulting changes in CO2 levels directly and indirectly influence various components of the HPA (hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal)- and sympatho-adrenomedullary (SAM) axes, as well as chemo-sensitive regions in the brain and have consequences on mitochondrial functions (most directly oxidative phosphorylation and reactive oxygen species generation) and inflammatory processes. CRF; corticotropin-releasing factor, ACTH; adrenocorticotropic hormone, CORT; cortisol.

6. Modulating hypoxia adaptations to counteract anxiety and depressive disorders
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Depending on the severity and patterns of hypoxia administration, hypoxia interventions can have different, even opposing effects (Navarrete-Opazo and Mitchell, 2014). While severe hypoxia causes cellular and tissue damage, mild, sub-harmful hypoxia can induce protective adaptations, rendering cells, tissues and the whole organism more resilient to subsequent hypoxia insults (Noble, 1943). This process is called hypoxia conditioning and has great potential as treatment strategy for neurological and psychiatric diseases (Baillieul et al., 2017, Burtscher et al., 2021a) and possibly also in anxiety and depressive disorders as will be discussed in this chapter. In addition, the application of hyperbaric oxygen or the use of breathing methods represent efficient tools to target hypoxia-related responses in chronic stress, anxiety and depressive disorders.

### 6.1. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy and breathing techniques

It has been suggested that re-establishing normal oxygen levels may be beneficial in conditions of hypoxia-related inflammation (Larrick et al., 2021). Therefore, interventions like hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT) may also be efficient to treat anxiety and depressive disorders. Emerging evidence from recent mouse studies confirms this potential for anxiety (Lin et al., 2019, Luo et al., 2020). Results from HBOT application against depression (Krzystanek et al., 2021), for example in post-stroke depression (Liang et al., 2020), also indicate efficiency of this approach.

The modulation of breathing – a way of willfully modulating oxygen-supply – is another tool to reduce stress, anxiety and depressive symptoms (Jerath et al., 2015). This may be related to benefits of the repeated controlled experience to dyspnea (Meuret et al., 2018), which in turn may reduce sensitivity to stressors, possibly based on physiological adaptations to hypoxia, as discussed in the next section.

### 6.2. Hypoxia conditioning

Assuming that hypoxia facilitates the development of mood disorders, hypoxia conditioning consequently may be protective and could increase resistance to mental stress, anxiety and depressive symptoms (Rybnikova et al., 2008).

In line with this rational, antidepressant effects by hypoxia conditioning have been observed in rat models of depression, including models of learned helplessness (Rybnikova et al., 2007, Rybnikova et al., 2008) and unpredictable chronic mild stress (Kushwah et al., 2016).

Testing rats in models of depression, including the forced swim test, chronic mild stress and novelty suppressed feeding, Zhu et al. (2010) identified BDNF mediated hippocampal neurogenesis modulation as a mechanisms involved in antidepressant effects of hypoxia conditioning. Indeed, hypoxia conditioning has also been reported to increase neurogenesis in cerebral cortical cultures (Jin et al., 2002). Impaired neurogenesis has also been linked to depression (Drew and Hen, 2007) and is crucially implicated in rodent chronic stress models, for example glucocorticoid elevating models (David et al., 2009).

In humans some early preliminary studies (original work published in Russian) also point to an efficacy of hypoxia conditioning in the treatment of depression, as summarized by Basovich (2010).

Based on these findings, Rybnikova et al. (2008) hypothesized that hypoxia conditioning may be a promising treatment strategy for post-traumatic stress disorder. Indeed, anti-anxiety effects of hypoxia conditioning have been shown in several recent animal studies modelling post-traumatic stress disorders (Ding et al., 2019, Manukhina et al., 2020, Manukhina et al., 2018).

Rybnikova and Samoilov (2015) attribute the beneficial effects of hypoxia (pre-) conditioning to enhanced HPA-responses and adaptation to mild stressors, as well as to the potentiation of negative glucocorticoid feedback. Hypoxia conditioning protocols have also been reported to reduce inflammation (Gangwar et al., 2019) and may represent new strategies for anxiety and depressive disorders also due to this effect. The emerging link of deficits in mitochondrial respiration (Hollis et al., 2015) and mitochondrial dynamics (Gebara et al., 2020) with trait anxiety and depressive-like phenotypes in mouse models, also supports a dysregulation of oxygen metabolism associated with anxiety and depressive disorders. It furthermore is suggestive for another mechanism through which hypoxia conditioning may exert its beneficial effects; boosting mitochondrial efficiency and resilience (Burtscher et al., 2021b). Hypoxia conditioning has furthermore been demonstrated to partly prevent the autonomic imbalance associated with acute stress like hypoxia or exercise (Bernardi et al., 2001, Burtscher et al., 2004a). For example, Bernardi and colleagues showed that 2 weeks of hypoxia conditioning (3–4 periods of 7 min hypoxia exposure at rest during 1 h per day) elicited reduced vagal withdrawal (and increased hypoxic ventilatory response) during subsequently applied progressive hypoxia stress (Bernardi et al., 2001). Burtscher et al. (2004b) used a similar hypoxia-conditioning protocol over 3 weeks in older individuals, which resulted in reduced increases of heart rate, systolic blood pressure, blood lactate concentration, and the rating of perceived exertion during subsequent sub-maximal exercise (cycling at 1 W/kg) in normoxia when compared to pre-conditioning and the control group as well. Lower sympathetic tone after hypoxia conditioning, indicated by reduced resting heart rate and blood pressure values in cardiac patients, has recently been confirmed by a meta-analysis (Glazachev et al., 2021). Provided that major depression and anxiety disorders (Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2013, Vinkers et al., 2021) are associated with increased sympathetic nervous system activity, therapeutic benefits from hypoxia conditioning may be reasonably assumed. Another mechanism by which hypoxia conditioning may impart its favorable effects is the control of HIF-pathways: a persistent upregulation of HIF-1α was observed in rodents exposed to psycho-emotional stress but could be prevented by hypoxia conditioning (Baranova et al., 2017, Rybnikova et al., 2013).

Anxiety is also a common comorbidity of neurodegenerative diseases, including the most common form of dementia, Alzheimer’s disease (Leung et al., 2021), and one with massive impacts on the quality of life. Meng et al. (2020) and Correia et al. (2021) demonstrated in mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease that hypoxia conditioning not only improved cognition but also reduced anxiety symptoms. Hypoxia conditioning protocols and outcomes on anxiety and fear parameters in rodent models of post-traumatic stress disorder and neurodegenerative diseases are summarized in Table 2.

Table 2. Outcomes and protocols of hypoxia conditioning for the treatment of anxiety and fear symptoms.

| Model | Conditioning protocol | Main results | Reference |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Rat PTSD model | 3 sessions of 10% O 2 for 2 h every 24 h (pre or after experimental PTSD induction) | HIF-1α expression after restress ↑ Conditioning (pre and after) reduced HIF-1α overexpression and reduced anxiety-like behavior | (Baranova et al., 2017), (Rybnikova et al., 2013) |
| Rat PTSD model | 14 days at simulated altitude with altitude and duration progressively increasing from 1000 m for 30 min on day 1–4000 m (about 12.6% O 2) for 4 h on day 5 | Conditioning reduced anxiety-like behavior and fear symptoms evoked by experimental PTSD, mitigated damage to the adrenal glands, alleviated PTSD-induced metabolic and structural injury and reduced oxidative stress in various organs. Conditioning was also anxiolytic in the (non-PTSD) control group | (Manukhina et al., 2018), (Manukhina et al., 2020) |
| Mouse PTSD model | Over 2 weeks the mice were exposed daily to 4 h at 3000 m (about 14.2% O 2) | Conditioning reduced fear and anxiety-like behavior, reduced activation of various brain areas in PTSD and increased brain protein expression of HIF-1α, VEGF and BDNF | (Ding et al., 2019) |
| APP/PS1 mice (Alzheimer’s disease model) | 4 h hypoxia (5000 m, about 11.2% O 2) per day for 15 consecutive days | Conditioning decreased anxiety‐like behaviors (and improved cognition). It increased hippocampal neurogenesis and BDNF expression and inhibited apoptosis‐related protein expression | (Meng et al., 2020) |
| 3 ×Tg-AD mice (Alzheimer’s disease model) | Over 2 weeks 9 hypoxic episodes (each either 2 or 4 h long) were administered at either 8% or 11% O 2 | Conditioning improved cognition and decreased anxiety-like behaviors, it also reduced cortical levels of amyloid-β and improved various parameters of brain energy metabolism 3 ×Tg-AD mice | (Correia et al., 2021) |

PTSD; posttraumatic stress disorder, O2; oxygen, BDNF; brain derived neurotrophic factor

Importantly, hypoxia may be a core trigger or facilitator of neurodegenerative diseases (Burtscher et al., 2021a, Burtscher et al., 2021b, Burtscher et al., 2021d). This could contribute to an explanation for the increased occurrence of anxiety and depressive disorders in neurodegenerative diseases, as well as for the effectiveness of hypoxia conditioning.

### 6.3. Exercise

Motor-cognitive challenges have been shown to be associated with increased neuronal activity leading to higher oxygen demands and “functional” hypoxia in the brain and in particular in the hippocampus (Butt et al., 2021, Tang et al., 2010). While speculative at this point, such “functional”, endogenous hypoxia may at least partly be responsible for the well-established cognitive (Hillman et al., 2008) and anxiolytic and antidepressive (Aylett et al., 2018, Carek et al., 2011) capacities of exercise via beneficial hypoxia adaptations.

### 6.4. Pharmacological approaches

It is well known that hypoxia-induced HIF activation ameliorates oxygen supply by improving vascularization and erythropoiesis via induction of VEGF and EPO, respectively. In addition, HIF-1 is a potent inducer of glycolysis, another means to secure cellular energy production in hypoxic conditions. On the other hand, HIF-1 upregulation mediates inflammatory responses and may be involved in the pathogenesis of anxiety and depressive disorders. The rapidly evolving field of HIF inhibitor development against cancers (Fallah and Rini, 2019) will provide also the only just emerging field of hypoxia-adaptations in anxiety and depressive disorders with valuable tools for preclinical trials.

Also- the potential role of central chemosensors in the development of anxiety and depressive disorders and their pharmacological modulation to target these diseases merits further research, as previously suggested (Baldwin et al., 2017).

Other pathways involved in hypoxia adaptations are those revolving around adenosine receptors, for example erythrocyte adenosine receptor A2B, the activation of which elicits beneficial metabolic reprogramming in the brain in response to hypoxia (Qiang et al., 2021), and its downstream affector AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK). AMPK has been demonstrated to decrease as a result of the unpredictable chronic mild stress model in mice and possibly is involved in the development of anxiety- and depressive-like phenotypes (Zhu et al., 2014). Despite some promising results of modulating AMPK for example with metformin (Sarkaki et al., 2015), the potential of targeting these pathways for the treatment of anxiety and depressive disorders needs to be further explored.

| **Key points** |
| --- |
| → Training or modulation of the hypoxic response may be beneficial in anxiety and depressive disorders |
| → Hyperoxia can counteract anxiety and depressive symptoms in humans |
| → Controlled hypoxia exposure (hypoxia conditioning) induces adaptations that were beneficial in animal models of anxiety and depression |
| → Exercise-induced “functional hypoxia” may partially account for anxiolytic and antidepressive effects of exercise |
| → An expanding toolset to pharmacologically modulate or mimic hypoxia adaptations is becoming available |

7. Conclusions and perspectives
-------------------------------

Although oxygen deprivation and fear of suffocation are primordial inducers of stress, panic, anxiety and possibly depression, converging adaptive mechanisms to hypoxic and mental stressors are only beginning to be acknowledged. The role of chemo-sensitive brain regions in mental stress and the parallel involvement of classical neurotransmitters, neuropeptides, transcriptomic alterations orchestrated by central transcription factors and metabolic responses in adaptations to hypoxic and mental stressors are only some of these overlaps. Based on these shared mechanisms, it is possible that the modulation of physiological systemic and cellular responses to either type of stress may affect the outcome of both hypoxic and mental stress with implications for stress-related diseases, such as anxiety and depressive disorders. Considering how physiological responses to hypoxia can influence stress response pathways (Fig. 4), it is likely that hypoxic insults or exposure to severe hypoxia can result in dysfunction of these pathways, including the SAM- and HPA-axes, and contribute to the development of stress-related diseases. Conversely, dysfunctional stress responses associated with diseases such as anxiety and depressive disorders could influence physiological responses to hypoxia, for example via impacting integral pathways for hypoxic stress adaptations, such as HIFs. This could have consequences on the tolerance to hypoxia and may affect the development of AMS and other high-altitude diseases – however, experimental and observational data on this topic are controversial. Furthermore, theoretically inter-dependent effects of stress pathways and responses to hypoxic stress may cooperatively facilitate the development of stress-related diseases. It is even possible that such synergistically acting hypoxic and mental stress responses – either acutely or by long-lasting stress-induced changes – can trigger other neuropsychiatric diseases, such as neurodegenerative diseases. Recently, increasing interest has arisen for the role of hypoxia in the pathogenesis of various neurodegenerative diseases (Burtscher et al., 2021a, Burtscher et al., 2021d, Correia and Moreira, 2021). Anxiety and depressive symptoms are common comorbidities and potential risk factors in these diseases, for example in Parkinson’s (Kalia and Lang, 2015) and Alzheimer’s disease (Becker et al., 2018, Cassimjee, 2007, Rosenberg et al., 2013). Although this is currently only speculative and will require experimental elucidation, hypoxic insults may be risk factors for anxiety and depressive symptoms, as well as – or thereby – for neurodegenerative diseases. In addition, chronic stress-derived vulnerabilities of shared stress pathways to hypoxia (or hypoxia-induced impairments of stress pathways) could facilitate neurodegenerative processes.

While there are indeed indications from epidemiological studies that the prevalence of anxiety and depressive disorders is influenced by for example the altitude of residence - and thus by variations in atmospheric oxygen pressures – these studies are inconsistent, probably due to the existence of a broad array of potential confounding factors (including socio-economic and other physical characteristics of high altitude environments). However, those observations are supported by (limited) evidence from animal experiments demonstrating noteworthy implications of hypoxia in models of anxiety and depression. In addition, some reports suggest an efficiency of hypoxia conditioning for related diseases, in particular post-traumatic stress disorder. This suggests that specific responses to hypoxia could be targeted to treat stress-related disorders, either by pharmacological means or by modulation of oxygen levels, e.g., using HBOT or hypoxia conditioning.

Among the vulnerabilities that can result from both severe hypoxia or from maladaptive stress responses are mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress and inflammation, all of which could be pharmacological targets beside molecules targeting HIFs or adenosine receptors (as discussed above). They are also all thought to be amenable to hypoxia conditioning (Mallet et al., 2020).

Possibly one of the greatest impediments of translational research using oxygen modifications to target cerebral functions, neurological and psychiatric diseases is the hazardous nature of oxygen and especially the lack of it, in particular to the brain. It is thus important to consider hypoxia as a hormetic stressor; at adequate concentrations - and depending on other environmental and individual characteristics - it induces beneficial effects but a too high dose (composite of severity, duration and frequency) it is detrimental to the brain. Also, this aspect is similar to mental stress; while acute stress responses can be physiologically highly useful (for example by fueling rapid responses to immediate threat), excessive or persisting stress is harmful.

| **Summary** |
| --- |
| → Systemic and cellular responses to hypoxic and mental stressors affect the outcome also of the respective other stressor |
| → Hypoxic insults can result in dysfunction of stress-pathways and trigger stress-related diseases |
| → Dysfunctional stress responses associated with diseases such as anxiety and depressive disorders could compromise hypoxia responses and promote mountain-sicknesses |
| → Improving hypoxia adaptations (e.g., by hypoxia conditioning) may improve stress-related diseases |
| → Mechanistically hypoxia conditioning improves overlapping outcomes of hypoxic and mental stress, including mitochondrial function and cellular defenses against oxidative stress and inflammation |
| → Determination of the optimal hypoxic dose for various clinical applications of hypoxia conditioning will be a major research challenge |

Submission declaration and verification
---------------------------------------

The article has not been published previously and is not under consideration for publication elsewhere. All authors have read the final version of the article and approved its publication.

Declaration of interest
-----------------------

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Recommended articles

Data Availability
-----------------

No data was used for the research described in the article.

References
----------

1.   Agorastos and Chrousos, 2021 A. Agorastos, G.P. Chrousos The neuroendocrinology of stress: the stress-related continuum of chronic disease development  Mol. Psychiatry (2021) Google Scholar 
2.   Aguilera and Rabadan-Diehl, 2000 G. Aguilera, C. Rabadan-Diehl Vasopressinergic regulation of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis: implications for stress adaptation  Regul. Pept., 96 (2000), pp. 23-29 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
3.   Aguilera et al., 2008 G. Aguilera, S. Subburaju, S. Young, J. Chen The parvocellular vasopressinergic system and responsiveness of the hypothalamic pituitary adrenal axis during chronic stress  I.D. Neumann, R. Landgraf (Eds.), Progress in Brain Research, Elsevier (2008), pp. 29-39 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
4.   Ahmad and Hussain, 2017 S. Ahmad, S. Hussain Mood changes at very high altitudes in Pakistan  Pak. J. Med Sci., 33 (2017), pp. 231-235 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
5.   Alameda-Palacios et al., 2015 J. Alameda-Palacios, M. Ruiz-Ramos, B. García-Robredo Suicide mortality in andalusia  Revista española de salud pública, 89, Geographical distribution and relationship with antidepressants, altitude and socioeconomic inequalities, Spain (2015), pp. 283-293 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
6.   Allen et al., 2010 P.J. Allen, K.E. D’Anci, R.B. Kanarek, P.F. Renshaw Chronic creatine supplementation alters depression-like behavior in rodents in a sex-dependent manner  Neuropsychopharmacology, 35 (2010), pp. 534-546 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
7.   Andrade et al., 2018 A.G. Andrade, O.M. Bubu, A.W. Varga, R.S. Osorio The relationship between obstructive sleep apnea and Alzheimer’s disease  J. Alzheimer’s. Dis., 64 (2018), pp. S255-S270 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
8.   de Aquino Lemos et al., 2012 V. de Aquino Lemos, H.K. Antunes, R.V. dos Santos, F.S. Lira, S. Tufik, M.T. de Mello High altitude exposure impairs sleep patterns, mood, and cognitive functions  Psychophysiology, 49 (2012), pp. 1298-1306 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
9.   Aubin et al., 2011 H.J. Aubin, I. Berlin, M. Reynaud Current smoking, hypoxia, and suicide  Am. J. Psychiatry, 168 (2011), pp. 326-327 author reply 327 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
10.   Aylett et al., 2018 E. Aylett, N. Small, P. Bower Exercise in the treatment of clinical anxiety in general practice - a systematic review and meta-analysis  BMC Health Serv. Res, 18 (2018), p. 559 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
11.   Bahrke and Shukitt-Hale, 1993 M.S. Bahrke, B. Shukitt-Hale Effects of altitude on mood, behaviour and cognitive functioning. A review  Sports Med, 16 (1993), pp. 97-125 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
12.   Bailey et al., 2009 D.M. Bailey, S. Taudorf, R.M. Berg, C. Lundby, J. McEneny, I.S. Young, K.A. Evans, P.E. James, A. Shore, D.A. Hullin, J.M. McCord, B.K. Pedersen, K. Möller Increased cerebral output of free radicals during hypoxia: implications for acute mountain sickness?  Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol., 297 (2009), pp. R1283-R1292 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
13.   Baillieul et al., 2017 S. Baillieul, S. Chacaroun, S. Doutreleau, O. Detante, J.L. Pépin, S. Verges Hypoxic conditioning and the central nervous system: A new therapeutic opportunity for brain and spinal cord injuries?  Exp. Biol. Med., 242 (2017), pp. 1198-1206 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
14.   Baitharu et al., 2012 I. Baitharu, S.N. Deep, V. Jain, K. Barhwal, A.S. Malhotra, S.K. Hota, D. Prasad, G. Ilavazhagan Corticosterone synthesis inhibitor metyrapone ameliorates chronic hypobaric hypoxia induced memory impairment in rat  Behav. Brain Res., 228 (2012), pp. 53-65 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
15.   Baldwin et al., 2017 D.S. Baldwin, R. Hou, R. Gordon, N.T. Huneke, M. Garner Pharmacotherapy in generalized anxiety disorder: novel experimental medicine models and emerging drug targets  CNS Drugs, 31 (2017), pp. 307-317 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
16.   Baranova et al., 2017 K.A. Baranova, E.A. Rybnikova, M.O. Samoilov The dynamics of HIF-1α expression in the rat brain at different stages of experimental posttraumatic stress disorder and its correction with moderate hypoxia  Neurochem. J., 11 (2017), pp. 149-156 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
17.   Basovich, 2010 S.N. Basovich The role of hypoxia in mental development and in the treatment of mental disorders: a review  Biosci. Trends (2010), p. 4 Google Scholar 
18.   Batistela et al., 2021 M.F. Batistela, H.H. Vilela-Costa, A.T. Frias, P.M. Hernandes, T.A. Lovick, H. Zangrossi Jr. Enhanced responsiveness to hypoxic panicogenic challenge in female rats in late diestrus is suppressed by short-term, low-dose fluoxetine: Involvement of the dorsal raphe nucleus and the dorsal periaqueductal gray  J. Psychopharmacol., 35 (2021), pp. 1523-1535 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
19.   Beck et al., 1999 J.G. Beck, P.J. Ohtake, J.C. Shipherd Exaggerated anxiety is not unique to CO 2 in panic disorder: a comparison of hypercapnic and hypoxic challenges  J. Abnorm. Psychol., 108 (1999), pp. 473-482 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
20.   Becker et al., 2018 E. Becker, C.L.O. Rios, C. Lahmann, G. Ruecker, J. Bauer, M. Boeker Anxiety as a risk factor of Alzheimer’s disease and vascular dementia  Br. J. Psychiatry, 213 (2018), pp. 654-660 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
21.   van den Bemt et al., 2009 L. van den Bemt, T. Schermer, H. Bor, R. Smink, E. van Weel-Baumgarten, P. Lucassen, C. Van Weel The risk for depression comorbidity in patients with COPD  Chest, 135 (2009), pp. 108-114 View PDF View article Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
22.   Berger et al., 2020 M.M. Berger, L.M. Schiefer, M. Sareban, P. Bärtsch Re: “are pre-ascent low-altitude saliva cortisol levels related to the subsequent acute mountain sickness score? observations from a field study” by Gatterer et al.  High Alt. Med. Biol. (2020), pp. 308-309 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
23.   Bernardi et al., 2001 L. Bernardi, C. Passino, Z. Serebrovskaya, T. Serebrovskaya, O. Appenzeller Respiratory and cardiovascular adaptations to progressive hypoxia; effect of interval hypoxic training  Eur. Heart J., 22 (2001), pp. 879-886 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
24.   Betz et al., 2011 M.E. Betz, M.A. Valley, S.R. Lowenstein, H. Hedegaard, D. Thomas, L. Stallones, B. Honigman Elevated suicide rates at high altitude: sociodemographic and health issues may be to blame  Suicide Life Threat Behav., 41 (2011), pp. 562-573 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
25.   Bezerra Filho et al., 2012 J.G. Bezerra Filho, G.L. Werneck, R.L.Fd Almeida, M.I.Vd Oliveira, F.B. Magalhães Socio-demographic determinants of suicide in the State of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 1998-2002  Cad. De. Saúde Pública, 28 (2012), pp. 833-844 Crossref Google Scholar 
26.   Bian et al., 2013 S.Z. Bian, J.H. Zhang, X.B. Gao, M. Li, J. Yu, X. Liu, J.Q. Dong, G.Z. Chen, L. Huang Risk factors for high-altitude headache upon acute high-altitude exposure at 3700 m in young Chinese men: a cohort study  J. Headache Pain., 14 (2013), p. 35 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
27.   Bian et al., 2016 S.Z. Bian, J. Jin, J.Q. Dong, Q.N. Li, J. Yu, C.F. Tang, S.Y. Yu, X.H. Zhao, J. Qin, L. Huang A higher baseline somatization score at sea level as an independent predictor of acute mountain sickness  Physiol. Behav., 167 (2016), pp. 202-208 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
28.   Bian et al., 2019 S.Z. Bian, L. Zhang, J. Jin, J.H. Zhang, Q.N. Li, J. Yu, J.F. Chen, S.Y. Yu, X.H. Zhao, J. Qin, L. Huang The onset of sleep disturbances and their associations with anxiety after acute high-altitude exposure at 3700 m  Transl. Psychiatry, 9 (2019), p. 175 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
29.   Bogdanova et al., 2014 O.V. Bogdanova, O. Abdullah, S. Kanekar, V.B. Bogdanov, A.P. Prescot, P.F. Renshaw Neurochemical alterations in frontal cortex of the rat after one week of hypobaric hypoxia  Behav. Brain Res., 263 (2014), pp. 203-209 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
30.   Bolmont et al., 2000 B. Bolmont, F. Thullier, J.H. Abraini Relationships between mood states and performances in reaction time, psychomotor ability, and mental efficiency during a 31-day gradual decompression in a hypobaric chamber from sea level to 8848 m equivalent altitude  Physiol. Behav., 71 (2000), pp. 469-476 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
31.   Boos et al., 2018a C.J. Boos, M. Bass, J.P. O'Hara, E. Vincent, A. Mellor, L. Sevier, H. Abdul-Razakq, M. Cooke, M. Barlow, D.R. Woods The relationship between anxiety and acute mountain sickness  PLoS One, 13 (2018) e0197147-e0197147 Google Scholar 
32.   Boos et al., 2018b C.J. Boos, M. Bass, J.P. O'Hara, E. Vincent, A. Mellor, L. Sevier, H. Abdul-Razakq, M. Cooke, M. Barlow, D.R. Woods The relationship between anxiety and acute mountain sickness  PLoS One, 13 (2018), Article e0197147 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
33.   Bordag et al., 2015 N. Bordag, S. Klie, K. Jürchott, J. Vierheller, H. Schiewe, V. Albrecht, J.C. Tonn, C. Schwartz, C. Schichor, J. Selbig Glucocorticoid (dexamethasone)-induced metabolome changes in healthy males suggest prediction of response and side effects  Sci. Rep., 5 (2015), p. 15954 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
34.   Brasanac et al., 2022 J. Brasanac, S. Gamradt, C. Otte, Y. Milaneschi, A.S. Monzel, M. Picard, S.M. Gold Cellular specificity of mitochondrial and immunometabolic features in major depression  Mol. Psychiatry (2022) Google Scholar 
35.   Bravo, 1989 E.L. Bravo Metabolic factors and the sympathetic nervous system  Am. J. Hypertens., 2 (1989), pp. 339S-344S Google Scholar 
36.   Brenner et al., 2011 B. Brenner, D. Cheng, S. Clark, C.A. Camargo Jr. Positive association between altitude and suicide in 2584 US counties  High. Alt. Med. Biol., 12 (2011), pp. 31-35 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
37.   Bubu et al., 2020 O.M. Bubu, A.G. Andrade, O.Q. Umasabor-Bubu, M.M. Hogan, A.D. Turner, M.J. de Leon, G. Ogedegbe, I. Ayappa, G. Jean-Louis, G. Jackson, M.L. Varga, A.W. Osorio, R.S Obstructive sleep apnea, cognition and Alzheimer’s disease: a systematic review integrating three decades of multidisciplinary research  Sleep. Med. Rev., 50 (2020), Article 101250 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
38.   Buchanan and Richerson, 2009 G.F. Buchanan, G.B. Richerson Role of chemoreceptors in mediating dyspnea  Respir. Physiol. Neurobiol., 167 (2009), pp. 9-19 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
39.   Burtscher and Millet, 2021 J. Burtscher, G.P. Millet Hypoxia, acidification and inflammation: partners in crime in Parkinson’s disease pathogenesis?  Immuno, 1 (2021), pp. 78-90 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
40.   Burtscher et al., 2021a J. Burtscher, V. Maglione, A. Di Pardo, G.P. Millet, C. Schwarzer, L. Zangrandi A rationale for hypoxic and chemical conditioning in Huntington’s disease  Int J. Mol. Sci. (2021), p. 22 Google Scholar 
41.   Burtscher et al., 2021b J. Burtscher, R.T. Mallet, M. Burtscher, G.P. Millet Hypoxia and brain aging: neurodegeneration or neuroprotection?  Ageing Res Rev., 68 (2021), Article 101343 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
42.   Burtscher et al., 2021c J. Burtscher, G.P. Millet, M. Burtscher Does living at moderate altitudes in Austria affect mortality rates of various causes? An ecological study  BMJ Open, 11 (2021), Article e048520 Crossref Google Scholar 
43.   Burtscher et al., 2021d J. Burtscher, M.M.S. Syed, H.A. Lashuel, G.P. Millet Hypoxia conditioning as a promising therapeutic target in Parkinson’s disease?  Mov. Disord. (2021) Google Scholar 
44.   Burtscher et al., 2022 J. Burtscher, R.T. Mallet, V. Pialoux, G.P. Millet, M. Burtscher Adaptive responses to hypoxia and/or hyperoxia in humans  Antioxid. Redox Signal (2022) Google Scholar 
45.   Burtscher, 2014 M. Burtscher Effects of living at higher altitudes on mortality: a narrative review  Aging Dis., 5 (2014), p. 274 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
46.   Burtscher et al., 2004a M. Burtscher, O. Pachinger, I. Ehrenbourg, G. Mitterbauer, M. Faulhaber, R. Pühringer, E. Tkatchouk Intermittent hypoxia increases exercise tolerance in elderly men with and without coronary artery disease  Int. J. Cardiol., 96 (2004), pp. 247-254 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
47.   Burtscher et al., 2004b M. Burtscher, O. Pachinger, I. Ehrenbourg, G. Mitterbauer, M. Faulhaber, R. Pühringer, E. Tkatchouk Intermittent hypoxia increases exercise tolerance in elderly men with and without coronary artery disease  Int J. Cardiol., 96 (2004), pp. 247-254 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
48.   Burtscher et al., 2018 M. Burtscher, H. Gatterer, J. Burtscher, H. Mairbaurl Extreme terrestrial environments: life in thermal stress and hypoxia. a narrative review  Front Physiol., 9 (2018), p. 572 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
49.   Butt et al., 2021 U.J. Butt, A.A. Steixner-Kumar, C. Depp, T. Sun, I. Hassouna, L. Wüstefeld, S. Arinrad, M.R. Zillmann, N. Schopf, L. Fernandez Garcia-Agudo, L. Mohrmann, U. Bode, A. Ronnenberg, M. Hindermann, S. Goebbels, S. Bonn, D.M. Katschinski, K.W. Miskowiak, K.-A. Nave, H. Ehrenreich Hippocampal neurons respond to brain activity with functional hypoxia  Mol. Psychiatry (2021) Google Scholar 
50.   Carek et al., 2011 P.J. Carek, S.E. Laibstain, S.M. Carek Exercise for the treatment of depression and anxiety  Int J. Psychiatry Med, 41 (2011), pp. 15-28 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
51.   Carneiro-Nascimento et al., 2020 S. Carneiro-Nascimento, J. Opacka-Juffry, A. Costabile, C.N. Boyle, A.M. Herde, S.M. Ametamey, H. Sigrist, C.R. Pryce, M. Patterson Chronic social stress in mice alters energy status including higher glucose need but lower brain utilization  Psychoneuroendocrinology, 119 (2020), Article 104747 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
52.   Carroll et al., 1968 B.J. Carroll, F.I. Martin, B. Davies Resistance to suppression by dexamethasone of plasma 11-O.H.C.S. levels in severe depressive illness  Br. Med J., 3 (1968), pp. 285-287 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
53.   Carroll et al., 1976 B.J. Carroll, G.C. Curtis, J. Mendels Cerebrospinal fluid and plasma free cortisol concentrations in depression  Psychol. Med, 6 (1976), pp. 235-244 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
54.   Cassimjee, 2007 N. Cassimjee A review of mood and anxiety disturbances in Alzheimer’s disease: implications for treatment outcomes  J. Psychol. Afr., 17 (2007), pp. 145-153 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
55.   Catrina et al., 2004 S.B. Catrina, K. Okamoto, T. Pereira, K. Brismar, L. Poellinger Hyperglycemia regulates hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha protein stability and function  Diabetes, 53 (2004), pp. 3226-3232 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
56.   Chen et al., 2014 S.J. Chen, J.F. Yang, F.P. Kong, J.L. Ren, K. Hao, M. Li, Y. Yuan, X.C. Chen, R.S. Yu, J.F. Li, G. Leng, X.Q. Chen, J.Z. Du Overactivation of corticotropin-releasing factor receptor type 1 and aquaporin-4 by hypoxia induces cerebral edema  Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 111 (2014), pp. 13199-13204 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
57.   Chung et al., 2014 J.H. Chung, C.H. Han, S.C. Park, C.J. Kim Suicidal ideation and suicide attempts in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: the Korea National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (KNHANES IV, V) from 2007–2012  NPJ Prim. care Respir. Med., 24 (2014), pp. 1-5 Google Scholar 
58.   Correia and Moreira, 2021 S.C. Correia, P.I. Moreira Oxygen sensing and signaling in Alzheimer’s disease: a breathtaking story!  Cell Mol. Neurobiol. (2021) Google Scholar 
59.   Correia et al., 2021 S.C. Correia, N.J. Machado, M.G. Alves, P.F. Oliveira, P.I. Moreira Intermittent hypoxic conditioning rescues cognition and mitochondrial bioenergetic profile in the triple transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease  Int J. Mol. Sci., 22 (2021), p. 461 Crossref Google Scholar 
60.   Coryell et al., 2007 M.W. Coryell, A.E. Ziemann, P.J. Westmoreland, J.M. Haenfler, Z. Kurjakovic, X.-m Zha, M. Price, M.K. Schnizler, J.A. Wemmie Targeting ASIC1a reduces innate fear and alters neuronal activity in the fear circuit  Biol. Psychiatry, 62 (2007), pp. 1140-1148 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
61.   Cosarderelioglu et al., 2021 C. Cosarderelioglu, L.S. Nidadavolu, C.J. George, R. Marx-Rattner, L. Powell, Q.-L. Xue, J. Tian, J. Salib, E.S. Oh, L. Ferrucci, P. Dincer, D.A. Bennett, J.D. Walston, P.M. Abadir Higher angiotensin II type 1 receptor levels and activity in the postmortem brains of older persons with Alzheimer’s dementia  J. Gerontol. Ser. A (2021), p. 76 Google Scholar 
62.   Costello et al., 2019 H. Costello, R.L. Gould, E. Abrol, R. Howard Systematic review and meta-analysis of the association between peripheral inflammatory cytokines and generalised anxiety disorder  BMJ Open, 9 (2019), Article e027925 Crossref Google Scholar 
63.   Cummins et al., 2020 E.P. Cummins, M.J. Strowitzki, C.T. Taylor Mechanisms and consequences of oxygen and carbon dioxide sensing in mammals  Physiol. Rev., 100 (2020), pp. 463-488 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
64.   Daniels et al., 2020 T.E. Daniels, E.M. Olsen, A.R. Tyrka Stress and psychiatric disorders: the role of mitochondria  Annu Rev. Clin. Psychol., 16 (2020), pp. 165-186 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
65.   Das et al., 2018 S.K. Das, P. Dhar, V.K. Sharma, K. Barhwal, S.K. Hota, T. Norboo, S.B. Singh High altitude with monotonous environment has significant impact on mood and cognitive performance of acclimatized lowlanders: Possible role of altered serum BDNF and plasma homocysteine level  J. Affect Disord., 237 (2018), pp. 94-103 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
66.   David et al., 2009 D.J. David, B.A. Samuels, Q. Rainer, J.W. Wang, D. Marsteller, I. Mendez, M. Drew, D.A. Craig, B.P. Guiard, J.P. Guilloux, R.P. Artymyshyn, A.M. Gardier, C. Gerald, I.A. Antonijevic, E.D. Leonardo, R. Hen Neurogenesis-dependent and -independent effects of fluoxetine in an animal model of anxiety/depression  Neuron, 62 (2009), pp. 479-493 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
67.   Daviu et al., 2019 N. Daviu, M.R. Bruchas, B. Moghaddam, C. Sandi, A. Beyeler Neurobiological links between stress and anxiety  Neurobiol. Stress, 11 (2019), Article 100191 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
68.   De Kloet, 2013 E. De Kloet Functional profile of the binary brain corticosteroid receptor system: mediating, multitasking, coordinating, integrating  Eur. J. Pharmacol., 719 (2013), pp. 53-62 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
69.   Del Negro et al., 2018 C.A. Del Negro, G.D. Funk, J.L. Feldman Breathing matters  Nat. Rev. Neurosci., 19 (2018), pp. 351-367 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
70.   DelMastro et al., 2011 K. DelMastro, T. Hellem, N. Kim, D. Kondo, Y.H. Sung, P.F. Renshaw Incidence of major depressive episode correlates with elevation of substate region of residence  J. Affect. Disord., 129 (2011), pp. 376-379 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
71.   Dergacheva et al., 2011 O. Dergacheva, K. Philbin, R. Bateman, D. Mendelowitz Hypocretin-1 (orexin A) prevents the effects of hypoxia/hypercapnia and enhances the GABAergic pathway from the lateral paragigantocellular nucleus to cardiac vagal neurons in the nucleus ambiguus  Neuroscience, 175 (2011), pp. 18-23 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
72.   Ding et al., 2019 F.-S. Ding, X. Cheng, T. Zhao, Y.-Q. Zhao, G.-B. Zhang, H.-T. Wu, L.-L. Zhu, K.-W. Wu [Intermittent hypoxic preconditioning relieves fear and anxiety behavior in post-traumatic stress model mice]  Sheng Li Xue Bao, 71 (2019), pp. 537-546 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
73.   Dong et al., 2013 J.-q Dong, J.-h Zhang, J. Qin, Q.-n Li, W. Huang, X.-b Gao, J. Yu, G.-z Chen, X.-g Tang, L. Huang Anxiety correlates with somatic symptoms and sleep status at high altitudes  Physiol. Behav., 112–113 (2013), pp. 23-31 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
74.   Drew and Hen, 2007 M.R. Drew, R. Hen Adult hippocampal neurogenesis as target for the treatment of depression  CNS Neurol. Disord. Drug Targets, 6 (2007), pp. 205-218 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
75.   Druss and Pincus, 2000 B. Druss, H. Pincus Suicidal ideation and suicide attempts in general medical illnesses  Arch. Intern Med, 160 (2000), pp. 1522-1526 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
76.   Du et al., 2016 M.K. Du, N.J. Hunt, K.A. Waters, R. Machaalani Cumulative effects of repetitive intermittent hypercapnic hypoxia on orexin in the developing piglet hypothalamus  Int. J. Dev. Neurosci., 48 (2016), pp. 1-8 View PDF View article Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
77.   Duan et al., 2021 K. Duan, Q. Gu, R.S. Petralia, Y.X. Wang, D. Panja, X. Liu, M.L. Lehmann, H. Zhu, J. Zhu, Z. Li Mitophagy in the basolateral amygdala mediates increased anxiety induced by aversive social experience  Neuron, 109 (3793–3809) (2021), Article e3798 Google Scholar 
78.   Dudek et al., 2020 Dudek, K.A., Dion-Albert, L., Lebel, M., LeClair, K., Labrecque, S., Tuck, E., Ferrer Perez, C., Golden, S.A., Tamminga, C., Turecki, G., Mechawar, N., Russo, S.J., Menard, C., 2020. Molecular adaptations of the blood-brain barrier promote stress resilience vs. depression. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 117, 3326–3336. Google Scholar 
79.   Dwivedi, 2009 Y. Dwivedi Brain-derived neurotrophic factor: role in depression and suicide  Neuropsychiatr. Dis. Treat., 5 (2009), pp. 433-449 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
80.   Estoppey et al., 2019 J. Estoppey, B. Leger, P. Vuistiner, C. Sartori, B. Kayser Low- and high-altitude cortisol awakening responses differ between AMS-prone and AMS-resistant mountaineers  High. Alt. Med. Biol., 20 (2019), pp. 344-351 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
81.   Fagenholz et al., 2007 P.J. Fagenholz, A.F. Murray, J.A. Gutman, J.K. Findley, N.S. Harris New-onset anxiety disorders at high altitude  Wilderness Environ. Med, 18 (2007), pp. 312-316 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
82.   Fallah and Rini, 2019 J. Fallah, B.I. Rini HIF inhibitors: status of current clinical development  Curr. Oncol. Rep., 21 (2019), p. 6 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
83.   Fan et al., 2016 J. Fan, X. Fan, Y. Li, J. Guo, D. Xia, L. Ding, Q. Zheng, W. Wang, F. Xue, R. Chen, S. Liu, L. Hu, Y. Gong Blunted inflammation mediated by NF-κB activation in hippocampus alleviates chronic normobaric hypoxia-induced anxiety-like behavior in rats  Brain Res. Bull., 122 (2016), pp. 54-61 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
84.   Feddersen et al., 2007 B. Feddersen, H. Ausserer, P. Neupane, F. Thanbichler, A. Depaulis, R. Waanders, S. Noachtar Right temporal cerebral dysfunction heralds symptoms of acute mountain sickness  J. Neurol., 254 (2007), pp. 359-363 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
85.   Feddersen et al., 2015 B. Feddersen, P. Neupane, F. Thanbichler, I. Hadolt, V. Sattelmeyer, T. Pfefferkorn, R. Waanders, S. Noachtar, H. Ausserer Regional differences in the cerebral blood flow velocity response to hypobaric hypoxia at high altitudes  J. Cereb. Blood Flow. Metab., 35 (2015), pp. 1846-1851 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
86.   Feng et al., 2014 Y. Feng, T. Liu, X.-Q. Li, Y. Liu, X.-Y. Zhu, J. Jankovic, T.-H. Pan, Y.-C. Wu Neuroprotection by Orexin-A via HIF-1α induction in a cellular model of Parkinson’s disease  Neurosci. Lett., 579 (2014), pp. 35-40 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
87.   Filiou and Sandi, 2019 M.D. Filiou, C. Sandi Anxiety and brain mitochondria: a bidirectional crosstalk  Trends Neurosci., 42 (2019), pp. 573-588 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
88.   Forster and Smith, 2010 H.V. Forster, C.A. Smith Contributions of central and peripheral chemoreceptors to the ventilatory response to CO 2/H+  J. Appl. Physiol., 108 (2010), pp. 989-994 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
89.   Gamboa et al., 2011 J.L. Gamboa, R. Caceda, A. Arregui Is depression the link between suicide and high altitude?  High. Alt. Med. Biol., 12 (2011), pp. 403-404 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
90.   Gamradt et al., 2021 S. Gamradt, H. Hasselmann, A. Taenzer, J. Brasanac, V. Stiglbauer, A. Sattler, M. Sajitz-Hermstein, S. Kierszniowska, C. Ramien, J. Nowacki, L. Mascarell-Maricic, K. Wingenfeld, D. Piber, A. Ströhle, K. Kotsch, F. Paul, C. Otte, S.M. Gold Reduced mitochondrial respiration in T cells of patients with major depressive disorder  iScience, 24 (2021), Article 103312 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
91.   Gangwar et al., 2019 A. Gangwar, Pooja, M. Sharma, K. Singh, A. Patyal, G. Bhaumik, K. Bhargava, N.K. Sethy Intermittent normobaric hypoxia facilitates high altitude acclimatization by curtailing hypoxia-induced inflammation and dyslipidemia  Pflug. Arch., 471 (2019), pp. 949-959 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
92.   Gatterer et al., 2013 H. Gatterer, M. Wille, M. Faulhaber, H. Lukaski, A. Melmer, C. Ebenbichler, M. Burtscher Association between body water status and acute mountain sickness  PLoS One, 8 (2013), Article e73185 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
93.   Gatterer et al., 2019 H. Gatterer, G. Bernatzky, J. Burtscher, M. Rainer, B. Kayser, M. Burtscher Are pre-ascent low-altitude saliva cortisol levels related to the subsequent acute mountain sickness score? Observations from a field study  High. Alt. Med Biol., 20 (2019), pp. 337-343 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
94.   Gatterer et al., 2020 H. Gatterer, J. Burtscher, J. Estoppey, M. Burtscher, B. Kayser Response to Berger et al. re: “are pre-ascent low-altitude saliva cortisol levels related to the subsequent acute mountain sickness score? observations from a field study”  High. Alt. Med. Biol., 21 (2020), pp. 423-424 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
95.   Gaur et al., 2020 P. Gaur, S. Saini, K. Ray, K.N. Asanbekovna, A. Akunov, A. Maripov, A. Sarybaev, S.B. Singh, B. Kumar, P. Vats Temporal transcriptome analysis suggest modulation of multiple pathways and gene network involved in cell-cell interaction during early phase of high altitude exposure  PLoS One, 15 (2020), Article e0238117 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
96.   Gebara et al., 2020 E. Gebara, O. Zanoletti, S. Ghosal, J. Grosse, B.L. Schneider, G. Knott, S. Astori, C. Sandi Mitofusin-2 in nucleus accumbens regulates anxiety and depression-like behaviors through mitochondrial and neuronal actions  Biol. Psychiatry (2020) Google Scholar 
97.   Gerlach et al., 2021 D.A. Gerlach, J. Manuel, A. Hoff, H. Kronsbein, F. Hoffmann, K. Heusser, H. Ehmke, J. Jordan, J. Tank, F. Beissner Medullary and hypothalamic functional magnetic imaging during acute hypoxia in tracing human peripheral chemoreflex responses  Hypertension, 77 (2021), pp. 1372-1382 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
98.   Ghosal et al., 2014 S. Ghosal, J. Bundzikova-Osacka, C.M. Dolgas, B. Myers, J.P. Herman Glucocorticoid receptors in the nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS) decrease endocrine and behavioral stress responses  Psychoneuroendocrinology, 45 (2014), pp. 142-153 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
99.   Glazachev et al., 2021 O.S. Glazachev, S.Y. Kryzhanovskaya, M.A. Zapara, E.N. Dudnik, V.G. Samartseva Safety and efficacy of intermittent hypoxia conditioning as a new rehabilitation/ secondary prevention strategy for patients with cardiovascular diseases: a systematic review and meta-analysis  Curr. Cardiol. Rev. (2021) Google Scholar 
100.   Godoy et al., 2018 L.D. Godoy, M.T. Rossignoli, P. Delfino-Pereira, N. Garcia-Cairasco, E.H. de Lima Umeoka A comprehensive overview on stress neurobiology: basic concepts and clinical implications  Front. Behav. Neurosci. (2018), p. 12 Google Scholar 
101.   Goodwin, 2011 R.D. Goodwin Is COPD associated with suicide behavior?  J. Psychiatr. Res., 45 (2011), pp. 1269-1271 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
102.   Goodwin et al., 2003 R.D. Goodwin, K. Kroenke, C.W. Hoven, R.L. Spitzer Major depression, physical illness, and suicidal ideation in primary care  Psychosom. Med., 65 (2003), pp. 501-505 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
103.   Goodwin et al., 2012 R.D. Goodwin, R.T. Demmer, S. Galea, A.R. Lemeshow, A.N. Ortega, A. Beautrais Asthma and suicide behaviors: results from the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES III)  J. Psychiatr. Res., 46 (2012), pp. 1002-1007 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
104.   Green et al., 1992 H.J. Green, J.R. Sutton, E.E. Wolfel, J.T. Reeves, G.E. Butterfield, G.A. Brooks Altitude acclimatization and energy metabolic adaptations in skeletal muscle during exercise  J. Appl. Physiol., 73 (1992), pp. 2701-2708 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
105.   Grobe et al., 2008 J.L. Grobe, D. Xu, C.D. Sigmund An intracellular renin-angiotensin system in neurons: fact, hypothesis, or fantasy  Physiology, 23 (2008), pp. 187-193 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
106.   Guyenet, 2014 P.G. Guyenet Regulation of Breathing and Autonomic Outflows by Chemoreceptors, Comprehensive Physiology  John Wiley & Sons, Ltd (2014), pp. 1511-1562 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
107.   Guyenet et al., 2019 P.G. Guyenet, R.L. Stornetta, G. Souza, S.B.G. Abbott, Y. Shi, D.A. Bayliss The retrotrapezoid nucleus: central chemoreceptor and regulator of breathing automaticity  Trends Neurosci., 42 (2019), pp. 807-824 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
108.   Hackett and Roach, 2001 P.H. Hackett, R.C. Roach High-altitude illness  New Engl. J. Med., 345 (2001), pp. 107-114 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
109.   Halder and Milner, 2019 Halder, S.K., Milner, R., 2019. A critical role for microglia in maintaining vascular integrity in the hypoxic spinal cord. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116, 26029–26037. Google Scholar 
110.   Hasler et al., 2007 G. Hasler, S. Fromm, R.P. Alvarez, D.A. Luckenbaugh, W.C. Drevets, C. Grillon Cerebral blood flow in immediate and sustained anxiety  J. Neurosci., 27 (2007), pp. 6313-6319 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
111.   Haws et al., 2009 C.A. Haws, D.D. Gray, D.A. Yurgelun-Todd, M. Moskos, L.J. Meyer, P.F. Renshaw The possible effect of altitude on regional variation in suicide rates  Med. Hypotheses, 73 (2009), pp. 587-590 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
112.   Helbich et al., 2013 M. Helbich, V. Blüml, M. Leitner, N.D. Kapusta Does altitude moderate the impact of lithium on suicide? A spatial analysis of Austria  Geospatial Health, 7 (2013), pp. 209-218 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
113.   Hillman et al., 2008 C.H. Hillman, K.I. Erickson, A.F. Kramer Be smart, exercise your heart: exercise effects on brain and cognition  Nat. Rev. Neurosci., 9 (2008), pp. 58-65 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
114.   Hochachka, 1986 P.W. Hochachka Defense strategies against hypoxia and hypothermia  Science, 231 (1986), pp. 234-241 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
115.   Hollis et al., 2015 Hollis, F., van der Kooij, M.A., Zanoletti, O., Lozano, L., Cantó, C., Sandi, C., 2015. Mitochondrial function in the brain links anxiety with social subordination. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112, 15486–15491. Google Scholar 
116.   Holsboer, 2003 F. Holsboer Corticotropin-releasing hormone modulators and depression  Curr. Opin. Invest. Drugs, 4 (2003), pp. 46-50 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
117.   Honda, 1992 Y. Honda Respiratory and circulatory activities in carotid body-resected humans  J. Appl. Physiol. (1992), pp. 1-8 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
118.   Honigman et al., 2020 B. Honigman, S.R. Lowenstein, M. Valley, R. Roach Rebuttal to Kious et al., re: "editorial comment on: effect of altitude on veteran suicide rates by Sabic et al  High. Alt. Med Biol., 21 (2020), p. 209 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
119.   Horn and Waldrop, 1998 E.M. Horn, T.G. Waldrop Suprapontine control of respiration  Respir. Physiol., 114 (1998), pp. 201-211 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
120.   Horstman et al., 1980 D. Horstman, R. Weiskopf, R.E. Jackson Work capacity during 3-wk sojourn at 4,300 m: effects of relative polycythemia  J. Appl. Physiol., 49 (1980), pp. 311-318 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
121.   Huber et al., 2005 D. Huber, P. Veinante, R. Stoop Vasopressin and oxytocin excite distinct neuronal populations in the central amygdala  Science, 308 (2005), pp. 245-248 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
122.   Huckstepp and Dale, 2011 R.T. Huckstepp, N. Dale Redefining the components of central CO 2 chemosensitivity--towards a better understanding of mechanism  J. Physiol., 589 (2011), pp. 5561-5579 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
123.   Hüfner et al., 2015 K. Hüfner, A. Oberguggenberger, C. Kohl, S. Geisler, E. Gamper, V. Meraner, J. Egeter, M. Hubalek, B. Beer, D. Fuchs, B. Sperner-Unterweger Levels in neurotransmitter precursor amino acids correlate with mental health in patients with breast cancer  Psychoneuroendocrinology, 60 (2015), pp. 28-38 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
124.   Hüfner et al., 2021 K. Hüfner, J.M. Giesinger, J.M. Gostner, J. Egeter, P. Koudouovoh-Tripp, T. Vill, D. Fuchs, B. Sperner-Unterweger Neurotransmitter precursor amino acid ratios show differential, inverse correlations with depression severity in the low and high depression score range  Int. J. Tryptophan Res., 14 (2021) 11786469211039220 Google Scholar 
125.   Hwang et al., 2017 G.-S. Hwang, C.-C. Chen, J.-C. Chou, L.-L. Chang, S.-F. Kan, W.-H. Lai, F.-K. Lieu, S. Hu, P.S. Wang, S.-W. Wang Stimulatory effect of intermittent hypoxia on the production of corticosterone by zona fasciculata-reticularis cells in rats  Sci. Rep., 7 (2017), p. 9035 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
126.   Iturriaga et al., 2021 R. Iturriaga, J. Alcayaga, M.W. Chapleau, V.K. Somers Carotid body chemoreceptors: physiology, pathology, and implications for health and disease  Physiol. Rev., 101 (2021), pp. 1177-1235 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
127.   Jain et al., 2015 K. Jain, D. Prasad, S.B. Singh, E. Kohli Hypobaric hypoxia imbalances mitochondrial dynamics in rat brain hippocampus  Neurol. Res Int, 2015 (2015) 742059-742059 Google Scholar 
128.   Jameson et al., 2016 H. Jameson, R. Bateman, P. Byrne, J. Dyavanapalli, X. Wang, V. Jain, D. Mendelowitz Oxytocin neuron activation prevents hypertension that occurs with chronic intermittent hypoxia/hypercapnia in rats  Am. J. Physiol. -Heart Circ. Physiol., 310 (2016), pp. H1549-H1557 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
129.   Janak and Tye, 2015 P.H. Janak, K.M. Tye From circuits to behaviour in the amygdala  Nature, 517 (2015), pp. 284-292 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
130.   Jerath et al., 2015 R. Jerath, M.W. Crawford, V.A. Barnes, K. Harden Self-regulation of breathing as a primary treatment for anxiety  Appl. Psychophysiol. Biofeedback, 40 (2015), pp. 107-115 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
131.   Jin et al., 2002 K. Jin, X.O. Mao, Y. Sun, L. Xie, D.A. Greenberg Stem cell factor stimulates neurogenesis in vitro and in vivo  J. Clin. Investig., 110 (2002), pp. 311-319 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
132.   Johnson et al., 1984 T.S. Johnson, P.B. Rock, C.S. Fulco, L.A. Trad, R.F. Spark, J.T. Maher Prevention of acute mountain sickness by dexamethasone  New Engl. J. Med., 310 (1984), pp. 683-686 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
133.   Joiner et al., 2005 T.E. Joiner Jr., J.S. Brown, L.R. Wingate The psychology and neurobiology of suicidal behavior  Annu Rev. Psychol., 56 (2005), pp. 287-314 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
134.   Joyce et al., 2018 K.E. Joyce, S.J.E. Lucas, C.H.E. Imray, G.M. Balanos, A.D. Wright Advances in the available non-biological pharmacotherapy prevention and treatment of acute mountain sickness and high altitude cerebral and pulmonary oedema  Expert Opin. Pharm., 19 (2018), pp. 1891-1902 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
135.   Kalia and Lang, 2015 L.V. Kalia, A.E. Lang Parkinson’s disease  Lancet (Lond., Engl. ), 386 (2015), pp. 896-912 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
136.   Kanekar et al., 2018 S. Kanekar, C.S. Sheth, H.J. Ombach, P.R. Olson, O.V. Bogdanova, M. Petersen, C.E. Renshaw, Y.-H. Sung, K.E. D’Anci, P.F. Renshaw Hypobaric hypoxia exposure in rats differentially alters antidepressant efficacy of the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors fluoxetine, paroxetine, escitalopram and sertraline  Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav., 170 (2018), pp. 25-35 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
137.   Kanekar et al., 2021 S. Kanekar, C. Sheth, H. Ombach, J. Brown, M. Hoffman, R. Ettaro, P. Renshaw Sex-based changes in rat brain serotonin and behavior in a model of altitude-related vulnerability to treatment-resistant depression  Psychopharmacology, 238 (2021), pp. 2867-2881 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
138.   Karinen and Tuomisto, 2017 H.M. Karinen, M.T. Tuomisto Performance, mood, and anxiety during a climb of mount everest  High. Alt. Med Biol., 18 (2017), pp. 400-410 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
139.   Katayama et al., 2021 Katayama, P., Leirão, I., Kanashiro, A., Luiz, J.P., Cunha, F., Navegantes, L., Menani, J., Zoccal, D., Colombari, D., Colombari, E., 2021. The Carotid Body Detects Circulating Tumor Necrosis Factor-Alpha to Activate a Sympathetic Anti-Inflammatory Reflex. bioRxiv. Google Scholar 
140.   Katz, 1980 I.R. Katz Oxygen affinity of tyrosine and tryptophan hydroxylases in synaptosomes  J. Neurochem, 35 (1980), pp. 760-763 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
141.   Katz, 1982 I.R. Katz Is there a hypoxic affective syndrome?  Psychosomatics, 23 (846) (1982), pp. 849-850 852-843 Google Scholar 
142.   Kavushansky and Richter-Levin, 2006 A. Kavushansky, G. Richter-Levin Effects of stress and corticosterone on activity and plasticity in the amygdala  J. Neurosci. Res., 84 (2006), pp. 1580-1587 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
143.   Kayser, 1996 B. Kayser Lactate during exercise at high altitude  Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. Occup. Physiol., 74 (1996), pp. 195-205 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
144.   Kierans and Taylor, 2021 S.J. Kierans, C.T. Taylor Regulation of glycolysis by the hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF): implications for cellular physiology  J. Physiol., 599 (2021), pp. 23-37 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
145.   Kim et al., 2011 N. Kim, J.B. Mickelson, B.E. Brenner, C.A. Haws, D.A. Yurgelun-Todd, P.F. Renshaw Altitude, gun ownership, rural areas, and suicide  Am. J. Psychiatry, 168 (2011), pp. 49-54 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
146.   Kious et al., 2018 B.M. Kious, D.G. Kondo, P.F. Renshaw Living high and feeling low: altitude, suicide, and depression  Harv. Rev. Psychiatry, 26 (2018), pp. 43-56 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
147.   Kious et al., 2019 B.M. Kious, A. Bakian, J. Zhao, B. Mickey, C. Guille, P. Renshaw, S. Sen Altitude and risk of depression and anxiety: findings from the Intern Health Study  Int. Rev. Psychiatry, 31 (2019), pp. 637-645 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
148.   Klein, 1993 D.F. Klein False suffocation alarms, spontaneous panics, and related conditions. An integrative hypothesis  Arch. Gen. Psychiatry, 50 (1993), pp. 306-317 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
149.   de Kloet et al., 2005 E.R. de Kloet, M. Joëls, F. Holsboer Stress and the brain: from adaptation to disease  Nat. Rev. Neurosci., 6 (2005), pp. 463-475 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
150.   de Kloet et al., 2016 E.R. de Kloet, C. Otte, R. Kumsta, L. Kok, M.H. Hillegers, H. Hasselmann, D. Kliegel, M. Joels Stress and depression: a crucial role of the mineralocorticoid receptor  J. Neuroendocrinol. (2016), p. 28 Google Scholar 
151.   Kodama et al., 2003 T. Kodama, N. Shimizu, N. Yoshikawa, Y. Makino, R. Ouchida, K. Okamoto, T. Hisada, H. Nakamura, C. Morimoto, H. Tanaka Role of the glucocorticoid receptor for regulation of hypoxia-dependent gene expression*  J. Biol. Chem., 278 (2003), pp. 33384-33391 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
152.   Köhler et al., 2016 S. Köhler, K. Cierpinsky, G. Kronenberg, M. Adli The serotonergic system in the neurobiology of depression: Relevance for novel antidepressants  J. Psychopharmacol., 30 (2016), pp. 13-22 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
153.   Kong et al., 2015 F. Kong, S. Liu, Q. Li, L. Wang Sleep architecture in partially acclimatized lowlanders and native tibetans at 3800 meter altitude: what are the differences?  High. Alt. Med Biol., 16 (2015), pp. 223-229 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
154.   Krzystanek et al., 2021 M. Krzystanek, M. Romańczyk, S. Surma, A. Koźmin-Burzyńska Whole body cryotherapy and hyperbaric oxygen treatment: new biological treatment of depression? A systematic review  Pharm. (Basel) (2021), p. 14 Google Scholar 
155.   Kulandavelu et al., 2015 S. Kulandavelu, W. Balkan, J.M. Hare Regulation of oxygen delivery to the body via hypoxic vasodilation  Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 112 (2015), pp. 6254-6255 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
156.   Kumari et al., 2020 P. Kumari, M. Wadhwa, G. Chauhan, S. Alam, K. Roy, P. Kumar Jha, K. Kishore, K. Ray, S. Kumar, T.C. Nag, U. Panjwani Hypobaric hypoxia induced fear and extinction memory impairment and effect of Ginkgo biloba in its amelioration: Behavioral, neurochemical and molecular correlates  Behav. Brain Res., 387 (2020), Article 112595 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
157.   Kuo et al., 2010 C.-J. Kuo, V.C.-H. Chen, W.-C. Lee, W.J. Chen, C.P. Ferri, R. Stewart, T.-J. Lai, C.-C. Chen, T.-N. Wang, Y.-C. Ko Asthma and suicide mortality in young people: a 12-year follow-up study  Am. J. Psychiatry, 167 (2010), pp. 1092-1099 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
158.   Kushwah et al., 2016 N. Kushwah, V. Jain, S. Deep, D. Prasad, S.B. Singh, N. Khan Neuroprotective role of intermittent hypobaric hypoxia in unpredictable chronic mild stress induced depression in rats  PLoS One, 11 (2016), Article e0149309 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
159.   Lapin, 1996 I.P. Lapin Kynurenines and anxiety  Adv. Exp. Med. Biol., 398 (1996), pp. 191-194 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
160.   Larrick et al., 2021 J.W. Larrick, J.W. Larrick, A.R. Mendelsohn Response to Hypoxia in Cognitive Decline  Rejuvenation Res, 24 (2021), pp. 319-324 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
161.   Lawley et al., 2016 J.S. Lawley, B.D. Levine, M.A. Williams, J. Malm, A. Eklund, D.M. Polaner, A.W. Subudhi, P.H. Hackett, R.C. Roach Cerebral spinal fluid dynamics: effect of hypoxia and implications for high-altitude illness  J. Appl. Physiol. (1985), 120 (2016), pp. 251-262 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
162.   Leonard et al., 2005 M.O. Leonard, C. Godson, H.R. Brady, C.T. Taylor Potentiation of glucocorticoid activity in hypoxia through induction of the glucocorticoid receptor  J. Immunol., 174 (2005), pp. 2250-2257 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
163.   Leung et al., 2021 D.K.Y. Leung, W.C. Chan, A. Spector, G.H.Y. Wong Prevalence of depression, anxiety, and apathy symptoms across dementia stages: a systematic review and meta-analysis  Int J. Geriatr. Psychiatry, 36 (2021), pp. 1330-1344 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
164.   Liang et al., 2020 X.X. Liang, Y.G. Hao, X.M. Duan, X.L. Han, X.X. Cai Hyperbaric oxygen therapy for post-stroke depression: a systematic review and meta-analysis  Clin. Neurol. Neurosurg., 195 (2020), Article 105910 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
165.   Liebowitz et al., 1984 M.R. Liebowitz, A.J. Fyer, J.M. Gorman, D. Dillon, I.L. Appleby, G. Levy, S. Anderson, M. Levitt, M. Palij, S.O. Davies, _et al._ Lactate provocation of panic attacks. I. Clinical and behavioral findings  Arch. Gen. Psychiatry, 41 (1984), pp. 764-770 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
166.   Lin et al., 2019 C.C. Lin, K.L. Huang, C.S. Tung, Y.P. Liu Hyperbaric oxygen therapy restored traumatic stress-induced dysregulation of fear memory and related neurochemical abnormalities  Behav. Brain Res, 359 (2019), pp. 861-870 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
167.   Liu et al., 1994 J.-P. Liu, D. Engler, J.W. Funder, P.J. Robinson Arginine vasopressin (AVP) causes the reversible phosphorylation of the myristoylated alanine-rich C kinase substrate (MARCKS) protein in the ovine anterior pituitary: evidence that MARCKS phosphorylation is associated with adrenocorticotropin (ACTH) secretion  Mol. Cell. Endocrinol., 105 (1994), pp. 217-226 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
168.   Loeppky et al., 2003 J.A. Loeppky, M.V. Icenogle, D. Maes, K. Riboni, P. Scotto, R.C. Roach Body temperature, autonomic responses, and acute mountain sickness  High. Alt. Med. Biol., 4 (2003), pp. 367-373 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
169.   Loeppky et al., 2005 J.A. Loeppky, M.V. Icenogle, D. Maes, K. Riboni, H. Hinghofer-Szalkay, R.C. Roach Early fluid retention and severe acute mountain sickness  J. Appl. Physiol., 98 (2005), pp. 591-597 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
170.   Lukas and Neumann, 2013 M. Lukas, I.D. Neumann Oxytocin and vasopressin in rodent behaviors related to social dysfunctions in autism spectrum disorders  Behav. Brain Res., 251 (2013), pp. 85-94 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
171.   Luo et al., 2020 C.W. Luo, X.Y. Deng, J.L. Cheng, D.X. Xiao, C.Y. Zhang, J.X. Feng, S.Q. Chen, N. Hu Altered anxiety and social behaviors in a mouse model of Fragile X syndrome treated with hyperbaric oxygen therapy  J. Clin. Neurosci., 73 (2020), pp. 245-251 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
172.   Ma et al., 2008 S. Ma, S.W. Mifflin, J.T. Cunningham, D.A. Morilak Chronic intermittent hypoxia sensitizes acute hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal stress reactivity and Fos induction in the rat locus coeruleus in response to subsequent immobilization stress  Neuroscience, 154 (2008), pp. 1639-1647 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
173.   Maddock et al., 2009 R.J. Maddock, M.H. Buonocore, L.E. Copeland, A.L. Richards Elevated brain lactate responses to neural activation in panic disorder: a dynamic 1H-MRS study  Mol. Psychiatry, 14 (2009), pp. 537-545 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
174.   Mallet et al., 2020 R.T. Mallet, J. Burtscher, E.B. Manukhina, H.F. Downey, O.S. Glazachev, T.V. Serebrovskaya, M. Burtscher Hypoxic–hyperoxic conditioning and dementia  Diagnosis and Management in Dementia, Elsevier (2020), pp. 745-760 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
175.   Mann, 2003 J.J. Mann Neurobiology of suicidal behaviour  Nat. Rev. Neurosci., 4 (2003), pp. 819-828 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
176.   Manukhina et al., 2018 E.B. Manukhina, V.E. Tseilikman, O.B. Tseilikman, M.V. Komelkova, M.V. Kondashevskaya, A.V. Goryacheva, M.S. Lapshin, P.O. Platkovskii, A.V. Alliluev, H.F. Downey Intermittent hypoxia improves behavioral and adrenal gland dysfunction induced by posttraumatic stress disorder in rats  J. Appl. Physiol. (1985), 125 (2018), pp. 931-937 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
177.   Manukhina et al., 2020 E.B. Manukhina, V.E. Tseilikman, M.N. Karpenko, N.S. Pestereva, O.B. Tseilikman, M.V. Komelkova, M.V. Kondashevskaya, A.V. Goryacheva, M.S. Lapshin, P.O. Platkovskii, A.P. Sarapultsev, A.V. Alliluev, H.F. Downey Intermittent hypoxic conditioning alleviates post-traumatic stress disorder-induced damage and dysfunction of rat visceral organs and brain  Int. J. Mol. Sci., 21 (2020), p. 345 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
178.   Marchi et al., 2020 D. Marchi, K. Santhakumar, E. Markham, N. Li, K.-H. Storbeck, N. Krone, V.T. Cunliffe, F.J.Mv Eeden Bidirectional crosstalk between Hypoxia-Inducible Factor and glucocorticoid signalling in zebrafish larvae  PLOS Genet., 16 (2020), Article e1008757 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
179.   Marciante et al., 2021 A.B. Marciante, B. Shell, G.E. Farmer, J.T. Cunningham Role of angiotensin II in chronic intermittent hypoxia-induced hypertension and cognitive decline  Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol., 320 (2021), pp. R519-R525 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
180.   Marshall, 1998a J. Marshall Chemoreceptors and cardiovascular control in acute and chronic systemic hypoxia  Braz. J. Med. Biol. Res., 31 (1998), pp. 863-888 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
181.   Marshall, 1994 J.M. Marshall Peripheral chemoreceptors and cardiovascular regulation  Physiol. Rev., 74 (1994), pp. 543-594 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
182.   Marshall, 1998b J.M. Marshall Chemoreceptors and cardiovascular control in acute and chronic systemic hypoxia  Braz. J. Med. Biol. Res, 31 (1998), pp. 863-888 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
183.   Maurer et al., 2008 J. Maurer, V. Rebbapragada, S. Borson, R. Goldstein, M.E. Kunik, A.M. Yohannes, N.A. Hanania Anxiety and depression in COPD: current understanding, unanswered questions, and research needs  Chest, 134 (2008), pp. 43s-56s Google Scholar 
184.   McEwen, 1998 B.S. McEwen Protective and damaging effects of stress mediators  New Engl. J. Med., 338 (1998), pp. 171-179 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
185.   McEwen and Gianaros, 2010 B.S. McEwen, P.J. Gianaros Central role of the brain in stress and adaptation: links to socioeconomic status, health, and disease  Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 1186 (2010), pp. 190-222 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
186.   McGettrick and O’Neill, 2020 A.F. McGettrick, L.A. O’Neill The role of HIF in immunity and inflammation  Cell Metab. (2020) Google Scholar 
187.   McGonagle and Kessler, 1990 K.A. McGonagle, R.C. Kessler Chronic stress, acute stress, and depressive symptoms  Am. J. Community Psychol., 18 (1990), pp. 681-706 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
188.   Meng et al., 2020 S.X. Meng, B. Wang, W.T. Li Intermittent hypoxia improves cognition and reduces anxiety‐related behavior in APP/PS1 mice  Brain Behav., 10 (2020), Article e01513 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
189.   Meuret et al., 2018 A.E. Meuret, T. Ritz, F.H. Wilhelm, W.T. Roth, D. Rosenfield Hypoventilation therapy alleviates panic by repeated induction of dyspnea  Biol. Psychiatry Cogn. Neurosci. Neuroimaging, 3 (2018), pp. 539-545 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
190.   Miller and Raison, 2016 A.H. Miller, C.L. Raison The role of inflammation in depression: from evolutionary imperative to modern treatment target  Nat. Rev. Immunol., 16 (2016), p. 22 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
191.   Miller et al., 2013 A.H. Miller, E. Haroon, C.L. Raison, J.C. Felger Cytokine targets in the brain: impact on neurotransmitters and neurocircuits  Depress Anxiety, 30 (2013), pp. 297-306 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
192.   Missoum et al., 1992 G. Missoum, E. Rosnet, J.P. Richalet Control of anxiety and acute mountain sickness in Himalayan mountaineers  Int J. Sports Med., 13 (Suppl 1) (1992) S37-39 Google Scholar 
193.   Möller, 2003 H.-J. Möller Suicide, suicidality and suicide prevention in affective disorders  Acta Psychiatr. Scand., 108 (2003), pp. 73-80 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
194.   Morris et al., 2020 L.S. Morris, J.G. McCall, D.S. Charney, J.W. Murrough The role of the locus coeruleus in the generation of pathological anxiety  Brain Neurosci. Adv., 4 (2020) 2398212820930321 Google Scholar 
195.   Moya et al., 2020 E.A. Moya, A. Go, C.B. Kim, Z. Fu, T.S. Simonson, F.L. Powell Neuronal HIF-1alpha in the nucleus tractus solitarius contributes to ventilatory acclimatization to hypoxia  J. Physiol., 598 (2020), pp. 2021-2034 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
196.   Mulkey et al., 2007 D.K. Mulkey, D.L. Rosin, G. West, A.C. Takakura, T.S. Moreira, D.A. Bayliss, P.G. Guyenet Serotonergic neurons activate chemosensitive retrotrapezoid nucleus neurons by a pH-independent mechanism  J. Neurosci., 27 (2007), pp. 14128-14138 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
197.   Muza et al., 2010 S.R. Muza, B.A. Beidleman, C.S. Fulco Altitude preexposure recommendations for inducing acclimatization  High. Alt. Med. Biol., 11 (2010), pp. 87-92 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
198.   Myers et al., 2005 D.A. Myers, P.A. Bell, K. Hyatt, M. Mlynarczyk, C.A. Ducsay Long-term hypoxia enhances proopiomelanocortin processing in the near-term ovine fetus  Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol., 288 (2005), pp. R1178-R1184 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
199.   Myers et al., 2016 D.A. Myers, K. Singleton, C. Kenkel, K.M. Kaushal, C.A. Ducsay Gestational hypoxia modulates expression of corticotropin-releasing hormone and arginine vasopressin in the paraventricular nucleus in the ovine fetus  Physiol. Rep., 4 (2016), Article e12643 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
200.   Narkiewicz et al., 2006 K. Narkiewicz, P. van de Borne, N. Montano, D. Hering, T. Kara, V.K. Somers Sympathetic neural outflow and chemoreflex sensitivity are related to spontaneous breathing rate in normal men  Hypertension, 47 (2006), pp. 51-55 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
201.   Nattie, 1999 E. Nattie CO 2, brainstem chemoreceptors and breathing  Prog. Neurobiol., 59 (1999), pp. 299-331 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
202.   Navarrete-Opazo and Mitchell, 2014 A. Navarrete-Opazo, G.S. Mitchell Therapeutic potential of intermittent hypoxia: a matter of dose  Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol., 307 (2014), pp. R1181-R1197 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
203.   Nelson, 1982 M. Nelson Psychological testing at high altitudes  Aviat., Space, Environ. Med. (1982) Google Scholar 
204.   Neumann and Landgraf, 2012 I.D. Neumann, R. Landgraf Balance of brain oxytocin and vasopressin: implications for anxiety, depression, and social behaviors  Trends Neurosci., 35 (2012), pp. 649-659 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
205.   Neurauter et al., 2008 G. Neurauter, K. Schröcksnadel, S. Scholl-Bürgi, B. Sperner-Unterweger, C. Schubert, M. Ledochowski, D. Fuchs Chronic immune stimulation correlates with reduced phenylalanine turnover  Curr. Drug Metab., 9 (2008), pp. 622-627 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
206.   Nguyen et al., 2021 K.T. Nguyen, C.A. Gates, J.E. Hassell Jr., C.L. Foxx, S.N. Salazar, A.K. Luthens, A.L. Arnold, B.L. Elam, A.I. Elsayed, M. Leblanc, S.C. Adams, C.A. Lowry, J.D. Reuter Evaluation of the effects of altitude on biological signatures of inflammation and anxiety- and depressive-like behavioral responses  Prog. Neuropsychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry, 111 (2021), Article 110331 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
207.   Niedermeier et al., 2017 M. Niedermeier, R. Waanders, V. Menz, M. Wille, M. Kopp, M. Burtscher Is acute mountain sickness related to trait anxiety? A normobaric chamber study  Physiol. Behav., 171 (2017), pp. 187-191 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
208.   Noble, 1943 R.L. Noble The development of resistance by rats and guinea pigs to amounts of trauma usually fatal  Am. J. Physiol., 138 (1943), pp. 346-351 Crossref Google Scholar 
209.   Ogoh et al., 2021 S. Ogoh, T. Washio, B.S. Stacey, H. Tsukamoto, A. Iannetelli, T.S. Owens, T.A. Calverley, L. Fall, C.J. Marley, S. Saito, H. Watanabe, T. Hashimoto, S. Ando, T. Miyamoto, D.M. Bailey Integrated respiratory chemoreflex-mediated regulation of cerebral blood flow in hypoxia: implications for oxygen delivery and acute mountain sickness  Exp. Physiol., 106 (2021), pp. 1922-1938 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
210.   Ohayon, 2014 M.M. Ohayon Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease and its association with sleep and mental disorders in the general population  J. Psychiatr. Res, 54 (2014), pp. 79-84 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
211.   Oliver et al., 2012 S.J. Oliver, S.J. Sanders, C.J. Williams, Z.A. Smith, E. Lloyd-Davies, R. Roberts, C. Arthur, L. Hardy, J.H. Macdonald Physiological and psychological illness symptoms at high altitude and their relationship with acute mountain sickness: a prospective cohort study  J. Travel Med, 19 (2012), pp. 210-219 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
212.   Olugbemide et al., 2021 A.S. Olugbemide, B. Ben-Azu, A.G. Bakre, A.M. Ajayi, O. Femi-Akinlosotu, S. Umukoro Naringenin improves depressive- and anxiety-like behaviors in mice exposed to repeated hypoxic stress through modulation of oxido-inflammatory mediators and NF-kB/BDNF expressions  Brain Res. Bull., 169 (2021), pp. 214-227 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
213.   Oxenkrug, 2010 G.F. Oxenkrug Tryptophan kynurenine metabolism as a common mediator of genetic and environmental impacts in major depressive disorder: the serotonin hypothesis revisited 40 years later  Isr. J. Psychiatry Relat. Sci., 47 (2010), pp. 56-63 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
214.   Pan et al., 2007 Y. Pan, K.D. Mansfield, C.C. Bertozzi, V. Rudenko, D.A. Chan, A.J. Giaccia, M.C. Simon Multiple factors affecting cellular redox status and energy metabolism modulate hypoxia-inducible factor prolyl hydroxylase activity in vivo and in vitro  Mol. Cell Biol., 27 (2007), pp. 912-925 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
215.   Panesar, 2004 N.S. Panesar High altitude sickness. Is acute cortisol deficiency involved in its pathophysiology?  Med Hypotheses, 63 (2004), pp. 507-510 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
216.   Pariante and Lightman, 2008 C.M. Pariante, S.L. Lightman The HPA axis in major depression: classical theories and new developments  Trends Neurosci., 31 (2008), pp. 464-468 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
217.   Parker et al., 2014 Parker, K.J., Garner, J.P., Libove, R.A., Hyde, S.A., Hornbeak, K.B., Carson, D.S., Liao, C.-P., Phillips, J.M., Hallmayer, J.F., Hardan, A.Y., 2014. Plasma oxytocin concentrations and OXTR polymorphisms predict social impairments in children with and without autism spectrum disorder. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111, 12258–12263. Google Scholar 
218.   Perrin et al., 2019 A.J. Perrin, M.A. Horowitz, J. Roelofs, P.A. Zunszain, C.M. Pariante Glucocorticoid resistance: is it a requisite for increased cytokine production in depression? A systematic review and meta-analysis  Front Psychiatry, 10 (2019), p. 423 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
219.   Pham et al., 2021 K. Pham, K. Parikh, E.C. Heinrich Hypoxia and inflammation: insights from high-altitude physiology  Front. Physiol., 12 (2021), Article 676782 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
220.   Picard et al., 2018 M. Picard, B.S. McEwen, E.S. Epel, C. Sandi An energetic view of stress: Focus on mitochondria  Front Neuroendocr., 49 (2018), pp. 72-85 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
221.   Prioux-Guyonneau et al., 1982 M. Prioux-Guyonneau, E. Mocaër-Cretet, F. Redjimi-Hafsi, C. Jacquot Changes in brain 5-hydroxytryptamine metabolism induced by hypobaric hypoxia  Gen. Pharm., 13 (1982), pp. 251-254 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
222.   Proczka et al., 2021 M. Proczka, J. Przybylski, A. Cudnoch-Jędrzejewska, E. Szczepańska-Sadowska, T. Żera Vasopressin and breathing: review of evidence for respiratory effects of the antidiuretic hormone  Front. Physiol. (2021), p. 12 Google Scholar 
223.   Qiang et al., 2021 Q. Qiang, J.M. Manalo, H. Sun, Y. Zhang, A. Song, A.Q. Wen, Y.E. Wen, C. Chen, H. Liu, Y. Cui, T. Nemkov, J.A. Reisz, G. Edwards Iii, F.A. Perreira, R.E. Kellems, C. Soto, A. D’Alessandro, Y. Xia Erythrocyte adenosine A2B receptor prevents cognitive and auditory dysfunction by promoting hypoxic and metabolic reprogramming  PLoS Biol., 19 (2021), Article e3001239 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
224.   Radley et al., 2015 J. Radley, D. Morilak, V. Viau, S. Campeau Chronic stress and brain plasticity: Mechanisms underlying adaptive and maladaptive changes and implications for stress-related CNS disorders  Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev., 58 (2015), pp. 79-91 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
225.   Raman et al., 2005 L. Raman, I. Tkac, K. Ennis, M.K. Georgieff, R. Gruetter, R. Rao In vivo effect of chronic hypoxia on the neurochemical profile of the developing rat hippocampus  Dev. Brain Res., 156 (2005), pp. 202-209 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
226.   Ratcliffe et al., 1998 P.J. Ratcliffe, J.F. O’Rourke, P.H. Maxwell, C.W. Pugh Oxygen sensing, hypoxia-inducible factor-1 and the regulation of mammalian gene expression  J. Exp. Biol., 201 (1998), pp. 1153-1162 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
227.   Ravi et al., 2021 M. Ravi, A.H. Miller, V. Michopoulos The immunology of stress and the impact of inflammation on the brain and behavior  BJPsych Adv., 27 (2021), pp. 158-165 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
228.   Ray et al., 2011 K. Ray, A. Dutta, U. Panjwani, L. Thakur, J.P. Anand, S. Kumar Hypobaric hypoxia modulates brain biogenic amines and disturbs sleep architecture  Neurochem. Int., 58 (2011), pp. 112-118 View PDF View article Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
229.   Reno et al., 2018 E. Reno, T.L. Brown, M.E. Betz, M.H. Allen, L. Hoffecker, J. Reitinger, R. Roach, B. Honigman Suicide and high altitude: an integrative review  High. Alt. Med. Biol., 19 (2018), pp. 99-108 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
230.   Risal et al., 2016 A. Risal, K. Manandhar, M. Linde, T.J. Steiner, A. Holen Anxiety and depression in Nepal: prevalence, comorbidity and associations  BMC Psychiatry, 16 (2016), p. 102 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
231.   Roach et al., 2018 R.C. Roach, P.H. Hackett, O. Oelz, P. Bärtsch, A.M. Luks, M.J. MacInnis, J.K. Baillie, E. Achatz, E. Albert, J.S. Andrews, J.D. Anholm, M.Z. Ashraf, P. Auerbach, B. Basnyat, B.A. Beidleman, R.R. Berendsen, M.M. Berger, K.E. Bloch, H. Brugger, A. Cogo, R.G. Costa, A. Cumpstey, A. Cymerman, T. Debevec, C. Duncan, D. Dubowitz, A. Fago, M. Furian, M. Gaidica, P. Ganguli, M.P.W. Grocott, D. Hammer, D. Hall, D. Hillebrandt, M.P. Hilty, G. Himashree, B. Honigman, N. Gilbert-Kawai, B. Kayser, L. Keyes, M. Koehle, S. Kohli, A. Kuenzel, B.D. Levine, M. Lichtblau, J. Macdonald, M.B. Maeder, M. Maggiorini, D. Martin, S. Masuyama, J. McCall, S. McIntosh, G. Millet, F. Moraga, C. Mounsey, S.R. Muza, S. Oliver, Q. Pasha, R. Paterson, L. Phillips, A. Pichon, P.A. Pickerodt, M. Pun, M. Rain, D. Rennie, G. Ri-Li, S. Roy, S. Verges, T.B.C. dos Santos, R.B. Schoene, O.D. Schoch, S. Singh, T. Sooronbaev, C.D. Steinback, M. Stembridge, G. Stewart, T. Stobdan, G. Strapazzon, A.W. Subudhi, E. Swenson, A.A. Roger Thompson, M.T. van Patot, R. Twomey, S. Ulrich, N. Voituron, D.R. Wagner, S.-h Wang, J.B. West, M. Wilkes, G. Willmann, M. Yaron, K. Zafren The 2018 Lake Louise Acute Mountain Sickness Score  High. Alt. Med. Biol., 19 (2018), pp. 4-6 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
232.   Rock et al., 1987 P.B. Rock, T.S. Johnson, A. Cymerman, R.L. Burse, L.J. Falk, C.S. Fulco Effect of dexamethasone on symptoms of acute mountain sickness at Pikes Peak, Colorado (4,300 m)  Aviat. Space Environ. Med., 58 (1987), pp. 668-672 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
233.   Rosenberg et al., 2013 P.B. Rosenberg, M.M. Mielke, B.S. Appleby, E.S. Oh, Y.E. Geda, C.G. Lyketsos The association of neuropsychiatric symptoms in MCI with incident dementia and Alzheimer disease  Am. J. Geriatr. Psychiatry Off. J. Am. Assoc. Geriatr. Psychiatry, 21 (2013), pp. 685-695 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
234.   Roth et al., 2002 W.T. Roth, A. Gomolla, A.E. Meuret, G.W. Alpers, E.M. Handke, F.H. Wilhelm High altitudes, anxiety, and panic attacks: is there a relationship?  Depress Anxiety, 16 (2002), pp. 51-58 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
235.   Rubin et al., 1995 R.T. Rubin, J.J. Phillips, T.F. Sadow, J.T. McCracken Adrenal gland volume in major depression. Increase during the depressive episode and decrease with successful treatment  Arch. Gen. Psychiatry, 52 (1995), pp. 213-218 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
236.   Ruyle et al., 2018 B.C. Ruyle, P.J. Klutho, C.P. Baines, C.M. Heesch, E.M. Hasser Hypoxia activates a neuropeptidergic pathway from the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus to the nucleus tractus solitarii  Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol., 315 (2018), pp. R1167-R1182 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
237.   Rybnikova and Samoilov, 2015 E. Rybnikova, M. Samoilov Current insights into the molecular mechanisms of hypoxic pre- and postconditioning using hypobaric hypoxia  Front. Neurosci. (2015), p. 9 Google Scholar 
238.   Rybnikova et al., 2007 E. Rybnikova, V. Mironova, S. Pivina, E. Tulkova, N. Ordyan, L. Vataeva, E. Vershinina, E. Abritalin, A. Kolchev, N. Nalivaeva, A.J. Turner, M. Samoilov Antidepressant-like effects of mild hypoxia preconditioning in the learned helplessness model in rats  Neurosci. Lett., 417 (2007), pp. 234-239 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
239.   Rybnikova et al., 2008 E.A. Rybnikova, M.O. Samoilov, V.I. Mironova, E.I. Tyul’kova, S.G. Pivina, L.A. Vataeva, N.E. Ordyan, E.Y. Abritalin, A.I. Kolchev The possible use of hypoxic preconditioning for the prophylaxis of post-stress depressive episodes  Neurosci. Behav. Physiol., 38 (2008), pp. 721-726 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
240.   Rybnikova et al., 2013 E.A. Rybnikova, K.A. Baranova, T.S. Glushchenko, O.V. Vetrovoĭ, M.V. Sidorova, V.I. Portnichenko Involvement of transcriptional factor induced by hypoxia in the neuronal mechanisms of adaptation to psychoemotional and hypoxic stress  Fiziol. Zh., 59 (2013), pp. 88-97 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
241.   Sabic et al., 2019 H. Sabic, B. Kious, D. Boxer, C. Fitzgerald, C. Riley, L. Scholl, E. McGlade, D. Yurgelun-Todd, P.F. Renshaw, D.G. Kondo Effect of altitude on veteran suicide rates  High. Alt. Med. Biol., 20 (2019), pp. 171-177 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
242.   Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2013 M.A. Sanchez-Gonzalez, R.W. May, A.P. Koutnik, M. Kabbaj, F.D. Fincham Sympathetic vasomotor tone is associated with depressive symptoms in young females: a potential link between depression and cardiovascular disease  Am. J. Hypertens., 26 (2013), pp. 1389-1397 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
243.   Sandi and Richter-Levin, 2009 C. Sandi, G. Richter-Levin From high anxiety trait to depression: a neurocognitive hypothesis  Trends Neurosci., 32 (2009), pp. 312-320 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
244.   Sapolsky, 1996 R.M. Sapolsky Why stress is bad for your brain  Science, 273 (1996), pp. 749-750 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
245.   Sapolsky et al., 2000 R.M. Sapolsky, L.M. Romero, A.U. Munck How do glucocorticoids influence stress responses? Integrating permissive, suppressive, stimulatory, and preparative actions  Endocr. Rev., 21 (2000), pp. 55-89 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
246.   Sarkaki et al., 2015 A. Sarkaki, Y. Farbood, M. Badavi, L. Khalaj, F. Khodagholi, G. Ashabi Metformin improves anxiety-like behaviors through AMPK-dependent regulation of autophagy following transient forebrain ischemia  Metab. Brain Dis., 30 (2015), pp. 1139-1150 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
247.   Saxena et al., 2015 A. Saxena, J.T. Little, T.P. Nedungadi, J.T. Cunningham Angiotensin II type 1a receptors in subfornical organ contribute towards chronic intermittent hypoxia-associated sustained increase in mean arterial pressure  Am. J. Physiol. -Heart Circ. Physiol., 308 (2015), pp. H435-H446 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
248.   Scaini et al., 2021 Scaini, G., Mason, B.L., Diaz, A.P., Jha, M.K., Soares, J.C., Trivedi, M.H., Quevedo, J., 2021. Dysregulation of mitochondrial dynamics, mitophagy and apoptosis in major depressive disorder: Does inflammation play a role? Mol Psychiatry. Google Scholar 
249.   Schaaf et al., 1998 M.J.M. Schaaf, J. de Jong, E.R. de Kloet, E. Vreugdenhil Downregulation of BDNF mRNA and protein in the rat hippocampus by corticosterone  Brain Res., 813 (1998), pp. 112-120 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
250.   Schultz et al., 2007 H.D. Schultz, Y.L. Li, Y. Ding Arterial chemoreceptors and sympathetic nerve activity: implications for hypertension and heart failure  Hypertension, 50 (2007), pp. 6-13 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
251.   Seagroves et al., 2001 T.N. Seagroves, H.E. Ryan, H. Lu, B.G. Wouters, M. Knapp, P. Thibault, K. Laderoute, R.S. Johnson Transcription factor HIF-1 is a necessary mediator of the pasteur effect in mammalian cells  Mol. Cell Biol., 21 (2001), pp. 3436-3444 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
252.   Seematter et al., 2002 G. Seematter, P. Battilana, L. Tappy Effects of dexamethasone on the metabolic responses to mental stress in humans  Clin. Physiol. Funct. Imaging, 22 (2002), pp. 139-144 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
253.   Selek, 2013 S. Selek Altitude, immigration and suicide rates: a study from Turkey  Psychiatry Invest., 10 (2013), pp. 89-91 Crossref Google Scholar 
254.   Shah et al., 2020 N. Shah, K. Bye, A. Marshall, D.R. Woods, J. O’Hara, M. Barlow, J. Rimmer, C.J. Boos The effects of apnea training, using voluntary breath holds, on high altitude acclimation: breathe-high altitude study  High. Alt. Med. Biol., 21 (2020), pp. 152-159 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
255.   Shukitt and Banderet, 1988 B.L. Shukitt, L.E. Banderet Mood states at 1600 and 4300 meters terrestrial altitude  Aviat. Space Environ. Med., 59 (1988), pp. 530-532 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
256.   Shukitt-Hale et al., 1998 B. Shukitt-Hale, L.E. Banderet, H.R. Lieberman Elevation-dependent symptom, mood, and performance changes produced by exposure to hypobaric hypoxia  Int. J. Aviat. Psychol., 8 (1998), pp. 319-334 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
257.   Silverman and Sternberg, 2012 M.N. Silverman, E.M. Sternberg Glucocorticoid regulation of inflammation and its functional correlates: from HPA axis to glucocorticoid receptor dysfunction  Ann. N. Y Acad. Sci., 1261 (2012), pp. 55-63 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
258.   Slavich and Irwin, 2014 G.M. Slavich, M.R. Irwin From stress to inflammation and major depressive disorder: a social signal transduction theory of depression  Psychol. Bull., 140 (2014), pp. 774-815 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
259.   Smith et al., 2013 S.M.C. Smith, S.A. Friedle, J.J. Watters Chronic intermittent hypoxia exerts CNS region-specific effects on rat microglial inflammatory and TLR4 gene expression  PLoS One, 8 (2013) e81584-e81584 Google Scholar 
260.   Smoller et al., 2014 J.W. Smoller, P.J. Gallagher, L.E. Duncan, L.M. McGrath, S.A. Haddad, A.J. Holmes, A.B. Wolf, S. Hilker, S.R. Block, S. Weill The human ortholog of acid-sensing ion channel gene ASIC1a is associated with panic disorder and amygdala structure and function  Biol. Psychiatry, 76 (2014), pp. 902-910 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
261.   Southwick et al., 1999 S.M. Southwick, J.D. Bremner, A. Rasmusson, C.A. Morgan 3rd, A. Arnsten, D.S. Charney Role of norepinephrine in the pathophysiology and treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder  Biol. Psychiatry, 46 (1999), pp. 1192-1204 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
262.   Sperner-Unterweger et al., 2014 B. Sperner-Unterweger, C. Kohl, D. Fuchs Immune changes and neurotransmitters: possible interactions in depression?  Prog. Neuropsychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry, 48 (2014), pp. 268-276 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
263.   Spijker and van Rossum, 2012 A.T. Spijker, E.F.C. van Rossum Glucocorticoid sensitivity in mood disorders  Neuroendocrinology, 95 (2012), pp. 179-186 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
264.   Spitzer et al., 2011 C. Spitzer, S. Gläser, H.J. Grabe, R. Ewert, S. Barnow, S.B. Felix, H.J. Freyberger, H. Völzke, B. Koch, C. Schäper Mental health problems, obstructive lung disease and lung function: findings from the general population  J. Psychosom. Res., 71 (2011), pp. 174-179 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
265.   Spliethoff et al., 2013 K. Spliethoff, D. Meier, I. Aeberli, M. Gassmann, W. Langhans, M. Maggiorini, T.A. Lutz, O. Goetze Reduced insulin sensitivity as a marker for acute mountain sickness?  High. Alt. Med. Biol., 14 (2013), pp. 240-250 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
266.   Sracic et al., 2014 M.K. Sracic, D. Thomas, A. Pate, J. Norris, M. Norman, J.H. Gertsch Syndrome of acute anxiety among marines after recent arrival at high altitude  Mil. Med., 179 (2014), pp. 559-564 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
267.   Strasser et al., 2017 B. Strasser, B. Sperner-Unterweger, D. Fuchs, J.M. Gostner Mechanisms of inflammation-associated depression: immune influences on tryptophan and phenylalanine metabolisms  Curr. Top. Behav. Neurosci., 31 (2017), pp. 95-115 Google Scholar 
268.   Swenson, 2015 E.R. Swenson Pharmacology of acute mountain sickness: old drugs and newer thinking  J. Appl. Physiol., 120 (2015), pp. 204-215 Google Scholar 
269.   Swenson, 2016 E.R. Swenson Pharmacology of acute mountain sickness: old drugs and newer thinking  J. Appl. Physiol., 120 (2016), pp. 204-215 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
270.   Tang et al., 2014 E. Tang, Y. Chen, Y. Luo Dexamethasone for the prevention of acute mountain sickness: systematic review and meta-analysis  Int. J. Cardiol., 173 (2014), pp. 133-138 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
271.   Tang et al., 2010 K. Tang, F.C. Xia, P.D. Wagner, E.C. Breen Exercise-induced VEGF transcriptional activation in brain, lung and skeletal muscle  Respir. Physiol. Neurobiol., 170 (2010), pp. 16-22 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
272.   Tank and Lee Wong, 2015 A. Tank, D. Lee Wong Peripheral and central effects of circulating catecholamines  Compr. Physiol., 5 (2015), p. 15 Google Scholar 
273.   Taylor et al., 1999 E.W. Taylor, D. Jordan, J.H. Coote Central control of the cardiovascular and respiratory systems and their interactions in vertebrates  Physiol. Rev., 79 (1999), pp. 855-916 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
274.   Taylor et al., 2008 M.K. Taylor, J.P. Reis, K.P. Sausen, G.A. Padilla, A.E. Markham, E.G. Potterat, S.P. Drummond Trait anxiety and salivary cortisol during free living and military stress  Aviat. Space Environ. Med, 79 (2008), pp. 129-135 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
275.   Teran et al., 2014 F.A. Teran, C.A. Massey, G.B. Richerson Serotonin neurons and central respiratory chemoreception: where are we now?  Prog. Brain Res., 209 (2014), pp. 207-233 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
276.   Terraneo and Samaja, 2017 L. Terraneo, M. Samaja Comparative response of brain to chronic hypoxia and hyperoxia  Int. J. Mol. Sci., 18 (2017) Google Scholar 
277.   Triana-Del Río et al., 2018 R. Triana-Del Río, E. van den Burg, R. Stoop, C. Hegoburu Acute and long-lasting effects of oxytocin in cortico-limbic circuits: consequences for fear recall and extinction  Psychopharmacology (2018) Google Scholar 
278.   Ulrich-Lai and Herman, 2009 Y.M. Ulrich-Lai, J.P. Herman Neural regulation of endocrine and autonomic stress responses  Nat. Rev. Neurosci., 10 (2009), pp. 397-409 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
279.   Vale et al., 1981 W. Vale, J. Spiess, C. Rivier, J. Rivier Characterization of a 41-residue ovine hypothalamic peptide that stimulates secretion of corticotropin and β-endorphin  Science (1981), pp. 1394-1397 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
280.   van der Kooij, 2020 M.A. van der Kooij The impact of chronic stress on energy metabolism  Mol. Cell Neurosci., 107 (2020), Article 103525 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
281.   van der Kooij et al., 2018 M.A. van der Kooij, T. Jene, G. Treccani, I. Miederer, A. Hasch, N. Voelxen, S. Walenta, M.B. Müller Chronic social stress-induced hyperglycemia in mice couples individual stress susceptibility to impaired spatial memory  Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 115 (2018), pp. E10187-e10196 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
282.   Vanderhaeghen et al., 2022 T. Vanderhaeghen, S. Timmermans, D. Watts, V. Paakinaho, M. Eggermont, J. Vandewalle, C. Wallaeys, L. Van Wyngene, K. Van Looveren, L. Nuyttens, S. Dewaele, J. Vanden Berghe, K. Lemeire, J. De Backer, L. Dirkx, W. Vanden Berghe, G. Caljon, B. Ghesquière, K. De Bosscher, B. Wielockx, J.J. Palvimo, R. Beyaert, C. Libert Reprogramming of glucocorticoid receptor function by hypoxia  EMBO Rep. (2022), p. 23 Google Scholar 
283.   Vettori et al., 2017 A. Vettori, D. Greenald, G.K. Wilson, M. Peron, N. Facchinello, E. Markham, M. Sinnakaruppan, L.C. Matthews, J.A. McKeating, F. Argenton, F.J.Mv Eeden Glucocorticoids promote Von Hippel Lindau degradation and Hif-1α stabilization  Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 114 (2017), pp. 9948-9953 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
284.   Vinkers et al., 2021 C.H. Vinkers, E. Kuzminskaite, F. Lamers, E.J. Giltay, B.W.J.H. Penninx An integrated approach to understand biological stress system dysregulation across depressive and anxiety disorders  J. Affect Disord., 283 (2021), pp. 139-146 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
285.   Vögele and von Leupoldt, 2008 C. Vögele, A. von Leupoldt Mental disorders in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)  Respir. Med, 102 (2008), pp. 764-773 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
286.   Vreeburg et al., 2009 S.A. Vreeburg, W.J. Hoogendijk, J. van Pelt, R.H. Derijk, J.C. Verhagen, R. van Dyck, J.H. Smit, F.G. Zitman, B.W. Penninx Major depressive disorder and hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis activity: results from a large cohort study  Arch. Gen. Psychiatry, 66 (2009), pp. 617-626 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
287.   Wang et al., 2019 J. Wang, Y. Zhou, Y. Liang, Z. Liu A large sample survey of tibetan people on the qinghai-tibet plateau: current situation of depression and risk factors  Int. J. Environ. Res Public Health (2019), p. 17 View PDF View article Google Scholar 
288.   Wang et al., 2021 L. Wang, B. Zhou, C. Yang, S. Pan, Y. Huang, J. Wang The effect of ultrahigh altitude on the mental health of civil servants in western china based on propensity score matching  High. Alt. Med. Biol. (2021) Google Scholar 
289.   Watts et al., 2021 D. Watts, J. Stein, A. Meneses, N. Bechmann, A. Neuwirth, D. Kaden, A. Krüger, A. Sinha, V.I. Alexaki, R. Luis Gustavo Perez, S. Kircher, A. Martinez, M. Theodoropoulou, G. Eisenhofer, M. Peitzsch, A. El-Armouche, T. Chavakis, B. Wielockx HIF1α is a direct regulator of steroidogenesis in the adrenal gland  Cell. Mol. Life Sci., 78 (2021), pp. 3577-3590 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
290.   Webb et al., 2012 R.T. Webb, E. Kontopantelis, T. Doran, P. Qin, F. Creed, N. Kapur Suicide risk in primary care patients with major physical diseases: a case-control study  Arch. Gen. Psychiatry, 69 (2012), pp. 256-264 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
291.   Whiteford et al., 2013 H.A. Whiteford, L. Degenhardt, J. Rehm, A.J. Baxter, A.J. Ferrari, H.E. Erskine, F.J. Charlson, R.E. Norman, A.D. Flaxman, N. Johns, R. Burstein, C.J. Murray, T. Vos Global burden of disease attributable to mental and substance use disorders: findings from the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010  Lancet, 382 (2013), pp. 1575-1586 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
292.   WHO, 2018 WHO, 2018. ICD-11: International classification of diseases 11th revision. WHO (https://icd. who. int/en). Google Scholar 
293.   Willgoss and Yohannes, 2013 T.G. Willgoss, A.M. Yohannes Anxiety disorders in patients with COPD: a systematic review  Respir. Care, 58 (2013), pp. 858-866 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
294.   Williams et al., 2007 Williams, R.H., Jensen, L.T., Verkhratsky, A., Fugger, L., Burdakov, D., 2007. Control of hypothalamic orexin neurons by acid and CO2. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104, 10685–10690. Google Scholar 
295.   Wilson and Teppema, 2016 R.J. Wilson, L.J. Teppema Integration of central and peripheral respiratory chemoreflexes  Compr. Physiol., 6 (2016), pp. 1005-1041 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
296.   Wu et al., 2021 Z. Wu, C. Xie, H. Kuang, J. Wu, X. Chen, H. Liu, T. Liu Oxytocin mediates neuroprotection against hypoxic-ischemic injury in hippocampal CA1 neuron of neonatal rats  Neuropharmacology, 187 (2021), Article 108488 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
297.   Yang and Feldman, 2018 C.F. Yang, J.L. Feldman Efferent projections of excitatory and inhibitory preBötzinger Complex neurons  J. Comp. Neurol., 526 (2018), pp. 1389-1402 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
298.   Yang et al., 2020 N. Yang, A. Berry, C. Sauer, M. Baxter, I.J. Donaldson, K. Forbes, R. Donn, L. Matthews, D. Ray Hypoxia regulates GR function through multiple mechanisms involving microRNAs 103 and 107  Mol. Cell. Endocrinol., 518 (2020), Article 111007 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
299.   Young, 2013 S.N. Young Elevated incidence of suicide in people living at altitude, smokers and patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and asthma: possible role of hypoxia causing decreased serotonin synthesis  J. Psychiatry Neurosci.: JPN, 38 (2013), p. 423 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
300.   Yuan et al., 2011 L.-b Yuan, H.-l Dong, H.-P. Zhang, R.-n Zhao, G. Gong, X.-m Chen, L.-n Zhang, L. Xiong Neuroprotective effect of orexin-a is mediated by an increase of hypoxia-inducible factor-1 activity in rat  Anesthesiology, 114 (2011), pp. 340-354 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
301.   Zaeh et al., 2016 S. Zaeh, C.H. Miele, N. Putcha, R.H. Gilman, J.J. Miranda, A. Bernabe-Ortiz, R.A. Wise, W. Checkley Chronic respiratory disease and high altitude are associated with depressive symptoms in four diverse settings  Int. J. Tube Lung Dis., 20 (2016), pp. 1263-1269 Crossref View in Scopus Google Scholar 
302.   Zhu et al., 2014 S. Zhu, J. Wang, Y. Zhang, V. Li, J. Kong, J. He, X.-M. Li Unpredictable chronic mild stress induces anxiety and depression-like behaviors and inactivates AMP-activated protein kinase in mice  Brain Res., 1576 (2014), pp. 81-90 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
303.   Zhu et al., 2010 X.-H. Zhu, H.-C. Yan, J. Zhang, H.-D. Qu, X.-S. Qiu, L. Chen, S.-J. Li, X. Cao, J.C. Bean, L.-H. Chen, X.-H. Qin, J.-H. Liu, X.-C. Bai, L. Mei, T.-M. Gao Intermittent hypoxia promotes hippocampal neurogenesis and produces antidepressant-like effects in adult rats  J. Neurosci., 30 (2010), pp. 12653-12663 View in Scopus Google Scholar 
304.   Ziemann et al., 2009 A.E. Ziemann, J.E. Allen, N.S. Dahdaleh, I.I. Drebot, M.W. Coryell, A.M. Wunsch, C.M. Lynch, F.M. Faraci, M.A. Howard III, M.J. Welsh The amygdala is a chemosensor that detects carbon dioxide and acidosis to elicit fear behavior  Cell, 139 (2009), pp. 1012-1021 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 
305.   Zoccal et al., 2007 D.B. Zoccal, L.G.H. Bonagamba, J. Antunes-Rodrigues, B.H. Machado Plasma corticosterone levels is elevated in rats submitted to chronic intermittent hypoxia  Auton. Neurosci., 134 (2007), pp. 115-117 View PDF View article View in Scopus Google Scholar 

Cited by (62)
-------------

*   ### The effects of long-term high-altitude exposure on cognition: A meta-analysis

2024, Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews Citation Excerpt : 
Long-term exposure to hypoxia induces systemic physiological responses to facilitate adaptation to hypoxia and meet the increased energy demands of brain function and protect against cognitive decline (Wang et al., 2022). While these compensatory adaptations occur to maintain oxygen delivery to the brain, prolonged hypoxia can still result in oxidative-nitrosative stress and neuroinflammation (Bailey et al., 2019; Burtscher et al., 2022). Hence, in this review, we propose an alternative explanation: that the impact of long-term HA exposure on cognitive performance reflects a form of selective adaptation.   Show abstract Long-term high altitudes (HA) exposure’s impact on cognition has yielded inconsistent findings in previous research. To address this, we conducted a meta-analysis of 49 studies (6191 individuals) to comprehensively evaluate this effect. Moderating factors such as cognitive task type, altitude (1500–2500 m, 2500–4000 m, and above 4000 m), residential type (chronic and lifelong), adaptation level and demographic factors were analyzed. Cognitive tasks were classified into eight categories: perceptual processes, psychomotor function, long-term memory, working memory, inhibitory control, problem-solving, language, and others. Results revealed a moderate negative effect of HA on cognitive performance (_g_ = −.40, _SE_ =.18, 95% CI = −.76 to −.05). Psychomotor function and long-term memory notably experience the most pronounced decline, while working memory and language skills show moderate decreases due to HA exposure. However, perceptual processes, inhibitory control, and problem-solving abilities remain unaffected. Moreover, residing at altitudes above 4000 m and being a HA immigrant are associated with significant cognitive impairment. In summary, our findings indicate a selective adaptation of cognitive performance to HA conditions.    
*   ### Mitochondrial dysfunction: mechanisms and advances in therapy

2024, Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy     
*   ### Mechanisms underlying the health benefits of intermittent hypoxia conditioning

2024, Journal of Physiology     
*   ### Advancements Exploring Major Depressive Disorder: Insights on Oxidative Stress, Serotonin Metabolism, BDNF, HPA Axis Dysfunction, and Pharmacotherapy Advances

2024, International Journal of Translational Medicine     
*   ### Oxidative Stress in Depression: The Link with the Stress Response, Neuroinflammation, Serotonin, Neurogenesis and Synaptic Plasticity

2023, Antioxidants     
*   ### Molecular Mechanisms of High-Altitude Acclimatization

2023, International Journal of Molecular Sciences     

View all citing articles on Scopus

© 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.

Recommended articles
--------------------

*   ### Neurological effects of respiratory dysfunction

Handbook of Clinical Neurology, Volume 189, 2022, pp. 309-329  Vikram V.Holla, …, Pramod Kumar Pal   
*   ### Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Is Associated With a Decrease in Anaerobic Threshold, Oxygen Pulse, and Maximal Oxygen Uptake

Chest, Volume 160, Issue 3, 2021, pp. 1017-1025  Michael J.McMahon, …, Michael J.Morris   
*   ### Effect of hypoxia on human cognitive ability and indoor oxygen environment demand for sojourners at high altitude

Building and Environment, Volume 194, 2021, Article 107678  Yanfeng Liu, …, Guannan Duan   
*   ### Association between depressive symptoms and lung function in the United States adults without pulmonary diseases: A cross-sectional study from NHANES

Journal of Affective Disorders, Volume 325, 2023, pp. 787-793  Gang Peng, …, Xiang Zhou   
*   ### Hypobaric hypoxia induced fear and extinction memory impairment and effect of _Ginkgo biloba_ in its amelioration: Behavioral, neurochemical and molecular correlates

Behavioural Brain Research, Volume 387, 2020, Article 112595  Punita Kumari, …, Usha Panjwani   
*   ### Prevalence of depression and depressive symptoms at high altitudes: A systematic review and meta-analysis

Journal of Affective Disorders, Volume 317, 2022, pp. 388-396  Gianfranco W.Basualdo-Meléndez, …, Rodrigo Vargas-Fernández   

Show 3 more articles

Article Metrics
---------------

### Citations

*   Citation Indexes 62

### Captures

*   Mendeley Readers 119

### Mentions

*   News Mentions 2

### Social Media

*   Shares, Likes & Comments 39

View details

*   About ScienceDirect
*   Remote access
*   Contact and support
*   Terms and conditions
*   Privacy policy

Cookies are used by this site.Cookie settings

All content on this site: Copyright © 2025 Elsevier B.V., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the relevant licensing terms apply.

We use cookies that are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyze, improve, and personalize our content and your digital experience. You can manage your cookie preferences using the “Cookie Settings” link. For more information, see our Cookie Policy

Cookie Settings Accept all cookies

Cookie Preference Center
------------------------

We use cookies which are necessary to make our site work. We may also use additional cookies to analyse, improve and personalise our content and your digital experience. For more information, see our Cookie Policy and the list of Google Ad-Tech Vendors. 

 You may choose not to allow some types of cookies. However, blocking some types may impact your experience of our site and the services we are able to offer. See the different category headings below to find out more or change your settings. 

 You may also be able to exercise your privacy choices  as described in our Privacy Policy

Allow all
### Manage Consent Preferences

#### Strictly Necessary Cookies

Always active

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work.

Cookie Details List‎

#### Performance Cookies

- [x] Performance Cookies 

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site.

Cookie Details List‎

#### Contextual Advertising Cookies

- [x] Contextual Advertising Cookies 

These cookies are used for properly showing banner advertisements on our site and associated functions such as limiting the number of times ads are shown to each user.

Cookie Details List‎

### Cookie List

Clear

- [x] checkbox label label

Apply Cancel

Consent Leg.Interest

- [x] checkbox label label

- [x] checkbox label label

- [x] checkbox label label

Confirm my choices

×

**Read strategically, not sequentially**

ScienceDirect AI extracts key findings from full-text articles, helping you quickly assess the article's relevance to your research.

Unlock your access
