Title: Report on the Investigation Into Unauthorized Removal, Retention, and Disclosure of Classified Documents Discovered at Locatinos Including the Penn Biden Center and the Delaware Private Residence of President Joseph R. Biden, Jr.

URL Source: https://www.justice.gov/storage/report-from-special-counsel-robert-k-hur-february-2024.pdf

Published Time: Thu, 08 Feb 2024 19:54:03 GMT

Markdown Content:
U.S.  Department of Justice 

Special Counsel's Office 

February 5, 2024 

The Attorney General of the United States 

Re: Report of the Special Counsel on the Investigation Into Unauthorized Removal, Retention, and Disclosure of Classified Documents Discovered at Locations Including the Penn Biden Center and the Delaware Private Residence of President Joseph R. Biden, Jr. 

Dear Attorney General Garland: 

Enclosed please find a "confidential report explaining the prosecution or declination decisions" I have reached, as required by 28 C.F.R. § 600.8(c). 

As we previously discussed, at the request of the White Hou se Counsel and personal counsel to President Biden (collectively, "counsel"), I ag r ee d. with certain conditions including nondisclosure, to allow counsel to review a draft of the report for purposes of determining whether to assert any claim of privilege, and otherwise providing comments to the Special Counsel's Office. Counsel reviewed a draft of the report on February 3 and 4, 2024. 

Earlier today, counsel submitted to my office the enclosed letter. After reviewing their letter, my team and I corrected the following minor errors: 

• The draft report stated that "[wJe reviewed the materials that were deemed to be classified at the Top Secret/Sensitive Compartmented Information level when the National Security Council conducted prepublication review for the Reagan Diaries." Draft Report n.811. We have amended that sentence by adding "some of' after the word "reviewed." 

• In Chapter Twelve, the draft report cited Chapter Four in a footnote. Draft Report n.892. We have amended that footnote to read "See id.; NARA Ai:chivist 1 Tr. at 56-59, 77-78, 81-82, 93-94, 122-23." 

• The draft report included a section heading that read, "MARKED CLASSIFIED DOCUMENT IN SECOND-FLOOR OFFICE." Draft Report at 333. We have amended that heading to read, "MARKED CLASSIFIED DOCUMENT IN THIRD-LEVEL DEN." The Attorney General of the United States Februarv 5 2024 

> '

Page 2 "

My team and I also corrected several typographical errors that we identified on our own, and we removed a watermark and headers that designated the document as a confidential draft. 

After reviewing the draft report, the relevant intelligence agencies have identified no content that is classified or otherwise unfit for public disclosure. The White House Counsel has not conveyed to me the President's decisions as to assertions of executive privilege; I understand that the White House Counsel will convey such decisions to you directly. 

Thank you for allowing the Special Counsel's Office to conduct our 

investigation independently and for supporting us with the necessary resources. 

I am extraordinarily grateful for the thorough, careful, and diligent work of the 

Department of Justice employees who worked on this matter. I am deeply honored to 

have  served  ,1vith them. 

Respectfully, 

Robert K Hur Special Counsel 

Enclosures: Report Letter from counsel Report on the Investigation Into Unauthorized Removal, Retention, and Disclosure of Classified Documents Discovered at Locations Including the Penn Eiden Center and the Delaware Private Residence of President Joseph R. Eiden, Jr. 

## Special Counsel Robert K.     

> to 28 §600.
> Washington, D.
> February

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EXECUTIVE St;MMARY ...................................................................................................... lCHAPTER ONE: LEGAL FRA_MEW0RK GOVERNING CLASSIFIED lNFORYIATIOJ\'  ................  15 

CHAPTER Two: OVERVIEW OF THE IJ\.'VESTIGATIOI\ CHAPTER THREE: HANDLL\fG OF CLASSIFIED l:.--JFORMATIOI\ II\ THE OFFICE OF THE 

........................................................  19  

> VICE

PRESIDENT············································································································  33 

CHAPTER FOCR: MR. BIDEN'S CLASSIFIED NOTECARDS Al\D NOTEBOOKS  .....................  53  

> CHAPTER

FIVE : MR. BIDEN'S SECOND BOOK, PROMISE ME, DAD, Al\D THE DISCOVERY OF CLASSIFIED AFGHANISTAN DOCUMENTS  ...................................................................  95 

CHAPTER SIX: THE CLASSIFIED AFGHANISTAN DOCUMENTS ······································· ll6 

CHAPTER SEVEN: TRACING THE AFGHANISTAN DOCUMENTS  .......................................  150 

CHAPTER EIGHT: MR. BIDE.\' 1 S FIRST BOOK, PROMISES TO KEEP, Al\D THE CHAPTER ELEVEI\: At\ALYSIS OF THE EVIDENCE - CLASSrFIED AFGHANISTA.'J CHAPTER FIFTEE:'.\: CLASSIFIED DOCL'.MENTS Foi:;:--.;D AT THE UKIVERSITY OF CHAPTER SIXTEEN: OTHER CLASSIFIED DOCCMENTS FOl.TND II\ MR. BID EN'S CHAPTER SEVENTEEN: DELETION OF ACDI0 RECORDINGS BY MARK ZW0NITZER, APPENDIX B: CLASSIFICATION REVIEW RESULTS FOR SELECT NOTEBOOK ENTRIES 

CLASSIFIED SENATE DOCU:VIENTS IN THE DELAWARE GARAGE  ...................................  170 

CHAPTER NIKE: LEGAL STANDARDS  .......................................................... ,. ................  178 

CHAPTER TEN: HISTORICAL BACKGROCI\D  ..................................................................  192 

DOCU:'.\1ENTS  ................................................................................................................  200  

> CHAPTER TWELVE :

ANALYSIS OF THE EVIDENCE - CLASSIFIED NOTEBOOKS  ...............  223 

CHAPTER THIRTEEI\: ANALYSIS OF PRINCIPLES OF FEDERAL PR0SECCTION FACTORS  249 

CHAPTER FOURTEEN: CLASSIFIED D0CCMENTS FOUND AT THE PENN BIDE:\" CE.'.\'TER  256 

DELA .. \iVARE ...................................................................................................................  312  

> DELA\\'ARE

HOlvIE  ........................................................................................................  326 

MR. BmEN's GHOSTWRITER  ........................................................................................  334    

> CONCLGSION ... .............................................................................................................

345 

APPENDIX A: RECOVERED D0CCMENTS  .......................................................................  A-1 

AND OTHER HANDWRITTEN MATERIAL  ........................................................................  B-1 

APPENDIX C: EVIDENCE ITEMS  ....................................................................................  C-1  

> lEXECUTIVE SUMMARY

We conclude that no criminal charges are warranted in this matter. 1 We would 

reach the same conclusion even if Department of Justice policy did not foreclose 

criminal charges against a sitting president. 2

Our investigation uncovered evidence that President Biden willfully retained 

and disclosed classified materials after his vice presidency when he was a private 

citizen. These materials included (1) marked classified documents about military and 

foreign policy in Afghanistan, and (2) notebooks containing Mr. Biden's handwritten 

entries about issues of national security and foreign policy implicating sensitive 

intelligence sources and methods. FBI agents recovered these materials from the 

garage, offices, and basement den in Mr. Biden's Wilmington, Delaware home. 

However, for the reasons summarized below, we conclude that the evidence does not establish Mr. Biden's guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. Prosecution of Mr. Biden is also unwarranted based on our consideration of the aggravating and mitigating factors set forth in the Department of Justice's Principles of Federal Prosecution. For these reasons, we decline prosecution of Mr. Biden.   

> ***

The classified documents and other materials recovered in this case spanned Mr. Biden's career in national public life. During that career, Mr. Biden has long seen                                            

> 1We submit this report to the Attorney General pursuant to 28 C.F.R. § 600.S(c), which states that, "[a]t the conclusion of the Special Counsel's work, he or she shall provide the Attorney General aconfidential report explaining the prosecution or declination decisions reached by the Special Counsel."
> 2

A Sitting President's Amenability to Indictment and Criminal Prosecution, 24 Op. O.L.C. 222, 260 (2000). 

1himself as a historic figure. Elected to the Senate at age twenty-nine, he considered running for president as early as 1980 and did so in 1988, 2008, and 2020. He believed his record during decades in the Senate made him worthy of the presidency, and he collected papers and artifacts related to significant issues and events in his career. He used these materials to write memoirs published in 2007 and 2017, to document his legacy, and to cite as evidence that he was a man of presidential timber. 

In 2009, then-Vice President Eiden strongly opposed the military's plans to send more troops to Afghanistan. U.S. policy in Afghanistan was deeply important to 

Mr. Eiden, and he labored to dissuade President Obama from escalating America's involvement there and repeating what Mr. Eiden believed was a mistake akin to Vietnam. Despite Mr. Biden·s advice, President Obama ordered a surge of additional 

U.S.  troops, and Mr. Biden's views endured sharp criticism from others within and outside of the administration. But he always believed history would prove him right. He retained materials documenting his opposition to the troop surge, including aclassified handwritten memo he sent President Obama over the 2009 Thanksgiving   

> holiday, and

related marked classified documents. FBI agents recovered these materials from Mr. Biden's Delaware garage and home office in December 2022 and January 2023. 

Also, during his eight years as vice president, Mr. Eiden regularly wrote notes by hand in notebooks. Some of these notes related to classified subjects, including the President's Daily Brief and National Security Council meetings, and some of the notes are themselves classified. After the vice presidency, Mr. Eiden kept these 

2classified notebooks in unsecured and unauthorized spaces at his Virginia and 

Delaware homes and used some of the notebooks as reference material for his second 

memoir, Promise Me, Dad, which was published in 2017. To our knowledge, no one 

has identified any classified information published in Promise Me, Dad, but Mr. 

Biden shared information, including some classified information, from those 

notebooks with his ghostwriter. FBI agents recovered the notebooks from the office 

and basement den in Mr. Biden's Delaware home in January 2023.   

> ***

Marked classified documents about Afghanistan. These documents from fall 2009 have classification markings up to the Top Secret/Sensitive Compartmented Information level. They were found in a box in Mr. Biden's Delaware garage that 

contained other materials of great personal significance to him and that he appears to have personally used and accessed. The marked classified documents were found along with drafts of the handwritten 2009 Thanksgiving memo Mr. Biden sent President Obama in a last-ditch effort to persuade him not to send additional troops to Afghanistan. These materials were proof of the stand Mr. Biden took in what he regarded as among the most important decisions of his vice presidency. 

Mr. Biden wrote his 2007 and 2017 memoirs with the help of a ghostwriter. In 

a recorded conversation with his ghostwriter in February 2017, about a month after he left office, Mr. Biden said, while referencing his 2009 Thanksgiving memo, that he had "just found all the classified stuff downstairs." At the time, he was renting a home in Virginia, where he met his ghostwriter to work on his second memoir. Downstairs from where they met was Mr. Biden's office, where he stored his papers. He moved 

> 3

out of the Virginia home in 2019, consolidating his belongings in Delaware-where 

FBI agents later found marked classified documents about the Afghanistan troop surge in his garage. 

Evidence supports the inference that when Mr. Eiden said in 2017 that he had  

> "just

found all the classified stuff downstairs" in Virginia, he was referring to the same marked classified documents about Afghanistan that FBI agents found in 2022 in his Delaware garage. 

Nevertheless, we do not believe this evidence is sufficient, as jurors would likely find reasonable doubt for one or more of several reasons. Both when he served as vice president and when the Afghanistan documents were found in Mr. Biden's Delaware garage in 2022, his possession of them in his Delaware home was not a    

> basis for prosecution because

as vice president and president, he had authority to keep classified documents in his home. The best case for charges would rely on Mr. 

Biden's possession of the Afghanistan documents in his Virginia home in February  

> 2017.

when he was a private citizen and when he told his ghostwriter he had just   

> found classified

materiaL 

Several defenses are likely to create reasonable doubt as to such charges. For example, Mr. Eiden could have found the classified Afghanistan documents at his Virginia home in 2017 and then forgotten about them soon after. This could convince some reasonable jurors that he did not retain them willfully. \Vhen Mr. Eiden told his ghostwriter about finding ''all the classified stuff downstairs," his tone was matter-of-fact. For a person who had viewed classified documents nearly every day 

4for eight years as vice president, including regularly in his home, finding classified 

documents at home less than a month after leaving office could have been an 

unremarkable and forgettable event. Notably, the classified Afghanistan documents 

did not come up again in Mr. Biden's dozens of hours of recorded conversations with 

the ghostwriter, or in his book. And the place where the Afghanistan documents were 

eventually found in Mr. Biden's Delaware garage-in a badly damaged box 

surrounded by household detritus-suggests the documents might have been 

forgotten. 

In addition. Mr. Biden's memory was significantly limited, both during his 

recorded interviews with the ghostwriter in 2017, and in his interview with our office 

in 2023. And his cooperation with our investigation, including by reporting to the 

government that the Afghanistan documents were in his Delaware garage, will likely 

convince some jurors that he made an innocent mistake, rather than acting 

willfully-that is, with intent to break the law-as the statute requires. 

Another viable defense is that Mr. Eiden might not have retained the classified Afghanistan documents in his Virginia home at all. They could have been stored, by mistake and without his know ledge, at his Delaware home since the time he was vice president, as were other classified documents recovered during our investigation. This would rebut charges that he willfully retained the documents in Virginia. 

Given Mr. Biden's limited precision and recall during his interviews with his ghostwriter and with our office, jurors may hesitate to place too much evidentiary weight on a single eight-word utterance to his ghostwriter about finding classified 

5documents in Virginia, in the absence of other, more direct evidence. We searched for 

such additional evidence and found it wanting. In particular, no witness, photo, e mail, text message, or any other evidence conclusively places the Afghanistan documents at the Virginia home in 2017. 

In addition to this shortage of evidence, there are other innocent explanations for the documents that we cannot refute. When Mr. Eiden told his ghostwriter he "just found all the classified stuff downstairs," he could have been referring to something other than the Afghanistan documents, and our report discusses these possibilities in detail. 

We have also considered that, at trial, Mr. Eiden would likely present himself to a jury, as he did during our interview of him, as a sympathetic, well-meaning, elderly man with a poor memory. Based on our direct interactions with and 

observations of him, he is someone for whom many jurors will want to identify reasonable doubt. It would be difficult to convince a jury that they should convict him-by then a former president well into his eighties-of a serious felony that 

requires a mental state of willfulness. 

We conclude the evidence is not sufficient to convict, and we decline to recommend prosecution of Mr. Eiden for his retention of the classified Afghanistan documents.  

> *

## * *

Notebooks containing classified information. FBI agents recovered from unlocked drawers in the office and basement den of Mr. Biden's Delaware home a set 

6of notebooks he used as vice president. Evidence shows that he knew the notebooks contained classified information. Mr. Eiden wrote down obviously sensitive information discussed during intelligence briefings with President Obama and meetings in the White House Situation Room about matters of national security and military and foreign policy. And while reading his notebook entries aloud during meetings with his ghostwriter, Mr. Eiden sometimes skipped over presumptively classified material and warned his ghostwriter the entries might be classified, but at  

> least

three times Mr. Eiden read from classified entries aloud to his ghostwriter nearly verbatim. 

Some evidence also suggests Mr. Eiden knew he could not keep classified handwritten notes at home after leaving office. Mr. Eiden, who had decades of experience with classified information, was deeply familiar with the measures taken to safeguard classified information and the need for those measures to prevent harm to national security. Asked about reports that former President Trump had kept classified documents at his own home, Mr. Eiden wondered how "anyone could be that 

irresponsible" and voiced concern about "[w]hat data was in there that may compromise sources and methods." \Vhile vice president, he kept his notebooks in aWhite House safe for a time, in contrast with his decision after leaving office to keep them at home in unlocked drawers. 

When Mr. Eiden left office, he also knew his staff decided to store notecards 

containing his classified notes in a Secure Compartmented Information Facility (SCIF) at the National Archives, and he knew his notebooks contained the same type 

> 7

of classified information. As he told his ghostwriter during a recorded interview, the same staff who arranged to secure his classified notecards "didn't even know" he had retained possession of his classified notebooks. Twice in 2017, Mr. Eiden visited the National Archives SCIF to review his classified notecards while writing his book. Yet  

> he

kept his notebooks, which also contained classified information, in unlocked drawers at home. He had strong motivations to do so and to ignore the rules for properly handling the classified information in his notebooks. He consulted the notebooks liberally during hours of discussions with his ghostwriter and viewed them as highly private and valued possessions with which he was unwilling to part. 

\Ve do not, however, believe this evidence would meet the government's burden at trial~particularly the requirement to prove that Mr. Eiden intended to do something the law forbids. Consistent with statements Mr. Eiden made during our interview of him and arguments made by the White House Counsel and Mr. Biden's personal counsel, we expect Mr. Eiden's defense at trial would be that he thought his notebooks were his personal property and he was allowed to take them home, even if they contained classified information. During our interview of him, Mr. Eiden was emphatic, declaring that his notebooks are "my property" and that "every president before me has done the exact same thing," that is, kept handwritten classified materials after leaving office. Ho also cited the diaries that President Reagan kept in his private home after leaving office, noting that they included classified information. 

Contemporaneous evidence suggests that when Mr. Eiden left office in 2017, he believed he was allowed to keep the notebooks in his home. In a recorded 

> 8

conversation with his ghostwriter in April 2017, Mr. Eiden explained that, despite 

his staffs views to the contrary, he did not think he was required to turn in his notecards to the National Archives-where they were stored in a SCIF-and he had not wanted to do so. At trial, he would argue plausibly that he thought the same about his note books. 

If this is what Mr. Eiden thought, we believe he was mistaken about what the law permits, but this view finds some support in historical practice. The clearest example is President Reagan, who left the White House in 1989 with eight years' worth of handwritten diaries, which he appears to have kept at his California home even though they contained Top Secret information. During criminal litigation involving a former Reagan administration official in 1989 and 1990, the Department of Justice stated in public court filings that the "currently classified" diaries were Mr. Reagan's "personal records." Yet we know of no steps the Department or other agencies took to investigate Mr. Reagan for mishandling classified information or to retrieve or secure his diaries. Most jurors would likely find evidence of this precedent and Mr. Eiden's claimed reliance on it, which we expect would be admitted at trial, to be compelling evidence that Mr. Eiden did not act willfully. 

As with the marked classified documents, because the evidence is not sufficient to convict Mr. Eiden for willfully retaining the notebooks, we decline prosecution. 

We also considered whether Mr. Eiden willfully disclosed national defense information to his ghostwriter by reading aloud certain classified notebook passages to the ghostwriter nearly verbatim on at least three occasions. Mr. Eiden should have 

9known that by reading his unfiltered notes about classified meetings in the Situation 

Room, he risked sharing classified information with his ghostwriter. But the evidence does not show that when Mr. Biden shared the specific passages with his ghostwriter, Mr. Biden knew the passages were classified and intended to share classified information. Mr. Biden's lapses in attention and vigilance demonstrate why former officials should not keep classified materials unsecured at home and read them aloud 

to others, but jurors could well conclude that Mr. Biden's actions were unintentional. 

We therefore decline to charge Mr. Eiden for disclosure of these passages to his 

ghostwriter. 

Principles of Federal Prosecution. \Ve have also evaluated ·'all relevant considerations" in aggravation and mitigation, as outlined in the Justice Manual, and 

determined that on balance, these factors do not support prosecution of Mr. Biden.: 1

Historically, after leaving office, many former presidents and vice presidents have knowingly taken home sensitive materials related to national security from 

their administrations without being charged with crimes. This historical record is important context for judging whether and why to charge a former vice president and former president, as Mr. Eiden would be when susceptible to prosecution-for similar actions taken by several of his predecessors. 

With one exception, there is no record of the Department of Justice prosecuting a former president or vice president for mishandling classified documents from his         

> 3U.S. Dep't of Just., Just. Manual§§ 9-27.001, 9-27.220. 9-27.230 (2023).

10 own administration. The exception is former President Trump. It is not our role to assess the criminal charges pending against Mr. Trump, but several material distinctions between Mr. Trump's case and Mr. Biden's are clear. Unlike the evidence involving Mr. Biden, the allegations set forth in the indictment of Mr. Trump, if proven, would present serious aggravating facts. 

Most notably, after being given multiple chances to return classified documents and avoid prosecution, Mr. Trump allegedly did the opposite. According to the indictment, he not only refused to return the documents for many months, but 

he also obstructed justice by enlisting others to destroy evidence and then to lie about 

it. In contrast, Mr. Eiden turned in classified documents to the National Archives and 

the Department of Justice, consented to the search of multiple locations including his 

homes, sat for a voluntary interview. and in other ways cooperated with the 

investigation. 

In reaching our decision, we did not consider every circumstance m which 

criminal charges against a former president or vice president for mishandling classified information may be warranted. But on the facts of this case, "the fundamental interests of society" do not "require" criminal charges against Mr. Eiden.~ For this additional reason, applying the Principles of Federal Prosecution set forth in the Justice Manual, we decline prosecution. 

The practices of retaining classified material m unsecured locations and reading classified material to one's ghostwriter present serious risks to national          

> 4U.S. Dep't of Just., Just. Manual§§ 9-27.001, 9-27.220 (2023).

11 security, given the vulnerability of extraordinarily sensitive information to loss or compromise to America's adversaries. The Department routinely highlights such risks when pursuing classified mishandling prosecutions. But addressing those risks through criminal charges, the only means available to this office, is not the proper remedy here.   

> ***

Other classified materials. For other recovered classified documents, after a thorough investigation the decision to decline criminal charges was straightforward. The FBI recovered additional marked classified documents at the 

Penn Eiden Center, elsewhere in Mr. Biden's Delaware home, and in collections of his Senate papers at the University of Delaware, but the evidence suggests that Mr. 

Eiden did not willfully retain these documents and that they could plausibly have been brought to these locations by mistake. We also investigated whether persons other than Mr. Eiden knowingly mishandled these classified documents, and our investigation showed that they did not. In reaching these conclusions, we note the numerous previous instances in which marked classified documents have been 

discovered intermixed with the personal papers of former Executive Branch officials and members of Congress.   

> ***

Mr. Biden's ghostwriter and destruction of evidence. After learning of the special counsel's appointment in this matter, Mr. Biden's ghostwriter deleted audio recordings he had created of his discussions with Mr. Eiden during the writing of Mr. Biden's 2017 memoir. The recordings had significant evidentiary value. 

12 After telling the Special Counsel's Office what he had done, the ghostwriter 

turned over his computer and external hard drive and consented to their search. Based on the FBI's analysis. it appears the FBI recovered all deleted audio files    

> relating to the

memoir, though portions of a few of the files appear to be missing, 

which is possible when forensic tools are used to recover deleted files. The ghostwriter 

kept, and did not delete or attempt to delete, his near-verbatim transcripts of the recordings and produced those transcripts to us, including for each of the incomplete           

> recovered files.
> \Ve considered whether to charge the ghostwriter with obstruction of justice, but we believe the

evidence would be insufficient to obtain a conviction and therefore     

> declined to prosecute him.
> While

the ghostwriter admitted that he deleted the recordings after he learned of the special counsel's investigation, the evidence falls short of proving beyond areasonable doubt that he intended to impede an investigation, which is the intent required by law. In his interviews, the ghostwriter offered plausible, innocent reasons  

> for

why he deleted the recordings. He also preserved his transcripts that contain some  

> of

the most incriminating information against Mr. Eiden-including his statement about finding "all the classified stuff downstairs" in 2017-which is inconsistent with an intent to impede an investigation by destroying evidence. And the ghostwriter voluntarily produced to investigators his notes and the devices from which the recordings were recovered. 

13 For these reasons, we believe that the admissible evidence would not suffice to 

obtain a conviction of the ghostwriter for obstruction of justice. On balance, relevant aggravating and mitigating factors also not support his prosecution. 

## * * *     

> 14 CHAPTER ONE LEGAL FRAMEWORK GOVERNING CLASSIFIED INFORMATION

The Constitution vests the president with "authority to classify and control 

access to information bearing on national security.'":\ By executive order, presidents 

since Franklin Roosevelt have prescribed a system for classifying and safeguarding national security information. 6 In 1994, Congress directed the president to establish 

by executive order or regulation uniform procedures governing access to classified 

information across the executive branch. 7 President Obama issued the current order when Mr. Eiden was vice president. 8 Among other things, the order sets forth rules that determine whether a person may access classified information and how that information must be handled. 9

The 1994 statute-and, by implication, the current executive order governing 

classified information-do not apply to a sitting president or vice president, members of Congress, justices of the Supreme Court, and federal judges. rn 

There is, however, no statutory exception for a former president or vice 

president, and the restrictions on access to classified information in the executive              

> 5Dep't of the Navy u. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988); see U.S. CONST. art.

II, § 2.                               

> 6KEVIN R. KOSAR, CONG. RSCH. SERV., R41528, CLASSIFIED INFORl\!L,\TION POLICY AND EXECUTIVE ORDER 13526 3 (2010).
> 750 U.S.C. § 3161. 8Classified National Security Information, Executive Order 13526, 75 Fed. Reg. 707
> (2009).
> 9Id. § 4.1.
> 10 50 U.S.C. §§ 3161(a), 3163.

15 order and the rules prescribed under its authority appear to apply to such former 

officials. 11 

The order defines classified information to include: (a) military plans, weapons 

systems, or operations: (b) foreign government information; and (c) intelligence activities, including covert actions and intelligence sources, methods, or cryptology. 12 

Information is classified only if "its unauthorized disclosure could reasonably be expected to cause identifiable or describable damage to the national security.'Tl Information is classified as "Confidential" if its unauthorized disclosure reasonably 

could be expected to cause damage to the national security. It is classified as "Secref' 

if its unauthorized disclosure reasonably could be expected to cause serious damage 

to the national security. And it is classified as '·Top Secret" if its unauthorized 

disclosure reasonably could be expected to cause exceptionally grave damage to the 

national security.  11 

The order also sets forth conditions that any person (other than the current 

officeholders listed above) must meet to access to classified  information. 15  To receive such access, a person is required to: 

1.  Have a favorable determination of eligibility (generally after completion of a background investigation); 

2.  Sign an approved nondisclosure agreement; and    

> li 50 U.S.C.

§ 3163; Executive Order 13526 §§ 4. l(a), 4.4; Trump L'. United States, No. 22-13005, 2022 \NL 4366684, at *8 (11th Cir. Sept. 21, 2022) (per curiam).     

> 12 Executive Order 13526

§ 1.4.   

> 13 Id.

§ 1.4.     

> 11 Id.§ 1.2.
> l'l Id.

§ 4. l. 

16 3.  Have a need-to-know the  information.Hi 

For former presidents and vice presidents, the order expressly allows for the 

need-to-know requirement (but not the others listed above) to be waived by an 

agency. 17 A former official may obtain such a waiver only if a senior official of the 

agency that originated the classified information "determines in writing that access 

is consistent with the interest of the national security," "takes appropriate steps to 

protect [the] classified information from unauthorized disclosure or compromise,'· and 

"ensures that the information is safeguarded in a manner consistent with [the 

executive order]."18 

In addition to establishing rules that govern access to classified information, the order also requires agency heads to establish controls over how it must be 

stored.  19 Among other things, Top Secret and Secret information must be kept in a

storage container approved by the General Services Administration or an approved and locked storage area. 20 Information that is even more sensitive-called Sensitive Compartmented Information and sometimes referred to as "codeword" information-must be stored in an accredited Sensitive Compartmented Information Facility, or SCIF. 21  

> 16

Id. § 4. l(a).  

> 17

Id.§ 4.4.  

> 18

ld. § 4.4; Trump t:. United States, No. 22-13005, 2022 WL 4366684, at *8.  

> 19

Executive Order 13526 § 4. l(g).  

> 20

See 32 C.F.R §§ 2001.43(b)(l) and (2), 2001.53.  

> 21

Office of the Director of National Intelligence, Intelligence Community Directive 705 (2010). Sensitive Compartmented Information is a subset of classified information "concerning or derived from intelligence sources, methods or analytical processes that is required to be protected within formal access control systems established by the [Director of 

17 The restrictions described above apply to classified information m any 

documentary form, whether it is printed, typed, or  handwritten. 22 

National Intelligence]." Office of the Director of National Intelligence, Intelligence Community Directive 703, "Protection of Classified National Intelligence, Including Sensitive Compartmented Information," § D2 (2013).  

> 22

See Executive Order 13526 §§ 1. 1, 2.1, 6. 6. l(p), G.1 

18 CHAPTER Two 

> OVERVIEW OF THE INVESTIGATION

I.  DISCOVERY OF CLASSIFIED DOCUMENTS 

A.  Personal counsel to Mr. Eiden discovered marked classified documents at the Penn Eiden Center 

On November 2, 2022, Patrick Moore-one of Mr. Eiden's personal counsel-

reviewed boxes of material belonging to Mr. Eiden, which were stored at the Penn 

Eiden Center for Diplomacy and Global Engagement in Washington, D.C., an office 

space formerly used by Mr. Eiden. During this review, Moore found documents with 

classification markings dating to Mr. Eiden's vice presidency. 

Moore notified Robert Bauer, another personal counsel to Mr. Eiden, who then notified the White House Counsel. That evening, the White House Counsel's Office informed the general counsel for the National Archives and Records 

Administration. 23 

The next morning, November 3, 2022, the National Archives sent two archivists to retrieve the documents and the three boxes in which they were found. 24 Upon reviewing the documents in a SCIF, the National Archives found nine 

documents, totaling 44 pages, with classification markings.  2 .5 The documents were  

> 23

NARA General Counsel 11/10/22, FBI Serial 4 at 1-2; FBI Serial 4 1A5 at 2-3. An FBI Serial refers to a numbered entry in the FBI's case file, which may have evidentiary attachments that are often designated as "lA" files. When an FBI agent logs a new report, for example, into the case file, the report is given a serial number corresponding to the order in which the new file was logged.  

> 24

NARA Archivist 2 11/10/22, FBI Serial 3 at 1-2; NARA COS 11/16/22, FBI Serial 6at 1-2; NARA COO 11/15/22, FBI Serial 10 at 2-3; NARA General Counsel 11/10/22, FBI Serial 4 at 2.  

> 25

NARA Archivist 2 11/10/22, FBI Serial 3 at 2; NARA COO 11/15/1022, FBI Serial 10 at 3 and 1A8 11-422 e-mail with notes on boxes. 

19 classified up to the Top Secret level and included codes indicating some of the 

information was Sensitive Compartmented  Infonnation.  26 The marked classified 

documents were located in two  of  the three boxes.  1 All three boxes contained records 

dating  from  Mr. Biden's time as vice  president. 27 

The day after the National Archives retrieved the classified documents, on November 4, 2022, the Archives notified officials in the National Security Division of 

the Department of Justice (DOJ) and the Office of the Director of National Intelligence of the discovery of "classified records related to President Bide n's time as 

Vice  President." 28 A few days later, on November 9, the FBI opened an initial 

assessment to begin investigating the  matter. 29 

The following day, November 10, the Chief of DOJ's Counterintelligence and 

Export Control Section sent Bauer a letter describing the steps that Bauer and others 

acting on the president's behalf should take.  30 The Chief informed Bauer that ''[t]he 

prospect that classified material may have been stored in an unsecure location over a prolonged period may have national security implications.":ii He also told Bauer that, pending further action by DOJ, the Penn Eiden Center and Mr. Biden's post 

Vice Presidential Office should (1) secure "rooms and locations that contain any  

> 26

NARA Archivist 2 11/10/22, FBI Serial 3 at 2; NARA COO 11/15/22, FBI Serial 10 

at 3 and 1A8 11-422 e-mail with notes on boxes.  

> 2 ~

NARA COO 11/15/22, FBI Serial 10 at ~-3.  

> 28

11/4/22 e-mail from NARA OIG, FBI Serial 28, 1A35.  

> 29

The FBI opened an initial assessment on November 9, 2022. See FBI Serial l; FBI Serial 2; FBI Serial 28. On January 13, 2023, the FBI converted the initial assessment to a full investigation after receiving approval from the Attorney General and other appropriate authorities. FBI Serial 68.  

> 30

11/10/22 1tr. from CES Chief, FBI Serial 9, 1A7.  

> 31

Id. 

20 additional potential government records and materials from President Biden's time 

as Vice-President," (2) preserve the status quo as to the location of such materials and refrain from reviewing them, (3) preserve all video footage, visitor logs, and other access records from the Penn Eiden Center, (4) provide a list of all locations where 

material from Mr. Biden's time as vice president have been stored, and (5) give express consent for FBI and Department of Justice personnel to review the records retrieved by the National Archives: 12 

Bauer responded the next day stating that President Eiden had no objection to the requested steps and would "cooperate fully with the Department and, as directed by the Department, with [the Archives]." 13 Bauer stated, '·[w]e do not know of any rooms or locations that contain additional potential government records and materials from President Biden's time as Vice President, but will immediately 

acknowledge and act as directed in the event we learn of any. as we did here.": 31 

On November 14, 2022, the Attorney General assigned John Lausch, then the 

U.S.  Attorney for the Northern District of Illinois, to lead the initial investigation and assess whether the Attorney General should appoint a special counsel to investigate the matter.% Among other steps, investigators interviewed witnesses, reviewed the recovered documents, obtained security video footage from the Penn Biden Center,                   

> 32 11/10/22 ltr. from CES Chief, FBI Serial 9, 1A7. 33 11/11/22 e-mail from Bauer, FBI Serial 9, 1A7.
> 34

Id.                              

> 35 Attorney General Merrick B. Garland Delivers Remarks on the Appointment of aSpecial Counsel, Office of Public Affairs, U.S. Dep't of Justice (Jan. 12, 2023),
> https://www.justice.gov/opa/speech/attorney-general-merrick-b-garland-delivers-remarks
> appointment-special-counsel-O (last visited Feb. 2, 2024).

21 and conductE~d a consensual search of the Penn Eiden Center to ensure there were no 

other classified materials there.:3G 

B.  Personal counsel discovered marked classified documents relating to Afghanistan in Mr. Biden's Delaware garage On December 20, 2022, nearly seven weeks after the initial discovery of classified documents at the Penn Eiden Center. Bauer and Moore traveled to Mr. Biden·s personal residence in \Vilmington, Delaware to search the garage for 

classified documents or other Obama-era presidential records.: 17 They later explained 

that through discussions with current and former Eiden staffers, they came to believe that documents from Mr. Biden's time as vice president may have been moved into the  garage. 38  We considered the possibility that Mr. Biden alerted his counsel that 

classified documents were in the garage, but our investigation revealed no evidence of such a discussion because, it if happened, it would be protected by the attorney client privilege. Bauer searched a closet in the garage and found documents with classification markings inside a binder. 39 After Bauer made this discovery, Moore found documents 

with classification markings in an unsealed box in another area of the garage, including documents from 2009 relating to U.S. policy in Afghanistan.+ 0 After finding  

> 30

E.g .. NARA COS 11/16/22, FBI Serial 6; NARA COO 11/15/22, FBI Serial 10; NARA Archivist 3 11/16/22, FBI Serial 7; Moore 11/18/22, FBI Serial 16; Staff Assistant 3 12/21/22, FBI Serial 36; Executive Assistant 1/4/22, FBI Serial 64: FBI Serial 19; FBI Serial 26; FBI Serial 41; FBI Serial 693; FBI Serial 14.  

> 37

See Moore 2/17/23, FBI Serial 96; 12/28/22 Narrative from Bauer, FBI Serial 8 1A5.  

> ;rn

See Moore 12/21/22, FBI Serial 33.  

> 39

Id. at 2; 12/28/22 Narrative from Bauer at 2, FBI Serial 8 1A5.  

> ,o

Moore 12/21/22, FBI Serial 33 at 2; 12/28/22 Narrative from Bauer at 2, FBI Serial 8 1A5; FBI Serial 75 at 2. 

22 these marked classified documents in two locations in the garage, Bauer and Moore 

stopped their search.  41 

Later that same day, Bauer notified Lausch of the discoveries in Mr. Biden's 

garage. 12 On Mr. Biden's behalf, Bauer provided consent for FBI agents to search the 

garage and seize classified or other government records from the time of the Obama 

administration . .:3 

The FBI dispatched two agents to retrieve the boxes in the garage the following 

day.n The agents met Moore at the garage, expecting he would point them to all of 

the boxes potentially containing classified material.-!Ci Upon learning, however, that 

counsel had not searched the entire garage, the agents conducted a limited search of 

the garage intended to determine whether it contained other classified documents. 16 

The agents seized the containers 1\fr. Biden's counsel had identified and several other 

containers, documents, and materials.  17 

The two agents lacked sufficient resources to conduct a comprehensive search of the entire garage given the volume of material stored there. rn Accordingly, Lausch e-mailed Bauer and asked that he ensure "that the garage remains secure, access to it is strictly limited, and no items are removed from that location until a further  

> ~1

Moore 12/21/22, FBI Serial 33 at 2; 12/28/22 Narrative from Bauer at 2, FBI Serial 8 1A5. 12 Moore 2/17/23, FBI Serial 96 at 3-4, 11; Moore 11/18/22, FBI Serial 16 at 2; 12/28/22 

Narrative from Bauer, FBI Serial 8 1A5.   

> 43 12/20/22

Consent to Search, FBI Serial 35 1A39.  

> 44

FBI Serials 29, 35.  

> , 5

FBI Serial 35 at 1.  

> rn

Id. at 1-2.  

> 47

Id. at 3-5; FBI Serial 29.  

> 18

FBI Serial 35 at 1-2. 

23 review of the remaining materials occurso" 49 Lausch also wrote that they needed to 

"continu[e] our conversation about the Department receiving appropriate assurances that no records from President Biden's prior term as Vice-President remain at any unauthorized location, including within the Wilmington Residence, or any other residence, storage facility, or spaceo" 50 

C.  Personal counsel discovered more marked classified documents in Mr. Biden's basement den After the holidays, Bauer and Jennifer Miller, another personal counsel for Mro Eiden, continued their efforts to determine whether there were any other classified records in Mro Biden's Delaware homeo 51 On the evening of January 11, 2023, counsel traveled to the house to search areas other than the garageo 52 Bauer and Miller remained together during the searcho 5:3 They first searched Mro Biden's primary office-sometimes called "the library"-on the main floor of the houseo 51 They identified no documents with classification markings thereo:S;i They moved on to the 

den  in  the  basementJ 56 There, in a wooden two-drawer file cabinet, counsel found adocument with classification markings from the Obama administration in a notebook  

> 49

Ido; 12/22/22 e-mail from Lausch to Bauer; FBI Serial 34, 1A3K  

> 50

12/22/22 e-mail from Lausch to Bauer; FBI Serial :34, lA,38.  

> 'ii

Miller Tro at 9-10; FBI Serial 5L  

> 32

FBI Serial 51; 1/17/23 Description of Searches from Bauer, FBI Serial 55, 1A67; Miller Tro at 4-50 <'ii Miller Tro at 10-12; FBI Serial 5L 01 1/17/23 Description of Searches from Bauer at 1-7, FBI Serial 55, 1A67; Miller Tro 

at 6.  

> 55

See 1/17/2:3 Description of Searches from Bauer at 1-7, FBI Serial 55, 1A670  

> sr;

1/17/23 Description of Searches from Bauer at 7; Miller Tr. at 400 

24 labeled "1/6/12 #2 Foreign Policy." 57 Bauer and Miller stopped their detailed search 

at this point and performed a cursory visual inspection of the rest of the house after 

that. 58 

The next day, January 12, 2023, Bauer informed Lausch of the discovery in the 

basement den.' 39 The FBI sent agents to the house that evening to recover the 

classified material.GO  Bauer informed Lausch that, at that time, Bauer did not have 

Mr. Biden's consent for the FBI to search and seize his notebook that contained the 

marked classified document. Thus, on Bauer's instructions, Richard Sauber of the 

White House Counsel's Office met agents at the house and escorted them to the 

marked classified material found in the notebook in the basement  cabinet. 61 

Agents observed Sauber pick up the notebook and leaf through it. Sauber and 

the agents eventually found two documents with classification markings: (1) a three 

page PowerPoint presentation marked as "Secret//NOFORN//Pre-decisional" dated 

May 22, 2013, relating to Afghanistan; and (2) a three-page memorandum labeled "TS/SCI"-shorthand for Top Secret/Sensitive Compartmented Information-dated November 1, 2013, relating to Iraq. 62 The agents seized the documents with classification markings and secured the "1/6/12 #2 Foreign Policy" notebook in alocking classified-document courier bag. 6• 3 After discussions with Lausch, Sauber  

> 67

1/17/23 Description of Searches from Bauer at 7; Miller Tr. at 40-42, 44; FBI Serial 44.  

> 38

1/17/23 Description of Searches from Bauer at 7-8; Miller Tr. at 46, 51, 59.  

> 59

1/13/23 Conference Call with Bob Bauer and personal counsel, FBI Serial 51 at 1-2.  

> 60

See FBI Serial 44.  

> 61

FBI Serials 44, 694.  

> 62

FBI Serial 43; FBI Serial 44 at 1-2.  

> 63

FBI Serial 44 at 2; FBI Serial 160 at 2. 

25 provided the "1/6/12 #2 Foreign Policy" notebook to FBI agents two days  later. 61 The notebook, like other notebooks described below, contained Mr. Biden's handwritten notes as vice president relating to foreign policy and national  security. 65 

D.  The Attorney General appointed a special counsel to investigate 

On January 12, 2023-the same day FBI agents retrieved marked classified 

documents from the basement cabinet-the Attorney General appointed Robert Hur 

as special counsel to investigate the  matter. 66  The Attorney General's Order authorized Hur to conduct the investigation initially led by Lausch, "including 

possible unauthorized removal and retention of classified documents or other records discovered at the Penn Biden Center for Diplomacy and Global Engagement and the Wilmington, Delaware, private residence of President Joseph R. Biden, Jr .. as well as 

any matters that arose from the initial investigation or may arise directly from the 

special counsel's investigation or that are within the scope of 28 C.F.R. § 600.4(a)." 67 

E.  FBI agents discovered more marked classified documents and handwritten classified notes in various parts of Mr. Biden's home 

After the discovery of the classified documents in Mr. Biden's basement, Mr. 

Biden consented to a search of the entirety of the Delaware home by the FBI for                            

> 64 FBI Serials 46, 51.
> 65 Notebook lB 15; FBI Serial 199.
> 66 Office of the Attorney General, Order No. 5588-2023, Appointment of Robert KHur as Special Counsel (January 12, 2023).
> 67

Id. Section 600.4(a) of Title 28 of the Code of Federal Regulations provides, in relevant part, that the jurisdiction of a special counsel "shall also include the authority to investigate and prosecute federal crimes committed in the course of, and with intent to interfere with, the Special Counsel's investigation, such as perjury, obstruction of justice, destruction of evidence, and intimidation of witnesses.'' 28 C.F.R. § 600.4(a). 

26 relevant materials, including documents with classification markings and other potentially classified  information.Gs 

FBI agents searched the home on January 20, 2023. 69 Agents searched all areas of the house, including the garage, which agents had partially searched on December 21, 2022. 70 The house has a lower-level basement, a first-level main floor, a second level with the primary bedroom, and a third-level top floor with additional rooms and attic storage  space. 71  Agents seized items that fell primarily into two categories: (1) boxes or folders containing documents with classification markings, most of which date to the 1970s and relate to foreign trips Mr. Eiden took as a senator; and (2) notebooks containing his handwritten notes from his time as vice president relating to foreign policy and national security. Two of these notebooks had marked 

classified documents stored inside them. and several notebooks contained handwritten information that was itself  classified. 72 

In Mr. Biden's garage, agents found several documents with classification 

markings dating from Mr. Biden's time in the Senate in the 1970s and 1980s. 7:3 Some of those documents relate to foreign trips Mr. Eiden took as a senator, some of which he chronicled in his 2007 memoir, Promises to Keep. Agents found those Senate-era documents in a storage closet in Mr. Biden's garage.                                 

> 68 1/20/23 Consent to Search for the Wilmington House, FBI Serial 77. 69 FBI Serial 77. 70 FBI Serials 77, 35. 71 FBI Serial 77. 72 Id.; FBI Serial 676. 73 FBI Serials 77, 639; Recovered documents Dl-D17, Dl7-1 to D19.

27 In Mr. Biden's main-floor office, basement den, and second-floor office, agents found and seized seventeen notebooks and a stack of notecards, all of which contained Mr. Biden's handwritten notes on foreign policy and national security matters as vice 

president.  71 Two of the notebooks, found in the main-floor office, had documents with 

classification markings stored inside them.  75 

Elsewhere in the house, agents found one document with classification markings in the third-level den. 7G And in an office attached to the primary bedroom on the second level agents found a binder (similar to a binder previously found in the 

garage). which contained most of the same marked classified documents as the binder 

found in the  garage. 77 

F.  FBI agents found more marked classified documents from the Senate era at the University of Delaware 

Between January and June 2023, FBI agents searched over 300 boxes containing Mr. Biden's Senate papers. which were stored in two locations at the 

University of Delaware. Within those boxes. agents found documents with potential 

classification markings, dating from 1977 to 1991, during Mr. Biden's service in the 

Senate.  78 

IL SUMMARY OF li"li'VESTIGATIVE ACTIVITY 

The FBI and the Special Counsel's Office undertook an extensive investigation into Mr. Biden's handling of classified information and of the classified documents                 

> 7~ FBI Serial 77. 75 Id.; FBI Serials 178, 682.
> 76 FBI Serial 77.
> 77 Id.; FBJ Serial 701. 78 FBJ Serials 83, 91, 98, 290.

28 the FBI seized. We applied our best efforts to conduct the investigation thoroughly 

and expeditiously. 

Investigators conducted 173 interviews of 147 witnesses, including Mr. Biden 

himself. All told, the investigation collected over seven million documents, including 

e-mails, text messages, photographs, videos, toll records, and other materials from 

both classified and unclassified sources. 

We also coordinated with the government agencies that had equities in the classified and potentially classified documents the FBI seized from locations associated with Mr. Biden. The agencies conducted classification review of seized 

documents to recommend the appropriate classification level, compartmentation, and dissemination controls for each document. Investigators met with subject-matter 

experts in the intelligence community to determine whether the documents contained 

information that a jury could conclude was national defense information under the 

Espionage Act.  19 

Mr. Biden's notebooks, which contained, among other things, his handwritten notes taken during classified meetings as vice president, presented a challenge. None of the pages contained classification markings but investigators assessed some of the 

content was potentially classified. Classification review by intelligence agencies of unmarked information is more challenging and time-consuming than for marked documents. We therefore reviewed all of Mr. Biden's handwritten notes and selected thirty-seven excerpts totaling 109 notebook pages to submit for classification review.              

> 79 See Chapter 9, Section I.B for adiscussion of the term "national defense information."

29 Investigators selected entries they believed were most likely highly classified and 

that a jury of laypeople would find was national defense information under the 

Espionage Act. 

For both marked classified documents and unmarked documents, the Office of 

the Director of National Intelligence reviewed each document and provided a list of agencies with potential equities in each document. The FBI requested classification review from each identified agency accordingly. For documents where multiple agencies had equities, the Special Counsel's Office used the highest level of classification identified by an agency as the current classification of the document. Results of the classification review are summarized in Appendix A, which provides an unclassified summary of the recovered documents submitted for classification review. 

Classification review conducted in the context of a criminal investigation has 

limitations. Agencies with equities in the information in the seized documents have 

applied their best efforts to determine the current classification of the material we 

submitted to them. In so doing, some have indicated that classification determinations are subject to change. Real-world events and changed circumstances can affect the harm to national security that would result from unauthorized disclosure of the information. Changed circumstances and events could therefore result in future modifications to classification determinations. 

Some agencies have also noted that, in the typical context of a classification review, such as pursuant to a Freedom of Information Act request, they consult with 

30 one another before making a final classification determination. That is to ensure an 

agency does not, for example, release information another agency considers classified. In this investigation, however, the Special Counsel's Office and FBI have asked agencies to determine only the classification of information belonging to them, 

without consulting other agencies to determine the overall classification of adocument. Consistent with how the Department of Justice has handled the issue in 

similar investigations, the Special Counsel's Office enlisted the help of the Office of 

the Director of National Intelligence to determine which information should be 

submitted to which agency. Classification determinations provided to the Special 

Counsel's Office, therefore, are not "final" determinations of the agencies, in the sense 

that each agency cannot unequivocally state the classification level of a document without having undertaken that interagency coordination themselves. Instead, 

agencies have provided classification determinations specific to the information they originated or own, and nothing more. 

Finally, the National Security Council is an equity holder in a large volume of the classified or potentially classified information recovered in this investigation. The National Security Council, however, works in direct support of Mr. Biden in his 

current position as president. To avoid a conflict of interest in having Mr. Bide n's own National Security Council determine the classification level of documents recovered in this investigation, the White House asked the Department of State to "stand in" for the National Security Council in conducting classification review of White House or National Security Council information. The State Department did so by applying 

31 the National Security Council's classification guide to the documents with such 

information, rather than by following its internal State Department classification review process. The State Department, however, is not the National Security Council. And the classification authorities at the State Department do not have the legal  

> authority

to classify information belonging to the National Security Council. Results  

> received

from the State Department as a "stand-in" for the National Security Council, therefore, are the government's current best estimate of classification under the circumstances. The National Security Council could reach different conclusions. 

32 CHAPTER THREE          

> HANDLING OF CLASSIFIED INFORMATION IN THE OFFICE OF THE VICE PRESIDENT

As vice president, Mr. Eiden received and stored classified materials at the \Vhite House, his official residence at the Naval Observatory, his private home in Delaware. and-very briefly-his rental home in  Virginia. 80  He relied on staff to help 

deliver, store, and retrieve these classified materials. 

The task of tracking and retrieving these documents was challenging given the 

relatively small size of Mr. Biden's staff and the volume of classified material Mr. Biden received through various channels on a near-daily and often urgent basis. While many members of Mr. Bide n's staff sought to ensure that classified information 

was handled and stored properly, the Office of Vice President as a whole was unable to account for all the classified material Mr. Biden received and retained. Mr. Biden was known to remove and keep classified material from his briefing books for future use, and his staff struggled-and sometimes failed-to retrieve these materials. And 

there was no procedure at all for tracking some of the classified material Mr. Biden received outside his briefing books. Mr. Biden also kept some material on his person or in his briefcase that he carried between the West Wing and his  residences. 81  Staff did not go through the 

briefcase to retrieve or archive material from it. 82  

> so

See Chapter Seven. 81 Staff Assistant 3 10/4/23 Tr. at 49; Executive Assistant 9/28/2~3 Tr. at 78-7 4; 

Personal Aide 1 4/26/23 Tr. at 58; Personal Aide 2 Tr. at 35. 82 See Staff Assistant 3 10/4/23 Tr. at 67-68; Military Aide 10 Tr. at 22. 

33 These gaps in the tracking and retrieval of Mr. Biden's classified materials 

made it more difficult to determine when, how, and why many of the classified documents later found in Mr. Biden's home and think tank ended up where they did not belong. 

I.  STRUCTURE OF THE OFFICE OF THE VICE PRESIDENT 

Numerous witnesses told us that Mr. Eiden relied on his staff to help transport, store, or return classified materials he received as vice president, and to ensure that 

those materials were handled  properly. 83  As summarized below, several groups of staff were involved with the handling of classified material. 

National Security Affairs staff. The Office of the Yice President had its own 

National Security Affairs staff that supported the vice president, his national security advisor, and his deputy national security  advisor. 81  This office was distinct from President Obama's much larger National Security Council staff, which had its own 

systems for tracking and logging classified material that went to the president. 8: 3

The National Security Affairs staff consisted of (1) the national security advisor 

and staff, and (2) the Executive Secretary team. The national security advisor's staff 

included a mix of political staff and detailees from agencies such as the State Department; they provided substantive advice to the vice president on matters of 

foreign policy and national security. BG \tVhile the national security advisors often             

> 83 Military Aide 4Tr. at 7; Military Aide 9 Tr. at 7.
> si

See, e.g., Executive Secretary 3 Tr. at 14-17.                                  

> 85 NSC Records Director Tr. at 18-31; McKean Tr. at 36-4,0; Executive Secretary 1 Tr. at 73; Executive Secretary 3Tr. at 14-15; Bakotic 7/19/23 Tr. at 9. 86 11/1/16 Memorandum from Outgoing OVP NSA, SCOH-000143.

See also OVP NSA Staffer 3 Tr. at 5. 

34 attended meetings and briefings with Mr. Biden where classified documents were 

discussed, these advisors did not view themselves as responsible for retrieving any 

classified materials from Mr. Biden or ensuring that he stored them  properly. 87 

The Executive Secretary team had an administrative role: It compiled, provided, tracked, and retrieved classified material for Mr.  Biden. 88  It was a small 

group, composed mostly of detailees from agencies. who provided administrative support and assisted in compiling classified briefing books for Mr.  Biden. 89  The Executive Secretary-an experienced, career military officer-worked closely with the Director of Programs, who continued through the transition from the Bush administration and served through the entirety of the Obama  administration. 90 

The Executive Secretary team had little direct access to Mr. Eiden and relied on others to deliver and retrieve classified briefing books. 91 These others included military aides. naval enlisted aides, personal aides, and front office assistants.  

> 8 ~

OVP NSA Staffer 2 Tr. at 41-42; OVP NSA Staffer 1 Tr. at 41; Blinken Tr. at 13; 

Sullivan Tr. at 19.  

> 88

See, e.g., Director of Programs Tr. at 55-58, 105; Executive Secretary 1 Tr. at 14-18, 65; Executive Secretary 3 Tr. at 13; Bakotic 7/19/23 Tr. at 9-10; Executive Secretary 2 Tr. at 6, 9, 30; 11/1/16 Memorandum from Outgoing OVP NSA, SCOH-000143.  

> 89

Executive Secretary 1 Tr. at 14, 21-22; Bakotic 7/19/23 Tr. at 10; Director of Programs Tr. at 17-18; Executive Secretary 2 Tr. at 9; Executive Secretary Staffer 3 Tr. at 24-25; Executive Secretary Staffer 1 Tr. at 34, 41; Executive Secretary Staffer 2 7/7/23 Tr. at 8-9.  

> 90

Executive Secretary 1 Tr. at 7, 11-12, 17, 65; Executive Secretary 2 Tr. at 5, 8; Executive Secretary 3 Tr. at 11-13, 37-39; Bakotic 7/19/23 Tr. at 6-12; 11/1/16 Memorandum from Outgoing OVP NSA, SCOH-000143; Director of Programs Tr. at 5-6.  

> 91

See, e.g., Director of Programs Tr. at 12; Executive Secretary 3 Tr. at 46; Bakotic 7/19/23 Tr. at 52-53; 1/14/17 e-mail amongst OVP National Security Affairs staff, Military Aides, and Naval Enlisted Aides, SCOH-000447. 

35 Military aides. Military aides were servicemembers on detail from the 

Department of  Defense. 92 Their primary role was to ensure continuity of operations should something happen to the president. 9:-i They also helped deliver classified material from the National Security Affairs staff to Mr. Biden when he was not at the 

White House, and brought classified material back when Mr. Biden was finished with 

it.  94 This included printing classified materials and compiling classified binders for Mr. Biden when he was  traveling.95 

Military aides were not responsible for ensuring that all materials delivered to the vice president were retrieved or properly disposed of, or for otherwise tracking 

classified  documents. 96  But they assisted with the handling of classified documents 

because of their high-level security clearances, proximity to the vice president, and 

access to proper storage containers for classified material, such as lockable bags. 97 

Naval enlisted aides. Naval enlisted aides supported Mr. Eiden at the Naval Observatory and at his personal home in Delaware, as well as on all foreign and domestic  travel. 98  Their primary duties included cooking, cleaning, and laundry for 

the vice  president. 99  Like military aides, they served as go-betweens for the delivery 

and retrieval of classified information due to their security clearances and proximity  

> 92

See, e.g., Military Aide 9 Tr. at 7.  

> 93

Military Aide 4 Tr. at 7; Military Aide 9 Tr. at 7.  

> 94

Military Aide 4 Tr. at 13-14, 17; Military Aide 5 Tr. at 10-11, 13-14; Military Aide 8  

> Tr.

at 24-25, 44; Military Aide 11 Tr. at 25; NEA 2 Tr_ at 33-34. 95 See, e_g., Military Aide 4 Tr. at 8-9. 96 See, e.g., Military Aide 3 Tr. at 32-33. 97 See, e.g., Military Aide 1 Tr. at 14-15; Military Aide 8 Tr. at 24-25; Military Aide 10 

Tr. at 23-24; Military Aide 12 Tr. at 14, 16.  

> 98

NEA 5 Tr. at 16-18.  

> 99

Id. at 13-14. 

36 to the vice president. 100 They were the only staff members who regularly accessed Mr. Biden's private spaces on the second floor of the Naval Observatory Residence and at the Delaware residence. 101 At times they delivered classified material to him on the second floor of the Naval Observatory, 102 and when Mr. Eiden left classified material 

out and unattended in those private spaces, they retrieved and secured it. 103 

Mr. Biden regularly received and reviewed classified material in the Naval 

Observatory and his Delaware home and left that material out where the naval 

enlisted aides collected it when he was finished with it. During his vice presidency, 

naval enlisted aides occasionally found classified material in various locations on the 

second  floor  of the Naval  Observatory and in Delaware.  10 -i They either sent those 

materials back to the White House directly or through the military aides, who 

brought them to the Executive Secretary team for proper disposal.JOii 

Personal aides ('"body men"). Mr. Biden's personal aide, or "body man," who 

was always physically present with him at the White House and when traveling except to Delaware. also delivered and retrieved classified documents for him. 106 Personal aides typically had Top Secret/Sensitive Compartmented Information  

> 100

NEA 5 Tr. at 7, 28; NEA l Tr. at 13.  

> 101

See, e.g., NEA 5 Tr. at 29; Military Aide 3 Tr. at 31; Military Aide 5 Tr. at 21; Residence Manager Tr. at 13; Personal Aide 1 4/26/23 Tr. at 113-14; Personal Aide 2 Tr. at 32, 36.  

> 102

NEA 5 Tr. at 28-30.  

> 108

Id. at 28-30, 35-36.  

> 104

NEA 2 Tr. at 30-31, 36; KEA 3 Tr. at 12, 40; NEA 4 Tr. at 11, 15, 21-22, 24, 25, 34; NEA 5 Tr. at 53-54, 59, 84-85; NEA 6 Tr. at 14-15, 24. But see NEA l Tr. at 18, 25, 31, 32, 44 (did not recall seeing classified material left out at Naval Observatory or Delaware). 105 See, e.g., Military Aide 5 Tr. at 11; Military Aide l Tr. at 9; Military Aide 3 Tr. at 30-31; NEA 2 Tr. at 19-20; NEA 5 Tr. at 42-43, 104, 107-108; NEA 6 Tr. at 15, 18. 106 Personal Aide 1 4/26/23 Tr. at 20, 22. 

37 clearances and were read into codeword compartments (involving Sensitive Compartmented Information) as needed. 107 They handled the logistics of Mr. Eiden's 

schedule and ensured he had everything he needed.  108 They coordinated with military aides and National Security Affairs staff to handle the flow of classified material to and from Mr. Eiden, but they did not track it. 10 B

Front office assistants. At the White House, two assistants sat in the front office of Mr. Eiden's West Wing office along with the personal aide and, at various times. a Counselor to the Vice President. 110 Staffers believed the \Yest Wing office was a SCIF or otherwise approved for the discussion of classified information and 

treated it as such. I 1 1 The assistants did not intentionally keep classified material for 

Mr. Eiden in their front office space, and recalled that the only storage area they knew of for classified material in the Vice President's ~Test ~'ing space was the safe 

in his office closet, which they generally did not access. 112 Assistants retrieved unclassified material from an outbox on Mr. Eiden's desk, kept it in a box in their office space, and periodically sent it to the White House Office of Records Management to be archived in compliance with the Presidential Records Act.I 13 vVhen  

> 107

Personal Aide 1 4/26/23 Tr. at 18; Personal Aide 2 Tr. at 29-30; Personal Aide 3 3/28/23 Tr. at 21; 2/~i/09 e-mail from OVP Counsel to Personal Aide 1, lB0Ol_0:3201938.  

> 108

Personal Aide 1 4/26/23 Tr. at 19-20.  

> 109

Id. at 20-22, 52, 145-146 (delivery and retrieval of classified material at the Wilmington Residence "wasn't my role").  

> iw

See, e.g., Staff Assistant 2 Tr. at 25; Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 6-7, 17-19. 111 Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 28; Staff Assistant 2 Tr. at 33-34; Director of 

Programs Tr. at 25-26; Blinken Tr. at 23-24. rn Staff Assistant 2 Tr. at 31-32; Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 32; Staff Assistant 3 10/4/23 Tr. at 18. 113 Staff Assistant 2 Tr. at 19-20; Staff Assistant 1 Tr. at 49; Staff Assistant ;3 10/4/23 Tr. at 15-16; 5/22/12 Duties and Responsibilities, 1B001_02941293. 

38 Mr. Biden left classified material in his outbox or handed it to an assistant, the 

assistant typically called his National Security Affairs team to retrieve it or returned 

it to the Situation Room.1 14 

Counsel to the Vice President. The various staff members within the Office 

of Vice President responsible for delivering, storing, retrieving, and tracking 

classified documents relied  on guidance from the  Counsel  to the Vice President.  1Li 

Mr. Biden had his own Counsel, separate from the White House Counsel's Office. 11 G

The Counsel had a Top Secret/Sensitive Compartmented Information clearance. 117 In 

the early days of the administration, Cynthia Hogan, Mr. Biden's first Counsel, 

developed policies and procedures for the proper handling and storage of classified 

materials in the Office of the Vice President. 

The \Vhite House Counsel's Office and other \\rhite House components also 

provided  guidance on the proper  handling of classified  material.  118 According to 

schedules and other documents, Hogan met with a number of White House employees  

> 114

Staff Assistant 2 Tr. at 19-21, 37-38, 45; Staff Assistant 3 10/4/23 Tr. at 17; Executive Assistant 9/28/23 Tr. at 33-35; 5/22/12 Duties and Responsibilities, 1B001_02941293; August 2016 West Wing Guide, SCOH-000427; 9/6/11 e-mail from front office assistant to Executive Secretary team, 1B001_02872534; 4/3/12 e-mail from front office assistant to Executive Secretary team, 1B001_02854428. But see Staff Assistant 1 Tr. at 62 -

63 (never returned classified material to his National Security Staff, his personal aide "did all of that").  

> 115

See, e.g., 8/17/10 Memo from OVP Counsel to Mr. Eiden re "Handling of Classified Documents," NARAWH_00000050; 8/23/10 e-mail from Military Aide 14 to OVP military aides re "Handling of Classified Material," NARAWH_00014447.  

> 116

Hogan 5/23/23 Tr. at 23-24.  

> 117

2/25/09 e-mail from OV'P Counsel, NARAWH_00002839; Lambros Tr. at 20; Nourse Tr. at 48; McGrail 5/2/23 Tr. at 54.  

> 118

Hogan 5/23/23 Tr. at 24-29. 

39 to discuss the handling of classified material, including employees from the National Security Council and the White House Office of Records Management. 119 

II.  THE PRESIDENTIAL RECORDS ACT AND ARCHIVING OF RECORDS 

Mr. Biden's staff was also responsible for ensuring that documents were properly archived as required by the Presidential Records Act. 120 The Act gives the United States "complete ownership, possession, and control" of all presidential records and vice-presidential records, which must be retained and sent to the 

National Archives at the end of the administration. 121 The statute defines 

presidential records and vice-presidential records broadly to include documentary 

materials created or received "in the course of conducting activities which relate to or 

have an effect upon the carrying out of the constitutional, statutory, or other official or ceremonial duties" of the president or vice president. including memoranda, 

correspondence, papers, photographs, and electronic records. 122 Mr. Biden's Executive Secretary team was responsible for ensurmg that 

classified documents were properly archived according to the Act. 12• 1 The White House 

Office of Records Management handled the archiving of unclassified documents. 121  

> 119

OVP Counsel's Office Weekly Report for Feb. 12 to Feb. 19, 2009, 1B001_00040596_0001-0002; OVP Counsel's Office Weekly Report for Feb. 27 to March 5, 2009, 1B001_00040491_0018-0019; OVP Counsel's Office Weekly Report for June 4-10, 2009, 1B001_00049811_001 l-0015.  

> 120

WH Records Director Tr. at 14-16. 121 44 U.S.C. §§ 2201-09; 9/26/16 Memo by White House Counsel re Preservation and Retention of Records, NARA WH_00000905.  

> m

44 U.S.C. §§ 2201(2), 2207. We discuss the Presidential Records Act again in 

Chapters Nine and Ten.  

> 123

WH Records Director Tr. at 14-16.  

> 121

Id. at 13-14. 

40 During the first week of the administration, a member of the White House 

Counsel's Office briefed Mr. Eiden on the Act's recordkeeping requirements. 125 Hogan 

put in place a procedure to make sure that presidential and vice presidential records were collected and properly archived. She circulated a White House Counsel memo on the Act's requirements to employees in the Office of the Vice President. 126 She also met with Mr. Eiden's personal aide to discuss the Act and its recordkeeping requirements, including the need to collect and preserve Mr. Eide n's briefing books. 127 

Ill. THE HANDLING OF CLASSIFIED MATERIAL IN THE OFFICE OF THE VICE PRESIDENT 

A.  Classified products 

Mr. Eiden received classified documents in three primary forms: a classified binder prepared by his national security staff; the President's Daily Brief: and materials delivered to him as needed by his staff. 

Classified briefing book. Most days, the Executive Secretary team compiled a classified briefing book for Mr. Eiden. 128 It was a binder of materials drafted or 

selected by Mr. Biden's advisors to prepare him for the day and upcoming trips. 12 H 

> 125

1/25/09 Memo re Briefing from White House Counsel on the Presidential Records Act and Ethics Rules, NARAWH_00000049; 1/26/09 Mr, Biden's Schedule for January 26, 2009, 1B001_03202545.  

> 126

3/17/09 e-mail from Hogan to All OVP employees, 1B001_03199194; 3/11/09 Memo re the Presidential Records Act from White House Counsel to All EOP Staff, 1B001_031991950  

> 127

1/23/09 e-mail from Hogan to Personal Aide 1, 1B001_03061921. 128 See, e.g, Executive Secretary 2 Tr" at 9; 7/18/12 e-mail to all OVP staff, 1B001_00213201; 7/29/15 e-mail between Personal Aide and ML Eiden, lB001_02072094. 129 See, e.g, Executive Secretary 3 Tr" at 14, 16, 21-24, 29-30; Executive Secretary lTro at 20. 

41 The Executive Secretary team assembled the book and ensured its delivery to 

Mr. Eiden, in coordination with other staff as described above. 130 The Executive Secretary team also tracked the book's return. 1:31 Once returned, the books were 

stored in a safe in the Executive Secretary team's office.  1: 32 Periodically, the team sent 

the books to the White House Office of Records Management to be archived. 1. 13 

President's Daily Brief. The Office of the Director of National Intelligence compiled a collection of intelligence community products known as the President's 

Daily Brief Mr. Eiden was assigned his own briefer, who also briefed his national security advisor, deputy national security advisor. and his last chief of staff. 1 :ii The Director of National Intelligence required inclusion of a core group of articles, while the briefer supplemented articles tailored to Mr. Biden's interests and requestsY 33 

Early in his vice presidency, Mr. Biden declined to receive oral briefings from 

his own briefer and instead joined President Obama for his briefings in the Oval  

> 130

See, e.g., Executive Secretary 3 Tr. at 28, 33-34; Executive Secretary 1 Tr. at 26; Executive Secretary 2 Tr. at 13-14; 10/26/16 e-mail amongst OVP staff, SCOH-000239. 131 Executive Secretary 3 Tr. at 34-35; Director of Programs Tr. at 55-56; Executive Secretary Staffer 2 7/7/23 Tr. at 24-25.  

> 132

Director of Programs Tr. at 53-54.  

> IB

Id. at 53, 61, 100; Executive Secretary 3 Tr. at 35; 2/4/09 e-mail from Hogan to Personal Aide 1, 1B001_03201837; 6/19/09 National Security Advisory Staff Assistant Standard Operating Procedures. NARAWH_00000712.   

> n4

PDB Briefer 1 Tr. at 3.  

> L15

Id. at 22-24, 36-37. 

42 Office.  i: 35 Throughout his tenure, Mr. Eiden received a written brief, first on paper in 

a binder, and beginning in 2014, on a portable electronic device. 1: 37 

Mr. Eiden's briefer generally retrieved the copy of the brief delivered to Mr. 

Eiden. Mr. Biden's Executive Secretary team stored the briefs in their safe until the 

briefer retrieved them.13s 

"As-needed" materials. Mr. Eiden also received classified documents on an 

as-needed basis, hand-delivered to him by staff or printed to his vVest Wing office on 

a secure printer. 139 The Naval Observatory also had a classified printer the military 

aides used to print and deliver such materials to Mr. Biden there. 110 The Executive 

Secretary team lacked a formal system for tracking classified documents delivered to  

> 136

PDE Briefer 1 Tr. at 20-22; 1/28/09 e-mail to Personal Aide 1 listing Mr. Biden's 

schedule, 1B001_03202433; 12/15/09 e-mail between listing Mr. Biden's schedule, 

1B001_03185236 ("9:45-10: 15 am- Attend POTUS PDB"); 9/12/11 e-mail listing Mr. Biden's 

schedule, 1B001_02872037 ("9:30-10:00am POTUS PDB in Oval").  

> 137

PDB Briefer 1 Tr. at 42-4~:S. In the early years, the PDB was printed for the Vice President, received at the Naval Observatory, and brought with him to the West Wing. 2/10/10-2/11/10 e-mail between Executive Secretary l and staff, 1B001_03060726. When interviewed, Mr. Eiden said he received the PDB in a binder. Eiden 10/8/23 Tr. at 19. When 

Mr. Eiden was traveling, he received the PDB in paper copy via secure fax. PDB Briefer 1 Tr. at 40-43. See also 1/13/17 e-mail amongst Secret Service describing PDB delivery, USSS -

0000477389.  

> 138

PDB Briefer 1 Tr. at 42-44; PDB Briefer 2 Tr. at 15, 24, 33.  

> 139

OVP NSA Staffer 2 Tr. at 24-26; 10/15/14 e-mail from Director of Programs to Executive Assistant ("There is a high side printer under your desk that I understand does not work correctly."), 1B001_03521121; 11/30/16 e-mail amongst OVP staff (requesting "toner for the classified printer"), SCOH-000224; 9/13/16 e-mail (discussing fixing the "classified printer"), SCOH-000269; 8/29/16 e-mail (requesting assistance with the "high side printer" in "the Vice President's West Wing Office"), SCOH-000425.  

> Ho

2/8/11 e-mail from Military Aide 15 to Personal Aide 1 and OVP National Security Affairs staff ("If they have a SECRET or higher classification, please have the WHSR send them to our VP MILAIDE (high side) printer here at the VPR."), 1B001_03155733; 11/17/16 e-mail amongst military aides and OVP National Security Affairs staff ("There is one piece of traffic/cable that I just printed to the Naval Observatory printer. Mil Aides, can you please deliver with morning traffic?"), SCOH-000241; Military Aide 5 Tr. at 10; Military Aide 1 Tr. at 8-9. The naval enlisted aides did not have access to a classified computer. NEA 5 Tr. at :30 -

> 31.

43 Mr. Eiden on an as-needed basis, and no one else in the Office of the Vice President 

appears to have tracked them either.  1 n Several of the marked classified documents recovered by the FBI in this investigation appear to have been given to Mr. Eiden 

outside the briefing books.  1 12 

B.  Efforts to retrieve and track classified material 

In the early days of Mr. Biden's vice presidency, his Counsel, Hogan, instructed Mr. Biden's personal aide that all classified material provided to Mr. Eiden should be returned to the Executive Secretary team. 1 n Although there was a safe in Mr. Biden's office, Hogan told Mr. Biden's personal aide that "we don't want to store any classified material in the [West Wing] office, so just look to hand this stuff off as soon as it comes to you." 1 h 

The Executive Secretary team sought to retrieve Mr. Biden's classified briefing 

books every day but could not always do so. 1 !,\ At times, he kept one or more classified 

briefing books for his own reference or because he was not done with the material.1-l- 6 

> 141

Executive Secretary Staffer 2 7/7/23 Tr. at 32<35; OVP NSA Staffer 2 Tr. at 40-42; 

0\lp NSA Staffer 1 Tr. at 41; Blinken Tr. at 13.  

> 142

For example, document A2 was a memorandum recovered at the Penn Biden Center. See Chapter Fourteen. E-mail correspondence indicates it was printed to the West Wing printer, after the regular classified briefing book (which also contained a copy of the document) was returned. 9/27/16 Memo amongst OVP NSA and West Wing staff, 1B001_02306967. See also Chapter Sixteen.  

> 113

2/4/09 e-mail from Hogan to Personal Aide l, 1B001_03061837.  

> H 4

2/16/09 e-mail from Hogan to Personal Aide 1, 1B001_03201046.  

> 115

Director of Programs Tr. at 54, 57-58, 78.  

> tH,

Id. at 54, 57-59; Executive Secretary Staffer 2 7/7/23 Tr. at 28-29. 11/8/10 e-mails amongst Personal Aide 1, military aides, and Executive Secretary team, 1B001_03161903. 

44 And on occasion, he removed one or more briefing memos from the classified briefing 

book before returning it.  117 

In 2010, the Executive Secretary team raised concerns about the number of classified briefing books that Mr. Eiden had not returned, and the fact that, even when they were returned, some of the content was missing. 118 These concerns were raised with Hogan as well as Mr. Biden's personal aide and military aides. E-mails indicate that the Executive Secretary team alerted Hogan to the issue at least in June 

2010, when nearly thirty of the classified briefing books from the first six months of 2010 were outstanding, and in August 2010, when Mr. Eiden failed to return Top Secret, Sensitive Compartmented Information (also referred to as "codeword") 

contents of a classified briefing book that he had received during a trip to the Hamptons, in New York. 119 \Ve were unable to determine whether these materials 

were ever recovered, although they were likely found and disposed of by military 

aides or naval enlisted aides. 150  

> 117

Director of Programs Tr. at 54-60; Executive Secretary Staffer 2 7/7 /23 Tr. at 28 -

29; 11/8/10 e-mails amongst Personal Aide 1, military aides, and Executive Secretary team, 1B001_03161903.  

> 148

Director of Programs Tr. at 69-76, 90-91; Executive Secretary 3 Tr. at 36-37; Executive Secretary Staffer 2 7/7/23 Tr. at 28-29 (seeing the same in 2016-18).  

> 149

6/29/10 e-mail from Director of Programs to Personal Aide 1 and military aides, 1B001_03171078; 8/16/10 e-mail from Executive Secretary to Hogan, 1B001_03168570; 8/17/10 e-mails between Military Aide 14 and Personal Aide 1, 1B001_03168569; Military Aide 10 Tr. at 24-25.  

> 150

8/17/10 to 8/18/10 e-mails between Hogan and the Executive Secretary team and naval enlisted aides, NARAWH_00017121; Executive Secretary Staffer 2 7/7/23 Tr. at 31-33. 

45 The return of classified briefing books without all of their contents frustrated 

the Executive Secretary team.  1 f\ 1 In response, Hogan implemented additional security 

procedures described below. 152 But even after those measures were implemented, the 

Executive Secretary team continued to struggle to retrieve classified briefing books 

from Mr. Bi den. 

We were able to trace one of the marked classified documents recovered by the 

FBI to a briefing book-a 2015 memorandum recovered from the Penn Biden 

Center. 1:i:i But we were not able to determine whether other recovered documents 

came from briefing books or were handed or sent to Mr. Eiden on an as-needed basis. 

C.  August 2010 briefing of Mr. Eiden on the handling of classified material 

Days after the Top Secret, codeword book went missing in 2010, Hogan met 

with Mr. Eiden to discuss the handling of classified material.1' 54 Before the meeting, 

she prepared a briefing memo for himYi 5 The memo, which was addressed to Mr. 

Biden and dated August 17, 2010, outlined "our procedures for handling your  

> 161

Director of Programs Tr. at 72-73: Executive Secretary 3 Tr. at 36-37; 11/8/10 e mail from Director of Programs to military aides and others, 1B001_03161902. See also 

Executive Secretary Staffer 2 7/7 /23 Tr. at :10-31 (seeing the same in 2016-2018).  

> 152

Director of Programs Tr. at 72-75, 90-91; 8/17/10 Memo from O\'P Counsel to Mr. 

Bid en re "Handling of Classified Documents," NARA WH_00000050.  

> 153

A review of the classified book or binder from the Archives showed that the binder from the date of document A8 was missing a tab and attachment which matched document AS. FBI Serial 692. Document A8 was also hole-punched, indicating it may have been the copy that was originally placed in that binder. FBI Serial 238.   

> 15 -1

8/17/10 e-mails between Military Aide 10, Military Aide 12, and Personal Aide 1, 1B001_03168569; 8/16/10 e-mail from Executive Secretary to Hogan, 1B001_03168570: 8/19/10 e-mail from OVP Counsel to Executive Secretary and others, 1B001_03168426.  

> 15 ~

8/17/10 Memo from OVP Counsel to Mr. Eiden re "Handling of Classified Documents," NARAWH_00000050. 

46 classified briefing material" that "must be maintained at all times," including the 

following: 

• "Classified information of any kind may only be reviewed or discussed in secured locations, and never in a public place such as on a train." 

• "The [classified briefing] books must remain in your custody, or that of your cleared staff, at all times unless they are in your safe. Classified material must be returned to your national security staff as soon as you are finished 

with them." 

• "Classified materials may never be left unattended, but must be secured in an appropriate safe or transferred to an individual authorized to transport 

them in an appropriate locked bag whenever they are not in your personal custody." 

• '·Whenever possible, classified materials should remain at the ·white House complex .... If you need to receive classified materials while at your 

residence at NAVOBS or in Delaware, the military aides will bring the 

material to you and then wait to take the material back when you are finished so that it can be stored safely.''J,'iG 

When interviewed, Hogan did not recall the August 2010 meeting with Mr. 

Biden. She did, however. identify her handwritten talking points on "best 

practices."  157 Even though she did not remember their content, she identified her 

handwriting and said she likely created them in advance of her meeting with Mr. 

Biden_ lfiS According to her talking points, she briefed Mr. Eiden on such best practices 

as making sure that "classified info stays in the VVH complex whenever possible"' and 

is "returned to N[ational] S[ecurity] staff at end of each day."  159 She also counseled 

Mr. Eiden that any classified material taken from the White House must be                            

> 156 8/17/10 Memo from Hogan to Mr. Biden re "Handling of Classified Documents,"
> NARA WH_ 00000050. 157 Undated handwritten notes, NARAWH_00000050 at 4158 Hogan 9/19/23 Tr. at 66-69. 159 Undated handwritten notes, NARAWH_00000050 at 4.

47 transported by military aides in locked bags and that military aides must retrieve the classified material when Mr. Eiden was done with it. 160 

After the briefing, Mr. Eiden sent Hogan an e-mail through one of his front office assistants, thanking her for the "security briefing." 161 

Despite the Hogan memo's language that the Office of the Vice President 

"must" follow certain procedures for handling classified information, Hogan conceived 

of the memo as describing "best practices" rather than legal requirements. Hi 2 That view is consistent with the executive order governing handling and storage of classified information, which, as explained in Chapter One, does not apply to a sitting vice president. As outlined below, Mr. Eiden and his staff did not follow Hogan's guidance to the letter. 

D.  The handling of classified material  1n Mr. Biden's personal spaces after August 2010 As part of his duties as vice president, Mr. Eiden accessed and stored classified 

material in the Naval Observatory and at his Delaware home, outside of containers 

normally authorized for such information. His staff, following Hogan's advice, tried  

> 160

Undated handwritten notes, NARAWH_00000050. See also 8/23/10 e-mail from Military A.ide 14 to other OVP military aides re "Handling of Classified Material," NARAWH_00014447; Hogan 5/2:3/23 Tr. at 5:1-55.  

> 161

8/17/20 e-mail from front office assistant to OVP Counsel, NARAWH_00017043.  

> 162

Hogan 9/19/23 Tr. at 65-68, 81, 113-14; 8/17/10 Memo from Hogan to Mr. Eiden re "Handling of Classified Documents," NARAWH_00000050. 

48 to ensure that classified material was handled securely. 

1.  Tracking of classified briefing books 

In the wake of the August 2010 Hamptons trip and the difficulty in retrieving Top Secret, codeword documents, Executive Secretary staff implemented a more formal system for tracking Mr. Eiden's classified briefing books. The team began 

numbering and recording the contents of each book,  16• 3 and created a spreadsheet that 

logged the date, book number, how the book was delivered, and date of return.  164 Despite these new procedures, the Executive Secretary team continued to struggle to 

retrieve Mr. Eiden's classified briefing books.  165 

2.  Delivery of classified material to personal spaces 

Hogan orally instructed military aides that the classified briefing books must be delivered directly to Mr. Eiden and "could not be left on the 'round table"' in the 

front hall on the main floor of the Naval Observatory residence.  166 During our interview, Hogan said that she "wanted to make sure that a book with classified 

information wasn't just sitting on the hallway table."  167 According to notes taken by one of Mr. Eiden's military aides, Hogan instructed that "if [Mr. Eiden] asks us to  

> 163

8/23/10 e-mail from Director of Programs to OVP National Security Staff, NARAWH_00017126; 8/17/10 Memo from Hogan to Mr. Biden re "Handling of Classified Documents," NARAWH_00000050.  

> 164

8/23/10 e-mail from Director of Programs to OVP National Security Staff, NARAWH_000l 7126; VP Classified book tracking.xlsx, NARAWH_00014902.  

> 165

Executive Secretary Staffer 2 7/7/23 Tr. at 25-28; In November 2010, Military Aide 14 e-mailed Personal Aide 1 asking him to help retrieve multiple of Mr. Biden's classified briefing books. 11/8/10 e-mail from Director of Programs to military aides and others, 1B001_03161902.  

> 166

Hogan 5/23/23 Tr. at 45-46. 8/23/10 e-mail from Military Aide 14 to OVP Military Aides re "Handling of Classified Material," NARAWH_00014447.  

> 167

Hogan 5/23/23 Tr. at 46-47. 

49 leave it on the 'round table' we should place it on the table and then maintain eyes 

on it until he picks it up." 1G8 But in practice, military aides regularly left his classified 

briefing books unattended on the round table at Mr. Biden's request.1G 9

3.  Storage of classified material in personal spaces 

According to a military aide's notes of a meeting with Hogan in August 2010, she communicated to staff that Mr. Eiden "understands that classified material needs to be kept in one of two places a. Personal Custody, or b. a safe." 170 His staff then installed identical safes for him to use to store classified material, installing one safe  

> 168

Id. 8/23/10 from Military Aide 14 to OVP Military Aides re "Handling of Classified Material," NARAWH_00014447.  

> 169

Military Aide 1 . at 10-11, 42-44; Military A.ide 4 Tr. at 9, 16 ("He knew that at some point in the evening there would be a book available him on the table. • Military Aide 8 Tr. at 21-22 ("We would make contact with and he would say, can you leave it on the table at the of the stairs in the Na val Observatory. So, he would request that and we would leave it him to retrieve. • Military Aide 10 Tr. at 15 ("his direction to me was to put it on a table in the foyer .... [H]is direction to me was to set it on that table. 

But see Military Aide 11 at 28 ("You couldn't ... [I]f you couldn't positively hand it off to somebody, you didn't. I wasn't going to leave, you know, secrets sitting on the kitchen counter in the Naval Observatory."); Military Aide 13 Tr. at 15 ("All of the handoffs that I'm thinking about, I don't think we left classified sitting around for him."). Some military aides described ensuring the material was picked up from the table that evening. Military Aide 3 Tr. at 40 ("I wouldn't stand there waiting for him to come down and get them, say if he was, you know, upstairs. But I would make sure they were picked up. Military Aide 6 Tr. at 30 ("[\\i1e would leave them on the table on the first floor, and I would always kind of wait, and he would walk or let the dog out, Champ, and so you'd see that he let [the] dog out, and then I would go back up to make sure that those documents were not on the table after I saw him."). At least one military aide pushed back if the material was particularly sensitive. Military Aide 5 Tr. at 13-15, 33 (would not leave anything above Top Secret/Sensitive Compartmented Information classification on the round table and Mr. Biden would be informed it couldn't be left on the table; would not leave the book on the table for more than 30 minutes.). On at least one occasion, Mr. Biden's personal aide sent an e-mail to Mr. Eiden himself via Mr. Biden's personal e-mail account notifying him that the "classified book was delivered and is on the round table downstairs[.]" 7/11/11 e-mail from personal aide to Mr. Eiden, 1B001_03223432.  

> 170

8/23/10 e-mail from Military Aide 14 to UVP Military Aides, NARAWH_00014447. 

50 each in his West Wing office closet, the second-floor personal space of the Naval 

Observatory, and his personal residence in Delaware.  171 

There is some evidence that after the new safes were installed at the 

residences, Mr. Eiden used them to store classified information, at least for a time. 

In December 2010, for example, Mr. Biden's personal aide e-mailed members of the 

Executive Secretary team saying that Mr. Eiden had "just put" classified material in 

a safe in the Naval Observatory, including classified briefing books and one of Mr. 

Biden's handwritten notebooks.  172 And in November 2010, the personal aide sent 

another e-mail saying that "the system put in place by [Hogan] of using safes at his 

residence has been working."  173 

But we also found that Mr. Eiden continued frequently to leave classified documents unattended, outside of safes, at the Naval Observatory and his Delaware home. As to the Naval Observatory, only one of the eight naval enlisted aides we 

interviewed recalled a safe there ever being used to store classified material.1  74 

Several did not recall a second-floor safe at all.1  75 And only one aide recalled a safe 

being in the library of the Delaware home, but the aide never opened it.  176  

> 171

8/23/10 e-mail from Military Aide 14 to OVP Military Aides, NARAWH_00014447; 12/11/10 e-mail from Personal Aide 1 to Director of Programs, 1B001_03159080 (referring to safe in Mr. Biden's "room" in his residence at the Naval Observatory).  

> 172

12/11/10 e-mail from Personal Aide 1 to Director of Programs and Executive Secretary, 1B001_03159095 (listing a "classified binder" with materials from "two books" on "Af/Pak"); Notebook 1B63.  

> 173

11/8/10 e-mail from Personal Aide 1 to Director of Programs, et al., 

1B001_03161902.  

> 174

NEA 5 Tr. at 35-36, 39, 40-41.  

> 175

NEA 1 Tr. at 17; NEA 4 Tr. 16; NEA 8 at 23-24.  

> 176

5/2/13 e-mail from Director of Programs, 1B001_03097089; 10/18/10 Memorandum, NARAWH_00014906; NEA 5 Tr. at 80-83. 

51 Despite Hogan's admonishments never to leave classified material unattended, 

several aides observed classified material left out on the second floor of the Naval 

Observatory  177 or in the Delaware home. 178 Some thought it was fine for documents 

to be left out in those spaces, and only recalled moving them if asked. 179 When interviewed, Mr. Eiden recalled that at the Naval Observatory his practice was to "leave something on the desk that I was working out of in the office ... and they'd come and clear it out ... when I got finished." 180 

E.  Lack of counseling on the handling of classified material after 2010 

Hogan left her position as Counsel to the Vice President in June 2013.  181 After her guidance in 2010 and 2011, it does not appear the Counsel's office provided Mr. 

Eiden with any additional advice of significance about how to handle and store classified information until the very end of the administration, when an issue arose 

relating to his handwritten classified notecards. That matter is discussed in detail in Chapter Four.  

> 177

NEA 2 Tr. at 29-32; NEA 3 Tr. at 12, 40; NEA 4 Tr. at 11-13; NEA 5 Tr. at 53-55, 59; NEA 6 Tr. at 14-15; NEA 7 Tr. at 51-53. 178 NEA 2 Tr. at 36; NEA 4 Tr. at 21, 24-25, 34, 35-38; NEA 5 Tr. at 53-54, 84-85: NEA 

6 Tr. at 24.  

> 179

NEA 4 Tr. at 23-24, 47; NEA 5 Tr. at 84; NEA 7 Tr. at 51-53.  

> 180

Biden 10/8/23 Tr. at 30-:31.  

> 181

Hogan 5/23/23 TL at 36; Lambros Tr. at 13; 6/21/13 e-mail from Hogan, 1B001_00180811. 

52 CHAPTER FOUR MR. BIDEN'S CLASSIFIED NOTECARDS AND NOTEBOOKS 

In addition to the marked classified documents Mr. Biden received through the 

President's Daily Brief classified briefing books, and other avenues, he also regularly created classified documents in the form of his own handwritten notes. Throughout the eight years of the Obama administration, Mr. Eiden took notes during classified meetings and about classified information in notebooks and on notecards. Although 

the substantive information in the notebooks and notecards was similar-and 

similarly classified-the notebooks and notecards were handled differently, both during the administration and after. 

During the Obama administration, Mr. Biden's staff regularly collected and reviewed his notecards to determine if they contained classified information and so 

they could eventually be archived as presidential records. At the end of the administration, Mr. Biden's staff arranged for him to store most of his classified notecards, which contained notes on the President's Daily Brief and other classified information, in a SCIF at the National Archives. In contrast, Mr. Eiden held his notebooks close, and his staff did not review them. After the administration, Mr. Biden brought his notebooks home with him and stored them in unsecured locations that were not authorized to store classified information-even though the notebooks, like the notecards, contained classified information. 

53 - --

Some information in the notebooks remains classified up to the Top Secret level and includes Sensitive Compartmented Information, including from compartments used to protect information concerning human intelligence sources.  182

I.  MR. BIDEN'S NOTECARDS 

A.  As vice president, Mr. Biden carried and took notes on notecards every day 

Mr. Eiden regularly took notes on 4-inch by 7.5-inch notecards. Many of them had "The Vice President," or "Office of the Vice President" printed at the top.  183         

> r11 ,1r 1••"-· ,11-11 ,! I

# i. ./ b - ~ .... ,....  1:

## ' 

> '
> II '
> II
> 'I
> I

I     

> I
> j
> I
> 11
> II
> I
> j
> Examples of vice presidential notecards184
> 182

Office of the Director of National Intelligence, 12/31/13 Memorandum for Distribution from the Principal Deputy Director of National Intelligence (2013), 

https://sgp.fas.org/othergov/intel/hcs-update.pdf ; FBI Serial 676.  

> 183

Staff Assistant 2 Tr. at 100; 12/20/10 e-mail from OVP staffer to Staff Assistant 2, 1B001_02888681; Staff Assistant 3 10/4/23 Tr. at 34-35.  

> 184

NARA_SCAN_00001317, NARA_SCAN_00001320, NARA_SCAN_00001305; FBI Serial 3. 

54 Mr. Biden's staffers printed a copy of hi s sc he dule on a notecard for him to 

carry and refer to eac h d ay .185  He al so had staffers print ot her information on the notec ards , s u ch as t he number of troops who had died during the wa r in Afghanistan and t alking p oi nts for me et ings and spe eches.  186  Mr. Biden carried th e notec ards in his inner jac k et pocket, and he referred to t hem throughout the d ay and jott ed down not es on the m .18i 

Mr. Biden also carried bl a nk no tecards th at he used to take notes. A cc ording to s ta ffers, he used th e not ec ard s to t ak e notes during a nd after meetin gs.  18 8       

> Mr. Biden with handwritten notecards (Jun e 30, 2010)1 89
> 185

9/1/16 West Wing Gui de, SCOH-000434; Klain Tr. at 43; Pers o nal Aide 1 4/26/23 Tr. at 26-27; Hog an 5/23/23 Tt· . at 33; Ex ecutive Assistant 9/28/23 Tr. at 50-51.  

> 18 6

9/1/16 West Wing Guide, SC OH -000434; Kl ai n Tr. at 43; P erso nal Aide 1 4/ 26 /23 Tr. at 29-30; McK e an Tr. at 82 -83 ; Personal Aide 3 3/28/23 Tr. at 31-32.  

> 187

9 /1/ 16 West Wing Guide , SC OH -000434; Kl ai n Tr . at 43-44; P ersonal Aide 1 4/26/23 Tr. at 26-27; Hoga n 5/23/23 Tr . at 33; Sta ff Ass ist ant 3 10/4/23 Tr. at 25-26.  

> 188

P ers on al Aide 1 4/26/23 Tr. at 28-29; Personal Aide 3 3/ 28/23 Tr. at 31-34; St aff Assistant 3 10/4/23 Tr. at 25 -26.  

> 1s9

1B001_00506500. 

55 In addition to taking notes in unclassified settings, Mr. Eiden used notecards 

to take notes on a variety of classified meetings and briefings, including the 

President's Daily Brief, 190 Situation Room meetings, and other briefings from the 

intelligence community.191 

B.  Mr. Biden's notecards were collected and organized by his staff 

Mr. Biden's front office staff regularly collected his notecards. Generally, Mr. 

Eiden handed them to his personal aide or staff assistants or left them in an outbox 

on the desk in his office, where his front office staff collected material at each day's 

end. 192 Staff then organized the notecards by date or topic so that Mr. Eiden could 

reference them_ 19:3 Front office staff stored the notecards in their work area outside of 

Mr.  Biden's West Wing office.19 4

When notecards contained notes related to foreign policy meetings or other 

potentially classified information, 1\Ir. Biden's staff turned them over to the National 

Security Affairs team, who stored them in a secure location. 195 At times, the National  

> 190

E.g., NARA-Bx1_1682, 2428, 2432-39, 2444-46, 2452, 2458, 2460; Staff Assistant 3

10/4/23 Tr. at 31-32; Personal Aide 1 4/26/23 Tr. at 26-29; Personal Aide 3 3/28/23 Tr. at 31; FBI Serial 281 1A300, 1A301.  

> 191

E.g., NARA-Bxl_0l23, 195-96, 274, 277, 422, 1074-75, 1100, 1197, 1692-93, 1702, 1737-38, 2140-41, 2159, 2218, 2372, 2403, 2442; NARA-Bx2_ VP Notecards 2016_0090; Staff Assistant 3 10/4/23 Tr. at 31-32; FBI Serial 281 1A300, 1A301.  

> 192

Staff Assistant 2 3/16/23 Tr. at 19-20, 27-28; Executive Assistant 9/28/23 Tr. at 43, 60-61; 9/1/16 West Wing Guide, SCOH-000434; Staff Assistant 3 10/4/23 Tr. at 15-17, 26-27. 198 Staff Assistant 3 10/4/23 Tr. at 24-27; 9/1/16 West Wing Guide, SCOH-000434; 

Staff Assistant 2 3/16/23 Tr. at 31, 98-99; Executive Assistant 9/28/23 Tr. at 43, 45. 191 Staff Assistant 2 3/16/23 Tr. at 31, 98; Staff Assistant 3 10/4/23 Tr. at 25-26, 33, 37; 9/1/16 West Wing Guide, SCOH-000434.  

> 195

Staff Assistant 4 Tr. at 37-39, 52-53, 101-102; Staff Assistant 2 3/16/23 Tr. at 20 -

21; Personal Aide l 4/26/23 Tr. at 28-29, 52, 5(); 2/5/11 e-mail from Deputy Counsel to WH Records Director et al. re "\lP Notecards," 1B001_02886522; Staff Assistant 3 10/4/23 Tr. at 31-32; Executive Secretary Staffer 2 11/21/23 Tr. at 6-7; Bakotic 1/11/24 Tr. at 20-22. 

56 Security Affairs team marked some of the notecards as classified.  rnG Mr. Biden also 

marked some of his own note cards as classified. 197 

C.  Mr. Eiden wanted to take copies of his notecards when he left office to help write his book As explained in Chapter Five, in the final year of his vice presidency, Mr. Bi den began writing a memoir about his time in office. When conceiving of and writing the book, Mr. Biden worked with a ghostwriter, Mark Zwonitzer. In 2016, Zwonitzer reached out to Mr. Biden's staff and requested help with locating Mr. Biden's journals 

and notes that would be helpful in writing the book. 198 As he approached the end of 

his vice presidency, Mr. Bid en sought to keep copies of his notecards and other records 

for use in the book-writing process. According to a staffer involved in the project, Mr. 

Biden wanted to take copies of the notecards "so that he didn't have to go to [the 

National Archives] every  day to help write this  book."  199 In late September 2016, Zwonitzer e-mailed Mr. Biden's chief of staff to schedule an interview with Mr. Biden. 200 Zwonitzer said he wanted to cover "very specific topics and time frames" and said he would "tell you exactly what ground/time 

period I want to cover in the session so the VP could have relevant notes/diaries etc, 

with him when we talk." 20 1  

> 196

Executive Secretary Staffer 2 11/21/23 Tr. at 6-11; Ratner Tr. at 42-43, 51. 197 Staff Assistant 3 10/4/23 Tr. at 31-32; NARA-Bxl_2438, 2446; FBI Serial 281 

1A300, 1A301. 198 5/21/16 e-mail from Zwonitzer to Ricchetti, Zwonitzer-00007399. 199 Associate Counsel 3/29/23 Tr. at 59.  

> 200

9/26/16 e-mail from Zwonitzer to Ricchetti, Zwonitzer-00007613.  

> 201

Id. 

57 Around this same time, Mr. Biden's staff made copies of the notecards and 

organized them into binders so that he could take them after he left office. 202  The notes were organized by topic or date. 208  For example, one binder contained copies of notes Mr. Biden took during President's Daily Brjefs and his lunches with President Obama. 201  The binder contained notes on classified meetings and information.         

> Copies of notecards regarding lunches with P,·esident Obama 205

Other binders contained copies of Mr. Biden's notecards organized by year:205  

> M

Staff Assistant 3 10/4/23 Tr. at 25-31; Associate Counsel 3/29/23 Tr. at 54-55: Executive Secretary Staffer 2 7/7/23 Tr. at 71-74.  

> 20 :1

Staff Assistant 2 :1/16/23 Tr. at 31, 98; Staff Assistant 3 10/4/23 Tr. at 36, 38-40; 9/1/16 \Vest Wing Guide, SCOH-000434.  

> 204

BlendedBoxes-0026, BlendedBoxes-0028; Staff Assistant 3 10/1/23 Tr. at 36, 38-40; 

FBI Serial 392 1A469.  

> 205

BlendedBoxes-0026, BlendedBoxes-0028; FBI Serial 392 1A469.  

> 206

E.g., BlendcdBoxes-0040 to BlendedBoxes-0044 (binder labeled "2009-2013" with 

tabs corresponding to those years); FBI Serial 392 1A169. 

58 Copies of  not .eca,.ds  organized b_ y ye a,·· 20 ;

In a ddit io n to note ca rds, some of th e bind e rs co ntain ed co pi es of l\.fr. Bi. den's sc hedule s and other materiaL 208 

Copies of notecards and Mr. Biden's schedules 209   

> 20 ,

Ble nd edBoxes-0040, Blende dB oxe s-0 044.   

> 208

E.g., Bl endedBoxes-0037; FBI Se rial 392 IA 469.  

> 209

BlendedBoxes-0035, Blend edBoxes-003i; FBI Ser ia l 392 1A469. 

59 D.  Near the end of the administration, staff determined that some 

of the note cards contained classified information 

The counsel in the Office of the Vice President were involved in reviewing the copies of the notecards that Mr. Biden wanted to take with him after his vice presidency. 210 While reviewing the notecards, an associate counsel noticed that some 

of them contained notes about the President's Daily Brief.2 11 Although the associate counsel did not see any classification markings, she understood the President's Daily Brief was classified and was concerned because a non-classified copier had been used 

to make the  copies. 21  2

The associate counsel raised the issue with the Executive Secretary team, 

which, as explained in Chapter Three, was responsible for the delivery and handling of classified material in the Office of the Vice President. 213 E-mail correspondence from early October 2016 indicates the notecards were temporarily stored in the deputy national security advisor's office "until the lawyers determine the appropriate next steps." 21 ~ In an interview, the deputy national security advisor recalled "reviewing materials" at the end of the administration "to understand what was classified or not."21:"i  

> 210

Associate Counsel 3/29/23 Tr. at 54-60; 10/6/16 e-mail from Associate Counsel to Executive Assistant, et al., NARAWH~00017698 (indicating Associate Counsel would deliver the "2009-2013" binder to the Executive Assistant when she was finished reviewing it).  

> 211

Associate Counsel 3/29/23 Tr. at 54-55.  

> 212

Id. at 55.  

> 211

Id.  

> 214

10/7/16 e-mail between Associate Counsel, Deputy National Security Advisor Ely Ratner, and others, NARAWH_00017743.  

> 215

Ratner Tr. at 40. 

60 Soon after, a military detailee working on the Executive Secretary team raised her own concerns about the handling of Mr. Biden's notecards. After learning that Mr. Eiden wanted copies of the notecards for use in writing his book "after the administration has ended," the detailee raised concerns that the notes contained classified material commingled with Mr. Biden's personal notes. 216 According to the detailee, the executive secretary, Kristen Bakotic (who was also on detail from the military), disagreed and concluded that "the notes belong to the Vice President and should be made available to him without restriction." 217 Because Bakotic outranked the detailee, the detailee sent an e-mail to herself "for the record," in which she explained her belief that the notes were "being mishandled" and documented her 

request not to participate "in any project or meetings that involve these records." 218 

For the Record 

On October 18th, 2016 in the Office of the Vice President's National Security Affairs office, there began a discussion of the use and disposition of the Vice President's notes. These notes, which are currently being stored in the EEOB room 291 contain classified information that is comingled with personal notes of the Vice President. They cover a span of several years. None of the notes have classification markings or are otherwise indicated as containing classified information. The determination of classified content was made by the Deputy National Security Advisor, after reviewing the content. 

Kristen Bakotic, the Vice Presidents Executive Secretary, insist that the notes belong to the Vice President and should be made available to him without restriction. She has indicated that she is aware that these notes will be used during this book-writing process, but she is confident that he (the Vice President) understands which information is classified and which information is not. 

Kristen has stated that these notes should not be subjected to the regulations of the Presidential Records Act, because they fall under the category of personal notes. She has stated that the Vice President can keep these notes, including the classified portions (without redaction), after the administration has ended. 

She has repeatedly stated that his position as the Vice President of the United States excludes him from the guidance that other members of the administration are required to adhere to. 

I do not agree with Kristen Bakotic. I believe these records are being mishandled; however, Kristen is my superior 

officer and I am not in a position to challenge her authority. I have requested to not participant in any project or 

meetings that involve these records. 

Detailee's e-mail "For the Record" (Oct. 18, 2016) 219  

> 216

10/18/16 e-mail from Executive Secretary Staffer 2, NARAWH_00015190.  

> 217

Id.  

> 21s

Id.  

> 219

Id. 

61 When interviewed by our office, the detailee said she believed providing the 

notes to Mr. Biden after the administration "without restriction" would be "outside of 

the protocols and policies that ... had been put in place for our office for safeguarding 

the material." 220 The detailee did not recall the ultimate disposition of the notecards 

or whether the discussion percolated up to Mr. Biden. 221 

As for Bakotic, during an interview with our office, she said that she did not recall ever taking the position that Mr. Biden could take classified notes home with him after his vice presidency. 222 According to Bakotic, she believed in the fall of 2016, when the detailee wrote her e-mail, that there was still time for Mr. Biden to review his notes and get the information he needed in a secure fashion before the administration ended. 22:1 She also did not recall ever advising Mr. Biden that he could retain classified notes after his term in office, and said it was not her role to advise the vice president about classified record-handling. 221 Nor did she recall anyone else in the Obama administration taking the position that Mr. Biden could take classified material home with him in an unsecure environment after the vice presidency. 225 Based on her own training, she knew that classified materials were supposed to be stored in a secure facility. 226 A memorandum from the National Security Council sent to all Office of the Vice President staff in December 2016 and January 2017 confirmed  

> 220

Executive Secretary Staffer 2 11/21/23 Tr. at 19. 221 Id" at 32, 38.    

> 2:2 2

Bakotic 1/11/24 Tr. at 45-47, 50-52, 56. 223 Id. at 11, 43-450 224 Id. at 56-57, 59, 620 225 Id" at 62-630 :2 26 Id" at 50, 53-540 

62 this understanding, instructing that "[m]eeting notes ... , and classified notes of any 

kind, are NOT personal notes" and that only unclassified personal records could be removed from the White House at the end of the administration, though there is no 

evidence this guidance was ever communicated to Mr. Biden. 227 

E.  In October 2016, Mr. Biden's staff installed a new safe at the Naval Observatory for the storage of Mr. Biden's notecards 

Shortly after the Executive Secretary detailee raised an objection to the 

handling of Mr. Biden's notecards in October 2016, Mr. Biden's staff installed a new 

safe at the Naval Observatory. E-mail traffic from that time suggests the safe was 

meant to store Mr. Biden's classified notecards. 

On October 20, 2016-two days after the Executive Secretary detailee objected 

to the handling of the notecards-Mr. Biden's deputy national security advisor reached out to Mr. Biden's personal aide asking to ·'run something" by Mr. Biden. 228 Later that night, the personal aide replied that he had talked to Executive Secretary Bakotic and "[s]ounds like we're good. Let me know if there's anything additional beyond the safe issue."229 

That same day, the deputy national security advisor sent an e-mail with the subject line "New Safe at NavObs" to Mr. Biden's chief of staff, Counsel, national security advisor, and others. 230 In the e-mail, the deputy national security advisor                                             

> 227 12/22/16 e-mail from Director of Programs to #ALL-O\lP, NARAWH CLASS_00015305; 1/3/17 e-mail from Director of Programs to #ALL-OVP, NARAWH CLASS_00015634.
> 228 10/20/16 e-mail from Ratner to Personal Aide, 1B001_02137508.
> m10/20/16 e-mail from Personal Aide to Deputy National Security Advisor, 1B001_02137508.
> 230 10/20/16 e-mail from Ratner to Ricchetti, McGrail, Kahl et al., 1B001_03798594.

63 said that "[t]he VP approved the placement of a new safe at NavObs and conveyed 

his desired location." 231 He explained that the safe would be installed the following 

day and would be "load[ed] up with the relevant materials.'' 2 • 12 Later that evening, a career employee on the Executive Secretary team e-mailed the detailee to let her know "for [her] awareness" that a safe was being installed. 23 :3 

Although these e-mails suggest that Mr. Biden's staffers installed the new safe at the Naval Observatory to store the notecards, the staffers told investigators that they did not remember why the safe was installed or what was stored in it. 234 

F.  At the same time Mr. Biden's staff was considering how to handle the notecards, he told his ghostwriter that "they didn't even know" he had notebooks containing similar classified notes 

Mr. Biden appeared to reference the notecards issue during a recorded interview with his ghostwriter Zwonitzer on October 10, 2016-the same time period 

during which his staff were discussing and arranging the secure storage of his classified notecards. At the time, Mr. Biden was reading aloud from his "Foreign Policy" notebook, including reading notes from meetings in the Situation Room. 235 As explained below, Mr. Biden's notebooks were separate from his notecards, though he often took similar-and similarly classified-notes in each. Referring to his "Foreign Policy" notebook, Mr. Biden added, ''[t]hey didn't even know I have this."  

> 231

Id.  

> 232

10/20/16 e-mail from Ratner to Ricchetti, McGrail, Kahl et al., 1B001_03798594.   

> 2:1:o

10/20/16 e-mail from Director of Programs to Executive Secretary Staffer 2, SCOH -

000268. 234 E.g., Executive Secretary Staffer 2 11/21/23 Tr. at 29-30; Bakobc 1/11/24 Tr. at 66 -

69; Ratner Tr. at 60-62. 235 Notebook entries 1B58-50-51, 56-60. 

64 Mr. Eiden: There was a lot of stuff going on at the same time in foreign policy. You said-they said, you didn't wanna go into ... but I have extensive notes over this period of time. 

Zwonitzer: Oh, you actually have those here? 

Mr. Eiden: Yeah, now there's a lot of other notes too. But, I mean, this is my ... They didn't even know I have this. Some of this stuff I'm not, you know, going ... I have stuff all the way up to 5-19. May 19. And then it skips in my notes to ... 6-16 is the next entry.236 

In this exchange, Mr. Eiden seemed to distinguish between his notecards, which his staff were in the process of implementing protocols to safeguard, and his notebooks, which, "[t]hey didn't even know I have." As explained below, although the notecards and notebooks both contained classified information, most of the notecards were handled differently than the notebooks after the vice presidency. 

G.  The investigation did not determine what, if anything, staff told Mr. Eiden about the proper storage of classified information in his notecards 

After staff raised concerns about the possibility that Mr. Biden's notecards may contain classified material, his staff discussed how to properly handle and store the notecards. There is some indication that Mr. Biden's staff may have advised him that his notecards contained classified information and needed to be held in a secured location. But the investigation did not determine what, if anything, Mr. Biden's staffers actually told him on this subject.               

> 236 Zwonitzer recording Carved_000246 (emphasis added); Carved_000246 Tr. at 3-5; FBI Serials 315, 335; Notebook entries 1B58-50-51, 56-60.

65 As explained above, e-mails obtained during the investigation show that in 

October 2016, Mr. Biden's national security staff appear to have installed a new safe at the Naval Observatory in which to store Mr. Biden's notecards during the rest of his vice presidency. After an e-mail from Mr. Biden's deputy national security advisor 

asked Mr. Biden's personal aide to "run something'' by Mr. Biden, a follow up e-mail from the personal aide referred to the ''safe issue," suggesting that the personal aide had talked to ~r. Biden about the decision to install a new safe at the Naval Observatory to hold Mr. Biden's notecards. 2 :-1 7 But when interviewed, neither the deputy national security advisor nor the personal aide recalled talking to Mr. Biden 

about the installation of the  safe  or the handling of his notecards.  238 

For her part, the associate counsel who initially raised concerns about potentially classified material in Mr. Biden's notecards believed the then-Counsel to 

the \"ice President, John McGraiL was going to meet with Mr. Biden to address the issue. 2: 39 According to the associate counsel, after she flagged the issue of classified 

information in Mr. Biden's notes, she thought "someone had a conversation" with the Vice President "about the binders [containing copies of the notecards] and probably 

about making sure classified documents are put in the safe."  240 The associate counsel believed McGrail had this conversation with Mr. Biden, but she was not part of it and did not know what, if anything, was discussed. 2 -1 1 As explained below, for his part,                    

> ~: 37 10/20/16 e-mail from Ely Ratner to Personal Aide, 1B001_02137508: 10/20/16 e -
> mail from Personal Aide to Ratner, 1B001_02137508.
> ~38 Ratner 11/21/23

Tr. at 55, 74.     

> 2:l9 Associate Counsel 3/29/23

Tr. at 61.  

> 210

Id.  

> rn

Id. at 55. 

66 McGrail did not recall any such conversation, and indeed, said he did not remember 

anything about the notecard project or about concerns that Mr. Biden's notecards could contain classified information. 212 

Mr. Biden's deputy chief of staff recalled discussions about a slightly different 

issue. As he described it, during the last year of the Obama administration, members of Mr. Biden's staff flagged that Mr. Biden had written personal notes by hand on the pages of classified  documents. 21  :3 Mr. Biden's deputy chief of staff had discussions 

with l\foGrail and the associate counsel, as well as others, about the proper disposition of these notes.2--1 1 They determined that the Counsel's office would convey 

to 1\fr. Eiden that he could not keep the notes after the end of the administration, 

because "classified documents belong with either the creator of the documents," or, 

"if they were native to our office," to the National  Archives. 21  :'i The deputy chief of 

staff was not involved in any conversation between McGrail and Mr. Biden on this 

issue. 216 Again, McGrail did not recall having any conversations with Mr. Eiden about 

the proper disposition of classified documents, though McGrail did recall telling Mr. Eiden that all his records (which McGrail understood to encompass notes) would be sent to the National Archives. 211 

E-mails obtained during the investigation suggest that McGrail and others in the Office of the Vice President conducted some research on the handling and  

> 242

McGrail 1/22/24 Tr. at 9, 15, 16-18, 42, 48, 78, 98-99, 127.  

> 243

Amin Tr. at 29-33.  

> 244

Id. at 35-37.  

> 245

Id. at 29-33, 35-37.  

> 216

Id. at 35-37.  

> 247

McGrail 1/22/24 Tr. at 78-83, 86-87, 94, 98-99, 107, 113, 123-26. 

67 accessmg of classified materials after the vice presidency. In November 2016, for example, McGrail sent an e-mail containing a reference to the executive order governing classification, specifically citing the prov1s10n that would apply when aformer vice president sought to gain access to classified information. 2 -rn                   

> Message
> From·
> Sent:
> To
> McGra,1_ JOh~ F EOP/OVP [J'.l~~-p _r-n:g•ad@cvp cop.gcv 111/14/2016 6:00:33 PM
> CC:
> Subject: Classified Nationai Security lnforfPation
> Execut:ve Orde: 13526, Sec. 4 4 f¾cc:ess by Historicai Researche'"s and Certa1" Former Govern'1te·:t Pe ✓sorme'l
> 32 '.: F.s:;: Part 2001

111cGrail Nov. 14, 2016 e-mail about Executive Order 13,526 219 

Six weeks later, in January 2017. the associate counsel sent McGrail an e-mail containing information about the same executive order and about one use of Ronald Reagan's diaries after he was president, 250 a topic that is discussed in more detail in Chapter Ten. The subject line of the e-mail was "per our discussions today.'' 251  

> 248

11/14/16 e-mail from McGrail, SCOH-000340.  

> 2.i9

Id.  

> 250

1/05/17 e-mail from Associate Counsel to McGrail, SCOH-000339.  

> 201

Id. 

68 Message  

> From: @ovp.eop.gov ]

Sent: 1/5/20:7 9:43:47 PM         

> To: McGrail, John [john...9_mcgraii@ovp.eop .gov]; McGrail, John ["/o=eop/ou=exchange administrative group
> /rn=recipients/cn=mcgrail, john p. mcgrail_jf85"]
> Subject:

Per our discussions today 

- President Reagan voluntarily allowed in camera review of h·s d1anes re Iran Contra. The Court allmved 1n some relevant sections. 732 F. Supp. 135 

http:! f•www. nytirn es. com/ 1990/0 1I31 /us/reagan-is-ordered-tD-provide-diari es-i n-poind exter-case. rtm I

- This executive order is helpful when discussing the President's declassification authority This is an Executive Order issued by President Obama. Part 3 explains the declassification process: 

https:ilwww.wl11tehouse.gov/the-press-oftice/execut1ve-order-ciassified-national-seccirity-1nformation 

I'm still doing research. But , think these are a good start. 

Associate counsel Jan. 5, 2017 e-mail referencing Mr. Reagan's diaries 252 

During his interview, McGrail did not recall these e-mails or any discussions about the executive order or the Reagan diaries, except that he recalled having conversations about getting Mr. Biden's "security clearance" extended so Mr. Biden could access classified material after the vice presidency. 253 According to McGrail, he could not recall having any discussions about Mr. Biden's notecards, notes, or diaries containing classified information.254 

McGrail explained that he and an archivist at the National Archives had arranged for all of Mr. Biden's records from the vice presidency, including all his notes, to be sent to the National Archives when he left office. 255 In this arrangement, McGrail made no distinctions between presidential vs. personal records, or classified 

252 Id. 

253 McGrail 1/22/24 Tr. at 51-55, 59-62, 68-70, 73-74, 76-77, 92, 118-19. 254 Id. at 78-80, 98-99. 255 Id. at 80-83. 

69 vs. unclassified records; they simply arranged to send all of Mr. Biden's records to the 

Archives. 256 From there, McGrail said his understanding was that the Archives would undertake the time-consuming task of sorting through the records to determine what was personal and what was presidential.2· 57 

According to McGrail, near the end of the administration he told Mr. Biden they would send all his records to the Archives. 2 :,s McGrail's message was simple: "It 

was just, 'Your records are going to the Archives.' That was it." 259 McGrail told Mr. Biden this more than once, and Mr. Biden understood the arrangement and accepted it. 260 McGrail said he did not discuss with Mr. Biden the specific requirements of the Presidential Records Act or the treatment of personal vs. presidential records under the Act. 261 McGrail also said he did not discuss Mr. Eiden's notecards, notebooks, or diaries with him.ZGZ 

~1cGrail said he never spoke with Mr. Eiden about withholding personal notes from the National Archives. 2 G3 Mr. Eiden never told McGrail he had notes he wanted to take home instead of sending to the Archives. and McGrail saw no indication that Mr. Eiden believed he could take classified notes home with him at the end of his vice presidency. 264 If Mr. Eiden had such a belief or plan, McGrail would have expected  

> 256

Id. at 80-83, 126. 257 Id. at 83, 109. 258 Id. at 86-87, 94. 99, 107, 113, 12:3-26. 258 Id. at 107.  

> 260

Id. at 86-87, 91, 99. 107, 113, 115, 12:3-26. 261 Id. at 85-87, 91.  

> 262

Id. at 78-79, 83-85, 98-99, 117-19. 263 Id. at 83-84. zc;i Id. at 83-84, 99, 117-18. 

70 him to raise it during their conversations about sending all Mr. Biden's records to the Archives at the end of the administration. 265 McGrail never advised Mr. Eiden one way or the other about whether he could keep classified documents, including classified handwritten notes, outside a secure, authorized facility, after leaving office, and McGrail was unaware of such advice from anyone else. 26 G

More generally, McGrail said he was unaware of any conversations among staff in the Office of the Vice President suggesting that Mr. Biden could take classified materials home after leaving office and keep them outside a SCIF, noting, "It was the opposite. It was how are we going to find him a SCIF in case he ever has a reason to go to a SCIF?"2 G7 When asked during his interview about whether anyone told Mr. 

Eiden that the Presidential Records Act authorizes a former vice president to keep certain materials at home, even if they are classified, McGrail said no, and added "[T]hat doesn't make logical sense to me .... [M]y understanding is that ... if you 

copy or write down classified information on a piece of paper, it maintains its 

classified status."2G8 

According to McGrail, Mr. Eiden did not, and would not, come to him for legal advice about whether he could take classified information home after the vice presidency, because, in McGrail's words, "I think he knows." 269 In McGrail's view, the rule that you cannot take classified information out of a secure facility is "obvious." 270  

> 2G5

!do at 117-18. 266 Id. at 98-99, 107-08, 119, 126. 267 Id. at 126. 268 Id. at 107-08. 268 Id. at 100. 270 Id. at 102. 

71 McGrail explained that Mr. Eiden knew classified information "needs to be 

maintained in a secure facility .... [H]e was the chairman of the Foreign Relations 

Committee .... [H]e understands how it works."  271 

Finally, McGrail said it would be ·'very surprising" if Mr. Biden intentionally took home classified information after the vice presidency. 272 In McGrail's words, Mr. Eiden knew that "information is classified for a good reason, that its disclosure can 

harm sources and methods and the national security interests of the United States, and he has been committed to the national security interests of the lJ nited States as long as I've known him." 273 According to McGrail, if Mr. Eiden took home classified 

information after the vice presidency, "[i]t would be completely inconsistent with 

everything that we were killing ourselves to try to accomplish'' at the end of the administration by sending all of Mr. Biden's records to the National  Archives. 27  ~

H.  After Mr. Eiden left office, copies of many of his notecards were held in a SCIF at the National Archives 

Ultimately, the associate counsel and McGrail arranged for Mr. Eiden's 

classified notecards to be held in a SCIF at the National Archives under a deposit  

> 271

Id. at 100-01. 2, 2 Id. at 111, 112, 117-18. 273 Id. at 111. 274 Id. at 112. 

72 agreement that allowed Mr. Eiden to store personal material at a National Archives 

facility.  27 '5 

On January 12, 2017, Mr. Eiden signed a deposit agreement allowing him to 

store "certain personal effects" in a "secure and protected area" at the National 

Archives. 276 According to the agreement, the material consisted of "correspondence, 

memorabilia, personal notes, and other miscellaneous personal property.'· 

\:Vhen the associate counsel made arrangements to bring the deposit 

agreement to Mr. Eiden's executive assistant for Mr. Eiden's signature, she indicated 

that McGrail "has spoken with him [Mr. Eiden] about the issues." 277 But in an 

interview, McGrail said that he thought the deposit agreement related to personal 

records from Mr. Eiden's Senate tenure, and he did not recall binders of classified 

notecards going into Mr. Biden's personal storage at the Archives. 278 

On January 16, 2017-four days before Mr. Eiden left the vice presidency-the 

associate counsel asked a member of the Executive Secretary team to "pick up the Vice President's classified materials" at the Naval Observatory. 279 Soon after, another member of the Executive Secretary team explained that the material consisted of four  

> 275

Associate Counsel 8/29/23 Tr. at 9-10, 76; 1/5/17-1/6/17 e-mails between Associate Counsel, McGrail, and NARA Archivist 1, SCOH-000326, SCOH-000330, SCOH-000332, SCOH-000334.  

> 276

1/12/17 Deposit Agreement regarding the Administration of Personal Materials of Vice President Joseph R. Eiden, NARA-H-700000012. 277 1/10/17 - 1/11/17 e-mails between Associate Counsel and Executive Assistant, 1B001_01915351.  

> 218

McGrail 1/22/24 Tr. at 82, 120-21.  

> 279

1/16/17 e-mail from Associate Counsel to Executive Secretary Staffer 2, SCOH -

000246. 

73 to five binders and that "[o]nce you return [you] will need to place m 1-2 pra 

[Presidential Records Act] boxes along with the originals." 280 

The following day was the associate counsel's last day in the Office of the Vice President. She sent McGrail and others an outstanding to-do list. 281 Among other things, she reminded McGrail to approve the deposit agreement to allow Mr. Biden to store his personal materials at the Archives. She also wrote, "[wJe need to send his 

personal diaries to storage at the Archives. [A National Archives employee] has 

offered to come and pick them up. I think this is the best option." 282 \Vhen interviewed, the associate counsel clarified that she was "referring to the binders that 

we copied," meaning the binders of Mr. Biden's notecards containing classified information, discussed above. 2 s: 3 The associate counsel said, "I believe we were using 

diaries  as shorthand  because  they were  personal notes,  thoughts." 281 She explained 

that "it was the safest decision to have [the notecards] be in a SCIF since there w[ere] 

likely  classified documents." 28 5 

On January 18, 2017, a National Archives employee visited the \Vhite House, 

picked up the copies of the notecards in Mr. Biden's \;Vest Wing office from McGraiL 

and  brought  them to  the  National Archives. 28G McGrail said in his interview with our  

> ~80

1/16/17 e-mail from Director of Programs to Executive Secretary Staffer 2, SCOH -

000246. 281 1/17/17 e-mail from Associate Counsel to McGrail, SCOH-000141 ("I wanted to send along the list of items that still needs to be taken care of after I leave.'').  

> 2s2

Id.  

> 283

Associate Counsel 8/29/23 Tr. at 65.  

> 281

Id.  

> 283

Id. at 9-10, 76. 286 1/18/17 e-mail from NARA Archivist 1 to McGrail, NARA-H-700000010. 

74 office that he had no memory of g1vmg the Archives employee the binders of 

notecards, or that they contained classified information, but the Archives employee recalled McGrail telling him that the materials contained classified information. 287 Accordingly, the Archives stored the materials inside a SCIF. 288 

I.  After he left the vice presidency, Mr. Eiden twice visited the National Archives to review copies of his notecards in a SCIF Soon after he left office in 201 7 and while researching his book, l\Ir. Biden visited the National Archives twice to consult the copies of his notecards that were being held in a SCIF.2s9 During a recorded interview on April 24, 2017, Mr. Eiden told his ghostwriter, Zwonitzer, that he took separate notes regarding his private lunches with President Obama. 290 Mr. Eiden said that before each lunch, he and his chief of staff prepared and wrote an agenda on ''one of those little cards of mine"-an apparent reference to 

the long narrow notecards that Biden carried in his jacket pocket.  291 After each lunch, Mr. Biden dictated notes about the lunch to his executive assistant. 292 Mr. Biden 

explained that he previously "had all those [notes] at the house in a safe" but that "I 

don't know what they made me do with them,"  29 :3 

Zwonitzer: Can we spend some time on that lunch?  

> 287

McGrail 1/22/24 Tr. at 121-22; NARA Archivist 1 Tr. at 56, 62. 288 NARA Archivist 1 Tr. at 56, 62. 289 5/11/17 and 7/11/17, National Archives Visitor Logs, NARA-H-700002505; NARA 

Archivist 2 6/1/23 Tr. at 14; McGrail 5/2/23 Tr. at 169-80. 290 Zwonitzer recording 170424_0091; 170424_0091 Tr. at 28-30; Evidence item 1B80. 291 Zwonitzer recording 170424_0091; 170424_0091 Tr. at 28-30; Evidence item 1B80. 292 Zwonitzer recording 170424_0091; 170424_0091 Tr. at 28-30; Evidence item 1B80; 

Executive Assistant 9/28/23 Tr. at 47. 291 Zwonitzer recording 170424_0091; 170424_0091 Tr. at 28-30; Evidence item 1B80. 

75 Mr. Eiden: I had all those presidential notes. 

Zwonitzer: I know you gave me this much from the diaries. 

Mr. Eiden: But I actually, I wonder where those ... 

Zwonitzer: Do you have separate notebooks of the presidential [lunches]? 

Mr. Eiden: Yeah. What I would do is after every lunch I would dictate 

to, um, I would call in [the Executive Assistant] and I would dictate to her what the lunch was about. I had all those at the house in a safe. I don't know what they made me do with them. But what I would do is I would make up a card, one of those little cards of mine. Before I'd have lunch, I'd meet with Steve [Ricchetti] and anything anybody thought I should be bringing up [I'd put] on our agenda. And when I came back, I'd dictate notes to [the Executive Assistant] as to what actually transpired at the 

lunch. 294 

Two days later, in another recorded interview, Mr. Eiden said he had learned 

that his notecards had been "turned in" to the National Archives and that Mr. Eiden 

would have to go through his former counsel, McGrail, to get them. 295 Mr. Eiden also 

told Zwonitzer that he had not wanted to turn the notecards in: 

Mr. Eiden: I'm told by [a personal aide], I guess he checked with you, in order for me to get my, uh, get all those presidential notes I had for lunch, the luncheon meetings, I have to go to McGrail? 

Assistant: Yes, McGrail has them. We were supposed to turn it in and that is the last person who had them.                 

> 294 Zwonitzer recording 170424_0091 (emphasis added); 17042'1_0091 Tr. at 28-:30:
> Evidence item lBS0. ~95 Zwonitzer recording Carved_000599: Carved_000599

Tr. at 3-4; FBI Serials 315, 

> 3~-35.

76 Mr. Eiden: OK Uh. See if you can get me McGrail on the line while I have you now. OK? And stay on okay? Assistant: Got it sir. Hold on. Zwonitzer: This is probably something that goes to the presidential papers. 

Mr. Eiden: I don't think so. It was in between. I didn't want to turn them in. 

Zwonitzer: Right, so, it's the gray area. 296 

The next day, Zwonitzer sent an e-mail to the assistant and personal aide, explaining that Mr. Biden "may try to review some of his notes from lunches with the President and asked [Zwonitzer] to give him a list of the dates of the lunches that 

would be important." 297 Zwonitzer included a list of the dates of several such lunches in his e-mail. Zwonitzer forwarded the list to Mr. Biden's personal e-mail account on 

May 11, 2017.  298 

On that day and agam two months later, Mr. Biden visited the National 

Archives to review copies of his notecards, which were held in a SCIF. 299 McGrail 

accompanied him.  300 During both visits, Archives staff made clear to Mr. Eiden that, by viewing the notecards in the Archives SCIF, he was accessing classified  

> 296

Zwonitzer recording Carved_000599 (emphasis added); Carved_000599 Tr. at 3-4; FBI Serials 315, 335. 297 4/27/17 e-mail from Zwonitzer to Executive Assistant and Personal Aide 3, Zwonitzer-00001464.  

> 29s

Id.  

> 299

5/11/17 and 7/11/17 National Archives Visitor Logs, NARA-H-700002505; NARA Archivist 2 6/1/23 Tr. at 14; McGrail 5/2/23 Tr. at 169-80. 800 McGrail recalled only the first visit to the Archives, but visitor logs show he accompanied Mr. Eiden on both visits. 5/11/17 and 7/11/17 National Archives Visitor Logs, NARA-H-700002505; NARA Archivist 2 6/1/23 Tr. at 14; McGrail 5/2/23 Tr. at 169-80. 

77 information.  301 Nonetheless, in his interview with our office, McGrail said he believed the material was in a SCIF at the Archives simply to keep it secure, not necessarily 

because it was classified_:rn 2

During the first visit on May 11, Archives staff followed a detailed checklist to ensure they properly safeguarded the classified information in the notecards. :irn The staff ensured that Mr. Biden did not bring his phone or other electronic device into 

the SCIF_:io 4 They announced that the visit involved access to classified infonnation.:io, 3 They remained in the SCIF and monitored Mr. Eiden while he 

reviewed the  notecards.  30 (; They also reminded him of his continuing responsibility to protect all classified information after his visit. :io, 

On July 11, 2017, two months after their first visit to the Archives, Mr. Eiden and McGrail returned_:rns Before the second visit. Zwonitzer e-mailed Mr. Eiden another list oflunches and events for which his notes would be helpfuP 09 During the second visit, Archives staff followed the same general procedures to safeguard classified information_:iio Mr. Eiden also signed a form entitled ·'Notice to Users of 

NARA Classified Research Rooms.''· 311 The first sentence of the form read, "You will  

> 301

5/11/17 and 7/11/17 National Archives Checklist for Classified Visits and Meetings, NARA-H-700002505.  

> 302

McGrail 1/22/24 Tr. at 69-70, 113-14, 129-30. 

303 5/11/17 National Archives Visitor Logs, NARA-H-700002505.  

> JO!

Id.  

> 30"

Id.  

> 306

Id.: NARA Archivist 1 Tr. at 70-71; NARA Archivist 2 Tr. at 18-19. 

,o, 7/11/17 National Archives Visitor Logs, NARA-H-700002505.  

> :ios

Id.  

> 309

7/9/17 e-mail from Zwonitzer to Mr. Biden, Zwonitzer-00000631, Zwonitzer -

00000632.  

> 310

7/11/17 National Archives Visitor Logs, NARA-H-700002505.  

> 311

Id. 

78 be viewing materials containing classified national security information," and the 

remainder of the form explained the various procedures and rules necessary to safeguard such classified information. ::n 2

Not all of Mr. Biden's notecards made their way to the SCIF at the Archives. 

When the FBI searched Mr. Biden's Delaware home on January 20, 2023, they discovered a stack  of Mr. Biden's notecards  in his office., 313 While many of these 

notecards were from after his term as vice president, some of them dated from his vice presidency and included handwritten notes about intelligence products and 

matters  of national security.  314 One notecard included a handwritten classification marking.: 315 Some of the notecards found in the Delaware home remain classified up 

to the Top Secret level. :3lG    

> II. MR. BIDEN'S NOTEBOOKS

A.  Mr. Eiden used notebooks during his vice presidency to record both official and personal events 

As with his notecards, Mr. Eiden also frequently took notes about classified 

information in notebooks. Most of the classified notecards were stored differently from the classified notebooks after the vice presidency. As explained above, most of  

> 312

Id. 

:m FBI Serial 77. 311 FBI Serials 77, 691, 530, 664; Handwritten material 1B23. 315 FBI Serials 691, 530, 664; Handwritten material 1B23. 316 FBI Serial 619; Handwritten material 1B23. 

79 the classified notecards went to an Archives SCIF, but Mr. Eiden took his classified 

notebooks home with him and stored them in unsecured and unauthorized locations. 

Mr. Eiden regularly took notes in notebooks throughout his vice presidency. 317 Most of these notebooks were bound with black covers.3 18 Some had labels identifying the date range or general subject matter of their contents.3 19 Photos of some of these notebooks are below:             

> Notebooks seized frorn file cabinet under television in Delaware home office 320
> 317

Personal Aide 3 3/28/23 Tr. at 31-32, 35; McKean Tr. at 120-21; Personal Aide 1

4/26/23 Tr. at 30-31, 129-30; Staff Assistant 2 Tr. at 101-02; OVP NSA Staffer 2 Tr. at 80-81; Klain Tr. at 44, 129; Staff Assistant 3 10/4/23 Tr. at 47-48; Notebooks 1Bl5, 1B20, 1B22, 1B25, 1B30, 1B5 l-52, 1B57-59, 1B62-63, 1B65-67.  

> 318

Klain Tr. at 129; Personal Aide 1 4/26/23 Tr. at 30-31, 103; Personal Aide 3 3/28/23 Tr. at 32; Notebooks 1B15, 1B20, 1B22, 1B25, 1B30, 1B51-52, 1B57-59, 1B62-63, 1B65-67.   

> 31 ~

Personal Aide 1 9/18/23 Tr. at 110-11; Staff Assistant 3 10/4/23 Tr. at 48-49; Notebooks 1Bl5, 1B20, 1B22, 1B25, 1B30, 1B51-52, 1B57-59, 1B62-63, 1B65-67.  

> 320

20230120_FBI_0l56. FBI Serial 77 lA 86. 

80 Notebooks seized from file cabinet under printers in Delawal'e home office 321 

# 15 

Notebooks seized from bookcase in Delaware home's second-level office 322 

> 3

z1 20230120_FB1_0132. FBI Serial 77 1A86. 322  20230120 _FBI_0218. FBI Serial 77 1A86. 

81 The content of Mr. Biden's notebooks took several forms_:m 

(1)  Work notes. Mr. Eiden wrote these notes during or soon after meetings he attended as vice president. These notes memorialize, often in bullet-point format, things such as the issues presented, comments of meeting participants, and decisions made. For example, Mr. Eiden often took notes during meetings of the National Security Council and the President's Daily Brief. 324 Most of the notes in Mr. Bide n's collection of notebooks recovered by FBI agents from his Wilmington residence are work notes of this type. 

(2)  Work reflections. These were Mr. Biden's impressions, reflections, opinions, and commentary about people and issues he encountered as vice president. For example, during the 2009 review of U.S. military strategy and foreign policy in Afghanistan, discussed in Chapter Six, Mr. Eiden recorded his deep concerns that President Obama's eventual decision about Afghanistan would be a terrible mistake. 32 Ei 

(3)  Political notes and reflections. These were Mr. Biden's summaries of and 

commentary about political or electoral issues-for example, his notes about his decision whether to run for president in 2016. 

(4)  Personal reflections. These were entries about purely personal subjects. 

such as the illness and death of his son, Beau. 

(5)  To-do lists. These were reminders about issues ranging from policy 

deliberations, to political concerns, to personal matters. 

While Mr. Eiden often organized his notebooks roughly based on subject 

matter, many notebooks contained entries on a variety of topics. He typically added 

entries sequentially by date, so that a given notebook could contain, for example, real 

time notes of White House meetings, purely personal entries about Mr. Biden's 

family, and entries about an upcoming election. Most of the notebooks contained                                

> 123 See generally Notebooks 1Bl5, 1B20, 1B22, 1B25, 1B30, 1B51-52, 1B57-59, 1B62 -
> 68. 32 -+ Klain Tr. at 44, 51; Personal Aide 1 4/26/23 Tr. at 130-31; see generally Notebooks 1Bl5, 1B20, 1B22, 1B25, 1B30, 1B51-52, 1B57-59, 1B62-68. 325 Personal Aide 1 4/26/23 Tr. at 30-31, 130-32; Executive Assistant 9/28/23 Tr. at 75; Chapter Six.

82 predominantly "work notes"-summaries or minutes of work meetings-but a few 

writings were more diary-like and personal in nature. 326 

B.  The notebooks contained classified information 

Though none of the notebooks have classification markings, some of the notebooks contain information that remains classified up to the Top Secret/Sensitive Compartmented Information level.32 7

As with his notecards, Mr. Eiden routinely took notes in his notebooks about classified subjects and during meetings where classified information was discussed. 328 For example, he regularly took notes related to the President's Daily Brief, which typically contains classified information. 329 He also regularly took notes during meetings in the White House Situation Room, and numerous photographs document this practice. 330  

> 326

See generally Notebooks 1B15, 1B20, 1B22, 1B25, 1B30, 1B51-52, 1B57-59, 1B62 -

68.  

> 327

FBI Serial 676.  

> 328

Notebooks 1B15, 1B20, 1B22, 1B30, 1B51-52, 1B57-58, 1B63-64, 1B66-67.  

> 329

E.g., Notebook entries 1B30-0065, 0093-94; 1B67-0076.  

> 330

E.g., Notebook entries 1B15-0012; 1B20-0034; 1B51-0073-74, 0080-81; 1B58-0029 -

31; 1B63-0016, 0026-29; 1B66-0082-84; 1B67-0019-20. 

83 Mr. Biden using a notebook at a Principals Committee meeting (Sept. 29, 2009)331 

Mr. Eiden writing in a notebook at a meeting with the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Oct. 30, 2009) 332  

> 331

SCOH-000756. n 2 SCOH-000757. 

84 Often, Mr. Biden's notes contained real-time minutes of National Security 

Council meetings, during which the President deliberated with his senior military, 

intelligence, and foreign policy advisers. 3: 33 These meetings regularly involved 

discussions of classified information_:rn  1 For this reason, they took place in the 

Situation Room, which is itself a SCIF, and signs conspicuously designated National 

Security Council meetings as "Top Secret.":rnp; 

Some of the handwritten notes Mr. Eiden took in his notebooks during these 

meetings included classified information_:nG The notebooks contained such 

information about the following subjects:  

> 11

U.S.  intelligence sources, methods, and capabilities_:i:r,  

> 11

U.S. intelligence activities_3:is  

> 11

The activities of foreign intelligence servicesJ 19 

• U.S. military programs and capabilities. no 

• Foreign military programs and capabilities_: 341  

> 11

Plans and capabilities of foreign terrorist organizations. 342  

> 133

E.g., Notebook entries 1Bl5-0012; 1B20-0034; 1B51-0073-74, 0080-81; 1B58-0029 -

31; 1B63-0016, 0026-29; 1B66-0082-84; 1B67-0019-20.  

> 334

E.g., Notebook entries 1B15-0012-13; 1B51-0073-74; 1B63-0016, 0026-29.   

> 33 ,,

See photographs above; SCOH-000756; SCOH-000757.  

> 336

FBI Serial 676.  

> 337

E.g., Notebook entries 1B22-0026; 1B52-0091; 1B57-0014; 1B63-0012;80-0028; 1B66-0082. 338 E.g., Notebook entries 1B51-0080-81; 1B66-0082. 339 E.g., Notebook entries 1B51-007 4; 1B66-0082. , 4 o E.g., Notebook entries 1B58-0029-30; 1B63-0028. 341 E.g., Notebook entries 1Bl5-0012; 1B51-0080; 1B58-0033; 1B64-0056; 1B67-0019 -

20.  

> 342

E.g., Notebook entries 1B20-0034; 1B58-0094. 

85 The FBI and the Special Counsel's Office selected thirty-seven excerpts 

totaling 109 pages from Mr. Biden's handwritten materials-including mostly notebook entries and a few notecards seized from his Delaware home-to submit to classification authorities in the intelligence community and the Department of Defense to determine the appropriate classification level for each. Investigators selected a sampling of excerpts across Mr. Biden's notebooks that both appeared to be classified and that they expected a jury could find are national defense information under 18 U.S.C. § 793. 

Subject to the limitations discussed in Chapter Two, classification authorities identified each excerpt as containing presently classified information. :i~: 3 Of the 

thirty-seven excerpts:  

> 111

Eight are Top Secret with Sensitive Compartmented Information, seven of which include information concerning human intelligence sources, 

• Six are Top Secret,  

> 111

Twenty-one are Secret, and 

• Two are  Confidential.34  1A more detailed description of the results of the classification review is in Appendix B. 

Mr. Eiden also sometimes placed marked classified documents inside his notebooks. 345 Photos in the Situation Room show documents tucked inside his    

> 343 FBI Serial 676.

M-!Jd.        

> 345 SCOH-000758, SCOH-000759; Recovered documents CL C2, C3, C4, D20, D21.

86 notebooks, and the FBI recovered marked classified documents from inside thr ee not ebooks found in Mr. Biden's Delaware home.3 46 

Nolebooh with inserted documents, at a meeting with the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Oct. 30, 2009)34~ 

Notebook with additional inserted documents at the end of th e same meeting (Oct . 30, 2009)3 48  

> 346

SCOH -000758, SCOH-000759; Recovered do cu ments Cl , C2, C3, C4, D20, D21.  

> 347

SCOH-000758. :14 8 SCOH-000759. 

87 C.  At times during his vice presidency, Mr. Biden stored his 

notebooks in a White House safe 

During his vice presidency and afterward, Mr. Eiden kept his notebooks close, and even his most trusted advisers did not read them.349 Ron Klain, Mr. Biden's Chief of Staff as both vice president and president, explained that Mr. Biden considered his notes to be "his personal reflections and [he] didn't want people looking at them."350 As shown below in a photograph from 2009, and as witnesses explained, Mr. Biden carried the note books himself in his own briefcase.  351  Unlike his notecards, which, as explained above, he often handed to staff to collect and organize, he did not give the 

notebooks to his staff.362         

> Vice President Biden with notebook (Aug. 7, 2009) 353
> 349

Personal Aide 1 9/18/23 Tr. at 112; Klain Tr. at 51, 63.  

> 350

Klain Tr. at 63.  

> 351

Personal Aide 3 3/28/23 Tr. at 35; Staff Assistant 3 10/4/23 Tr. at 49, 51; Executive Assistant 9/28/23 Tr. at 73-74.  

> 352

Executive Assistant 9/28/23 Tr. at 74; Staff Assistant 3 10/4/23 Tr. at 49.  

> 353

1B001_00674466. 

88 Early in the Obama administration, the first Counsel to the Vice President, 

Cynthia Hogan, personally advised him about the proper handling of classified information and Mr. Eiden agreed to follow her advice. 351 As explained in Chapter Three, the advice was codified in a 2010 memo from Hogan, which instructed Mr. Eiden that "[c]lassified materials may never be left unattended," but must be kept in the custody of Mr. Eiden or an authorized staff member, or secured in a safe. 355 According to Hogan's notes, among her concerns were Mr. Biden's "notes on codeword info" which were kept in his "AFPAK - notebooks," that is, his notebooks concerning various policy reviews relating to Afghanistan and Pakistan, which are discussed further in Chapter Six. 356 Hogan's notes say that Mr. Biden's personal aide "will collect" those notebooks. 357 But in interviews with the Special Counsel's Office in 2023, Hogan did not remember Mr. Biden's notebooks, or whether she ever advised 

Mr. Eiden about how he should store notes he took during classified meetings. 358 

In 2011, Hogan provided Mr. Eiden further written guidance about the proper handling of classified notes. 359 In a memo to Mr. Eiden about protocols for hiring ahistorian to work in the Office of the Vice President, Hogan explained that:  

> 354

Hogan 5/23/23 Tr. at 27, 53.  

> 355

8/17/10 Hogan memo to VP, NARAWH_00000050; see also 8/23/10 e-mail from Military Aide to VP MILAIDEs, NARAWH_00014447 ("The VP understands that classified material needs to be kept in one of two places[:] a. Personal Custody, or b. a safe."); Hogan 5/23/23 Tr. at 27, 53, 91-92; Hogan 9/19/23 Tr. at 68-69, 79-80, 83, 106.  

> 356

8/17/10 Hogan memo to VP, NARAWH_00000050; Evidence items 1B63, 1B66. In her interview with the Special Counsel's Office over a decade later, Hogan did not remember her note on this topic, or any of her concerns or advice about Mr. Biden's notebooks. Hogan 5/23/23 Tr. 39, 90-93; Hogan 9/19/23 Tr. at 86.  

> 357

8/17/10 Hogan memo to VP, NARAWH_00000050. 358 Hogan 5/23/23 Tr. at 39, 90-93; Hogan 9/19/23 Tr. at 69, 82-83, 86, 120-21. 359 4/27/11 memo from Hogan et. al. to the Vice President, 1B001_02881350. 

89 any discussions with you that cover classified topics will need to take place in accordance with Executive Order 13526 on Classified National Security Information. This means that such discussions must occur in asecure facility like your West Wing office, and that any notes or other materials that contain classified information must be maintained in secure safes, produced on a classified computer, 

and stored in a secure facility[.]3 60 

For a time-at least during the early part of his vice presidency-Mr. Eiden 

stored his notebooks relating to national security, along with other classified 

documents, in a safe in his West \¥ing office. 861 As Mr. Biden's first personal aide 

explained, Mr. Biden stored these notebooks-including the Af/Pak notebook-in the 

safe because "[tJhat safe was for classified information. It was the purpose of the 

safe_":rn 2 Periodically, Mr. Biden removed certain classified items from his safe and 

asked his personal aide to return them to members of his national security staff, but 

:Vir. Biden never let anyone else possess his notebooks. 1c: 5 

> 360

Id. (emphasis added). 361 Personal Aide 1 4/26/23 Tr. at 30-:31, 103-04, 125-27, 129-130, 134-35; Personal Aide 1 9/18/23 Tr. at 122; Klain Tr. 38-40.  

> 3G2

Personal Aide 1 4/26/23 Tr. at 104, 129. In a second interview. the personal aide said he could not say that the reason Mr. Biden stored the notebooks in a safe was because they were classified, explaining that the personal aide did not read the notebooks, was not an expert in classification, and that Mr. Biden could have stored the notebooks in the safe simply because they were private. Personal Aide 1 9/18/23 Tr. at 123. In contrast, in his first interview, the personal aide said Mr. Biden only stored materials in the safe if they were related to national security and explained, "it's not like he ever felt like, oh my God, ifl leave this on my desk, somebody's going to come steal this thing out of my West Wing office ... at the White House." Personal Aide 1 4/26/23 Tr. at 129 In both interviews, the personal aide explained his belief that because Mr. Biden was taking notes about classified subjects in classified meetings, the notebooks contained classified information. Personal Aide 4/26/23 Tr. at 104, 129; Personal Aide 9/18/23 Tr. at 121. Other witnesses confirmed generally that the purpose of the safe was to store classified information and that classified information was stored in it. See, e.g., Director of Programs Tr. at 26-28, 59, 79, 111-14; Staff Assistant 1 Tr. at 46-50.  

> 3G3

Personal Aide 1 4/26/2:3 Tr. at 128. 132-33. 

90 At some point during his vice presidency, Mr. Eiden appears to have stopped 

storing his notebooks in the \¥est Wing safe: 164 Mr. Eiden's first personal aide, who regularly retrieved the notebooks from the safe for Mr. Eiden, left the administration in 2014.:lGo After that, there is no evidence Mr. Eiden or his staff stored his notebooks in the West Wing safe.36G 

Mr. Eiden also appears to have kept his notebooks and other classified 

information in a safe when he was at the Naval Observatory, again, at least for a time near the beginning of the administration. 3G7 For example, a 2010 e-mail from Mr. 

Eiden's personal aide to members of his staff notes that Mr. Eiden had '"just put" classified material into the Naval Observatory safe, including several sets of marked 

classified documents and l\fr. Eiden's notebook documenting the 2010 

Afghanistan/Pakistan policy review_: 3Gs 

D.  After his vice presidency, Mr. Biden stored the notebooks 1n unlocked and unauthorized containers in his home 

After l\1r. Eiden left the White House in 2017, while most of his classified notecards went to a SCIF at the National Archives, his notebooks went to his private homes, where they were not secured in a safe, and were in a setting that was not 

authorized  for  the storage of classified information.: 369 The notebooks first went to Mr.  

> 364

Personal Aide 3 3/28/23 Tr. at 48-49, 52-54.  

> 365

Personal Aide 1 4/26/23 Tr. at 63.  

> 366

Personal Aide 2 Tr. at 47; Personal Aide 3 3/28/23 Tr. at 48-49, 52-54; Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 32; Executive Assistant 9/28/23 Tr. at 32.  

> 367

12/11/10 e-mail from Personal Aide 1 to Executive Secretary 3 and Director of Programs, 1B001_03159095; Notebook IB63.  

> 3G 8

12/11/10 e-mail from Personal Aide 1 to Executive Secretary 3 and Director of Programs, 1B001_03159095; Notebook 1B63.   

> :i 59

Eiden 10/9/23 Tr. at 30, 41; FBI Serial 77 1A86; 20230120_FBI_0l27, 0151. 

91 Biden's rental home in Virginia, where he kept them in a room he used for meetings. :r,o As explained in the next chapter, in the months after he left the White House, Mr. Eiden gathered the notebooks and referred to several of them while writing his book, Promise lvle, Dad. During their conversations while writing the book, Mr. Eiden told his ghostwriter, Zwonitzer, that the notebooks might contain classified information.:3,1 

When Mr. Eiden moved out of the Virginia home, his notebooks were eventually moved to his home in Delaware.:i, 2 In January 2023, during a search of 

the Delaware home, FBI agents found the notebooks in unlocked and unauthorized 

locations, primarily in Mr. Biden's main-floor office and basement den.                    

> >' 70 Eiden 10/9/23 Tr. at 26-28, 30, 41. 371 Zwonitzer recording 170424_0091; 170424_0091 Tr. at 13-14; Evidence item 1B80. :m FBI Serial 77 1A86; 20230120_FBI_0l27, 0151.

92 File cabinet under tel er;ision i,i Delaware home's main-fl.oor office, containing the ''Af/Pak J" and ''DAILY/MEMO" notebooks (Jan. 20, 2023) 373 

File cabinet under printers in Delaware home's main-floor office, containing three seized notebooks (Jan.. 20, 2023)3 7 4 

~,a 20230120_FBI_0151.  

> 37 •1

20230120_FBI_0l27. 

93 In Mr. Biden's interview with our office, he explained that he took his 

notebooks with him after his vice presidency because "[t]hey are mine," and explained that "every President before me has done the same exact thing." 375 He also specifically referenced President Reagan, who, after leaving office, kept handwritten containing classified information at his private home, as discussed in Chapter Ten.:37 6

written answers, Mr. Eiden wrote that, "[l]ike presidents and vice presidents before me, I understand these notes to be my personal property." 377 declined to answer several questions about whether he believed his notes contained classified information; whether he believed he was authorized to possess classified information 

after his vice  ~~,,~n,., and whether he took steps to avoid writing classified information in his notebooks_: 3,s  

> ,FG

Riden 10/9/23 Tr. at 42-43. J,G Eiden 10/8/23 Tr. at 111-12. 37• Eiden 12/1/23 written responses at L•3• 8 Id. at 1-2. 

94 CHAPTER FIVE       

> MR. BIDEN'S SECOND BOOK, PROMISE ME, DAD, AND THE DISCOVERY OF CLASSIFIED AFGHANISTAN DOCUMENTS

Like many presidents, Mr. Eiden has long viewed himself as a historic figure. 

Elected to the Senate at age twenty-nine, he considered running for president as early 

as 1980 and did so in 1988, 2008, and 2020. During his thirty-six years in the Senate, 

Mr. Eiden believed he had built a record in both domestic and foreign affairs that 

made him worthy of the presidency. 

In addition to the notebooks and notecards on which he took notes throughout 

his vice presidency, Mr. Eiden collected papers and artifacts related to noteworthy 

issues and events in his public life. He used these materials to write memoirs 

published in 2007 and 2017, to document his legacy, and to cite as evidence that he 

was a man of presidential timber. 

For example, as a young senator in the 1970s, Mr. Eiden led several congressional delegations to Europe and the Soviet Union. 379 As explained in Chapter Eight, he viewed these trips as historic and believed they prepared him to be president. Mr. Eiden wrote about these trips in his 2007 memoir, Promises to Keep. 

In 2023, FBI agents recovered official documents, including marked classified documents, related to these trips in Mr. Biden's Delaware garage. 380 

In 2009, while serving as vice president, Mr. Eiden strongly opposed the military's plan to send tens of thousands of additional troops to Afghanistan. 381 Mr.  

> 379

See Chapter Eight.   

> 38°

Evidence items 1Bl7, 1Bl8.  

> 381

See Chapter Six. 

95 Eiden endured sharp criticism both during the debate and after President Obama 

rejected his advice and decided to send additional troops to Afghanistan. But Mr. Biden always believed he was right and that he would be vindicated by history. He kept documents related to the debated troop surge, including a classified handwritten memo he sent President Obama in 2009 opposing the surge and marked classified documents supporting his position. In December 2022 and January 2023, FBI agents recovered these materials from Mr. Biden's Delaware garage and office. 382 

Finally, as explained in Chapter Four, during his eight years as vice president, 

Mr. Eiden regularly wrote notes by hand in notebooks. One such notebook entry makes clear that Mr. Eiden had long contemplated writing a book about his vice presidency. In July 2010, he documented a meeting to discuss a possible book about "my Y.P. years.'' is:i In Mr. Bide n's view, "there were three plausible reasons for having one written or writing one. 

1.  Defense - others will write and I want a record 

2.  Future - who knows about 2016 

3. Profit - retirement[.]"  0 81 

One function of Mr. Biden's notebooks was to provide raw material for his 

eventual second memoir. After leaving office, Mr. Eiden kept his notebooks at his homes in Virginia and Delaware and used them to write that book, Promise Me, Dad.           

> 382 Evidence items 1B04, 1B 17, and 1Bl8. l83 Notebook entry 1B30-0012.
> :381 Jd.

96 In January 2023, FBI agents recovered these notebooks, primarily in Mr. Biden's 

home office and den. :is 5

I.  MR. BIDEN'S 2017 MEMOIR: PROMISE ME, DAD 

After his vice presidency, Mr. Eiden wrote and published a memoir in 2017 titled Promise Me, Dad. Evidence suggests that, while researching and writing the book, Mr. Biden found marked classified documents in the basement of his rental home in Virginia and told his ghostwriter about it during an audio-recorded conversation. And while the published book is not known to contain classified information, while writing the book in unsecure locations, Mr. Biden used notebooks containing notes he took during his vice presidency about classified meetings and 

information. 

A.  Promise Me, Dad 

Unlike Mr. Biden's earlier idea for a book that would chronicle all eight years of his vice presidency. Promise Me, Dad has a narrower focus.: 186 The book recounts a14-month period of Mr. Biden's vice presidency from Thanksgiving 2014 to January 2016, during which he dealt with the illness and eventual death of his elder son, Beau, who died in May 2015_:is, The book discusses the toll that loss took on Mr. Biden, the foreign policy issues in Ukraine, Central America, and Iraq he addressed during that time, and the role his son's death played in Mr. Biden's decision not to run for  

> 385

Evidence items 1Bl7 and 1Bl8.  

> 386

See generally Joe Biden, PROMISE ME, DAD: A YEAR OF HOPE, HARDSHIP, AND PURPOSE (Flatiron Books 2017); Notebook entry 1B30-0012.  

> 387

See generally Biden, PRO:½ISE ME, DAD. 

97 president in 2016. 388 Published in November 2017, Proniise Me, Dad quickly became a #1 New York Times bestseller.389 

1.  Mark Zwonitzer 

Mr. Eiden worked with a ghostwriter, Mark Zwonitzer, to write Promise Me, Dad.: 19 o Zwonitzer is an author and documentary filmmaker specializing in American 

history and politics.  391 He had previously ghostwritten Mr. Biden's 2007 memoir, 

Promises to Keep_:l92 

Zwonitzer has never held a security clearance or become familiar with the 

restrictions on  the  handling of classified materiaP 93 Mr. Eiden knew this_:: 194 In 2011, he proposed hiring Zwonitzer as an official historian for the Office of the Vice President. 39 'i At Mr. Biden's request, Counsel to the Vice President Hogan prepared a memorandum assessing the proposal and any issues that could arise. 396 The memorandum noted that if hired, Zwonitzer "will likely need a security clearance" and that any discussions that cover classified topics would have to "occur in a secur.e facility like your \Vest Wing office.":i 97 The memo explained that "any notes or other  

> 888

See generally Biden, PROMISE ME, DAD.  

> 389

The New York Times Best Sellers, N.Y. TIMES, 

https://www.nytimes.com/books/best-sellers/2017/12/03 / (last visited January 30, 2024); Promise Me, Dad, Pan MacMillan,  https://www.panmacmillan.com/authors/joe 

biden/promise-me-dad/9781509890088 (last visited Jan. 30, 2024).  

> 39°

Zwonitzer 7/31/23 Tr. at 56.  

> 391

Id. at 12.  

> 392

Id. at 31-32.  

> 393

Id. at 98-100.  

> 394

Id. at 102; Zwonitzer recording 170424_0091; 4/27/11 Memo, Cynthia Hogan to Mr. 

Biden, 1B001_02881350.  

> 393

4/27/11 Memo from Cynthia Hogan to Mr. Biden, 1B001_02881350.  

> 396

Id.  

> 397

Id. at 5. 

98 material that contained classified information must be maintained in secure safes, 

produced on a classified computer, and stored in a secure facility."  398 Mr. Eiden did 

not go through with the proposal.  399 

2.  Book planning and research 

In late 2015, shortly after his son's death, Mr. Eiden began planning to write a memoir that drew upon his time as vice president. 400 He met with Zwonitzer and other aides to discuss book ideas and logistics. rni They also solicited input from editors and publishers. 102 During these early meetings in late 2015 and early 2016, Mr. Eiden and Zwonitzer decided to focus the book on a "small window in time" during which Mr. Biden balanced his responsibilities as vice president with his family 

responsibilities during  and  in the wake of his son's illness and death.  w3

From approximately April 2016 through February 2017, Mr. Biden worked with Zwonitzer to outline the book and draft a proposal to submit to publishers. 404 Zwonitzer compiled a chronology of Mr. Biden's day-to-day activities in late 2015 and early 2016 using Mr. Eiden's daily schedules and calendars from his time as vice president. 105 Mr. Eiden's staffers gathered the schedules for Zwonitzer. 106  

> 19s

Id.  

> 399

Zwonitzer 7/31/23 Tr. 53-54. 100 Id. at 56. 401 Id. at 59; 2/10/16 e-mail from Executive Assistant re "Thursday, 2/11, mtg/dinner, 

6:30 pm," Zwonitzer-00000447; 4/6/16 e-mail from Executive Assistant re "Meeting/dinner, Monday, April 11 6:30 - 8:30 pm," Zwonitzer-00008802.  

> 102

Zwonitzer 7/31/23 Tr. at 59.    

> 4o: 3

5/21/16 Document named "JRB-Book-Idea.doc" circulated on May 21, 2016, Zwonitzer-00007400; Zwonitzer 7/31/23 Tr. at 56-59; Draft Book Proposal circulated on June 

22, 2016, Zwonitzer-00003463. 104 Zwonitzer 7/31/23 Tr. at 59. 4o5 Id. at 62-64. rnG Id. at 63-65; 9/29/16 e-mail from Zwonitzer to Ricchetti, Zwonitzer-00007613. 

99 3.  The writing process 

Zwonitzer interviewed Mr. Biden more than a dozen times while researching and writing Proniise Me, Dad. 107 During the interviews, Mr. Biden recounted the events of 2015, including the challenges of dealing with profound personal tragedy while fulfilling his duties as vice president. Zwonitzer also interviewed Mr. Biden's family members and former staffers. 408 Zwonitzer audio-recorded the interviews. then transcribed the recordings for use in writing Promise Me, Dad.W 9

The interviews began in the spring of 2016 and continued through the summer of 2017. Zwonitzer interviewed Mr. Biden several times at the Naval Observatory in 2016 while Mr. Eiden was still serving as vice presidenL After Mr. Eiden left office, he met with Zwonitzer at his rental home in Virginia. 110 During the summer of 2017, Zwonitzer and Mr. Eiden worked together to finalize manuscript at Mr. Eiden's 

beach home in Rehoboth Beach, Delaware.  111 

B.  Mr. Eiden used his notebooks in writing Promise Me, Dad 

In writing Promise Me, Dad, Mr. Biden relied extensively on the notebooks 

notes he took during his vice presidency. Mr. Biden referred to read from notebooks during interviews with Zwonitzer. 412 According to Zwonitzer,         

> 10 ~ FBI Serials 315, 335.
> rns Zwonitzer 7/31/23 Tr. at 144-450 109

Id. at 95-96.         

> no FBI Serial 315, 335.
> 411 Zwonitzer 7/31/23 at 130.
> 412

Ido at 96. 

100 the notebooks "made the book possible" by providing the "emotional arc of the .

story."-±1 3

One of the primary sources of material for Promise Me, Dad was Mr. Biden's 

"Daily" notebook for ''August 2014-September 2016." 111 This notebook contained 

notes of meetings Mr. Biden attended as well as entries about his other activities 

during this period. Many of the meetings related to foreign policy and classified 

information, including the President's Daily Brief, National Security Council 

meetings, and other briefings. Some of these entries remain classified up to the Secret 

level.  11 '3 

The notebook also contained notes on matters other than foreign policy, 

including Mr. Biden's private lunches with President Obama and meetings with advisors to discuss whether to run for president in 2016. Some of the entries were 

highly personal-most notably, entries reflecting on his son's illness and death. 

vVhile this notebook provided much of the framework for Proniise Me, Dad, Mr. 

Biden also used other notebooks in writing the book. Mr. Biden used and referred to a notebook labeled "Foreign Policy 11/2013-2014." 11 G This notebook also contained his notes on the President's Daily Brief, National Security Council and other Situation Room meetings, and other foreign policy briefings. As explained below, at one point   

> n3

Id. at 63, 65. 111 Notebook 1B57. 4 1, 5 FBI Serial 676. -m Notebook 1B67. 

101 Mr. Biden told Zwonitzer that some of the information in the notebook may be classified. Some of these entries remain classified up to the Top Secret level. 117 

Mr. Biden also referred to a notebook labeled "Foreign Policy,'.' which contained similar notes on classified briefings. 118 Some of these entries remain classified up to the Secret level. 419 Finally, Mr. Biden also used a notebook labeled "Obama/Biden 7-

15-13--+ 10-10-16." 120 It contained mainly notes on meetings with political advisors 

and upon preliminary inspection it does not appear to contain classified 

information.  J2 J

C.  Mr. Eiden referred to and read from his notebooks during his interviews with Zwonitzer 

During many of the interviews with his ghostwriter, Mr. Biden read from his notebooks nearly verbatim. sometimes for an hour or more at a time. Zwonitzer later 

transcribed the recordings of the interviews. Zwonitzer described this process of 

listening to and transcribing Mr. Biden's reading from his notebooks as ''incredibly 

painstaking." 422 

At times during these interviews, Mr. Biden took steps to ensure that Zwonitzer did not read or have access to the classified portions of the notebooks. With one exception of which we are aware, discussed below, Mr. Biden did not let Zwonitzer read or handle the notebooks. On multiple occasions, Zwonitzer suggested it would   

> -1 17

FBI Serial 676. m Notebook 1B58. mi FBI Serial 676. 1~0 Notebook 1B68. 421 FBI Serial 676. m Zwonitzer 7/31/23 Tr. at 74, 121. 

102 be easier if Mr. Biden photocopied the relevant notebook entries and allowed 

Zwonitzer to use the copies, but Mr. Biden declined. 423 According to Zwonitzer, Mr. Biden "really never let the journals out of his hand" and did not let others access 

them.  121 

D.  Mr. Biden disclosed classified information in his notebooks to Zwonitzer Based on our review of the notebooks and recorded interviews, when Mr. Eiden came to potentially classified material in his notebook entries, he appears to have sometimes stopped at or skipped over the potentially classified materiaL 125 Zwonitzer also recalled Mr. Biden mentioning the need to be careful "because he was worried that there was a possibility that ... some of this stuff [handwritten entries in the notebooks] could be classified." 126 According to Zwonitzer, "there were things he 

couldn't tell me, lines he couldn't cross."J 27 At other times, however, Mr. Biden read his notes from classified meetings to Zwonitzer nearly word-for-word.12s 

Notes of Situation Room meeting during summer of 2015. On February 16, 2017, for example-when Mr. Biden was no longer vice president-he met with  

> 123

Id. at 75, 121-22. 424 Id. at 71-72, 113. 425 Id. at 102; Evidence items 1B57, 1B58, 1B67, 1B79, 1B8L • 26 Zwonitzer 7/31/23 Tr. at 83.  

> i2,

Id.  

> 128

Zwonitzer recording Carved_000571; Notebook entry 1B57-0062-6.5; Zwonitzer recording 170424_0091; 170424_0091 Tr. at 4-22; Notebook entry 1B67-0063-65; Evidence items 1B79 and 1B8 l; FBI Serials 315, 33.5. 

103 Zwonitzer at the rental house in Virginia.  'lZ!J During this meeting, Mr. Eiden read 

from notes he took during a meeting in the Situation Room in the summer of 2015, which was attended by senior military officials, the CIA Director, and others. 130 Mr. Eiden appeared to tell Zwonitzer this notebook entry related to "a long meeting on 

the Security Council on - it probably was classified." 431 Mr. Biden's meeting notes 

summarized the actions and views of U.S. military leaders and the CIA Director relating to a foreign country and a foreign terrorist organization. J: 12 Mr. Biden had 

skipped over this same notebook entry during a previous conversation with Zwonitzer 

in October 2016, when Mr. Eiden was still vice president. t 33 

But on February 16, 2017, after he was no longer vice president. Mr. Eiden read portions of the same notebook entry aloud and nearly verbatim to Zwonitzer, 

including portions containing information that remains classified up to the Secret 

level.  43 --1 Though Mr. Eiden read these portions of the notebook entry. he also skipped 

over other portions of the entry. 

Two months later, on April 10, 2017, during another recorded conversation 

with Zwonitzer, Mr. Biden returned to the same notebook entry detailing the same  

> 129

Recording Carved_000556; Carved_000556 Tr. at 5-6; 2/15/17 e-mail re "VP's 

Schedule - Thu, Feb 16, 2017," USSS-0000523776; FBI Serials 315, 335; Evidence items 1B79, 1B81.  

> 430

Zwonitzer recording Carved_000556; Carved_000556 Tr. at 4; Notebook entry 1B57-0062-65; FBI Serials 315, 335; Evidence items 1B79, lBSl.  

> 431

Zwonitzer recording Carved_000556; Carved_000556 Tr. at 4; Notebook entry 1B57-0062-65; FBI Serials 315, 335; Evidence items 1B79, 1B81. Mr. Biden's precise words are difficult to discern. This quotation is our best attempt to do so.  

> 432

Notebook entry 1B57 _0062-65.   

> 43 :i

Zwonitzer recording Carved_000241; FBI Serials 315, 335. 

w Zwonitzer recording Carved_000556; Carved_000556 Tr. at 4; Notebook entry 1B57-0062-65; FBI Serials 315, 335, 676. 

104 Situation Room meeting from the summer of 2015. 435 Immediately before discussing 

the notebook entry, Mr. Eiden discussed extremely personal notebook entries touching on the illness and death of his son Beau, its effect on his family, and the wrenching decision about whether to run for president in 2016. 436 After discussing these highly emotional topics, Mr. Eiden turned immediately to the notebook entry from the summer 2015 Situation Room meeting, which began on the very next page of the notebook, and read additional portions of the entry nearly verbatim, including the portions of the entry he read to Zwonitzer during the February 16, 2017 meeting. 437 The passages Mr. Eiden read to Zwonitzer on April 10, 2017 contain information that remains classified up to the Secret level. 438 

Notes of National Security Council meeting in November 2014. In a later recorded conversation with Zwonitzer on April 24, 2017, Mr. Eiden read from a different notebook entry, this time from notes he took during a National Security Council meeting in the Situation Room in November 2014. 439 Mr. Eiden read aloud from notes summarizing a range of issues relating to a foreign terrorist organization, including specific activities of the U.S. military and views expressed by the  

> 435

Zwonitzer recording Carved_000571; Carved_000571 Tr. at 2-6; FBI Serials 315, 335; Notebook entry 1B57-0062-65; Evidence items 1B79, 1B81.  

> 436

Zwonitzer recording Carved_000571; Carved_000571 Tr. at 1-2.  

> 437

Zwonitzer recording Carved_000571; Carved_000571 Tr. at 2-6; Notebook entry 1B57-0062-65; FBI Serials 315, 335; Evidence items 1B79, 1B81. 438 FBI Serial 676. 439 Zwonitzer recording 170424_0091; 170424_0091 Tr. at 4-22; Notebook entry 1B67 -

0063-65; Evidence items 1B79, 1B81. 

105 intelligence community, including the Director of National Intelligence and the CIA 

Director.  440 

While reading these notes, Mr. Biden struggled to read his handwriting, and he showed part of the handwritten passage to Zwonitzer. The two then had the following exchange: 

Mr. Biden: Do you have any idea what the hell I'm saying there? Less on the number of what? Isn't that awful? Zwonitzer: Something. Number, something - quality. I can't. Mr. Eiden: Some of this may be classified, so be careful. 

Zwonitzer: Okay. 

Mr. Eiden: I'm not sure. It isn't marked classified, but. 441 Mr. Eiden then continued to read nearly verbatim from portions of his notes on the 2014 Situation Room meeting. 112 Some of the portions that Mr. Eiden read to 

Zwonitzer remains classified at the Secret level. J-l:l 

More generally, during his dozens of hours of interviews with Zwonitzer, Mr. Eiden read from notebook entries related to many classified meetings, including National Security Council meetings, CIA briefings. Department of Defense briefings, 

and other meetings and briefings with foreign policy officials. 411  

> 4

rn Zwonitzer recording 170424_0091; 170424_0091 Tr. at 4-22; Notebook entry 1B67 -

0063-65; Evidence items 1B79, 1B81. rn Zwonitzer recording 170424_0091; 170424_0091 Tr. at 13-14; Notebook entry 1B67-0065. 142 Zwonitzer recording 170424_0091 (emphasis added); 170424_0091 Tr. at 14-22; 

Notebook entry 1B67-0063-65.  

> 443

FBI Serial 676.  

> H 4

E.g., Notebook entries 1B57-0039, 1B57-0062-63, 1B67-0059-61, 1B67-0063-65. 

106 E.  Mr. Eiden also used his notecards in writing his book 

In addition to his notebooks, Mr. Eiden used other notes he wrote on notecards 

while vice president.  445 These included notes that he took during his private lunches 

with President Obama, several of which featured prominently in the book. 446 

In the book, Mr. Eiden described his weekly lunches with President Obama as 

"the one setting where we could talk frankly, without fear of being overheard."  447 They were an opportunity to "discuss the most important issues facing the administration, the country, and the world at that moment; and we could talk 

through any personal issues we were having." 448 "If something one of us had done 

angered or disappointed the other, the weekly lunch was the time to clear the air." 449 The lunches were often personal in nature, as Mr. Eiden described in the book: 

The conversation at our lunches was just as often personal. We talked about our wives. We talked about the close friendship between his daughters and my granddaughter, and what was going on in their lives. 

We talked about golf.  450 

Many of Mr. Eiden's notes on his lunches with President Obama were taken on the 

long, narrow notecards that he used regularly as vice president.  451  

> 445

See Chapter Four.  

> 446

See, e.g., Eiden, PROMISE ME, DAD 21, 57-59, 66-79, 88-89, 156-59, 203-04, 206-07, 232-33. 447 Id. at 67. 448 Id.  

> 449

Id. at 66. 450 Id. at 68. 451 See Chapter Four; Staff Assistant 2 3/16/23 Tr. at 100; 12/20/10 e-mail from OVP 

staffer to Staff Assistant 2, 1B001_02888681; Staff Assistant 3 10/4/23 Tr. at 34-35; FBI Serial 3; NARA_SCAN_00001317. 

107 F.  Mr. Biden's staff made copies of his notecards for use in writing 

Promise Me, Dad 

As explained in Chapter Four, Mr. Biden's staff made copies of his notecards for him to take after he left the vice presidency and use in writing Promise Me, Dad. 

After his staffers raised concerns that some of the notecards contained classified information, it appears that Mr. Bide n's staff arranged for his copies of the notecards to be stored in a safe at the Naval Observatory, and then to be held in personal storage in a SCIF at the National Archives. 152 Mr. Eiden visited the National Archives twice after he left office in 2017 to review the notecards as part of the book-writing process. 4,5 :i Both trips were occasioned by Zwonitzer's requests for notes related to specific events during Mr. Biden's vice presidency, including several of Mr. Biden's lunches with President Obama that were later featured in Promise Me, Dad. 4'5 -1 

II.  FEBRUARY 16, 2017: "I JUST FOUND ALL THE CLASSIFIED STUFF DOWNSTAIRS" 

During a recorded interview on February 16, 2017. at lvlr. Biden's rental home in Virginia after the end of his vice presidency, Mr. Eiden told Zwonitzer he had just 

found classified material downstairs.  455 

From context, Mr. Eiden appears to have been referring to classified documents relating to American military and foreign policy in Afghanistan. When he  

> M

See Chapter Four; 1/12/17 Deposit Agreement regarding the Administration of Personal Materials of Vice President Joseph R. Eiden, NARA-H_700000012.  

> !Gl

See Chapter Four.  

> 151

See Chapter Four; 5/:Zl/16 e-mail from Zwonitzer to Ricchetti, Zwonitzer-00007399.  

> 155

Recording Carved_000556; Carved_000556 Tr. at 5-6; 2/15/17 e-mail re "\lP's Schedule - Thu, Feb 16. 2017," USSS-0000523776; FBI Serials 315, 335; Evidence items 1B79. 1B81. 

108 made his sta tement to Zwonitzer, Mr. Biden w as discu ssi ng a handwritten memo he 

had se n t to President Ob ama opposi ng the deploy men t of more troops to Afghanistan 

in 2009. 456 

Before meet in g with Mr. Bi den on February 16, 2017, Zwonitzer e-mailed a Bi de n staff er explaining that he "wanted to con cent rat e on the personal diaries from Jun e 2015 through Thank sg iving 2015" a nd ask ing if Mr. Biden "co uld have those on hand." 457  When th ey met on February 1 6, 2017, Mr. Bid en and Zwonit ze r talk ed for sev era l hours. Mr. Bid e n's si ster , Valerie Biden Owens, was also pr esent .458 

Zwonitzer recorded the conversation and la ter tra n sc rib ed it. 459  They sat on the main flo or of th e Virgin ia hou se in the library/den, which is shown belo w: 460         

> Main floor library/den of Virginia home (Jul y 10, 2019) "" 1
> 456

Reco rding Ca rved _000556; F BI S eria l 315, 33 5; Ev idence items 1B66, 1B79, 1B81.  

> 457

2/14/17 e-mail from Zwonitzer to Oval Office Operation s Director, Zwonitzer -

00006071.  

> 458

Zw oni tzer 7/31/23 Tr. at 109; Car ved_000556; Carv ed_000556 Tr. at 2, 4; 2/15/17 

e-mail r e "VP's Schedule -Thu , Feb 16, 2017 ," USSS-0000523776.  

> 459

Zw oni tzer 7/31/23 Tr. at 109-10.  

> 460

Id. at 84 , 97; Biden 10/9/23 Tr. at 28.   

> 46 1

FBI Serial 624 1A719; SCOH-000760 

109 Mr. Eiden began the interview with a long discussion about the murder of nine 

worshippers at the Emanuel African Methodist Church in Charleston, South 

Carolina, and a discussion of his son Eeau.  162 During this portion of the recording, Mr. Biden did not sound like he was reading from notes. 46 :3 

He then turned to his "Daily" notebook for "August 2014-September 2016." 461 

Mr. Biden read from an entry containing notes on a July 7, 2015 National Security 

Council meeting about Iraq.  16,"'i 

While reading from his notebook, Mr. Eiden listed four points he made about the Iraq situation during the July 7, 2015 meeting. Mr. Eiden explained to Zwonitzer that he had made similar arguments years earlier, during the 2009 debate about the 

troop surge in Afghanistan.  166 Mr. Eiden told Zwonitzer he had sent President Obama a 40-page, handwritten memo arguing against the deployment of additional troops in 

Afghanistan ''on the grounds that it wouldn't matter."'  467 Mid-sentence during this narrative, Mr. Eiden said, in a matter-of-fact tone, that he had "just found all the classified stuff downstairs." 

So this was - I, early on, in '09-I just found all the classified stuff downstairs-I wrote the President a handwritten 40-page  

> 462

Zwonitzer recording Carved_000556; ZWONITZER-TR_0064-78; FBI Serials 315, 335; Evidence items 1B79, 1B81. 463 Zwonitzer recording Carved_000556; ZWONITZER-TR_0064-78; FBI Serials 315, 335; Evidence items 1B79, 1B81. 164 Zwonitzer recording Carved_000556: ZWONITZER-TR_0079; FBI Serials 315, 335; Notebook 1B57; Evidence items 1B79, 1B81. 4 cci Zwonitzer recording Carved_000556; Carved_000556 Tro at 4; ZWONITZER TR_0079; FBI Serials 315, 335; Evidence items 1B79, 1B81. 466 Zwonitzer recording Carved_000556; Carved_000556 Tr. at 5-6; ZWONITZER TR_0079; FBI Serials 315, 335; Evidence items 1B79, 1B81. 167 Zwonitzer recording Carved_000556; Carved_000556 Tro at 5-6; ZWONITZER TR_0079; FBI Serials 315, 335; Evidence items 1B79, 1B81. 

110 memorandum arguing against deploying additional troops to Iraq-I mean, to Afghanistan-on the grounds that it wouldn't matter, that the day we left would be like the day before we arrived. And I made the same argument ... I wrote that piece 11 or 12 years ago.' t68 

As discussed in the next chapter, Mr. Eiden was referring to a long, handwritten memo he faxed to President Obama from Nantucket over the Thanksgiving weekend in 2009. In the memo-which Bob Woodward later detailed in his book, Obama's Wars-Mr. Eiden argued against engaging in full-scale 

counterinsurgency and nation-building in Afghanistan.  469 

As noted above, this February 2017 meeting with Zwonitzer was on the main floor of the Virginia home. "Downstairs" from where Mr. Eiden and Zwonitzer sat was 

Mr. Biden's basement office, where he kept his personal papers.  470 The photo below 

shows the basement office in October 2017, several months after the February 2017 

meeting with Zwonitzer:                       

> 468 Zwonitzer recording Carved_000556; Carved_000556 Tr. at 5-6; ZWONITZER
> TR_0079 (emphasis added); FBI Serials 315, 335; Evidence items 1B79, 1B81. 469 Bob Woodward, OBLv1A'S WARS 309 (Simon

& Schuster 2010). 470 Eiden 10/9/23 Tr. at 36-37; SCOH-000322. 

111 Mr. Biden's basement office in the Virginia home (Oct. 2017) 471 

During Mr. Biden's interview with the special counsel, he said that at the time of the February 2017 meeting, which was about a month after he moved into the Virginia house, he was likely still going through boxes of materials. 472  He said his belongings were "taking up a lot of room" in the house, and he was trying to figure out "what'd they [his staff] pack up, what's here?" "where in the hell is all this stuff going?" and "what do I clear out ... what do I get out of the way? .... "473 Among the  

> 471

David Kamp, Why Joe Biden Didn't Run ... And Why He's Not Ruling Out 2020, 

VANITY  FAIR (Oct. 25, 2017), https://www.vanityfair.com/news/2017/10/why-joe-biden-didnt 

run-for-president-and-why-hes-not-ruling-out-2020 (last visited Jan. 30, 2024).  

> 472

Biden 10/9/23 Tr. at 32-34.  

> 473

Biden 10/9/23 Tr. at 33. 

112 things he probably searched for in boxes were his notebooks, which he believed he 

gathered and kept on the main floor of the Virginia house.  174 

All three participants in the February 16, 2017 meeting-Mr. Biden, 

Zwonitzer, and Mr. Eiden's sister, Ms. Biden Owens-said they did not remember 

Mr. Eiden's statement that he had "just found all the classified stuff downstairs."' 175 

For his part, Mr. Eiden said he did not remember anything at all about this incident. 

including whether he actually found classified documents in his basement office.!7 6

During his interview with our office, Mr. Eiden said he did not remember 

finding marked classified documents at any time after the end of the Obama 

administration and before he was elected President but that if he had found such 

classified material, he would have given it to his personal aide at the time, or to 

another trusted staff member such as his former chief of staff.  117 We have interviewed 

the personal aide, former chief of staff, and several other staffers with whom Mr. 

Eiden interacted at the Virginia house in and around February 2017. Except for a 

separate incident involving different classified material given to the personal aide in January 2017, some weeks before the Zwonitzer conversation, no one recalled Mr. Eiden turning in classified documents after the end of his vice presidency. 478  

> 474

Id. at 41.  

> 475

Id. at 32; Zwonitzer 7/31/23 Tr. at 82-84; Eiden Owens Tr. at 28-30, 71-73; 2/15/17 e-mail re "VP's Schedule -Thu, Feb 16, 2017," USSS-0000523776. iiG Eiden 10/9/23 Tr. at 32-33. 477 Id. at 32, 39-40.  

> 478

E.g., Ricchetti Tr. at 187; Executive Assistant 9/28/23 Tr. at 165; Personal Aide 3 

3/28/23 Tr. at 197-212. As explained in Chapter Seven, Mr. Eiden's personal aide recalled that during the first week after the end of the administration-several weeks before Mr. Eiden told Zwonitzer he "just found all the classified stuff downstairs"-Mr. Eiden returned 

113 The Special Counsel's Office worked with the National Archives to identify 

whether Mr. Eiden returned any classified documents after the end of the Obama administration. The National Archives has no awareness or records indicating that Mr. Eiden returned classified records to the White House (to then be turned over to the Archives) in the weeks following the end of the administration. 179 As is the case with every presidential transition, the National Archives continued to receive Obama administration presidential records from the White House after the end of the 

administration.  180 There would therefore have been nothing unusual or notable for the National Archives about also receiving vice presidential records after the end of 

the administration.  18 1

Several years after Mr. Eiden's February 2017 meeting with Zwonitzer, in December 2022, FBI agents recovered marked classified documents from a cardboard 

box in the garage of Mr. Eiden's Delaware home.  is 2 These marked classified documents related to Afghanistan and the U.S. troop surge in 2009-the very same subject that Mr. Eiden addressed with Zwonitzer in 2017 when he said that he had "just found all the classified stuff downstairs." In one of the folders containing these marked classified documents, agents also found drafts of Mr. Eiden's 2009                       

> aslim binder of classified material he had found at the Virginia home, which the personal aide believed was related to foreign leader calls

Mr. Eiden made in the last days of the administration. Personal Aide 3 3/28/23 Tr. at 197-212.           

> F 9 1/30/24 e-mail from NARA General Counsel to Special Counsel's Office, SCOH -
> 000761.
> 1so

Id.  

> 4s1

Id.  

> 182

See Chapter Six. 

114 handwritten Thanksgiving memo to President Obama. Agents found the final 

Thanksgiving memo in the office of . Biden's Delaware home. rn::i    

> 1s 3See

Chapter Six. 

115 L 

> CHAPTER

SIX    

> THE CLASSIFIED AFGHANISTAN DOCUMENTS

To fully appreciate Mr. Biden's :references to Afghanistan in his conversation with Zwonitzer on February 16. 2017, it is helpful to understand Mr. Biden's place in the fraught debate about American policy in Afghanistan in the early days of the Obama administration. 

In that debate. Mr. Eiden played a conspicuous role. He strongly opposed the 

military's effort to send large numbers of U.S. troops to Afghanistan, and this opposition culminated in the lengthy handwritten memo Mr. Eiden sent President Obama over the Thanksgiving holiday in 2009. By 2017, Mr. Eiden believed his judgment as reflected in the memo had been vindicated by history. Years later, in 

December 2022 and January 2023. FBI agents found the handwritten Thanksgiving memo and marked classified documents containing his advice to President Obama in 

Mr. Eiden's Delaware home.      

> MR. BIDEN'S ROLE IN THE

2009 AFGHANISTAN POLICY REVIEWS 

At the beginning of 2-009, one of the incoming administration's first and most significant foreign policy challenges was the war in Afghanistan, which was then in its eighth year. Early in the administration, Mr. Biden opposed President Obama's decision to deploy additional American troops to Afghanistan, and in the 

administration's internal debates, Mr. Biden was the lone dissenter.  484 Privately, he 

worried the nation was drifting into another Vietnam.  485            

> is 4Barack Obama, APROMISED LAND 317-19 (Crown 2020). 485 Notebook entry 1864-0012-13.

116 Soon after the announcement of additional troops in March 2009, General 

Stanley McChrystal assumed command of forces in Afghanistan and conducted his 

own review of the war effort. 186 McChrystal's written assessment concluded that 

America must send yet more troops and adopt a counterinsurgency strategy to protect 

the Afghan population. 187 McChrystal soon followed this assessment with a request 

for  another 40,000 U.S. troops.  188 

Around the time McChrystal submitted his assessment, "the Obama foreign policy team was splintering" and the divisions between two opposing sides "began to 

harden."'1-89 On one side, Defense Secretary Robert Gates, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Michael Mullen, and General David Petraeus supported McChrystal's call for a counterinsurgency campaign and for 

significantly more American troops in Afghanistan. 190 On the other side, Mr. Biden 

and a number of National Security Council and other \Vhite House advisers were 

deeply skeptical of these proposals. '191   

> 48 G

Obama, A PROMISED LAND 323.  

> 187

Stanley McChrystal, COMISAF's INITIAL ASSESSMENT (unclassified version) 1-

1, 1-4 (Aug. 30, 2009),  https://nsarchive.gwu.edu/docurnent/24560-headquarters 

international-security-assistance-force-kabul-afghanistan-gen-stanley (last visited Feb. 2, 2024).  

> 488

Kevin Whitelaw, Can Obama Say No To His Generals On Afghanistan?, NATIONAL PUBLIC RADIO (Sept. 30, 2009),  https://www.npr.org/2009/09/30/113339833/can-obama-say 

no-to-his-generals-on-afghanistan (last visited Feb. 2, 2024).  

> 489

Robert Gates, DUTY: ME::vIOIRS OF A SECRETARY AT WAR 323 (Knopf 2014); Obama, A PRO:.VUSED LAND 432-33; Klain Class. Tr. at 19-21; Klain Tr. at 25-26, 56-57.  

> 490

Gates, De'fY 323; Obama, A PROMISED LAND 432-33; Klain Class. Tr. at 19-21, 34; 

Klain Tr. at 25-26, 56-57.  

> 191

Obama, A PROMISED LA~D 432-33; Klain Tr. at 25-26, 56-57. 

117 Mr. Biden left no doubt where he stood. The military's public lobbying for more 

troops was, he said at the time, "fucking outrageous." 492 Privately, Mr. Biden continued to fret that President Obama was poised to repeat the disastrous mistakes of Vietnam.493 

A.  Fall 2009 review 

Against this backdrop, from September to November 2009, President Obama convened nine meetings of the National Security Council to debate McChrystal's troop request and the strategy in Afghanistan.49 4 One such meeting is shown below.           

> ANational Security Council meeting to debate Afghanistan strategy (Oct. 9, 2009) 495
> 492

Obama, A PROMISED LAND 434-35; Notebook entry IB66-0050.  

> 493

Notebook entry 1B64-0012-13.  

> 494

Obama, A PROMISED LAND 437.  

> 495

SCOH-000762. 

118 Photos of other me etin gs during the course of thi s policy review show Mr. Biden 

taking notes in hi s "Af/Pak" notebook and re view ing marked classified documents ,in cludi ng two marked classifi ed documents that were lat er recovered from hi sDel a ware ga rage. 'lf ·JG                

> National Securit yCouncil (Nov. 11, 2009) with mark ed classified document late, ·found in De laware garage (B 37 )' 197

Durin g the fall 200 9 review, Mr. Bi den's voice w as one of the strongest. 498  As 

Mr. Bid en put it during an interview with the special counsel: 

The President thought that I knew a lot mo1·e about Afghanistan than he did and othe r me mbers of the adm ini stration .... [H]e didn 't have overwhelming forei gn policy experience, an d how could he tak e on th emo st premier members of the foreign policy establishment in his  

> 496

E.g., SCOH-00076 3, SCOH-000764 , SCOH-000765, SCOH-000766; Recovered 

documents B32, B3 7; Note book entri es 1B66-0092, 102.  

> 197

SCOH-000764: Recov ered document B37.  

> 498

Obama, A PROMISED LAND 319; Klain Tr . at 56 -57. 

119 administration □ .... So he was looking for me to make the strongest case I could ... which I was prepared to do because I knew as much about it as they did. 11 J9 

Playing the role of leading in-house skeptic, Mr. Biden consistently and 

forcefully opposed McChrystal's call for a fully resourced counterinsurgency strategy 

in Afghanistan and the request for 40,000 more troops to implement this strategy. 500 

As an alternative, Mr. Biden advocated a narrower strategy involving a reduced U.S. 

military footprint.  50  1

Mr. Biden's notebook entry after the first meeting of the fall 2009 review 

reveals the depth of his opposition to McChrystal's proposed counterinsurgency 

strategy (often abbreviated "COIN"). 502 Mr. Eiden wrote that in his presentation 

during the meeting, he was "able to punch a hole in the logic of' those advocating 

COIN and noted that another official in attendance praised Mr. Biden's critique as 

"devastating.'' 5 o:i Summing up, Mr. Biden's notebook entry explained: 

If I succeed in slowing down or stopping this misguided (policy) buildup it will make taking this job worthwhile. 

This decision will define our Admin[istration] in history - hanging out there alone is worth it. I don't want history to associate me with the 

adoption of a COIN_,rn-1  

> 499

Biden 10/9/23 Tr. at 17-18.  

> 500

Notebook entries 1B66-0067-69, 1B66_0098-99; Blinken Class. Tr. at 40-41; Klain Tr. at 46-47; Sullivan Class. Tr. at 53-54; FBI Serials 683 lA772, 512 lA.614; Recovered documents Bl8, B24, B25, B28, B29.  

> 501

Blinken Class. Tr. at 41; Klain Class. Tr. at 41-42; FBI Serials 683 lA.772, 512 

1A614; Recovered document B24. 502 Gates, DUTY 339; FBI Serial 77 1A86; Notebook entry lB66_0068-69. °' 03 Notebook entry 1B66-0069.  

> oo4

Id. 

120 Deep into the fall 2009 review, when, in President Obama's words, "everyone 

was sick of Afghanistan, sick of meetings, and sick of one another," Secretary Gates offered a compromise. 505 This modified version of McChrystal's proposal called for an 

"extended surge" of approximately 30,000 troops, with a plan to begin drawing this 

number down within 18 to 24 months. 50G The troop number was far larger than what 

Mr. Eiden wanted but the drawdown was meant to avoid what Mr. Eiden feared most: an open-ended American commitment. 501 The last National Security Council meeting 

to discuss the president's options was held near the end of November, with President 

Obama promising a final decision soon after.i 08 

B.  Mr. Biden's Thanksgiving memo to President Obama 

\Vith the Thanksgiving holiday looming, Mr. Eiden made one final push to 

change President Obama's mind about the way forward. 509 The day before Thanksgiving, Mr. Biden sent a typewritten memo to the president emphasizing Mr. 

Biden's concerns that adding more troops was a potential ·'strategic blunder."i 510 

As was his longstanding tradition, Mr. Biden spent Thanksgiving with his family in Nantucket. 511 For much of the holiday weekend, Mr. Biden and his staff  

> 505

Obama, A PROMISED LAND 438, 442-43; FBI Serials 683 1A772, 512 1A614; Recovered documents B26, B30, B37. 506 Obama, A PROMISED LAND 442-43; FBI Serials 683 1A772, 512 1A614; Recovered documents B26, B30, B37.  

> 507

FBI Serials 77 1A86, 683 1A772, 512 1A614, 682; Recovered documents B18-l, B24, B25, B25-1, B28, B29; Handwritten material 1B66-0004-28; Eiden 10/9/23 Tr. at 14-19; Blinken Tr. at 85-86.  

> 508

Obama, A PR0:\11SED LAND 442-43; Gates, DCTY 352-53; Bob Woodward, OBA.:.VLA.'S WARS 289.  

> 509

Eiden 10/9/23 Tr. at 14-15.  

> 51

# °FBI Serials 683 1A772, 512 1A614; Recovered document B25.  

> 511

Eiden, PROMISE ME, DAD 5-7; Notebook entry 1B66-0099; 11/29/09 VP Schedule 1B001_00010833; 11/27/09 e-mail from Blinken to Klain, SCOH-000228; FBI Serial 77 1A86; 

121 worked on yet another memo to the president on Afghanistan. 512 That Saturday, two days after Thanksgiving, Mr. Biden sent President Obama a lengthy handwritten merno offering Mr. Biden's final thoughts-the sarne memo he recalled in his 2017 

discussion with Zwonitzer.  513 The memo strongly criticized the premises underpinning the military's counterinsurgency strategy., 314 Mr. Biden also vented his frustration with senior military officials, noting that he was "tired and angry at the way they have tried to box you [in] through leaks and less than straightforward analysis of the alternative offered." 51 ii Mr. Bide n's notes from that day reflect that the rnemo was sent by secure fax and "placed in Pres. Hands." 316 The handwritten Thanksgiving memo, later found in Mr. Biden·s home office in 2023, contains 

information that remains classified up to the Secret level.' 317 

As Mr. Biden explained to the special counsel, he sent the handwritten Thanksgiving memo "because I was trying to change the President's mind, and Iwanted to let him know I was ready to speak out ... and to really, quite frankly, save 

his ass[.]""  18 Mr. Biden said he "spent a lot of time'' writing the memo, and he "stayed up Thanksgiving writing it." 519 It was, he said, the '·first and only time" he ever wrote  

> 512

Notebook entry 1B66-0096; Recovered documents B25-1, B25; 11/27/09 e-mail from Blinken to Klain and Carney, SCOH-000230; Biden 10/9/23 Tr. at 14-15. oil Handwritten material 1B66-0003-0022; Evidence items 1B79, IB81; Military Aide 

9 Tr. at 47-57; Chapter 5.  

> 514

Handwritten material 1B66-0003-0022; FBI Serial 682.  

> 515

Handwritten material 1B66-0006; FBI Serial 682.  

> 016

Notebook entry 1B66-0098; FBI Serial 682.   

> '17

FBI Serials 77 1A86, 676, 682; Handwritten material 1B66-0003-0022.  

> 518

Biden 10/9/28 Tr. at 14-15.  

> 519

Id. at 14-15. 

122 the President a memo such as this by hand, and without distributing it to anyone else in the government_.i520 

The same day Mr. Eiden sent the memo, he wrote in his Af/Pak notebook based on his deep disagreement with what anticipated be President Obama's decision, he considered resigning as Vice President. 

Tomorrow the President is going to make a fateful decision regarding Afghanistan - as I sat looking out the window at the sea - thinking Ishould resign in protest over will bring his administration down. 

Although I obviously there I feel like this is what it must have 

felt like for Kennedy then Johnson in the early days ofVTN [Vietnam]. I feel guilty and boxed in myself. Guilty not having been more successful w/ the President - and staying. 

Boxed in by knowing or at least feeling that my resignation would only harden his position and leave him with one less voice. 521 

C.  President Obama's final decision 

The next day, Mr. Eiden left his family in Nantucket to be by the President's side for the final decision. 522 Before a scheduled Oval Office meeting, Mr. Eiden tried to schedule a last-minute conversation with the President but his request was rebuffed. 523 Undaunted, Mr. Eiden showed up to the White House early and waited for the President to come down from the residence. 524 Mr. Eiden used the short walk to the Oval Office to urge the President not to bend any further to the wishes of his                                      

> 520 Id. at 18; see also Military Aide 9 Tr. at 47-49, 62-63. 521 FBI Serial 77 1A86; Notebook entry 1B66-0098-99. 522 Notebook entry 1B66-0099; 11/29/09 VP schedule, 1B001_00010833; 11/28/09 e
> mail discussing meeting with POTUS on 11/29/09, SCOH-000228. 523 Klain Tr. at 59; Klain Class. Tr. at 39-40, 44-45.
> 524 Id.

123 generals. 525 After the day's meetings ended on November 29, Mr. Biden recorded this 

final reflection: 

I think - I hope - I did all I could have done to move us as far away from [Petraeus and McChrystal] as possible. 

On the short walk over from the WH to Oval, I emphasized [President Obama's] need to be strong. He said that is why I brought them in "face to face." I said good he was Pres[ident] and not me - I would have gone to war with them - he smiled and said - "I know I would have enjoyed seeing that." 526 

Two days later, in a speech at West Point President Obama announced the 

Afghanistan troop surge: an additional 30,000 American troops, who would begin to 

draw down after 18 months.  521 

As Ron Klain-one of Mr. Biden's longest-serving and most-trusted aides-

explained, although Mr. Biden publicly supported the President, privately, he 

'"deep [ly] disagree [ d]" with the decision, which he considered to be a "historic 

mistake." 528 Among other things, he feared "'a second Vietnam," with the United 

States ·'sending tens of thousands of Americans over to a pointless war." 529 Mr. 

Biden's personal aide at the time likewise explained that the 2009 Afghanistan 

decision was a "huge" issue for Mr. Biden that was "very, very important" to him. 530  

> 523

Notebook entry 1B66-0101-105. 526 Notebook entry 1B66-0105. 527 Remarks by the President in Address to the Nation on the Way Forward in 

Afghanistan and Pakistan, The White House (Dec. 1, 2009). 

https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/the-press-office/remarks-president-address-nation 

way-forward-afghanistan-and-pakistan (last visited Feb. 1, 2024).  

> 528

Klain Class. Tr. at 43.  

> 32,1

Id.  

> 'do

Personal Aide 1 9/18/23 Tr. at 137. 

124 In the years since the 2009 surge, including when Mr. Eiden, as president, 

decided to withdraw all U.S. troops from Afghanistan in 2021, he has invoked his 

Thanksgiving memo and claimed that history has confirmed his good judgment. 531 

II.  IN DECEMBER 2022, THE FBI FOUND IN MR, BIDEN'S DELAWARE GARAGE MARKED CLASSIFIED DOCUMENTS FROM THE FALL 2009 AFGHANISTAN 

> REVIEW

As explained in Chapter Two, in November 2022, marked classified documents were found in Mr. Biden's files at the Penn Eiden Center in Washington, D.C. After this discovery, Mr. Biden's personal counsel then searched his Delaware home for additional classified documents. ci:-1 2 Their first search occurred on December 20, 2022, when counsel searched his garage, found additional marked classified documents 

there, and alerted the Department Justice_  5:3:3 The next day, December 21, 2022, 

Mr. Biden's written consent, FBI agents searched the garage_  5: 34 

A.  The garage box 

The garage contained a significant volume of boxes, storage, and clutter, as shown in the photographs the agents took upon arrival:  

> 531

Klain Class. Tr. at 41-42. 532 FBI Serials 33, 34.  

> 533

Id.  

> 534

FBI Serial 35. 

125 Mi·. Biden's Delaware garage (Dec. 21, 2022) 535

Mr. Biden's Delaware garage (Dec. 21, 2022)'> 3G 

> 5~,;

2022122l _ ERT _ 001:-3 .•rn; 20221221_ ER'T' _ 0022 .

126 Among the places Mr. Biden's lawyers found classified documents in the garage was a damaged, opened box containing numerous hanging folders, file folders, and binders. 537 The box, which was labeled "Cabinet" and "Desk file," was in a mangled state with ripped corners and two top flaps torn off. 538  Photos of the box, as the FBI 

encountered it, are below.    

> Garage box (Dec. 21, 2022) 539

Because the box was damaged and not able to properly package classified 

material, the agents transferred its contents to a new box for transport. 540  The  

> 537

FBI Serials 33, 35 IA42. 5• 38 FBI Serials 35 1A42, 680 1A770; 20221.22l_ERT_0024; 20221221_ERT_0025: 

2022122 l_ERT _0026; 1/22/24 photograph, GarageBox-00 l. 5,39 20221221_ERT_0024. 

> 54

# ° FBI Serial 35. 

127 photographs below show the contents of the garage box in the original box and in the new box:      

> Garage box (Dec. 21, 2022)541
> 541

FBI Serial 35 1A42 2022122l _ ERT _0025. 

128 Gara ge box in origi nal condition (D ec. 21, 202 2Y, 42 

Ga,.age box after repachaging (Jan. 3, 20 2 3)5 4 3 

> •542

2022122 l _ ERT _0026; FBI Se ria l 35 1A42.  

> 0•1J

20230103_DSC_0003; FBI Se rials 35, 195 1A212. 

12 9Inside the box, the FBI located two folders containing marked classified documents related to the fall 2009 policy review on Afghanistan.' 544 

1.  "Facts First" folder 

One of the folders containing marked classified documents about Afghanistan was an unlabeled red file folder with handwriting on the front, which included the 

phrase "Facts First." 5 -Ei In his interview with the special counsel, Mr. Eiden identified the handwriting as his, but said he recalled nothing about how this folder or its 

contents got into his garage_:"ii6 

When FBI agents repackaged the contents of the ripped garage box into a new box on December 21, 2022, it appears the order of a few of the materials changed slightly. This chapter discusses in detail below two folders that contained marked classified documents 

about Afghanistan: the manila "Afganastan" folder and the red "Facts First" folder. It appears the "Afganastan" folder was near the "Facts First" folder in the garage box when agents recovered the box, but the precise original location of the "Afganastan" folder at that 

time is unknown.  

> 514

FBI Serial 512 1A614; Evidence items 1B04, 1B44.  

> 545

FBI Serial 512 1A614; Evidence item 1B44.  

> 546

Eiden 10/9/23 Tr. at 43-45. In general, when our report identifies handwriting as 

Mr. Biden's, it is based on the following factors, which often occur in combination: (1) Mr. 

Eiden identified it as his handwriting or likely his handwriting; (2) others familiar with Mr. 

Biden's handwriting identified it as his or likely his; (3) Mr. Eiden confirmed that he wrote an entire class of documents, such as his notebooks and notecards; (4) the handwriting appears to match known instances of Mr. Biden's handwriting; (5) the document was found at Mr. Biden's home or office and is surrounded by materials attributable to Mr. Biden; and 

(6)  the content and context of the handwriting suggest that it is Mr. Biden's. 

130 ''Facts First" folder  541 

Garage box in original condition showing "Facts First" folder54 8 

> 54 7

1B004-FACTS_FIRST-000001. s4s 2022122l _ ERT _0026; FBI Se rial 35 1A42. 

131 The "Facts First" folder contained over 200 pages of documents related to the 

fall 2009 Afghanistan policy review, with a date range from approximately August 

through October 2009. 549 Among the marked classified documents were the following, 

which are summarized further in Appendix A: 

• McChrystal's assessment, marked "CONFIDENTIAL REL NATO/ISAF" and dated August 30, 2009, in which McChrystal announced the urgent need for additional troops and a comprehensive counterinsurgency campaign in Afghanistan.' 5: 50 Mr. Eiden marked up this document with 

extensive handwritten notes, which were highly critical of McChrystal's 

reasoning and conclusions.i':i 51 

• An August 31, 2009 memorandum from the National Security Adviser to President Obama marked "TOP SECRET/SCI." 552 According to subject matter experts in the intelligence community, this document contains national defense information in the form of highly sensitive information 

about the military programs of the United States and a foreign government. The unauthorized disclosure of this information, both today and in 2017 when Mr. Eiden was no longer vice president, reasonably could be expected to cause exceptionally grave damage to the national security. 

• A September 10, 2009 draft memorandum from Mr. Eiden to President Obama. 553 This memo, marked "TOP SECRET," was likely sent from Mr. Eiden to President Obama in advance of the first National Security Council 

meeting of the fall review, held on September 13, 2009. 55 '1 During the meeting, Mr. Eiden made lengthy comments that closely tracked the memo. 555 As explained above, after this meeting, Mr. Eiden wrote in his journal that his presentation had "punch[ed] a hole" in the logic of his opponents, that the Afghanistan decision would define the administration in history, and that he did not want history to associate him with counterinsurgency strategy.556        

> 549 Recovered documents B6-B24. 550 Recovered document B23.
> 551

Id.        

> 552 Recovered document B20.
> 553 Recovered document B24.
> 554

Id.; 12/3/09 e-mail chain between Carney, Blinken, and Klain titled ''Proposed Additions to Timeline," SCOH-000234; Evidence item 1B44. 5, 3 Notebook entry 1B66-0068-69; 12/3/09 e-mail chain between Carney, Blinken, and Klain titled "Proposed Additions to Timeline,'' SCOH-000234; FBI Serial 525 1A632. 3" 6 Notebook entry 1B66-0068-69. 

132 • An undated memorandum marked "TOP SECRET//HSC 557 //NOFORN" entitled "Some Facts and Considerations." 558 This memo supported Mr. Eiden's views in the Afghanistan debate and offered commentary on the intelligence community's analysis about Afghanistan. 559 According to subject-matter experts in the intelligence community, the memo contains national defense information, including highly sensitive information about intelligence activities, sources, and methods. Unauthorized disclosure of this information in 2017 when Mr. Eiden was no longer vice president reasonably could be expected to cause exceptionally grave damage to the national security. 

• A September 29, 2009 memorandum with attachments, from the National Security Adviser to the President, marked "TOP SECRET WITH TOP SECRET/NOFORN/CODEWORD ATTACHMENTS." 560 Mr. Eiden underlined and marked several passages that relate to the classified attachments to the memo. 561 The memo's attachments include several intelligence products from the Office of the Director of National Intelligence. 562 One such attachment, marked "TOP SECRET//HUMINT/COMINT//ORCON/NOFORN//FISA," appears to contain Mr. Eiden's handwriting and underlining. 563 According to subject matter experts in the intelligence community, portions of this document contain national defense information about sensitive intelligence sources and methods. Unauthorized disclosure of this information, in 2017 when Mr. Eiden was no longer vice president, and still today, reasonably could be expected to cause serious damage to the national security. 

• A draft handwritten note from Mr. Eiden to President Obama, dated October 18, 2009, offering Mr. Eiden's advice about Afghanistan, including Mr. Eiden's explanation of why he believed the military's proposed counterinsurgency strategy would fail.5 64 This note does not appear to have been completed.  

> 557

This is a typographical error. The correct marking is HCS, which stands for HUMINT Control System, and signifies information human intelligence sources.  

> 558

Recovered document B15.   

> 559 Id.
> 560

Recovered documents B6-B 13. 561 Recovered document B6. 562 Recovered documents B7, B9, BlO, Bll. 563 Recovered document B7. 564 Recovered document B18-1; Klain Class Tr. at 3-4. 

133 2.  "Afganastan" folder 

The second folder in the box that contained marked classified documents 

relating to Afghanistan was a manila folder labeled "Afganastan 2009." 565     

> "AFGANASTAN 2009" manila folder5 66

In his interview with the special counsel, Mr. Eiden said the handwritten label on this folder looks like his handwriting, 56 i and the distinctive misspelling of "Afganastan" confirms this. Mr. Eiden repeatedly used this or a similar misspelling  

> •565

Evidence item 1B04.  

> 500

1B004-A.FGANASTAN_2009-000001; Evidence item 1B04.  

> 567

Eiden 10/9/23 Tr. at 51-52. 

134 in handwritten notes as vice president, and before that in notes he took as a senator 

dating back to 198Q.5G8 

The "Afganastan'' folder contained almost 100 pages of documents from 

October and November 2009, including numerous materials Eiden used as 

reference material when writing the Thanksgiving memo to President Obama. 569 

Among the documents were following, which are summarized further in Appendix 

A: 

• A November 25, 2009 typewritten memorandum from Mr. Eiden to President Obama about Afghanistan, marked "TOP SECRET." 570 Mr. Eiden made handwritten edits to this memo, some of which were incorporated into the handwritten Thanksgiving memo dated three days later. 571 Entire pages of the handwritten Thanksgiving memo are repeated nearly verbatim from the November 25 memo, making the November 25 memo the original source document. /57 2

• Multiple drafts of the handwritten Thanksgiving memo.  573 These include documents with edits, comments, and additions from Mr. Eiden's staff, which were delivered to Mr. Eiden when he was in Nantucket writing the Thanksgiving memo. 571 Mr. Eiden repeated numerous passages from these documents nearly verbatim in the final memo.  575 

• A copy of Mr. Eiden's talking points for a National Security Council meeting held on November 11, 2009, and Mr. Biden's follow-up memorandum to the National Security Advisor a few days later, on November 15, 2009, both  

> 568

6/11/80 Handwritten Notes from June 11, 1980 Meeting with West German Chancellor Helmut Schmidt, 1B017-BIDEN MEETING WITH CHANCELLOR SCHMIDT -

000015; Notebook entries 1B67-0011, 0013; 1B68-0033; 1B65-0016; 1B22-0016.  

> 569

Recovered documents B25-B38; Evidence item 1B04; FBI Serials 35, 512 1A614, 682, 683 lA 772.  

> 5

rn Evidence item 1B04; Recovered document B25.  

> cS,t

Recovered document B25; Handwritten materials 1B66-0003-28; Eiden 10/9/23 Tr. at 52-53; Klain Classo Tr. at 8; Evidence item 1B04. 572 Recovered document B25; Handwritten materials 1B66-0003-28; 11/27/09 e-mail from Blinken, SCOH-000230; Evidence item 1B04. 573 Recovered document B25-1.  

> 5,4

Ido  

> 575

Id.; Evidence item 1B04. 

135 marked "Top Secret." 576  The talking points and memo contain numerous points that were later incorporated into the handwritten Thanksgiving memo, including Mr. Biden's "dee[p] concer[n] that adding significantly more resources into Afghanistan is, potentially, a gigantic strategic blunder that plays into Al Qaeda's hands." 577 

In addition to the manila "Afganastan" file folder, the box also contained a blue hanging folder bearing the same misspelling on the handwritten label. 578  The blue hanging "Afganastan" folde1· contained only a red file folder holding a one-page memo from 2012 unrelated to Afghanistan.579      

> Blue hanging folder labeled '~GANASTAN'~ 80
> 576

Recovered documents B28, B29; Evidence item IB04.  

> 5Ti

Id.  

> 518

20230103_ DSC_0136; Evidence item 1B04.  

> 579

Evidence item 1B04. The garage box also contained a folder labeled "Foreign Policy: Second Term CLASSIFIED MARCH 2013." This folder contained two marked classified documents-one marked ''SECRET/NOFORN," the other marked "TOP SECRET//NOFORN//Pre-decisional"-which outlined, in broad terms, foreign policy goals for the Obama administration's second term. FBI Serials 512 1A614, 683 1A772; Evidence items 1B04, B4, B5. The folder also contained an unmarked memorandum from Mr. Biden to President Obama providing advice about managing the U.S. relationship with a foreign nation (not Afghanistan) in the second term. B4- l.  

> 580

20230103_DSC_0034; FBI Serials 35, 195 1A212. 

136 B.  Other materials in the garage box 

In addition to the two folders with marked classified documents about 

Afghanistan, the garage box contained folders with unclassified material that was of 

great personal interest to Mr. Eiden and that he appears to have personally used and 

accessed. 581 

Several folders in the garage box contained materials that Mr. Eiden appears 

to have accessed both shortly before and shortly after February 2017, the day Mr. 

Biden told Zwonitzer he had "j found classified documents downstairs. 582 For 

example, in January 201 less than a month before told Zwonitzer he had just 

found the classified documents downstairs, Mr. Eiden appears to have accessed 

documents later found in the box. On January 201 . Eiden wrote a notebook 

entry about a call scheduled for later that to finalize a deal with Creative Artists 

Agency (GAA), a talent agency that went on to represent him in negotiating • book 

deal for Proniise 1Vle, Dad. 5s:i The same entry also referenced Mr. Biden's work with 

his sister on his "S Corp."58 4The box found in Mr. Biden's garage contained a corresponding file folder, labeled "Signed Contracts Penn, CAA," which contained the signature page of a final                                      

> 581 FBI Serial 512 1A614.
> 582 FBI Serials 315, 355 1A400, 512 1A614; Evidence item 1B80; Chapter 5.
> 583 Notebook entry 1B59-0025; ASSOCIATED PRESS, Joe and Jill Eiden get multi-book deal, WHYY (Apr. 5, 2017), https://whyy.org/articles/joe-and-jill-biden-get-multi-book-deal /; FBI Serial 77 1A86; FBI Serial 682.
> 584 Notebook entry 1B59-0025.

137 agreement between Mr. Biden and Creative Artists AgencyJ 58 ;3 Mr. Biden signed the agreement, which was dated a few days after the notebook entry, on January 26, 2017.; 586 The folder also contained the final agreement between Mr. Biden and the Penn Biden Center-Mr. Biden's primary employer after his vice presidency-which Mr. Biden signed, also on January 26, 2017. 387 And the folder contained a \V-9 tax form for Mr. Biden's S corporation, CelticCapri, which Mr. Biden used to receive income from book deals and speeches, among other purposesJi 88 The W-9 form listed Mr. Biden as the president of the S corporation and was signed by Mr. Biden and dated January 30, 2017-less than three weeks before Mr. Biden told Zwonitzer he had just found classified documents downstairsJi 89 

The folder of signed contracts from late January 2017 was found in the box a few folders away from the '·Facts First" folder that contained marked classified documents about Afghanistan, as shown in the image below :>BO   

> 58 "

1B004-SIGNED CONTRACTS PENN_C1-\i-\-0000Ol - 1B004-SIGNED CONTRACTS PENN_CAA-000008. Evidence item 1B04.  

> 586

1B004-SIGNED CONTRACTS PENN_CAA-000008.  

> 587

1B004-SIGNED CONTRACTS PENN_CAA-000004 - 1B004-SIGNED CONTRACTS PENN_CAA-000007; FBI Serial 512 1A614; Evidence item 1B04.  

> 588

1B004-SIGNED CONTRACTS PENN_CA!\-000002; FBI Serial 512 1A614; Evidence item 1B04; Darla Mercado, Joe Eiden used this strategy to trim. his tax bill. Yoa can, too, CNBC (Aug. 6,  2019), https://www.cnbc.com/2019/08/06/joe-biden-used-this-strategy-to 

trim-his-tax-bill-you-can-too.html.  

> 589

FBI Serial 512 1A614; 1B004-SIGNED CONTRACTS PENN_CA .. A.-000002. 

> 59

# °FBI Serial 512 lA.614. 

138 )-\,oiih1  t'!-m 1ck1-11e  wi1h r~rir~me-11  r a  ml 

> in .... urn1U:i'!  info
> Contents  of  box  recovered  from  Delaware  garage  (Dec. 21, 2022) 591
> 59 1 Evidence  item  1B04.
> 139

Mr. Biden also appears to have created a folder with the handwritten label "Short Termism" and the handwritten date February 3, 2017-less than two weeks before he told Zwonitzer he had just found classified documents downstairs. 592 This folder, later recovered by the FBI in the same box as the classified Afghanistan documents, appears to be labeled in Mr. Biden's handwriting and contains material about a public policy issue of longstanding interest to Mr. Biden.:i!'l: 1 After creating this folder in or around February 2017, Mr. Biden spoke on a panel addressing "short termism" at the University of Delaware a few months later in May 2017. 594 

The box also contained a folder labeled "mark Z" and dated 2i16/17. 595 "Mark 

Z" is a reference to Mr. Biden's ghostwriter, Mark Zwonitzer, and the folder is dated the same day Mr. Eiden met with Zwonitzer at the Virginia home and told Zwonitzer he had just found classified documents downstairs. 596  

> :;\JS

Zwonitzer 7/31/23 Tr. at 82-83; FBI Serial 512 1A614. As explained below, the folder appears to be labeled in Mr. Biden's handwriting, based on comparisons with other known instances of that handwriting.  

> 593

FBI Serials 35, 512; see also, e.g., Joe Biden, How Short-Termism Saps the Economy, WALL ST. J., Sept. 27, 2016; Notebook entries 1B20-0027, 0025, 0041.  

> 594

Larissa Kubitz, Biden Institute taJ:ws first step u ith dynamic business panel, THE REVIEW (May 2, 2017),  https://udreview.com/biden-institute-takes-first-step-with-dynamic 

business-panel/ (last visited Feb. 1, 2024).   

> ,, 95

1B004-MARK Z 2-16-17-000001; FBI Serial 512, 1A614.   

> 59G

1B004-MARK Z 2-16-17-000001; Biden 10/8/23 Tr. at 132; Zwonitzer 7/31/23 Tr. at 82-83; Evidence item 1B04. 

140 "MARK Z 2116117" blue file  folde,.s 9~

In s ide th e Mark Z folde r was the final book proposal for P1·om ise Me, Dad.  598 

Mr. Eid en used this proposal to shop his book to pot ent ial pub lishe rs , and this bidding process resulted in a book contract netting Mr. Ei den a n advance of $8 million :'i 99  l\'Ir. Biden's ass istan t identifi ed the h and writin g on thi s fol der as Mr. Bid en's. 600  Th e date on the folder in dicates that Mr . Biden created it at or ar ound the same time he met with Zwonitzer on Feb ruar y 16, 2017, and said he ha d ju st found classifi ed doc um ents. Th e folder was at some point placed in the same box as the marked classified documents about Afghanistan.  

> 597

1B004-MARK Z 2-16-17-000001; FB I Serial 512. •598  IB004~M.ARK Z 2-16-17-000001 thro ugh 000005.  

> 599

Zwonitzer-00001334; Zwonitzer 7/31/23 Tr. at 32-33, 59 -66, 78-79, 82, 85-89.  

> 600

Execubve Assistant 9/28/23 Tr. at 84. 

141 Mr. Eiden also continued to access materials in the box after he told Zwonitzer on February 16, 2017 that he had found the classified documents. For example, on March 5, 2017, less than three weeks later, Mr. Eiden wrote in one of his notebooks that he wanted to get a copy of the contract offered by Washington Speakers Bureau a group that had made Mr. Eiden a lucrative offer to arrange paid speeches-"for my records." 601 The garage box contained a folder with the handwritten label "Washington Speakers Bureau," which contained a copy of that offer. 602 The 

handwriting is Mr. Eiden's.  603 The Washington Speakers Bureau folder was found a few folders away from the "Facts First" folder containing marked classified documents about Afghanistan. 

The materials described above, which Mr. Eiden appears to have accessed in the weeks before, during, and after he told Zwonitzer about ''just" finding classified documents, were all located in folders in front of the "Facts First" folder in the box (to the right of the folder in the image of the box above). 

Immediately behind (to the left of) the "Facts First" folder were three more items that contained information of significant personal interest to Mr. Eiden: 

• A manila envelope containing documents from February and March 2017 relating to Mr. Biden's retirement payments and then-current health insurance information, along with a copy of the Senate Ethics Manual bearing Mr. Biden's handwriting. Mr. Eiden also wrote on the envelope, 

including the date "4-17," an apparent reference to April 2017. 60 ! These months-February, March, and April 2017-coincide with and closely                              

> 601 Notebook entry 1B59-0027; FBI Serial 77.
> 602 1B004-WASHINGTON -SPEAKERS BUREAU 000001-000007; FBI Serial 512.
> 603 Biden 10/9/23 Tr. at 57; Personal Aide 4 Tr. at 119.
> 604 1B004-E?\J"'\TELOPE ADDRESSED TO JOE BIDEN-000001-000028; FBI Serial 512.

142 follow the date when Mr. Eiden told Zwonitzer he found classified documents, February 16, 2017. 

• A white binder labeled "2016" containing detailed financial information about Mr. Biden's income and expenses, including expenses relating to the 

Virginia home.  605 Mr. Eiden described this type of financial binder as the sort of material that he knowingly kept in his files.GOG When interviewed, his sister, Ms. Eiden Owens, identified materials in the binder as ones she printed for Mr. Eiden at his  request.Go ,

A brown/maroon binder labeled "Beau Iowa, appears to have been compiled in roughly 2014, and which contains, among other things, photographs Beau Eiden campaigning in Iowa. 608 

The box also contained other materials of personal interest to Mr. Eiden, some 

which go back decades, and some of which extend for years after Mr. Eiden told 

Zwonitzer he had found classified documents.  609 These included: 

• The Eiden Archives, which compiled ancestry information about the Eiden family, and which was addressed to Mr. Biden's parents at their home in 

Delaware.  610 

• Photos and biographical information of Mr. Eiden other members of his graduating law school class, from 1967.Gl J

• A folder labeled "V.P. Image - Press" containing a 2015 newspaper article from the Delaware News Journal. The article's opening sentence reads: "While Vice President Joe Biden has assured himself a place in U.S. history books, political legacy in tiny Delaware is epic." 612   

> so 5

FBI Serial 512 1A614.  

> 606

Eiden 10/8/23 Tr. at 99-101; FBI Serial 554 1A662.  

> Go,

Eiden Owens Tr. at 62-66.  

> Gos

FBI Serial 512 1A614.  

> 609

FBI Serial 512 1A612.  

> 610

1B004-ARCHIVES BIDEN_THE EIDEN ARCHrVES-000001; FBI Serial 512 1A612.  

> 611

1B004_MANILA FOLDER WITH DOCUMENTS-000002; FBI Serial 512 1A612.  

> 612

1B004_ARCHIVES EIDEN_ VP IMAGE - PRES-000006; FBI Serial 512 1A612. 

143 • Polling data related to the 2016 presidential election showing Mr. Biden outperforming Mr. Trump in several swing states that Hillary Clinton 

lost.  6 1'.l  

> 111

Documents from the end of the Obama administration. For example, information about Mr. Biden's move out of the Naval Observatory, from 

November 2016; 614 a folder about the Penn Biden Center with materials 

from November 2016;G  15 moving company information for Mr. Biden and 

Dr. Jill Biden from December 2016; 616 and a folder relating to the Biden Institute at the University of Delaware, dated January 3, 2017. 617 

• Documents from the first few months after the Obama administration, when Mr. Biden was a private citizen. 

• An IRS Form 1099 for tax year 2017 documenting Mr. Biden's lump-sum payment to Zwonitzer for his work ghostwriting Promise Me, Dad, and 

other tax documents dated 2018. 618  

> 111

A binder of briefing materials from the 2020 presidential campaign, dated from 2019 and 2020. Inside the binder are personal photos of Mr. Biden and 

his family, including his grandchildren. 619  

> @

Notecards with presidential campaign remarks from 202Q_G:zo 

In sum, the materials surrounding the marked classified documents about 

Afghanistan were of personal importance to Mr. Eiden and were materials he appears 

to have accessed around the time he told Zwonitzer. while they were in Mr. Biden's 

\'irginia home, that he had "just found all the classified stuff downstairs."  

> Gu

FBI Serial 512 1A612; 1B004_POLLING HRC 2016 ,JRB-000002-000005.   

> 61l

FBI Serial 512 1A612; 1B004_VICE PRESIDENT OF THE US_FURNITURE -

000001; 1B004_VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES-000001. 

m FBI Serial 512 1A612; 1B004_PENN DC-000001.  

> 01

c FBI Serial 512 1A612; 1B004_TRANSITION-000001.  

> 617

FBI Serial 512 1A612; 1B004_UDEL 1-03-17-000001.  

> 618

FBI Serial 512 1A612; 1B004-GREEN FOLDER WITH DOCUMENTS-000003.  

> 619

FBI Serial 512 1A612; lB00°1-BOOK 2-000001.  

> 62

# °FBI Serial 512 1A612; IB004-CARDS-REMARKS A.i."'ID NOTES-000001. 

144 III.  IN JANUARY 2023, THE FBI FOUND TH E CLASSIFIED 2009 THANKSGlVING MEMO IN MR. BIDEN'S DELAWARE HOME OFFICE 

On January 20, 2023, about a month aft er FBI ag ents se arch ed Mr. Biden's Del awa re garage and found the box with classified Afghanistan documents, age nt sreturned to se arch the living area s of Mr. Biden's Delaware home. 621  In Mr. Biden's main office, agents found the not ebook he used to chronicle the fall 2009 Afghanistan policy revi ew. 622  The notebook, which was label ed "Af/Pak 1," was found in a drawer along with man y of Mr. Biden's other notebooks from the Obama admini st rati on. 623             

> Mr. Biden 's Delaware home office containing his notebooks (Jan. 20, 2023)6'/A
> 621

FBI Setials 35, 77. 

s22  FBI Serial 77; Not ebook 1B66. 

e23  FBI Serial 77 1A86.  

> 624

FBI Seria l 77 IA86 20230120_ JLH _Ol73. 

145 Office file ca binet und er television containing eight seized notebooks (Jan. 20, 2023) 623 

Contents of office file cabinet under television containing eight seized not e books (Jan. 20, 2023) 626  

> 625

20230120_FBI_0l51; FBI Se rial 77 lA87. 626  20230120_FBI_0152; FBI Serial 77 1A87. 

146 Notebook labeled «Af/Pak 1' 162 '

Inside the front cover of the Af/Pak notebook, held together with a binder clip, was Mr. Biden's handwritten 2009 Thanksgiving memo to President Obama, dated November 28, 2009.6 28 The handwritten memo contains information that remains classified up to the Secret level. Attached to the memo was a November 2009 State Department cable about Afghanistan that was marked classified as Confidential. 629 

The cable shows a declassification date in November 2019, though the State Department has been unable to confirm whether it has been formally declassified. 630  

> 627

20230120_FBI_0l58; FBI Serial 77 1A86. 628 Handwritten material 1B66_0001-28; FBI Serial 77 1A86; 682.  

> 629

FBI Serial 676.  

> G30

Id. 

147 - • ' 1

# r , I

, . 

> V
> v,

,,.    

> Ill •.. .,.

, .. . { r- :a. .. J   

> Si aff nani<' i•pdactt>rl I

Int,erim· of "Af/Pah 1" notebooh tJ.'ith coper page of Thanksgil•ing memo 1;-:i 

In Mr. Eiden\; interview with the special counsel. he initially said he was not aware that he had kept the Thanksgiving memo after his vice presidencyY 12  In response to a follow-up question, he said, "I guess 1 wanted to hang onto it for posterity's sake. I mean. this wc1s my position on Afghanistan. And it later became 

discussed .... It became discussed inside the foreign policy establishment that I was 

recommending it ... ,"6,3:J  

> 5:31

202:S0120_FBI_0l61; FBI Serial 77 1A86. i;;1  1 Biden 10/!:l/2,3 Tr. at 14-21. G:,:, Id. at 21. 

148 In December 2022 and January 2023, in Mr. Biden's Delaware garage and home office, FBI agents found classified documents relating to one of the seminal moments of his vice presidency: his opposition to the 2009 troop surge in Afghanistan. The classified documents were physically surrounded by Mr. Biden's private, personal material, including material he accessed around the same time his ghostwriter in February 2017, while in his Virginia home, that he ''just found all the classified stuff downstairs." 

149 CHAPTER SEVEN    

> TRACING THE AFGHANISTAN DOCUMENTS

vVe were unable to determine how the marked classified Afghanistan 

documents got from the \Vhite House, where Mr. Biden possessed them as vice president in 2009. to his Delaware home, where they were found in 2022. Mr. Biden had at least some of the Afghanistan documents with him in Nantucket during Thanksgiving 2009, when, as described in Chapter Six, he used some or all those documents as reference material in writing his handwritten memo to President Obama. From Nantucket. we have been unable to determine whether the documents next went to Mr. Biden's office in the vVhite House, or to his official residence at the Naval Observatory, or to his personal home in Delaware. 

In an attempt to trace the path of the Afghanistan documents and other marked classified documents found in the Delaware home, we reviewed extensive evidence of the movement of Mr. Biden's belongings from the end of the Obama administration. We interviewed numerous people who were in Mr. Biden's Delaware and Virginia homes at relevant times, and reviewed photographs and videos of the spaces as well as records from moving companies, furniture companies, and other sources. Ultimately, we could not determine precisely when the box containing the Afghanistan documents got into the garage, or who put the documents there. 

As explained in Chapter Eleven, the strongest case for criminal charges against Mr. Biden relating to the Afghanistan documents would rest on his retention of the documents at the Virginia home in 2017. The February 16. 2017, recorded conversation when Mr. Eiden told Zwonitzer he "just found all the classified stuff 

150 downstairs" in the Virginia home is evidence that the Afghanistan documents were there. Other evidence provides some additional clues suggesting that these documents may have been stored in the Virginia home and then moved to the Delaware home, where they were ultimately placed in the box in the garage. As 

discussed further in Chapter Eleven, we find this evidence to be insufficient to meet 

the government's burden in a criminal prosecution. 

I.  MR. BIDEN'S MOVES FROM THE NAVAL OBSERVATORY TO VIRGINIA AND THEN  

> TO DELAWARE

As explained below, when Mr. Eiden left the vice presidency in January 2017, 

he moved into a rental home in Virginia. From 2017 to 2019, ML Eiden split time 

between the Virginia home and his permanent home in Delaware, which he owned 

before, during, and after the vice presidency, and still owns today_c:; 4 In July 2019, some of Mr. Eiden's belongings in the Virginia home were moved to his home in DelawareY 33 

A.  2017 move out of the Naval Observatory 

On January 7, 2017, the Eidens moved furniture and personal belongings out of the Naval Observatory and into the Virginia home using a private moving                      

> 634 Biden 10/8/23 Tr. at 40-47 (describing building the Delaware home while aSenator). See also Sections I.A and I.B below.
> 635 See Section I.D below.

151 company. 6~6 The Bidens paid for the move themselves and packed their own 

belongings, with the help of staff members and naval enlisted aides_G:J, 

Mr. Eiden was personally involved in the move: He selected which pieces of 

government-owned furniture from the Naval Observatory he bought and moved to 

Virginia, directed some of the packing, and was personally present for the entirety of 

the move_n:is One military aide recalled seeing him "packing by himself' and "just him 

moving his stuff one at a time into the ... truck" at the Naval Observatory on moving 

day, and Secret Service agents saw Mr. Eiden "moving boxes" at the '\Tirginia house 

during the weekend of his move into that house_G:rn 

Mr. Biden stored papers in several places at the Naval Observatory, including 

desks, safes, and briefcases. As explained above in Chapter Three, Mr. Eiden stored 

classified materials at the Naval Observatory while vice president. \Ve were unable   

> 63 G

12/21/16 Invoice from private moving company, Georgetown Moving and Storage, SCOH-000279; 1/7/17 e-mails from Secret Service agents describing status of movers packing up the Na val Observatory. USSS-0000528890 and USSS-0000529043.  

> 637

12/21/16 Invoice from private moving company, Georgetown Moving and Storage, SCOH-000279 (indicating "customer to pack all," "carrier to pack none"); Residence Manager TL at 37; NEA 5 Tr. at109-114; Ricchetti Tr. at 122, 124; NEA 1 Tr. at 48, 50-5 l, 55-56; NEA 3 Tr. at 28-30, 34; Personal Aide 3 3/28/23 Tr. at 111-112; Personal Aide 3 10/4/23 Tr. at 14 -

15, 31; Dr. Biden Personal Aide Tr. at 58-61; Staff Assistant 2 Tr. at 86-87, 91-92.  

> 638

10/6/16 Memo from Residence Manager to the Vice President and Dr. Eiden, 1B004-Vice President of the US_Furniture at 000002 ("Per our conversation yesterday .... "); handwritten notes describing phone call with Residence Manager on 12-19-16, FBI Serial 278, Notebook 1B59; entry in Notebook DAILY 2016 (1B59) describing 12/19/16 call with Residence Manager (" 12-19-16, 9:55pm The Lake: Also spent time on phone w/ [Residence Manager] re: furniture + movement of furniture"); NEA ;3 Tr. at 28-34; NEA 5 Tr. at 114: NEA 1 Tr. at 48, 50-51, 55-56; Military Aide 7 Tr. at 50; 1/7/17 e-mail from Secret Service agents describing Mr. Eiden as present at the Naval Observatory with the movers, USSS -

0000528890; 1/7/17 e-mail from Secret Service agents describing Mr. Biden going to Virginia Residence, USSS-0000524214; Personal Aide 3 10/4/23 Tr. at :3-6, 16-18, 20; Residence Manager Tr. at 60;~Ricchetti Tr. at 122, 125  

> 639

Military Aide 7 Tr. at 50, 53-55; 1/13/17 Secret Service e-mail, USSS-000040G162. 

152 to determine whet h er any classified docume nt s were inadvertently moved to the 

Virginia home when Mr . Bid en moved ou t of the N ava l Obs erva tory. 

During his vice presidency, Mr. Eid en used a desk with green leat h er inserts in th e turret of the Naval Observatory's primary bedroom. 640  Private movers moved the gr een-top d esk to th e large b ase ment room in the Virgin ia home tha t Mr. Biden used as an office. 641  No staffers recalled r emoving or packing material from t he desk before mov ers removed it from th e Naval Observatory. 642                       

> Antique Clesk with green leather in sets Purchased by the OVP 20 11
> Gree n-top desk in Naual Obse roatory Green-top desh in Virginia basement office
> (undat ed)G 43(Sept. 21, 2017 )614
> 640

10/5/16 e-mail from Residence M anage r to the n-OVP Associate Direc tor for Finance , SCOH-000225; 10/6/16 Memo from Res iden ce Manager to the Vice President and Dr. Biden, Evidence Item 1B004-Vice President of the US _Furniture at 000002; 12/30/16 e mail from Executive Assist ant to Mr. Biden, forwarding correspon den ce from OVP Counsel, SCOH-000236; P ersona l Aide 3 10/4/23 'l'r. at 9-11. 

s4 t Personal Aide 3 10 /4/23 Tr . at 9.  

> 642

See, e.g., Residence Manager Tr. at 37; Personal Aide 3 10/4/23 Tr. at 9-11; Executive Assistant 9/28/23 Tr. at 11 5; NEA 1 Tr. at 56.  

> 64 3

Evidence Item 1B004-Vice President of the US_Furniture at 000007.  

> 644

9/ 21 /17 photograph taken at the Virginia Residence, SCOH-000323. 

153 Mr. Biden and his staff kept classified documents in safes at the Naval 

Observatory, but staff cleared out their contents after the January 7, 2017 move. 64 '1 Mr. Biden was also known to keep documents in his briefcases, which he carried with 

him  when traveling.  64G Mr. Biden's staff did not go into his desk at the Naval Observatory, and it appears staff retrieved documents from his briefcase only rarely, 

if ever, so we were unable to determine if those locations contained any documents at 

the end  of the administration.  Gi 7

vVe were also unable to determine whether any of :Mr. Biden's papers classified or not-were in the boxes moved out of the Naval Observatory and to Virginia. No one involved recalled packing or moving papers or files belonging to Mr. Biden. G1S Mr. Biden also stated that he did not '·ever remember packing up written material to go anywhere. 649 He explained that, "[i]t doesn't mean it didn't happen, 

but I just don't remember any of that.''G::iO 

During the investigation, we obtained photographs of the Virginia home from 

several sources in an attempt to identify photographs showing the classified  

> 645

1/15/17 e-mail from military aide to Executive Secretary, SCOH-000255; Military Aide 8 Tr. at 17, 33-34; 1/16/17 e-mail correspondence between OVP National Security Affairs and OVP Counsel staff, SCOH-000246; 1/16/17 e-mail correspondence between OVP National Security Affairs and O"VP Counsel staff, SCOH-000218; 1/16/17 e-mail, SCOH-000259; Executive Secretary Staffer 2 7/7/23 Tr. at 57; 1/17/17 e-mail, SCOH-000256; Associate Counsel 3/29/23 Tr. at 16, 7 4; Bakotic 7/19/23 Tr. at 90-92.  

> G4G

Staff Assistant 3 Tr. at 49; Executive Assistant 9/28/23 Tr. at 73-7 4; Personal Aide 1 4/26/2:3 Tr. at 58; Personal Aide 2 Tr. at 35; Personal Aide 3 3/28/23 Tr. at 34-:35, 56-57; Personal Aide 3 10/4/23 Tr. at 52-53.  

> 647

Personal Aide 3 3/28/23 Tr. at 85; Personal Aide ~3 10/4/23 Tr. at 10; NEA 5 Tr. at 67; Staff Assistant 3 10/4/23 Tr. at 67-68; Military Aide 10 Tr. at 22.  

> 618

See, e.g., NEA 1 Tr. at 56; NEA 3 Tr. at 30-31.   

> c19

Eiden 10/8/23 Tr. at 67.  

> 6• 50

Id. at 67. 

154 Afghanistan documents or the box in which they were found. We found none. We did 

identify photographs taken in January 2017, while Mr. Biden was moving into the Virginia home from the Naval Observatory. But the photographs showed only the exterior of moving boxes, not their contents, and we were not able to identify the box in which the Afghanistan documents were found in any of the photos. 

B.  Security at the Virginia home The Virginia home was not authorized to store classified information in 

February 2017, when Mr. Biden told Zwonitzer he had "just found all the classified stuff downstairs." 

The Virginia home was not set up for secure handling or storage of classified 

documents. No one we interviewed recalled any safes or other approved facilities for 

the storage of classified material in the home. 6 '> 1 The Virginia home had an alarm 

system. 652 It was also generally locked, although a staff member entered the house through an unlocked door to facilitate the move-out in July 2019.G,°iJ Although the White House Situation Room delivered a classified book to Mr. 

Eiden at the Virginia home on one occasion near the end of the Obama administration 

in early January 2017,Gf5 4 his National Security Affairs staff later determined that he  

> 651

See, e.g., Secret Service Special Agent 2 Tr. at 80; Virginia house manager Tr. at 45.  

> 652

Virginia House Manager Tr. at 14-15; 1/30/17 e-mail from U.S. Secret Service agent to Dr. Biden's personal aide, USSS-0000527876; Secret Service Special Agent 1 Tr. at 37-39. 

But see NEA 1 Tr. at 86 ("If there was [an alarm] we didn't use it or it didn't work.").  

> 653

NEA 1 Tr. at 87; Secret Service Special Agent 1 Tr. at 39; Dr. Biden Staffer 1 Tr. at 63-64.  

> 654

1/15/17 e-mail from Military Aide 8 to OVP staff and White House Situation Room, SCOH-000318; 1/14/17 Secret Service e-mail, USSS-0000524184; 1/15/17 e-mails between military aide, OVP staff, and the White House Situation Room, SCOH-000314. That evening, 

155 should not receive classified material there. 655 E-mail correspondence among his 

staff, military aide, and briefer reflect that Mr. Eiden learned of this change in 

process, as he "requested the [President's Daily Brief] for the drive into the White 

House"G,iG when he started spending the night at the Virginia home,  6157 as opposed to 

his staffs alternative plan of delivering it to the West Wing for him to review after he 

;:,irrived there.Gris 

After the vice presidency, the Virginia home had an intermittent Secret Service 

presence for six months, ending in July 2017. 6 :iH During those six months, agents were 

present only when a protected person was there (such as Mr. Eiden or Dr. Jill Eiden), 

the Bidens returned to the Naval Observatory. 1/15/17 Secret Service e-mail. USSS -

0000524182. 0·'·3 1/17/17 e-mail from National Security staffer to Kahl, SCOH-000304; 1/17/17 e mail from Kahl to National Security Staff, SCOH-000:301. G-,G 1/18/ 17 e-mail from Military Aide 3 to OVP National Security Affairs staff and PDB briefer, SCOH-000271.  

> 637

Between January 7, 2017, when he moved into the \'irginia home, and January 18, 2017, when he began spending the night there, Mr. Biden traveled extensively and continued to stay overnight at the Naval Observatory on the few occasions he was in Washington, D.C. 

See, e.g., 1/8/17 e-mails between Military Aide 7, OVP staff, and the White House Situation Room, SCOH-000248; 1/7/17 Secret Service e-mail, 1B001_01916050 (indicating Mr. Biden returned to the Naval Observatory at 23: 17 on January 7, 2017); 1/8/17 e-mails between military aide and OVP staff, ] B001_01915912 (indicating that briefing books for January 9. 2017 will be delivered to the Vice President in the morning in Los Angeles); 1/10/17 e-mails between military aide, OVP staff, and the \Vhite House Situation Room, SCOH-0002,14, SCOH-000252, SCOH-000265; 1/11/17 e-mail from OVP National Security Affairs staff, SCOH-000261: Secret Service schedule for January 11, 2017, USSS-0000004488; Secret Service schedule for ,January 12, 2017, USSS-0000004494; 1/11/17 e-mails amongst OVP staff with Mr. Bide n's schedule for January 12, 2017, lB00l_0 1984097; 1/13/17 White House Press Release, SCOH-000222; 1/14/17 Secret Service e-mail, USSS-0000001109 (indicating Mr. Biden arrived at the "Lake House'' the evening of ,January 13, 2017).  

> Gss

1/18/17 e-mail from Military Aide 3 to OVP National Security Affairs staff and PDB briefer, SCOH-000271: 1/18/17 e-mail from Military Aide 3 to Executive Assistant, OVP National Security Affairs staff, SCOH-000:302; 1/18/17 e-mail from OVP National Security Affairs staffer to National Security Affairs staff, SCOH-000272; 1/19/17 e-mails amongst OVP National Security Affairs staff, SCOH-000263.  

> 659

7/7/17 Secret Service e-mail, USSS-0000523706: Secret Service Supervisor Tr. at 32; Secret Service Special Agent l 8/24/23 Tr. at 36. 

156 and agents generally had a staffer or protected person give them access to the 

home. 660 Mr. Biden split his time between the Virginia home, the Delaware home, 

and his recently purchased beach home in Rehoboth Beach, Delaware. 661 Dr. Biden 

stayed overnight at the Virginia home when she was teaching.G 62 

The Virginia home was frequented by family members, staff, and guests, not 

all of whom had a security clearance. A Secret Service agent lived intermittently in a

basement bedroom from about the summer of 2017 until the summer of 2018. though 

he was not working on Mr. Biden's security detail at the time.G 63 A former naval 

enlisted aide stayed there from about January 2019 until July '.Wl9.GGl Family 

members and guests also visited occasionally. 6 G,s 

C.  In January 2017, after the end of his vice presidency, Mr. Biden found classified documents at his Virginia home and returned them 

Soon after leaving the vice presidency, Mr. Eiden apparently recognized that 

the Virginia home was not a secure location for the storage of classified material. When interviewed, Mr. Eiden's personal aide recalled that during the first week after the end of the administration-several weeks before Mr. Eiden told Zwonitzer he "just found all the classified stuff downstairs"-Mr. Biden discovered classified material at  

> 660

1/15/17 e-mail from Secret Service agent to personal aide, SCOH-000223; Secret Service Special Agent 2 Tr. at 79; Virginia house manager Tr. at 15-18; NEA 1 Tr. at 86-87; Dr. Biden Staffer 1 Tr. at 32.  

> 661

See, e.g., NEA 1 Tr. at 92; Secret Service Special Agent 1 8/24/23 Tr. at 26, 34, 36; Zwonitzer 7/31/23 Tr. at 146-47; Ricchetti Tr. at 140; Personal Aide 3 3/28/23 Tr. at 144, 17 4. 6/8/17 Schedule, NARA_SCAN_00000300 ("Close on the Beach House"); FBI Serial 3.  

> 662

NEA 1 Tr. at 66.  

> 663

Secret Service Special Agent 1 8/24/23 Tr. at 31-32.  

> G64

NEA l Tr. at 65-66.  

> 665

Id. at 66-68; Dr. Biden Personal Aide Tr. at 78-79; Zwonitzer 7/31/23 Tr. at 144-46. 

157 the Virginia home and directed the aide to return it to the White House_GGG According to the aide, he was standing outside the Virginia home when Mr. Biden approached him and handed him a "slim binder[]" with a classified coversheet. 667 Mr. Biden said something like, "I just found this. Can you make sure it gets back to the \iVhite House?" 668 The aide surmised that the binder contained materials relating to "foreign leader calls" because Mr. Bi den participated in many such calls in the last days of the administration. GG9 

The aide believed he notified the director of programs for the Office of the Vice President's National Security Affairs team, who had stayed on into the next administration. G,o The aide believed he then gave the classified binder to a Secret Service agent at the Virginia home, who brought it to the Naval Observatory, where a military aide delivered it to Vice President Pence's national security staff at the White House. 671 \Ve reviewed available phone records and interviewed several people serving at the time in the White House, the Secret Service, and the Naval  

> 666

Personal Aide 3 3/28/23 Tr. at 197-212; Personal Aide 3 10/4/23 Tr. at 58 (describing timing of incident as "a week or roughly a week after the Inauguration.")  

> 667

Personal Aide 3 3/28/23 Tr. at 197-99. The aide did not believe it was one of the "typical" classified coversheets with red, orange, or yellow classification markings; rather, he believed it had the "vice presidential seal" and "some type of classified marking on it." Id. at 198-99.  

> 668

Id. at 199-200; see also id. at 197. 669 Id. at 204, 211-12. The aide did not believe the binder was one of the Vice President's "traditional briefing book[s]" from his National Security Affairs team. Id. at 199.  

> 670

Id. at 201-04. Initially, the aide stated it was possible that he notified a military aide instead. Id. at 201. When re-interviewed, however. the aide stated that he believed he contacted the Director of Programs for National Security Affairs, and not a military aide. Personal Aide 3 10/4/2:3 Tr. at 58-59.   

> fi 71

Personal Aide 3 3/28/23 Tr. at 203-04, 208-10. 

158 Observatory, and none of them recalled this event.G 72 Mr. Eiden did not remember it 

either, although he stated in written responses to questions submitted by the special 

counsel: "If I had seen any marked classified documents in my home or office between 

the time when I was serving as Vice President and President, I would have 

immediately returned them to the U.S. government.''G,: 3 During his interview, he also 

stated that ifhe found classified documents, "I would have gotten rid of them. I would 

have gotten them back to their source .... I had no purpose for them, and I think it 

would be inappropriate for me to keep clearly classified documents." 674 

D.  Move out of Virginia home to Delaware in 2019 

On July 18, 2019, private movers packed and moved the Bidens' belongings 

from the Virginia home to the Delaware home, under a staffer's supervision. 675 Mr. 

Biden was not present for the packing or move, as he was traveling for his 

presidential campaign.G 7G  

> G,:2

Director of Programs Tr. at 156-57, 180 (stating that the incident did "not sound familiar"); Secret Service Supervisor Tr. at 29-30 (stating he was unaware of Secret Service agents being given classified information found at the Virginia Residence); Military Aide 1Tr. at 32-37; Military Aide 2 Tr. at 13-14; Military Aide 3 Tr. at 82-83; Military Aide 8 Tr. at 55-56.  

> 67 :3

Eiden 10/9/23 Tr. at 7-8, 39-40; President Joseph R. Eiden, Jr.'s Responses to Written Questions Submitted by the Special Counsel, Dec. 1, 2023, at 1. Mr. Eiden caveated his response in his interview by adding that "notes in my book, they're my notes and they're my property, but that document is not my property." Biden 10/9/23 Tr. at 42.  

> 674

Eiden 10/9/23 Tr. at 41.  

> 675

Moving company invoice, SCOH-00027 4 (indicating a pack date of 7/16/19, a load date of 7/17/19, and move date of 7/18/19 from Virginia home to Delaware home); Dr. Biden Staffer 1 Tr. at 61-64.  

> 676

CITY NEWS SERVICE, Joe Eiden visits Crenshaw-district soul food restaurant, hits Trump on 'go back' rhetoric, LOS ANGELES DAILY NEWS (July 19, 2019), 

https://www.dailynews.com/2019/07/19/joe-biden-visits-crenshaw-district-soul-food 

restaurant-hits-trump-on-go-back-rhetoric/ (last visited Jan. 31, 2024) (Eiden returned Thursday [Friday, July 19, 2019)] to Southern California to raise money for his Democratic 

159 Our investigation focused on a wooden. two-drawer file cabinet that moved 

from the Virginia home to the Delaware home, because marked classified documents 

were later found inside the file cabinet in the Delaware home, and because of the 

possibility that the classified Afghanistan documents later found in the Delaware 

garage were at one time stored in the file cabinet.  G"i7 

In the Virginia home. the file cabinet held files and was located near Mr. 

Biden's green-top desk in his basement office. 678 In July 2019. the file cabinet moved 

from the Virginia home to the Delaware home.G 79 Mr. Eiden said in his interview he 

believed he bought the cabinet for the Virginia home, but was unsure.G 80 \Ve were 

otherwise unable to determine where the cabinet originated, although photographs 

and records suggest it did not come from the Naval Observatory, and it likely came 

from the Delaware home or was bought for the V"irginia home.G 81 Regardless. Mr. 

presidential bid[.]"); Heidi Przybyla, Eiden 's plan for rural America is the latest Democratic outreach to Trump cou.ntry, NBC NEWS (July 18, 2019), 

https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2020-election/biden-s-plan-rural-america-latest 

democratic-outreach-trump-country-nl03l441 (last visited ,Jan. 31, 2024); Alexandra Jaffe, 

Biden plan seel-cs to boost rural America through inc·estments, AP NEWS ONLINE, (July 16, 2019),  https://apnews.com/united-states-presidential-election -

54b68dl99fbd46158735b87f8al518al (last visited Jan. 30, 2024) ("We have to ensure we bring along everyone,' the former vice president said in Manning, an Iowa town of about 1,500 residents.").  

> 67 7

FBI Serials 43, 44.  

> 6~8

Biden 10/8/23 Tr. at 78-79; Personal Aide 3 10/4/23 Tr. at 43-44.  

> 679

Personal Aide 3 10/4/23 Tr. at 43-44 ("green hanging files"). The desk did not move to Delaware. See, e.g., SCOH-000274; August 2019 Photographs of Virginia home, SCOH -

000741; SCOH-000742; SCOH-000743; SCOH-000744; SCOH-000745; SCOH-000746.   

> 5so

Eiden 10/8/23 Tr. at 43, 72.  

> G81

We identified several other sources of furniture and deliveries of items to the Virginia home between January and April 2017. However, none of those deliveries appear to have included the file cabinet. 2/14/17 e-mail from Mr. Biden's Personal Aide to Secret Service, USSS-0000523734; 1/12/17 e-mail from Secret Service agent to Dr. Biden's personal aide, SCOH-000220; 1/13/17 e-mail between Secret Service agents, USSS-0000527855; 

160 Eiden told us the file cabinet contained his own files and no one else's, and his 

personal aide recalled filing papers for Mr. Eiden in both that cabinet and his green 

top desk when those items of furniture were in the Virginia home. 682 

The staffer present for the move out of the Virginia home recalled that furniture such as the cabinet was plastic-wrapped and moved with contents inside, rather than being emptied before moving. 683 No one we interviewed recalled emptying the cabinet and packing its contents for the move to Delaware. 684 

In January 2023, FBI agents recovered two marked classified documents from a notebook found in the same file cabinet in the basement den of Mr. Biden's Delaware home. 685 Both documents were dated from 2013, and one related to American troop levels in Afghanistan, while the other related to Iraq. 686 

February 2017 Secret Service Final Survey Report, USSS-0000523800; March 2017 Secret Service e-mails, USSS-0000313361, USSS-0000310321.  

> 682

Eiden 10/8/23 Tr. at 79 ("[T]hey were all my files, I believe, or at least under my control .... [I]t wasn't like somebody filed their papers in my file cabinet."); Personal Aide 3 10/4/23 Tr. at 11-14, 43-44.  

> 683

Dr. Eiden Staffer 1 Tr. at 62, 66-67, 70-72.   

> 684 Id.;

7/15/09 text messages between Dr. Eiden Staffer 1 and Personal Aide 3, SCOH -

000380; Personal Aide 3 10/4/23 Tr. at 54-56.  

> 685

FBI Serials 44 1A56, 682.  

> 686

FBI Serial 683 lA 772 C 1, C2, C3, C4. 

161 File cabinet in Virginia home's basement office 

File cabinet in Virginia home's basement  (March 8, 2018) 688 

office (Sept. 21, 2017)68, 

File cabinet in Delaware home's basement den (Jan. 12, 2023) 689  

> 681

FBI Serial 89 1A92; 9/21/17 photograph taken in Virginia home, SCOH-000321.  

> 688

SCOH-000767; FBI Serial 696 IA 786.  

> 689

1/12/23 photograph taken in Delaware home, FBI Serial 44 1A56 

202301112 _ DSC _0005. 

162 II.  EVIDENCE THAT MR. BIDEN POSSESSED THE CLASSIFIED AFGHANISTAN DOCUMENTS IN THE VIRGINIA HOME 

Some evidence suggests the Afghanistan documents were stored in the basement of the Virginia home from 2017 to 2019, moved in July 2019 to the Delaware home, and, at some point either before or after the move, transferred to the garage box, where they were finally found in the Delaware garage in December 2022. But we cannot rule out other explanations, including the possibility that the classified Afghanistan documents were left somewhere in Mr. Biden's Delaware home while he was vice president and forgotten there, until someone put them in the garage box after the 2019 move from the Virginia home to the Delaware home without realizing the documents contained classified information. 

A.  The dates of documents in the garage box suggest they were in the Virginia home 

There are clues in the files themselves that suggest the contents of the garage box were moved from Virginia to Delaware. The garage box containing the Afghanistan documents also contained other documents with dates that correspond to dates when Mr. Biden's schedule shows him present at the Virginia home in and around February 2017 and afterward. The coinciding dates suggest that those documents were at the Virginia home with him during that period. 690  

> 69

# °FBI Serials 304 1A340, 179, FBI-00001343 (Schedules); 1B004-SHORT TERMISM 2-3-17-000001; 1B004-PLAN FOR YOUR FUTURE VANGUARD-000001; 1B004-MARK Z 2-

16-17-000001. The garage box also included Biden's speeches, speaking engagement offers, and financial documents dated between March 2017 and March 2019. 1B004-2016 CAMPAIGN SPEECHES_LABOR-000017; 1B004-CAA- SPEECHES-000003; 1B004 -

INCOME AND EXPENSES 2016-000005-21; 1B004 -

GREEN FOLDER WITH DOCUMENTS-000002-28. 

163 B.  The garage box containing marked classified Afghanistan documents came from the move out of the Virginia home Based on photographs we obtained, it is likely the garage box that was later found to contain the Afghanistan documents came to the Delaware home during the July 2019 move from Virginia to Delaware. About a month after the move from Virginia to Delaware, in late August 2019, a photo shows what appears to be the same box as the garage box containing the Afghanistan documents, inside the Delaware home in Mr. Biden's main-floor office, 

immediately next to his desk.  691 The box is not seen in photographs of that space next to his desk from June 2019 (one month before the move). 692 Two months after the August 2019 photo of the box, in October 2019, another photo shows what appears to be the same box in the same place in Mr. Biden's office.G 93 Based on its size and markings, the box next to Mr. Biden's desk in the August and October 2019 photos 

appears to be of the same type as the boxes that moved from the Virginia home to the Delaware home in late July 2019.fiB+                                  

> 591 8/26/19 photograph, SCOH-000576; FBI Serial 625 1A720. 692 7/3/19 photos, SCOH-00077 4and SCOH-000775 693 SCOH-000768. Our conclusion is based on close inspection of the box's distinctive
> markings and packing tape. 69~ 7/20/2019 photo. SCOH-000769; FBI Serial 679 1A768.

164 Box next to desk in Delaware home's office Box next to desk in Delaware home's of /ice (Aug. 2019) 695  (Oct. 2019) 696 

The boxes shown above and the timing of the move suggest that the box next 

to Mr. Biden's desk in De laware came from the Virginia home. 

Upon close inspection of th e photographs and the gar age box itself re cover ed by the FBI, we conclude that the box shown above next to Mr. Bi.den's Delaware office desk in 20 19 is the same as the garag e box containing the Afghanistan docume nts found in Mr. Bid en's Del aware garage in 2022. The words "Ca binet " and "Desk file" are hand written on the top flaps of the recovered garage box. A portion of the "Desk file" handwriting ca n be seen on the box in the above photos from 2019 in Mr. Biden's Delaware office (magnified below):  

> 69 ;;

8/26/19 photo graph , SCOH-000576; FBI Serial 625 1A720. Based on our review of the phot ogra phs, this cabin et pictured behind Mr. Biden 's desk is not the same file cabin et from the basement office of the Virginia. home.  

> 696

SCO H-000768. 

165 __.......                            

> Top left: zoomed-in photograph of box frnm Augu.st 201 fJ'i~• Top right: zoomed-in photograph of box frnm October 2019" 98
> Bottom: photog,·aph of garage box containing marlied Afghanistan documents (Jan. 22, 2024) 099

One possibility is that the classified Afghanistan documents were stored in the 

Virginia home, then placed in the box and moved to the Delaware home, where the 

box (with the Afghanistan documents inside) sat in Mr. Biden's office for several 

months between August and October 2019. But we cannot rule out other possibilities.  

> 6~•

8/26/19 photograph, SCOH-000576; FBI Serial 625 1A720.  

> 69 8

SCOH-000768; FBI Serial 625 IA270.  

> 699

1/22/24 photograph, GarageBox-001; Evidence item 1 TI87 

166 The August and October 2019 photographs of Mr. Bi den's Delaware office desk 

do not show the box's contents. When the garage box was recovered by the FBI in 

December 2022, it contained material dated between December 2019 and September 

2020, after Mr. Eiden moved out of the Virginia home and when he was living in the 

Delaware home.  700 This means that at least some of the box's contents were added 

after the box was stored in Mr. Biden's Delaware home office in 2019. It is also 

possible that, sometime after the box was photographed in Mr. Biden's Delaware 

office in October 2019, someone put the classified Afghanistan documents into this 

box from elsewhere in the Delaware home, reusing the box for this purpose. One 

witness specifically recalled Mr. Eiden reusing old boxes, even when they were 

damaged. 701 In any case, the box containing the Afghanistan documents was 

eventually moved out of Mr. Biden·s Delaware home office to the Delaware garage, 

where it was found in 2022. 

We interviewed dozens of witnesses about the box and its contents, including Mr. Eiden. All denied knowing that the classified Afghanistan documents were in the box, and all denied knowing when or how the box and its contents arrived in the garage, or who put them there. In the intervening years, boxes, furniture, the Corvette, and miscellaneous items were repeatedly moved in, out, and around the                                                      

> 700 IB004-BOOK 2-000001177 (binder containing memos, schedules, and speeches dated between December 2019 and March 2020); 1B004-LOOSE DOCUMENTS AND PHOTO-000001-13; 1B004-CARDS-REMARKS AND NOTES-000001-73 (campaign speeches, schedules, and an event memo for Justice Ginsburg's memorial service dated between August 2019 to September 2020); Personal Aide 4 Tr. at 86-89. Secret Service emails show Mr. Biden also visited his beach house.

See, e.g., 6/13/20 e-mail between Secret Service agents, USSS-0000007733.      

> io1 NEA 1Tr. at 123.

167 garage. 702 While staffers-and even Mr. Eiden-recalled being in the garage and seeing boxes at various points, no one recognized the box containing marked classified documents or recalled moving boxes within the Delaware home to the garage.7°· 3

C.  Investigation of the file cabinet that was moved from Virginia to Delaware was inconclusive We also examined connections between the contents of the garage box and the file cabinet that moved from Virginia to Delaware, to investigate the possibility the 

Afghanistan files were at one time stored in the file cabinet. No witnesses recalled 

removing files from the cabinet.  10•1 Ultimately. the investigation was inconclusive. 

## * * *

Independent of the February 2017 Zwonitzer recording, the dates of the files in the garage box and the way the box was labeled suggest that some or all the files in the garage box, including the classified Afghanistan documents, may have been moved from the Virginia home to the Delaware home in 2019, before they were found in a box in the Delaware garage in 2022. But there are alternative explanations for how the Afghanistan documents got into the garage box that are also consistent with the evidence described above. As discussed in Chapter Eleven, we find the evidence  

> 702

1/20/23 FBI photographs of garage, 20230120_JLH_0027 and 20230120_,JLH_00l 8; 12/21/22 FBI photograph, 2022122l_ERT_0013; April 2018 through December 2022 Mechanic records, SCOH-000568; Photograph of Delaware residence, SCOH-000575; FBI Serial 625 li\720; Secret Service photographs of Delaware home, USSS-0000366970, USSS -

0000262676: Campaign photographs SCOH-000770. SCOH-000771, SCOH-000772. SCOH -

000773.     

> 703 See, e.g ..

Personal Aide 4 Tr. at 112-113; Director of Oval Office Operations Tr. at 64-70: Dr. Eiden Personal Aide Tr. at 113-118.  

> 701

NE.A l Tr. at 111-12; Personal Aide 4 Tr. at 147-48 (doesn't remember going through the cabinet); Director of Oval Office Operations Tr. at 115 ("I have never accessed that, no.") 

168 as a whole insufficient to meet the government's burden of proving that Mr. Biden willfully retained the Afghanistan documents in the Virginia home in 2017. 

169 CHAPTER EIGHT               

> MR. BIDEN'S FIRST BOOK, PROMISES TO KEEP, AND THE CLASSIFIED SENATE DOCUMENTS IN THE DELAWARE GARAGE

The Afghanistan documents were not the only marked classified documents in Mr. Biden's garage. FBI agents also found boxes containing organized files related to several international trips Mr. Biden took as a young senator in the late 1970s. 705 Like the 2009 debate over the troop surge in Afghanistan, Mr. Eiden viewed these trips as seminal episodes in his public life. Indeed, in his 2007 memoir Promises to Keep: On Life and Politics. Mr. Eiden described these trips as historic and formative experiences that prepared him for the presidency. 706 

As explained below, some of the documents m these files were marked classified, though, because of the passage of time. we do not know whether Mr. Eidtm willfully retained the classified documents or consulted them when writing the book.   

> I. IN

2023, THE FBI FOUND FILES RELATED TO THE TRIPS CHRONICLED IN        

> PROMISES TO KEEP IN MR. BIDEN'S DELAWARE GARAGE

During the January 2023 search of Mr. Eiden's Delaware garage, FBI agents recovered boxes labeled "International Travel 1973-1979" and "Foreign Travel." 707 Agents found these boxes in a storage closet, in the same garage where they found the box containing the classified Afghanistan documents, as shown below. 708  

> 7

o, Evidence items 1B17. 1B18. 706 Joseph R. Eiden, PROMISES TO KEEP: ON LIFE A~D POLITICS (Random House Trade 

Paperback ed. 2008). 

707 Evidence items 1B17, 1B18. 708 FBI Serials :35. 77 IA86. 

170 Garage box and storage closet in Mr. Biden's Def aware garage (Dec. 21, 2022) 709 

Interior of Mr. Biden's garage storage closet containing Senate documents (Jan. 20, 2023)' 10  

> 709

2022122l_ERT_0013; FBI Serial 35 1A42. 710 20230120_FBI_0054; 20230120_FBI_0058; FBI Serial 35 1A42. 

171 Like the box containing the classified Afghanistan documents, these boxes contained files and documents related to Mr. Biden's foreign policy experience and expertise-namely, organized files documenting his official foreign travel, including 

trips to the Soviet Union, West Germany, and Yugoslavia that he wrote about in his 

first book.  711 The files contained handwritten notes, briefing materials, and travel itineraries related to the trips. 1 l2 

II.  PROMISES TO KEEP 

In 2007, Mr. Eiden published a memoir titled Promises to Keep: On Life and 

Politics. As with his later book, Mr. Biden hired Zwonitzer as a ghostwriter. 713 

\Vritten in anticipation of Mr. Eiden's run for president in 2008, Promises to Keep 

covered his life and political career from his childhood through his final years in the 

Senate. 

In Promises to Keep, Mr. Eiden discussed several international trips he took as a young senator in the late 1970s, including a congressional delegation to the Soviet 

Union where he met with the Soviet Premier. a trip to West Germany where he met with the Chancellor, and a trip to Yugoslavia, where he represented the United States at the state funeral of a Yugoslavian leader. 711 

According to Zwonitzer, he and Mr. Eiden included these anecdotes to show how then-Senator Eiden gained experience in foreign policy "not just learning by 

being a staff member but by literally sitting across the table from people like [the                           

> 111 Biden, PR0:\,1TSES TO KEEP 132, 143, 248; Evidence items 1B4, 1B17, 1B18. 712 Evidence items 1B17, 1B18. 713 Biden, PROMISES TO KEEP 366; Zwonitzer 7/31/23 Tr. at 31-35. 714 Biden, PROMISES TO KEEP 132, 142-43, 2,18-52.

172 Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs]."  715 During a recorded interview with Zwonitzer, 

Mr. Biden explained that during these international trips, he learned the importance of foreign policy experience and that "[i]t matters what kind of personal relationships and rapport you can establish with foreign leaders." 716 l\h. Eiden said that when he later considered a presidential run, he "was never worried ... whether I could sit across [from] [Soviet President Leonid] Brezhnev or sit across from [British Prime 

Minister Margaret] Thatcher ... or [that I would] sit there and be intimidated." 717 

Promises to Keep put these anecdotes in a similar context. In discussing his 

decision to run for president in 1988, for example, Mr. Biden wrote that despite his relative youth, he felt he "measured up" to the other candidates in part due to his 

foreign policy experience: 

I was just forty-two years old, but after a decade on the Senate Foreign 

Relations Committee and nearly that long on the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, I knew the world and America's place in it in a way few politicians did. My education in foreign affairs wasn't just the time spent in committee hearings but in traveling the world and meeting leaders. 118 

III.  FOREIGN TRIPS CHRONICLED IN PROMISES TO KEEP 

A.  Mr. Biden's 1979 trip to Yugoslavia 

One of the trips Mr. Eiden wrote about was his 1979 trip to Yugoslavia to represent the United States at the state funeral of a Yugoslavian political leader. Mr. 

Eiden described the trip as "a strange kind of awakening for me."  719 He made the trip  

> 715

Zwonitzer 7/31/23 Tr. at 46-47. 71 G 1978-race.doc at 18, Zwonitzer-00009492. 717 1988.doc at 10, Zwonitzer-00009499. 718 Eiden, PRO:'.VIISES TO KEEP 143. 719 Id. at 248. 

173 with Averell Harriman, one of America's most distinguished diplomats, who "adopted" Mr. Biden and served as his "own personal tutor." 720 During the trip, Mr. Biden and Harriman had a private meeting with longtime Yugoslavian president and World \Var II hero Josip Broz Tito. 721 Mr. Biden called the meeting "remarkable," an opportunity to be in the room with "the last two living men who remembered" the Yalta Conference at the end of \Vorld \Var II. 722 

B.  Mr. Biden's 1979 congressional delegation to the Soviet Union 

Elsewhere in the book, Mr. Biden wrote that he observed the benefits of direct 

engagement with foreign leaders during a congressional delegation he led to the 

Soviet Union in 1979. The purpose of the trip was to discuss arms control and the 

SALT II strategic nuclear arms limitations agreement. 723 In Promises to Keep, Mr. Biden described how he "gained the grudging respect" of his Russian counterpart 

during a frank and sometimes tense face-to-face meeting with the Soviet Premier, where Mr. Biden also met President Leonid Brezhnev. 724 

Mr. Biden also sought to put the trip in the larger context of his foreign policy expertise and political ambitions. As the 1988 presidential election approached, Mr. 

Biden explained, "'it was becoming clear that the new Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, was looking for a partner to write the end to the Cold \Var. And there                

> 720 Biden, PROMISES TO KEEP 248. 721 Id. at 248, 250-52. 722 Id. at 251.
> 723 Id. at 143-45.
> 724 Id.

174 wasn 't anybody lining up to run for the nominati on I thought would be a better 

partner tha n m e."7 25 

IV.  THE FILE S RELAT ED TO THE TRIPS CHRONICLED IN PROMISES TO KEEP IN MR. BIDEN'S DELAWARE GARAGE CONTAL.'l'ED MARKED CLASSIFIED DOCUMENTS 

One of the boxes con taining organized files about t he trips 1\.fr. Biden wrote a bout in Promises to Keep contained marked classified doc uments from th e late 1970s. 72 G The box labeled "International Travel 1973-1979" contained materials from l\fr. Bide n's trips to As ia a nd Eu1·ope, including trip s to Yugos lavia and th e Soviet Union. 727  The box contain ed rou ghly a doz en mark ed classified docum en ts that are curren t ly classifi ed at th e Secret l eve l. •28         

> "International T,-avel" box containing marked classified docu.ments 729
> 726

Biden, PROMISES TO KE EP 146.   

> •26

Evidence item 1Bl8 . 

> 727

Id.  

> 72 8

Jd.; Recove red do cu ments Dll-19. , 29  20211221_ ERT _0 l02; FBI Serial 35 1A42. 

175 For example, the "International Travel 1973-1979" box contained files related 

to the congressional delegation that Mr. Eiden led to the Soviet Union in 1979. 730 Inside the files were more than a dozen folders devoted to aspects of the trip, including Mr. Biden's travel itinerary, handwritten notes. letters, and briefing material. 731 

The files also contained documents marked as classified. For example, a folder labeled "Senator Eiden'· stored several documents, including background information about Soviet officials. 732 These documents were marked "CONFIDENTIAL" and 

"CONFIDENTIAL ~OFORN [not releasable to foreign nationals].·',: 3:-i The intelligence community has determined that these documents are currently classified at the Secret leveu:i-i 

The box also contained a file related to Mr. Biden's 1979 trip to  Yugoslavia. 71  iA note on the front page indicates that the file consists of a "reproduction of the contents of [Mr. Biden's] Yugoslavia file." 736 The file contained documents marked "Classified" and "Confidential" as well as a memo marked "SECRET." 737 The  

> 7 3u

Evidence item 1B18.  

> 731

Id.  

> 732

Id.; Recovered documents Dll-Dl9.  

> 73 3

Recovered documents Dl l-Dl9.  

> 731

FBI Serial 676; Recovered documents D 11-D 19. The reason for the change is that the relevant intelligence agency no longer uses the designation "Confidential." Information that was previously classified as "Confidential" is now classified as "Secret."   

> ~35

Recovered documents D04-D06, folder labeled "Yugoslavia."  

> ,J(i

Evidence item 1B18.    

> 7i7

Recovered documents D04-D06, folder labeled "Yugoslavia." 

176 intelligence community has determined that these documents are classified at the 

Secret level. 7 :Js   

> ***

We were limited in our ability to investigate these documents because of the significant passage of time since their creation. Although we cannot prove that Mr. Eiden retained these classified documents willfully or used them in writing Prmnises to Keep, he did write about the foreign trips that were the subject of the documents. And like the classified Afghanistan documents, the classified files in Mr. Biden's garage relating to the trips discussed in Prornises To Keep were part of a larger set of materials in Mr. Biden's home chronicling his experiences and achievements, 

particularly in foreign policy.    

> 738 FBI Serial 676.

177 CHAPTER NINE  

> LEGAL STANDARDS

Our investigation focused on the ''possible unauthorized removal and retention of classified documents or other records discovered at the" Penn Eiden Center, the 

University of Delaware,  and Mr.  Biden's personal residences.  7:-lD The criminal statutory provision that best fits the facts of our investigation is 18 U.S.C. § 793(e), a section of the Espionage Act that proscribes unauthorized retention and disclosure of national defense information. The law governing that crime is discussed below in sections I and II. We discuss other criminal prohibitions, and why they do not apply, in section III.       

> I. UNAUTHORIZED RETENTION OF NATIONAL DEFENSE INFORMATION

To prove unauthorized retention of national defense information under 18 U.S.C. § 793(e) the government must show: (1) the defendant had unauthorized possession of a document, writing, or note; (2) the document, writing, or note related to the national defense; and (3) the defendant willfully retained the document. writing, or note and failed to deliver it to an employee or officer entitled to receive 

it.  1 !0  

> 739

Office of the Attorney General, Order No. 5588-2023, Appointment of Robert K. Hur as Special Counsel (January 12, 2023).  

> 140

See United States c. Rosen, 445 F. Supp. 2d 602, 623-26 (E.D. Va. 2006), am.ended, 

Order, No. l:05-cr-225, 2006 WL 5049154 (E.D. Va. Aug. 16, 2006); Court's Instruction to the Jury at 19, United States u. Brar.en, No. 21-cr-348 (M.D. Fla. Dec. 12, 2022), ECF No. 304; Government's Proposed Jury Instructions at 18, United States v. Sterling, No. 1: 10-cr-485 

(E.D.  Va. Oct. 11, 2011), ECF No. 258; Final Jury Instructions at 44, United States v. Ford, 

No. 05-cr-235 (D. Md.). 

178 A.  Unauthorized possession 

The Espionage Act does not define "unauthorized possession," but courts in 

recent decades have construed that language and a related phrase in the same statute 

("entitled to receive") by referencing the executive order governing the handling of 

classified information in effect at the time of the conduct.' n As explained in Chapter 

One, under that executive order a private citizen's access to classified information is 

authorized only if he or she receives a favorable eligibility determination, signs an 

approved non-disclosure agreement, and has a need to know the information or 

obtains a formal waiver of that requirement. 712 Classified information must also be 

kept in approved and secure storage containers.  743 

By implication from the exception in § 4.4 of the executive order, the 

restrictions on access to classified information in the order appear to govern a former  

> 7

n United States L'. Morison, 844 F.2d 1057. 1075 (4th Cir. 1988) (construing governing executive order and holding, "the words 'entitled to receive· in [18 U.S.C. § 793(d) and (e)l can be limited and clarified by the Classification Regulations .... "); Rosen, 445 F. Supp. 2d at 622 ("the rule regulating who is 'entitled to receive' is the Executive Order setting forth auniform classification system for national security information"); see also United States L'. 

Hung, 629 F.2d 908,919 n.10 (4th Cir. 1980) ("The trial judge provided adequate content for ['unauthorized possession'] by advising the jury that a person would have authorized possession if he had an appropriate security clearance and ifhe gained access to the document because it was necessary to the performance of his official duties."). Jury instructions in Espionage Act cases have generally mirrored the executive order's requirements for access to classified information by defining unauthorized possession to mean that the possessor lacks a security clearance, lacks a need to know, or removes the information from its proper storage location. See Final ,Jury Instructions at 45, Ford, No. 05-cr-235; Government's Proposed ,Jury Instructions at 10, Sterling, No. 1: 10-cr-485, ECF No. 258; Transcript of Jury Instructions at 194, United States c. Morison ("An individual has unauthorized possession of documents and writings when he possesses those under circumstances or in a location which is contrary to law or regulation for the conditions of his employment.").  

> 712

Executive Order 13526 §§ 4. l(a), 4.4.  

> 743

Id. § 4. l(g); see 32 C.F.R. §§ 2001.43(b)(l) and (2), 2001.53; Office of the Director of National Intelligence, Intelligence Community Directive 705. 

179 vice president, which Mr. Eiden was between January 2017 and January 2021. 7 i 4

Under the executive order's provisions, a former vice president (or former president) may receive a waiver of the need-to-know requirement, but only if a senior official of the agency that originated the classified information "determines in writing that access is consistent with the interest of national security" and "'takes appropriate 

steps to protect classified information from unauthorized disclosure or compromise, and ensures that the information is safeguarded in a manner consistent with this 

For all of the classified materials recovered during this investigation, after the vice presidency, Mr. Eiden did not receive a written waiver of the need-to-know 

requirement, and no agency official made the findings required by the executive 

order. Therefore, Mr. Eide n's possession of those materials in unsecured spaces in his home after his vice presidency was unauthorized within the meaning of the 

Espionage Act. 7 -16 

The \Vhite House Counsel's Office and Mr. Eiden's personal attorneys have 

argued to us that, despite these requirements, the Presidential Records Act 

authorizes a former president or vice president to keep classified materials in locations that are not approved for storage of classified information at home, as long as those materials are not defined as presidential records under the Act. Counsel note       

> 744 Executive Order 13526 §,-i.4.
> 715

Id.§§ 4.1, 4.4; Trump t'. United States, No. 22-13005, 2022 WL 4366684, at *8.    

> 7'" 6

See Trump c·. United States, .No. 22-13005, 2022 WL 4366684, at *8; Superseding Indictment ~:~r 18-19, United States v. Trump, et al., No. 2:3-cr-80101 (S.D. Fla. July 27, 2023), 

ECF No. 85. 

180 that the Presidential Records Act excludes personal records (which can include 

diaries) from government ownership and preexisting White House guidance has 

interpreted the Act to exclude rough meeting notes from its definition of records. 

Pointing to Mr. Reagan's treatment of his diaries containing Top Secret/Sensitive 

Compartmented Information (as discussed in Chapter Ten), counsel contend that a

former president or vice president may lawfully retain written national defense 

information provided it is not a presidential record under the Act and that Mr. Biden's 

notebooks, like Mr. Reagan's diaries, are not presidential records. 

The approach that the Department and courts have taken in Espionage Act cases after passage of the Presidential Records Act cuts against this view. 747 Courts and the Department have determined whether possession of national defense information is authorized principally based on the terms of the executive order. The order specifically addresses and is the primary source of law governing access to such information, in contrast with the Presidential Records Act, which mentions classified material in just one irrelevant provision.7 18 The executive order's restrictions on access to classified information also appear to apply to former presidents and vice 

presidents.  749 We therefore decline to adopt the argument that compliance with the  

> 747

E.g., Trump u. United States, No. 22-13005, 2022 WL 4366684, at *8; Superseding  

> Indictment

## ~,r 18-19, United States v. Trump, No. 23-cr-80101, ECF No. 85. ,is See 44 U.S.C. § 2204(a)(l)(A). 719 See nn. 7 44-46 above. 

181 Presidential Records Act authorizes former presidents and vice presidents to retain 

national defense information in unsecured and unapproved locations. 750 

As explained in Chapters Ten, Twelve, and Thirteen, we do consider the historical practices of former presidents and vice presidents-including Mr. Reagan's treatment of his diaries-when evaluating whether Mr. Eiden acted willfully and when weighing the factors set forth in the Principles of Federal Prosecution. 

B.  Related to the national defense 

The Espionage Act, including Section 793(e), is concerned with "information relating to the national defense," which is distinct from but related to the term "classified information.'' 751 "Classified information" is defined by the executive order as information whose "unauthorized disclosure could reasonably be expected to cause identifiable or describable damage to the national security[.]" 752 Information relating to the national defense (often referred to as "national defense information") is not defined in the Espionage Act and so its meaning has been construed by courts. As the Supreme Court held in the seminal case Gorin v. United States, "'national defense" is a "generic concept of broad connotations, referring to military and naval  

> 760

Additionally, the Presidential Records Act makes no mention of the relevant criminal statutes and there is no conflict between the Act and those criminal laws. See Carcieri u. Salazar, 555 U.S. 379, 395 (2009) ("Absent a clearly expressed congressional intention, an implied repeal will only be found where provisions in two statutes are in irreconcilable conflict, or where the latter Act covers the whole subject of the earlier one and is clearly intended as a substitute.") (cleaned up).  

> 751

Compare 18 U.S.C. § 793 (concerning information "relating to the national defense"). 1rith 18 U.S.C. § 1924 (concerning "classified information of the United States," which is statutorily defined as "information originated, owned, or possessed by the United States Government concerning the national defense or foreign relations of the United States that has been determined pursuant to law or Executive order to require protection against unauthorized disclosure in the interests of national security.'').   

> 7'~

Executive Order 13526 §§ 1.2, 1.4, 6. l(i). 

182 establishments and the related activities of national preparedness." 7" 53 It includes "all 

matters directly and reasonably connected with the defense of our nation against its 

enemies." 754 

Information relating to the national defense must be "closely held" and not 

lawfully "made public" or "available to the general public." 755 But "[t]he mere fact that 

similar but unofficial information is publicly available does not automatically remove 

information in closely-held documents from the realm of 'national defense' 

information." 7'36 

In determining whether information relates to the national defense under the 

Espionage Act, the fact that the information is classified is neither sufficient nor 

necessary, but it is "highly probative'" evidence.  757   

> 7,-;i

Gorin L'. United States, 312 U.S. 19, 28 (1941).  

> ~54

Id. at 30; see United States l'. Drwnmond, 354 F.2d 132, 151-52 (2d. Cir. 1965) 

(applying Gorin definition to 18 U.S.C. § 794 and finding jury instructions "more than ample" 

where district court instructed jury to consider documents as well as testimony about their 

content and significance to determine whether standard was met).  

> 755

Morison, 844 F.2d at 1071-72; see also Hung, 629 F.2d at 918 n.9 (publicly available 

information not national defense information under the Espionage Act); United States v. 

Dedeyan, 548 F.2d 36, 39-40 (4th Cir. 1978) (affirming jury instruction for Section 793(£) 

stating information did not relate to the national defense if it was "made public [by the 

government and] ... is found in sources lawfully available to the general public" or if 

government "made no effort to guard such information").  

> 756

United States c. Squillacote, 221 F.3d 542, 579 (4th Cir. 2000).  

> 737

Rosen, 445 F. Supp. 2d at 623. Jury instructions follow this principle. E.g., Jury Charge at 22-23, United States u. Schulte, No. 17-cr-548 (S.D.N.Y. July 8, 2022), ECF No. 879 ("In determining whether material is 'closely held,' you may consider whether it has been classified by appropriate authorities and whether it remained classified on the date or dates pertinent ... I caution you that the mere fact that information is classified does not mean that the information qualifies as NDI."); Court's Instructions to the Jury at 20, Brown, No. 21-cr-348, ECF No. 304 (same); Government's Proposed Jury Instructions at 44, Sterling, No. l:10-cr-485, ECF No. 258 ("[Y]ou are to determine whether certain information in this case was national defense information. That is not the same as 'classified information.' However, you may consider the fact that information was classified in determining whether the 

183 C.  Willfully retains 

Finally, the government must prove that a defendant willfully retained the 

material and failed to deliver it to an officer or employee "entitled to receive" the 

information. The statute does not define who is "entitled to receive'' the information, 

so agam, courts have looked to the governing rules concerning the handling of 

classified materials, primarily the executive order. 758 Generally, those entitled to 

receive the information are people with the requisite security clearance and the need 

to know. 7•39 

Willfulness is a heightened mens rea, which as articulated by the Supreme 

Court in Bryan v. United States, requires proof "that the defendant acted with 

knowledge that his conduct was unlawful."  7 GO Under the Espionage Act, an act is 

willful when "it is done voluntarily and intentionally and with the specific intent to 

do something that the law forbids. That is to say, with a bad purpose either to disobey 

or to disregard the law." 7G1 \Vhile willfulness requires proving an intent to disobey 

information at issue was national defense information."); Final Jury Instructions at 46, Ford, 

No. 05-cr-235 ("In determining whether material is 'closely held,' you may consider whether it has been classified by appropriate authorities and whether it remained classified on the date or dates pertinent .... ").  

> 758

1\1orison, 844 F.2d at 1075 ("the words 'entitled to receive' in [18 U.S.C. § 793(d) and (e)] can be limited and clarified by the Classification Regulations .... ''); Rosen, 445 F. Supp. 2d at 622 ("the rule regulating who is 'entitled to receive· is the Executive Order setting forth a unifonn classification system for national security information").  

> 759

Rosen, 445 F. Supp. 2d at 622-23.  

> 760

Bryan t·. United States, 524 U.S. 184, 191-92 (1998); accord Ratzlaf L'. United States, 510 U.S. 135, 136-37 (1994); United States c·. Bursey, 416 F.3d 301, 308-09 (4th Cir. 

2005).  

> 761

Morison, 844 F.2d at 1071; accord Court's Instructions to the Jury at 22, Brou'lt, 

No. 21-cr-348, ECF No. 304; Government's Proposed Jury Instructions at 15, Sterling·, No. l:10-cr-485. ECF No. 258; Final Jury Instructions at 19, Ford, No. 05-cr-235. 

184 the law, courts have applied Bryan's standard of "simple willfulness" to Section 793(e) 

and rejected any need for the government to prove an intent to cause harm. 762 

Accordingly, to prove a violation of Section 793(e) we would need to show that Mr. Biden knowingly retained national defense information and failed to deliver it to an appropriate government official, and that he knew this conduct was unlawful. As discussed in more detail below, because of the interrelation between "national defense information" and "classified information," when evaluating a potential Section 793(e) charge, the Department considers whether the information the person possessed was classified and whether the person knew it was classified. 

II.  UNAUTHORIZED DISCLOSURE OF NATIONAL DEFENSE INFORMATION 

Section 793(e) also prohibits the willful communication, delivery, or transmission of national defense information to a person not entitled to receive it. The first two elements, unauthorized possession and relating to the national defense, are identical to those addressed above in sections I.A. and LB. The element of willful disclosure to a person not entitled to receive is addressed below.  

> 162

United States l'. Hitselberger, 991 F. Supp. 2d 101, 107-08 (D.D.C. Dec. 3, 2013) (applying Bryan's willfulness standard to Section 793(e) and explaining "the core of 'willful' misconduct is to act with the knowledge or intent to disregard the law, not an evil intent to injure the United States"); United States v. Drahe, 818 F. Supp. 2d 909, 918 (D. Md. 2011) (applying Bryan's willfulness standard to Section 793(e) and noting the definition is consistent with Fourth Circuit precedent predating Bryan); see also United States v. Kim, 

808 F. Supp. 2d 44, 54 (D.D.C. 2011) (applying Bryan's willfulness standard to Section 793(d)). 

185 A.  Willfully communicates, delivers, or transmits to a person not 

entitled to receive 

Just as with retention, disclosure under Section 793(e) requires that the defendant act willfully-that is, with the intent to do something the law forbids. ,G:l A

person is not entitled to receive national defense information if he or she lacks a need to know and an appropriate clearance as required by the executive  order. 7G 1

For an oral disclosure of information (as opposed to the disclosure of a classified document), the government must also prove that "the possessor has reason to believe [the information] could be used to the injury of the United States or to the advantage of any foreign nation.'',G 5 Accordingly, to establish that Mr. Eiden violated Section 793(e) when he read information from his notebooks to his ghostwriter, we would need to prove that he acted with an intent to violate the law and had reason to believe the information he disclosed could be used to harm the United States or benefit aforeign nation.  

> 763

Rosen, 445 F. Supp. 2d at 625-26 (applying willfulness standard to disclosure under Sections 793(d) and 793(e)).  

> 761

See nn.758-59 above; Chapter One.  

> 765

18 U.S.C. § 793(e); Rosen, 445 F. Supp. 2d at 625-26 (when disclosure involves intangible information government must prove this "additional and significant scienter requirement" that is analogous to bad faith, but this requirement does not apply in instances where the disclosure is through a tangible medium such as a document); accord Dral?e, 818 

F.  Supp. 2d at 917 ("Section 793(e) provides for different scienter requirements depending on the character of the national defense item or data that a defendant is charged with possessing. In cases like this one, involving documents, the defendant need only have acted vvillfully, as a defendant will more readily recognize a document relating to the national defense based on its content, markings or design than it would intangible or oral 'information' that may not share such attributes.''). 

186 III.  OTHER CRIMINAL PROVISIONS 

A.  Other Espionage Act provisions 

The other provisions of the Espionage Act do not fit the facts of this case. Subsections (a), (b), and (c) of Section 793 are facially inapplicable because at no point did we find evidence that Mr. Biden intended or had reason to believe the information would be used to injure the United States or to benefit a foreign nation, which is a 

requirement of those subsections.  766 Subsection (d) also does not apply, because it requires a failure to deliver materials on demand. and when asked to return any classified materials from his vice presidency, Mr. Biden consented to searches and 

returned all potentially classified materials that were discovered.  7G7 

Among other reasons, Section 793(£) does not fit because that subsection requires removal of national defense information from "its proper place of custody" 

by a person who has lawful possession. That is a difficult requirement to apply here because presidents and vice presidents are generally permitted to retain classified information at their residences while in office. Because Section 793(£) can only be violated when Mr. Eiden had lawful possession (i.e. when he was vice president) any removal of classified information would have occurred while Mr. Biden was still vice president, when that conduct was not proscribed by the executive order issued                                                        

> 766 18 U.S.C. §793(a) requires acting "for the purpose of obtaining information respecting the national defense with intent or reason to believe that the information is to be used to the injury of the United States, or to the advantage of any foreign nation." Subsections
> (b) and (c) incorporate this requirement by reference to "the purpose aforesaid."
> 767 18 U.S.C.

§ 793(d) criminalizes conduct where the defendant "fails to deliver [the national defense information] on demand to the officer or employee of the United States entitled to receive it." 

187 pursuant to the president's authority to control national security information. It is at 

least arguable that as vice president, Mr. Eiden could not have removed national 

defense information "from its proper place of custody," as the statute requires, 

because his home and other locations were proper places of custody during his time 

in office. In any case, interpreting Section 793(f) to apply to a sitting vice president's 

conduct in that context would raise significant separation of powers concerns. 768 

Where such concerns exist, the Supreme Court and the Department of Justice have 

declined to interpret statutes as applying to the presidenFG 9 or vice president 770 

absent clear statutory text.  

> 768

United States u. [/nz:ted States District Court, 407 U.S. 297, 310 (1972) (President "has the fundamental duty, under Art. II, § 1, of the Constitution, to 'preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the United States."'); Disclosure of Grand ,Jury Material to the Intelligence Com nwnity. 21 Op. O.L.C. 159, 172 (1997) ("The Constitution vests the President with responsibility over all matters v,rithin the executive branch that bear on national defense and foreign affairs, including the collection and dissemination of national security information.·•).  

> 769

See Franklin 1. Massachusetts, 505 U.S. 788, 800-01 (1992) (out of respect for separation of powers, "[w]e would require an express statement by Congress" before applying the Administrative Procedure Act to the president); The Constitutional Separation of Pou·ers Belu·een the President and Congress, 20 Op. O.L.C. 124, 178 (1996) ("plain statement rule" is rooted in principles of constitutional avoidance and separation of powers); Application of Consu.mer Credit Reporting Reform Act of 1996 to Presidential Nomination and Appointment Process, 21 Op. O.L.C. 214, 214 (1997) ("It is a well settled principle of law. applied frequently by both the Supreme Court and the executive branch, that statutes that do not expressly apply to the President must be construed as not applying to him if such application would involve a possible conflict with his constitutional prerogatives."); Application of 28 US.C. § 458 to Presidential Appointments of Federal ,fudges, 19 Op. O.L.C. 350, 351-5~:3 (1995) (articulating the '"well-settled principle that statutes that do not expressly apply to the President must be construed as not applying to the President if such application would involve a possible conflict with the President's constitutional prerogatives").  

> 770

The Executive power is vested in the president, U.S. Co;-;sT. art. II§ 1, and the vice president has limited constitutionally enumerated functions, C.S. CONST. art. I § 3, amends. XII, XX, XXV (vice president's constitutional duties include serving as president of the Senate, opening the certified votes from electors for the president and vice president, and duties related to the death. disqualification, or inability of the president). Thus. it could be argued that the separation of powers concerns giving rise to the express statement rule are 

188 B.  Unauthorized removal of classified materials 

We also considered the applicability of 18 U.S.C. § 1924, which criminalizes 

the unauthorized removal of classified material by an officer, employee, contractor, 

or consultant of the United States. In addition to concerns about the statute's five-

year limitations period, 771 the statute's text suggests that it should not apply to the 

conduct of a sitting president or vice president. 

First, the statute requires removal "without authority, and when Mr. Biden 

was vice president he was authorized to take and keep classified materials at his 

private residences. Because any act of removal must have occurred when Mr. Eiden 

was vice president, it was arguably done with authority. 

Second, the statute does not explicitly apply to a president or vice president, 

and given the significant separation of powers concerns that would result from the 

statute's application to a sitting president or vice president, the express statement 

rule cautions against construing the statute to apply. 772 

less applicable to the vice president. See Mem. from Laurence H. Silberman, Dep. Att'y Gen., for Richard T. Burress, Office of the President, Re: Conflict of Interest Problems Arising out of the President's Nomination of Nelson A. Rockefeller to be Vice President under the Twenty Fifth A,nendment to the Constitution, at 2 (Aug. 28, 197 4). Nonetheless, given that the vice president is an elected constitutional officer who is regularly delegated significant executive duties, the Department of Justice has long applied the express statement rule to vice presidents. Whether the Office of the Vice President is an "Agency" for Purposes of the Freedom of Information Act, 18 Op. O.L.C. 10, 11 (1994) ("Because the Vice President is also aconstitutional officer, the same 'express statement' rule should apply" (citation omitted) in the context of determining whether the Freedom of Information Act applies to the Office of the Vice President.); Conflict of Interest Problems, at 5-6 (concluding that a federal conflict of-interest statute does not apply to either the president or vice president because "[i]t would be strange for Congress to subject the President and the Vice President to possible criminal prosecution without naming them explicitly .... ").  

> 771

18 U.S.C. § 3282. 772 See nn.768-70 above. 

189 Finally, because Section 1924 requires that a defendant "knowingly remove[d]" 

classified information "without authority and with the intent to retain [it] at an 

unauthorized location," a prosecution under this statute would face many of the same 

evidentiary hurdles discussed in Chapters Eleven and Twelve. 

C.  Removing, concealing, or destroying a government record 

Title 18 U.S.C. § 2071 criminalizes removing, concealing, or destroying 

government records. While there is scant case law, most courts that have addressed 

the statute's elements have required proof that the defendant deprived, or attempted 

to deprive, the government of its ability to use a given  record.  11 l We found no evidence 

that the government was deprived of the use of any of the materials recovered during 

this investigation or that Mr. Eiden acted with the intent to deprive the government 

of any record. In fact, no one in the government seems to have noticed that any 

classified materials were missing at any point from the time Mr. Biden left office on 

January 20, 2017, until marked classified documents were found at the Penn Eiden  

> 773

l'nited States c lhtselberger, 991 F. Supp 2d 108, 122-24 (D.D.C. March 5, 2014) (analyzing case law and concluding "'the government will need to prove that [the defendant] 

obliterated information from the public record"):  Fnzted States L·. Rosner. 352 F. Supp. 915, 921 (S.D.N.Y. 1972); -United States t·. _North, 708 F. Supp. 364, ~369 n.3 (nD.C. 1988): accord United States 1-. Poindexter, 725 F. Supp. 13. 20 (D.D.C. 1989) ("The obvious purpose of the statute is to prohibit the impairment of sensitive government documents ... .''); Mclnerney  

> L'.

Unitrd States, 143 F. 729, 730-31 (1st Cir. 1906) (Section 207l's predecessor statute was "enacted for the purpose of protecting records, papers, and proceedings of courts of justice. and papers. documents, and records filed or deposited in the public offices of the federal 

government"):  United States L'. De Groat, 30 F. 764, 765 (E.D. lVIich. 1887) (the "essential element" of Section 2071's predecessor statute was ''the specific intent to destroy them as records of a public office; or in other words, to obliterate or conceal them as evidence of that which constitutes their value as public records, or to destroy or impair their legal effect or 

usefulness as a record of our governmental affairs ... "):  but see United States l'. Lang, :364 F.3d 1210, 1221-22 (10th Cir. 2004) (finding that "a copy of a government record itself functions as a record for purposes of§ 2071"), cert. granted, ret·'d on other grounds, 543 U.S. 1108 (2005), and opinion reinstated in part, ,!05 F.3d 1060 (10th Cir. 2005). 

190 Center on November 2, 2022. It is therefore unlikely we could prove deprivation. 

Section 2071 also requires proof of willfulness, a heightened mens rea discussed above in sections I.C, II.A. And so even putting aside the issue of deprivation, any Section 2071 charge would fail for the same reasons discussed in Chapters Eleven and Twelve. 

191 CHAPTER TEN HISTORICAL BACKGROUND 

I.  HISTORICALLY, FORMER PRESIDENTS AND VICE PRESIDENTS TREATED ALL RECORDS AS PERSONAL PROPERTY 

For most of our nation's history, presidents and vice presidents treated all 

records from their respective administrations-including records relating to issues of 

national security-as personal property that they took with them upon leaving 

office.  774 A congressionally commissioned study found in 1977 that, when leaving 

office, past presidents routinely took national security files including ''briefing 

materials for the President, records of negotiations with foreign governments, 

correspondence with foreign heads of state or governments. [and] correspondence 

with or directives to agencies within the Executive branch on foreign affairs."' 775 

The practice of outgoing presidents and vice presidents retaining their records 

was reconsidered in the 1970s, culminating in the passage of the Presidential Records 

Act in 1978. 776 The Act provides that all ''Presidential records"-documents created  

> ~74

See Nixon L. United States, 978 F.2d 1269, 1270 (D.C. Cir. 1992) (remarking upon the "long and unbroken history relating to the use, control, and disposition of presidential papers" and concluding ''that Mr. Nixon, like every President before him, had a compensable property interest in his presidential papers"): Tz:tle to Presidential Papers-Subpoenas, 43 Op. Att'y Gen. 11, 11 (1974) (former presidents' ownership of materials from their administration was a matter of "almost unvaried understanding of all three branches of the Government since the beginning of the Republic"); FINAL REPORT OF THE NATIONAL STL'.DY CO:VIMISSION ON RECORDS Al\"D DOCUME~TS OF FEDERAL OFFICIALS at 16 (March 31, 1977) ("The papers of Vice Presidents of the United States have traditionally been disposed of in the same manner as Presidential papers; that is, Vice Presidents have removed them when they left office.").  

> 775

FI:\'AL REPORT OF THE NATIO:\JAL STUDY C0.:\1MISSIO:\' at 14-15.  

> ,,G

Before the Presidential Recordings and Materials Preservation Act of 197 4, which applied only to former President Nixon, "Presidents exercised complete dominion and control over their presidential papers,'' Sixon, 978 F.2d at 1277. "In 1978, Congress prospectively 

192 or received by the president or his staff to assist or advise him in carrying out his 

official duties-belong to the government. 777 In contrast, "[p]ersonal records" remain 

the property of the former officeholder. 778 

The Act defines "personal records" to mean "all documentary materials, or any 

reasonably segregable portion thereof, of a purely private or nonpublic character 

which do not relate to or have an effect upon the carrying out of the constitutional, 

statutory, or other official or ceremonial duties of the President." 779 Such personal 

records include "diaries, journals, or other personal notes serving as the functional 

equivalent of a diary or journal which are not prepared or utilized for, or circulated 

or communicated in the course of, transacting Government business." 780 

While the Presidential Records Act marked a turning point in the treatment of 

presidential materials, as discussed in Chapter Nine, the Act does not exempt former 

presidents and vice presidents from specific prohibitions on removing, retaining, 

losing, or disclosing classified and national defense information. 781 

After the Act's passage, at least one former president, President Reagan, left office with his presidential diaries, which contained classified information, and stored those diaries at his private home. The Department of Justice, the National Archives, and others knew that President Reagan treated his diaries (containing classified            

> abolished presidential ownership of White House materials with the Presidential Records Act."

Id. at 1277 n.19.     

> 177 44 U.S.C. §§ 2201-02.
> 778

Id. §§ 2201-03; Nixon, 978 F.2d at 1277 n.19.     

> 77 9 44 U.S.C. §§ 2201(3).
> 180

Id.  

> 781

See Executive Order 13526 §§ 4.1 4.4; 18 U.S.C. § 793. 

193 information) as personal property, but no agency took action to recover the classified 

materials or to investigate or prosecute the former president. 

II.  THE REAGAN DIARIES 

The first president subject to the Presidential Records Act, Mr. Reagan kept a

diary in which he wrote an entry nearly each day while he served as president. 782 His 

diaries contained information that was classified up to Top Secret/Sensitive 

Compartmented Information level, and remained so until 2007 or later, years after 

Mr. Reagan died. Mr. Reagan took all five volumes of his diaries home with him when 

he left office, and at that time, it was known to the Department of Justice, the Iran 

Contra Independent Counsel, and the National Archives that (1) Mr. Reagan's diaries 

contained Top Secret classified information, and (2) Mr. Reagan treated his diaries 

as personal property that was not in the National Archives' possession. 78 :3 The  

> ' 82

Ronald Reagan, THE REAGAN DIARIES ix (Douglas Brinkley ed., First Harper Perennial Ed. 2009).  

> ' 83

Other former presidents kept diaries or journals that they took with them after they left office. For example, President George H. W. Bush regularly kept a dictated diary that was later quoted extensively in published works. Interview by George W. Bush with Jon Meacham, Author, DESTTN'Y AND POWER, (Nov. 8, 2015),  https://www.c 

span.org/video/?400044-2/destiny-power; JOJ\i" MEACJ-LA,_,_l\;I, DESTIN'Y AND POWER: THE Al\iIERICAN ODYSSEY OF GEORGE HERBERT WALKER BUSH (Kindle ed. 2015); George H. W. Bush & Brent Scowcroft, A WORLD TRAKSFORMED (First Vintage Books ed. 1999). President Carter also kept a dictated diary that was typed up by his secretary and that he took with him upon leaving office. Jimmy Carter, WHITE HOCSE DIARY xii-xv (2010). Mr. Carter published excerpts from that diary-keeping the original, full version with him at his home and transferring a copy to his presidential library. Id. While there is some reason to think that the Bush and Carter diaries may have also contained classified information, the historical record is clear that Mr. Reagan's diaries did and that relevant government entities knew of Mr. Reagan's possession of that material. 

We also examined the practices of other former Presidents predating the Presidential Records Act, but we were unable to glean much from that inquiry. Like the key statutory provision, 18 U.S.C. § 793(e), the modern classification system did not come into being until the mid-20th century. See Cong. Research Serv., The Protection of Classified Information: 

194 Department of Justice also repeatedly described the diaries in public court filings as 

Mr. Reagan's personal records.784 

Mr. Reagan's personal possession of his diaries, and the fact that portions of 

his diaries were classified up to the Top Secret level, was also known to the 

Congress 785 and the federal courts. 786 In the wake of the Iran-Contra affair, Mr. 

Reagan produced relevant excerpts from his diaries to various investigative bodies, 

including congressional committees and the Independent Counsel. 787 During the 

Independent Counsel's prosecution of former National Security Adviser John 

The Legal Frarneworl? l (updated Feb. 2, 2023). Two Presidents during this period died in office (Franklin D. Roosevelt and John F. Kennedy), and several appear to have entered agreements while in office expressly contemplating their continued access to classified information in their presidential papers after the end of their terms. See Letter for James B. Rhoads and Robben W. Fleming from Gerald R. Ford, annex B, § 5(c)(vii), (d), (g) (Dec. 13, 1976),  https://www.fordhbrarymuseum.gov/library/forddeed.asp ; Letter for Lawson B. Knott, Jr., from Lyndon B. Johnson, §§ 2(c)(ii) & (e), 5 (Aug. 13, 1965), reprinted in 111 Cong. Rec. 21661-62 (1965); Letter for Franklin Floete from Dwight D. Eisenhower, §§ 5, 7(a), 8 (Apr. 13, 1960), reprinted in The "Public Documents Act": Hearings on HR. 16902 and Related Legislation Before the Subcomrn. on Printing of the H. Conun. on H. Adniin., 93d Cong., 2d Sess. 134 (197 4). Nor were we able to find specific evidence that the Department of Justice was contemporaneously aware of any instances where these earlier Presidents kept classified materials without appropriate safeguards. For these and other reasons, what we have been able to discern about the earlier history sheds little light on the question at hand and our analysis focuses on the Reagan diaries as the most probative historical example.  

> 784

See, e.g., Memorandum in Support of Motion to Quash Subpoena to Archivist and Statement of Interest by the Department of Justice at 5-6, United States u. Poindexter, Crim. No. 88-0080-01 (HHG) (D.D.C. Dec. 6, 1989) (DOJ Mot. to Quash in Poindexter).  

> 785

Lawrence Walsh, FINAL REPORT OF THE INDEPENDENT COUNSEL FOR IRAN/CONTRA MATTERS: VOLlJME III at 686 n.30 (1993) ("Access to the President's relevant diary entries was provided by the President to the Tower Commission, the Congressional Committees and to the Independent Counsel, who reviewed them in 1987.").  

> 786

United States v. Poindexter, 732 F. Supp. 135, 137-41 (D.D.C. Jan. 30, 1990).  

> 787

Memorandum of Points and Authorities in Support of Motion by Former President Ronald W. Reagan to Quash Subpoena at 32-33, United States u. Poindexter, Crim. No. 88 -

0080-01 (HHG) (D.D.C. Dec. 6, 1989) (Reagan Mot. to Quash in Poindexter); David E. Rosenbaum, Reagan Will Allow Inuestigators to See Diary Items on Iran Affair, N.Y. TIMES (Apr. 9, 1987),  https://www.nytimes.com/1987/04/09/world/reagan-will-allow-investigators 

to-see-diary-items-on-iran-affair. html. 

195 Poindexter, Poindexter sought Mr. Reagan's diary entries for purposes of his criminal 

defense.  788 In numerous public filings and judicial opinions in 1989 and 1990 after 

Mr. Reagan left office, the Department of Justice and the U.S. District Court both 

acknowledged that Mr. Reagan's diaries contained information that was classified, 

including Top Secret information about sensitive matters. 789 

While this litigation was ongoing, Mr. Reagan was a private citizen living in 

California, where he kept his diaries at his private home, apparently outside of 

facilities that were authorized to store Top Secret information.  790 According to the 

editor of the published versions of Mr. Reagan's diaries, "[f]or several years after their 

return to California, the Reagans would often sit together in their den after dinner, 

reading aloud from their diaries and reminiscing about their White House years."  791 

While it is unlikely that, after leaving office, Reagan's den was approved for the 

storage Secret/Sensitive Compartmented Information, Mr. Reagan retained 

Secret Service protection at his home for the remainder of his life. 792 Mr. Reagan 

maintained the ability to receive and handle classified information after leaving the  

> 788

Memorandum in Support of Motion to Quash Subpoena to Archivist and Statement of Interest by the Department of Justice at 5-6, United States u. Poindexter, Crim. No. 88 -

0080-01 (HHG) (DOJ Mot. to Quash in Poindexter); Lawrence Walsh, Final Report of the Independent Counsel for Iran/Contra Matters: Volume III at 686 n.30 (1993).  

> 789

E.g., DOJ Mot. to Quash at 5-7, United States v. Poindexter, Crim. No. 88-0080-01 (HHG); Poindexter, 732 F. Supp. at 137-41. 790 See Ronald Reagan, THE REAGAN DIARIES x (Douglas Brinkley ed., First Harper Perennial ed. 2009). 791 Id. It is not clear that the Department of Justice knew, at the time of the Poindexter 

litigation, how Mr. Reagan's diaries were stored, or who had access to them.  

> 792

Act of Sept. 15, 1965, Pub. L. No. 89-186, 79 Stat. 791 (1965) (codified as amended at 18 U.S.C. § 3056); Former Reagan Official Tr. at 51-52 (Mr. Reagan's private residence had Secret Service protection that involved converting portions of the home into Secret Service Space. Former Reagan Official described the home as a "very tight secured 24/7 protected facility."). 

196 White House, as he continued to receive national security briefings at his office space 

located a few miles from his home, and he consulted with President George H. W. 

Bush about foreign affairs. 793 Notably, Secret Service agents collected daily 

intelligence briefing materials after Mr. Reagan had finished with them and ensured 

that they were properly destroyed. 794 

The wider American public also knew of the existence of Mr. Reagan's diaries. 

Indeed, the diaries served as sources for at least three publications that Mr. Reagan 

or his representatives authorized: (1) An American Life, 795 Mr. Reagan's 

autobiography published in 1990; (2) Dutch, a biography authored by Edmund Morris 

and published in 1999; 796 and (3) The Reagan Diaries, a collection of the diaries 

themselves first published in 2007 after Mr. Reagan's death. 797 Notably, An American 

Life was being written during the Poindexter litigation 798 and mcludes dozens of 

verbatim quotations from Mr. Reagan's diaries. 799 And even as early as 1989, the 

classified nature of Mr. Reagan's diaries was discernable to any member the public who read filings and opinions from the Poindexter litigation. 800  

> 791

Former Reagan Official Tr. at 26-41.  

> ,91

Id.  

> 795

Ronald Reagan, A:'-J Al\/I:ERICAN LIFE (First Threshold trade paperback ed. Jan. 2011).  

> 796

Edmund Morris, DGTCH (Random House 1999).  

> 797

Ronald Reagan, THE REAGAN DIARIES (Douglas Brinkley ed., First Harper Perennial ed. 2009).  

> 798

Robert Lindsey, GHOST SCRIBBLER: SEARCHING FOR REAGAN, BRA:'-JDO AND THE KING OF POP, Chapter 37 (2d ed. 2014) (explaining that ghostwriter Robert Lindsey began helping Mr. Reagan write the book after a March 1989 interview).  

> 799

E.g., Reagan, AN AMERICAN LIFE 445-47.  

> soo

E.g., DOJ Mot. to Quash at 5-7, United States u. Poindexter, Crim. No. 88-0080-01 (HHG); Poindexter, 732 F. Supp. at 137-41. 

197 Mr. Reagan died in 2004. 801 In 2005, Nancy Reagan provided his diaries to the 

Reagan Library, 802 which is run by the National Archives, 80 :3 so that the diaries could 

be publicly displayed as part of the collection of Mr. Reagan's personal papers.  804 At 

that time, the Archives worked with officials at the National Security Council to 

identify several pages of material that were still classified up to the Top 

Secret/Sensitive Compartmented Information level. Archives officials removed all 

pages containing classified information from the diaries so they could be publicly 

displayed. 

Meanwhile, a historian reviewed the unclassified portions of Mr. Reagan's 

diaries and compiled a collection of them for publication in 2007. 80 ,s The Reagan 

Diaries  was a bestseller,  806 and a New York Times article from May 2007 remarked 

that "readers can get a retroactive sense of being in on some classified information." 807 

Today, anyone can view online the full set of i\fr. Reagan's presidential diaries,  

> 801

Press Release, The White House, Announcing the Death of Ronald Reagan (June 6, 2004), http s://georgew bus h-w hi tehouse. archives. gov/news/releases/2004/06/20040606 -

1.  html.  

> 802

Anna Bakalis, Library Gets First Look at 'Reagan Diaries', VC STAR (May 20, 2007), 

https://archive . vcstar.com/news/library-gets-first-look-at-reagan-diaries-ep-375630016 -

35288794 L html.  

> soi

Ronald Reagan Presidential Library & Museum: About Us, Ronald Reagan Presidential Library & Museum,  https://www.reaganlibrary.gov/about-us  (last visited Feb. 2, 2024).  

> 804

Interview of Michael Duggan & Douglas Brinkley (Apr. 27,  2007), https://www.c 

span.org/video /? 198343-1/the-reagan-diaries#.  

> 805

Anna Bakalis, Library Gets First Looi? at 'Reagan Diaries', VC STAR (May 20, 2007), h ttps:// archive. vcstar .com/news/library-gets-first-look-at- reagan -diaries-ep-375630016 -

352887941. html.  

> 806

BEST SELLERS: July 29, 2007, N.Y. TIMES (July 29, 2007), 

https://archive.nytimes.com/query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage -

9C05E7DD 1431F93i\A15754C0A9619C8B63.htm1.  

> 807

Motoko Rich, History Made Intinwte Through Reagan's Diaries, N.Y. TIMES (May 3, 2007),  https://www .nytimes.com/2007 /05/03/books/Gadiar.htmt 

198 excluding a small number of excerpts that were redacted for personal reasons or 

national security concerns.sos 

There is no indication that Mr. Reagan acted with any ill intent, attempted to secret away his diaries, or hid their existence or content from appropriate authorities. Quite the opposite, he disclosed the existence of his diaries to several investigative bodies during the Iran-Contra investigations. And during the Poindexter litigation, Mr. Reagan's personal attorneys and the Department of Justice repeatedly asserted that the diaries were Mr. Reagan's personal property.so 9 But it was apparent his diaries contained classified information. Indeed, some diary entries specifically described information recorded there as "very hush, hush" or "top secret."S 10 Some entries were obviously classified at the time he wrote them; some continued to be 

classified until at least 2007; and some contain national security information that 

appears to be sensitive to this day.s 11  

> 808

E.g., vVhite House Diaries, Diary Entry O1 I 20 I 1988, Ronald Reagan Presidential Foundation & Institute,  https://www.reaganfoundation.org/ronald-reagan/white-house 

diaries/diary-entry-01201988/ (last visited Feb. 2, 2024).  

> 809

Reagan Mot. to Quash at 1-2, United States u. Poindexter, Crim. No. 88-0080-01 (HHG). 810 12/1/23 National Security Council production of classified excerpts from Reagan diaries.  

> 811

We reviewed some of the materials that were deemed to be classified at the Top Secret/Sensitive Compartmented Information level when the National Security Council conducted prepublication review for the Reagan Diaries. While we did not submit those unpublished entries for a new classification review, the subject matter appears to us to be sensitive even today. 12/1/23 National Security Council production of classified excerpts from Reagan diaries. Additionally, National Archives officials seem to have inquired about the classification status of the diaries in 2022 and were told that the diaries remained classified at the Top Secret/Sensitive Compartmented Information level. NARA Employee Tr. at 61-63. 

199 L       

> CHAPTER ELEVEN
> ANALYSIS OF THE EVIDENCE-CLASSIFIED AFGHANISTAN DOCUMENTS
> INTRODUCTION

There is evidence that, after his vice presidency, Mr. Biden willfully retained marked classified documents about Afghanistan and unmarked classified handwritten notes in his notebooks, both of which he stored in unsecured places in his home. He had no legal authority to do so, and his retention of these materials, and disclosure of classified information from his notebooks to his ghostwriter, risked serious damage to America's national security. 

But the evidence falls short of proof beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Biden retained and disclosed these classified materials willfully. The Department's prior treatment of former presidents and vice presidents who kept national security 

materials also counsels against prosecution of Mr. Biden, as do the most relevant aggravating and mitigating facts presented here."' 12 Therefore, under established Department principles, we decline criminal charges against Mr. Biden relating to the classified Afghanistan documents and his classified  notebooks. 81  :) \Ve would do so 

even if we were not bound by the Office of Legal Counsel's legal conclusion that a

sitting president may not be charged with federal crimes. 814 In reaching these conclusions, we consider two questions. First, whether the evidence proves beyond a reasonable doubt that a crime occurred; and then, if so,  

> 812

See U.S. Dep't of Just., Just. Manual§ 9-27.320 (2023).  

> m

See id. at§§ 9-27.001, 9-27.220, 9-27.230 (2023).  

> 811

A Sitting President's Amenability to Indictment and Criminal Prosecution, 24 Op. O.L.C. 222, 260 (2000). 

200 whether criminal charges are warranted. Thus, the Department's Justice Manual 

requires federal prosecutors to determine whether the person under investigation 

committed a federal offense and whether "the admissible evidence will probably be 

sufficient to obtain and sustain a conviction." 81 fi Next, the Manual directs prosecutors 

to evaluate relevant aggravating and mitigating facts and to determine whether 

criminal charges are supported by a "substantial federal interest." 816 A prosecutor 

should seek criminal charges only after considering each of these questions and 

making "a policy judgment that the fundamental interests of society require the 

application of federal criminal law to a particular set of circumstances[.]" 817 

We address the first question, the sufficiency of the evidence, for the classified 

Afghanistan documents immediately below, then for the classified notebooks in 

Chapter Twelve. We discuss the second question, whether criminal charges are 

otherwise warranted, for both sets of classified material in Chapter Thirteen. 

II.  THERE IS EVIDENCE THAT MR. BIDEN WILLFULLY RETAINED THE CLASSIFIED AFGHANISTAN DOCUMENTS 

In a recorded conversation on February 16, 2017, at Mr. Biden's rental home in Virginia, Mr. Biden told Mark Zwonitzer that Mr. Biden had "just found all the  

> 815

U.S. Dep't of Just., Just. Manual§ 9-27.220 (2023).  

> 816

See id. at § 9-27.220 (2023). In determining whether prosecution would serve asubstantial federal interest, prosecutors should weigh "all relevant considerations," including: (1) federal law enforcement priorities; (2) the nature and seriousness of the offense; 

(3)  the deterrent effect of prosecution; (4) the person's culpability; (5) the person's criminal history, or its absence; (6) the person's willingness to cooperate in the investigation or prosecution of others; (7) the person's personal circumstances; (8) the interests of any victims; and (9) the probable sentence or other consequences if the person is convicted; and (10) other relevant facts. Id. § 9-27.230.  

> 8 17

Id. § 9-27.001 (emphasis added). 

201 classified stuff downstairs." 818 According to what Mr. Biden told Zwonitzer, ''all the 

classified stuff' related to President Obama's 2009 decision to surge American troops to Afghanistan, and to a pivotal moment when Mr. Biden sent President Obama his handwritten Thanksgiving memo opposing the troop surge. 819 Photos of the Virginia home show that the lowest level "downstairs"-where Mr. Biden told Zwonitzer he had "just found all the classified stuff'-included rooms that Mr. Biden used as work and storage spaces_s20 

Six years later, during this criminal investigation, the FBI recovered marked classified documents relating to the debate over the 2009 Afghanistan troop surge in a box in Mr. Biden's Delaware garage. 821 The classified documents were in folders 

that also contained drafts of Mr. Biden's Thanksgiving memo, other source 

documents for that memo, and other memos establishing Mr. Biden's strong 

contemporaneous opposition to the surge. 822 The folders of classified Afghanistan documents appear to be files of Mr. Biden's creation, labeled in his handwriting, and containing memos and intelligence products he removed from the ordinary flow of paper he received as vice  president. 82  :) Inside Mr. Biden's home office, agents found his "Af/Pak l" notebook with the classified Thanksgiving memo tucked inside. 824    

> s1s

See Chapter Five.  

> 819

See Chapters Five and Six.  

> 820

See Chapter Five.  

> 821

See Chapter Six.  

> 822

See id.  

> 823

See id.  

> 824

See id. 

202 In the same box m the garage where FBI agents found the classified 

Afghanistan documents, agents also found other documents of great personal 

importance to Mr. Eiden, including photos of his son Beau and documents Mr. Eiden 

filed, accessed, and used in early 2017, during the same time he told Zwonitzer 

found the classified documents about Afghanistan in his Virginia home. 82 i5 The 

evidence suggests that Mr. Eiden maintained these files himself 

l\1r. Eiden had a strong motive to keep the classified Afghanistan documents. 

believed President Obama's 2009 troop surge was a mistake on par with Vietnam. 826 He wanted record to show that he was right about Afghanistan; that his critics were wrong; and that he had opposed President Obama's mistaken decision forcefully when it was made-that his judgment was sound when it mattered most. 827 

This evidence provides grounds to believe that Mr. Eiden willfully retained the marked classified documents about Afghanistan. If he was not referrmg to those documents-later found in his garage-when he told Zwonitzer he had "just found all the classified stuff downstairs," it is not clear what else Mr. Eiden could have been referring to. 828 

Nevertheless, for the reasons below, we believe this evidence 1s not strong enough to establish Mr. Biden's guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.  

> 825

See Chapters Five and Six. 826 See Chapter Six. 827 See id.  

> 828

See Chapters Five and Six. 

203 III.  THE EVIDENCE FALLS SHORT OF ESTABLISHING MR. BID EN'S WILLFUL RETENTION OF THE CLASSIFIED AFGHANISTAN DOCUMENTS BEYOND AREASONABLE DOUBT 

In February 2017, when Mr. Eiden told Zwonitzer he had "just found all the classified stuff downstairs," Mr. Eiden was at his home in Virginia. 829 In December 2022, the FBI recovered the marked classified documents about Afghanistan in the garage of Mr. Biden's home in Delaware, nearly six years later and over one hundred miles  away.  880 When the FBI recovered the documents in 2022. Mr. Eiden was the sitting president, and he was authorized to have classified documents in his private home. Thus, any criminal charges would most plausibly depend on Mr. Biden's possession of the Afghanistan documents in the Virginia home in 201 7, when he was not in office. 

There are at least three defenses likely to create reasonable doubt as to such charges. First, Mr. Eiden could have found the classified Afghanistan documents at the Virginia home in 2017 and then forgotten about them soon after. This could convince some reasonable jurors that he did not willfully retain them. Second, Mr. Eiden might not have retained the classified Afghanistan documents in the Virginia home at all. They could have been stored, without his knowledge, at his Delaware home since the time he was vice president. This would rebut charges that he willfully retained the documents in Virginia. Finally, Mr. Eiden could have found only some of the classified Afghanistan documents in the Virginia home in 2017-the ones in the manila "Afganastan" folder found in the garage box-and it is unclear whether        

> s:2 9See Chapter Five. 830 See Chapter Six.

204 this folder contained national defense information. This too would rebut charges that 

he willfully retained national defense information, as required by the criminal 

statute.s:n 

We discuss each potential defense in turn. 

A.  Mr. Eiden may have found the classified documents in Virginia in February 2017 and then forgotten about them 

It is possible that Mr. Eiden encountered the classified Afghanistan documents at the Virginia home in February 2017, told Zwonitzer about them, and then, soon after, forgot about them and did not willfully retain them. \Vhile such a swift and permanent bout of forgetfulness may seem implausible, several pieces of evidence provide some support for this possibility. If Mr. Eiden discovered classified documents at the Virginia home on February 

16, 2017, when he told Zwonitzer he "just found all the classified stuff downstairs,'' it may not have been something he found memorable. Mr. Eiden, after all, had seen classified documents nearly every day for the previous eight years. As vice president, he regularly-and permissibly-kept classified documents in his home. 8: 12 When he 

spoke to Zwonitzer in February 2017, Mr. Eiden had left the White House less than a month earlier. After more than forty years in the highest ranks of government, he was accustomed to having staff members attend to the details of handling, storing, 

and retrieving classified documents. 833 For a person of his position, the presence of classified documents might not have been noteworthy, and it may have seemed        

> s31 See 18 U.S.C. § 793(e).
> s:i:2 See Chapter Three. 833 See id.

205 natural that someone else would inevitably take care of it, because, for Mr. Eiden, 

that is how it had nearly always worked. 

In response to this defense, the government could note that several weeks before the February 2017 conversation with Zwonitzer, just after leaving the vice presidency, Mr. Eiden returned different classified material he found in the Virginia home, giving a slim binder of material possibly relating to foreign leader calls to his 

personal aide to return to the vVhite House. 8: 14 One explanation is that Mr. Eiden 

returned the binder of foreign leader calls because he did not care about it, whereas 

he intentionally kept the classified Afghanistan documents because he cared about 

them a great deal. 

But another inference the evidence permits is that Mr. Eiden returned the 

binder of classified material to the personal aide because, after leaving office, Mr. Eiden did not intend to retain any marked classified documents. As Mr. Eiden said 

in his interview with our office, if he had found marked classified documents after the vice presidency, "I would have gotten rid of them. I would have gotten them back to 

their source .... I had no purpose for them, and I think it would be inappropriate for me to keep clearly classified documents." 8: 15 Some reasonable jurors may credit this statement and conclude that if Mr. Eiden found the classified Afghanistan documents in the Virginia home, he forgot about them rather than willfully retaining them. 

Mr. Biden's own words to Zwonitzer provide some support for this conclusion. In the recorded conversation when Mr. Eiden told Zwonitzer he had "just found all           

> 8:0 1See Chapter Seven. 835 Biden 10/9/23 Tr. at 41.

206 the classified stuff downstairs," Mr. Eiden's tone was remarkably casual. His sole 

reference to this discovery of classified documents was this brief aside. Mr. Eiden did 

not sound surprised or concerned by the documents he referenced. While reasonable 

jurors could draw different conclusions from Mr. Eiden's seeming nonchalance, one 

conclusion is that if Mr. Eiden discovered classified documents, it simply was not 

significant to him and was something he could have quickly forgotten. 

After all, the Afghanistan documents and the 2009 troop surge played no role in Promise Me, Dad, the book Mr. Eiden wrote with Zwonitzer in early 2017. 836 There is no reason to believe Mr. Biden intended to discuss the 2009 Afghanistan troop debate in his book, which, as explained in Chapter Five, covered his experiences in 2014 and 2015. In dozens of hours of recorded conversations with Zwonitzer in 2016 and 2017, when Mr. Eiden talked about a vast array of topics, the Afghanistan documents never came up again. 837 This may suggest that after February 16, 2017, the documents were simply not on Mr. Eiden's mind. 

Mr. Eiden's memory also appeared to have significant limitations-both at the time he spoke to Zwonitzer in 2017, as evidenced by their recorded conversations, and today, as evidenced by his recorded interview with our office. Mr. Biden's recorded conversations with Zwonitzer from 2017 are often painfully slow, with Mr. Eiden struggling to remember events and straining at times to read and relay his own notebook entries.s3s             

> 836 See generally Biden, PROMISE ME, DAD; Chapter Five.
> 837 See generally FBI Serials 315, 335.
> 838 See generally id.

207 In his interview with our office, Mr. Biden's memory was worse. He did not remember when he was vice president, forgetting on the first day of the interview when his term ended ("if it was 2013 - when did I stop being Vice President?"), and forgetting on the second day of the interview when his term began ("in 2009, am Istill Vice President?"). 839 He did not remember, even within several years, when his son Beau died. 81 rn And his memory appeared hazy when describing the Afghanistan debate that was once so important to him. Among other things, he mistakenly said he "had a real difference" of opinion with General Karl Eikenberry, when, in fact, Eikenberry was an ally whom Mr. Eiden cited approvingly in his Thanksgiving memo to President Obama.Sil 

In a case where the government must prove that Mr. Biden knew he had possession of the classified Afghanistan documents after the vice presidency and chose to keep those documents, knowing he was violating the law, we expect that at trial, his attorneys would emphasize these limitations in his recall. 

\Ve also expect many jurors to be struck by the place where the Afghanistan documents were ultimately found in Mr. Biden's Delaware home: in a badly damaged box in the garage, near a collapsed dog crate, a dog bed, a Zappos box, an empty 

bucket, a broken lamp wrapped with duct tape, potting soil, and synthetic firewood.  8' 12                         

> 839 Biden 10/8/2~-3 Tr. at 146; 10/9/23 Tr. at 15. 840 Biden 10/8/23 Tr. at 82-83. 841 Riden 10/9/23 Tr. at 17; Recovered document D20. 842 See Chapter Six.

208 Ga rag e box with classified Afghanistan docum ent s as encountered by FBI (Dec. 2 1, 202 2) 843 

A r ea sonable juror could con clu de th at thi s is n ot wh ere a pe rson intentionally s tor es wh at he sup posedly conside rs to be import a nt classified docum ents, cr i tical to his l eg acy . Rath er, it looks more like a plac e a p ers on st ore s classified documents he has for go tte n about or is un aw a re o f. VVe have conside red - and inves tigat e d-th epossibility t hat the box wa s int en tion a lly placed in th e gar ag e t o mak e it appear to be th e re by mis ta ke, but th e evidence does not support t hat co nclu si on. 

Fin ally, Mr. Bide n's co op era tion with our inv es tig ati on will likely cau se some juror s to co nclu de th at th e Afghanist a n docum ents w er e in his Delaware ho me by mistake, which is con sis t ent with him fo rg ett ing a bou t the doc um e nts soon after he  

> si;;

See id. 

20 9discovered them in the Virginia home. Most significantly, Mr. Eiden self-reported to 

the government that the Afghanistan documents were in his Delaware garage and 

consented to searches of his house to retrieve them and other classified materials. He 

also consented to searches of other locations, and later in the investigation, he 

participated in an interview with our office that lasted more than five hours and 

provided written answers to most of our additional written questions. 

Many will conclude that a president who knew he was illegally storing classified documents in his home would not have allowed a search of his home to discover those documents and then answered the government's questions afterwards. \iVhile various parts of this argument are debatable, we expect the argument will carry real force for many reasonable jurors. These jurors will conclude that Mr. 

Eiden-a powerful, sophisticated person with access to the best advice in the world would not have handed the government classified documents from his own home on a silver platter ifhe had willfully retained those documents for years. Just as a person who destroys evidence and lies often proves his guilt, a person who produces evidence 

and cooperates will be seen by many to be innocent. 

To prove that Mr. Eiden willfully retained the Afghanistan documents, the government must establish that he acted "with a bad purpose either to disobey or to disregard the law." 814 Reasonable jurors could conclude that Mr. Eiden discovered the                                        

> 8➔ 4 See Chapter Nine; Morison, 844 F.2d at 1071 (emphasis omitted); accord Court's Instructions to the Jury at 22, Brou.·n, No. 21-cr-348, ECF No. 304; Government's Proposed Jury Instructions at 24, Sterl£ng, No. l:10-cr-485, ECF No. 258; Final Jury Instructions at 19, Ford, No. 05-cr-235.

210 Afghanistan documents in his Virginia home and then forgot about them almost 

immediately. Such jurors would likely acquit him. 

B.  The classified documents may never have been in the Virginia home The second potential defense argument is that Mr. Eiden may not have retained the classified Afghanistan documents in Virginia home at \¥hile there is evidence that he did, most notably his recorded statement to Zwonitzer in February 201 that evidence is not conclusive. First, as discussed in Chapter Seven, while the evidence provides clues classified Afghanistan documents were stored in the Virginia home, there 1s no definitive evidence putting them there. Beyond the Zwonitzer recording, no witness, photo, text message, or other evidence establishes that the documents were ever stored in Virginia. When considering charges that Mr. Eiden willfully the classified documents in the Virginia m February 2017, this absence of additional direct evidence that the documents were in the Virginia home in February 2017 is significant. Second, the Zwonitzer recording itself is not conclusive. When writing Promise Me, Dad, Zwonitzer recorded dozens of hours of conversation with Mr. Eiden, and those recordings show that Mr. Biden's statements were often imprecise and his meaning was not always clear. 845 That was particularly true when Mr. Eiden spoke 

elliptically or in asides, as he did when he briefly referenced finding "all the classified stuff downstairs." Given Mr. Biden's tendency towards loose talk with Zwonitzer -    

> 845 See generally FBI Serials 315, 335.

211 and Mr. Biden's limited precision and recall during his interview with our office, discussed above-reasonable jurors may hesitate to place too much evidentiary weight on a single eight-word utterance to Zwonitzer from almost seven years ago, in the absence of other, more direct evidence. 

Third, there are alternative explanations for Mr. Biden's statement to Zwonitzer that do not involve the classified Afghanistan documents later found in the Delaware garage. For example, Mr. Eiden could have been referring to the collection 

of handwritten notebooks he kept when he was vice president. As discussed in Chapter Four, Mr. Eiden retained more than a dozen such notebooks, which contained his handwritten notes from the President's Daily Brief and \Vhite House Situation Room meetings. Some of these notes were themselves classified. One of those notebooks was his Af/Pak 1 notebook, which contained his detailed notes about the 2009 Afghanistan policy review, and a copy of the handwritten Thanksgiving 

memo. 816 

Mr. Eiden explained in his interview with our office that he believed he gathered his notebooks in the Virginia home after moving in, which was at around the same time he met with Zwonitzer in February 2017. 847 And we know from his recorded conversations with Zwonitzer that Mr. Eiden planned to, and did, refer to some of his notebooks regularly while writing his book. 818             

> 84 6See Chapter Six. 847 Biden 10/9/23 Tr. at 30. 40-,11. s-1s See Chapter Five.

212 Thus, some evidence suggests that when Mr. Eiden told Zwonitzer he had "just 

found all the classified stuff downstairs," he could have been referring to his collection 

of notebooks, including his Af/Pak 1 notebook, which contained classified information. 

As explained in Chapter Twelve, we do not believe there are viable criminal charges 

against Mr. Eiden for willfully retaining classified information in the notebooks. 8 -1 9

This would make the notebook explanation a potentially successful defense. 

Another possible explanation is that Mr. Eiden could have been referring to 

the slim binder of classified documents he found at the Virginia home shortly after 

leaving office and gave to his personal aide to return to the White House. 850 

discussed above, this appears to have happened several weeks before Mr. Biden's 

recorded statement to Zwonitzer in February 2017. 

This explanation seems improbable, as Mr. Eiden said he "just" found the classified material, which typically suggests more recency-a matter of hours or days, rather than several weeks. And the personal aide recalled that Mr. Eiden handed him a single slim binder or folder of material, which the aide believed related to calls with foreign leaders in the last week of the administration. 851 It is unlikely Mr. Eiden was referring to such a small amount of material when he said he just found "all the classified stuff," and it would have been a non sequitur during a conversation about his decision-making on Afghanistan in 2009. 852 But our assessment that this  

> 849

See Chapter Twelve for an analysis of the evidence pertaining to the classified notebooks.  

> s5o

See Chapter Seven.        

> 861 Personal Aide 3 3/28/23 Tr. at 197-212.
> 85 2

See Chapter Five. 

213 explanation seems unlikely does not make it unreasonable, and reasonable jurors 

could conclude that Mr. Biden's statement to Zwonitzer referred to classified 

information Mr. Biden had already found and returned. 

Mr. Biden could also point to the possibility that the classified Afghanistan documents were never in Virginia but were stored elsewhere without his knowledge: 

for example, tucked away in his Delaware home since the time he was vice president. 

'Ne cannot rule out that possibility. As discussed in Chapter Seven, if the documents were somewhere in the Delaware home for many years, someone must have moved them to the garage box after the move from the Virginia home to the Delaware home in July 2019, because that is likely when the garage box arrived in Delaware. But it is possible Mr. Biden or others moved the Afghanistan documents to the garage box without carefully reviewing the files or realizing they contained marked classified 

documents. As explained in Chapters Fourteen, Fifteen. and Sixteen, our investigation has revealed several other instances of Mr. Biden and others making 

similar filing mistakes. 

Unlike most defendants m classified mishandling cases, Mr. Biden was allowed to have classified documents in his home for eight years as vice president. He also had layers of staff who were responsible for assembling, carrying, storing, and retrieving the types of classified briefing materials found among the Afghanistan documents. 85 :l Even if Mr. Biden intended to keep the Afghanistan documents for some time while he was vice president-to help him write the 2009 Thanksgiving    

> 853 See Chapter Three.
> 214

memo, for example, or as reference material for the Afghanistan policy debates to 

come in the later years of the Obama administration-it remains possible that Mr. 

Biden lost track of the documents in the nearly eight years that followed, and that he 

did not know he still had them after leaving office. 

Mr. Biden's house was also filled with paperwork and other materials from 

almost five decades in government service. He kept boxes of files from nearly every 

political campaign he ran between 1972 and 2012; files documenting his more than 

thirty years in the Senate; files from his eight years as vice president; and files 

relating to his family, his house, his car, and his pets. 854 It is possible the Afghanistan 

documents, which were in ordinary folders that were not packaged or marked as 

containing classified information, were needles in the haystack of Mr. Biden's papers. 

While it is natural to assume that Mr. Biden put the Afghanistan documents in the box on purpose and that he knew they were there, there is in fact a shortage of evidence on these points. We do not know why, how, or by whom the documents were placed in the box. We do not know whether or when Mr. Eiden carefully reviewed the box's contents. We do not know why only some of Mr. Biden's classified Afghanistan memos to President Obama from the fall of 2009 were found in the box, but several other memos he wrote during that time were not. 855 And we do not know why Mr. Biden would have wanted to keep some of the other marked classified documents in  

> 854

See generally FBI Serial 512, 1A614, FBI Serial 77, 1A86.                                                    

> 855 During the fall 2009 Afghanistan review, Mr. Biden wrote President Obama multiple additional classified memos opposing the troop surge. None of these memos were in the garage box with the other classified Afghanistan documents, and none of the memos were recovered during this investigation, though we obtained copies of the memos from the current White House.

See Classified memos on file with Special Counsel's Office. 

215 the box-in particular, a classified document relating to President Obama's second 

term foreign policy goals, which was kept in a folder right next to the Afghanistan 

documents, and which served no particular purpose of Mr. Biden's of which we are 

aware. 8• 16 

The location of the box containing Afghanistan documents in a seemingly random place in the Delaware garage, and Mr. Biden's cooperation with our investigation-both discussed above-could provide additional reasons for jurors to conclude that the Afghanistan documents were stored in the Delaware home without 

Mr. Biden's knowledge, and were not in Virginia in 2017. 

C.  Mr. Biden may not have found the "Facts First" folder containing national defense information A reasonable juror could also conclude that, even if Mr. Eiden found classified 

documents about Afghanistan in his Virginia home in February 2017, and even if he remembered he had them after that day, and even if they were the same documents 

found in his garage six years later and one hundred miles away in Delaware, there is a shortage of evidence that he found both the "Afganastan" folder and the "Facts 

First" folder. This is important because even though the "Afganastan" folder 

contained documents that were marked classified in 2009, there are serious questions about whether those particular documents remain sensitive today, or when Mr. Biden met with Zwonitzer in 2017. Thus, the "Afganastan" folder alone is not a strong basis 

upon which to prosecute Mr. Eiden for willfully retaining national defense information. And if Mr. Biden saw only the "Afganastan" folder and not the "Facts    

> 856 FBI Serial 512, 1A614; B4, B5.

216 First" folder, which did contain national defense information, he did not willfully 

retain such national defense information. 

This "only one folder" defense is not very strong, but it does find some support 

in the evidence. Mr. Biden spoke of finding "all the classified stuff downstairs" in the 

context of telling Zwonitzer about the 2009 handwritten Thanksgiving memo. 857 And 

folder most closely associated with that memo is the "Afganastan" folder, which 

held the raw materials that we know Mr. Biden must have relied on when writing 

the Thanksgiving memo. The "Afganastan" folder contained previous handwritten 

and typewritten drafts of Thanksgiving memo, some of which were incorporated 

nearly word-for-word into the final document.  8 • 58 The folder also held a November 

memo from Mr. Biden's communications director, and Mr. Biden incorporated portions of this memo, again nearly word-for-word, into the final Thanksgiving memo. 8 :5 9 Thus, the evidence establishes that Mr. Biden used the documents in the "Afganastan" folder to write the 2009 Thanksgiving memo to President Obama. 

Mr. Biden probably also used the documents in the "Facts First" folder when writing the Thanksgiving memo, but the connection between that folder and the memo is not as strong. The "Facts First" folder contains numerous documents relevant to the memo, but none of them are documents Mr. Biden must have used. And most of the materials in the "Facts First" folder were from September 2009, two 

months before Mr. Biden wrote the Thanksgiving memo.  860               

> s,Yi See Chapter Five. 858 See Chapter Six. 859 11/27/09 e-mail from Blinken to Klain, SCOH-000230. 86

# °FBI Serials 35 1A42, 512 1A614, 683 1A772; Recovered documents B6-B24. 

217 Based on this difference between the two folders, some reasonable jurors may 

conclude that when Mr. Eiden told Zwonitzer he "just found all the classified stuff 

downstairs," he may have been referring only to the "Afganastan" folder, which 

reminded him of his Thanksgiving memo. The "Afganastan" folder contained roughly 

a dozen marked classified documents, which could correspond to Mr. Biden's 

reference to "all the classified stuff' he found. And if Mr. Eiden found the 

"Afganastan" folder, it is possible he did not continue looking through the contents of 

the separate "Facts First" folder, whose cover had no label or other indication that 

the materials inside related to Afghanistan. 

None of these possibilities are particularly plausible. There is no reason to think, for example, that after identifying the contents of the "Afganastan" folder, Mr. Eiden stopped looking through folders that were nearby, including the "Facts First" folder, and that he never returned to these materials. 

But reasonable jurors who are unwilling to read too much into Mr. Biden's brief aside to Zwonitzer-"I just found all the classified stuff downstairs"-may find a shortage of evidence to establish that Mr. Eiden looked through the "Facts First" folder, which is the only folder known to contain national defense information. These jurors would acquit Mr. Eiden of willfully retaining national defense information from the "Facts First" folder. 

D.  For other reasons, a jury will be unlikely to unanimously convict Mr. Eiden 

Several additional facts would make it difficult for the government to present a case that reasonable jurors would unanimously find compelling. 

218 First, the Afghanistan documents are now almost fifteen years old. While there 

is evidence that some contain national defense information, in general, they concern 

a conflict that is now over, in a country where there are no longer any American 

troops, about a subject (the 2009 troop surge) that has already been widely discussed 

in books and media reports. At a trial, we expect the defense would strongly challenge 

whether the documents still contain sensitive national defense information. 

Second, Mr. Eiden was allowed to have the Afghanistan documents in his home 

for eight years as vice president. And when the documents were discovered in his 

home in December 2022, he was again allowed to have them there as president. To 

prevail, the government must convince a jury to convict him for having the documents 

in his home in between, in February 2017, about a month after he left the White 

House. Because the possibility that, even if Mr. Eiden discovered the Afghanistan 

documents, he might have forgotten about them soon after, any criminal charges 

would likely be limited to the days or perhaps weeks surrounding his conversation with Zwonitzer in February 2017. It may be difficult to convince a jury they should care about Mr. Biden's brief illicit possession of documents from 2009, particularly since he was allowed to possess the same documents both before February 2017 (as vice president) and after (as president). 

Third, as discussed to some extent above, Mr. Biden will likely present himself to the jury, as he did during his interview with our office, as a sympathetic, well meaning, elderly man with a poor memory. While he is and must be accountable for his actions-he is, after all, the President of the United States-based on our direct 

219 observations of him, Mr. Eiden is someone for whom many jurors will want to search 

for reasonable doubt. It would be difficult to convince a jury they should convict him 

by then a former president who will be at least well into his eighties-of a serious 

felony that requires a mental state of willfulness. 

Finally, while jurors might not find reasonable doubt in any one the evidentiary shortcomings identified above, some jurors may find reasonable doubt because of the cumulative effect of some or all of these shortcomings. 

E.  There is also insufficient evidence that Mr. Eiden willfully retained the handwritten Thanksgiving memo As explained in Chapter Six, inside the office of Mr. Biden's Delaware home, agents found his Af/Pak 1 notebook, which contamed his notes about the 2009 Afghanistan troop reviews. In the front of the notebook, binder-clipped together, were pages of the handwritten 2009 Thanksgiving memo in which Mr. Eiden made argument to President Obama opposing Afghanistan troop surge. The Thanksgiving memo discussed a November 2009 State Department cable, and the cable itself, which is marked as Confidential, is clipped to the memo. 8G1 In Mr. Biden's interview with our office, he said he "guess[ed]" he "wanted to hang onto [the Thanksgiving memo] for posterity's sake" because "this was my position on 

Afghanistan." 862 The handwritten memo, though unmarked, contains information that remains classified up to the Secret level.8 63 The State Department cable shows a              

> 861 FBI Serials 77 1A86, 682, 683 1A772; Evidence item 1B66; Recovered document D20.
> 862 Biden 10/9/23 Tr. at 21.
> 863 FBI Serial 676.

220 declassification date of November 2019, but the State Department has been unable 

to tell us if it has been formally declassified.  SG4 

Though the handwritten Thanksgiving memo has been determined to be currently classified, we cannot prove that Mr. Eiden believed it was classified after leaving office in 2017. The memo was derived from at least one document that was marked as classified in 2009, but during his interview with our office, Mr. Eiden said he did not consider the memo classified when he discussed it with his ghostwriter, Zwonitzer, in 2017 The memo concerned deliberations from more than seven years earlier about the Afghanistan troop surge, and in the intervening years those deliberations had been widely discussed in public, so Mr. Eiden could have reasonably expected that the memo's contents became less sensitive over time. Because we cannot prove that he knew the memo was classified when he left office, we cannot prove that retaining the memo, he willfully retained national defense information. As for the State Department cable, it does not appear to contain national defense information today, and there is no reason to believe it did in 2017. Therefore, the cable cannot be the subject of a willful retention charge under Section 793(e). In addition, Mr. Eiden told us in his interview that he does not recognize the marking "Confidential" as a classification marking. To him, the marking means the document 

should be held in confidence, but not necessarily that it is classified.  SGG Although "Confidential" is, in fact, a category of classified information enumerated in the  

> s64

Id.                            

> 865 See Chapter Six; Biden 10/9/23 Tr. at 31-33, 38 (explaining that the memo "wasn't a Top Secret thing," and was "not confidential in the classification sense"). 866 Eiden 10/9/23 Tr. at 24-25.

221 governing executive order, we would likely be unable to refute Mr. Biden's claim that he did not know this. * * *We conclude that the evidence is insufficient to meet the government's burden. In accordance the Justice Manual, because we do not believe the government is to a conviction at we decline prosecution. 

222 CHAPTER Tw:ELVE     

> ANALYSIS OF THE EVIDENCE-CLASSIFIED NOTEBOOKS

There is evidence that when Mr. Biden left office in 2017, he willfully retained his classified notebooks-that is, he knew he kept classified information in notebooks stored in his house and he knew he was not allowed to do so. There is also evidence that Mr. Biden willfully disclosed classified information in his notebooks to his ghostwriter by reading it aloud to him. We conclude that this evidence does not establish Mr. Biden's guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. We therefore decline prosecution of Mr. Biden based on his retention of his notebooks and disclosure of information in them. 

I.  WILLFUL INTENT 

A.  There is evidence that Mr. Biden retained the classified notebooks, knowing he was not allowed to do so As with the classified Afghanistan documents, there is evidence that Mr. Eiden kept his notebooks after his vice presidency knowing they were classified and he was not allowed to have them. The evidence shows convincingly that Mr. Biden knew the notebooks, as awhole, contained classified information. For eight years, he wrote in his notebooks about classified information during classified meetings in the White House Situation Room and elsewhere. 867 He was familiar with the notebooks' contents, which included 

obviously classified information. When reviewing the notebooks with Zwonitzer, Mr. Biden sometimes read aloud classified notes verbatim, but he also sometimes    

> 867 See Chapter Four.

223 appeared to skip over classified information, and he warned Zwonitzer that the material in the notebooks could be classified. 868 Mr. Biden also stored the notebooks in a classified safe in the vVhite House for a time as vice president because the 

notebooks were classified.  869 

In Mr. Biden's written answers to questions from our office, he called into question whether he knew the information in his notebooks was classified. In those answers, Mr. Eiden explained that when he described material in his notebooks to Zwonitzer as "classified'' he did not actually mean "classified." According to Mr. Eiden, "I may have used the word 'classified' with Mr. Zwonitzer in a generic sense, to refer not to the formal classification of national security information, but to sensitive or private topics to ensure that Mr. Zwonitzer would not write about 

them." 870 Mr. Biden qualified this answer by explaining, "I do not recall the specific conversations you reference with Mr. Zwonitzer, which took place more than six years 

ago."s,1 

This explanation-that "classified" does not mean "classified"-is not credible. At the time Mr. Biden met with Zwonitzer, Mr. Biden had nearly fifty years of experience dealing with classified information, including as a member of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, a member and Chairman of the Senate Committee on the Judiciary, a member and Chairman of the Senate Committee on Foreign       

> 868 Zwonitzer recordings 170424_0091, Carved_000556, Carved_00057L
> 869

See Chapter Four.                             

> 870 Eiden 10/1/2:3 written responses at l. Mr. Eiden said something similar during our in-person interview of him. Eiden 10/9/23 Tr. at 32-33.
> s, 1Eiden 10/1/23 written responses at l.

224 Relations, and Vice President of the United States. 872 It is not plausible that a person 

of his knowledge and experience used the term "classified" in this context as a

euphemism for "private." 

Mr. Biden's explanation is even less credible in light of his actual words to 

Zwonitzer. As described below, among the times Mr. Biden spoke to Zwonitzer about 

classified information was when Mr. Biden handed Zwonitzer a notebook entry about 

a National Security Council meeting in the Situation Room and asked if Zwonitzer 

could read Mr. Biden's handwriting. 873 Mr. Biden warned Zwonitzer, "Some of this 

may be classified, so be careful," and added, "I'm not sure. It isn't marked classified, 

but .... "s,1 

This is not a reference to merely private material. In this context, when aformer official of Mr. Biden's stature and experience warns someone without asecurity clearance to "be careful" because some information "may classified," and then refers to "marked classified" material, the former official is talking about classified national security information. 875 The evidence shows that Mr. Biden knew his notebooks contained such information. 

There is also evidence that Mr. Eiden knew he could not keep classified handwritten notes unsecured at home after his time as vice president.                                             

> 872 NARA_SCAN_00000904; Eiden, Joseph Robinette (Joe), Jr., Biographical Directory of the United States Congress, https://bioguideretro.congress.gov/Home/MemberD
> etails?memlndex=b000444 (last visited Jan. 30, 2024).
> 873 Zwonitzer recording 170424_0091; 170424_0091 Tr. at 13-14; Evidence item 1B80.
> 874 Zwonitzer recording 170424_0091; 170424_0091 Tr. at 13-14; Evidence item 1B80.
> 875 Zwonitzer recording 170424_0091; 170424_0091 Tr. at 13-14; Evidence item 1B80.

225 Mr. Eiden knew the purpose of classified handling rules: to prevent unauthorized disclosure of our nation's secrets The basic principles of the system that protects classified information should be clear to anyone who understands why it is necessary to protect such material in the first place. Information is classified only if its unauthorized disclosure "reasonably could be expected to cause ... damage to the national security." 876 To prevent such disclosure, people who access classified information must store it in authorized, secure places. 877 And • classified information is disclosed, for example to a foreign adversary, it can damage national security whether 1t is typewritten or 

handwritten. 878 

These principles are familiar. even obvious, to with experience handling classified information. And they have long been enshrined in the legal and policy regime used to safeguard our nation's secrets. regime requires classified information to safeguarded properly whether it is by hand or typed on a

keyboard. 879 

As above, when Mr. Eiden office in 17, he had nearly fifty years of experience with classified information, including eight years in the second-highest position in the Executive Branch. He was deeply familiar with the measures taken to  

> s,G

Executive Order 13526 § 1.2. 877 Id. § 4. l(g); 32 C.F.R. §§ 2001.43(b)(l) and 2001.53 (2024); Office of the Director of National Intelligence, Intelligence Community Directive 705 (2010).  

> 878

Under Executive Order 13526, information is classified only if ''its unauthorized disclosure could reasonably be expected to cause identifiable or describable damage to the national security," § 1.4, and "information" refers to "any knowledge that can be communicated or documentary material, regardless of its physical form or characteristics." § 6. l(t).    

> 879 See id.

§§ 2.1, 6. l(i), 6. l(o), 6. l(p), 6. l(t). 

226 safeguard classified information and the reasons for them. As Ron Klain, one of Mr. Biden's closest aides, explained, Mr. Eiden "had traveled the world. He knew the risks that men and women were taking to gather this information and ... felt a great deal 

of responsibility about it." 880 And John McGrail, Mr. Biden's top lawyer at the end of the Obama administration, said he would be "surprise[d]" if Mr. Biden intentionally took classified materials home because he well knew, from extensive government experience, that disclosure "can harm sources and methods and the national security interests of the United States."ssi 

2.  Mr. Biden's public statements show he knew the restrictions on handling classified information after leaving office 

Mr. Biden's public statements show he knew classified information must be safeguarded to protect intelligence sources and methods. As Mr. Biden has put 

"People know I take classified documents and classified information seriously." 882 In a September 2022 interview with CBS, Mr. Biden said the following in response to a question about the marked classified documents allegedly found in Mr. Trump's private home: 

Reporter: When you saw the photograph of the top secret documents laid out on the floor at Mar-a-Lago, what did you think to yourself? Looking at that image. 

Mr. Biden: How that could possibly happen. How one-anyone could be that irresponsible. And I thought, what data was in                                          

> sso Klain Tr. at 52-53.
> 88 1 McGrail 1/22/24 Tr. at 100-01, lll.
> 882 Carol E. Lee, Ken Dilanian, Kristen Welker, and Zoe Richards, Eiden says he was "surprised" to learn government docs were found at his former office, NBC NEWS (Jan. 10, 2023), h ttps://www.nbcnews.com/politics/w hite-house/less-dozen-classified-documents found-biden-office-sources-say-rcna65 l 79 (last visited Feb. 2, 2024).

227 there that may compromise sources and methods? By that I mean names of people who helped or th-- et cetera. And it just-- totally irresponsible. 883 

Mr. Biden's emphatic and unqualified conclusion that keeping marked classified documents unsecured in one's home is "totally irresponsible" because it "may compromise sources and methods" applies equally to his own decision to keep his notebooks at home in unlocked and unauthonzed containers. notebooks, like the marked documents, contained classified information, the unauthorized disclosure 

which could compromise intelligence sources and methods and damage national security. 884 And Mr. Biden's public statements, during his vice presidency and after, demonstrate that understands "classified information," not merely marked classified documents, is what must be protected. 885 These statements undercut his purported he lawfully retain the classified information in his notebooks.  

> 883

President Joe Eiden: The 2022 60 Minutes , CBS NEWS, at 12:09 (Sept. 12, 2022),  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ul UC89H4Swc (last visited Feb. 2, (emphasis added). 

ss 4 See Chapter Four.  

> 885

Carol E. Lee, Ken Dilanian, Kristen Welker, and Zoe Richards, Eiden says he was "surprised" to learn government docs were found at his former office, NBC NEWS (Jan. 10, 2023),  https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/white-house/less-dozen-classified-documents 

found-biden-office-sources-say-rcna65l79 (last visited Jan. 30, 2024); Transcript And Audw: Vice Presidential Debate, NPR NEWS (Oct. 11, 2012),  https://www.npr.org/2012/10/l  l/16275 4053/transcript-biden-ryan-vice-presidential-debate (last visited Jano 30, 2024) (during a vice presidential debate in October 2012, Mr. Eiden asserted that he had to be careful about safeguarding classified information when he said, "with regard to the ability of the United States to take action militarily. it is - it is not in my purview to talk about classified information"). 

228 Mr. Eiden has also publicly acknowledged limits on how he may properly 

handle classified information in his home, even as a sitting president. In August 2022, 

he told reporters: 

Reporter: Mr. President, in simple terms, is it ever appropriate for a President to take home with them classified and top secret documents? 

Mr. Eiden: Depending on the circumstance. For example, I have in my home, a cabined-off space that is completely secure. taking home with me today's PDB. It's locked. I have aperson with me-military with me. I read it, I lock it back up, and give it to the military. 

Reporter: Without a specialized area in which you can declassify documents, is it ever appropriate for a president to bring classified and top secret documents home with them? 

Mr. Eiden: It depends on the document, and it depends on how secure the room is. 886 

Eiden thought in 2022 that he was obligated to keep the PDB-the Presidenfs Daily Brief-secured in his home as a sitting president, he should have known in 2017 that as a former vice president and a private citizen he was not permitted to keep handwritten notes about the President's Daily Brief and other classified information in unlocked drawers in his home.                      

> 886 Remarks by President Biden Before Marine One Departure, The White House (Aug. 26, 2022), https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speeches -
> remar ks/2022/08/26/remar ks-by-presiden t-biden -before-marine-one-departure-18/ (last visited Jan. 30, 2024).

229 3.  As vice president, Mr. Biden received advice from staff about the need to secure classified notes properly Mr. Eiden received advice from his staff about the need to secure classified information in the form of notes. In 2011, his first Counsel to the Vice President, Cynthia Hogan, advised him in writing that classified notes generated in the context of discussions with a historian "must be maintained in secure safes" and "stored in asecure facility." 887 And as vice president, Mr. Eiden stored his classified notebooks in 

a safe, at least for a time, in contrast with his decision after leaving to keep the 

notebooks at home in unlocked and unauthorized drawers.  888 

4.  After his vice presidency, Mr. Eiden stored his classified notecards in a SCIF, but kept his classified notebooks in unlocked drawers at home 

When Eiden left office, he knew his staff decided to keep his classified 

in a SCIF at the National Archives, knew his notebooks contained the same type of classified information. As he told his ghostwriter during a recorded interview in October 2016, the same staff who eventually arranged for careful storage of his classified notecards in an Archives SCIF "didn't even know" he also had 

possession of his notebooks, which he simply took home without informing his staff.  889 

After his vice presidency, Mr. Eiden was reminded twice more that his classified notes should be secured in a SCIF: on each of the two days in 2017 when he 

visited the Archives SCIF to review his notecards in writing his book. 890 The form he                   

> 887 4/28/11 e-mail from Hogan to OVP staff, 1B001_02881349; 4/27/11 Briefing Memo from Hogan, 1B001_02881350. 888 See Chapter Four. 889 See id.
> 890 See id.

230 was required to sign at the Archives made clear he was accessmg classified 

information that could not leave the SCIF, and that he had an ongoing obligation to 

protect this information. 891 And at the end of his first visit, Archives staff asked to see the notes he had taken during his review of the notecards, to ensure he was not 

removing and mishandling classified information. 892 It should have been clear to Mr. Eiden that not only were his classified notecards required to be in a SCIF, he also could not take classified notes about those notecards home with him-and, by extension, he could not keep any classified notes at home at all. 

5.  Mr. Biden had strong motivations to ignore proper procedures for safeguarding his classified notebooks Finally, Mr. Eiden had strong motivations to ignore the proper procedures for safeguarding the classified information in his notebooks. He decided months before leaving office to write a book and began meeting with his ghostwriter while still vice 

president.  89 :3 After his vice presidency, the notebooks continued to be an invaluable resource that he consulted liberally. 894 During hours of recorded interviews in which he read aloud from his notebooks in his private home, Mr. Eiden provided raw material to his ghostwriter detailing meetings and events that would be of interest to 

prospective readers and buyers of his book. 895 He also likely viewed the notebooks, 

like the marked classified documents related to Afghanistan recovered from his garage, as an irreplaceable contemporaneous record of some of the most important  

> 891

See id.  

> 892

See id.; NARA Archivist 1 Tr. at 56-59, 77-78, 81-82, 93-94, 122-23. 893 See Chapter Five. 89 4 See Chapter Four. 895 See id. 

231 moments of his vice presidency. This record was valuable to him for many reasons, including to help defend his record and buttress his legacy as a world leader. 

B.  The evidence does not prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Eiden willfully retained the notebooks We do not believe this evidence would meet the government's burden at trial to prove Mr. Biden knew his handling of the notebooks broke law. We expect Mr. Biden's defense would be that he thought his notebooks were his personal property and that he was allowed to take them home after his vice presidency, even they contained classified information. Enough evidence supports this defense to establish reasonable doubt. First, we expect Mr. Biden to offer direct evidence that he believed he was entitled to take the notebooks home. During his interview with the Special Counsel's Office, Mr. Biden was emphatic, declaring that his notebooks are "my property," and that "every president before me has done the exact same thing," that is, kept handwritten materials after his term in office, even if they contain classified material. 896 He also specifically cited the diaries President Reagan kept while in office, noting that they included classified information. 897 Mr. Biden repeated this theme in his written answers to our questions, writing that, "[l]ike presidents and vice presidents before me, I understand these notes to be my personal property." 898 

At trial, we expect Mr. Eiden to offer similar evidence of his subjective understanding. Such evidence would be admissible as to the element of willfulness,                      

> 896 Eiden 10/9/23 Tr. at 41-43; Eiden 10/8/23 Tr. at 111-12. 897 Eiden 10/8/23 Tr. at 111-12. 898 Eiden 12/1/23 written responses at 1.

232 which requires proof that Mr. Eiden acted with intent to do something the law 

forbids. 899 And we expect the evidence of Mr. Biden's state of mind to be compelling 

clear, forceful testimony that he did, in fact, believe he was allowed to have the 

notebooks. While the government could question this testimony's veracity as a

convenient answer perhaps suggested by his attorneys after the discovery of his 

classified notebooks, such a suggestion lacks evidentiary support and Mr. Biden's 

testimony will likely carry significant weight with many jurors. 

The government could also question the veracity of Mr. Biden's testimony by introducing evidence that he appears to have come to and acted on the belief that he could take home classified notes entirely on his own, without the advice or knowledge of any of his staff, including the Counsel to the Vice President, John McGrail. 900 Based on the evidence we found, Mr. Eiden appears to have consulted no one on this significant question. None of the witnesses we interviewed recalled Mr. Eiden mentioning that he intended to take his classified notebooks home or that he believed he was permitted to do so, even during conversations in which McGrail told Mr. Eiden that all of Mr. Biden's records-including all his notes-would be sent to the National  

> 899

A broad array of defense evidence is admissible at criminal trials for willfulness crimes that would not be admissible for crimes that require a less culpable mental state. 

United States v. Lankford, 955 F.2d 1545, 1550 (11th Cir. 1992) (when willfulness is at issue, a defendant is entitled to "wide latitude in the introduction of evidence tending to show lack of intent") (quoting United States v. Garber, 607 F.2d 92, 99 (5th Cir. 1979) (en bane)); see also Cheek v. United States, 498 U.S. 192, 203 (1991) (reversible error to instruct the jury to disregard evidence of defendant's belief that he was not required to pay taxes "as incredible as such misunderstandings of and beliefs about the law might be"). Indeed, the Supreme Court has admonished, in the context of a tax crime requiring proof of willfulness, "forbidding the jury to consider evidence that might negate willfulness would raise a serious question under the Sixth Amendment's jury trial provision." Cheek, 498 U.S. at 203.  

> 900

McGrail 1/22/24 Tr. at 84-87, 97-119. 

233 Archives. 901 When interviewed, McGrail recalled that Mr. Biden "understood why his 

documents were going to [the National Archives.] ... He understood it and accepted 

it."90 2 McGrail also told us the following: 

• Mr. Biden never told McGrail that he was retaining any notes he took while vice president. 903 McGrail said Mr. Biden understood the approach of sending all his records to the National Archives so that archivists could 

separate presidential records from the rest.90 4

• Mr. Biden never told McGrail that he was retaining any classified notes. 90 ,3McGrail said he would have expected that to be part of the conversation he had with Mr. Biden about the handling of his notes. 906 

• McGrail never advised Mr. Biden that he could bring home classified material any kind. 907 Indeed, .McGrail said he would be surprised to learn that Mr. Eiden took classified materials home-even personal notes knowing they were classified because (1) that would have been "inconsistent with everything that we were killing ourselves trying to accomplish," 908 (2) he knows his home is not a SCIF, 909 and (3) as former chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Mr. Bi den knew that classified information cannot be stored outside a secure facility because its disclosure can harm national security and compromise intelligence sources and methods. 910 

• McGrail never spoke to Mr. Biden or anyone else about the Reagan diaries, or historical practices of presidents taking home classified diaries or other materials. 911  

> 90 1

See Chapter Four.  

> 902

McGrail 1/22/24 Tr. at 115.  

> 903

Id. at 84, 117.   

> 9o,i

Id. at 86-87, 115.  

> 905

Id. at 98-99.  

> 906

Id. at 117.  

> 90,

Id. at 107, 111-12.  

> 908

Id. at 112.  

> 909

Id. at 101.  

> 910

Id. at 100-01. 111.   

> 91 1

Id. at 73-74, 119. 

234 All that said, we expect Mr. Biden's defense at trial to remain fairly simple. 

According to McGrail, the only thing he recalls telling Mr. Eiden about the disposition 

of his records was that all his records would go to the National Archives after the 

administration to separate personal from presidential records.  912 McGrail says he 

never spoke to Mr. Eiden about classified notes or how they should be stored. 913 

From this, Mr. Eiden will likely claim that McGrail outlined a cautious 

arrangement-not a legal requirement-to treat all his records as presidential 

records until the Archives could sort out what was personal. But, Mr. Eiden will likely 

say, he never believed his notebooks, which he thought of as his personal diaries, fell 

within that arrangement. He treated the notebooks markedly differently from the 

rest of his notes and other presidential records throughout his vice presidency, for 

example, allowing staff to store and review his notecards, but not his notebooks.  914 

This treatment, he will argue, and the extremely personal content of some of the 

notebooks, shows that he considered them to be his personal property. Mr. Biden's 

notebooks included gut-wrenching passages about his son's death and other highly 

personal material.  915 His claim that he believed he did not need to send what he considered to be his personal diary to be stored at a government facility will likely 

appeal to some jurors. 916   

> 912

See Chapter Four.  

> 913

See id.  

> 914

See id.  

> 915

E.g., Notebook entries 1B57-0051, 54.                             

> 916 The government could respond that many of the notebooks are unlike diaries because they contain work notes, including minutes of meetings of the National Security Council and other classified briefings.

See Chapter Four. These notebooks do not meet the 

235 We expect Mr. Biden also to contend that the presence of classified information 

in what he viewed as his diary did not change his thinking. As a member of the 

exclusive club of former presidents and vice presidents, Mr. Biden will claim that he 

knew such officials kept diaries, and he knew or expected that those diaries-like Mr. 

Reagan's-contained classified information. 917 He also understood that former 

presidents and vice presidents took their diaries home upon leaving office, without 

being investigated or prosecuted for it. Thus, whatever McGrail now thinks of the 

matter, Mr. Biden will claim that it did not occur to him to store what he thought of 

as his personal diaries-which he held close for eight years-at the National 

Archives, and he certainly did not know that by failing to do so he committed a crime. 

Contemporaneous evidence from immediately after the vice presidency 

supports this defense. a recorded conversation with on April 26, 2017, 

l\fr. Biden: I'm told by [a personal aide], I guess he checked with you, in order for me to get my, uh, get all those presidential notes I had for lunch, the luncheon meetings, I have to go to McGrail? 

Assistant: Yes, McGrail has them. We were supposed to turn it in and that is the last person who had them.                                                                                                                             

> definition of "personal records" under the Presidential Records Act because they "relate to or have an effect upon the carrying out of' the duties of the vice president, and they are not "of apurely private or nonpublic character." 44 U.S.C. §2201(3). But Mr. Eiden will likely present acompelling case that he viewed the notebooks as his personal diaries or the rough equivalent. Indeed, in arecorded conversation with Zwonitzer, while reviewing anotebook entry about anational security meeting, Mr. Biden twice referred to the passage as a·'diary entry." Carved_000556. And, as discussed extensively in Chapter Ten, Mr. Reagan's diaries contained several instances of classified information, the Department of Justice described them as his "personal records," and Mr. Reagan brought them home after his presidency without repercussion.
> 91, See Chapter Ten.

236 Mr. Eiden: OK. Uh. See if you can get me McGrail on the line while I have you now. OK? And stay on okay? Assistant: Got it sir. Hold on. Zwonitzer: This is probably something that goes to the presidential papers. Mr. Eiden: I don't think so. It was in between. I didn't want to turn them in. Zwonitzer: Right so, it's the gray area.91s This exchange concerned Mr. Biden's handwritten notecards, which, like his notebooks, addressed both personal and official matters, and which also contained classified information. 919 The evidence suggests, as explained above, that McGrail decided the classified notecards should be stored at the National Archives after the 

administration, with Mr. Eiden telling Zwonitzer he did not want to do so.  920 But when Zwonitzer suggested that the notecards might be "presidential papers''-that is, presidential records that are required by law to be stored at the National Archives-Mr. Eiden disagreed. Mr. Eiden explained that he did not think he was required to turn in the notecards and that he had not wanted to do so. One interpretation of this exchange that the evidence permits is that, while Mr. Eiden followed McGrail's advice to store the classified notecards in a SCIF at the Archives, he did not believe he was required to, and he thought that, at most, the notecards fell into an "in between" or "gray area." Indeed, when interviewed, McGrail              

> 918 Zwonitzer recording Carved_000599 (emphasis added); Carved_000599 Tr. at 3-4;
> FBI Serials 315, 335. 919

See Chapter Four. 920 See id. 

237 recalled that he advised Mr. Eiden to turn over all his records, "whether personal or 

not," to the National Archives.  921 McGrail's advice was premised on a desire to avoid 

taking a constrained view of the Presidential Records Act's requirements, as McGrail 

believed former vice president Dick Cheney had, and the understanding that 

archivists would review Mr. Biden's notes and separate presidential records from the 

rest. 922 McGrail also said he believed that the notes were to be stored in a SCIF at 

the Archives due to their general sensitivity, not because were classified.  92:3 

At trial, Mr. Eiden would argue that the 2017 Zwonitzer recording is the best 

evidence of what he believed after the vice presidency, and it shows he did not believe 

he was legally required to store his notecards at the Archives, and that he thought 

the same about his notebooks. In this way, the Zwonitzer recording dovetails with 

Mr. Biden's expected defense at trial that the Presidential Records Act defined his 

notebooks as his personal property, and that the him to keep these  

> 921

McGrail 1/22/24 Tr. at 83.  

> 922

Id. at 83.  

> 92 '

Id. at 114. McGrail's recollection on this point is inconsistent with e-mails and other documents that suggest he knew the notecards contained classified information in late 2016 and early 2017. 10/7/16 e-mails between Ratner, Associate Counsel, McGrail, and others, NARAWH-00017698, NARAWH-00017743, NARAWH-00019307; 10/18/16 e-mails between Associate Counsel, McGrail, and others, NARAWH-00017820; 10/20/16 e-mail from Ratner to Ricchetti, McGrail, Kahl et al., 1B001_03798594; 11/14/16 e-mail from McGrail, SCOH-000340; 1/05/17 e-mail from Associate Counsel to McGrail, SCOH-000339; 1/5/17 and 1/6/17 e-mails between Associate Counsel, McGrail, and NARA Archivist 1, SCOH-000326, SCOH-000330, SCOH-000332, SCOH-000334; 1/6/17 Handwritten Note re: VP diary/notecards. It is also at odds with the recollection of the NARA archivist that McGrail told him the notecards contained classified information, NARA Archivist 1 Tr. at 56, 62, and the understanding of the associate counsel who helped McGrail arrange for the notecards to be stored at the Archives. In an interview with our office, she said that ''it was the safest decision to have [the notecards] be in a SCIF since there u:{ere] hhely classified documents." 

Associate Counsel 8/29/23 Tr. at 9-10, 76 (emphasis added). McGrail's memory of these events could well have faded over the course of more than six years. 

238 notebooks in his home, even if they contained classified information. That Mr. Biden 

was mistaken in his legal judgment is not enough to prove he acted willfully, which 

requires intent to do something the law forbids.  924 

The defense will buttress these claims by contending that other credible authorities, including at least one former president and the Department of Justice, also have concluded that a former president may keep handwritten notes even if they contain classified information. As discussed in Chapter Ten, the clearest historical example is President Reagan, who left the White House in 1989 with eight years' worth of handwritten diaries, which he kept at his private home in California. The Reagan diaries contained classified information, such as entries recounting National Security Council meetings and referencing highly sensitive intelligence sources and 

methods, including human sources and signals intelligence.  92 :i Some entries that addressed sensitive subjects included descriptions such as "top secret" and "very hush hush," and some entries remained classified Top Secret as of 2007, decades after Mr. 

Reagan wrote them. 

As we also describe in Chapter Ten, during the Poindexter litigation in 1989 and 1990, after Mr. Reagan's presidency, the Department of Justice took the position in public court filings that the diaries were both "currently classified" and Mr. Reagan's "personal records" that were not in the Archives' possession. 926 In a later                                 

> 924 See Chapter Nine and n.899 above. 925 See Chapter Ten. 926 Memorandum in Support of Motion to Quash Subpoena to A.rchivist and Statement
> of Interest by the Department of Justice at 2-3, 6-7, 17 n.8, 20, United States u. Poindexter,
> Crim No. 88-0080-01 (HHG).

239 written order, the district court, after conducting an in camera review of diary 

excerpts, described the diaries as containing "classified and highly sensitive information" including an entry about "a certain top-secret and extremely sensitive activity." 927 

After these legal declarations by the Department and the court, the classified diaries remained in Mr. Reagan's private home for another fifteen years, until he in 2004. And even though the Department of Justice publicly acknowledged that Mr. Reagan treated the diaries as his personal records and they were not in possession the National Archives, to our knowledge neither the Department nor anyone else sought the diaries' return or initiated a criminal mvestigation. 928 

In short, there will be evidence at that at least one former president did Mr. Eiden now claims it was proper for him to do too: take his diaries home leaving the White House, even though the diaries contained classified information. As indicated by letters we have received from the VVhite House Counsel's Office and . Biden's personal attorneys, defense will argue that the Department Justice blessed this view in Reagan's case stating in public filings that the diaries were both classified and Mr. Reagan's personal records and by taking no recovery or enforcement action. Most jurors would likely find this precedent  

> 927

United States i·. Poindexter, 732 F. Supp. 135, 138 n.5, 141 (D.D.C. Jan. 30, 1990). 928 See Chapter Ten. 

240 and Mr. Bide n's claimed reliance on it, evidence of which we expect would be admitted 

at trial, 929 to be compelling evidence that Mr. Biden did not act willfully. 

The government could reply that, whatever the reasons for the Department of 

Justice's inaction in Mr. Reagan's case-including, perhaps, that former presidents 

have Secret Service protection indefinitely after leaving office, or simply that officials 

at the Department did not realize Mr. Reagan stored his diaries at home-the 

relevant executive order and controlling regulations require former presidents and 

vice presidents to store classified information in a secured location after their time in 

office.rno 

While we agree with this statement of the law, and we recogmze the 

Reagan precedent is from a different era with a different legal landscape, we think 

jurors assessing Mr. Biden's guilt and intent will be persuaded less by what the 

government says in executive orders and agency regulations, and more by what the 

government actually has done (or not done) by way of enforcement among the small  

> 9 ~9

Admissible evidence concerning a lack of willfulness can include legal materials upon which the defendant claims to have relied in forming the view that his conduct was not forbidden by law, so long as the defendant lays a proper foundation. United States L'. Powell, 

955 F.2d 1206, 1214 (9th Cir. 1991); see also United States u. Harris, 942 F.2d 1125, 1132 n.6 (7th Cir. 1991) (noting that, in the context of tax crimes requiring proof of willfulness, defendants can introduce expert testimony about case law "to the extent that the defendant claims actual reliance on that case law"); United States v. Willie, 941 F.2d 1384, 1392-98 (10th Cir. 1991) (to show lack of willfulness in a tax case, defendant can introduce evidence to prove his "descriptive" belief that the law does not apply to him, but not his "normative" belief that the law should not apply to him).  

> 930

See Executive Order 13526 §§ 4.1, 4.4; Superseding Indictment ~:.-: 18-19, United States v. Trump, No. 23-CR-80101-AMC, ECF No. 85. It is not clear that the presence of Secret Service agents materially enhances the level of protection afforded to classified materials. Agents we interviewed said they focus on the protection of persons, not documents, and they do not monitor the movement of or access to documents. Secret Service Supervisor Tr. at 12-13; Secret Service Special Agent 1 8/24/23 Tr. at 27-29, 87-88; Secret Service Special Agent 2 Tr. at 31-33. 

241 group of former presidents and vice presidents. Many jurors would conclude that, 

given the Department's treatment of Mr. Reagan, who kept his classified diaries for more than a decade before his death, it would have been plausible for Mr. Biden to believe he could properly keep his classified notebooks. Citing relevant sources of 

likely would not sway such jurors from this conclusion. 

We also believe some of the same evidence that supports reasonable doubt for the classified Afghanistan documents also supports reasonable doubt for the notebooks, including Mr. Biden's cooperation with the investigation, his diminished faculties in advancing age, and his sympathetic demeanor. These factors likely make it difficult for jurors to conclude he had criminal intent. 

Finally, the two main sets of evidence summarized above, suggesting Mr. Biden knew he was not allowed to keep classified note books, do not suffice to prove his willfulness beyond a reasonable doubt. The first set of evidence is that . Biden, at his staffs insistence. stored his classified notecards in a SCIF at the Archives, and several months earlier in the fall of 2016 he told Zwonitzer "they didn't even know I

have this [notebook]." 931 This could suggest that Mr. Biden concealed his notebooks from staff to avoid restrictions on his access to or use of them. 

But the defense will argue that this treatment of the notecards and notebooks 1s also consistent with an innocent explanation: Mr. Biden may have simply acquiesced to his staffs decision to store his notecards in the Archives SCIF, even though, as he suggested to his ghostwriter on April 26, 2017, he (like Mr. Reagan and    

> 93 1 See Chapter Four.

242 the Department of Justice before him) did not think he was required to do so. If that 

is what happened, Mr. Eiden was not required to inform his staff that their (in his view) unnecessary advice could also apply to his notebooks. His failure to flag the notebooks for what he believed to be his staffs overly cautious treatment is not compelling evidence of willfulness. In the same vein, Mr. Eiden could have concluded that the forms he signed about safeguarding classified information in the Archives SCIF were boilerplate paperwork that applied in most cases, but not to the handwritten materials of a former president or vice president, which historically have been treated as the former officeholder's personal property. And he could point to McGrail's current understanding that the notecards were stored in a SCIF simply to 

keep them secure, not because they were classified.  932 

The second set of evidence concerns the guidance on "best practices" that Counsel Cynthia Hogan gave Mr. Eiden in 2010 and 2011 about handling classified information, and his decision after receiving this guidance to store the notebooks in a safe in the White House. 933 This evidence, too, is consistent with innocence. By the time Mr. Eiden left the White House in 2017, Hogan's guidance about storage in asafe was six years old, and Mr. Eiden had long since stopped following it. The evidence suggests that he did not store his notebooks in a safe for the last several years of his 

administration, and no one in the White House raised concerns.  934            

> 932 McGrail 1/22/24 Tr. at 69-70, 113-14, 129-30. 933 See Chapters Three and Four. 934 See id.

243 While Mr. Biden may have recalled Hogan's advice and concluded that it meant 

he should not bring the notebooks home with him when he left the White House, there 

is no evidence he did so recall. And there would have been good reason for him not to 

think this way, especially since Hogan gave her 2010 advice seven years earlier 

during a meeting scheduled to last ten minutes, and Mr. Biden had long since stopped 

following her advice, which Hogan told us would have reflected best practices rather 

than legal requirements_9:l5 

For these reasons, we do not believe the government could prove beyond a

reasonable doubt that Mr. B1den knew it was unlawful to retain his notebooks at his 

home after the vice presidency. 

C.  The evidence does not prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Eiden willfully disclosed national defense information in the notebooks to his ghostwriter 

We have also considered whether Mr. Eiden willfully disclosed national defense information to Zwonitzer by reading certain passages of his notes, aloud and nearly verbatim, from national security meetings. 936 Mr. Eiden should have known that by reading his unfiltered notes about classified meetings in the Situation Room, he risked sharing classified information with his ghostwriter. But we do not believe the evidence supports charges of willful disclosure beyond a reasonable doubt. 

At least three times, Mr. Eiden read classified notes from national security meetings to Zwonitzer nearly verbatim. The first two incidents involved the same             

> 935 See id.
> 936 See 18 U.S.C. §793(e) (prohibiting the willful transmission of national defense information).

244 notebook passage. 937 On February 16, 2017, Mr. Eiden appeared to explain to 

Zwonitzer that a notebook entry related to "a long meeting on the Security Council 

on - it probably was classified." 938 Mr. Eiden had skipped over this entry entirely 

during a recorded conversation with Zwonitzer several months earlier in October 

2016. 939 But during the February 16, 2017 recorded conversation, Mr. Eiden read 

aloud to Zwonitzer portions of the notebook entry that contained classified 

information.94 0

Two months later, on April 10, 2017, during another recorded conversation with Zwonitzer, Mr. Eiden turned to the same notebook entry and read additional classified portions aloud, again nearly verbatim. 941 He did so immediately after reviewing aloud highly emotional notebook entries about the death of his son Beau and other personal topics, which appeared on the pages right before the classified entry.942 

This evidence shows that Mr. Eiden disclosed classified information to Zwonitzer, who was not authorized to receive it. But the evidence falls short of proving that Mr. Eiden did so willfully-that is, that he knew these notebook passages were classified and that he intended to share classified information with Zwonitzer. During the February 16, 2017 conversation, Mr. Eiden appeared to say                            

> 9s7See Chapter Five.
> 938 Zwonitzer recording Carved_000556; Carved_000556 Tr. at 4; Notebook entry 1B57-0062-65; FBI Serials 315, 335; Evidence item 1B79; Evidence item 1B81.
> 939 See Chapter Five.
> 940 See id.
> 941 See id.
> 942 See id.

245 that the meeting his notes summarized-not his notes themselves-"probably" was 

classified.  943 Though it was foreseeable that Mr. Eiden's notes about a classified meeting would themselves be classified (which they were), the evidence does not prove definitively that Mr. Eiden actually knew that, or that he intended to share classified information. 

And during the April 10, 2017 meeting, jurors could well conclude that Mr. Eiden read the same classified entry without pausing to consider that it was classified, given his discussion of highly emotional topics with Zwonitzer just before he read the classified passage, and the lack of any pause before Mr. Eiden launched 

into reading the classified entry.  941 Though it would require jurors to that Mr. Eiden ignored or missed clear warning signs that he was sharing classified information with Zwonitzer in February and April 201 we believe some reasonable Jurors likely reach that conclusion. 

The third incident happened on April 24, 2017, when Mr. Eiden read aloud to Zwonitzer portions of a different entry of classified notes from a National Security Council meeting, also nearly verbatim. 915 \Vhen Mr. Eiden could not read a particular word in the entry, he showed the entry to Zwonitzer but warned him, "Some of this may be classified, so be careful ... I'm not sure. It isn't marked classified, but..." 946  

> 9• 13

See id.  

> 914

See id.  

> 945

See id.  

> 946

See id. 

246 Mr. Eiden nonetheless continued to read aloud and nearly verbatim portions of the 

same passage of his notes, some of which remain classified at the Secret level.9 47 

Mr. Eiden's decision to read notes nearly verbatim to Zwonitzer that Mr. Eiden 

had just identified as potentially classified cannot be justified. But the evidence does 

not prove beyond a reasonable doubt that he intended to share classified information. 

Mr. Eiden told Zwonitzer he was "not sure" the notebook passage he read was 

classified. That is enough to create reasonable doubt about whether Mr. Eiden acted 

willfully. 

There 1s also evidence that Mr. Eiden took some steps to avoid sharing classified information with Zwonitzer. As explained in Chapter Five, Mr. Eiden sometimes skipped over notebook passages to avoid reading classified information. And if called as a witness at trial, Zwonitzer would testify that Mr. Eiden mentioned the need to be careful "because he was worned that there was a possibility that ... some of this stuff [handwritten entries in the notebooks] could be classified," and, "there were things he couldn't tell me, lines he couldn't cross." 948 

Given the intelligence and military officials present and the topics discussed at the meetings Mr. Eiden recounted for Zwonitzer, Mr. Eiden should have realized that his notes did or were likely to contain classified information. But taken as awhole, the evidence will likely leave jurors with reasonable doubts about whether Mr. Eiden knew he was sharing classified information with Zwonitzer and intended to do so. For these jurors, Mr. Eiden's apparent lapses and failures in February and April      

> 947 See id.
> 948 Zwonitzer 7/31/23 Tr. at 83.

247 2017 will likely appear consistent with the diminished faculties and faulty memory 

he showed in Zwonitzer's interview recordings and in our interview of him.  949 Therefore, we conclude that the evidence does not establish that Mr. Biden willfully disclosed national defense information to Zwonitzer.    

> 949 See Chapter Eleven.

248 CHAPTER THIRTEEN 

> ANALYSIS OF PRINCIPLES OF FEDERAL PROSECUTION FACTORS

In addition to considering the sufficiency of the evidence, we have also evaluated "all relevant considerations" in aggravation and mitigation and determined that on balance, for both the marked classified Afghanistan documents and the classified notebooks, these factors do not warrant criminal charges. 950 

I.  HISTORICAL PRACTICE 

While in office, the president and vice president, like members of Congress and federal judges, are exempt from the ordinary rules governing classified information that apply to almost everyone else. 951 As discussed in Chapter Nine, presidents and vice presidents are constitutional officers whose handling of classified information supports their Article II functions of conducting foreign affairs and providing for the national defense. 952 After their time in office, for much of our nation's history, it appears that many former presidents and vice presidents knowingly retained information concerning national security without being subject to criminal investigations or charges. 953 This historical record is important context for judging  

> 950

Memorandum for All Federal Prosecutors: General Department Policies Regarding Charging, Pleas, and Sentencing, Office of the Att'y Gen. (Dec. 16, 2022) at 1-2 (even if aprosecutor is able to obtain and sustain a conviction, "a prosecutor should not commence a prosecution if the prosecution would not serve a substantial federal interest," and in determining whether a substantial federal interest exists, the prosecutor should "weigh all relevant considerations," including nine enumerated factors); U.S. Dep't of Just., Just. Manual§§ 9-27.001, 9-27.230 (2023).  

> 951

See Chapter One.  

> 952

See nn. 768-70 above.  

> 953

See Chapter Ten. 

249 whether and why to charge a former vice president (and president) such as Mr. Eiden 

for the same acts taken by several of his predecessors. 

With one exception, there is no record of the Department of Justice prosecuting a former president or vice president for mishandling classified documents from his own administration. The exception is former President Trump. is not our role to assess the criminal charges pending against Mr. Trump, but several material distinctions between Mr. Trump's case and Mr. Eiden's are clear. Unlike the evidence involving Mr. Eiden, the allegations set forth in the indictment of Mr. Trump, proven, would clearly establish not only Mr. Trump's willfulness but also serious aggravating facts. 

Most notably, after being given multiple chances to return classified documents avoid prosecution, Mr. Trump allegedly did the opposite According to the • not refused to return documents for months, but he also obstructed justice by enlisting others to destroy evidence and then to about   

> 95 ,i

In contrast, Mr. Eiden alerted authorities, turned in classified documents to the National Archives and the Department of Justice in 2022 and 2023, consented to the search of multiple locations including his homes, permitted the seizure and review of handwritten notebooks he believed to be his personal property, and in numerous 

other ways cooperated with the investigation.  956      

> 954 Superseding Indictment ,i,i 7-8,

United States v. Trump, No. 23-CR-80101-AMC, ECF No. 85.  

> 955

Id.   

> ,i 55

See Chapter Two; see also U.S. Dep't of Just., Just. Manual § 9-27.230 (2023) (a person's willingness to cooperate is a relevant factor in determining whether prosecution is warranted). 

250 With respect to Mr. Biden's notebooks, the Reagan precedent provides an 

additional reason to forgo criminal charges. The Department of Justice previously 

informed a court in public filings that Mr. Reagan's diaries were both "currently 

classified" and Mr. Reagan's "personal records." 957 This should give the Department 

pause before now concluding that Mr. Eiden will be charged with a crime for retaining 

his own classified writings. Such an about-face, without previous public warning that 

is sharper than the relevant executive order and regulations, would be seen by many 

to violate basic principles of notice and fairness. 958 And even though it is possible the 

Department lacked knowledge of all the facts about how Mr. Reagan stored his 

diaries, officials knew they contained classified information and that Mr. Reagan was 

treating them as his personal records, and it appears no one ever asked how the 

diaries were stored or made efforts to recover them. 959  

> 957

See Chapter Ten.  

> 958

Other officials have been prosecuted for the retention of classified notes-most notably, David Petraeus, who served as a four-star general in the Army and later Director of the Central Intelligence Agency. See Plea Agreement at ~ 1, United States v. Petraeus, 3: 15 -

cr-00047 (W.D.N.C. Mar. 3, 2015), ECF No. 2. There are significant similarities between Petraeus's case and Mr. Biden's, but the differences are more significant. First, Petraeus's retention of notebooks violated numerous nondisclosure agreements he signed as an employee of the Department of Defense. By contrast, by virtue of his unique constitutional role as vice president, Mr. Eiden signed no such nondisclosure agreements or attestations. Second, Petraeus lied when questioned by FBI agents, telling them he had not provided classified information to his biographer. See id. at ~ 32. Mr. Biden's case began with aproactive self-disclosure, and he has cooperated with the Department of Justice and special counsel by consenting to multiple searches of his personal residence and offices. Third, there was stronger evidence of willfulness in Petraeus's case, in light of his lies and obfuscations, whereas Mr. Eiden has asserted his rightful ownership of his notebooks based on a long history of former presidents and vice presidents retaining diaries, notes, and other writings that contained classified information. Despite these important differences, Petraeus was charged only with a misdemeanor violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1924, a statute that, as discussed in Chapter Nine, is not applicable to the facts of this case.  

> 959

See Chapter Ten. 

251 In the past forty years, twelve men and women have served as president and 

vice president. At least two-Mr. Reagan and Mr. Eiden-have kept handwritten notes containing classified material at their homes after leaving office. It is quite possible that others had or presently have such handwritten notes in their personal possession to this day. We have not identified aggravating facts that compel bringing the first prosecution of such actions here. 

In reaching our decision, we did not consider every circumstance in which criminal charges against a former president or vice president for mishandling classified information may be warranted. But on the facts of this case, given the historical practices we have discussed, the evidence revealed in our investigation, and the extent of Mr. Bide n's cooperation, criminal charges are not warranted. 960   

> II. OTHER FACTORS

We have also considered other factors the Department traditionally applies when considering charges for mishandling classified information. Those factors are: 

(1)  The volume of classified information and the manner in which it is stored; 

(2)  The sensitivity of the information, including the level of classification and whether it is dated or recent; 

(3)  Reasons the person retained the information; 

(4)  Whether the information was disclosed to someone else, and under what circumstances: 

(5)  Whether there is a potential foreign nexus: 

(6)  Whether the person made false statements related to the retention; and                      

> 9r;o See 28 C.F.R. §600.7 (explaining that "[a] Specia] Counsel shall comply ,vith the rules, regulations, procedures, practices and policies of the Department of.Justice.'}

252 (7)  Other relevant aggravating and mitigating factors. 

While these factors cut in different directions, on balance, they favor 

declination of charges against Mr. Eiden. 

The volume of classified information is not small, while it could support a

decision to being criminal charges, it does not require such charges. As for the 

sensitivity and recency of the information, the Afghanistan documents are relatively 

old and concern a conflict that is now over. The notebook entries contain some highly 

sensitive information that is more recent, dating as late as 2017. Mr. Reagan also 

kept classified information at home in his diaries after his presidency. 

If Mr. Eiden retained the classified documents intentionally, he appears to have done so to defend his record and burnish his credentials to run for president. This factor counts against him. It is difficult to conceive of good reasons to risk the nation's security by mishandling classified information, and bolstering one's reputation is not one. 

There is no evidence that Mr. Eiden shared classified information with any foreign person. As discussed in Chapter Twelve, though, he did share classified information with Zwonitzer by reading from classified notebook entries to Zwonitzer nearly verbatim. These entries included entries concerning human intelligence sources, as well as entries that Mr. Eiden had previously identified as classified or potentially classified. 961 Mr. Eiden's decision to take home notebooks knowing that as a whole they contained classified information, and then read verbatim notes from    

> 961 See Chapter 5.

253 national security meetings to his ghostwriter-recognizing those notes were at least 

potentially classified-counts squarely in aggravation. 

We cannot prove that Mr. Eiden made any false statements related to his retention of classified information. As noted in Chapter Twelve, he provided one answer to our written questions that was not credible-that when he described his notebook entries to Zwonitzer as classified or potentially classified, he did not really mean "classified," he merely meant "private." 962 But, while incredible, we cannot prove this statement was false. Mr. Eiden prefaced it by explaining that he did not 

remember the specific conversations in question, which occurred more than six years 

ago.  9 G:l And even if this written answer is a strike against Mr. Eiden. the other instances of his cooperation with our investigation weigh heavily in his favor. 

Other aggravating and mitigating facts addressed in the Justice Manual also counsel against prosecution. At the time of any trial or sentencing, Mr. Eiden would 

be well into his eighties, an age when relatively few people are prosecuted. 961 He has no criminal record. 96 •3 He is highly unlikely to be sentenced to prison or assessed asignificant fine. 966 Any deterrent effect of prosecution would likely be slight. 967 We are not concerned with specific deterrence, as we see little risk he will reoffend. As for general deterrence, future presidents and vice presidents are already likely to be deterred by the multiple recent criminal investigations, and one prosecution, of        

> 962 Biden 12/1/23 written responses at 1.
> 963

Id.  

> 964

See U.S. Dep't of Just., Just. Manual§ 9-27.230(7) (2023),  

> 965

See id. § 9-27.230(5) (2023).  

> 966

See id. § 9-27.230(9) (2023).  

> 967

See id. § 9-27.230(3) (2023), 

254 current and former presidents and vice presidents for mishandling classified 

documents. 968 Mr. Eiden has served the nation for nearly fifty years as President and 

Vice President of the United States and United States Senator. 969 On balance, his 

record of service also supports a decision to forgo criminal charges.   

> ***

The practice of retaining classified material m unsecured locations poses serious risks to national security, given the vulnerability of extraordinarily sensitive information to loss or compromise to America's adversaries. The Department routinely highlights such risks when pursuing classified mishandling prosecutions. But addressing those risks through the criminal law, the only means available to this office, is not the proper remedy here. 

For the classified Afghanistan documents and the classified notebooks, we believe the evidence falls short of supporting criminal charges. And other factors that inform our decision under the Principles of Federal Prosecution lead us to conclude that "the fundamental interests of society" do not "require" such  charges. 97  °For these reasons, we decline prosecution.           

> 968 See id. §9-27.230(3) (2023).
> 969 See id. § 9-27.230(7) (2023).
> 970 See id. §§ 9-27.001, 9-27.220 (2023).

255 CHAPTER FOURTEEN        

> CLASSIFIED DOCUMENTS FOUND AT THE PENN BIDEN CENTER

I.  FACTS 

A.  Description of the Penn Biden Center The Penn Eiden Center is housed in an office space leased the University of Pennsylvania on the sixth floor of a commercial office building near the United States Capitol in Washington, D.C. The office space includes a reception area, conference rooms, a kitchen and pantry, a copy room, a large office for Mr. Eiden designed to resemble the vice president's West Wing office, and roughly a dozen smaller offices and workrooms arrayed in a circle around a central, open office space. Mr. Eiden's 

office adjoins one of the smaller workrooms-sometimes called the "outer office" w here Mr. Eiden's personal assistant, scheduler, and trip director sat. 971        

> Penn Bid en Center floor plan 9 ~2
> 971

PBC Scheduler Tr. at 63-64. 972 SCOH-000451; FBI Serial 344 IA415. 

256 B.  Events leading up to the discovery of classified documents at the Penn Biden Center 

In March 2021, Mr. Biden's director of Oval Office operations visited the Penn 

Biden Center at Mr. Biden's request.  973 She described the purposes of the visit as: (1) 

to look for personal items such as family photographs and awards that Mr. Biden might want to display in the Oval Office, and (2) to "get a sense of what was there" more generally. 974 The director of Oval Office operations took photographs to 

document her visit and compiled an inventory with the help of an assistant. 975 In addition to personal items such as framed photographs, flags, awards, books, and challenge coins located in Mr. Biden's office, she noted the presence of "40 boxes" in a "hallway closet." 976 She took photographs of the boxes. 977 After the visit, she reported back to Mr. Biden what she had found. According to the director of Oval Office operations, the conversation was "very fast" and "pretty informal," and Mr. 

Biden did not provide any further direction about the Penn Biden Center. 978 

In May 2022, White House Counsel Dana Rem us undertook an effort to 

retrieve Mr. Biden's files from the Penn Biden Center.  979 Remus described the original purpose of that effort as gathering materials to prepare for potential congressional inquiries about the Biden family's activities during the period from  

> 973

Director of Oval Office Operations Tr. at 12-13. 974 Id. at 12-14, 19, 25. 975 Id. at 19-21; FBI Serial 348 1A419; WH-SCH-000000003 at 17. 976 FBI Serial 348 1A419; Penn Center Inventory, WH-SCH-000000003. 977 FBI Serial 348 1A419; WH-SCH-000000007 at 10-11; Director of Oval Office 

Operations Tr. at 19-20. 978 Director of Oval Office Operations Tr. at 27-28. 979 Remus Tr. at 64-66; Moore 11/18/22, FBI Serial 16. 

257 2017 through 2019, when Mr. Eiden was actively engaged with the Center. 980 Through later conversations, Remus learned that the Penn Eiden Center's offices contained a mix of Mr. Bide n's materials-including personal material-that was not limited to records of his activities from 2017 through 2019. 981 Eventually, the goal of Mr. Biden's staff became to clear out all of his material the Penn Eiden 

Center. 982 

Remus decided to material that could be relevant to future congressional inquiries to Patrick Moore, one of Mr. Biden's personal counsel in Boston, 

Massachusetts, for further review by Moore and Bob Bauer. 98 :3 Moore's office had become a repository for some of Mr. Biden's political materials, such as awards and 

of speeches.  981 Bauer and Moore planned to inform the vVhite House Counsel's Office they found. 985 Strictly personal items would be shipped to Mr. Biden's Delaware home.9SG 

Remus initially coordinated with the executive assistant, who had worked for Mr. Eiden both during second term as vice president and at the Penn Eiden 

Center. 987 The executive assistant offered to pack up Mr. Biden's files at the Penn  

> 980

Remus Tr. at 65, 75-76, 80; Moore 11/18/22, FBI Serial 16; Personal Attorney 112/8/22, FBI Serial 40.   

> 98 1

Remus Tr. at 67, 80.  

> 982

Id. at 67; Dr. Eiden Staffer 2 Tr. at 36-37.  

> 983

Remus Tr. at 82-83.   

> 93 -1

Moore 11/18/22, FBI Serial 16 at 2, 4.  

> 98 5

Remus Tr. at 82.  

> 986

Id. at 83.  

> 987

Id. at 66, 74-75; Executive Assistant Tr. 1/4/23 at 3-4, 66, 95; FBI Serial 350 1A421; 5/24/22 e-mail from Remus, SCOH-000747. 

258 Eiden Center. 988 Remus understood the executive assistant was going to segregate 

personal files-such as photographs and handwritten letters to Mr. Eiden-from files 

related to his work. 989 As the executive assistant later told investigators, "[a] lot of 

the stuff was already packed up."990 

On June 28, 2022, the executive assistant came to pack up the remammg 

unpacked files. 99 1 She completed the packing in about a half-hour. 992 Her packing involved simply transferring files from office drawers into Home Depot boxes she had picked up earlier. 993 In doing so, she did not review individual files or documents. 994 

Most of the packing involved boxing up files the executive assistant stored for Mr. Biden in the outer office she formerly occupied along with Mr. Biden's former scheduler and trip director at the Penn Biden Center. 995 The outer office was accessible on one end from Mr. Biden's office. 996 At the other end, the outer office had a door to the Center's larger office area. 997 Mr. Biden's office and the outer office are depicted in the photographs below.  

> 988

Executive Assistant Tr. 1/4/23 at 97; Remus Tr. at 81-82; FBI Serial 350 1A421; 6/21/22 e-mail from Executive Assistant to Remus, SCOH-000748; 6/23/22 e-mail from Former Executive Assistant to Remus, SCOH-000753.  

> 989

Remus Tr. at 89-90.  

> 990

Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 98-99; Executive Assistant 9/28/2023 Tr. at 142.  

> 991

FBI Serial 350 1A421; 6/21/22 e-mail from Former Executive Assistant, SCOH -

000750; 6/23/22 e-mail from Former Executive Assistant to Remus, SCOH-000753. 992 Executive Assistant 9/28/23 Tr. at 138-39. 993 Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 98-99. 994 Id. at 99. 995 Id. at 100-01; PBC Scheduler Tr. at 64. 996 Moore 11/18/22, FBI Serial 16 at 2-3, 6; Personal Attorney 1 12/8/22, FBI Serial 40 

at 2. 997 Penn Eiden Center Layout, SCOH-000452; FBI Serial 344 1A415. 

259 Mr. Biden's office at the Penn Biden Center (Nov. 28, 2022) 998 

Mr. Biden's office at the Penn Biden Center (Nov. 28, 2022) 999  

> 998

20221128_ERT_0068; FBI Serial 14 1Al4 .999 20221128_ERT_0060; FBI Serial 14 1A14. 

260 1'he uut.P,1· office {ti the Penn Rid en  Gen.I .er  (Noi·. 28, 202 2)  1000 

The outer office at the Penn BidP.n Center (Not ' . 28, 2022)  1001  

> 10 00

20221128_ERT_0074; FBI Se rial 14 ll\14_  

> 1001

20221128_ER'f _0075; FB I S er ia l H 1A 14 .

261 The executive assistant also looked for files in Mr. Biden's office and other staff 

offices but found none. 1002 She e-mailed Remus that evening: "13 boxes. There are clearly marked boxes with correspondence throughout 4 years." 1oo: 1 As the executive assistant later told investigators, many of the 13 boxes she referred to were boxes of correspondence files that had already been packed up and stored in a storage closet at the Penn Eiden Center. 1004 The others were the boxes she packed with files from the outer office.1005 

Remus visited the Penn Eiden Center two days later, on June 30, 2022, with amember of her staff and a top advisor to the First Lady. 1006 They expected to retrieve 

13 boxes mentioned by the executive assistant. 1007 Remus planned to ship some of the boxes to Moore. 1008 The member of her staff and the advisor to the First Lady would drive the rest to the Delaware residence. 1009 Upon arriving at the Penn Eiden Center, though, Remus discovered that there was much more than 13 boxes of material belonging to Mr. Eiden, and some of it was not even packed.1° 10 The project of going through the volume of material and figuring out where things should go "was a much bigger task" than Rem us had expected. 1011 Rem us and her colleagues left the  

> 1002

Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 100-01.  

> 1003

FBI Serial 350 1A421; 6/28/23 e-mail to Remus, SCOH-000755.  

> 1004

Executive Assistant 9/28/23 Tr. at 140-44.  

> 1005

Id. at 144.  

> rnoG

FBI Serial 364 1A429; Remus Tr. at 90, 93-94, 143-46; WHC Special Assistant Tr. at 19.  1007 Remus Tr. at 138-39.  

> 1008

Id. at 90-91.  

> 1009

Remus Tr. at 90; WHC Special Assistant Tr. at 16-17.   

> 10 10

Remus Tr. at 68, 138-39.  

> 1011

Id. at 68; see also Dr. Eiden Personal Aide Tr. at 142. 

262 Penn Biden Center that day without removing anything.  1012  The pho togr aphs taken 

by th e director of Oval Office operations in Ma1·ch 2021 corroborated R em us's statements about the quantity and variety of Mr. Biden's items stored at the Penn Eiden Center:1oi::1             

> Photos of astorage closet at the Penn Biden Center (March 2021) 10 14

Remus lat er contacted Moore and asked him to review and properly dispose of 

the material stored at th e Penn Biden Center. 1015  Moore visited the Center mo nths 

later, on October 12, 2022, along wi t h one of Mr. Bid en's Oval Office aides. 1016  Moore's  

> 1012

Remus Tr. at 68; WHC Sp ecial Assi stant Tr. at 21.  

> 1018

FBI Seri al 348 1A419; Dir ector of Oval Office Operations Tr. at 19 -26; Penn Office Inventory, WH-SCH-000000003; see also 3/17/21 e-mails between Oval Office Aides, WH SCH-000000002.  

> 101 4

Penn Office Inventory , WH-SCH-000000003 at 10; WH-SCH-000001234; FBI Serial 348 1A419.  

> 101 ~

Moore 01/12/23, FBI Serial 96 at 7; Moore 11/18/22, FBI Serial 16 at 4; Remus Tr. at 68-69, 148.   

> 10 16

Moore 11/18/ 22 , FBI Serial 16 at 5; Dr. Biden Staffer 2 Tr. at  40 .

263 goal was to take stock of what was stored there, determine how much needed to be 

reviewed, and create a plan for moving everything out. 1017 According to Moore, 

conducting the review was not a high priority because nobody expected to find 

classified documents or presidential records there. 1018 

The Oval Office aide accompanied Moore to facilitate his access to the Penn Eiden Center and his initial review of material. 1019 While at the Penn Eiden Center, aide also searched for and found items that could be used at the White House, such as gifts for visitors and Mr. Biden's personal stationery and personal items. 1020 

Moore first inspected material in a back storage closet-pictured above located off the mail room/kitchenette. 1021 He found a variety of items including gifts, memorabilia, books, and condolence correspondence related to the 2015 death Biden's son, Beau Biden. 1022 

Moore then inspected Mr. Biden's office space. 1023 That space included Biden's office, a small closet in that office, and the outer office. 1024 Moore identified six or seven boxes containing documents to review. 1025 He recalled finding at least some of those boxes the small closet in Mr. Biden's office  

> 1017

Moore 11/18/22, FBI Serial 16 at 5. 1018 Id. at 4. 1019 Dr. Eiden Staffer 2 . at 36, 45; 80; FBI Serial 8 1A5, 11/16/22 Narrative from Bauer at 2. 1020 Dr. Eiden Staffer 2 Tr. at 71, 75-77; FBI Serial 8 1A5, 11/16/22 Narrative from Bauer at 2. 10~1 Moore 11/18/22, FBI Serial 16 at 5; Moore 1/12/23, FBI Serial 96 at 8; FBI Serial 

348 1A419; Penn Office Inventory, WH-SCH-000000003, at 10; WH-SCH-000001216.  

> 1022

Moore 11/18/22, FBI Serial 16 at 5-6; Moore 1/12/23, FBI Serial 96 at 8.  

> 1023

Moore 11/18/22, FBI Serial 16 at 6.    

> 102l Id.
> 1025 Id.;

Moore 1/12/23, FBI Serial 96 at 9. 

264 and moving them to the outer office for review.  1026 When interviewed by FBI agents, 

Moore believed the small closet was initially locked and that a Penn Eiden Center 

staff member provided a key to unlock it, but his memory was fuzzy on that point. 1027 

He found the other boxes in the outer office, where he conducted his first cursory 

review of the material in the boxes.  1028 During that initial, quick review, Moore saw 

copies of speeches, political documents, and campaign materials.  1029 He also noticed 

documents dating from Mr. Biden's time as vice president; format of these 

documents him to believe they were from the White House.  1030 Moore knew such 

documents were potentially presidential records under the Presidential Records Act, 

must be stored at the National Archives. 10 :n He did not see any documents with 

classification markings at the time.  1032 Moore that day intending to return later 

and, among other things, conduct a more detailed review of the material and 

determine whether any of it included presidential records. 10 :n 

Moore returned to the Penn Eiden Center several weeks later on November 2, 

2022, with an associate from his law firm.  1034 They planned to review the materials   

> 1026 See

Moore 1/12/23, FBI Serial 96 at 9-10; Moore 11/18/22, FBI Serial 16 at 6.  

> 1021

Moore 11/18/22, FBI Serial 16 at 6. The executive assistant stated that the Home Depot boxes she packed up during her June 2022 visit were left in the Outer Office. Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 98-99, 106-08; Executive Assistant 9/28/23 Tr. at 147. She did not move these boxes into the closet in Mr. Biden's office. Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 107 -

08; Executive Assistant 9/28/23 Tr. at 148-49.  

> 1028

FBI Serial 96 at 9-10; FBI Serial 16 at 6.  

> 1029

FBI Serial 16 at 6.  

> 1030

Moore 11/18/22, FBI Serial 16 at 6; Moore 1/12/23, FBI Serial 96 at 8.   

> 1031 See

Moore 11/18/22, FBI Serial 16 at 6.  

> 1032

Moore 11/18/22, FBI Serial 16 at 6; FBI Serial 8 1A5, 11/16/22 Narrative from Bauer at 2. 1033 Moore 11/18/22, FBI Serial 16 at 6; Moore 1/12/23, FBI Serial 96 at 8-9. 1034 Moore 11/18/22, FBI Serial 16 at 7; FBI Serial 8 1A5, 11/16/22 Narrative from 

Bauer at 2. 

265 and send records that were not presidential records to their firm office in Boston. io: 35 

Moore brought FedEx boxes. and the two packed up and eventually shipped some materials they determined were clearly not presidential records, such as material dated after Mr. Biden's vice presidency. 1036 They set aside for further review four 

Home Depot boxes containing folders labeled with dates from 2009 to 2017, years during which Mr. Eiden served as vice president. 1037 

Moore began reviewing the material in one of the Home Depot boxes. 1o: 3s About a third of the way through the box, he found a manila envelope marked "EYES ONLY" for the Vice President. 10 :i 9 "IRAN" was handwritten on the envelope. 1010 Inside the envelope, Moore found documents with classification markings. 10• 11 He took the box 

into the adjoining room and contacted Bauer, who in turn contacted the White House 

Counsel.1°· 12 Members of the White House Counsel's Office then notified the National 

Archives' general counsel.  101 / 3 Moore added Post-It notes to designate where he found  

> 1035

Moore 11/18/22, FBI Serial 16 at 7; FBI Serial 8 1A5, 11/16/22 Narrative from Bauer at 2. 1036 Moore 11/18/22, FBI Serial 16 at 7-9; FBI Serial 8 1A5, 11/16/22 Narrative from Bauer at 2.  

> 1037

Moore 11/18/22, FBI Serial 16 at 7, 9.  

> 1038

Id. at 7-9.   

> 10 :-rn

Id. at 7-9.  

> lO!o

Id. at 8.  

> 1041

Id.  

> 1042

Moore 11/18/22, FBI Serial 96 at 8; FBI Serial 8 1A5, 11/16/22 Narrative from Bauer at 3. io-1 3 FBI Serial 8 1A5, 11/16/22 Narrative from Bauer at 3; Moore 11/18/22, FBI Serial 16 at 8. 

266 documents with classificat ion markings.  1044  He photographed the fil es in the box, 

which an archivist from the National Archives later labeled "Box 3." 1045             

> Photo of Box 3taken by Moore on or about Nov. 2, 2022 1046

Moore's associate also discovered ma terial with classification markings m

another box of files, which he had been reviewing page by pag e. 1047  That box als o 

> 1044

Moore 1/ 12/23, FBI Serial 96 at 11.   

> 104 0

Moore 11/18/22, FBI Seri al 16 at 10-11; FBI Serials 17 1Al9, 173 1Al82; NARA Archivist 2 12/2/22, FBI Serial 26 at 1-2.  

> 10 46

Bate s-000016; FBI Serial 17 1Al9.  

> 1047

Moore 11/18/22, FBI Serial 96 at 8; Personal Attorney 1 12/8/22, FBI Serial 40 at 

3-4. 

267 contained other records that Moore thought could qualify as presidential records.  1048 

The associate used Post-It notes to flag documents he wanted Moore to look at and to keep track of documents he removed to review. 1049  Moore photographed the files in the box, which his associate labeled "Box l." 1050             

> Photo of Box 1taken by Moore on or about Nov. 2, 2022 1051
> 104

s Moore 11/18/22, FBI Serial 16 at 7-9.  

> 1049

Personal Attorney 1 12/8/22, FBI Serial 40 at 4-5.  

> 1000

Moore 11/18/22, FBI Serial 16 at 10-11; FBI Serial 17 1A19; Personal Attorney 1

12/8/22, FBI Serial 40 at 5; NARA Archivist 2 12/1/22, FBI Serial 26 at 1. rn 51  Bates-000028; Moore 11/18/22, FBI Serial 16 at 10; FBI Serial 17 1Al9. 

268 Moore and his associate identified one other of the four boxes that pot e ntially contained pr es idential records but found no documents with classification marking sin that box.10 5:.? The National Archives later l abe led the box as "Box 2. "10,5 :3            

> Photo of Box 2taken by Moore on or about Nov. 2, 2022 1os4
> 1

os 2 Moore 11/18/22, FBI Seri al 16 at 9.  

> 1033

Id. ; NARA Archiv ist 2 12 /1/22, FBI Serial 26 at I; FBI Serial 26 1A31; 20221201_WFO_13.  

> IOM

Bate s-0 00030; Moore 11/18/22, FBI Serial 16 at 10; FBI Serial 17 1A19. 

269 The fourth box did not appear to contain any presidential records but was in 

the same style Home Depot box as the other three.  1055  Moore and the associate repackaged the material in the fourth box into a new FedEx box because the Home Depot box was in relatively poor condition. 1056  Pursuant to instructions from the \\-Thite House Counsel's Office, Moore locked the three boxes containing documents with classification markings or potential presidential records in the small closet off of Mr. Bide n's office.  1057  He photographed the interior of the closet:                   

> Photo of the interior of the small closet off of Mr. Biden's office taken by Moore (Nov. 3, 2022) 1058
> 10 5°

Moore 11/18/22, FBI Serial 16 at 9.  

> toa6

Id. 

105 ; See Moore 1/12/23, FBI Serial 96 at 10; Moore 11/18/22, FBI Serial 16 at 9; FBI Serial 8 1A5, 11/16/22 Narrative from Bauer at 3.  

> 1058

Bates-000035; Moore 11/18/22, FBI Serial 16 at 10; 17 1A19. 

270 The next day, November 3, 2022, two archivists from the National Archives 

met Moore and an Associate White House Counsel at the Penn Biden Center. 1059 

Moore took the three Home Depot boxes out of locked closet and put them in the 

outer office. 1060 He offered for the archivists to take the fourth (FedEx) box, but they 

said the National Archives had instructed them to take three . 1OG 1 The 

archivists returned a few days later on November 8, 2022, however, and took 

fourth box along with 28 Federal Records Center boxes from the Penn Eiden 

Center.  1062 Moore told the archivists that the 28 boxes contained letters expressing 

condolences related to the death of Beau Biden.  106,3 

Upon reviewing the contents of the three boxes m a SCIF at the National Archives, an archivist determined that they included nme documents with 

classification markings totaling 44 pages.  1064 Those documents were in Box 1 and Box  

> 1065

She estimated that about 90 percent of the documents in Boxes 1, 2, and 3 were 

personal in nature and related to financial matters, correspondence, and pictures.  1066 No other documents with classification markings were found in any of the material 

the National Archives took from the Penn Eiden Center.  1067 Box 4 contained an  

> 1059

Moore 11/18/22, FBI Serial 16 at 10; NARA Archivist 2 11/10/22, FBI Serial 3 at 2; NARA COS 11/21/22, FBI Serial 6 at 1-2.  

> 1060

Moore 11/18/22, FBI Serial 16 at 10.  

> 1061

Moore 11/18/22, FBI Serial 16 at 9-10.   

> 1062 Id.

at 11; NARA Archivist 2 11/10/2022, FBI Serial 3 at 3.  

> 1063

NARA Archivist 2 11/10/22, FBI Serial 3 at 3.   

> 1064 Id.

at 2.  

> 1065

NARA Archivist 2 12/1/22, FBI Serial 26 at 2.  

> 1066

NARA Archivist 2 11/10/22, FBI Serial 3 at 2.  

> 1067

NARA Archivist 2 12/1/22, FBI Serial 26 at 2. 

271 otherwise blank page with a classification marking.1068 The page appeared to be the 

last page of bound briefing material that had likely been removed from a classified briefing book.  1069 

FBI agents visited a SCIF at the National Archives on December 1 and 2, 2022, to review and photograph the four boxes and their contents.  1070

# I               

> The PBC boxes in aSCIF at the National Archives for FBI review (Dec. I, 2022) 10 ~1

The National Archives later trarn,ferred custody of the marked classified documents in Boxes 1 and 3 to the FBr. m, 2 

> toG 8

NARA. Archivist 2 11/10/22, FBI Serial 3 at 3.  

> 1009

Id. 

iorn FBI Serial 26.  

> 1011

20221201_WFO_0012; FBI Serial 26 1A31.  

> 1072

FBI Serial 173. 

272 C.  Description of the documents recovered from the Penn Biden 

Center 

The FBI identified te n documen ts recovered from t he P enn Bid en Center as class:iiied or potentially classified and desig na ted those documents as Al through 

Al0. 1073  In addition to th e nin e documents with classification markings that the Nation al Archives had identified, FBI designated a set of handwritten notes as potentially classified.  1074  The handwritten notes were found in an envelope with marked classified documents and related to the same topic as tho se do cume nt s.  107 ;'> 

1.  Marked classified documents found in Box 1

The FBI loc ate d the ma rked classified d oc ument desig nated Al among unclassified documents in a folder labeled "Sec ond Term," pictured below.  107 6       

> "Second Term" folder and contents from Box 11o; 7
> 107

s FBI Serials 26, 238 , 683 1A772.  

> 10 74

See Evidence item 1B48; FBI Serials 173, 177, 683 1A772.  

> 1075

Evidence item 1B48; FBI Serials 26, 17 3, 177, 683.  

> 10 76

Evidence item 1B49.  

> 1077

FBI Serial 26 1A31, 2022120LWFO_0026. 

273 The FBI located the marked classified document designated A2 among unclassified 

documents in a red file folder with a handwritten label "Filing 10-10-16." 1078       

> "Filing 10-10-16" folder from PBC Box 11o,9

Appendix A includes unclassified descriptions of documents Al and A2. 

2.  Unclassified contents of Box 1

Box 1 includes a variety of unclassified files of personal and professional 

significance to Mr. Biden. These include: 

• A file folder labeled "POTUS 21st Century Policing 2015" with a copy of the 

21 st May 2015 final report of the President's Task Force on Century Policing.  1080 

• A file folder labeled "Eiden Foundation" that included a 2017 Annual Report for the Eiden Foundation.  108  1 

> 1078

Evidence item 1B49.  

> 1079

FBI Serial 26 1A31, 20221201_ WFO _0066.  

> 1080

NARA_SCAN_00000067-68; NARA Archivist 2 11/10/22, FBI Serial 3.  

> 1081

NARA_SCAN_00000059, at 61; NARA Archivist 2 11/10/22, FBI Serial 3. 

274 • A file folder lab eled "VP H ea dshots" with phot ographs of Mr. Biden and 

Pr esi dent Obam a.1082 

• A file folder labeled "Ameri can Possibilities" with event memoranda for Mr. Biden dat ed February 1, 201 8.10 83 

• A file lab eled "Colorado Ski" with informa tion from 2011 r elat ed to a ski trip .1 084 

3.  Classified documents found in Box 3

a.  "EYES ONLY VPOTUS" manila envelope 

The FBI loca ted th e mark ed classified documents design ate d A3 through A6 and a set of potentially classified handwri tte n n otes d es igna te d A7 in a manila envelope sta mped "EYES ONLY" on the to p and bottom with "VPOTUS" handwritten in the middle.  108 5Th e envelope w as also labeled with Mr. Biden's handwriting: "IRAN 1/ 30/15." 1086        

> The VP Eyes Only envel ope from PBC Box 3108 7
> 108 2

FBI Se rial 26 1A31, 20221201_WFO_0024, 2022120l _WFO_0146.  

> 10 83

NARA_ SC AN_00000063-65; NARA Archivist 2 11/10/22, FBI Serial 3.  

> 1084

NARA_SCAN_ 000 00426-35; NARA Ar ch iv is t 2 11/10/22, FBI Serial 3.  

> 1oa5

Evidence it em 1B48.  

> 10 86

Evidence item 1B48; Executive A ss istant 1/4/23 Tr. at 156-57; FBI Se rial 641A74 ;St a ff As sis tant 3 10/4/23 Tr. at 80.  

> 108 i

FBI Se rial 26 1A3 1, 20221201_WFO_0006. 

275 Appendix A includes unclassified descriptions of documents A3 through A 7. Portions 

of redacted cover pages of some of the documents in the "EYES ONLY" envelope are below:       

> TOP 1 ECRET /1 / O RCONINOFDR N.
> l A lfllTElUQIEJICI:: IIS:5E:SSl'lll~~T

Portion of the ,,edacted cover of recovered document A.5 1088 

TOP SECRET // ORCONINOFORN     

> 1,, •rt;T~i.L IG'ENC E1.1 i:=-r.nn~A.NDlJl1

Portion of redacted cover of recovered document A6 1089 

108 8 Recovered document A5. 1089 Recovered document A6. 

276 Not ab ly, do c ument A 7 is ten pag es of Mr. Bid en' s unmarked , handwritten notes, three of which are dated January 28, 2015. 1090  All but one page of the notes r elate to the Obama adm inistration's efforts to negotiate the Joint Co mpr ehens ive Pl an of Act io n, oth erwise known as the Iran nuclear d ea l. For ex ampl e, five pages of th e handwritten notes reference the fou r pathways to an Irani an nucl ear weapon th eObama administration believed the nucl ear deal would block:             

> Graphic from Obama White House information page on the Iran nuclear deal 1091
> 1090

Evidence ite m 1B48, A7 at 3, 5, 9; Ex ecut ive Assi stan t Tr. 9/28/23 at 128-30 (handwriting identification) , FBI Serial 5 15 1A618.  

> 1091

The Hist oric D eal t hat Will Prev ent Iran from Acquiring a Nuclear Weapon, The Wh it e Hou se,  htt ps:// oba ma whit ehou se.a rchi ves .gov /issu es/foreign-policy/ ira n-de al  (last visited Jan. 31 , 2024). 

277 ~r~{¼~ 

I.  tr> ~ b..J w - ~ \. ~,..,.., ItJ.o..,.._ 

# "~ JJi u,J.,.\rr' ?\71 ~ - -i.. A,..i...jll..,, 0 w...tw 

# ½J.~~a  -

# ~ '1. ~~ 

Portion of p age 2 of recover ed d .ocument A 71092 

p ge 3 of recovered d ocument A71093 

wn of pag - f ---"~--- -

e iJ O recover ed d ocument A7l09J  

> 10,12

Recovered do 1093 Id. - cument A7. 

> 109 l

278 Portion of page 7 of recovered document A 71095 

The handwritten references to blocking "Arak" and "heavy water" correspond to the 

Obama White House's reference to blocking weapons-grade plutonium.  1096 

b.  "Ukraine 02/09/15" and "VP Personal" file folders 

The FBI located the marked classified document designated A8 among 

unclassified documents in a green file folder labeled "Ukraine 02/09/15" within an 

unlabeled green hanging folder.  1097 Agents located documents designated A9 and Al0 

among unclassified documents in a red file folder labeled "VP Personal" within an   

> 1095 Id.
> 1096

The Historic Deal that Will Prevent Iran from Acquiring a Nuclear Weapon, The White House,  https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/issues/foreign-policy/iran-deal  (last visited Jan. 31, 2023); The White House, 

https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/issues/foreign-policy/iran-deal  (last visited Jan. 31, 2023) ("The third way Iran could build a nuclear weapon is by using weapons-grade plutonium. The only site where Iran could accomplish this is the Arak reactor, a heavy-water nuclear reactor.").  

> 1097

Recovered document AS; Evidence item 1B49. 

279 ------

unlabeled green hanging folder. ions 

# --__._..... ..... -___ ...,._ 

# - -=V ',._,.  ~

# -- ---- ~~ 

# ---__ =::=-: .. -._;-;.;...;.....,~ 

....., __ .... ......... 

# --- .,,, 

"Uhmine 02/09/15" folder and unclassified contents 1099 

"VP Personal" folder and unclassified contents 1100  

> 1098

Recovered documents A9 and AlO; Evidence item 1B49. 

109 ~ 2022120l _ WFO _ 0l13. The document titled "Withdrawal Marker" is a placeholder for the classified document AB. See FBI Serials 683 lA.772, 26 1A31. two FBI Serial 26 1A31, 20221201_WFO _ 0l17. The documents titled "Withdrawal Marker" are placeholders for the classified documents A9 and AlO. See FBI Serial 683 1A772. 

280 Appendix A includes unclassified descriptions of documents AS through AlO. Document A9 is a telephone call sheet setting forth the purpose and talking points for a call between Mr. Eiden and the Ukrainian Prime Minister. Mr. Biden wrote anote to his executive assistant on the sheet: "Get [a] copy of this conversation from Sit Rm for my Records please" and signed it "Joe."         

> Handwritten note from Mr. Biden on recovered document A9 1101

c.  Unclassified contents of Penn Biden Center Box 3

Like Box 1, Box 3 included a wide variety of unclassified files of personal and 

professional significance to Mr. Eiden. To name a few: 

• A file folder labeled "Genealogy" with information about the ancestors of 

Mr. Eiden and Biden family history.  1102 

• Various file folders with documents related to Mr. Biden's "Cancer 

Moonshot" initiative_  1103 

• A file folder labeled "Economy" with documents from 2015 related to economic policy and meetings with officials such as the Secretary of the 

Treasury .110,1  

> 1101

Recovered document A9.  

> 1102

NARA_SCAN_00001390-98; NARA Archivist 2 11/10/2022, FBI Serial 3. 1103 E.g., NARA_SCAN_00001505-16, NARA_SCAN_00001641-51; NARA Archivist 2

11/10/2022, FBI Serial 3. 1101 NARA_SCAN_00001581-91; NARA Archivist 2 11/10/2022, FBI Serial 3. 

281 • A file folder labeled "Notable Stories on the Life of Beau Biden" with 

compiled news clippings about Mr. Biden's son. 11 o: 3

D.  Security and access controls at the Penn Biden Center To access the Penn Biden Center, employees used a key fob, which they had to scan at the building's front door, the elevator, and the Center suite's front door. 1106 

The Center did not allow visitors inside unless someone with a key fob escorted 

them.  1107 The Center required the logging of visitors through a third-party security 

management system, and visitors had to check in with building security upon arrival in the building lobby.11os Despite those controls, we cannot account for all visitors to the Center. In 

practice. employees with key fobs could and sometimes did bring guests with them to 

the Center without logging them with security. 11 0H The Center's office manager did 

not maintain a visitor log. 1110 The third-party vendor retained its visitor logs for only 

one year, so logs for the years 2017 through 2021, when Mr. Biden was a private citizen, were not available to investigators. 1111 

The Center hosted visitors from its inception until the recovery of marked classified documents in November 2022. In keeping with its stated purpose to  

> 1105

NARA_SCAN_00001716-17; NARA Archivist 2 11/10/2022, FBI Serial 3.  

> 1106

Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 103-104; PBC Director of Programs Tr. at 48-49; PBC Scheduler Tr. at 63; Speechwriter Tr. at 92-93; 0-VP Intern Tr. at 41-42; Prescott Tr. at 85-86.  

> 110 ~

PBC Employee 2 Tr. at 24; Prescott Tr. at 86.  

> 1108

Legislative Affairs Staff 1 Tr. at 26; PBC Employee 2 1/16/23 Tr. at 16-18; Personal Aide 3 3/28/23 Tr. at 147; PBC Employee 1 1/16/23 Tr. at 71; PBC Scheduler Tr. at 9, 100.  

> 1109

PBC Director of Programs Tr. at 60; PBC Scheduler Tr. at 100; PBC Employee 21/16/23 Tr. at 46.  

> 1110

PBC Employee 2 1/16/23 Tr. at 16.  

> 1111

FBI Serial 345 1A416, SCOH-000448. 

282 "convene world leaders,"  1112 the Center hosted foreign dignitaries for roundtable 

events or to meet with Mr. Eiden in his personal office. Center staff recalled events and meetings with the former President of Mexico, the President of Costa Rica, the former Secretary General of NATO, the Prime Minister of Estonia, members of the 

Ukrainian Orthodox Church, and Israeli officials.  1113 The Center also hosted more than a dozen classes for University of Pennsylvania faculty, students, and interns over a period of years. For instance, a course on "Business Strategies for Engaging with Government" in March 2022 featured guest speakers from the U.S. Department of Commerce, General Electric, and  Google.rn ~ In addition, a cleaning crew came 

through the Center every night to clean the offices.  11 Fi 

As a general matter, the administrative staff at the Center tried to keep the 

offices locked or closed off during classes or events.il  16 However, Mr. Biden's office 

did not lock, and the adjoining outer office where Mr. Biden's executive assistant  

> 1112

Penn Biden Center, Our Mission Statement, Penn Biden Center, 

https://global . upenn.edu/penn-biden-center/our-mission-statement  (last visited Feb. 2, 2024). 

rn 3 Speechwriter Tr. at 101-02; PBC Employee 1 1/16/23 Tr. at 68; OVP NSA Staffer 2 Tr. at 109; Legislative Affairs Staff 1 Tr. at 30; Prescott Tr. at 82-83; Personal Aide 3 3/28/23 Tr. at 145; OVP Intern Tr. at 47-48. Mr. Eiden also met with the former Prime Minister of Ukraine in May 2017 when the Penn Eiden Center was housed in a temporary office space located at 701 Pennsylvania Avenue Northwest in Washington, DC. 5/14/17 e-mail from Penn Biden Center Business Manager, SCOH-000453.   

> ni 4

FBI Serial 346 IA417; 2/9/23 Penn Biden Center List of Classes and Seminars, SCOH-000734.   

> m5

PBC Employee 1 1/16/23 Tr. at 30. 

u 16 Id. at 30-34; PBC Scheduler Tr. at 71-72. 

283 maintained his files was always accessible through Mr. Eiden's office. 1117 Other 

employees' habits varied as to whether they kept their offices locked.  1118 

The Center relaxed security measures after Mr. Eiden stopped working there in April 2019. 1119 It still required visitors to check in with security in the building lobby, but they did not need a key fob or an escort in order to access the sixth floor of the building. 1120 The Center also permitted University of Pennsylvania students who took classes at the Center to work in the office space during the day. 1121 The Center 

was locked down for about two years due to the COVID-19pandemic. 1122 

E.  Investigation of the classified documents recovered from the Penn Eiden Center 

As described further below, Mr. Eiden's now-former executive assistant maintained the files in the four relevant boxes recovered by FBI agents from the Penn Eiden Center, two of which included marked classified documents. The executive assistant originally maintained those files in her office space outside Mr. Biden's 

vVest Wing office and moved them-through two temporary spaces-to the Penn Eiden Center, where she continued to add to the files.  

> 1117

Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 103-04; PBC Employee 1 1/16/23 Tr. at 29-32, 76-77; PBC Employee 2 1/16/23 Tr. at 22-23, 60-61. For security reasons, the Vice President's office could only be locked from the inside using a panic button. PBC Employee 2 1/16/23 Tr. at 22-23; PBC Employee 1 1/16/23 Tr. at 76-77. 

u is PBC Director of Programs Tr. at 49; OVP Intern Tr. at 42-43.  

> 1119

Legislative Affairs Staff 1 Tr. at 42-43.  

> mo

Id.  

> iu1

Id.  

> 1121

PBC Employee 1 1/16/23 Tr. at 11-13; PBC Director of Programs Tr. at 111; PBC Employee 2 1/16/23 Tr. at 42; Ricchetti Tr. at 151. 

284 We set forth in particular detail what we learned about these documents and 

their path to the Penn Eiden Center because they are the most highly classified, sensitive, and compartmented materials recovered during our investigation. 

1.  Document handling and filing in Mr. Biden's vice presidential office in the West Wing 

Mr. Eiden's office suite in the West Wing of the White House during his vice 

presidency consisted primarily of his office and a connected front office. 1123 During 

his vice presidency, Mr. Eiden's first executive assistant and staff assistant worked 

in his front office from the start of the Obama administration through mid-2012.  1124 

The assistants who staffed the front office at the end of the administration-the 

executive assistant and Staff Assistant 3-started in mid-2012 and mid-2014, 

respectively . 1125 

The front office staff collected and organized Mr. Eiden' s records. 1126 Classified records were retrieved by members of Mr. Eiden's National Security Affairs team or sent to the White House Situation Room. 1127 The majority of unclassified records were 

regularly sent to the National Archives as presidential records.  1128 Given the volume of paper that passed through his office every day, if staff did not constantly collect,  

> 1123

12/21/22 Staff Assistant 3 Interview, FBI Serial 36 at 2; Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 17-19.  

> 1124

Staff Assistant 1 Tr. at 4-5, 33-34; Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 3-4, 10.  

> 1125

FBI Serial 36 at l; Executive Assistant Tr. 1/4/23 at 3-4.  

> 1126

Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 22-24, 30-31, 178-80; Staff Assistant 3 10/4/23 Tr. at 15-17; Staff Assistant 2 Tr. at 19; August 2015 West Wing Guide, SCOH-000427 at 3, 6. 1127 FBI Serial 36 at 3-4; Staff Assistant 3 10/4/23 Tr. at 16-17; Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 23-24; Staff Assistant 2 Tr. at 20-21. 1128 FBI Serial 36 at 2-3; Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 22-23; Staff Assistant 2 Tr. at 19-20. 

285 orgamze, and archive his records, paper would have piled up quickly and become 

unmanageable .1129 

In addition to records that were regularly archived, Mr. Biden's front office staff kept a relatively small number of files for him in their desk drawers and acredenza located behind the executive assistant. 1130  Those files were generally materials, including briefing materials, policy papers, and other official documents, that he wanted to keep outside of the normal archiving process, at least temporarily.  1131                 

> View of the front office and the executive assistant's desk and the rear· file cabinet (Dec. 2016) 1132
> 1129

See Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 31-32, 179-80.  

> 1130

1/4/2023 Staff Assistant 3 Interview, FBI Serial 36 at 2-3; Executive Assistant 1/4/2023 Tr. at 40-41; Staff Assistant 3 10/4/23 Tr. at 6-7.  

> 1131

Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 77-80, 148-49; Executive Assistant 9/28/23 at 20; August 2016 West Wing Guide, SCOH-000427 at 6; Staff Assistant 3 10/4/23 Tr. at 77-80; FBI Serial 36 at 2-3.   

> I132

IB0O 1_ 0075477 4. 

286 View of the front office toward the staff assistant's desk (Dec. 201 G) ll:Ja 

Mr. Biden sometimes wrote a note on material he wanted to save. 1134  For example, he might writ e "save," "save in office, or "file." 11 3:5 In at lea st one instance, Mr. Eiden wrote a note on a classified call-sheet instructing his executive assistant to retrieve the transcript of a call with a foreign leader for "my [r]ecords." 1136  

> 11 33

1B001_00766834.   

> 11 34

See, e.g ., August 2016 West Wing Guide, SCOH-000427 at 6; Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 141, 200.   

> 11 35

August 2016 West Wing Guide, SCOH-000427 at 6; Executive Assistant 1/4/ 23 Tr .at 141, 200.  

> 11 36

Evidence item 1B49; Recovered Document A9. 

287 Portion of a redacted vice presidential notecard with "File" written on top 1137 

The files kept in the front office also included some of Mr. Biden's personal documents.l1 38 For example, Mr. Eiden sometimes asked his front office assistants to save poems he liked or retrieve Eiden-family genealogy information stored in the 

files.  1139 

The front office assistants occasionally reviewed their files, selected material they determined Mr. Eiden no longer needed or wanted, and sent it to be archived. 11 ~0 

Based on the documents recovered from the Penn Biden Center, however, the occasional review of files stored in the front office was imperfect or not exhaustive. 

Many of the files stored in the front office-both personal and official-were old.  1111  

> 1137

NARA-Bx2_ VP Notecards_2016-0090; FBI Serial 281.  

> ws

12/21/22 Staff Assistant 3 Interview, FBI Serial 36 at 2; Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 76-77; August 2016 West Wing Guide, SCOH-000427 at 6.  

> 1139

Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 79-80; Executive Assistant 9/28/23 Tr. at 25.   

> 11 w

12/21/22 Staff Assistant 3 Interview, FBI Serial 36 at 2-3.    

> 11 -1 1

Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 41, 193; Executive Assistant 9/28/23 Tr. at 20, 69-70. 

288 Some dated back to Mr. Biden's first term as vice president or even his Senate 

days.1142 

2.  Mr. Biden's move out of the vice president's West Wing office 

At the end of the Obama administration, Mr. Bide n's staff prepared to pack up and move out of his West Wing office and into a transition office in Washington, 

D.C.  11  B Mr. Biden's front office staff, led by his executive assistant, packed up his 

West Wing office.  1114 Packing the office was a challenge: Staff had to pack up and move out by Inauguration Day while continuing operations until the very end of the administration. 114" 5 The executive assistant recalled packing everything up in "maybe 

a couple of days" in January 2017. 114G 

The front office staff packed up both Mr. Biden's office and the front office. 1111 The front office contained the bulk of the files to be packed. The executive assistant recalled packing hanging file folders from the front office into boxes provided by the General Services Administration. 1148 The staff assistant packed up the contents of 

Mr. Biden's desk in his West Wing Office.  1149 The desk contained some files, most of  

> 1142

Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 41, 193; Executive Assistant 9/28/23 Tr. at 20, 69-70. 1143 11/17/16 Memorandum for the Vice President and Dr. Eiden from Staff, SCOH -

000305-SCOH-000306; FBI Serial 81 1A91 FBI_00000477.  

> 1144

Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 36-39.   

> 1145 Id.

at 36-39; Staff Assistant 3 12/21/22 Interview, FBI Serial 36 at 7.  

> 1146

Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 38-39. Most of the files in the front office had not been packed up as of January 11 or 12, 2017. Staff Assistant 4 Tr. at 114-15, 120-21. 1147 Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 37-39. 1148 Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 37. 1149 Staff Assistant 3 12/21/22 Interview, FBI Serial 36 at 5; Staff Assistant 3 10/4/23 

Tr. at 92-93. 

289 which were personal-for instance, quotes and speeches that Mr. Eiden referred to 

often and notes from family members.  115 0

Mr. Biden's staff did not recall him packing any of his own boxes in the West 

Wing Office. 1151 Nor did they recall him directing them to bring specific files as they 

were moving out of the White House. 1 Li 2 However, there were a number of types of 

files that the executive assistant believed Mr. Eiden would want to keep with him., 

such as mementos relating to Beau Bide n's death, the genealogy of the Bidens, news 

articles, policy papers, and copies of his schedules and speeches. 1133 She described the 

packing process as somewhat "random." 1151 She explained that ''we knew that he was 

going to write a book" and "do some speaking engagements,'' but "none of us knew 

what we were going to need." 115ri 

The executive assistant did not believe the files they packed contained 

classified documents.  1 FiG The front office staffs practice was to return classified 

documents to their originating office or to the \Vhite House Situation Room, either 

daily or whenever Mr. Eiden was finished with them. 1 u; 7 Staff lacked the time when  

> 1150

Staff Assistant 3 12/21/22 Interview, FBI Serial 36 at 5; Staff Assistant 3 10/4/23 

Tr. at 92-93.  

> 1151

Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 38; Executive Assistant 9/28/23 Tr. at 113-14.  

> 1152

Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 82; Executive Assistant 9/28/23 Tr. at 113-14; 

Staff Assistant 3 Tr. at 93.  

> 115;3

Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 83-87.  

> 1151

Id. at 87.  

> ll'is

Id.  

> 113G

See Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 173-75, 177-79; Executive Assistant 9/28/2023 Tr. at 81.  

> m,

Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 23-27; Executive Assistant 9/28/23 Tr. at 81; Staff Assistant 3 12/21/22 Interview, FBI Serial 36 at 4-5; Staff Assistant 3 10/4/23 Tr. at 16 -

18; 9/1/16 West Wing Guide, SCOH-000434 at 7. Occasionally Staff Assistant 3 would store classified material in the safe in the Vice President's Office on a temporary basis until she 

290 packing to review files methodically to ensure everything was disposed of 

correctly.  11 ,ss 

A total of roughly fifteen boxes were moved from the West Wing Office to the transition office in administration's final days. 115B Once at the transition office, Mr. Biden's staff did not unpack many of the boxes of files from the West Wing 

Office.  1160 Mr. Eiden was not there daily but did come by occasionally for meetings. 1161 

In late June 2017, Mr. Eiden and a core group of staff moved from the transition office to the Penn Eiden Center's temporary office in Washington, D.C. 1162 They stayed in office for several months while the Penn Eiden Center's 

permanent office was under construction.  1163 Because Mr. Biden's staff knew they would not be at temporary office for long, they did not fully unpack, and material remained in boxes there.llG4 

could return it to the appropriate National Security personneL Staff Assistant 3 10/4/23 Tr. at 18-20. 1158 See Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 39; Staff Assistant 3 12/21/23 Interview, FBI Serial 36 at 7.  

> 1159

1/17/17 e-mail from Executive Assistant to Associate Director of Admin., et al., SCOH-000238; 1/17/17 e-mail from Associate Director of Admin. to GSA Employee 1, et al., SCOH-000216; 1/19/17 e-mail from Executive Assistant to OVP Purchase Manager, et al., SCOH-000217; 1/9/17 e-mail from Staff Assistant 4 to Associate Director of Admin. et al., SCOH-00057 4; 1/5/17 e-mail from OVP Operations Staffer to Staff Assistant 3 et al., SCOH -

000445; Staff Assistant 4 Tr. at 119-20.  

> 1160

Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 51; Personal Aide 3 3/28/23 Tr. at 102-03.  

> 1161

Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 48-49; Personal Aide 3 3/28/23 Tr. at 107.  

> 1162

FBI Serial 72 1A78; 6/12/17 e-mail from OVP Purchase Manager to PBC Scheduler, SCOH-000716; 6/19/17 e-mail from OVP Purchase Manager to PBC Employee 2, SCOH-000716; GSA Employee 2 Tr. at 53. 1163 12/8/22 PBC Employee 2 Interview, FBI Serial 20 at 1; PBC Scheduler Tr. at 33; Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 55-56. 1164 Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 54; PBC Scheduler Tr. at 57-58. 

291 In October 2017, Mr. Eiden and his staff moved into the Penn Eiden Center's 

permanent office.  1165 Once there, the executive assistant recalled unpacking some 

boxes but not all of them "because there was just no need."  11 GG She unpacked some of Mr. Eiden's files into file drawers in the outer office adjoining Mr. Eiden's  office. 11  G7 

In particular, she stored some files in a three-drawer filing cabinet adjacent to the 

door  to Mr. Eiden's  office.  1rns The executive assistant could not recall how they 

determined what to unpack versus what to leave in boxes.  1169 

When shown copies of the files in Boxes 1 through 3 recovered from the Penn Eiden Center, the executive assistant recognized many of them as files she maintained for Mr. Eiden in the West Wing. 117 °For instance, with respect to a manila envelope at the front of Box 3 labeled "Layout of Beau's House," she explained that this file "was very important" to Mr. Eiden and "he wanted to have access to it." 1171 

She stated that the file ''came from the White House," where she had stored it in her 

desk in the front office or in the credenza behind her; she then brought it to the Penn 

Eiden Center, where she  stored  it in  the  outer office. 1172 The executive assistant also identified her handwriting on many file folders in Boxes 1 and 3. 11 n She noted that 

u 55 12/8/22 PBC Employee 2 Interview, FBI Serial 20 at 1; PBC Employee 2 Tr. at 14; FBI Serial 344 1A415; 10/27/17 e-mail from PBC Employee 2 to Scott Hoffman, et al., SCOH -

000777.  

> 1156

Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 65. 1167 Id. at 72.  

> 1168

Id. at 72, 76.  

> 1169

Id. at 65-66.  

> 1170

Id. at 128-33, 147-48; see generally Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 128-203.  

> 1171

Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 153-54; FBI Serial 17 1Al9, Bates-000016.  

> 1172

Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 153-54.   

> 117 ::i

See, e.g., Executive Assistant 1/4/2:3 Tr. at 133, 151, 155; FBI Serial 26 1A31, 20221201_ WFO_0052; FBI Serial 17 1Al9, Bates-000019. 

292 some of the files in Boxes 1 through 3 predated her time in the White House and she 

likely inherited many of them from her predecessor. 1174 

The executive assistant did not specifically recall any of the folders containing 

classified documents, although she acknowledged that they could have been files she 

maintained for Mr. Eiden in the West Wing. She identified other files that postdated 

the Obama administration as ones she likely maintained for Mr. Eiden at the 

transition office or the Penn Eiden Center. 1175 

Numerous unclassified files in Boxes 1 through 4 contained handwritten notes from Mr. Eiden directing that the contents be "saved" or "filed." The executive assistant explained that these notes meant Mr. Eiden wanted the files saved and kept in the office rather than archived in case he wanted them later. During the administration she did not have an expectation of where the files would go after Mr. 

Biden's term as vice president.1  176 But when she packed the files to move out, she expected the files from the West Wing Office would travel with Mr. Eiden to his new 

office. 1177 

3.  Origin of marked classified documents in the "EYES ONLY'' envelope 

In January 2015-around the date handwritten on the "EYES ONLY" envelope recovered from the Penn Eiden Center-the Obama administration was negotiating                           

> 1174 Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 128-29, 146-47, 193.
> 1175 Id. at 206-12; FBI Serial 26 1A32, 20221202_WFO_0292-94; 20221202_ WFO _0336; 20221202_WFO _0415-18.
> 1176 Executive Assistant 9/28/23 Tr. at 27-28.
> 1177 Id. at 27-29.

293 the Iran nuclear deal.  11,s The administration sought to obtain concessions from the 

Iranian government that would limit its ability to develop nuclear weapons. 1179 In exchange, the United States and other countries would ease economic and trade 

sanctions on  Iran.  11 so 

During those negotiations, the administration worked both to gam congressional support for the Iran nuclear deal and to ensure Congress did not take action that would interfere with negotiations, in particular, by imposing additional 

sanctions on  Iran.  1181 Additional sanctions. in the administration's view, would cause 

Iran to walk away from a deal and toward further development of nuclear 

weapons.  1182 The administration also opposed legislation that would purport to give 

the Senate an up-or-down vote on  the final Iran nuclear deal.  1is:i  

> 1178

Evidence item 1B48; Colin Kahl, Iran Timeline, SCOH-000287 at 10-lL  

> 1179

See, e.g., Key Points on the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action with Iran, 1B001_00009530; The White House, The Iran Nuclear Deal: What You Need to Know about the JCPOA, SCOH-000456 at 4-5.  

> 1180

See Legislative Affairs Staff 2 Tr. at 8-9; The \Vhite House, The Iran Nuclear Deal: What You Need to Know about the JCPOA SCOH-000456 at 8; Top Lines Points -Sanctions, 1B001_01913030; Sanctions Relief- Countering Iran's Regional Activities, IB001_01913035; Sanctions FAQ's, 1B001_02226166.  

> 1181

See 7/20/14 Memorandum for the President, Legislative Report for the Week of July 21, 2014, 1B001_02436788 at 1-2; Legislative Affairs Staff 2 Tr. at 8-9; 2/8/15 Memorandum for the President, Legislative Report for the Week of February 9, 2015, 1B001_01903477.  

> 1182

1/28/15 Briefing Memo from OVP-NSA, Background and Points for Breakfast with Senators on Iran Legislation, 1B001_02256623 at 5.  

> 1183

See 1/20/15 Memo re Telephone Call with Senator from White House Legislative Affairs Staff, NARA_SCAN_00001464; FBI Serial 3; Memorandum for the Vice President, Corker Iran Legislation: Policy and Precedent Issues, NARAWH_00016231. 

294 The administration sought to engage members of Congress to advance these 

goals. Given his lengthy service in the Senate and longstanding relationships with 

members of Congress, Mr. Eiden assisted in that effort as vice president.  1181 

As part of that effort, Mr. Eiden scheduled a breakfast six senators on 

January 29, 2015. 1185 Colin Kahl, Mr. Eiden's National Security Advisor, e-mailed 

staff on January 24, 2015, stating that the "VP wants to do a breakfast next week" 

with the aforementioned senators "to discuss Iran sanctions."  118 f, Kahl noted, IS 

group that travelled together to Israel and other spots in the Middle East - and many came back in support of the Corker-Graham Iran legislation we oppose." 1181 

The day before the breakfast, Mr. Eiden's national security staff gave him abriefing memo stating the six • Senators "returned recent trip to Israel more skeptical of imposing new sanctions on Iran (along the lines of the Kirk-Menendez legislation) more sympathetic to Corker-Graham legislation that 

would give Congress [an] up-or-down vote on a final nuclear deal."  1188 The memo also 

stated that "[a]dditional classified paper will be provided separately."  1189 Soon after  

> 1184

Legislative Affairs Staff 2 Tr. at 7-11; Legislative Affairs Staff 1 Tr. at 12-13; OVP NSA Staffer 1 Tr. at 44-45.  

> 1185

1/29/15 Schedule for Vice President Joe Eiden, NARAWH_00000571.  

> 1186

1/24/15 e-mail from Kahl, 1B001_02612074. Senator McCain was on the initial list of Senators proposed by Mr. Eiden, but not the final list of Senators invited to the breakfast because he had a conflict on his schedule. See 1/27/15 e-mail from Mr. Biden's Director of Legislative Affairs, 1B001_02611625.  

> 1187

1/24/15 e-mail from Kahl, 1B001_02255821.  

> 1188

1/28/15 Briefing Memo from OVP-NSA, Background and Points for Breakfast with Senators on Iran Legislation, 1B001_02256623.  

> 11s9

Id. 

295 e-mailing the memo, a staff member sent another message stating, "[t]here'll be more 

classified material later."I  190 

The evening before the breakfast with Senators. the White House and intelligence community staff prepared a set of classified intelligence products for Mr. Eiden-documents designated A3 through A6 by the FBI-which was delivered to him the next morning in an envelope marked for his eyes only. That night, Mr. Biden's deputy national security advisor Jeff Prescott e-mailed Mr. Biden's staff: 

There are IC products that are being generated per high side traffic for the VP in advance of his breakfast tomorrow. VP has indicated that he would like them delivered to him as soon as possible anytime after 6:30am tomorrow mornmg so that he can absorb before the breakfast 

meeting.  1191 

An NSC staff member responded in the e-mail's reply thread: "Just to clarify, these are compartmented materials that can only be delivered in hardcopy." 1192 The NSC staffer said she had "connected our CIA briefing team" with the person who delivered 

Mr. Biden's copy of the President's Daily Brief every morning-his briefer-"so hopefully she can facilitate the physical transfer to the appropriate folks." Mr. Biden's 

briefer replied,  "I  will drop everything at NavObs  by  0630."  119:3 Mr. Biden's briefer stated it was possible she packaged the documents in an envelope marked "EYES  

> mo

1/28/15 e-mail from OVP NSA Staffer 1, 1B001_02122583; 1/28/15 e-mail from OVP NSA Staffer 1, 1B001_02256622; 1/28/15 Briefing Memo from OVP-NSA, Background and Points for Breakfast with Senators on Iran Legislation, 1B001_02256623.  

> 1191

1/28/15 e-mail from Prescott, 1B001_02973019.  

> 1192

Id.  

> 1193

1/28/15 e-mail from PDB Briefer 2. 1B001_02973019. 

296 ONLY'' because such envelopes might have been the only ones available in her office 

at the time. 1194 

Prescott responded, asking Mr. Biden's briefer, "can you please specifically 

indicate the products that are responsive to this request and highlight them 

separately for Milaide to deliver to VP?" 1195 The briefer responded she would do so.  1196 

Prescott replied telling her to "[p]lease bring one for VP and a separate copy for [Kahl] 

both to NavObs." 1197 Mr. Biden's on-duty military aide responded on the thread, "I 

will be in the kitchen at 0630 to take delivery. I will hold [Kahl]'s with me and send 

the VP's up with the morning traffic."ll98 

At 6:28 a.m. the next morning, the military aide notified the recipients of the e-mail thread that he had the sensitive materials: I have the PDBs and the other document for the VP and [Kahl] that [the briefer] dropped off. The VP's will be delivered with his morning traffic unless he contacts me or any of you and wants them earlier. I will hold [Kahl]'s until 

he arrives. 1199 Mr. Biden's executive assistant asked, "can you pls put note on the docs he was asking 

about to highlight it."  1200 The military aide replied, "they just went up and the 

document said for VP eyes only."  1201 A National Security Council staffer replied in the e-mail chain that afternoon: "Hope the VP was satisfied with the materials/found  

> 1194

PDB Briefer 2 Tr. at 72. 1195 1/28/15 e-mail from Prescott, 1B001_02973019. 1196 1/28/15 e-mail from PDB Briefer 2, 1B001_02973019. 1197 1/28/15 e-mail from Prescott, 1B001_02973019. 1198 1/28/15 e-mail from Military Aide 6, 1B001_02973019.   

> 1199 Id.
> 1200

1/29/15 e-mail from Executive Assistant, 1B001_02973019. 1201 1/29/15 e-mail from Military Aide 6, 1B001_02973019. 

297 them helpful prior to the breakfast - it was a solid compilation." 1202  Classified e-mails 

within the intelligence community confirmed that the documents provided to Mr .Eiden were those recovered from the Penn Eiden Center and designated by the FBI as documents A3 though A6_ 1203 

Mr. Biden hosted the breakfast with senators the morning of January 29, 2015, as shown in the photograph below:       

> Mr. Biden's breakfast with senators (Jan. 29, 2015)1 204

As shown in the photographs below, Mr. Eiden had a manila envelope with him at the breakfast.  

> 1202

1/29/15 e-mail from National Security Council Staffer, IB001_03963559.  

> izoa

An Intelligence Community agency provided responsive documents pursuant to aprudential search request from the Special Counsel's Office. Investigators reviewed documents responsive to that request on July 24, 2023 at the agency.  

> 1204

lB0Ol _0 1223086. 

298 Mr. Biden with a manila envelope at t he breakfast with senato rs (Jan. 29, 2015) 120 ~

4.  Origin of the handwritten notes in the EYES ONLY envelope 

Th e handwritten notes in the EYES ONLY envelope re cove red from th e P enn Eid en Cen ter app ear to be Mr. Biden's ow n h an dwri tten no tes that he cre ate d in prep ar ation for hi s break fast wi th sen ato rs. Many of the not es are re petiti ve and appear to be from the same day: January 28, 2015, the day before t he breakfast. The notes all appear to be written in the sam e hand an d a former executive assistant to Mr. Biden identified th e handwriting t hrou gh out as Mr. Biden's. t 206  An d the ph otog raph bel ow sho ws Mr. Eid en at the Ja nua ry 29 br ea kfast with one of t he pages of hand written n otes la ter found in the EYES ONLY en velope in fron t of him , in one of h is notebooks. Th e titl e of the pag e is, "Basic Pre mise JRB Ope ratin g From ."  

> 1205

1B001_01223072; 1B001_01223164.  

> 120 6

Executive Assistant 9/ 28 /23 Tr. at 129 -3 0. 

299 Mr. Riden at the January 29, 2015 b1-eahfast with a page of the handwritten notes (A 7) found in the EYES ONLYenvelope 1207 

A former executive assistant to Mr. Biden confirmed that at times Mr. Biden committed talking points to memory by writing them down, sometimes multiple times.120 3

We considered but ultimately rejected the possibility that Mr. Biden or his staff collected the handwritten notes designated A7 from different people after a meeting involving discussions and notetaking about the highly compartmented information also found in the EYES ONLY envelope. The handwritten notes did not address the same information as the other documents. No witness recalled an instance or practice  

> 1207

SCOH-000776.  

> 12 0s

Executive Assistant 9/28/23 Tr. at 130-32. 

300 of collecting participants' notes after a sensitive meeting in the White House. 1209 And 

that theory is inconsistent with the evidence that the relevant handwriting in A 7

appears to be a single person's: Mr. Eiden's. 

The special counsel asked Mr. Eiden about the January 29, 2015 breakfast 

with Senators and the handwritten notes in the EYES ONLY envelope during Mr. 

Eiden's interview. 1210 Mr. Eiden had no recollection of the breakfast or the 

handwritten notes.1211 

5.  Mr. Biden's continuing interest in the Iran deal after receiving the EYES ONLY envelope 

Mr. Eiden's efforts to persuade members of Congress continued after the breakfast with Senators. Other examples included: 

• a telephone call with a senator on February 4, 2015, 12  12

• a telephone call with a representative on April 11, 2015, 1213 

• a telephone call with a representative on April 14, 2015, 1214 

• a meeting with Senate Foreign Relations Committee Democrats on July 16, 2015,1215 

• a telephone call with a senator on July 29, 2015,1216    

> 1209 See, e.g.,

Kahl Class. Tr. at 27-28; Executive Secretary Staffer 4 Tr. at 30; Legislative Affairs Staff 2 Tr. at 22-23.  

> 1210

Biden 10/9/23 Tr. at 85-86.  

> 1211

Biden 10/9/23 Tr. at 85-86.  

> 1212

2/3/15-2/4/15 -e-mail thread re Call Request, 1B001_02039129  

> 1213

4/11/15-4/12/15 e-mail thread among staff re Readout of VP Calls, 1B001_03791348. 1214 4/14/16 e-mail among staff re call with Congress rep., 1B001_03464705. 1215 7/16/15 Event Memo from Staff, Meeting with Senate Foreign Relations 

Committee Democrats to Discuss Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), 1B001_00009537. 1216 7/29/15 Telephone Call Sheet, Telephone Call with Senator Regarding Iran Nuclear Deal, 1B001_02227386. 

301 • breakfast with members of the House Democratic members on July 30, 2015, 1217 and 

• a meeting with House Democrats on July 15, 2015. 12 t 8

Mr. Biden's interest in the Iran deal potentially extended beyond his official duties and his time serving as vice president. In May 2016, Zwonitzer, the ghostwriter for Promise Me, Dad-then in the planning phase-e-mailed Mr. Eiden and his staff 

a "one-page description of the book we have been talking about."  i 219 The description proposed a "recounting of a small window of time ... in the spring and summer of 2015," which "may be the most momentous epoch of the eight-year administration." 1220 The description listed a number of administration activities during that time, starting with the "negotiation of the framework of the Iran nuclear deal and the effort to convince Congress to sign off on the pact." 1221 Ultimately, however, Prornise Me, Dad did not recount the negotiation of the Iran deal or Mr. Biden's role in it. The book's sole mention of the Iran deal is in a brief description of a call with a senator in early 2015, whom Mr. Eiden called ''to touch base with him 

on the Iran deal and on the Northern Triangle, and to bring him up to date on the effort to get money set aside for the Army Corps of Engineers to deepen the Delaware 

River channel." 1222  

> 1217

7/29/15 Event Memo, Breakfast with House Democratic Members on Iran Nuclear Deal, 1B001_00009428.  

> 1218

7/15/15 Event Memo, Meeting with House Democrats to Discuss the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), 1B001_00009547: 7/15/2015 Schedule for Vice President Joe Biden, 1B001_00014068.  

> 1219

5/21/16 e-mail from Zwonitzer, Zwonitzer-00007399; 5/23/16 e-mail from Personal Aide, 1B001_02171054.  

> 1220

,JRB-Book-Idea.doc. 1B001_02171055.   

> 1221 Id.
> 1222

Biden, PROJ\HSE ME, DAD 86. 

302 Mr. Eiden and his advisors-several of whom were affiliated with the Penn 

Eiden Center and were former senior officials in the Obama administration 1223 -had a continuing interest in the Iran deal as a matter of foreign policy after his time as vice president. In October 2017, for example, his Penn Biden Center team provided him seven notecards' worth of updates on the ·'Iran Nuclear Deal" and the Trump administration's stance on it. 1224 His staff also prepared remarks for him to give at the Brzezinski Annual Prize Lecture at the Center for Strategic International Studies; 1225 roughly a full page of the remarks defended the Iran deal and criticized 

the Trump administration's threats to pull out of 122 G His staff later drafted a"Decision Memo" with the subject "Statement Should President Trump Announce that He is Decertifying Iran's Compliance with the [Iran ." 1227 The decision memo set forth a proposed statement for staff to post to Mr. Eiden's Facebook account 

shortly after then-President Trump's expected announcement that he would not recertify the Iran deal.1228 In February 2018, Kahl sent Mr. Biden an Event Memo a "Meeting with Israeli Leaders." 1229 Kahl described actions taken by the Trump administration on  

> 1223

See, e.g., Penn Eiden Center-Affiliated University Employees - Preliminary List, SCOH-000779; 3/19/17 e-mail from PBC Employee 2, SCOH-000780. 1224 10/6/17 e-mail to Staff re 10-06 Foreign Policy Cards, SCOH-000351, Key Facts, Iran Nuclear Deal - 10/5/17, SCOH-000352 (attachment 3 of 3). 1225 10/1/17 Draft, Remarks for Vice President Joe Eiden, Brzezinski Annual Prize 

Lecture at CSIS, SCOH-000341. 1226 Id. at 6. 1227 10/12/17 Decision Memo, Statement Should President Trump Announce that He 

is Decertifying lran's Compliance with the JCPOA, SCOH-000359.  

> 122s

Id.  

> 1229

2/28/18 Event Memo, Meeting with Israeli Leaders, SCOH-000361. 

303 the Iran deal and set forth talking points for Mr. Eiden to advocate for the deal with 

Israeli leaders, including Prime Minister Netanyahu.  12 :rn And a Penn Eiden Center staffer proposed "Iran deal post UNGA and fight with allies" as one of several topics for members of his team-including Kahl and Elinken-to brief Mr. Eiden on in 

October 2018.  1231 

II.  ANALYSIS 

A.  Insufficient evidence exists to prove Mr. Eiden willfully retained the classified information in the EYES ONLY envelope 

There is insufficient evidence to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Biden intentionally retained the classified documents in the EYES ONLY envelope after his term as vice president or caused his staff to do so. Instead, the evidence supports an innocent explanation for the unauthorized retention of those documents. Mr. Eiden may have expected to need the material for further discussions with 

members of Congress about the Iran deal, which he continued to have after his breakfast with Senators on January 29, 2015. Given his practice of having his front office staff store files he wanted to keep close at hand, Mr. Biden likely gave the EYES ONLY envelope to his executive assistant to keep within reach for future engagement with members of Congress. He and his staff appear to have eventually forgotten about 

it-along with other older files in the front-office collection-and staff members unwittingly moved it out of the vVest Wing at the end of the administration.               

> 1230 Id. at l, 10-13. 1231 10/1/18 e-mail from PBC Staffer, SCOH-000001; FBI Serial 344 1A415.

304 Mr. Eiden's front office staff kept files in the front office that he wanted to keep 

close at hand for reference. 1232 The files recovered from the Penn Eiden Center-including those in the EYES ONLY envelope-were files his executive assistant kept 

in the front office and eventually moved to the Penn Eiden Center.  1233 One member of the front office staff periodically went through her files to identify material Mr. 

Eiden no longer needed,  1234 but the executive assistant does not appear to have done 

the same.  1235 The age of many of the files recovered from the Penn Eiden Center some of which dated back to Mr. Eiden' s first term as vice president-is consistent with the possibility that the executive assistant and Mr. Eiden simply forgot about them, having never purged or archived them. Some files remained in the front office in January 2017 that Mr. Eiden likely no longer needed, wanted, or remembered. 

Moreover, the EYES ONLY materials were stored in an envelope that was not marked classified; Mr. Eiden's executive assistant said the "EYES ONLY'' 

designation did not necessarily signify classified contents.  1236 She typically identified classified material by the cover sheets, which she said were "usually always" included. 1237 She also said she would have respected the instruction that it was for 

Mr. Eiden's eyes only and would not have looked inside.  1238 When interviewed, the executive assistant did not recall seeing the EYES ONLY envelope while packing up  

> 1232

Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 78-81, 85-86; Staff Assistant 3 12/21/22, FBI 

Serial 36 at 2-3; Executive Assistant 9/28/2023 Tr. at 133-34. 1233 Executive Assistant 9/28/23 Tr. at 7-10. 1234 FBI Serial 36 at 2-3. 1235 Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 39, 187-188. 1236 Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 147-48, 156-64. 1237 Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 35. 1238 Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 168-69. 

305 the West Wing Office or unpacking at the Penn Eiden Center.  1239 Even if she had 

seen the envelope, it is reasonable to believe she did not know the contents were classified and would not have looked inside to check because of the EYES ONLY stamp. 

Some evidence suggests Mr. Eiden had a motive to retain the documents in the EYES ONLY envelope after he left office, but that evidence is weak. He did have acontinuing interest in the Iran deal, both as a matter of foreign policy and as apotential topic Zwonitzer considered for Mr. Biden's book. But there is no evidence that he ever accessed or requested the EYES ONLY envelope after leaving office, or that he knew his staff had moved it to the Penn Eiden Center. None of his advisors at the Penn Eiden Center remembered the documents. The materials they prepared for Mr. Eiden on the Iran deal do not reference the type of classified information in the EYES ONLY envelope. The executive assistant stated she had no knowledge of the envelope's contents and no memory of him ever asking about it. And Mr. Eiden did not appear to recognize the documents during his interview with the special counsel. He barely mentioned his role with the Iran deal in Promise Me, Dad and does not appear to have thought it an important part of his legacy. Some former advisors stated Mr. Biden was pessimistic about negotiating with Iran but supported the 

negotiations anyway in support of the president.  1210                      

> 1239 Executive Assistant 1/4/23 Tr. at 159, 173-7 4; Executive Assistant 9/28/23 Tr. at 120, 135-36.
> urn Kahl Class. Tr. at 3-6; Donilon Tr. at 30.

306 Finally, several of the files in the box where the EYES ONLY envelope was found appear to have been forgotten files of little value to Mr. Eiden, such as the file about a 2011 ski trip. The files, therefore, do not appear to be a set that Mr. Eiden personally curated. Nor do they appear to be type of files keep as amatter of course in their everyday lives. 

In summary, the innocent explanation the retention the classified documents in the EYES ONLY envelope at the Penn Eiden Center 1s not only plausible, it is a better explanation than one of willful retention. There 1s insufficient evidence to support charging Mr. Eiden or anyone else willful retention of the documents in the EYES ONLY envelope at the Penn Eiden Center. 

E.  There is insufficient evidence to support charging Mr. Eiden for the retention of the other marked classified documents recovered from the Penn Eiden Center 

L There is insufficient evidence to charge Mr. Eiden with willful retention of marked classified documents Al and 

A2 

The evidence does not suggest that Mr. Eiden willfully retained documents Al or A2, which related to engagement with China in President Obama's second term and a summary of meetings with foreign leaders during a United Nations General Assembly Week. The FBI found these documents among unclassified documents in folders that Mr. Biden's executive assistant maintained for him. Mr. Eiden occasionally asked his executive assistant to retrieve material for him from the files she maintained, but she did not remember Mr. Eiden ever going through the files himself to retrieve documents. And Mr. Eiden did not move the files himself at the end of the Obama administration. 

307 The more plausible explanation for the unauthorized retention of documents Al and A2 is that the executive assistant stored and moved documents Al and A2 to the Penn Eiden Center unwittingly. In her interview with the Special Counsel's Office, she credibly stated that she did not know the files she maintained included marked classified documents. Documents Al and A2 did not have classified cover 

sheets intended to draw attention to the classified nature of the contents, nor were 

the folders containing the documents marked to designate classified contents. 

The evidence also suggests the executive assistant was not familiar with the contents of the folders because she likely did not create them. The handwritten label on the "Filing 10-10-16" folder (containing document A2) does not appear to be the 

executive assistant's handwriting. 1241 And the printed label on the "Second Term" folder (containing document Al) is large and on the cover of the folder, unlike most of 

the other printed labels, which appear on the file-folder tabs. 

It is also unlikely a jury would find that, after the end of the Obama administration, documents Al and A2 contained national defense information. Document Al is a memorandum to Mr. Eiden from his then-deputy national security advisor, Jeff Prescott, discussing general, high-level suggestions for the administration's engagement with China in the second term. Document A2 is a memo from Mr. Eiden to President Obama describing meetings he had with foreign leaders during General Assembly Week at the United Nations. Unauthorized disclosure of                

> u41 Compare lB00 1t-MARK Z2-16-17-000002 (handwriting sample); Executive l\ssistant 9/28/23 Tr. at 84 (identifying handwriting)

u·ith NARA_SCAN_00000097, FBI Serial 3 ("Filing 10-10-16" folder). 

308 such material could have revealed private, sensitive diplomatic considerations and discussions within the Obama administration. But any prosecution involving those documents would have to meet the defense that the Obama administration's foreign policy and diplomatic considerations, while historically important, had become far less sensitive by the time the documents were moved to the Penn Eiden Center. 

There are reasons why Obama-era diplomatic and foreign policy information, such as that in documents Al and A2, should retain its classification status after the administration ends. But those reasons are nuanced compared to the large-scale and well-known changes to policy, governance, and leadership style that occurred in the White House from the Obama administration to the Trump administration. It is unlikely a jury would conclude that, upon the onset of the Trump administration, the foreign-policy views of the Obama-era vice president and his advisors expressed in documents Al and A2 remained information relating to the national defense that would warrant a felony criminal charge. 

2.  There is insufficient evidence to charge Mr. Eiden with retention of marked classified document AS 

There is insufficient evidence to show Mr. Eiden willfully retained document AS for many of the same reasons as documents Al and A2. Document AS is abackground memo for a meeting with a foreign leader. The FBI found document A8 among unclassified documents in a folder that Mr. Biden's executive assistant maintained for him and that he did not go through or move himself. 

For many of the same reasons as stated for documents Al and A2, the more plausible explanation for the unauthorized retention of document AS is that the 

> 309

executive assistant stored and moved it to the Penn Eiden Center unwittingly. The 

executive assistant did not intend to store classified documents in the files she maintained. And the document and folder did not contain the cover sheets she relied on to flag the presence of classified information. 

3.  There is insufficient evidence to charge Mr. Eiden with retention of marked classified documents A9 and AlO Recovered document A9 is a telephone call sheet setting forth the purpose of acall between the Ukrainian Prime Minister and Mr. Biden and talking points for the call, which occurred on December 11, 2015. It is marked "SECRET." A handwritten 

note dated December 12, 2015, from Mr. Biden in the upper-right corner of the sheet 

asks his executive assistant to "[g]et copy of this conversation from Sit Rm for my Records please." Document Al0 documents the substance of that call in the format of 

a non-verbatim transcript. It is labeled ·'CONFIDENTIAL'' and "EYES ONLY DO 

NOT COPY." Given Mr. Biden's handwritten note, documents A9 and Al0 have additional 

indicia of willful retention by Mr. Biden as compared to the other marked classified documents recovered from the Penn Biden Center. On a document bearing "SECRET" classification markings with talking points for a call, Mr. Biden asked his executive assistant to get a copy of the transcript of the actual call from the Situation Room for "my [r]ecords." The executive assistant stored both the call sheet and the transcript 

in a folder labeled "VP Personal." And a witness familiar with foreign-leader calls stated that the content of such calls is typically classified by default. 1242      

> 12i 2McKeon Tr. at 98-99.

310 Nonetheless, there is reasonable doubt that Mr. Eiden willfully retained 

documents A9 and Al0. Mr. Eiden's handwritten note does not request that executive assistant save the classified call sheet containing talking points for the call (A9) in his records; rather, he only requested the transcript of the phone call itself And no jury could reasonably find that the substance of the call between Mr. Eiden and the Ukrainian Prime Minister was national defense information. The two exchanged pleasantries and the Prime Minister heaped praise upon Mr. Eiden for his December 9, 2015 speech to Ukraine's parliament. They did not engage in asubstantive policy discussion. There may be technical or nuanced reasons to maintain the classification of the call, but no reasonable jury could conclude the call or its contents were national defense information after the end of Obama administration, or that by asking for a transcript of the call Eiden intended to retain national defense information. 

The evidence suggests that the marked classified documents found at the Penn Eiden Center were sent and kept there by mistake. Therefore, we decline any criminal charges related to those documents. 

311 CHAPTER FIFTEEN        

> CLASSIFIED DOCUMENTS FOUND AT THE UNIVERSITY OF DELAWARE

In January, February, and June 2023, FBI agents identified and recovered just over a dozen marked classified documents in Mr. Biden's Senate-era papers housed at the University of Delaware. Almost all of these documents predate the Senate's establishment of rules for the tracking and handling of classified information. The evidence does not suggest that Mr. Biden willfully retained these documents. Rather, they appear to have been included in his large collection of Senate papers by mistake. 

I.  FACTS 

A.  Mr. Biden donated hundreds of boxes of senatorial records to the University of Delaware library As a senator, Mr. Eiden accumulated hundreds of bankers boxes of records. During his time as vice president, his staff shipped these records on a rolling basis to the National Archives storage facility in Maryland, where they were stored for Mr. 

Eiden as a courtesy. The Senate records consisted of his personal senatorial files, those of his staffers, and campaign materials. 121 :3 While the records were not supposed to include committee records, which belong to the Senate, senators' staff commonly intermingled committee documents with their senators' personal  papers. 12  H By the 

time Mr. Eiden became vice president, the National Archives had over 2,000 boxes and 415 gigabytes of electronic data in courtesy storage for him. 1245                      

> 12 k1 3/10/10 Memo from OVP Counsel, 1B001_000387170 1244 Ido at 4; Senate Staffer lTr. at 25-26, 43. 1:n, 3/10/10 Memo from OVP Counsel, 1B001_00038717.

312 Within the first year of his vice presidency, Mr. Biden's staff began 

preparations to donate his senatorial papers to the University of Delaware. 1246 In 

spring 2011, Mr. Biden asked two of his former longtime Senate staffers to review his 

boxes in courtesy storage. 1247 These former staffers reviewed and catalogued the 

boxes and recommended to him which papers to  donate. 12  rn During the review, 

neither staffer expected to or did find any marked classified documents. 1219 

In fall 2011, Mr. Biden formally agreed to donate his Senate papers and other 

records to the University of Delaware. 1250 Between 2012 and 2015, University's 

Morris Library received over 2,000 boxes Mr. Biden's senatorial papers shipped 

from the National Archives, the Russell Senate Office Building, and Mr. Biden's 

Delaware home. 1251 Upon their arrival at the University of Delaware, the boxes were 

urn FBI Serial 349 1A420; See, e.g., 2009 of Delaware 

general counsel and Mr. Biden's Chief of Staff, SCOH-000712.  

> 1247

Senate Staffer 1 Tr. at 30-31. Senate Staffer 2 14/23 Tr at 25. The staffers were 

paid by the University of Delaware to perform the pre-gift review. Senate Staffer 2 3/14/23 

Tr. at 65.  

> 1248

Senate Staffer I Tr. at 35. Senate Staffer 2 3/14/23 Tr. at 25-26.   

> ui 9

Senate Staffer 1 Tr. at 43; Senate Staffer 2 11/3/23 at 13, 26.  

> 125

# °FBI Serials 282 1A302, 349 1A420; See 2/12/14 Letter from Mr. Eiden to the National Archives, SCOH-000011. The "Ceremonial Agreement to Gift" was signed in aceremony at the University of Delaware on September 16, 2011, while the actual deed of gift was not fully executed until July 2016. See, e.g., July 2011 and September 2011 e-mails amongst University of Delaware staff, OVP Counsel, and personal counsel to the Vice President, SCOH-000783, SCOH-000706; 7/15/16 Deed of gift, SCOH-000578.  

> 1251

FBI Serials 79 1A89, 282 1A301, 349 1A420; 5/30/12-6/5/12 e-mails between former Senate staffer, current Senate staffer, and the University of Delaware, SCOH-000005, SCOH-000007, SCOH-000008, SCOH-000010; 10/23/11 e-mail from former Senate staffer to Mr. Eiden, 1B001_02683701 ("However, I have not forgotten about the boxes and files at your house. I am looking to start on those just after Thanksgiving. However, I know that you want to get them out of there sooner rather than later."); 1/31/13 e-mail from Archivist to UDel Morris Librarian and UDel library employee, SCOH-000714 (former Senate staffer was "looking though about 20-25 boxes in the garage .... From that group, he has about 2 boxes of Senate material so far.") When interviewed, the former Senate staffer did not recall 

313 placed in a secure storage area, and the materials were reviewed over time by 

archivists and other university staff. 1252 

B.  Marked classified documents discovered at the Morris Library 

In fall 2014, the Morris Library hired an intern to organize the Biden Senate papers, separate out documents belonging to the Foreign Relations Committee, and re-file the remainder. 125: 3 In late 2015 or early 2016, the intern discovered, among committee records, one document that was marked classified. 125" 1 She placed a sticky note on the document indicating the number of the box in which she found it and the fact it was marked "SecreL" 1255 

In February 2023, an archivist reviewed the box the intern had flagged, 

discovered the marked classified document within the box, secured the document in a vault, and reported it to the FBI. 1256 Agents retrieved the document that same day. 12" 7 The classified document is a two-page State Department cable from 1987. marked Secret concerning the NATO alliance. 1208 A classification review by the State Department determined that the document was declassified in 2012. 1259 

reviewing Senate-era boxes at Mr. Biden's Delaware residence and transporting them to the University of Delaware. Senate Staffer 2 11/3/23 Tr. at 9-10, 18-20.  

> 1252

Archivist Tr. 2/27/23 at 32.  

> 1253

Intern Tr. at 6-9.  

> 1254

Id. at 10, 12-13.   

> 1255 Jd.

at 21-22. The intern expressed confidence that she advised her supervisor of this discovery. Id. at 16-18. We were unable to determine why this issue went unaddressed at that time.  

> 1256

Archivist Tr. at 84: Report of i\rchivist interview, FBI Serial 79.  

> 1257

FBI Serials 79, 71.   

> 12 :" 58

Recovered document FL  

> 125:3

FBI Serial 676. 

314 After this discovery, and with Mr. Biden's consent, in June 2023, the FBI 

searched the contents of approximately 105 boxes at the Morris Library, the subset 

of boxes that contained Senate Foreign Relations Committee materials. 1260 Two of 

those boxes contained the following five marked classified documents: 

1.  Two-page letter to Richard G. Lugar, Committee on Foreign Relations, regarding Conventional Armed Forces in Europe Treaty, dated November 20, 1991 (signature block missing), marked Secret. 1261 According to a classification review, this document is currently classified as Secret. 1 262 

2.  Three-page document titled "Summary of March 11, 1977 Executive Meeting of Full Committee," dated Mar. 11, 1977, marked Secret and "CLASSIFIED COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN RELATIONS UNITED STATES SENATE." 1263 A classification review of this document is 

pending_ 126, 

Five-page document titled "Mutual Balanced Force Reductions (MBFR)," dated July 1977, and marked Confidential. 1265 According to a classification review, this document is currently classified as 

Confidential. 12 GG 

4.  Six-page Staff Memorandum titled, "National Security Interests in aLaw of the Sea Treaty, March 6, 1979 Hearings," dated March 2, 

1979, marked Confidential and "For Committee Use Only." 12 G7 

According to a classification review, this document is currently classified as Confidential.1268 

5.  Three-page Action Memorandum from Senate Staffer 3 to nme senators, including Mr. Eiden, with subject, "Proposed 1980 Committee Budget - For Discussion During Meeting of Democrats in S-2O1 at 2:00 p.m., Wednesday, January 23," dated January 23, 1980,   

> 12 60

FBI Serials 290, 292. 1261 Recovered document G5. 1262 FBI Serial 676. 1268 Recovered document G 1. 1264 FBI Serial 676. 1265 Recovered document G2. 1266 FBI Serial 676. 1267 Recovered document G3. 1268 FBI Serial 676. 

315 marked Confidential.  1269 The State Department did not provide a

classification determination for this document.  12 ,0 

C.  Marked classified documents at the Eiden Institute 

1.  Storage of Mr. Eid en's records at the Eiden Institute 

In addition to the thousands of boxes of Senate papers Mr. Biden donated to the University of Delaware, there was a smaller collection of mostly Senate-era material that remained stored at the Russell Senate Office Building and the National 

Archives. During the vice presidency, Mr. Biden's former Senate staffers reviewed the material to help him decide what, if any, he might donate to the University of Delaware. Mr. Biden wanted to identify and keep materials that may be "politically sensitive." speeches (from both the Senate era and vice presidency), photographs, contact information, and personal (and campaign) materials. 1271 The staffers found no marked classified documents during this review. 

Several months after the vice presidency, in July 2017, these materials, which filled about 263 boxes, were shipped to the Biden Institute at the University of 

Delaware, a domestic policy think tank established in 2017.  1272 The Biden Institute  

> 1269

Recovered document G4. This document is a duplicate of Recovered document E 1, a document recovered from the Eiden Institute, discussed later in this section.  

> 127

# ° FBI Serial 676. See also Section C.3 below.  

> 1271

May 2017 e-mails between transition staffer and Executive Director, SCOH -

000697, SCOH-000014; 12/15/16 meeting notes belonging to Senate Staffer 1, SCOH-000012; May 2017 e-mails between transition staffer and Senate Staffer l, SCOH-000027, SCOH -

000015.  

> 1272

7/7/17 e-mail between transition staffer and Executive Director, SCOH-000701; 

see also 7/7/17-7/14/17 e-mails between transition staffer and Executive Director, SCOH -

0007rn3. 

316 was a space that Mr. Eiden could use for free, where someone could continue to sort through the materials. 12,:3 

2.  Eiden Institute reviews the boxes 

In late 2018 or early 2019, the Eiden Institute hired the daughter of one of Mr. Biden's personal attorneys as a part-time employee to review Mr. Eiden's boxes. 127 /l Over several months, she conducted what she described as a cursory review of the boxes and inventoried their contents. 1275 She did not alert anyone to the presence of classified information. 1276 When interviewed, she stated that never saw any documents with classification markings. 1 2,7 

Several others also reviewed these materials. Former Senator and Mr. Biden's Senate Chief of Staff Ted Kaufman reviewed several boxes in 2019 to determine whether they contained any of his own papers. 1278 Mr. Eiden's sister, Valerie Eiden Owens, also reviewed some these boxes and recalled seeing speeches and  

> 1273

5/10/17 e-mail from transition staffer to Biden Owens and Senate Staffer 1, SCOH -

000014; 5/17/17 e-mail from transition staffer to Senate Staffer 1 SCOH-000015. 1274 June 2017 and January 2019 e-mails between Executive Director and employee, SCOH-000693, SCOH-000696.  

> 1275

Inventory attachment, SCOH-000677; FBI Serial 110.  

> 1276

FBI Serials 89, 110.  

> 1217

Jd.  

> 1278

7/19/19 e-mail from Executive Director to Kaufman, SCOH-000715; Executive Director Serial 74 at 3-4; Eiden Owens Tr. at 58. In January 2009, Mr. Kaufman was appointed to serve the remainder of Mr. Biden's term as Senator when Mr. Eiden resigned from the Senate to become vice president. Edward E. (Ted) Kaufman: United States Senator from Delaware and Chief of Staff to Senator Joe Eiden, 1973-2010, Oral History Interviews, August 17 to September 27, 2012, Senate Historical Office, Washington, D.C., 

https://www.senate.gov/about/oral-history/kaufman-edward-e-oral-history.htm  (last visited Jan. 31, 2024). 

317 schedules. 1279 One Institute staff member recalled looking in some of these boxes and 

seeing framed photographs and gifts.  12 so 

3.  Discovery of marked classified documents at the Eiden Institute After the discovery of classified information at the Penn Eiden Center in November 2022, the Eiden Institute's Executive Director notified Mr. Biden's 

personal counsel, Bob Bauer, that the institute had done its own inventory of the boxes in its possession and believed that four contained "VP Speeches &

Transcripts."  1281 

In January and February 2023, FBI agents searched all 263 boxes stored at the institute and determined that one contained seven marked classified documents 

dated between November 1979 and June 1980.  1282 Mr. Biden's former Senate staffers had reviewed this box before it was sent to the Eiden Institute and omitted it from the gift to the University of Delaware because the box contained campaign materials 

from 1978.  128:i  

> 1279

Executive Director FBI Serial 7 4 at 4; Biden Owens Tr. at 59-60.  

> 12 so

O\lP Intern Tr. at 33-34.  

> 1281

1/19/23 e-mail from Executive Director to Bauer with attached inventory, SCOH -

000661, SCOH-000662. See also 5/18/17 e-mail from OVP Purchase Manager to Senate Staffer 1 regarding Senate Records, SCOH-000027.  

> 1282

FBI Serials 66, 67; Recovered documents El-E7.  

> 1288

Senate Staffer 1 spreadsheet, SCOH-000056; June 2017, SCOH-000041 (listing boxes to send to the Biden Institute from the National Archives). The four documents were found in a box with the requisition number 329-94-341, #58. The Biden Institute employee had performed a review of the box and added her own number, 252, to the box. The employee inventorying the box had described it as containing "misc. news clips - some correspondence" from "c. mid-1970s." Inventory attachment. SCOH-000677. 

318 Two documents were marked Secret and five documents were marked 

Confidential. The two Secret documents and one Confidential document were found 

in a folder labeled "Foreign Relations Committee." The other four Confidential 

documents were in a folder labeled "Europe." 

Below is a description of the documents recovered from the Eiden Institute: 

1.  Three-page Action Memorandum from Senate Staffer 3 to nine senators, including Mr. Eiden, with subject, "Proposed 1980 Committee Budget- For Discussion During Meeting of Democrats in S-201 at 2:00 p.m., Wednesday, January 23," dated January 23, 1980, marked Confidentia1.12s4 

2.  Two-page letter to Edmund S. Muskie, Secretary of State, from Ted Kaufman/Senator Eiden, dated June 4, 1980, marked Confidential. 1285 

3.  One page Action Memorandum, addressed to Senators Church, Pell, and Eiden, with subject "Letter to Secretary Muskie on Consultations with the Allies on SALT and TNF," dated May 29, 1980, marked Confidentia1.12s6 

4.  One page Action Memorandum, addressed to Senator Eiden, with subject "Re: Letter to Secretary Muskie on Consultations with the Allies on SALT and TNF," dated May 29, 1980, marked Confidential. 1287 

5.  Three page letter from Edmund S. Muskie, Secretary of State, to Senators Church, Pell, and Eiden, dated May 30, 1980, marked Confidential. 1288 

6.  One page Action Memorandum, addressed to Senator Eiden ("The attached memo from Senate Staffer 4 on TNF Modernization is both                                

> 1284 Recovered document E1. This document is aduplicate of Document #5 (G4)
> discussed above in Section lB. 1285 Recovered document E2. 12 86 Recovered document E3. 1287 Recovered document E4. 12 88 Recovered document E5.

319 interesting and disturbing") from Senate Staffer 3 through Ted 

Kaufman, dated November 28, 1979, marked Secret.  1289 

7.  Two page Information Memorandum, addressed to Senate Staffer 3from Senate Staffer 4, titled "TNF Modernization and Arms Control," 

dated November 26, 1979, marked Secret.  1290 

For Documents 1 through 5, the State Department could not provide a

classification level in response to our request, though it noted that "[t]he details 

contained in some of these documents appear to have been highly sensitive at the 

time that these documents were created and included information that appeared to 

originate at executive branch federal agencies." 1291 According to the State 

Department, these documents may or may not still be sensitive today. 1292 The State 

Department was unable to render an opinion as to Document 6. 1293 The State 

Department could not provide a classification level for Document 7 but advised that 

certain pages of this document may be classified if they had been included in an 

executive branch document, as the legislative branch does not have the authority to 

classify documents_  129,1 

4.  U.S. Senate rules on handling of classified information during the timeframe of the recovered documents 

The documents recovered at the University of Delaware all appear to have  

> 1289

Recovered document E6.  

> 1290

Recovered document E7.  

> 1291

U.S. Department of State, Classification Review Results for State Department Equities, at 2 (Dec. 1, 2023); FBI Serial 676. 1292 U.S. Department of State, Classification Review Results for State Department Equities, at 2 (Dec. 1, 2023); FBI Serial 676. 1293 U.S. Department of State, Classification Review Results for State Department Equities, at 2 (Dec. 1, 2023); FBI Serial 676. 129 "' U.S. Department of State, Classification Review Results for State Department Equities, at 2 (Dec. 1, 2023); FBI Serial 676. 

320 originated from Mr. Eiden's service on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. Mr. 

Eiden served on the Committee from 1975 to 2009. 1295 He became Ranking Minority 

Member in 1997 and chaired the Committee in January 2001, from June 2001 to 

2003, and again from 2007 to 2009. 1296 As a Committee member, Mr. Eiden had access 

to classified information relating to diplomatic nominees, treaties, and oversight 

responsibilities for the Department of State. 

In the mid- to late-1980s, several factors led to growing concern within the 

Senate about the handling of classified information. 1297 Among other things, each 

Senate office handled classified information differently. 1298 Also, there was no central 

recordkeeping system to track which Senate employees held a security clearance. 1299 

As a result, then-Minority Leader Robert Dole described the Senate's handling of 

classified information as "a disaster, waiting to happen." 1300 

In response, in 1987, the Senate established the Office of Senate Security and 

charged it with protecting classified information in Senate offices and committees. 1301 

The Office's Senate Security Manual established rules for the handling of classified  

> 1295

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN RELATIONS, UNITED STATES SENATE, MILLENIUM EDITION 1816-2000, S Rep. No. 105 -

28, at  101, www.foreign.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/CDOC-105sdoc281.pdf  (senate.gov ) (last visited Jan. 23, 2024).  

> 1296

Garrison Nelson and Charles Stewart Ill, COMMITTEES IN THE U.S. CONGRESS 

1993-2010 585 (CQ Press 2010).  

> 1297

133 CONG. REC. 9371 (Apr. 23, 1987) (statement of Sen. Dole).  

> 129s

Id.  

> 1299

Id.  

> 1soo

Id.  

> 1301

S. RES. 243 (100th Congress, 1st Session, July 1, 1987) (on file with Office of Special Counsel); see also Offices of the Secretary, United States Senate, 

https://www.senate.gov/about/officers-staff/secretary-of-the-senate/offices-of-the 

secretary.htm#:-:text=The%200ffice%20ofl/o20Senate%20Security,in%20Senate%20offices %20and%20committees (last visited Jan. 18, 2024). 

321 information.i: 102 Senators could not store Top Secret or Special Access material in 

their personal offices_i:io:i Information at lower classification levels could be stored in a senator's personal office, but only in an appropriate storage facility that the Office of Senate Security had certified. 1304 And senators could not remove classified 

information from approved spaces or take it home with them.  1305 

In 1997-after all of the documents recovered at the University of Delaware were created-the Office Senate Security began tracking classified information 

using a computerized system.  1306 Under this system, which exists to this day, each copy of a classified document coming into the Office is logged and given a unique, physical barcode. 1307 The system catalogues each document with an unclassified title, 

subject, page count, document origin, document destination, and any codewords.  1308 This way, a classified document was found in an unauthorized location, the Office of Senate Security could identify the person who is responsible for document.  

> 1302

Id.  

> 1303

Security Manual, Office of Senate Security, Section Il.A.7(a) note (Apr. 2007). The manual's discussion of "Special Access" appears to be a shorthand reference to Special Access Programs, a term defined in its glossary as ''[a]ny program imposing need-to-know access controls beyond those normally prescribed for access to ConfidentialL] Secret, or Top Secret 

information."  Id.  Special  access  programs  are  a subset  of  Sensitive  Compartmented 

Information. See Executive Order 13526 § 4.3.  

> 1301

Security Manual, Office of Senate Secur ity, Section  7 (Apr. 2007).  

> 13o5

Id., Section Il.A.12.  

> rnoli

See Senate Employee 1 Tr. at 29.  

> 1307

Senate Employee 2 Tr. at 29. While these records are stored electronically, records of a senator's physical access to classified document at the Office, as well as most other types of records maintained by the Office, were kept manually using handwritten logs. Senate Employee 1 Tr. at 35.  

> 1308

Senate Employee 1 Tr. at 33-34. 

322 II.  ANALYSIS 

The evidence does not establish that Mr. Eiden or anyone else knowingly removed or retained the classified documents found at the University of Delaware. These documents appear to have been included in his Senate papers by mistake. 

First, Mr. Eiden depended on staffers to maintain his Senate files, organize and pack them, transport them to the proper place of storage, and review them before they were sent to the University of Delaware. No evidence suggests he knew these classified documents were within his massive collection of Senate papers. Further, given the age of the documents, we found no evidence that Mr. Eiden personally viewed any of them while he was a member of the Senate. Mr. Eiden sat on the committee that generated these documents, but it is entirely plausible they were handled by a staff member and that Mr. Eiden never handled the documents himself before they were filed among his papers. 1.1o 9 There is also no record of Mr. Biden's review of the documents before or after he donated them to the University. As a matter of historical context, there have been numerous previous incidents in which marked classified documents have been discovered intermixed with the personal 

papers of former executive branch officials and members of Congress. 1310  

> 1309

The 1991 letter addressed to Senator Lugar (then a Foreign Relations Committee member) found within Mr. Biden's papers does not contain a signature block. Therefore, we could not determine who sent the letter, or whether Mr. Eiden ever viewed (or ever received) the letter.  

> 1310

Joseph Weber, When state secrets land in the hands of uniuersity librarians, WASH. POST (Feb. 10, 2023, updated Feb. 19, 2023),  https://www.washingtonpost.com/education/20 

23/02/10/classified-documents-university-library-trump-biden-pence/ (last visited Jan. 31, 2024); Ronald G. Schafer, Presidential papers haue long been turning up in unexpected places, 

WASH. POST (Feb. 4, 2023),  https://www.washingtonpost.com/history/2023/02/04/presidentia 

323 Second, before the Senate papers arrived at the University, Mr. Biden asked 

two experienced staffers to review them. The staffers knew to segregate documents that were appropriate for the Morris Library gift. They did not identify any classified documents within these materials. 

The staffers' failure to do so is likely due, in part, to the small number of classified documents found within a large collection of the Senate papers. Another possible reason is that several of the documents use markings that do not clearly convey their classified nature. Some of the documents are marked "CONFIDENTIAL." While that is a valid marking for classified information, the term "CONFIDENTIAL" is also used in other contexts not involving classified information. Senate staffers could have understood these to be internal committee documents or simply sensitive documents created by authors who wanted to limit the number of 

people who viewed them. 

Third, the classified documents were found in collections of papers Mr. Biden had either already donated or planned to donate after his staff removed personal and political materials. This suggests neither he nor his staff knew about or wanted to keep the small number of classified documents later found there.      

> 1-papers-documents-misplaced/; Zeke Miller et al.,

Classified records pose conundrum stretching back to Carter, ASSOCIATED PRESS NEWS (Jan. 24, 2023),  

> https://apnews.com/article/biden-trurnp-classified-documents-president -
> 33df0355c72e9ae8fa4cb6eadl3f6521;

U.S. GEN. ACCOUNTING OFF., GAO/GDD-91-117, REPORT TO CONGRESSIONAL REQUESTORS: DOCL;\IENT REMOVAL BY AGENCY l{EADS NEEDS INDEPENDE.t--;T OVERSIGHT 17 -      

> 23 (Aug. 1991), https://www.gao.gov/assets/ggd-91-l 17.pdf (last visited Jan. 31, 2024).

324 Finally, none of these decades-old documents contains information so obviously 

sensitive that a jury would find it compelling enough to convict a former president and vice president of mishandling classified information. 

For these reasons, it is likely that the few classified found in Mr. Biden's Senate papers were there by mistake. The documents found at the University of Delaware are not a basis for criminal charges. 

325 CHAPTER SIXTEEN         

> OTHER CLASSIFIED DOCUMENTS FOUND IN MR. BIDEN'S DELAWARE HOME

I.  MARKED CLASSIFIED DOCUMENTS IN NOTEBOOKS 

As discussed in Chapters Two and Four, three notebooks found in Mr. Biden's Delaware home had marked classified documents placed inside them. One of these notebooks, labeled "Af/Pak l," is discussed in Chapter Six. For the other two, the evidence does not suggest either that Mr. Eiden retained the classified documents inside them willfully, or that the documents contain national defense information. Thus, these documents do not warrant criminal charges. 

A.  Documents found within notebook labeled "1/6/12 #2 Foreign 

Policy" 

The notebook labeled "1/6/12 #2 Foreign Policy" recovered from Mr. Biden's 

basement den contained two marked classified documents. 1311 One was three pages of what appear to be PowerPoint slides, each of which was marked 

Secret/NOFORN/Pre-Decisional_I: 312 The slides are dated May 22, 2013, and discuss 

various options for U.S. troop levels in Afghanistan after 2014.  1313 

The notebook contains a corresponding handwritten entry dated May 24, 2013, when Mr. Eiden took notes during a National Security Council meeting that he 

attended through a secure video teleconference from his Delaware home.  1:311 While we do not know exactly where inside the notebook the classified PowerPoint slides  

> 1311

Notebook 1Bl5.  

> 1312

Recovered documents Cl, C2, C3. 

> miJd.

rn 4 Notebook entry 1Bl5-00:39; 5/24/13 Final Schedule for Vice President Joe Biden, NARAWH_00000422. 

326 were located (because the slides were found by a member of the White House 

Counsel's Office rather than the FBI),  13 1:5 it is likely that Mr. Eiden had the slides at 

his home during the National Security Council meeting, then placed the slides in the 

notebook after the meeting, where they remained until discovered in 2023. 

The second marked classified document in the notebook was a briefing memorandum for Mr. Eiden from his National Security Affairs team dated November 1, 2013, and marked Top Secret/Sensitive Compartmented Information. 1316 The memorandum briefed Mr. Eiden in advance of a meeting with the Prime Minister of 

Iraq_1:n  7 The document corresponds to an entry in the notebook where Mr. Eiden :made handwritten entries about the Prime :Minister's visit, indicating that Mr. Eiden placed the memorandum in his notebook during or soon after that event_l: 318 

both marked classified documents found in this notebook, we investigated whether Mr. Eiden had reason to keep the documents, including by interviewing Mr. Eiden and relevant staff members, reviewing Mr. Biden's notebook entries, and examining the public record. The evidence does not suggest that he intended to keep these documents, and it is possible he put them in his notebook after meetings and forgot about them. While one of the documents concerned troop levels in Afghanistan  

> 1115

FBI Serial 44.  

> 1316

Recovered document C4. The document was classified by OVP National Security Affairs as Top Secret//SCI. The intelligence community has indicated that was an invalid marking and should be marked TS//HCS-0/SI//ORCON/NOFORN; FBI Serial 676; Notebook 1Bl5.  

> 1: 317

Recovered document C4.  

> 1: 318

FBI Serial 44. 

327 as 2013, 1319 an issue that remained of great interest to Mr. Eiden, 1:320 because it 

was a single document from years after the Afghanistan 2009 policy review, it is 

plausible that Mr. Eiden left it in the notebook by mistake rather than storing it there 

in ten tio nally. 

We investigated whether Mr. Eiden encountered these classified documents in his notebook after the vice presidency, but we did not find evidence that he There is no evidence he used this notebook when writing Promise 1\,1e, Dad, and the classified documents were not relevant to the book, and were not referenced in Mr. Eiden's recorded conversations with Zwonitzer. While it is natural to assume Mr. Eiden may have reviewed this notebook at some point after leaving office and found the classified documents inside, we did not find evidence to establish this. 

B.  Notebook labeled "DAILY/MEMO" 

Eiden's notebook labeled "DAILY/MEMO," which agents found in his office/library on the main floor of his Delaware home, contained one page of aPowerPoint slide marked Secret/NOFORN about national security priorities for the second term of Obama administration. 1321 The slide's subject matter suggests it may have been distributed at, or in preparation for, a National Security Council meeting. While the intelligence community has informed us that this document is 

properly marked, it does not appear to us to contain national defense information.  1: 322 The investigation also did not reveal evidence that Mr. Eiden intentionally kept the       

> 1:n 9Recovered documents Cl, C2, C3. 1320

See Chapter Six. 1321 Notebook IB25; Recovered document D21 1m Serial 676. 

328 document after the Obama administration, or that he knew the document was in his 

home. 

For each of the marked classified documents found in Mr. Eiden's notebooks, 

we cannot prove that Mr. Eiden knew about or intended to keep the document after 

he was vice president, or we cannot prove the document contains national defense 

information, or both. These documents do not support criminal charges against Mr. 

Biden. 

II.  "WEEKEND WITH CHARLIE ROSE" BINDERS 

During their search of Mr. Biden's Delaware home in December 2022 and 

January 2023, FBI agents found two nearly identical binders containing marked 

classified documents: one in a box in the garage, and the other in a paper bag in the 

office next to Mr. Biden's primary bedroom. 132• 3 The evidence does not show that Mr. 

Eiden knew the classified documents were in his home, and it is plausible that they 

were stored there by mistake. 

Mr. Biden's staff assembled the binders to prepare him for an event in September 2014, entitled "Weekend With Charlie Rose" in Aspen, Colorado. 1324 He flew to Aspen on Friday, September 19, 2014, and back to Delaware the next dayY 325 The guest list included leaders in government and business. 1326  

> 1323

Evidence items 1B5, 1B3 l, 1B77. 1321 9/17/14 e-mails amongst OVP National Security Affairs staff, NARAWH_00011307 ("Poroshenko paper, including background (classified)").  

> 1325

9/17/14 e-mail from Director of Programs, NARAWH_00010985 (attaching Mr. Biden's schedule from September 19, 2014); 9/18/14 e-mail from Director of Programs, NARAWH_00010943 (attaching Mr. Biden's schedule from September 20, 2014).  

> 1326

9/18/14 Event Memo, Weekend with Charlie Rose Dinner. NARA_SCAN_0000 1636. 

329 The binders included materials on foreign policy topics to prepare Mr. Biden 

for an interview with Charlie Rose on September 20, 2014. i:m A staff member who 

compiled the binder e-mailed his colleagues proposing its contents, stating that one 

document would be classified and another might be. 1828 The recovered binders' 

contents generally track this e-mail. 1: 329 The marked classified documents in the 

binders include the following:  

> GI

An Event Memo, marked Secret, from a National Security Affairs advisor preparing Mr. Biden for a lunch on September 17, 2014 at the Naval 

Observatory with a foreign leader.  1330 This memo was in both the binder in the garage (as a two-page document) and the binder in the upstairs office 

(as a three-page document). 

• A ten-page document labeled in part, "Background," marked Secret/NOFORN, which appears to be an attachment to the Event Memo 

referenced immediately above.  1331 This document also was in both recovered binders. u:32  

> e

A five-page document titled in part, "Scenesetter for National Security Advisor Susan Rice." It lacks classified headers or footers but does have 

portion markings indicating it contains Secret information.  i:-13 :-i This document was in both binders and corresponds to the staffer's e-mail 

describing one paper as potentially classified.  13: 34  

> 1327

Communications Director Tr. at 16: 9/9/14 Interview Memo, 1B001_00034947 (memo preparing Mr. Eiden with an ''off-the-record interview with Charlie Rose" on September 20).  

> 1328

9/17/14 e-mails amongst OVP National Security Affairs staff, NARAWH_00011307.  

> im

Compare 9/17/14 e-mails amongst OVP National Security Affairs staff, NARAWH_00011307, ujth IB005-CHARLIE ROSE BACKGROUND MATERIAL.  

> 133

# ° Classified documents Bl, D23; 9/18/14 White House Press Release, 1B001_02563406 (describing lunch with Mr. Eiden and foreign leader at the Naval Observatory).  

> Ll3l

Classified documents B2, D24.   

> 13 :32

9/17/14 e-mails amongst OVP National Security Affairs staff, 

NARA WH_000 11307 ("Poroshenko paper, including background (classified)"). 

is, 3 Classified documents B3, D25. LB-± 9/17/14 e-mails amongst OVP National Security Affairs staff, 

NARAWH_000l 1307 ("Poroshenko paper, including background (classified)"). 

330 Mr. Biden's staff appear to have mislabeled one of the binders as unclassified 

despite its cla ssified contents. The binder found in the garage had a cover page with the words "UNCLASSIFIED DOCUMENT" in all capital letters, while the binder from the second-floor bedroom office had no cover page:  13 35                 

> The Charlie Rose binder found in Garage Box 21336
> The second version of the Charlie Rose binder 133 •
> 1385

Evid ence it e ms 1B5, 1B31.  

> 1336

FBI Serial 195 IA212 , 20230103_DSC_0035. The FBI add ed the yellow Po st -It note to track it e ms that contain documents with classification markings.   

> ,33;

FBI Serial 77 IA 86 , 20230120_FBI_0243. 

331 In one of the boxes recovered by the National Archives from the Penn Biden Center was a copy of one unclassified document that was in both of these binders 

the dinner seating chart-in a folder labeled "Aspen, CO."  1: 33 s This folder at the Penn 

Biden Center contained no marked classified documents.  1: 339 

In searching the contents of the box in the garage where they found one of the "Weekend vVith Charlie Rose" binders, agents found binders from other trips Mr. 

Biden  took  as vice president in the same box.  1340 A naval enlisted aide recalled that 

Mr.  Eiden kept such binders after returning from his trips.  1311 

Within the paper bag in the upstairs office adjoining Mr. Biden's primary bedroom, where agents found the other "Weekend With Charlie Rose" binder, they also found personal documents that predate January 2017, when Mr. Biden left the vice presidency. 13 "2 We could not determine when or how the bag-and the binder 

within it containing marked classified documents-arrived at the location where agents found it in January 2023. 

These facts do not support a conclusion that Mr. Eiden willfully retained the marked classified documents in these binders. The cover of one binder was marked unclassified, the other had no classification marking, and we cannot show that Mr.  

> 1338

FBI  Serial  3;  "Aspen  CO"  folder,  NARA_SCAN_00001634,  Seating  Chart. 

NARA_SCAN_00001635,  9/18/14  Event  Memo,  Weekend  with  Charlie  Rose  Dinner, 

NARA_SCAN_000016.'36.  

> 1339

FBI Serial 3.  

> 134

# ° FBI Serial 701.  

> 1ii1

NEA l Tr. at 126-27.  

> 1312

FB [ Serial 518. 

332 Biden reviewed the binders after his vice presidency or knew the classified documents 

were inside. It is plausible that he retained these documents by mistake. 

HI. MARKED CLASSIFIED DOCUMENT IN THIRD-LEVEL DEN 

FBI agents found one document with classification markings in the third-level den area. Agents found the document inside a blue file folder with the handwritten label "AMPUTATIONS Feb '11," which was in a pile of miscellaneous materials on 

the bottom shelf of a bookcase.  1343 The document was marked Secret/NOFORN and 

related to events in Egypt.  1344 This document's subject matter does not relate to the label on the folder or the documents surrounding We cannot show that Mr. Biden knew this document was in his home, and the location of this document with unrelated materials makes it plausible that it was filed in error and that Mr. Biden kept this document by mistake.        

> 1343 Recovered document D22; FBI Serial 77.
> 1s41

Id. 

333 CHAPTER SEVENTEEN        

> DELETION OF AUDIO RECORDINGS BY MARK ZWONITZER, MR. BIDEN'S GHOSTWRITER

At some point after learning of Special Counsel Hur's appointment, Mr. Bide n's ghostwriter, Mark Zwonitzer, deleted digital audio recordings of his conversations with Mr. Biden during the writing of the book Promise Me, Dad. 1: 315 The recordings had significant evidentiary value. But Zwonitzer turned over his laptop computer and external hard drive and gave consent for investigators to search the devices. As a result, FBI technicians were able to recover deleted recordings relating to Pro,nise Me, Dad. Zwonitzer kept, and did not delete or attempt to delete, near-verbatim transcripts he made of some of the recordings_l:'l-±G He also produced those detailed notes to investigators. 

After reviewing available facts, analyzing governing law, and considering the Principles of Federal Prosecution, we decline to bring charges against Zwonitzer related to his deletion of the audio recordings. Charges against Zwonitzer are not appropriate both because the available evidence is insufficient to obtain and sustain a conviction, and because, even if the evidence were sufficient, the Principles of Federal Prosecution do not support any charge in these circumstances.  

> 1315

"[T]o ensure a full and thorough investigation," the Attorney General's appointment order authorized us to investigate and prosecute "federal crimes committed in the course of, and with the intent to interfere with, the Special Counsel's investigation, such as perjury, obstruction of justice, destruction of evidence, and intimidation of witnesses." 28 C.F.R. § 600.4(a).  

> 1346

Most of these files were essentially transcripts of the conversations, and Zwonitzer intended and viewed them as such. Zwonitzer 7/31/23 Tr. 7 4, 96. But in some instances, the files included portions that were more akin to Zwonitzer's notes of conversations rather than near-verbatim transcripts. For simplicity's sake, we refer to these files as transcripts. 

334 I.  FACTUAL BACKGROUND 

FBI agents contacted Zwonitzer to request an interview and to seek records 

related to his work ghostwriting two of Mr. Biden's memoirs, Promise Me, Dad and 

Promises to Keep. Zwonitzer provided investigators records that included near 

verbatim transcripts and some audio recordings. When reviewing these materials, 

investigators noticed that there were some transcripts for which there was no 

corresponding audio recording. They then learned from Zwonitzer's attorneys that, 

before the FBI contacted Zwonitzer, he deleted the recordings of his conversations 

with Mr. Eiden. Zwonitzer then provided all electronic devices that contained or were 

used to create the recordings and transcripts related to Promise Me, Dad. 

Zwonitzer stated that at some point he deleted the audio files subfolder from 

his laptop and external hard drive.  1347 No relevant deleted files were recovered from the laptop. Deleted audio files were recovered from a subfolder on the external hard drive labeled "Audio." Based on the available evidence from the forensic review, we assess that all deleted audio files were recovered from that subfolder. 1348 For three of the recovered files, portions of the audio appeared to be missing, and a fourth file 

appeared to have portions overwritten with a separate recording.  1349 These results are possible when forensic tools are used to recover deleted files. 135 °For each of these  

> 1347

Zwonitzer 7/31/23 Tr. 14-15.  

> 1348

FBI Operational Technology Division Report, FBI Serial 700.  

> 1349

FBI Serial 684. 

> 135

# °File carving is a digital forensic process of extracting data from a storage device by scanning the entire storage device at the byte level, including areas not assigned to the file system. Carving can retrieve files that are no longer known to the file system, such as those a user has deleted. 

335 four incomplete or overwritten files, Zwonitzer produced his corresponding 

transcripts to investigators. 1351 These notes summarized the content of the conversations, two of which were with Mr. Eiden and two of which were with Beau Biden's doctor. 1:352 

After producing the materials to investigators, Zwonitzer gave two consensual interviews during which he provided relevant information without seeking immunity or any protections or assurances (such as a proffer agreement). Zwonitzer was forthright that he had deleted recordings. 1353 In his words, "I simply took the audio 

files subfolder from both the G drive and my laptop and slid them into the trash. I

saved all the transcripts ... " 13154 Zwonitzer believed he did this at some point during the period between the end of January 2023 and the end of February 2023. 1,155 He 

took this action before the FBI contacted him about the investigation and requested that  he produce  evidence_l: 356 Zwonitzer explained that at the time he did so, he was 

"aware" of the Department of ,Justice investigation of Mr. Biden's potential mishandling of classified materials_ i: 357 As for why he deleted the audio recordings, Zwonitzer gave the following reasons: 

• As a practice, while he saved transcripts of recorded conversations indefinitely, he deleted audio recordings after completing a written work to  

> 1351

FBI Serials 315, 336; JRB-07; JRB_02_16_2017; Doctor-02-16-2017; Doctor-03-16 -

2017. i 3 ,; 2 FBI Serials 315,336; ,JRB-07; JRB_02_16_2017; Doctor-02-16-2017; Doctor-03-16 -

2017. 1353 Zwonitzer 7/31/23 Tr. at 14-15.  

> 1:354

Id.  

> 1355

Id. at 15. 1356 Id. at 15-16. m, Id. at 16. 

336 protect his interviewee's privacy.1 358 Zwonitzer explained that he did not have an established practice as to when he deleted audio recordings; rather, he would do so at convenient points in time, such as when he moved to a new residence or when he happened to notice that he still had audio recordings from past interviews. 1359 

• Zwonitzer had received vague but threatening e-mails from groups hostile to Mr. Eiden, and private conversations that included Zwonitzer had been published on the Internet. 1360 Accordingly, Zwonitzer was concerned that his computer could be hacked and the audio recordings of his conversations with Mr. Eiden published online. 1361 Those recordings contained personal information, including Mr. Eiden's reflections on the death of his son 

Eeau.1362 

• In January 2023, Zwonitzer had finished working on a book about the capabilities of a cyber-surveillance system called Pegasus.1. 36,3 Zwonitzer stated that he had a "heightened sense of awareness" of the capabilities of Pegasus, which he described as "the most ... frightful cybersurveillance tool ... on the market out there right now." 1364 The book discussed how Pegasus was used to spy on people around the world-including heads of state, diplomats, and journalists. 1365 The Pegasus tool could be used to "capture all videos, photos, emails, texts, and passwords - encrypted or not."1366 

Investigators asked Zwonitzer if he had deleted the recordings because of the 

special counsel's investigation. Zwonitzer replied that he "was aware that there was 

an investigation" when he deleted the recordings and continued, "I'm not going to say  

> 1358

Id. at 15. 1359 Zwonitzer 7/31/23 Tr. at 22. 1360 Id. at 14. 1361 Id.  

> 1s62

Id.  

> 1363

Zwonitzer 1/4/24 Tr. at 77; Laurent Richard & Sandrine Rigaud, PEGASUS: THE STORY OF THE WORLD'S MOST DANGEROUS SPYWARE (2023) (e-book), 

https://us.macmillan.com/books/9781250858696/pegasus  (last visited Jan. 31, 2024).  

> 1364

Zwonitzer 1/4/24 Tr. at 77.  

> 1365

Laurent Richard & Sandrine Rigaud, PEGASUS: THE STORY OF THE WORLD'S MOST DANGEROUS SPYWARE (2023) (e-book), 

https://us.macmillan.com/books/9781250858696/pegasus  (last visited Jan. 31, 2024).  

> 1366

Id. 

337 how much of the percentage it was of my motivation."  1:{G? When asked whether he 

deleted the recordings to try and prevent investigators from obtaining them, Zwonitzer said that he did not and further explained, "when I got the subpoena and when I realized that I still had audio that I not know I had on the laptop, I rnade sure to preserve that for this investigation." 1368 Zwonitzer also explained that at the tirne he deleted the recordings, he did not expect the investigation to involve him 1::i 59 and he did not think the audio recordings contained information relevant to classified information.1370 

According to Zwonitzer, he decided to delete recordings on his own; no one told him to do so. 1: 371 Nor had he been in contact with anyone from Mr. Biden's circle of staff, friends, and confidants about his participation in an interview with Special Counsel's . 1372 Our investigation-which included witness interviews and review of phone and e-mail records-did not uncover any evidence that Zwonitzer had been in contact with anyone about his decision to delete the recordings. IL THE EVIDENCE IS INSUFFICIENT TO OBTAIN A CONVICTION FOR OBSTRUCTION  

> OF JUSTICE

A.  Legal Standard 

The two relevant statutory prov1s1ons that criminalize the destruction of evidence are 18 U.S.C. § 1512(c)(l) and 18 U.S.C. § 1519. While in practice the proof 

uc 7 Zwonitzer 7/31/23 Tr. at 17. LJGS Zwonitzer 1/4/24 Tr. at 68. 13 69 Zwonitzer 7 /31/2~-3 Tr. at 16. 1370 Zwonitzer 1/4/24 TL at 66. 1371 Zwonitzer 7/31/23 at 17-22.  

> 1372

Id. 

338 needed to sustain a conviction under either statute is often very similar, the two 

provisions differ in their elements.  1.373 

Section 1512(c)(l), like most federal obstruction statutes, requires proof of a

"nexus" or "link" to a specified pending or foreseeable official proceeding. 1: 374 What 

constitutes an "official proceeding" is enumerated in a statutory list and includes 

proceedings before (1) a federal judge or federal court, (2) a federal grand jury, or (3) 

the United States CongressYrn 5 Section 1512(c)(l) also requires proof that the 

defendant acted "corruptly." And while courts have given slightly different definitions 

to that term, it generally requires proof that the defendant acted with the purpose of 

wrongfully impeding the due administration of justiceY 376 Under any formulation, 

"corruptly" is a heightened mens rea. i: 377  

> 1373

Compare 18 U.S.C. § 1512(c)(l); u·ith 18 U.S.C. § 1519.  

> 1374

United States u. White Horse, 35 F.4th 1119, 1121-23 (8th Cir. 2022) ("§ 1512(c)(l) 

requires proof of a nexus between the defendant's action and an official proceeding"); United 

States v. Matthews, 505 F.3d 698, 707-08 (7th Cir. 2007) (applying the nexus requirement to 

§ 1512(c)(l)).  

> 1375

18 U.S.C. § 1515(a)(l); see, e.g., United States v. Young, 916 3d 368, 384-85 (4th 

Cir. 2019) (applying§ 1512(c)(l) to federal grand jury proceeding).  

> 1376

See United States u. Akiti, 701 F.3d 883, 887-88 (8th Cir. 2012); Matthews, 505 F.3d at 704-06; Leonard B. Sand & John S. Siffert, MODERN FEDERAL JURY INSTRUCTIONS  -

CRIMINAL i[ 46.10 (Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., Release No. 83B 2023).  

> 1377

The Supreme Court has held that the word is "normally associated with wrongful, immoral, depraved, or evil." Arthur Andersen LLP v. United States, 544 U.S. 696, 705 (2005). The various formulations of corruptly amount to the same general requirement of proving abad purpose. See, e.g., United States u. Robertson, 86 F.4th 355, 359-63 (D.C. Cir. 2023) (affirming jury instruction for § 1512(c)(2) charge that defined corruptly as requiring "unlawful means, or act[ing] with an unlawful purpose, or both" and "consciousness of wrongdoing"); Matthews, 505 F.3d at 704-06 (purposefully and wrongfully impeding the due administration of justice); United States u. Delgado, 984 F.3d 435, 452 (5th Cir. 2021) ("knowingly and dishonestly, with specific intent to subvert or undermine the due administration of justice"); United States v. Gordon, 710 F.3d 1124, 1151 (10th Cir. 2013) ("with an improper purpose and to engage in conduct knowingly and dishonestly with the specific intent to subvert, impede or obstruct"). 

339 By contrast, Section 1519 permits prosecutions in broader circumstances. For 

a Section 1519 prosecution, the government need not show a link to a specified 

proceeding, it need only show the commission of an obstructive act with the intent to 

impede, obstruct, or influence an investigation that is within the federal 

government's jurisdiction.  1378 Additionally, Section 1519 does not require proof of 

corrupt intent, and instead requires proving that the defendant acted "knowingly ... 

with the intent to impede, obstruct, or influence." While a defendant must commit 

the obstructive act knowingly, the defendant does not need to know whether the 

investigation he intends to obstruct falls under the jurisdiction of the federal 

government.  1. 379 

Thus, Section 1519 criminalizes (1) knowingly; (2) altering, falsifying, 

destroying, mutilating, concealing, covering up, or making a false entry in any record, 

document, or tangible object; (3) with the intent to impede, obstruct, or influence the 

investigation or the proper administration of any matter within the jurisdiction of a

department or agency of the United States. 1380  

> i:i~s

United States v. Moyer, 674 F.3d 192, 209-10 (3d Cir. 2012) (government only required to prove an intent to impede an investigation into "any matter" that is "ultimately proven to be within the federal government's jurisdiction"); United States u. Gray, 692 F.3d 514, 519 (6th Cir. 2012) ("[T]he plain language of the statute only requires the Government to prove that [the defendant] intended to obstruct the investigation of any matter that happens to be within the federal government's jurisdiction." (alteration in original)); United 

States  L'. Gray, 642 F.3d 371, 376-377 (2d Cir. 2011) ("[I]n enacting§ 1519, Congress rejected any requirement that the government prove a link between a defendant's conduct and an imminent or pending official proceeding.").  

> 1379

United States u. Hassler, 992 F.3d 243, 246-47 (4th Cir. 2021) (so holding and collecting cases).  

> 1380

See Hassler, 992 F.3d at 246-47; United States c. Hunt, 526 F.3d 739, 7 43 (11th Cir. 2008); United States u. Kernell, 667 F.3d 746, 756-57 (6th Cir. 2012); Sand & Siffert, above, at ~ 46.13. 

340 Given that Section 1519 is less burdensome because it does not require proving 

a nexus requirement or a corrupt intent, we evaluated Zwonitzer's conduct under that provision. A prosecution under Section 1512(c)(l) would fail for the same reasons. 

B.  The evidence does not support a charge under Section 1519 

Zwonitzer admitted, in a consensual, recorded interview, simply took the audio files subfolder from both the [external hard] drive and my laptop and slid them into the trash."L 381 Therefore, Zwonitzer knowingly deleted audio files, Ll82 but the 

available evidence cannot establish beyond a reasonable doubt that Zwonitzer did so with the mtent to impede, obstruct, or influence this federal investigation. 

In his interviews, Zwonitzer offered plausible, innocent reasons for why he deleted the recordings. First, out of concern for privacy, he had a practice of deleting all audio recordings of interviewees in his possession and had done so previously. Second, Zwonitzer was concerned that the materials could be hacked and published online. This concern was increased by his recent work on a book discussing a powerful cyber-surveillance system known to target journalists, among other groups. \Vhile Zwonitzer admitted to being aware of the special counsel investigation, he did not say that his goal was to keep evidence from being uncovered by that investigation. Instead, Zwonitzer explained that "when I got the subpoena and when I realized that                                                           

> usi Zwonitzer 7/31/23 Tr. at 14-15.
> 1382 See Kernell, 667 F.3d at 756-57 (affirming sufficiency of evidence in Section 1519 conviction where defendant deleted files from his computer and ran adefragmentation program); United States v. Wortrnan, 488 F.3d 752, 753-55 (7th Cir. 2007) (affirming sufficiency of evidence in Section 1519 conviction where woman destroyed a CD containing child pornography that belonged to her boyfriend).

341 I still had audio that I did not know I had on the laptop, I made sure to preserve that 

for this investigation." ns3 

Zwonitzer's later actions-including the production to the special counsel of transcripts that mention classified information-suggest that his decision to delete the recordings was not aimed at concealing those materials from investigators. Significantly, Zwonitzer voluntarily consented to two interviews and could have, but did not, invoke the Fifth Amendment to decline to produce the transcripts, his laptop, and the external hard drive. And when FBI agents contacted Zwonitzer, they were unaware that audio recordings existed or where Zwonitzer's electronic devices were located. 

Therefore, agents did not have probable cause for a warrant to search those devices and recover the recordings. Investigators only learned the evidence because Zwonitzer was forthright, explained his actions, produced electronic devices, and consented to the search of those devices. Zwonitzer's own consensual statement is the only evidence of when deleted the recordings; without it, investigators would not have learned whether he did so before or after learning of the special counsel's appointment and federal criminal investigation. And while Zwonitzer admitted to being aware of the investigation at the time he deleted the files, the context in which this statement was made-during a consensual and voluntary interview-supports the conclusion that Zwonitzer acted with good faith and did not intend to impede, obstruct, or influence this investigation.      

> iis:i Zwonitzer 1/4/24 Tr. at 68.

342 Perhaps most significantly, Zwonitzer preserved near-verbatim transcripts 

that contain incriminating information about Mr. Eiden, including transcripts of the 

February 16, 2017 conversation where Mr. Eiden said he "just found all the classified 

stuff downstairs." Preserving these transcripts was inconsistent with a motive aimed 

at impeding the investigation. While there is unique evidentiary value in a subject's 

own voice as captured on an audio recording, we would expect a person intending to 

obstruct justice to also conceal or delete the notes that memorialized the same 

probative information. Zwonitzer could have just as easily "slid" the files containing 

the notes into the trash as he had done with the audio recordings. Instead, he 

preserved the transcripts and produced them to investigators. And he later produced 

the devices on which the recordings had been stored and consented to a search of those devices. None of this is consistent with intent to obstruct justice or the investigation. For these reasons, we believe that the admissible evidence would not suffice to obtain and sustain a conviction of Mark Zwonitzer for obstruction of justice. 

III.  DECLINATION IS ALSO APPROPRIATE BECAUSE ON BALANCE, RELEVANT AGGRAVATING AND MITIGATING FACTORS Do NOT SUPPORT ZWONITZER'S PROSECUTION 

Even if the evidence available were sufficient to obtain and sustain Zwonitzer's conviction for obstruction of justice, we would decline prosecution because on balance, relevant aggravating and mitigating factors do not support his prosecution. 1381 Zwonitzer willingly provided significant cooperation to the investigation without         

> 1384 U.S. Dep't of Just., Just. Manual§ 9-27.230 (2023).

343 seeking or receiving any protections or assurances. He was forthright in describing his conduct and working with investigators to obtain all relevant evidence in his possession. And his cooperation was uniquely valuable as the evidence that he provided was highly probative and not otherwise obtainable. Finally, prosecuting Zwonitzer under these circumstances would deter others from cooperating as he did. 

344 CONCLUSION 

For the foregoing reasons, we conclude that no criminal charges are warranted in this matter. 

345 Appendix  A:  Recovered  Documents  1  

> ..
> Doe..
> ID  . P~ge Count
> Q()lltained  lit  . Date  Summary  Classifloation M.itrkings  1-
> A Memorandum  for  the  Vice  President from  Jeff  Prescott  with  the  subject  "China Engagement  in  the  Second  Term,''
> "Second  Term" file folder
> Al  3/8/L3  4 SECRET
> A Memorandum  for  thr1  President  from  the Vice  President  with  the  subject  "Leader Meetings  and  Events  Dunng  UN  General Assembly  (UNGA) Week."
> ---------- ------- -------------+-
> "Filing  10-10-IG" file folder
> A2  9/26/16  TOP  SECRET/SCI
> -----~--~-+----------+----------j--~--~--+  --- ---------------
> A3
> VPOT lJS  EYES ONLY envelope
> 1/lG/15  2 A Memorandum  for  the  National  Sc)cm·ity Advisor  to  the  Vice  President.
> TOP  SECRET//SPECIAL HANDLING  REQUIRED
> ---------+--·--- -· - -----+-------------~-+--- --------- -------
> A4
> VPOTUS  EYES ONLY envelope
> ,January 2015 (est)
> 2 Classified  information  in  tlw  form  of  atable.
> TOP  SECRET// [5  SCI  Control  System  Markings]//
> 11  SCI  Control  System  Marking]// ORCON/NOFORN
> A5
> VPOTUS  B~YES ONLY envelope
> 6/2:ill  4 11  An  Intelligence  Assessment  from  the  CIA'.s Directorate  oflntelligence.
> TOP  SECRET// [8  SC1  Control  System  Markings]/ [2  SCI  Control  System  Markings]// ORCON/NOFORN and  a SENSITIVE  stripe  across tlw top  right-hand  corner  of  each page
> A6
> VPOTUS  EYES ONLY envelope
> 8/8/12  5 An  Intelligence  Memorandum  from  the CIA's  DirPctorate  ofintelligence.
> TOP  SECRET// [4  SCI  Control  System  Marking8]// ORCON/NOFORN and  a SENSITIVE  stripe  across the  top  right-hand  corner  of  each page
> RN,ults  o(  Classific;ition Review
> Declassification  date  has  passed, declassification  review  required before  public  release.
> TOP  SECRET//SCI**
> TOP  SECRET// [:1  SCI  Control  System  Markings]// ORCON/NOFORN
> TOP  SECRET// [5  SCI  Control  System  Markings]/ [1  SCI  Control  System  Marking]// ORCON/NOFORN
> TOP  SECRET// [8  SCI  Control  System  Markings]/ [2  SCI  Control  System  Marking]// ORCON/NOFORN
> TOP  SECRET// [4  SCI  Control  System  Markings]// ORCON/NOFORN
> 1 FBI  Serial  676.
> * Agency  with  highest  recommended  classification  would  need  to  consult  with  other  U.S.  government  agencies  before  settling  on a  final  classification.
> "*  Highest  level of  classification  handling  1·ecommended by  the  State  Depa1tment  acting  as  a proxy  for  the  National  Security  Council  (including  an  assessment  of  State Department  equities).
> A-1 Appendix  A:  Recovered  Documents
> l'ag~  Result$ of.  Cla1:11:1ineat1on
> C<nint  Classification Markings  lt!!\view
> A7
> A8
> A9
> AlO
> Bl
> VPOTUS  EYES ONLY envelope
> "Ukrnine 02/09/15" file folder
> "VP  Personal" file folder
> "VP PersoncJl" file folder
> "Weekend  With Charlie  Rose" binder  (in  garage); behind  "Russia" tab
> 1/28/15
> 3/9/15
> 12/12/15 (est.)
> 12/11/15
> 9/17/14
> Handwritten  notes.  all  but  one  page  of which  relate  to  the  ObamcJ
> 10  Administration's  efforts  to  negotiate  the Joint  Comprehensive  Plan  of  Action (",JCPOA").
> A memorandum  titled  "Backgrnund  for Meeting  with  President  Tusk."  There  is no
> 7 indiccJtion  of  an  author,  but  the classificcJ  tion-a  uthority  block  states  that ,Jeff  Prescott  classified  the  document.
> A Telephone  Call  Sheet  setting  forth  the
> purpose  of  and  talking  pain  ts  for a  call  with
> Ukrainian  Prime  Minister  Yatsenyuk.
> There  is a  handwritten  note  addressed  to
> Mr.  Biden's  executive  assistant:  "Get  copy
> of  this  converscJtion from  Sit  Rm  for  my
> Recmds  please"  that  is  signed  ''.Joe." Document  A 10 is  attached  to  the  document.
> A document  in  the  format  of a  transcript documenting  the  substance  of a  December
> 5 11, 2015  call  between  Mr.  Eiden  and Ukrainian  Prime  Minister  Yatsenyuk.  The document  is  attached  to  document  A9.
> An  Event  Memo  from  an  OVP  national
> security  staffer  titled  "Lunch  with
> Ukrainian  President  Pornshenko"  for a
> 2 lunch  at  the  Naval  ObservatOl'y on September  18,  2014.  The  memo  describes the  purpose  of  the  lunch,  the  participants, the  press  plan,  and  the  sPquence of  events.
> None
> SECRET  and  TOP  SECRET
> SECRET
> CONFIDENTIAL  and EYES  ONLY  DO  NOT  COPY
> SECRET
> SECRET//ORCON/NOFORN
> TOP  SECRET
> SECRET''*
> CONFIDENTIAL*,,
> SECRET**
> * Agency  with  highest  recommended  classification  would  need  to  consult  with  other  U.S.  government  agencies  before  settling  on a  final  classification.
> **  Highest  level  of  classification  handling  recommended  by  the  State  Department  acting  as  a prnxy  for  the  National  Security  Council  (including  an  assessment  of  State Department  equities).
> A-2 Appendix  A:  Recovered  Documents
> "Weekend  With
> Charlie  Rose"
> 82  binder  (in  garage);  Undated  10
> behind  "Russia"
> tab
> "Weehnd  With
> Charlie  Rose"
> B2-1  binder  (in  garage);  9/17/14  5
> behind  "Russia"
> tab
> "Weekend  With
> Charlie  Rose"
> K:l  binder  (in  garage);  8/29/14  5
> behind  "Russia"
> tab
> "Foreign  Policy:
> B4  2nd  Term"  Undated
> file folder
> "Foreign  Policy:
> B4-1  2nd  Term"  Undated
> file folder
> "Foreign  Policy:
> Btl-2  2nd  Tenn"  Undated
> fili!  folder
> A paper  attachment  to B 1 tith"d  "Tab  B -
> BACKGROUND"  discussing  issues  related to  Russian  aggression  toward  Ukraine. There  is no  indication  of  an  author.
> A Memorandum  for  the  Vice  President from  staff  members,  with  subJect "U.S. Energy  Assistance  to  Ukraine."
> A paper  with  subject  "Scenesetter  for National  Security  Advisor  Susan  Rice's Visit  to  China."  There  is  no  indication  of  an author.
> A paper  titled  "Second  Term  National Security  Narrative"  describing  goals  the Obama  Administration  could  seek  to achieve  in  its  second  term.  There  is no indication  of  an  author.
> A Memorandum  fm  the  President  from  The Vice  President  with  the  subject "Engagement  with  China  in  the  Second Tenn."  The  paper  suggests  activities  Vice President  Biden  could do  in  his  second term  to  "build  on  my  work  last  year  by engaging  with  China's  leaders  in  the sPcond  term."
> A document  containing  three  lists: Policy  Must  Do,"  "Foreign  Policy - Want  to Do,"  and  "Management  Administrative." There  is no  indication  of  an  author.
> SECRET/NOFORN
> None
> No  classification  header  or  footer; portion  markings  indicate  an overall  classification  of  SECRET.
> SECRET/NOFORN
> No Classificat10n  Marking
> No  Classification  Marking
> TOP  SECRET//NOFORN
> CONFIDENTIAL*
> SB~CRET**
> SECRET//NOFORN*"'
> CONFIDENTIAL*"
> CONFIDENTIAL*'"
> * Agency  with  highest  recommended  classification  would  need  to  consult  with  other  U.S.  government  agencies  before  settling  on a  final  classification. *"  Highest  level  of  classification  handling  rernmmended  by  the  State  Department  acting  as  a prnxy  for  the  National  Security  Council  (including  an  assessment  of  State Department  equities).
> A-3 Appendix  A:  Recovered  Documents
> - -._  --~----------~---- "
> -~---------------·-~
> --
> lI--
> •..,;,....,  L~ --y>
> -- '
> :. ,.
> . '
> L
> I '-
> Page
> ·count
> --
> Summary  Classification-Markings  Results  of  Classification Review
> B5
> "Foreign  Policy: 2nd  Term" file folder
> Undated  9
> A PowerPoint  presentation  with  "National Security  Council  Meeting:  Defining a Second  Tenn  Agenda"  and  "Prnpared  by National  Security  Staff,"  on  the  tit.le slide.
> TOP  SECRET//NOFORN//Pre -
> decisional (first  and  second  slides  only)  CONFIDENTIAL*"'
> A Memorandum  for  the  President  from  the
> National  Security  Advisor  with  the  subject
> B6  "FACTS FIRST'' file  fol  den·  9/29/09  5
> "Meeting  on  Afghanistan  and  Pakistan." The  memo  states  its  purpose  as  to  prepare  TOP  SECRET  WITH  TOP SECRET/NOFORN/CODEWORD  TOPSECRETllNOFORN*
> President  Obama  for "a  meeting  with  [his]  ATTACHMENTS
> senior  national  security  team  on  September
> 30, 2009,"
> B7  "FACTS FIRST" file folder  9/27/09  4
> A report  from  the  Office of  the  Director  of National  Intelligence  addressing  topics related  to  the  U.S.  war  in  Afghanistan.  The report  is  an  attachment  to  BG.
> TOP  SECRET// H UMINT/COMINT//ORCON/NOF ORN//FISA
> TOP  SECRET//HCS -
> P/SI//ORCON/NOFORN//FISA'''
> ----------- ~---~-,---
> A photocopy  of  an  infographic  related  to
> BS  "FACTS FIRST" file folder  Undated  1
> Afghanistan  and  Al-Qa'ida  that  is  partially cut  off on  the  top,  bottom,  and  right-hand side.  The  Ol'iginal  and  complete infographic-obtained  from  the  National Archives-is  labeled  as  a product  of  the National  Counterterrorism  Center.  ThP
> No  marking  in  the  header  or  footer of  the  photocopy,  but  the  original document-obtained  from  the National  Archives-was  marked TOP  SECRET//
> SECRET//NOFORN
> original  infographic  was  an  attachment  to  H CS/S1//FGI//ORCON/NOFORN
> 136.
> --· - ---·-- .. - .... ~~ -
> -
> A report  from  the  Office  of  the  Director  of
> B9  ''FACTS FIRST" file folder  9/27/09  2 National  Intelligence  addressing  topics related  to  the  U.S.  wa1·  in  Afghanistan.  The report  is  an  attachment  to  BG.
> TOP  SECRET// HCS/Sl/ORCON/NOFORN
> TOP  SECRET//HCS -
> P/Sl//ORCON/NOFORN
> ----·--···----- ---·----~--····-··--- • +--..  ------- -
> BlO  "FACTS FIRST" file folder  9/27/09  4
> A report  from  the  Office  of  the  Director  of National  Intelligence  addressing  topics related  to  the  U.S.  war  111  Afghanistan.  The  SECRET//NOFORN  SECRET//NOFORN
> report  is  an  attachment  to  86_  ~----- -------- ----·--···  I
> * Agency  with  highest  recommended  classification  would  need  to  consult  with  othe1· U.S.  government  agencies  before  settling  on  a final  classification. **  Highest  level  of  classification  handling  recommended  by  the  State  Department  acting  as  a proxy  for  the  National  Security  Council  (including  an  assessment  of  State
> Department  equities). A-4 Appendix  A:  Recovered  Documents
> A report  from  the  Office  of  the  Director  of
> Bll  "FACTS  FIRST" file folder  9/27/09  2 National  Intelligence  addressing  topics related  to  the  U.S.  war  in  Afghanistan.  The  SECRET//NOFORN  SECRET//NOFORN
> report  is  an  attachment  to  BG.
> f------+----- ------1------....je---------+----
> A State  Department  cable  from
> Ambassador  Anne  Patterson  at  the  U.S.
> Bl2  "FACTS  FIRST" file folder  ,'3  Embassy  in  Islamabad,  Pakistan,  with  the subject  "Reviewing  Our  Afghanistan  - SECRET//NOFORN  SECRET"·*
> Pakistan  Strategy."  The  cable  is  an
> attachment  to  BG.
> A paper  titled  "Afghanistan/Pakistan
> "FACTS  FIRST" file folder  Undated
> Minimal  Conditions  Necessary  to  AchiE1ve Our  Core  Goal."  The  State  Department authored  the  document.  Thn  paper  is  an
> SECRET//REL  TO  USA  GBR  SECRET**
> attachment  to  BG.
> A letter  from  the  president  of  a foreign
> country  to  President  Obama  that  addresses
> "the  ongoing  situation  in  Afghanistan"  and
> Bl3-1  "FACTS  FIRST" file folder  9/22/09  2
> sets  forth  the  foreign  country's  views  on  the war.  The  document  does  not  include classification  markings.  but  states  in  the
> None  CONFIDENTIAL**
> header  that  it  is  "Confidential  ...  For
> President  Obama."  Document  B15
> references  the  lette1·  as  an  attachment.
> A quarter-page  of  type  writ  ten  text  titled
> "Notes  from  Meeting  on  September  29.
> 2009: 1::30-:i:30  "Small  Group  Meeting:
> Afghanistan/Pakistan."  The  text  quotes  a
> B13-2  "FACTS  FIRST" file folder  9/29/09  1 question  asked  by  then-Director  of  the Central  Intelligence  Agency  Leon  Panetta  None  SECRET//NOFORN**
> of  then-Secretary  of  Defense  Robert  Gates
> and  provides  the  yes-or-no  answer  to  that
> question  given  by  "Intelligence,  State  and
> Defense."
> * Agency  with  highest  recommended  classification  would  need  to  consult  with  other  U.S.  government  agencies  befoi-e  settling  on a  final  classification. *"  Highest  fovel  of  classification  handling  rncommended  by  the  Stat(!  Department  acting  as  a proxy  for  the  National  Security  Council  (including  an  assessment  of  State Department  equities).
> A-5 Appendix  A:  Recovered  Documents
> B14 Bl4-l Bl5 Bl6 Bl7 BlS "FACTS FIRST" file folder "FACTS FIRST" file folder "FACTS  FIRST" file folder "FACTS FIRST" file folder "FACTS  FIRST" file folder "FACTS  FIRST" file folder 9/25/09  3
> Undated  4
> Undated  2
> Undated 10/13/09 Undated  2
> 1
> An  e-mail  copying  the  text  of a  September 25, 2009,  State  Department  cable  from  the
> U.S.  Embassy  in  KabuL  Afghanistan, authored  by  Ambassador  Karl  Eikenberry with  the  subject  "KARZAI: MY OBSERVATIONS."  The  subject  of  thee mail  and  text  of  the  cable  include  adesignation  and  each  paragraph  is portion marked  "(S),"  which  stands  for  Secret.
> A paper  titled  "Counterinsurgency  (COIN) vs.  Counterterrorism  (CT)  Strategies"  that has  no  indications  of  author.
> A paper  titled  "Some  Facts  and Considerations''  that  addresses  topics related  to al-Qa'ida,  the  Taliban,  and Intelligence  Community  resources.  Tlw document  appears  to  have  been  authored within  the  White  House  because  it  is critical  ofintelligence  Community assessments.  The  document  reforencc?s Document  Bl::l-1  as  an  attachment.
> A PowerPoint  slide  titled  "Pathway  to
> COMISAF  Initial  Assessment"  that  does not  indicate  an  author.
> A Power  Point  slide  with  the  partial  title "C,JCS  Update."
> A large-format  infographic  in  the  form  of  atable.  The  table  addresses  the  capabilities of  the  Afghan  government.
> Classifiication· Markings
> SECRET
> None
> TOP  SECRET//HSC//NOFORN
> SECRET/NOFORN SECRET
> SECRET//NOFORN
> Results  ofCiassifieation Review
> SECRET
> TOP  SECRET//NOFORN*
> TOP  SECRET//HCS-O// ~SCI  CONTROL  SYSTEM MARKINGS]// ORCON/NOFORN*
> SECRET//NOFORN
> SECRET
> SECRET//NOFORN
> 2 Investigators  located  the  document  on  the  conference  table  in  the  Situation  Room  in  White  House  photographs  dated  October  14, 2009.
> * Agency  with  highest  recommended  classification  would  need  to  consult  with  other  U.S.  government  agencies  before  settling  on a  final  classification. **  Highest  level  of  classification  handling  recommended  by  the  State  Department  acting  as  a proxy  for  the  National  Security  Council  (including  an  assessment  of  State
> Department  equities). A-G Appendix  A:  Recovered  Documents
> RWiulta  of  Chu1siflcation
> ReviefN.
> An  unsigned,  handwritten  letter  with  the
> B18-1  ·'FACTS FIRST" file folder  10/18/09  '.-l  salutation  "M.r.  President."  The  hitter appears  to  be  in  draft  format  and  discussEis  None  SECRET//NOFORN
> COIN  strategy  in  Afghanistan.
> -------
> Bl9  "FACTS FIRST" file folder  9/13/09  7 A Power  Point  prnsentation  regarding Afghanistan  title ➔ d "Sunday  Small  Group."  SECRET//NOFORN  SECRET//NOFORN
> -------~  ----·----~ - --
> A Memorandum  for  the  President  from  the
> National  Security  Advisor  with  the  subject
> B20  "FACTS FIRST" file folder  8/:31/09
> "Weekly  Update  on  Afghanistan  and Pakistan."  The  memo  included  two attachments,  labeled  "Tab  l"  and  "Tab  2."
> TOP  SECRET/SCI  TOP  SECRET//HCS-O P//ORCON/NOFORN*
> that  are  documents  B21  and  B22,
> respectively. --+--------+-----+---------+--~--..  ------------"~---- --------------------+-----
> A one-page  Memorandum  fo1·  the  President
> from  then-Secretary  of  State  Hillary  Cover  memo:
> Rodham  Clinton  dated  August  26, 2009,  SECRET//NOFORN//NODIS
> B21  "FACTS FIRST" file folder  8/26/09  8 attaching  a seven-page  Memorandum  to the  President  from  Special  Representative
> (UNCLASSIFIED  when  separate from  attachment)  SECRET/NOFORN/NODIS
> Holbrooke  dated  August  28, 2009,  with  Holbrooke  Memo:
> subject  "Afghanistan/Pakistan  Weekly  SECRET/NOFORN/NODIS
> Report  - August  22-August  28, 2009."
> * Agency  with  highest  recommended  classification  would  need  to  consult  with  other  U.S.  government  agencies  before  settling  on  a final  classification.
> "'*  Highest  level  of  classification  handling  recommended  by  the  State  Department  acting  as  a proxy for  the  National  Security  Council  (including  an  assessment  of  State Department  equities).
> A-7 Appendix  A:  Recovered  Documents
> Page
> Count
> "FACTS  FIRST"
> B22  8/24/09
> file folder
> A one-page,  unclassified  Memorandum  for Assistant  to  the  President  and  National Security  Advisor  from  then-Defense Secretary  Robert  Gates  attaching  a five page  Central  Command  ("CENTCOM") weekly  update  fOl'  August  17-23, 2009, from General  David  Petraeus.  The  Gates  memo also  attaches  a six-page  Multi-National Force  Iraq  ("MNF-1")  weekly  update  for the  same  week  from  General  Raymond Odierno.  There  are  two copies  of  the  cover memo  from  Gates  and  the  CENTCOM update.  The  CENTCOM  update  includes an  update  on  Afghanistan.
> Results  of  Classification Classification  Markings  Review
> CENTCOM  Update: SECRET//NOFORN MNF-I  Update:  SECRET//NOFORN SECRET  //  NOFORN  // 2001190221
> :i  B22  also  includes  a copy  of  the  last  eight  pages  of  the  first  copy  of  General  McChrystal'c,  assessment,  otherwise  designated  as  part  of  Document  B2:-3.  Those  pages  are  not counted  in  this  entry.
> * Agency  with  highest  recommended  classification  would  need  to  consult  with  other  U.S.  government  agencies  before  settling  on a  final  classification.
> **  Highest  level  of  classification  handling  recommended  by  the  State  Department  acting  as  a proxy  for  the  National  Security  Council  (including  an  assessment  of  State Department  equities).
> A-8 Appendix  A:  Recovered  Documents
> "FACTS  FIRST"
> 823  8/30/09  126  1
> file folder
> "FACTS  FIRST"
> B24  9110109  9
> file folder
> A one-page,  unclassified  letter  from General  Stanley  McChrystal,  Commander,
> United  States  Forces  Afghanistan/ International  Security  Assistance  Force, Afghanistan,  attaching  a document  tided "Commander's  Initial  Assessment"  dated August  30, 2009,  and  authored  by  General McChrystal  (only  the  first  58  pages included  in B23).
> B23  then  includes  another  copy  of  the lettN  from  McChrystal,  with  the  full  6G
> pagc1  assessment  attached.  The  second  copy of  the  assessment  contains  handwritten markings  and  notes.
> A one-page  Memorandum  for  the  Pn;sident from  the  Vice  President  with  the  subject "Afghanistan"  with  "DRAFT"  handwritten at  the  top.  The  memo  attaches  a nine-page paper  titled  "Afghanistan  Discussion Paper:  A 'Counter  Terrorism  Plus' Strategy."  The  paper  does  not  specify  an author,  but  the  classification-authority block  indicates  it  was  classified  by  Antony Blinken.
> The  last  two  pages  of  B23  are  a printout  of an  article  in  Newsweek  titled  "The Geopolitics  of  Golf,"  by  Richard  N.  Haass published  on  September  3,  2009.
> CONFIDENTIAL  REL  CONFIDENTTAL//REL  TO  USA NATO/ISAF'  ISAF, NATO
> TOP  SECRET  TOP  SECRET//NOFORN*
> 1 The  last  three  pages  of  B23  are  a printout  of  an  opinion  piece from  the  New  Yorh Ti.m.es  dated  August  20, 2009,  titled  "In  Afghanistan,  the  Choice  is  Ours"  by  Richard  N. Haass.  Those  pages  are  not  counted  in  this  entry.
> * Agency  with  highest  recommended  classification  would  need  to  consult  with  other  U.S. govc1rnment  agencies  before  settling  on  a final  classification. H Highest  level  of  classification  handling  recommended  by  the  State  DepartmE1nt  acting  as  a proxy  for  the  National  Security  Council  (including  an  assessment  of  State Department  equities).
> A-9 Appendix  A:  Recovered  Documents
> B25
> B25-l
> B26
> "AFG  ANAST  AN 2009" file folder
> "AFGANASTAN 2009" file folder
> "AFGANASTAN 2009" file folder
> 11/25/09
> 11/27  /09
> 11/12/08
> A MemOl'andum  for  the  President  from  the Vice  President  that  includes  handwritten notes,  edits,  and  markings.  It  also  includes partially  cut-off  fax-machine  markings  for November  25, 2009,  at  arnund  2:43  pm. The  memo  begins,  "[hlere  are  some  final thoughts  on  Afghanistan  and  Pakistan, which  may  help  shape  the  argument  you
> 3 make  to  the  American  people."  The  memo supports  Mr.  Biden's  belief  "that  we  should not  increase  our  forces"  in  Afghanistan.  Mr. Eiden  sought  to  "relay  the  highlights  of  aconversation  with  Karl  Eikenberry  and recommend  that  you  call  him." A handwritten  note  next  to  that  sentence states,  ''[h]e  is  a stand  up  guy  will  take risks."
> Handwritten  Letter  to  President  Obama
> 27  and  Drafts.  See  full  description  in  text  of report.
> A Memorandum  for  Principals  from  the
> National  Security  Advisor  with  subject
> "Afghanistan-Pakistan:  Following  up  on
> November  11  Meeting."  The  memo  begins:
> "Based  on  our  meeting  with  the  President
> on  November  11,  we  have  developed
> fj  revised  implementation  guidance  to achieve  our  national  core goal in Afghanistan  and  frame  a variant  of  'Force Option  2A."'  There  are  handwritten  notes and  markings  on  the  first  and  last  page  of the  memo.  The  memo  includes  a list  of  six questions  on  pages  :1  throug·h 4.
> Results  ot'ClassU:lcl.'l.tio1,1
> Review
> TOP  SECRET  SECRET**
> None  TOP  SECRET//NOFORN*
> Declassification  date  passed  on SECRET/NOFORN  11/9/2019;  handle  as  marked  until official  declassification  review.*"
> * Agency  with  highest  recommended  classification  would  need  to  consult  with  other  U.S.  government  agencies  before  settling  on a  final  classification.
> **  Highest  level  of  classification  handling  recommended  by  the  State  Department  acting  as  a prnxy  for  the  National  Security  Council  (including  an  assessment  of  State Department  equities).
> A-10 Appendix  A:  Recovered  Documents
> B27
> B28
> B29
> B30
> B31
> B31-l
> "AFG  ANAST  AN 2009" file folder
> "AFGANAST  AN 2009" file folder
> "AFGANAST  AN 2009" file folder
> -----~
> "AFGANASTAN 2009" file folder
> "AFGANASTAN 2009" file folder
> "AFGANASTAN 2009" file folder
> 1 l/l:-l/09  5
> 11/15/09
> ~----- --·-·---
> l 1/11/09  3
> ---- ---~
> 10/29/09  ;3
> Undated
> Undated
> A memorandum  that  is  nearly  identical  to the  memo  designated  as  1326,  except  that this  memo  is  elated  November  13, 2009, includes  a red  "TOP  SECRET"  stamp  at the  top  and  bottorn  of  each  page  (in addition  to  the  "SECRET/NOFORN" marking),  and  has  a list  of  seven  questions.
> A Memorandum  for  the  National  Security Advisor  from  the  Vice  President.  The  memo begins:  ",Jim  You  requested  comments  on a proposed  paper  to  the  President, following  up  on  our  November  11 met!ting on  Afghanistan-Pakistan,  with  a focus on the  Afghanistan  strategy.  Here  are  mine:"
> A document  titled  "Talking  Points"  with the  handwritten  date  ·'  11/11/09"  in  the upper-right  corner  of  the  first  page.  The talking  points  appear  to be for  Mr.  Biden  to deliver  to  President  Obama  on  the  topic  of the  Afghanistan  Strategic  Review.
> A paper  titler!  "Alternative  Mission  for Afghanistan"  with  no  author  indicated  and the  handwritten  date  "Oct 29"  in  the  upper rig·ht  corner.  It  "describes  an  alternative mission  to  properly  resmu·ced counterinsurgency  in  Afghanistan."
> A document  titled  "Talking  Points  for call to  Secretary  Gates"  addressing  the strategic  review  in  Afghanistan  ..
> /\.  typewritten  portion  of  the  draft  memo included  as  part  of  documents  B25  and B25-1.
> TOP  SECRET  and SECRET/NOFORN
> TOP  SECRET
> TOP  SECRET
> SECRET
> CONFIDENTIAL  and  SECRET
> None
> Declassification  date  passed  on 11/9/2019;  handle  as  marked  until official  declassification  review.**
> Declassification  date  passed  on 11/15/2019;  handle  as  marked until  official  declassification review.''*
> Declassification  date  passed  on 11/11/2019;  handle  as  marked until  official  declassification
> review.**
> SECRET
> TOPSECRETllNOFORN*
> * Agency  with  highest  recommended  classification  would  need  to  consult  with  other  U.S.  government  agencies  before  settling  on a  final  classification. "*  Highest  level  of  classification  handling  recommended  by  the  State  Department  acting  as  a proxy  for  the  National  Security  Council  (including  an  assessment  of  State Department  equities).
> A- l l ----------------
> Appendix  A:  Recovered  Documents
> ·'  '
> "..,,  i
> ,,.;
> C
> lJl  ' -..
> "AFGANASTAN B32  2009" file folder
> "AFGANASTAN B33  2009" file folder
> "AFGANAST  AN B34  2009" file folder
> "AFGANAST  AN B35  2009" file folder
> "AFGANAST  AN B36  2009" file folder
> "AFGANAST  AN B37  2009" file folder
> .
> 11/11/09
> 11/11/09 (est.)
> 11  /11/09 (est.)
> Undated
> 10/30/09
> Undated
> Page
> .Col;lnt
> 12
> 3
> 5
> 1
> 1
> J 1
> ~-~--- ---·
> ,..,
> A PowerPoint  Presentation  titled  "C,JCS Brief  to  the  President."  Among  other  topics, the  slides  describe  and  assess  thni(, different  force  options  fm  Afghanistan.
> --- - . ----- ---·
> PowerPoint  slides  numbered  13-15  that  are likely  part  of  the  same  presentation  as  B32. The  first  slide is  titled  "Progression  of  Full-Spectrum  C01N.''  The  second  slide  is  titled "T  mportance  of  Full-Spectrum  COIN."  The third  slide  includes  a chart  and  is  titled "Force  Level  Decision  Points."
> Five  PowerPoint  slides  numbered  16-20
> that  are  likely  part  of  the  same
> presentation  as  K-l2  and  1333.  The  first
> slide  is a  chart  titled  "Alternative  Mission
> in  Afghanistan."  The  last  slide  is  titled
> "Projected  ANSF  Growth  Decision  Points."
> A PowerPoint  slide  titled  "Securing
> Additional  Allied/Partner  Contributiom,."
> A Memorandum  for  the  President  from
> then-Defense  Secretary  Robm·t  Gates,
> responding  to a 1·equest from  the  National
> Security  Council.  The  memo  attaches  the
> document  designated  as  B37 .  ...
> A Memornndum  for  Principals  from  the National  Security  Advisor  with  the handwritten  date  "11-8"  in  the  upper  right corner  regarding  the  strategy  for Afghanistan.  The  attachments  a1·e  listed as: (1)  Tab  A:  Secretary  Gates\, Memorandum  and  "Alternative  Mission  for Afghanistan"  Paper  and  (2)  Tab  BAmbassador  Eikenberry's  Cable, "COJ N Strategy:  Civilian  Concerns."
> ~-~-----~---.  -~...------------
> Results  of  Classification Classification.  Ma:rkh1gs  Review
> SECRET//REL  USA, ISAF, NATO  SECRET//NOFORN
> -·-- ..
> Slides  labeled  13  14: CONFIDENTIAL  CONFIDENTIAL//REL  TO USA,
> REL/NATO/ISAF  ISAF. NATO
> Slide  labeled  15:  SECRET//REL USA, TSAF, NATO
> -·······-----~------
> Slides  labeled  Hi:  SECRET Slides  labeled  17-19:  SECRET
> SECRET//REL  USA, ISAF, NATO Slide  labeled  20:  None
> ------·------~-----
> Agency  could  not  determine
> SECRET//NOFORN  classification.
> SB:CRET//NOFORN  SECRET//NOFORN
> SECRET  WITH SECRET/NOFORN  SECRET//NOFORN* ATTACHMENT
> * Agency  with  highest  recommended  classification  would  need  to  consult  with  other  U.S.  government  agenci(!S before  settling  on a  final  classification. **  Highest  level  of  classification  handling  recommended  by  the  State  Department  acting  as  a proxy for  the  National  Security  Council  (including  an  assessment  of  State Department  equities).
> A-12 Appendix  A:  Recovered  Documents
> ---- ---~------;--~--~  ~----., ' ; •..  ••  :'"  ' I.  . •,  ._,,,
> Doc.  ,JJaae  .
> ..  .•
> Res'tilts  •.  o(Cla~!i!itlc•tion Contai~•ntJp  . bite  Su~1tq  . ·•  Clai,~lflcati~  ~arkinas  .ID  . •..  Count  ••  Review . ' •..  /'.  ·.  I ...  .·  ..··.·• ....  ..  .•·  . ..  ·'  .. • ..  .·  .. ,·  . •..  •..  •,  ...  ••  ·.  • •. ·.  '
> A State  Department  cable from  the  U.S. "AFG  ANAST  AN  Embassy  in  Kabul,  Afghanistan  authored B38  2009"  l l/6/09  •1  by  Ambassador  Karl  Eikenberry  with  SECRET  with  a NODIS  banner  SECRET** file folder  subject  "COIN  STRATimY:  CIVILIAN CONCERNS."
> ------~-- ~- ---~------ ......  ~- ----~~-------·-----
> A PowerPoint  slide  describing  an  "Option "l/6/12  #2  Foreign  C"  for  the  distribution  and  composition of  SECRET//NOFORN//PRE-Cl  Policy"  5/22/lil  1 SECRET//NOFORN U.S.  forces  in  Afghanistan  after  2014.  DECISIONAL Notebook  There  is no  indication  of  an  author.
> A Power  Point  slide  describing  an  "Option "1/G/J  2 #2  Foreign  D"  for  the  distribution  and  composition  of  SECRET//NOFORN//PRE -C2  Policy"  5/22/13  1 SECRET//NOFORN U.S.  forces  in  Afghanistan  after  2014.  DECISIONAL Notebook  There  is no  indication  of  an  author.
> ---- ----- --------· -
> A PowerPoint  slide  describing  an  "Option ''  rn;/J 2  #2  Foreign  C+" for  the  distribution  and  composition  of  SECRET//NOFORN//PRE -C3  Policy " 5/22/13  l SECRET//NOFORN U.S.  forces in  Afghanistan  after  2014.  DECISIONAL Notebook  There  is no  indication  of  an  author.
> A Memorandum  for  the  Vice  President from  the  Office of  the  Vice  President National  Security  Affairs  regarding  a
> "l/G/12  #2  Foreign  meeting  with  Iraqi  Prime  Minister  Maliki.  TOP  SECRET//HCS -C4  Policy"  11/1/13  ;3  TOP  SECRET//SCI
> The  memo  sets  forth  "[a] few  things  to note  O/SI//ORCON/NOFORN* Notebook  in  advance  of  your  Maliki  meeting"  and provides  "a concise  distillation  of  the  issues with  Iraq  that  may  be helpful.''
> f---~~--- r--------·----- - --------- "-------··---
> Undetermined:  Legislative  Branch
> A Staff  Memorandum  to  Members  oftbe  CONFIDENTIAL  document  without  indications  of
> Committee  on  Foreign  Relations  on  with  red  tag  stapled  to  the  cover  information  derived  from classified "[INT'L]  1 'T0rrorisn1:  Prntection  and  Policy"  that  memo  Executive  Branch  information.
> Dl  TERRORISM"  6/:30/76  5 "discusses  the  security  of  American  CLASSIFIED  COMMITTEE  ON  Marking  is  not  a necessarily  a
> file folder  embassies  and  diplomats  abroad  in  th,!  FOREIGN  RELATIONS  UNITED  national-security  classification
> wake  of  the  killing  of  Ambassador  MPloy  ST  ATES  SENATE  because  this  is  a LegislativP
> and  Mr.  Waring  in  Beirut."  Branch  document.*''
> ----~----- ~--------- ---··
> * Agency  with  highest  recommended  classification  would  need  to  consult  with  other  U.S.  government  agencies  before  settling  on a  final  classification. **  Highest  level of  classification  handling  recommended  by  the  State  Department  acting  as  a proxy  for  the  National  Security  Council  (including  an  assessment  of  State Department  equities).
> A-13 Appendix  A:  Recovered  Documents
> D2
> D3
> D4
> "Biden  Meeting w/Chancellor Schmidt  6/10/80 -
> 6/12/80"
> file folder
> "GREECE" file folder
> "YUGOSLAVIA" file folder
> A Memorandum  for  the  Reconl  from a Senate  staffer  with  subject  ''Senator Biden's  Meeting  with  Helmut  Schmidt" 6/13/80  6 that  recounts  the  discussion  at  a meeting between  Mr.  Riden  and  German  Chancellor Helmut  Schmidt  on  June  11, 1980.
> Three  separate  memoranda:
> • a 2-page  memo  titled  "US-GREEK RELATIONS"  marked  "LIMITED OFFICIAL  USE"
> • a 2-page  memo  titled  "STATUS  OF Total:  9 NEGOTIATIONS  ON  CYPRUS"  marked :3/1/80  Marked:  2 "CONFIDENTIAL"  on  the  first  page
> • a 5-page  memo  titled  "REINTEGRATION OF  GREEK  FORCES  INTO  MATO MILITARY COMMAND  STRUCTURE" marked  "CONFIDENTIAL"  on  the  second page
> A 5-page  State  Department  memo  with subject  "Visit to  the  United  States  by Dragoslav  MARKOVIC.  President  of  the Assembly  of  the  Socialist  Federal  Republic of Yugoslavia,  and  deleg·ation."  The  memo attaches  "[b]iographic  information  on
> Total:  6 Markovic  and  other  members  of  the 7/13/78  Marked:  1 delegation."  Page  6 is a  one-page biography  of  Markovic  marked "CONFIDENTIAL."
> There  are  two  copies  of  the  memo  and
> attachment,  which  FBI  separately
> designated  D4  and  D5.
> CONFIDENTIAL with  tag  stapled  to  the  cover memo CLASSIFIED  COMMITTEE  ON FOREIGN  RELATIONS  UNITED STATES  SENATE
> CONF1DENTIAL
> CONFIDENTIAL
> Undetermined:  Legislative  Branch document  without  indications  of information  derived  from classified Executive  Branch  information. Marking  is  not  a necessarily  anational-security  classification because  this  is a  Legislative Branch  document.**
> Undetermined:  Legislative  Branch document  without  indications  of information  derived  from classified Executive  Branch  information. Marking  is  not  a necessarily  anational-security  classification because  this  is a  Legislative Branch  document.**
> SECRB:T//NOFORN
> Classification  upgraded  in accordance  with  current classification  guidelines.
> * Agency  with  highest  recommended  classification  would  need  to  consult  with  other  U.S.  government  agencies  before  settling  on  a final  classification.
> **  Highest  level  of  classification  handling  recommended  by  the  State  Department  acting  as  a proxy  for th(!  National  Security  Council  (including  an  assessment  of  State Department  equities).
> A-14 Appendix  A:  Recovered  Documents
> A 5-page  State  Department  memo  with
> subject  "Visit to  the  United  States  by
> Dragoslav  MARKOVIC,  President  of  the
> Assembly  of  the  Socialist  Federal  Republic
> of  Yugoslavia,  and  delegation."  The  memo attaches  "[b]iographic  information  on  SECRET//NOFORN
> D5  "YUGOSLAVIA" file folder  711:-l/78  Total: 6 Marked:  1
> Markovic  and  other  members  of  the delegation."  Page  6 is a  one-page biography  ofMarkovic  marked "CONFIDENTIAL."
> CONFIDENTIAL  Classification  upgraded  in accordance  with  current classification  guidelines.
> There  am  two copies  of  the  memo  and
> attaclummt,  which  FBI  separately
> designated  D4  and  D5.
> SECRET//NOFORN
> 1)6  "YUGOSLAVIA" file folder  Undated  5
> A memorandum  titled  "EDVARD KARDEL,J:  A PRIMER  ON  HIS THINKING"
> SECRET  Classification  upgraded  in accordance  with  current
> classification  guidelines.
> "SALT III" file
> folder  in  a A memorandum  titled  "SALT III"  that
> D7  Redweld  folder labeled  "CODEL  Undated  3 discusses  predictions  regarding neg·otiations for a  Strategic  Arms  CONFIDENTIAL  Likely  UNCLASSIFIED,  subject  to formal  declassification  review.**
> RIDEN  August  Limitations  Talk  III.
> 1979"
> A 6-pagc,  memorandum  titled  "MBFR"  that
> "Other  Arms  discusses  the  "Mutual  and  Balanced  Force
> Control" file folder  Reduction  negotiations"  that  "began  in
> DS  in  a Redweld folder  labeled  Undated  Total: 6 Marked:  4
> November  1973  in  Vienna."  CONFIDENTIAL  CONFIDENTlAL//FORMERLY RESTRICTED  DATA
> "CODEL  BIDEN  The  last  two  pages  are  not  marked
> August  1979"  Confidential  and  set  out  "Anticipated
> Soviet  Points"  and  "Suggested  US  Points  .."
> * Agency wi.th  highest  recommended  classification  would  need  to  consult  with  other  U.S.  government  agencies  before  settling  on  a final  classification. "*  Highest  level  of  classification  handling  recommended  by  the  State  Department  acting  as  a proxy  for  the  National  Security  Council  (including  an  assessment  of  State Department  equities).
> A-15 -----
> Appendix  A:  Recovered  Documents
> _-_
> .j.;,  . ••  - ·•  "-- -•- :Page bate  Results  Qt  C.l,u;sifioatiot:t ' ·,_  - -_-__  -•  ; . eo:u~t  Summal'y  Claslllit:kationMltl'kings ;
> __
> _---
> I•
> . Review
> "Other  Arms  A memorandum  titled  "Comprnhensive
> Control" file folder  Test  Ban"  that  discusses  issues  expected  to
> in  a Redweld
> D9  folder  labeled  Undated  2 arise  upon  tlrn  resumption  of  the  "trilateral  CONFIDENTIAL CTB  talks  in  Geneva"  that  "recessed  in  late  Likely  UNCLASSIFIED,  subject  to
> "COD  EL  BID  EN  formal  declassification  review_""'
> July  and  are  expected  to  resume  again  in
> August  1979"  Septem  beL"
> ---------
> "Senator  Biden"  A memorandum  titled  "CODl~L  EIDEN"  -~
> file folder  in  a that  sets  forth  "a  tentative  draft  outline  of
> 010  Redweld  folder labeled  "CODEL  Undated  2 the  manner  in  which  the  delegation  might  CONFIDENTIAL  Likely  UNCLASSIFIED,  subject  to
> want  to  make  its  fixst  presentation  on  formal  declassification  review.**
> BIDEN  August  SALT  at  the  Plenary  session  with  the
> 1979"  Supreme  Sovipt."  --·--·------------------- ------- ----
> "SPnator  BidPn"
> filP foldPr in a  SECRET//NOFORN
> Dll  RedwPld foldn· labPIPd  "CODEL  5/25/79  1 A biography  of  a mPmlrnl'  of  a foreign  CONFIDENTIAL delPgation.  Classification  upgradPd  in
> EIDEN  August  accordancp  with  cm'l'Pnt
> 1979"  classification  guidPlinPs.
> "Spnator  BidPn"
> file folder  in  a SECRET//NOFORN
> Dl2  Redweld  foldm· labPlPd  "CODEL  8/16/79  2 NOFORN  at  the  top  (confidential A biography  of  a memba·  of a foreign  marking  appearn  cut  off)  and dPlegation.  Classification  upgradPd  in
> BIDEN  August  CONFIDENTIAL  at  the  bottom  accordance  with  curnmt
> 1979"  classification  guidelines.
> -----·-- --·------- --------_,,,  ____  ----
> "Senator  Biden"
> file folder  in  a SECRET//NOFORN
> D13  Redweld  foldPr labPlPd  "COD£i~L  8/10/79  2 A biography  of  a member  of a foreign  CONFIDENTIAL  NOFORN dPlega tion.  Classification  upgradPd  in
> EIDEN  August  accordancp  with  current
> 1979"  classification  guidelines.
> -- - --
> * Agency  with  highest  recommendPd  classification  would  nePd to  consult  with  other  U.S.  government  agenciPs  bdore  sPttling  on  a final  classification.
> **  Highest  level  of  classification  handling  rPcommcmdPd by thP  StatP  DPpartnrnnt  acting  as  a proxy for  the  National  Security  Council  (including  an  assPssment  of  StatP Department  equitiPs).
> A-16 Appendix  A:  Recovered  Documents
> "Senator  Biden" file folder  in  a SECRET/INOFORN
> Dl4  Redweld  folder labeled  "CODEL BIDB:N  August 1979"
> 8/10/79  2 A biography  of  a membel'  of  a foreign delegation.  CONFIDENTIAL  Classification  upgraded  in accordance  with  current classification  guidelines.
> -----~----
> "Senator  Biden" file folder in a  SECRETI/NOFORN
> Dl5  Redweld  folder labeled  "CODEL BIDEN  August 1979"
> 5/29/79  A biography  of  a rnembe1·  of  a foreign delegation.  CONFIDENTIAL  Classification  upgraded  in accordance  with  current classification  guidelines.
> "Senator  Biden" file folder  in  a SECRET//NOFORN
> Dl6  Redweld  folder labeled  "CODEL BIDEN  August 1979''
> Undated  A biography  of  a mmnber  of  a foreign delegation.  CONFIDENTIAL  Classification  upgraded  in accordance  with  current classification  guidelines.
> "Senator  Biden" file folder in a  SECRET/INOFORN
> D17  Redweld  folder labeled  "CODEL B lDEN  August 1979"
> 3/22/79  A biography  of  a member  of  a foreign delegation.  CONFTDENT1AL  Classification  upgraded  in accordance  with  current classificat10n  guidelines.
> "Senator  Biden"
> file folder  in  a
> Dl7-1  Redweld  folder labeled  "CODEL  7 /2;3179  A biography  of  a member  of  a foreign delegation.  None  SECRET//NOFORN
> BfDEN  August
> 1!)79" -----------~-
> Re~ttlti.  ot  Cliu,tsitieaJion
> '.fteview
> * Ag(mcy  with  highest  recommended  classification  would  need  to  consult  with  other  U.S.  gov(,rnment  agencies  befo1·e  settling  on a  final  classification. **  Highest  level  of  classification  handling  recommended  by  the  State  Department  acting  as  a proxy  for  the  National  Security  Council  (including  an  assessment  of  State Department  equities).
> A-17 Appendix  A:  Recovered  Documents
> "Senator  Biden"
> file folder  in  a SECRET//NOFORN
> Dl8  Redweld  folder labeled  "CODEL  5/29/79  A biography  of  a member  of a foreign delegation.  CONFIDENTIAL  Classification  upgraded  in
> BIDEN  August  accordance  with  current
> 1979"  classification  guidelines.
> "Senator  Biden"
> file folder  in  a SECRET//NOFORN
> D19  Redweld  folder labeled  "CODEL  8/13/79  A biography  of  a member  of  a foreign delegation.  CONFIDENTIAL  NOFORN  Classification  upgraded  in
> BIDEN  August  accordance  with  current
> 1979"  classification  guidelines.
> A State  Department  cable from  the  U.S.
> Embassy  in  Kabul  with  subject
> "HELMAND  VIEWS  ON  U.S.  TROOP
> D20  "Af/Pak  1" Notebook  11/21/09  5
> LEVELS  IN  AFGHANISTAN."  The  cable "was  drafted  by t.he  State  Representative  to the  2d  Marine  Expeditionary  Brigade,  and  CONFIDENTIAL
> Declassification  date  passed  on 11/11/2019;  handle  as  marked until  official  declassification
> its  Commanding  General,  Brigadier  review.**
> General  Lawrence  Nicholson .  . reviewed
> [the] cable."
> Two  PowerPoint  slides.  The  first  slide is
> titled  "Scoping Key  Priorities  for  the
> D21  "DAILY/MEMO" Notebook  Undated  2
> Second  Term"  and  sets  outs  "Key  Products to  Prepare  for  the  January  NSC  meeting  on Priorities."  The  slide is  marked "SECRET//NOFORN."  The  second  slide is unmarked  and  depicts  a flow  chart  for a
> SECRET//NOFORN (first  slide only)
> SECRET//NOFORN** State  Department  noted  that  the document  may  be overclassified.
> National  Security  Council process.
> A document  titled  "CJCS  12-Hour  Egypt
> D22
> "APUTATIONS Feb  '11" file folder
> 2/11/11 (est.)  1
> Update  for 11  Feb  0600"  that  provides  an update  on  events  related  to  the  2011 revolution  in  Egypt  and  the  resignation  of  SECRET//NOFORN  SECRET//NOFORN
> Hosni  Mubarak  from  the  presidency  in
> Egypt.
> Pt;tge
> C:ount  Results  pf  Classtftcation
> Review
> * Agency  with  highest  recommended  classification  would  need  to  consult  with  other  U.S.  government  agencies  before  settling  on a  final  classification.
> **  Highest  level  of  classification  handling  recommended  by  the  State  Department  acting  as  a proxy for  the  National  Security  Council  (including  an  assessment  of  State Department  equities).
> A-18 Appendix  A:  Recovered  Documents
> D23
> "Weekend  With Charlie  Rose" binder (in  bedroom office);  behind "Russia"  tab
> 9/17/14  3
> An  1':wmt  Memo  from  an  OVP  national security  staffer  titled  "Lunch  with Ukrainian  President  Poroshenko"  for a lunch  at  the  Naval  Observatory  on September  18, 2014.  The  mr!mo  describes the  purpose  of  the  lunch,  the  participants, the  press  plan,  and  the  sequence  of  events.
> SECR!£T  SECRET*''
> "Weekend  With
> Charlie  Rose"  A paper  attachment  to D23  titled  "Tab  B -
> D24  binder (in  bedroom office);  behind
> 9/17/15 (est.)  10  BACKGROUND"  discussing  issues  related to  Russian  aggression  toward  Ukraine. There  is no  indication  of  an  author.
> SECRET//NOFORN  TOP  SECRET//NOFORN*
> "Russia"  tab
> "Weekend  With
> D25
> Charlie  Rose" binder (in  bedroom office);  behind
> 8/29/14  5
> A Paper  titled  ''Scenesetter  for  National Security  Advisor  Susan  Rice's  Visit  to China"  with  no  indication  of  an  author.
> No  classification  header  or  footer; portion  markings  indicate  an overall  classification  of  SECRET.
> SECRET**
> "Russia"  tab
> An  Action  Memorandum  from a  Senate  Department  of  State  did  not
> El
> "FOREIGN RELATIONS COMMITTEE" file folder
> 1/23/80
> staffer  to  nine  Senators,  including  Mr. Biden,  with  subject  "Proposed  1980 Committee  Budget  •·  For  Discussion During  Meeting  of  Democrats  in  S-201  at 2:00 p.m-- Wednesday,  January  23."  The
> CONFIDENTIAL
> identify  any  potentially  sensitive Executive  Branch  information. The  "CONFIDENTIAL"  marking, therefore,  does  not  appear  to be a national  security  classification
> document  is  identical  to G4.  marking.**
> E2  "EUROPE" file folder  6/4/80  2
> A letter  from  three  Senators  on  the Committee  on  Foreign  Relations,  including Mr.  Biden,  to  Secretary  of  State  l<;dmund S. Muskie  intended  to  express  concerns  about delays  in  SALT  and  TNF  arms negotiations.  There  are  stapled  unclassified notes  and  correspondence  attached  to  the letter.
> CONFIDENTIAL
> Department  of  State  did  not identify  any  potentially  sensitive Executive  Branch  information. The  "CONFIDENTIAL"  marking, therefore,  does  not  appear  to be a national  security  classification marking.**
> * Agency  with  highest  recommended  classification  would  need  to  consult  with  other  U.S.  government  agencies  before  settling  on  a final  classification. **  Highest  level  of  classification  handling  recom1mmded  by  the.  State  Department  acting  as  a proxy  for  the  National  Security  Council  (including  an  assessment  of  State Department  equities).
> A 19 Appendix  A:  Recovered  Documents
> Res11lt1,  Qt'  Classifica:tfon.
> Rev1e~
> Department  of  State  did  not identify  any  potentially  sensitive Executive  Branch  information. The  "CONFIDENTIAL"  marking, therefore,  does  not  appear  to  be  anational  security  classification marking.**
> An  Action  Memorandum  addressed  to Senators  three  Senators  including  M1·. Biden  rngarding  the  letter  to  Secretary  of State  Edmund  S.  Muskie  rncommending "[t]hat  you  each  sign  the  attached  letter.
> "EUROPE" file folder
> E3  5/29/80  2 CONFIDENTIAL
> Department  of  State  did  not identify  any  potentially  sensitive Executive  Branch  information. The  "CONFIDENTIAL"  marking, therefore,  does  not  appear  to  be  anational  security  classification marking.** ---~--------------1
> Another  copy  of  the  Action  Memorandum designated  E3  with  an  unclassified  note from  Senate  Staffer  3 to  Mr.  Biden attached  to  the  front  of  memo recommending  Mr.  Biden  sign  the  letter.
> "EUROPE" file folder
> E4  5/29/80  2 CONFIDENTIAL
> ----+-----+-----·--+-------------~---------
> An  earlier  version  of  the  letter  from  thrne Senators  on  the  Committee  on  Foreign Relations,  including  Mr.  Riden,  to Secretary  of  State  Edmund  S.  Muskie intended  to  express  concerns  about  delays in  SALT  and  TNF  arms  negotiations.  Them are  stapled  unclassified  notes  and correspondence  attached  to  the  letter.
> +------------------+-
> Department  of  State  did  not identify  any  potentially  sensitive Executive  Branch  information. The  "CONFIDENTIAL"  marking, therefore,  does  not  appear  to be a national  security  classification marking.*"'
> "ElJROPE" file folder  5/30/80  2 CONFIDENTIAL
> Two copies  of  a one-page  Action Memorandum  from a  Senate  staffer,  thru Ted  Kaufman,  to  Mr.  Riden  attaching  amemo  from  another  Senate  staffer (designated  by  FBI  as  E7) on  TNF modernization.
> "FOREIGN RELATIONS COMMITTEE" file folder
> E6  ll/28/79  2 UNCLASSIFIED**
> * Agency  with  highest  recommended  classification  would  need  to  consult  with  other  U.S.  government  agencies  before  settling  on a  final  classification.
> **  Highest  level  of  classification  handling  recommended  by  the  State  Department  acting  as  a proxy  for  the  National  Security  Council  (including  an  assessment  of  State Department  equities).
> A-20 Appendix  A:  Recovered  Documents
> l>oe,
> IO
> Undetermined:  Legislative  Branch
> document  that  may  contain
> E7
> "FOREIGN RELATIONS COMMITTEE" file folder
> ll/2G/79  2
> An  Information  Memorandum  from a Senate  Staffer  to anothe1· Senatc,  staffer regarding  "TNF  Modernization  and  Arms Control."
> SECRET
> sensitive  Executive  Branch information,  which  may  have  been declassified  given  age  of  the document.  Marking  is  not  anecessarily  a national-security
> classification  because  this  is  a
> Legislative  Branch  document.''*
> "With  the
> Compliments  of
> Fl
> the  American Embassy,  Bonn" and  "Senator ,Josepb  R.  Eiden, ,Jr."
> 12/17  /87  2
> A State  Department  cable  from Ambassador  Burt  at  the  American Embassy  in  Bonn  with  subject  "Proposal for a NATO Wise  Men's  Study."
> SECRET with  a brown  strip  around  the document  la  be  led  "Restricted."
> Cable  automatically  declassified on  December  81,  2012**
> file folder
> Undetermined:  Legislative  Branch
> "GREECE" file folder  3/11/17
> A Senate  Committee  on  Fmeign  Relations "SUMMARY  OF  MARCH  11, 1977 EXECUTIVE  MEETING  OF  FULL COMMITTEE  (Closed S-1  lG.  10:30 -12:  15pm)  regarding  thE!  testimony  of Ambassador  Clark  M. Clifford.
> SECRET with  a cover  sheet  labeled CLASSIFIED  COMMITTEE  ON FOREIGN  RELATIONS  UNITED STATES  SENATE
> document  that  may  contain sensitive  B~xecutive  Branch information.  Marking  is  not  anecessarily  a national-security classification  because  this  is  aLegislative  Branch  document.*;,
> Includ("s  Foreign  Government
> !-----+-----------+------+--····--------+------ ------------ -·--------
> Information
> "MUTUAL
> BALANCED  A paper  titled  "Mutual  and  Balanced  Force G2  FORCE  July  1977  5 Reduction  (MBFR)." REDUCTION
> CONFIDENTIAL  CONFIDENTIAL//FORMERLY RESTRICTED  DATA
> MBFR" file folder
> • Clal!liiftc11tion Markings
> . .
> a of  Cla~ificatfon Je'Yi~w
> * Agency  with  highest  recommended  classification  would  need  to  consult  with  other  U.S.  government  agencies  before  settling  on  a final  classification. **  Highest  level  of  classification  handling  recommended  by  the  State  Department  acting  as  a proxy  for  the  National  Security  Council  (including  an  assessment  of  State Department  equities).
> A-21 G-5
> G3
> G4
> "FOREIGN RELATIONS COMMITTEE" file folder
> "FOREIGN RELATIONS COMMITTEE" file folder
> "CFE  briefing book  material" file folder
> 3/2/79
> 1/23/80
> 11/20/91
> Appendix  A:  Recovered  Documents
> Pti:ge  Sununary
> Count
> A Smiate  Committee  on  Fo1·eign  Relations Staff  Memorandum  titled  "National
> 8 CONFIDENTIAL
> Security  Interests  in  a Law  of  the  Sea Treaty  March  6,  1979  Hearing.s."
> An  Action  Memorandum  to  nine  Senators. including  Mr.  Riden,  with  subject "Proposed  1980  Committee  Budget  -- For
> 3 CONFIDENTIAL
> Discussion  During  Meeting  of  Democrats  in S-201  at  2:00p.m.,  Wednesdc1y.  ,January 23."  The  document  is  identical  to  El.
> A letter  to  Richard  G.  Lugar,  Chairman  of
> the  Committee  on  Foreign  Relations,  from
> 2 SECRET  NOFORN
> c1n  unspecified  sender  regarding  foreign
> compliance  with  the  CFE  Treaty.
> Results  ot  Classification Review
> Undetermined:  Legislative  Branch document  that  may  contain sensitive  1<:xecutive  Branch information.  Marking  is  not  anecessarily  a national-security classification  because  this  1s  aLegislative  Branch  document.*''
> Department  of  State  did  not identify  any  potentially  sensitive Executive  Branch  information. The  "CONFIDENTIAL"  marking, therefore,  does  not  appear  to  be  anational  security  classification marking.**
> Undetermined
> * Agency  with  highest  recommended  classification  would  need  to  consult  with  other  U.S.  government  agencies  before  settling  on  a final  classification.
> **  Highest  level  of  classification  handling  recommended  by  the  State  Department  acting  as  a proxy  for  the  National  Security  Council  (including  an  assessment  of  State Department  equities).  A-22 Appendix  B:  Classification  Review  Results  for  Select  Notebook  Entries  and  Other  Handwritten  Material  1
> (entries  from l 1/27/2008  -
> 7/15/2009)
> Unlabeled  notebook (entries  from  ll/27  /2008  -
> 7/15/2009)
> "Af1/Pak l" notebook
> "Af'lPak  l" notebook
> "FOREIGN POLICY 10/13/09  1/13/12" notebook
> "FOREIGN POLICY 10/13/09 - 1/13/12" notebook
> "FOREIGN POLICY 10/1::l/09 - I/B/12" notebook
> 1 FBI  Serial  G7G.
> 2 lBG4-005G.
> 1 lBG4-00G5.
> 1 lBGG-OOO:-l-22.
> " lBGG-0082-81.
> 6 1851-0073.
> 7 1B51-0074.
> 8 1B51-0080-81.
> (entry  has  typo 2008)
> Undated (likely G/17/09  or  G/18/09)
> 11/28/09
> 11/7  /09
> 4/lG/10
> Undated
> 4/29/  10
> page  2
> 20  loose  pages inserted  in notebook'
> 5 pages"
> 2 pagesG
> 2pages 7
> 2
> A foreign  adversary
> Pakistan
> Handwritten  memorandum  to  POTUS regarding  the  Afghanistan  strategy  review Afghanistan  / Pakistan
> Afghanistan/  Pakistan
> Pakistan
> Foreign  adversary
> TOP SECRET**
> CONFIDENTIAL**
> SECRET**
> TOP  SECRET//HCS-0// [4  SCI  Control  System  Markings]// ORCON/NOFORN
> TOP  SECRET//SI//NOFORN**
> SECRET**
> TOP SECRET//HCS-0// [3  SCI  Control  System  Madrings]// [2  SCI  Control  System  Markings]// ORCON/NOFORN
> **  Highest  level  of  classification  handling  recommended  by  the  State  Department  acting  as  a proxy  for  the  National  Security  Council  (including  an  assessment  of  State Department  equities).
> B-1 Appendix  B:  Classification  Review  Results  for  Select  Notebook  Entries  and  Other  Handwritten  Material
> "FOREIGN  POLICY
> 10/13/09 - 1/13/12"
> notebook
> Unlabeled  notebook (entries  from  4/20/2009  -
> 12/4/2009)
> Unlabeled  notebook (entries  from  4/20/2009  -
> 12/4/2009)
> Unlabeled  notebook (entries  from  4/20/2009  -
> 12/4/2009)
> "1-7-10  - ➔ 8-3-14"
> notebook
> "1-7-10---➔ 8-3-14"
> notebook
> "1-7-10---➔ 8-3-11"
> notebook
> "Miscellaneous
> 1/9/10-1/17/12"
> notebook
> 9 1B51-0121-0122.
> IO  1B63-0012.
> I I  1B63-0016. 12  1B63-0026-29.
> 13  1830-0030-33. 14  1B30-0065. 15  lB30-0093-94.
> 16  1852-0091.
> 11/29/l  1
> Undated (likely  1/10/11)
> 1/27  /l]
> 4/25/11
> 5/28/11
> 10/9/13
> Undated
> 6/19/13
> 2 loose  pages inserted  in notebook  9
> 1 page  10
> 1 page  11
> 6 pages  1l
> 7 pages  1:1
> 1 page  11
> 2 pages  1 ''
> l page  1G
> Foreign  adw,rsary
> Briefing  on  sensitive  topics
> Situation  Room  meeting  with  POTUS regarding  Afghanistan  and  Pakistan
> National  Security  Council  meeting regarding  Afghanistan  and  Pakistan
> Recollection  of  raid  on  Osama  Bin  Laden
> Notes  from  the  President's  Daily  Brief Notes  from  the  President's  Daily  Brief
> Brief  from  the  National  Security  Agency
> SECRET**
> TOP  SECRET//HCS-0//0RCON/NOFORW*
> SECRET//HCS-0//0RCON/NOFORN
> TOP  SECRET//NOFORN**
> TOP  SECRET//HCS-0// [4  SCl  Control  System  Markings]// ACCM  [Program  Name]// ORCON/NOFORN
> SECRET//NOFORN
> SECRET'"*
> SECRET//REL
> **  Highest  level of classification  handling  recommended  by  the  State  Department  acting  as  a proxy  fOl'  the  National  Security  Council  (including  an  assessment  of  State Department  equities).
> B-2 Appendix  B:  Classification  Review  Results  for  Select  Notebook  Entries  and  Other  Handwritten  Material
> "1/G/12  #2  Foreign  Policy" notebook
> "Foreign  Policy 11/2013 - 2014" notebook
> "Foreign  Policy 11/2013 - 2014" notebook
> "Foreign  Policy 11/2013 - 2014" notebook
> "Foreign  Policy 11/2013 - 2014" notebook
> "Foreign  Policy 11/2013 - 2014" notebook
> "Foreign  Policy 11/2013 - 2014" notebook
> "ForPign Policy 11/2013 - 2014'' notebook
> Notecards  Seized  from  Hearth Railing
> 17  1Bl5-0012-13. rn  1B67-0012. 19  lBG7-0013. 20  JB67-0019-20. 21  113G7-0038. 22  lBG?-0063-65. 2 :i  1B67-0075. 21  1B67-0076. 25  1B23-0012.
> 2/22/12 1/1/14 1/7/14 1/10/14 5/19/14 ll/2G/14 ::l/11/15 4/l/lS 9/17/13
> 2 pagesl'i 1 pagel8 2 pagpsl!J
> 3 pages  20
> 2 pages  21
> 4 pages  22
> 1 page  2 :i
> l page  2 '1
> 1 notecard (front  only)2°
> Situation  Room  meeting  with  POTUS
> Accumulated  questions  from  President's Daily  Briefs
> Meeting  in  the  Oval  Office  with  national security  advisors
> Meeting  in  the  Situation  Ifoorn  with POTUS  regarding  a foreign  adversary
> TOP  SECRET** SECRET** SECRET** SECRET**
> ~+-------~·---------------------<
> Notes  regarding  Unrnamwd  Aerial  Systems  SECRET**
> with  POTUS National  Security  Council  meeting  in  the  SECRET**
> Situation  Room  -------~----+---------------------,
> A meeting  with  ,John  Kerry  regarding  a SECRET//NOFORN
> foreign  adversary Notes  from  the  President's  Daily  Brief  TOP  SECRET** Notes  from  the  President's  Daily  Brief  TOP  SECRET*''
> **  Highest  level  of  classification  handling  recommended  by  the  State  Department  acting  as  a proxy  for  the  National  Security  Council  (including  an  assessment  of  State Department  equities).
> IL3 Appendix  B:  Classification  Review  Results  for  Select  Notebook  Entries  and  Other  Handwritten  Material
> Notecards  Seized  from  Hearth Railing
> Notecards  Seized  from  Hearth Railing
> "Foreign  Policy" notebook
> "Foreign  Policy" notebook
> "Foreign  Policy" notebook
> "Foreign  Policy" notebook
> "Daily  AUGUST  2014  -
> SEPTEMBER  2016" notebook
> "Daily  AUGUST  2014  -
> SEPTEMBER  2016" notebook
> 2G  1B23-0015.
> 27  1B23-0006-7.
> 28  1B58-0029-31.
> 29  1B58-0033.
> 10  1B58-0079-82.
> n 1B58-0094.
> lZ  1B57-0014.
> ll  1B57-0061-65.
> 10/15/13
> 8/19/14
> 10/28/14
> 11/4/14
> 12/14/15
> 11/24/16
> Undated
> Undated (likely 6/18/15)
> l notecard (front  only)2G
> 1 notecard (front  and
> back) 27
> 5 pages 28
> 2 pages  29
> 7 pages:JO
> 2 pages  32
> 7 pagesi:i
> Notes  from  the  President's  Daily  Brief
> Notes  from  the  President's  Daily  Brief
> Situation  Room  Meeting  with  POTUS  and the  Joint  Chiefs  rngarding  military rnadiness
> Meeting  with  POTUS,  the  Secretary  of Defense,  the  Chairman  of th(, ,Joint Chi("fs, and  other  advisors
> Meeting  with  "POTUS+Brass+NSC" regarding  Counter  lSIL  Strategy  Review
> Secure  Video  Teleconference  regarding homeland  threats
> Foreign  policy  meeting  notes
> Meeting  with  POTUS  and  national  security leaders
> TOP  SECRET** SECRET*''
> SECRET
> SECRET** SECRET//NOFORN SECRET//NOFORN SECRET//NOFORN
> SECRET//HCS-O//ORCON/NOFORN
> **  Highest  level  of  classification  handling  recommended  by  the  State  Department  acting  as  a proxy  for  the  National  Security  Council  (including  an  assessment  of  State Department  equities).
> B-4 Appendix  B:  Classification  Review  Results  for  Select  Notebook  Entries  and  Other  Handwritten  Material
> "FOREIGN  POLICY  G/10/15" notebook
> "FOREIGN  POLICY  G/10/15" notebook
> "FOREIGN  POLICY  G/10/15" notebook
> "FOREIGN  POLICY  G/10/15" notebook
> "DAILY 12/15/15 2026-2017-2018" notebook
> ll  1B22-0013-15. lG  1B22-002:J.
> JG  1B22-0024.
> 17  lB22-0026 18  1B20-00:l4.
> 9/3/15 (first  two  pages  undated)
> 5/14/16  2 pages:i  5
> 6/3/16 1/5/1 7
> 2 pages:rn
> G/13/lG
> Foreign  advel'Saries
> Counterterrorism  discussions,  including  on "Acela  North  Bound"
> Situation  Room  meeting  with  POTlTS regarding  Afghanistan
> Sensitive  Topic
> National  security  meeting
> --------~~~~~
> CONFIDENTIAL*''
> SECRET**
> SECRET//NOFORN TOP  SECRET//HCS-O//ORCON/NOFORN SECRET//NOFORN
> **  Highest  level  of  classification  handling  recommended  by  the  State  Department  acting·  as  a proxy  for  the  National  Security  Council  (including  an  assessment  of  State Department  equities).
> B-5 Appendix  C:  Evidence  Items
> rno1  1 11/28/22  PBC  Hard  drive  found  in  box  labeled:  VP  Records
> 1B04  2 12/21/22  Wilmington  Residence
> Box  containing  miscellaneous  documents  with classifications  up  to  TOP  SECRET.  Collected from  the  gai·age.
> B1-5,  B25-38
> Due  to  the  content's  higher  classifications and  sensitivities,  the  folder,  "Facts  First," was  removed  from 1B4  and  entered  as separate  evidence,  designated  as  1B44.
> 1B44 3 12/21/22  Wilmington  Residence
> Red  Folder  with  handwrittfm  "Facts  First" containing  documents  with  classifications  up  to TOPSECRETllHCSllNOFORN.
> B6-B24  Originally  contained  within  1B4.
> 1B05  4 12/21/22  Wilmington  Residence
> ----~---------1----------------------------1 Box  containing  binders  with  classified documents  up  to  SECRET//NOFORN.  Collected  Bl-B3 from  the  garage.
> 1B13 5 1/12/23  Wilmington  Residence  Three  (3)  pages  with  classification  markings  Documents  were  originally  contained C1-C3 SECRET//NOFORN//Pre-decisional.  within  notebook  (1815).
> 1BJ4G  l/12/23  Wilmington  Residence  Three  (3)  pages  with  classification  markings  Documents  were  originally  contained C4 TS/SC[  within  notebook  (1Bl5).
> 1B15  7 1/14/23  Wilmington  Residence  Black  spiral  notebook  labeled: "1/6/12  #2  Foreign  Policy"
> L_ ____ L_ ____ __L  _____________ ,L____ ____________________
> 1 FBI  Serials  12, 14, 23.
> 2 FBI  Serials  29, 35, 134, 181, 195, 284, 322, 443, 512.
> 3 FBI  Serials  29, 35, 195, 440, 443, 510, 512.
> '1  FBI  Serials  29, 35, 195, 270, 284, 701.
> 5 FBI  Serials  43, 44, 160, 682.
> G FBI  Serials  43, 44, 160, 682.
> 7 FBI  Serials  44, 46, 47, 134, 322, 682.
> L _ -~-------j__ __  _
> C-1 Appendix  C:  Evidence  Items
> 1B17  8 1/20/23  Wilmington  Residence
> LB18  9 Wilmington  Residence
> 1B20  10  1/20/2:-l  Wilmington  Residence
> rn22  11  1/20/23  Wilmington  Residence
> Wilmington  Residence
> 1B68  11  1/20/23  Wilmington  Residence
> 1/20/2'.3  Wilmington  Residence
> 8 FBI  Serials  49, 77, 270, 284, 639. 9 FBI  Serials  49, 77, 270, 284, 639. 1°FBI  Serials  49, 77, 248, 322. 11  FBI  Serials  49, 77, 322. 12  FBI  Serials  49, 77, 322.
> i:i  FBI  Serials  49, 77, 322. 14  FBI  Serials  49, 77, 322, 664.
> Box labeled:  Save  the  Attic;  Foreign  Travel. Contained  miscellaneous  documents  with classification  markings  up to CONFID1':NTIAL.
> Dl-D:-l
> Box labeled:  International  Travel  1973-1979. Contained  miscellaneous  documents  with classification  markings  up to  SECRET
> D4-D19
> Black  spiral  notebook labeled: "DAILY 12/15/15  and  2026-2017-2018."
> Black  spiral  notebook labeled: "FOREIGN  POLICY  6/10/15"
> At  the  time  of  the  search,  three  notebooks were  found  in  the  same  location,  seized  and entered  into  evidence, collectively designated  as  1B22.  For  evidence  handling and  review  purposes,  each  notebook  was given  its  own  FBI  evidentiary  number: 1B22, 1B67  and  1B68.
> Black  spiral  notebook labeled: "Foreign  Policy l 1/2013-2014"  Initially  collected  with  1B22.
> Black  spiral  notebook labeled: "Obama/Eiden  7-15-13  -- ➔ 10-10-16"  Initially  collected  with  1B22.
> Loose,  miscellaneous  papers  with  handwritten notes  (notecarcls).
> C-2 ---------- --
> Appendix  C:  Evidence  Items
> 1B25l  5 1/20/23  Wilmington  Residence
> lB5JlG  1/20/23  Wilmington  Residence
> 1B52l'i  1/20/23  Wilmington  Residence
> 1B62  18  1/20/23  Wilmington  Residence
> 1B63  19  1/20/23  Wilmington  Residence
> 1864  20  1/20/2:3  Wilmington  Residence
> 1B65 21  l/20/23  Wilmington  Residence
> 15  FBI  Serials  49, 77, 134, 322, 682.
> tG  FBI  Serials  49, 77, 322, 682.
> 17  FBI  Serials  49, 77, 322.
> 18  FBI  Serials  49, 77, 322.
> 19  FBI  Serials  49, 77, 322.
> 2°FBI  Serials  49, 77, 322.
> 21  FBI  Serials  49, 77, 322.
> At  the  time  of  the  search,  eight  notebooks were  found  in  the  same  location,  seized  and entered  into  evidence, collectively, designated  as  1B25.  For  evidence  handling
> Black  spiral  notebook  labeled: "Daily/Memo"  D21  and  review  purposes,  each  notebook  was given  its  own  FBI  evidentiary  number: 1B25, 1B51, 1B52,  11362,  1B63, 1B64, 1B65, and  1B66.
> Black  spiral  notebook labeled:  Initially  collected  with  1B25.
> "FOREIGN  POLICY  10/1:-)/09 - 1/17/12"
> -- ~---~·~----
> Black  spiral  notebook  labeled:  Initially  collected  with  1B25.
> "Miscellaneous  from 1/9/10 - 1/17/12"
> Black  spiral  unlabeled  notebook  with  first interior  page  stating:  Initially  collected  with  1B25. "12-2-09, 11-15-10"
> Black  spiral  unlabeled  notebook  with  first interior  page  stating:  Initially  collected  with  1B25.
> "Afghanistan  - Pakistan  Review  December  2010 Review"
> Black  spiral  unlabeled  notebook  with  entry  Initially  collected  with  1B25.
> dates  11/27  /08 to 7/15/09
> Black  spiral  notebook  labeled:  Initially  collected  with  1B25.
> "POST  ELECTION"
> C-3 Appendix  C:  Evidence  Items
> Black  spiral  notebook  labeled:
> lB66  22  1/20/23  Wilmington  Residence  ''Af/Pak  l"
> Various  documents  in  blue  file folder  labeled Amputations  Feb  '11.  Contained  document  with
> 1B27 2'3  1/20/23  Wilmington  Residence  classification  markings  up  to SECRET//NOFORN.
> 1------+--·--+---~--------~·---·------+-----------------------+--
> Black  notebook  labeled: 1B3024  1/20/2:3  Wilmington  Residence  "1/7/ 10  --->  8/3/ 14"
> Black  notebook  labeled:
> 1B57  25  J /20/23  Wilmington  Residence  "Daily  AUGUST  2014 - SEPTEMBER  2016"
> ----~----- ---·----
> Black  notebook  labeled:
> lB58 2G  1/20/23  Wilmington  Residence  "Foreign  Policy"
> Black  notebook  labeled:
> 1859  27  1/20/23  Wilmington  Residence  "DAILY 2016"
> Blm,  unlabeled  binder  contained  documents lB3l2 8 1/20/23  Wilmington  Residence  with  classification  markings  up  to SECRET//NOFO  RN.
> 22  FBI  Serials  49, 77, 322, 682.
> 21  FBI  Serials  49, 77, 270, 284.
> 2'1  FBI  Serials  49, 77, 248, 322.
> 2 °FBI  Serials  49, 77, 322.
> 26  FBI  Serials  49, 77,  ,322.
> 27  FBI  Serials  49, 77, 322.
> 28  FBI  Serials  49,  77,270,284,  701.
> D20  Initially  collected  with  1B25.
> D22
> At  the  time  of  the  search,  four  notebooks were  found  in  the  same  location,  seized  and entered  into  evidence,  collectively designated  as  1B30.  For  evidence  handling and  review  purposes,  each  notebook  was given  its  own  FBI  evidentiary  number: lB30,  1B57,  1858,  and  1B59.
> Initially  collected  with  1B30.
> Initially  collected  with  1B30.
> ---------1--------------------------j
> Initially  collected  with  lB:30.
> D23-D25 Appendix  C:  Evidence  Items
> 1B35w  1/27  /23  University  of  Delaware
> 1B3Tm  2/3/23  University  of  Delaware
> 1B43  31  3/3/23  PBC  Scheduler
> 1B48 32  4/13/23  NARA
> 4/13/23  NARA
> 1B7P 1 5/23/23  Wilmington  Residence
> 1B69  35  6/6/23  University  of  Delaware
> 29  FBI  Serials  67, 270, 284, 466.
> :io  FBI  Serials  71, 270, 284.
> :n  FBI  Serial  108.
> :,  2 FBl  Serial  173. ll  FBI  Serial  173. :i1  FBI  Serials  287, 294, 591.
> 15  FBI  Serials  292, 441.
> Unmarked  Box  329-94-341  containing documents  with  classification  markings  up  to SECRET.
> Manila  folder labeled:  With  the  Compliments  of the  American  Embassy,  Bonn,  Senator  Joseph
> R.  Eiden,  Jr.  Contained  documents  with classification  marking  up to  SECRET.
> One  laptop,  with  charging  cable.
> Manila  envelope  labeled:  Iran  1/30/15,  Eyes Only  VPOTUS.  From  Box 3 stoi-ed  at NARA.  The  envelope  contained  documents with  classification  markings  up  to  TS/SCI  and handwritten  notes.
> Documents  from Box 1  stored  at  NARA  with classification  markings  up to TS/SCI. Documents  from Box 3  stored  at  NARA  with classification  markings  up to  TOP  SECRET
> Brown  paper  bag  labeled: Balducci's,  containing various  items.
> Legal  sized  brown  folder labeled:  CFE  Briefing Book  Material,  containing  documents  with classification  marking  up to SECRET//NOFOHN.
> El-E7
> Fl
> A3-A7
> Al-A2  (Box  1); A8-A10 (Box 3)
> G5
> 1B31  was  originally  located  inside  this Balducci  bag. Appendix  C:  Evidence  Items
> Legal  sized  brown  folder labefod:  Foreign
> 1B7fflG  6/7/2?,  University  of  Delaware  Relations  Committee,  containing  documents with  classification  markings  up  to  G3-G4
> CONFIDENTIAL.
> Legal  sized  brown  folder  labeled:  Mutual
> 1B7P  7 6/7/23  University  of  Delaware  Balanced  Force  Reduction  MBFR,  containing documents  with  classification  marking  up  to  G2
> CONFIDENTIAL.  ------------+--------------
> Legal  sized  brown  folder  labeled:  Greece,
> 6/7/23  University  of  Delaware  containing  documents  with  classification  Gl
> markings  up  to  SECRET.
> G/29/23  Zwonitzer  Silver  Laptop  (with  power  charging  cord included)
> 1 B79 10  6/29/2:3  Zwonitzer  Silver  G Drive  (with  USB  connection  cord  and device casP  included)
> ·--------------- ----- ------------ -------------+----------------------j
> Derivative  Evidence  - Digital  copy  that
> 1880' 11  7/5/23  Zwonitzer  contains  audio  files  and  documents  from 1B78  Derived  from 1 B78  and  1B79.
> and  1B79
> -------+---------··----------
> 1B81' 12  7 /6/2::l  Zwonitzer  One  (1) DVD  containing  digital  copies  of  full length  carved  audio  files from 1B79.  Derived  from 1B79.
> lG  FBI  Serials  292. 441.
> 17  FBI  Serials  292, 441.
> rn  FBI  Serials  292, 441.
> :rn  FBI  Serial  315.
> 10  FBI  Serial  315.
> 1 1 FBI  Serial  320.
> 12  FBI  Serial  320.
> C-G Appendix  C:  Evidence  Items
> Empty,  ripped  cardboard  box.  One  top  flap  Original  container  of  all  1B04  items  which
> 1/22/24  Wilmington  Residence  labeled  "Desk  File"  and  the  opposite  flap  were  repackaged  as  described  in  Chapter  7
> labeled  "Cabinet".  Section  II.
> 1:l  FBI  Serials  680, 681.
> C-7 THE WHITE HOUSE
> WASHINGTON

February 5, 2024 

Special Counsel Robert K. Hur 

Deputy Special Counsel Marc Krickbaum 

Department of Justice 

145 N Street :t\ortheast 

Washington. D.C. 20503 

Dear Special Counsel Hur and Deputy Special Counsel Krickbaum: 

We are pleased to see thaL after more than a year of investigating. you have detennined that no criminal charges are warranted in this matter. Though \;i,,e wholeheartedly agree with your conclusion. we are taking this oppo11unity, pursuant to our agreement. to address specific issues that \Ve have identified in the report. Vv'e do so in the interest-which we believe that the Office of Special Counsel shares-of a final report that is both accurate and consistent with Department of Justice policy and practice. 

\Ve have been selective in the choice of issues for your consideration. We believe that each one presented below merits your careful review before finalizing your report. 

## l- We do not believe that the report's treatment of President Biden's memory is accurate or appropriate. The report uses highly prejudicial language to describe a commonplace occurrence among witnesses: a lack of recall of years-old events. Such comments have no place in a Department of Justice report, particularly one that in the first paragraph announces that no criminal charges are "warranted'' and that "the evidence does not establish Mr. Bi den's guilt." If the evidence does not establish guilt, then discussing the jury impact of President Bi den's hypothetical testimony at a trial that will never occur is entirely superfluous. 

In fact there is ample evidence from your intervievv· that the President did well in answering your questions about years-old events over the course of five hours. This is especially true under the circumstances, which you do not mention in your report, that his interview began the day after the October 7 attacks on Israel. In the lead up to the interview, the President was conducting calls with heads of state, Cabinet members, members of Congress, and meeting repeatedly with his national security team. 

The Special Counsel recognized the extraordinary juxtaposition of these events when he "thank[ed]" the President "for being here and making this lime for us" given that there were "a lot of other things in the world going on that demand your attention:· Interview Transcript ("Tr.''), Day Lat 3. Subsequently, far from being "hazy:' Report at 208. the President proceeded to provide often detailed recollections across a ,vidc range of questions, from staff management of paper flow in the \Vest Wing to the events surrounding the creation of the 2009 memorandum on the Afghanistan surge. He engaged at length on theories you offered about the way materials were packed and moved during the transition out of the vice presidency and between residences. He pointed to flaws in the assumptions behind specific lines of questioning. 

At the outset of the interview, you recognized that the questions you planned to ask ··relate to events that happened years ago.'' but nonetheless expressed your hope that the President would '·put forth [his] best efforts and really try to get [his] best recollection in response to the questions we ask.'' Tr.. Day I, at 4. It is hardly fair to concede that the President would be asked about events years in the past. press him to give his ''best" recollections. and then fault him for his limited memory. 

The President's inability to recall dates or details of events that happened years ago is neither surprising nor unusual, especially given that many questions asked him to recall the particulars of staff work to pack. ship, and store materials and furniture in the course of moves between residences. The same predictable memory loss occurred with other witnesses in this investigation. Yet unlike your treatment of President Biden, your report accepts other witnesses' memory loss as completely understandable given the passage of time. For example. you accepted without denigrating John McGrail's failure to remember certain events while he served as then-Vice President Biden's counsel: ''McGrail's memory of these events could well have faded over the course of more than 6 years." Report at 238 n.923; see also id at 67. 69 (noting Mr. McGrail's failure to recall events despite emails that place him in the center of various discussions). So, too, you accept the memory lapse of one of the President's personal la"vyers who testified that in his initial search of the Penn Biden offices certain boxes were stored in a locked closet, noting only that "his memory was fuzzy on that point." Id at 265. And the events on which you found the lawyer's memory to be '·fuzzy'' occurred only a few months before his interview. Id; see also id at 64, 66 (noting without comment the failures of recollection by numerous staffers). 

Your treatment of President Biden stands in marked contrast to the lack of pejorative comments about other individuals. It is also in contrast to your own description of the President's responses on other subjects as '·clear forceful testimony" that would be "compelling" to a jury. Id. at 233. 

Not only do you treat the President differently from other witnesses when discussing his limited recall of certain years-ago events. but you also do so on occasions in prejudicial and inflammatory terms. You refer to President Bi den· s memory on at least nine occasions-a number that is itself gratuitous. But. even among those nine instances, your report varies. It is one thing to observe President Bi den's memory as being "significantly limited" on certain subjects. Id. at 5. It is quite another to use the more sweeping and highly prejudicial language employed later in the report. This language is not supported by the facts, nor is it appropriately used by a federal prosecutor in this context. 

We request that you revisit your descriptions of President Biden's memory and revise them so that they are stated in a manner that is within the bounds of your expertise and remit. 

2.  Your report criticizes President Biden's "decision to keep his notebooks at home in unlocked and unauthorized containers" as "totally irresponsible," applying to him the same criticism, in the same words, he had directed at former President Trump for keeping marked 

2classified documents. Id at 228. Setting aside the significant difference of law and facts between the two cases (which the report recognizes). this kind of criticism of an uncharged party violates "'long-standing Department practice and protocol.'' See Office of the Inspector General, 

U.S.  Department of Justice. A Review of Various Actions by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and Department of Justice in Advance of the 2016 Election (June 2018) (finding that former FBI Director James Corney violated this practice and protocol when criticizing as "extremely careless'' former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton's use of unclassified systems to transmit classified material). Using President Biden·s own words does not make the criticism compliant with Department practice. 

3.  In an audio recording with Mr. Zwonitzer. the President said: '"I just found all the classified stuff downstairs. I wrote the President a handwritten forty-page memorandum arguing against deploying additional troops to Afghanistan on the grounds that it would not matter." Yet your report appears to conclude that the President was referring to marked classified Afghanistan documents. rather than the precise document referred to in the actual recording: the President" s handwritten letter to President Obama about Afghanistan. which the President viewed as a sensitive and private communication. Indeed. the President testified in his interview that. although he didn't remember the comment to Mr. Zwonitzer, the •'only thing that [he] can think of" \Vas this handwritten letter to President Obama. Tr.. Day II, at 38. We believe that an accurate recitation of the evidence on this point would recognize the strong likelihood that the President was referring in the recording to his private handwritten letter to President Obama the one mentioned on this recording immediately after the eight words that you are focused on rather than the marked classified Afghanistan documents discovered in the Wilmington garage. 

4.  Your report erroneously (and repeatedly) makes statements about the value of the marked classified Afghanistan documents to President Biden, such as President Biden had a ··strong motive·' to keep them and they were an .. irreplaceable contemporaneous record:' like the notebooks. Report at 203. 231. These statements are contrary to the evidence and the documents themselves. First the President forcefully testified that he "never thought abouC writing a book about the 2009 Afghanistan policy review. Tr.. Day IL at 22. Thus, the President had no need to retain the documents for that purpose. Second. the 2009 Afghanistan policy  

> revievv

was one of the most \"videly covered foreign policy decisions in history. documented in near real-time by public releases of government documents, leaks to newspapers. and publications by writers like Bob Woodward. The idea that the President needed to keep any classified documents related to these events, let alone the particular ones found in his garage, is implausible. This is particularly true given that the documents at issue primarily consist of drafts. duplicates, and a disorganized and incomplete assortment of briefing materials and presentations-nothing remotely resembling a consciously selected set of documents kept for historical value. Indeed, your report acknowledges that certain "•important" documents are not in the folders, including documents that-if President Biden had sought to keep documents for history· s sake (which he did not )-one ,vould expect to be included. However. your report fails to describe the haphazard and essentially random nature of the documents discovered. We believe that a fair and more accurate recitation of the evidence on this point would include a description of the documents that makes clear they do not appear to have been intentionally selected for retention. 

32c Your characterization of the box in the garage as containing only matters of "great 

personal significance'' to the President is inconsistent with the facts. The evidence shows that 

this tattered box contained a random assortment of documents. including plainly unimportant 

ones such as: a short-term vacation lease; a VP-era memorandum on furniture at the Naval 

Observatory for purchase; talking points from speeches: campaign material; empty folders; a 

1995 document commemorating Syracuse Law's 100-year anniversary; and other random 

materials. In his interview. President Biden commented regarding one of the folders, which read 

"Pete Rouse·': "Christ that goes back a way," confirming that he had not encountered that 

material in recent years. Tr., Day I, at 144. When asked how things like a binder labeled "Beau 

Iowa" got into the ·'beat-up" box. the President responded "'Somebody must've, packing this up, 

just picked up all the stuff and put it in a box, because I didn't." Id. at 146. When asked about 

the later-dated material, the President responded: ·'[s]ee, that's what makes me think just people gathered up whatever they found, and whenever the last thing was being moved. So the stuff moving out of the Vice President's residence, at the end of the day, whatever they found. they put - they didn't separate it out, you know, Speakers Bureau and Penn or whatever the hell it is. or Beau. They just put it in a single box. That's the only thing I can think of."' Id. at 147. Some of the documents in the box contain what appears to be staff handwriting--including a D.C. tax return and a W2-further indicating that the box was likely filled by staff. We believe that an accurate recitation of the evidence on this point would include a description of these facts. 

6.  In the course of his recorded conversations with his \\Ti ting assistant. the President makes a comment-''they didn't even know I have these ... Your report repeatedly cites the comment (e.g., Report at 8. 64. 65, 230. 242) and. from these six words, asks the reader to conclude that President Bi den was ·•distinguish[ing] between his notecards. which his staff was in the process of implementing protocols to safeguard. and his notebooks. which 'they didn ·t even know I have.""' Id at 65. The President" s comment does not support this unfounded conclusion. It is unclear who the President was referring to as "they'· or what he was referring to as "these,·· let alone that he was somehow distinguishing between his notecards and his notebooks. We believe the repmi should not make such unsupported assumptions-or leave the erroneous impression that the fact of President Bi den· s notebooks was unknown. \Vhen the report itself shows that it was well known and even documented in photographs. 

7.  There are a number of inaccuracies and misleading statements that could be corrected with minor changes: 

o ·'We considered the possibility that Mr. Biden alerted his counsel that classified documents were in the garage but our investigation revealed no evidence of such a discussion because if it happened, it would be protected by the attorney-client privilege." Report at 22. In fact, your investigation revealed no evidence of such a discussion because it did not happen-not because of any privilege. The President testified he was unaware that there were any classified documents in his possession. Tr., Day II, at 2, 41-42. You did not ask him in his interview or in the additional written questions if he had "alerted his counsel" about classified documents; if you had, he would have forcefully told you that he did not. 

o The report states that the President Biden's book, Promise Me. Dad, "is not known to" contain classified information. Report at 97. The book does not 

4contain classified information and there has never been any suggestion to the contrary. 

o "While it is natural to assume that JRB put the documents in the box on purpose and knew they were there, in fact there is a shortage of evidence on these points." 

Id. at 215 (emphasis added). We do not understand the basis for claiming this is a "natural" assumption.  

> o

In connection with its discussion of the Reagan diaries, the report states that the Special Counsel's Office "viewed the materials that were deemed to be classified at the Top Secret/SCI" level from the Reagan diaries, citing a December 1, 2023 production from the National Security Council. Id. at 199-200. This is not accurate; as was stated in the production letter, you viewed only a sample of such material. We offered to make the full volumes available for your review. 

o The report claims that the Archives staff asked to see President Biden's notes from one of his visits to the Archives in 2017, id. at 231, citing an earlier chapter, but such a proposition is not made in the earlier chapter, leaving us to raise the question of whether it is accurate.  

> o

The header on page 333 refers to the discovery of a document in President Biden's home in the second-floor office, but the text asserts that the document was found in the third-floor den. The header appears to be inaccurate. 

We respectfully request your close attention to these issues before finalizing your report. 

Richard Sauber 

Special Counsel to the President 

# -~~sf ~  

> u_) --

Bob Bauer 

Personal Counsel to Joseph R. Biden, Jr. 

5
