Title: 

URL Source: https://transport.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2022-11/COM_2022_652_drone_strategy_2.0.pdf

Published Time: Tue, 29 Nov 2022 09:41:25 GMT

Markdown Content:
EN EN EUROPEAN 

COMMISSION 

Brussels, 29.11.2022 

COM(2022) 652 final 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE COMMISSION TO THE EUROPEAN 

PARLIAMENT, THE COUNCIL, THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL 

COMMITTEE AND THE COMMITTEE OF THE REGIONS 

‘A Drone Strategy 2.0 for a Smart and Sustainable Unmanned Aircraft Eco -System in 

Europe’ 

{SWD(2022) 366 final} 1

COMMUNICATION FROM THE COMMISSION TO THE EUROPEAN 

PARLIAMENT, THE COUNCIL, THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL 

COMMITTEE AND THE COMMITTEE OF THE REGIONS 

‘A Drone Strategy 2.0 for a Smart and Sustainable Unmanned Aircraft Eco -System in 

Europe’ 

Context 

1. The European Union has the ambition to lead the transition to a healthy planet and a new 

digital world. Indeed, the objective of the European Green Deal 1 is to achieve climate 

neutrality by 2050 2. T he digitalisation of the economy should strengthen the Union 's 

competitiveness and empower people with a new generation of technologies , leaving no 

one behind, in line with the European Pillar of Social Rights . Based on two strategic 

communications, namely, shaping Europe’s digital future 3 and Europe’s digital decade 4, the 

Commission set out the specific actions it will undertake to aid the creation of safe and 

secure digital services and markets. 

2. The transport sector, including the emerging drone 5 sector and manned eVTOL s6, should 

help in a chieving th is twin green and digital transition . The Commission’s Sustainable and 

Smart Mobility Strategy 7 (SSMS) adopted in December 2020 pr ovides an ambitious 

roadmap aimed at putting the European transport firmly on track for a sustainable, smart 

and resilient future . The Zero Pollution Action Plan 8 is linked within the SSMS with targets 

and actions on how clean the new EU transport policies should be, for instance on noise and 

air pollutants. 

3. Among the actions set out in the SSMS, the Commission announced the preparation of ‘A 

Drone Strategy 2.0 for a smart and sustainable unmanned aircraft eco -system in Europe’ to 

be adopted by the end of 2 022, setting out possible ways to guide the further development 

of this technology and its regulatory and commercial environment. This Communication is 

a reflection of that announcement. 

4. The Commission has worked intensively since 2014 on building the foundations of a 

comprehensive EU policy in the field of drones. A first Communication setting out the 

foundations of this policy was adopted in 2014 9, followed by several major steps, such as                  

> 1https://ec.europa.eu/info/strategy/priorities -2019 -2024/european -green -deal_en
> 2COM (2019) 640 final
> 3https://ec.europa.eu/info/strategy/priorities -2019 -2024/europe -fit -digital -age/shaping -europe -digital -
> future_en
> 4https://ec.europa.eu/info/strategy/priorities -2019 -2024/europe -fit -digital -age/europes -digital -decade -
> digital -targets -2030_en
> 5The term “d rone” is the layman term for “Unmanned Aircraft Systems” which means an unmanned aircraft
> and the equipment to control it remotely.
> 6‘electric Vertical Take Off and Landing’ aircraft (eVTOL) are used for the transport of people and cargo
> initially with a pilot on board controlling the flight, in the future, they will have the ability to fly
> autonomously using the latest technologies when regulations allow.
> 7COM(2020) 789 final .
> 8Communication on an EU Action Plan: 'Towards Zero Pollution for Air, Wat er and Soil'.
> 9COM(2014) 207 final , “A new era for aviation -Opening the aviation market to the civil use of remotely
> piloted aircraft systems in a safe and sustainable manner”

2

the ‘Aviation strategy for Europe’ of 2015 10 and several landmar k Declarations endorsed at 

High Level drone conferences held in Riga, Warsaw, Helsinki, and Amsterdam 11 .

5. The Union has played a key role in developing a comprehensive drone regulatory 

framework for its 27 Member States , which is successfully contributing to the development 

of this promising sector. Under the new Basic Regulation 12 adopted in 2018, all drones, 

irrespective of their weight are subject to the Union harmonised safety rules. Based on those 

safety essential requirements and following the risk -based operation -centric approach 

embedded in the Ba sic Regulation , the Commission adopted in 2019 a series of rules 

regulating operations with drones (i.e. Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 

2019/947 on the rules and procedures for the operation of unmanned aircraft 13 and 

Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2019/945 on operators of unmanned aircraft 

systems 14 ). In addition, to ensure the safety of drone operations in airspace , the Commission 

adopted in 2020 three Implementing Reg ulations on U -space 15 , which provide the air traffic 

management system for drones. Th ose rules are the corner stone of the new Union drone 

regulatory framework, facilitating the development of the drone industry and the drone 

services market. 

6. Developing Uni on rules for drones has been all the more important as there were very few 

regulatory national frameworks in place in the EU Member States, or at the global level. 

Unlike in other sectors, where the EU regulatory harmonisation process started after the 

ado ption at national level of sometimes diverging regulation , here, it has been possible to 

start from the outset with a truly common set of rules. This continues to present a unique 

opportunity not to be missed. 

7. Today, the action s announced in the 2015 Aviation Strategy ha ve been largely completed 

and it is now time for an updated Union policy on drones, building on the achievements to 

date and taking into consideration the new policy priorities and new challenges , as well as 

recent technolo gical, regulatory and commercial developments. 

8. On the military side, drones have been used in the defence sector for the last 30 years, but 

the European military drone capabilities remain less mature than in other regions of the                      

> 10 COM(2015) 598 final ,“An Aviation Strategy for Europe”
> 11 High Level Drone Conferences in Riga (2015), Warsaw (2016), Helsinki (2017), Amsterdam (2018, 2019)
> 12 Regulation (EU) 2018/1139 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 July 2018 on common rules
> in the field of civil aviation and establishing a European U nion Aviation Safety Agency, and amending
> Regulations (EC) No 2111/2005, (EC) No 1008/2008, (EU) No 996/2010, (EU) No 376/2014 and Directives
> 2014/30/EU and 2014/53/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council, and repealing Regulations
> (EC) No 552/200 4 and (EC) No 216/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council and Council
> Regulation (EEC) No 3922/91, JO L 212 du 22.8.2018, p. 1.
> 13 Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2019/947 of 24 May 2019 on the rules and procedures for the
> operation of u nmanned aircraft, O L 152, 11.6.2019, p.1.
> 14 Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2019/945 of 12 March 2019 on unmanned aircraft systems and on
> third -country operators of unmanned aircraft systems, OJ L 152, 11.6.2019, p.1.
> 15 Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/664 of 22 April 2021 on a regulatory framework for the
> U-space, OJL 139, 23.4.2021, p. 161; Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/665 of 22 April
> 2021 amending Implementing Regulation (EU) 2017/373 as regards requirements for pr oviders of air traffic
> management/air navigation services and other air traffic management network functions in the U -space
> airspace designated in controlled airspace, OJ L 139, 23.4.2021, p. 184; Commission Implementing
> Regulation (EU) 2021/666 of 22 Apri l2021 amending Regulation (EU) No 923/2012 as regards
> requirements for manned aviation operating in U -space airspace, OJ L 139, 23.4.2021, p. 187.

3

world , whilst the potentia l contribution of military drones to future European Strategic 

autonomy is widely recognised . The European Commission 16 has shown its willingness 

together with the High Representative 17 to reinforce the EU’s role as a geopolitical actor, a 

position recognised by the European Council 18 in its endorsement of the Strategic 

Compass 19 approved by the Council on 21 March 2022, with a clear objective to build a 

stronger and more capable EU in sec urity and defence .

9. Th is Drone Strategy 20 should therefore contribute not only to the objectives set out in the 

SSMS , but also to the objectives of the ‘Action plan on synergies between civil, defence 

and space industries’ 21 adopted in February 2020, and whic h includes a n EU Drone 

Technologies flagship project. Th at Action plan identified s everal areas of possible cross -

fertilisation whereby defence projects may benefit from innovative developments of SMEs 

for civilian drones and civil aeronautics may benefit from developments in the field of 

defence .

10. In 2020, the Commission adopted two Communications, which both introduced new policy 

actions to counter possible threats that drones could pose. The EU Security Union Strategy 22 

and the Counter -Terrorism Agenda 23 stated that the threat of non -cooperative drones is a 

serious concern in Europe that needs to be addressed. Moreover, the proposed Directive on 

the resilience of critical entities (CER Directive) 24 will introduce obligations on Member 

States and critical e ntities to conduct risk assessments, and on critical entities to take 

technical, security and organisational measures to ensure their resilience against identified 

risks. This security dimension therefore also needs to be addressed in this Drone Strategy. 

11. A Staff Working Document setting out the assessment of the challenges that the drone sector 

faces , as well as the analysis and data underpinning the new Drone Strategy 2.0. , which has 

been conducted by the Commission with the support of an external consult ant , accompanies 

th is Communication 25 .

Unleashing the growth potential of drones 

12. Drones are already used as daily tools in ever broadening array of data intensive -demanding 

economic sectors, such as agriculture, construction, surveillance, film -mak ing, healthcare ,                       

> 16 COM(2022) 60, Communication on Commission contribution to European defence, 15.2.2022.
> 17 JOIN(2022) 24, Communication on the Defence Investment Gaps Analysis and Way Forward, 18.5.2022
> 18 EUCO 1/22, European Council conclusions 24 -25 March 2022, 29.3.2022 -EUCO 21/22 European Council
> conclusions 30 -31 May 2022, 31.5.2022
> 19 A Strategic Compass for Securi ty and Defence “For a European Union that protects its citizens, values and
> interests and contributes to international peace and security”, 21.03.2022.
> 20 While recognising the differences and commonalities between the different use cases and the need to avoid
> taking a one -size fits all approach to all issues, for further reference in the following text, the term ‘drones’
> will be used to cover all vehicles involved in Innovative Aerial Services, including manned eVTOL
> (electrically powered vehicles capable of vertical take -off and landing), as well as Unmanned Aircraft
> Systems used in the defence sector.
> 21 Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and
> Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions “Action Plan on synergies between civil, defence and
> space industries”, COM(2021) 70 final, 22.02.2021 .
> 22 COM(2020) 605 final of 24 July 2020
> 23 COM (202 0) 795 final of 9 December 2020
> 24 COM(2020) 829 final The European Parliament and the Council reached political agreement on the proposed
> Directive on 28 June 2022 ( Security Union (europa.eu)
> 25 Fact finding study preparing a “Drone Strategy 2.0”, Final report, Ecorys, 2022

4

medical emergency , energy, environment, public safety and security. Drones could be used 

in the future also , for example, as platforms for communication hubs or for weather and 

pollution monitoring , and for maintenance of renewable energy insta llations, especially for 

offshore wind .

13. In the transport sector, the use of drones for deliveries is already being tested in many 

countries. First pilot trials in passenger transport are expected to take place in the European 

Union within the coming years. It is important that the Union safeguards its open strategic 

autonomy in this area. 

14. The drone eco -system also includes the defence/military dimension for the purpose of 

achieving technological synergies between civil , security and defence sectors . Reaping 

synergies between the civil and the military use of drones , including counter -drone 

technologies, is an important success factor for the competitiveness of the European drone 

eco -system as well as the Union’s defence capabilities. 

15. On the civil si de, the drone services market includes three segments which are interlinked :

the new Innovative Aerial Services (IAS) 26 , includ ing two segments : ”Aerial Operations“ 

(surveillance, inspection, mapping, imaging, …), a nd “Innovative Air Mobility “ (IAM) 27 ,

covering international, regional and Urban Air Mobility (UAM) and thirdly, ” U-space “.

Although first IAM operations are expected to be conducted with manned eVTOL aircraft, 

such operations will likely be in the future performed on similar platforms but rem otely 

piloted and then fully autonomous. 

16. With the right framework in place, the drone services market in Europe could by 2030 reach 

a value of €14.5 billion, with a compound annual growth rate of 12.3%, and create 145,000 

jobs in the EU 28 . The different se gments of this market are constantly growing in terms of 

companies and volume of operations. 

17. Against this background, the existing strategy from 2015 has been overtaken by these new 

developments and a new strategy is needed at EU level to provide a forwar d-looking vision 

for the future holistic development of the sector.             

> 26 Due to the lack of a definition and in line with the regulatory operation centric approach, EASA has
> developed the notion of Innovative Aerial Services (IAS) which corresponds to the set of operations and/or
> services enabled by the new airborne te chnologies –the operations and/or services include both the
> transportation of passengers and/or cargo and aerial operations (e.g. surveillance, inspections, mapping,
> telecommunication networking).
> 27 The concept of Innovative Air Mobility (‘IAM’) is to ac commodate operations with novel aircraft designs
> (that do not automatically fall under one of the known categories, but which have vertical take -off and
> landing (VTOL) capabilities for take -off and landing, specific (distributed) propulsion features, can b e
> operated in unmanned configuration, etc.), that are conceived to offer a new air mobility of people and cargo,
> in particular in congested (urban) areas, based on an integrated air and ground -based infrastructure. IAM
> describes a diverse array of aircraft types (such as manned and unmanned), whose designs are enabled by
> ongoing innovations particularly in the areas of hybrid and electrification of propulsion systems, energy
> storage, lightweight materials, digitalisation and automation. These innovations ha ve made possible an array
> of novel designs spanning multi -rotor, tilt wing, tilt -rotor, powered wing, offering short take -off and landing
> (STOL) through to VTOL capabilities.
> 28 Fact finding study preparing a “Drone Strategy 2.0”, Final report, Ecorys, 2022 .5

The Commission’s vision  

> 18.

Setting out a clear v ision for the development of the drone sector will provide the foundation 

for the next steps at EU level to develop a thriving viable drone eco -system in the Union .

This vision for 2030 , which has been developed with the support of t he Drone L eaders’ 

Group 29 , can be formulated as follows :

- By 2030 drones and their required eco -system will have become an accepted part of 

the life of EU citizens .

- Drones will be used to provide numerous services to the benefit of diversified 

civilian and defence end -users, including EU citizens, organisations, Member States 

and industry. Drones’ aerial operations will include emergency services, inspections 

and surv eillance using drones to gather data, as well as for the delivery of goods. 

- IAM services will start provid ing regular transport services of passengers , initially 

using aircraft with a pilot on board but with the ultimate aim to fully automate their 

operati ons. Drone services will effectively integrate or complement existing 

transportation systems and contribute to the decarbonisation of the transport system 

by providing an alternative to carbon intensive modes of transport , while minimising 

their impact on the environment throughout their life cycle. UAM will become a

part of the future urban multimodal intelligent mobility ecosystem and the ground 

and air infrastructure s enabling these transport services will be widely deployed and 

integrated. 

- An increase d spectrum of distinct types of drones and use cases will coexist. The 

Union legislator, the Commission, the European Union Aviation Safety Agency 

(EASA) and the Member States all have an institutional responsibility to safeguard 

the safety, security and eff iciency of their operations. They ensure that a ll drone 

services are provided in a manner that ensures safety, security, sustainability, 

privacy, and affordability, in line with citizens’ expectations and addressing their 

concerns. Drones used for the tran sport of people and goods will be particularly 

oriented to the achievement of publicly accessible services, thus creating benefits 

for citizens and local communities. 

- The current U -space regulatory framework will have been completely rolled out in 

the EU . Additional advanced U -space services will support large scale highly 

automated and digitally connected affordable, safe, secure, and environmentally 

friendly unmanned aircraft operations in several Member States. The integration 

between manned and unmanne d traffic in the same airspace will be initiated, inside 

and outside U -space airspace. 

- The EU drone industry will have become viable and accessible to EU citizens and 

businesses with an active participation of actors of all sizes, including a variety of 

diversified SME’s, fostering collaboration between all actors, and broadening the 

spectrum significantly beyond the limited number of global multinational 

stakeholders. 

- Civil -defence industry synergies will be systematically identified and exploited. 

They will benefit both sectors. They will improve the competitiveness of European      

> 29 Drone Leaders’ Group Report: https://transport.ec.europa.eu/news/drone -leaders -group -supports -
> preparation -drone -strategy -20-2022 -05 -02_en 6

industry and strengthen Europe's strategic autonomy, by allowing Member States to 

rely on competitive drone technology of European origin. 

- The drone eco -system will provide jobs, promote and protect European 

technological know -how and allow for growth opportunities for the EU economy as 

a whole, enabling European companies, including new SMEs to grow and flourish 

as global leaders. 

Making the vision a reality  

> 19.

This strategy covers ten areas which should unfold the development of the drone eco -system 

and help to achieve the above vision. They were identified on the basis of the input received 

during wide -ranging consultations which are described in the accompanyi ng Staff Working 

Document . Th ose areas are grouped under two main objectives . T he first one is to build the 

Union drone service market , and the second one is to strengthen the Union’s civil , security 

and defence industry capabilities and synergies . Each area aims to reinforce the efficiency 

of the different segments of the overall drone value chain , ranging from drone operators, 

drone manufacturers, the defence sector, counter drones to the U-space. 

A. Building the Union drone services market 

1. Improving airspace capabilities (U -space development and integration 

with Air Traffic Management)  

> 20.

One of the major objectives of the existing Air Traffic Management (ATM) an d

Standardised European Rules of the Air (SERA) 30 is to avoid collisions between air craft. 

The SERA are built on the principle of “see and avoid” which is used by the pilot to avoid 

mid -air collision. Considering that , in drone operations , the intention is for the pilot not to 

be on -board, a strict adherence to this principle cannot be ap plied and hence collision risks 

need to be mitigated with adequate alternative means.  

> 21.

The integration of drones in the airspace therefore calls either for the revision of the existing 

aviation safety rules to take account of those differences , or for the develop ment of entirely 

new rules designed specifically for th ose new entrants. The Union’s strategy so far has been 

to progress on both fronts . In the first stage , the airspace for drones is separated from the 

airspace used for manned operations to then achieve in a second stage a full integrati on of 

both , allowing all airspace users (manned and unmanned, as well as IAM and regular air 

traffic, but also operators of State, including military, manned and unmanned aircraft ) to 

saf ely and freely operate within the same airspace or transit between airspaces. 

Flagship action 1: The Commission intends to adopt amendments to the Standardised 

European Rules of the Air and the Air Traffic Management/Air Navigation Services 

Regulation to s afely integrate drone and piloted eVTOL operations . 

> 22.

In terms of adapting airspace capabilities, in 2016 the Commission launched an initiative 

aimed at ensuring the safe and secure integration of drones into the airspace: the so -called 

U-Space, a bespoke, fully digital, and automated traffic management system that has been 

designed to enable the efficient and affordable scaling up of drone services. The U-Space     

> 30 Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 923/2012 of 26 September 2012 laying down the common
> rules of the air and operational provisions regarding services and procedures in air navigation and amending
> Implementing Regulation (EU) No 1035/2011 and Regulations (EC) No 1265/2007, (EC) No 1794/2006,
> (EC) No 730/2006, (EC) No 1033/2006 and (EU) No 255/2010 , OJ L 281, 13.10.2012, p. 1

7

should be as cost -effective as possible, while providing equitable access to airspace for a 

diver sity of drone operators from across the EU and enabling military and State manned 

and unmanned aircraft operations in a safe and efficient manner. 

23. U-space development was subsequently initiated in 2017 in the context of the Single 

European Sky ATM Research (SESAR) programme and is still the subject of ongoing 

research and innovation, in particular as regards more advanced U-space services. 

24. An initial regulatory framework , the U -space regulatory package 31 , was adopted by the 

Commission in 2021 to establish co mmon U -space foundations and ensure the convergence 

of the pioneer implementation projects blossoming across the Union. 

25. In the short to medium term, it is necessary to facilitate the roll -out of this initial regulatory 

framework . To that end, EASA, Air Navigation Service Providers and U -space service 

providers should agree on the necessary protocols to exchange information with Common 

Information Service provider , and better define navigation performance requirements .

Accordingly, they should also priori tise the d evelopment of the related standards .

26. U-space service providers should also be able to capitalise on the existing mobile 

telecommunication technologies and standards, such as those resulting from the Aerial 

Connectivity Joint Activity 32 which is a collaboration by U nmanned Traffic Management 

and mobile communication entities aimed to promote interchange and understanding 

between the aviation and cellular communities, the purpose being to enhance information 

sharing and avoid incompatibilities between those groups . The use of U -space solutions and 

operational concept s for a more automated ATM should also be considered. 

27. There also is a continuing need to support large scale demonstration and validation activities 

and harmonise efforts by pi oneer projects to validate prototyping implementations and draft 

standards used during real life tests . To this end, EU stakeholders can take advantage of the 

Living Labs for Future Urban Ecosystems recently set up by the European Commission’s 

Joint Research Centre (JRC) 33 .

28. The Commission intends to continue to support research and development i n order to build 

on the initial regulatory framework and enhance U -space deployment to support more 

advanced services and Innovative Air Mobility (IAM), in accordance with the European 

ATM Master Plan (MP) vision 34 , and the Roadmaps to achieve this, as described in t he 

Strategic Research and Innovation Agenda (SRIA) for the Digital European Sky 35 .

29. This research and development should be designed to increasingly consider ATM and U -

space together so that, by the time the full U -space is deployed, the two environments wil l

have become one, fully integrated air space , seamlessly encompassing small drones, IAM, 

manned aviation , and Higher Airspace Operations (HAO). As research continues in each 

thread, lessons from one environment should be applied to each of the others, so t hat the 

final air t raffic management system is safe, economically viable and environmentally 

sustainable. 

30. The Strategic Research and Innovation Agenda clearly describes the transformation from 

three separate Communication, Navigation and Surveillance (CNS) domains into one                 

> 31 Commission Implementing Regulations (EU) 2021/664, (EU) 2021/665 and (EU) 2021/666).
> 32 https://www.gs ma.com/iot/aerial -connectivity -joint -activity/
> 33 https://ec.europa.eu/jrc/en/research -facility/living -labs -at -the -jrc
> 34 European ATM Master Plan, Digitalising Europe’s Aviation Infrastructure, Edition 2020,
> https://www.atmmasterplan.eu
> 35 Strategic research and innovation agenda for the Digital European sky, Single European Sky ATM Research
> Joint Undertaking, 12 October 2020. 8

integrated CNS (ICNS) environment. This includes all current CNS technologies used for 

ATM, but also those needed to support U -space , I nnovative Air Mobility , drone integration 

and H igh er Airspace Operations . The SESAR programme, as envisaged in the SRIA, should 

look to ICNS as the mechanism by which all airspace users can inter -operate safely, while 

reducing costs and environmental im pact through rationalisation and multi -use of existing 

and developmental technologies. This integration should include technologies from other 

domains, such as the telecommunications and the space industries, leveraging services and 

data of the EU Space pr ogrammes (EGNOS, Galileo, Copernicus and Secure Connectivity ), 

and should address increased connectivity through digital communications as well as the 

more conventional elements. In this regard, synergies with the EU Space Programme will 

be further explore d and the coordination strengthened to support resilient and robust drone 

navigation, as well as development of U -Space services, as enabler of Innovative Air 

Mobility. Research and demonstration under this Action should address both technological 

issues and the specific performance and certification requirements of all relevant 

technologies that arise from the evolving U -space and IAM domains. 

Flagship action 2: The Commission will continue to promote coordinated research on 

integrated Communication, Navig ation and Surveillance technologies to ensure the 

convergence between ATM and U -space environments . 

> 31.

A key element for the fair and harmonised implementation of U -space across the Union ,

and the development of a competitive European market for drone services , is the pricing 

(and related oversight ) of the Common Information Services (CIS), as well as the pricing 

of access to data necessary for such services. The SES2+ recast proposal of the 

Commission 36 proposes to establish clear pricing and data shari ng rules necessary for the 

development of the U -Space market, thus its adoption by the Union legislator should take 

place without undue delay . 

> 32.

When ever possible , the EU regulatory framework, including the U -space regulations, 

should be promoted with tradin g partners outside of the EU, and at the level of ICAO, as a 

basis for a future global drone regulatory framework to ensure consistent approaches with 

other Regions and at the global level. Such cooperation should also cover the review of 

ICAO Annex 2 (rul es of the air) to cover drone operations’ specificities. 

2. Facilitating Aerial Operations  

> 33.

Drone operators performing Aerial Operations are an essential part of the drone value chain 

and one of the driving force s of the drone services market . They contribute to achiev ing 

competitive advantages in a wide spectrum of economic activities , ranging from 

surveillance, monitoring, mapping or filming , as well as medical and emergency services .

Business models associated to Aerial Operations are more advanced than tho se pertaining 

to Innovative Air Mobility. However, they have not yet been fully implemented and to a 

large extent are still to be rolled out as external services . In fact, most Aerial Operations are 

currently taking place as internal services within companies , based on a clear business 

perspective.  

> 34.

The risk -based operation -centric approach that has underpinned the development of the  EU 

regulatory framework  for drones  until now  provides operators with more flexibility in 

operations compared to the  pr evious  national regulation s applicable for unmanned aviation.   

> 36 Commission amended proposal for a Regulation on the implementation of the Single European Sky,
> COM(2020) 579 final, 22.9.2020.

9

However, t he markets for th ose services still remain relatively immature and mainly focused 

on research, innovation and testing activities. While this partly reflects the fact that th e EU 

regulatory framework is relatively recent, t he public consultations and workshops in 

preparation of this strategy highlighted two important elements . First, while safety is the 

first priority, the operation -centric policy should keep the safety requirem ents proportionate 

to the risk of operations , and secondly, in line with the principle of safety first and this 

operation -centric policy, there is a need to improve some regulatory aspects already in place 

to ensure a more harmonised application and legal certainty .

35. According to the feedback received during the consultation process, some industry 

stakeholders consider that in some cases, requirements to permit operational authorisations 

are disproportionate to address the level of risks from both an operational and financial point 

of view. The same also applies to real world testing and demonstration of new types of 

aerial operations for which the requirements are considered as too cumbersome . One of the 

risks for the d rone operator is that the competent authority may reach the conclusion that 

the operation should be performed under the conditions of the ‘certified’ category 37 , instead 

of the ‘specific’ category 38 , the former requiring the certification of the aircraft, th e

operators and the remote pilot , as applicable. 

36. As a large part of Aerial Operations present a low to a medium risk, more efforts could be 

made by the regulators to facilitate use -cases in the ‘specific’ category of drone operations. 

At this stage, the Co mmission adopted only two European Standard Scenarios targeting low 

risk operations in the ‘specific ’ category. For those, drone operators are allowed to just send 

a declaration to the respective authority instead of applying and waiting for an authorisati on. 

However, drones used in operations classified as medium risk o f the specific category for 

which there is no possibility to declare , they may have to undergo a prior design verification 

by EASA leading to a ‘design verification report’ 39 .

37. The Commission intends to review this situation to take account of the difficulties 

experienced in the initial implementation of the related procedure. To facilitate this pro cess, 

EASA and the Member States should continue to develop adequate Accept ed Mean s of 

Compliance and Guidance Material s for drone operations in the specific category in support 

of the specific operational risk assessment ( SORA ) methodology implementation and to 

support the further development of industry standards required for implemen tation of the 

drone regulations by industry. These standards should , where possible , be performance -

based setting minimum requirements and not be descriptive so as to avoid that they become 

outdated. 

38. In addition, t he administrative burden related to the operational authorisation process could 

be alleviated by developing further European Standard Scenarios and pre -defined risk 

assessments 40 . Further developing this regulatory approach could also help to address some             

> 37 ‘certified’ category means a category of UAS operation that is defined in Article 6 of Implementing
> Regulation (EU) 2019/947.
> 38 ‘specific’ category means a category of UAS operations that is defined in Art icle 5 of Implementing
> Regulation (EU) 2019/947.
> 39 EASA Guidelines on Design verification of UAS operated in the ‘specific’ category and classified in SAIL
> III and IV, Issue 1, 31.03.2021.
> 40 European standard scenario (STS) and the pre -defined risk asses sment (PDRA) aims to facilitate respectively
> the declarative and the permit application process by drone operators by ensuring that the risk assessment
> has already been performed in accordance with the SORA methodology for some low to medium risk
> operation s performed in the ‘Specific category’ .10

existing business uncertainty and support the inclusion of small and medium -sized 

enterprises in the drone operations market . 

> 39.

Finally , new European Standard Scenarios could also address specific needs related to State 

or military operations and maritime surveillance activities .

Flags hip action 3: The Commission intends to adopt new European standard scenarios 

for low to medium risk aerial operations 41 . 

> 40.

The current regulatory flexibility , for example in the definition of ‘UAS geographical 

zones’ 42 or approval of cross -border operations , provided for in the EU drone regulatory 

framework could lead to different interpretations and implementation approaches by 

Member States, ultimately affecting market conditions. Therefore, the Commission will 

closely examine how regulations are implemented by the competent authorities. Ensuring 

harmonised implementation practices should also contribute to ensure a level playing field 

between Member States/regions, for example in case of cross border operations. More 

coordination between compete nt authoritie s should help to avoid the risk of de -harmonised 

national implementations of EU rules.  

> 41.

Member States should support further pilot projects which aim to increase awareness of 

drone operators in the ‘open ’ and ‘specific ’ categor ies in order to facilitate th e development 

of applications and tools that enable automatic reporting of drone incidents and occurrences. 

Such data would enable validation of assumptions made when developing the ‘specific’ 

operational risk assessment required under Regulation (EU) 2019 /947. 

3. Developing Innovative Air Mobility  

> 42.

Innovative Air Mobility (IAM) consists of vehicles ranging from smal l drones used for 

cargo delivery operations to eVTOL aircraft, i.e. electrically powered aircraft capable of 

vertical take -off and landing for the transport of both goods and people. Indeed, multiple 

eVTOL developers are targeting passenger operations, built on economic efficiencies of 

electric power, nodal networks, and scalability to achieve competitive pricing and provide 

sustainable alternatives to existing travel services.  

> 43.

These technologies are attract ing the attention of mobility actors and local authorities as a 

means of contributing to sustainable and integrated mobility across cities and regions by 

providing less polluting, less congesting a nd safer mobility solutions to local communities 

in urban, sub -urban and rural areas.  

> 44.

Innovative Air Mobility and Urban Air Mobility (UAM) include manned VTOL as well as 

drone operations fall ing under the 'certified' category which caters for th os e operations with 

the highest level of risk . Like manned aviation, drone operators, remote pilots , drones and 

manned VTOL aircraft should be subject to uniform rules and procedures so that drone 

operations are as safe as those in manned aviation . Today, t he re is a significant technical 

and safety regulatory gap which prevents such ‘certified’ operations from be ing performed .

These should be addressed by new rules addressing the certification of aircraft, as well as 

the approval of the drone operator and the remote pilot licence by the competent authority.      

> 41 Amending the Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2019/94 7of 24 May 2019 on the rules and
> procedures for the operation of unmanned aircraft .
> 42 Definitions for the terms given in the Commission Implementing Re gulation (EU) 2019/947 of 24 May 2019
> on the rules and procedures for the operation of unmanned aircraft .

11 

Flagship action 4: The Commission intends to adopt rules for the ‘certified ’ category 

of drone operations , addressing the initial and continued airworthiness of drones 

subject to certification; and the operational requirements applicable to manned 

VTOL -capable aircraft 43 .

45. In addition, the Commission intends to develop a regulatory framework for the certification 

of vertiports and other ground infrastructure . Such framework should appropriately take 

account of interface s with aerodromes, interoperability and ensure an open access of 

equipment to ground infrastructures by drone operators. In this regard, the regulatory 

framework should ensure that those ground infrastructures do not become proprietary and 

follow the same open model as airports and heliports , where justified .

Flagship action 5: The Commission intends to adopt rules for the design and 

operations of vertiports under the scope of the EASA Basic Regulation 44 .

46. Although first Innovative Air Mobility operations are expected to be conducted with 

manned eVTOL aircraft, such operations will likely be in the future performed on similar 

platforms but remotely piloted and then fully autonomous. Therefore, it is necessary to 

support t he transitioning phase and ensure a smooth integration of these new operational 

concepts in the current aviation domain , as well as the future multimodal transport system. 

The U -space system is expected to provide the means to safely and efficiently manage high -

density traffic at low altitudes involving heterogeneous vehicles (small unmanned aircraft ,

eVTOL aircraft and conventional manned aircraft), including operations over populated 

areas and within controlled airspace. U -space will have to integrate seamlessly with the 

ATM system to ensure safe and fair access to airspace for all airspace users, including U rban 

Air Mobility flights departing from airports. 

47. When designing future global technology solutions , the needs and specificities of all 

airspace users should be considered . Also , from a cost point of view, these solution s should 

be affordable . Airspace users such as recreational (gliders, paragliders, etc.) or ultra -light 

aircraft could benefit from ‘light’ electronic conspicuity solutions along wi th other airspace 

users and allow their free movement in the EU airspace. 

48. The question of market access should also be addressed with due regard to the situation of 

the drone sector. Currently, the economic and financial conditions to obtain a Community          

> 43 Amending the Commission Regulation (EU) No 748/2012 of 3 August 2012 laying down implementing
> rules for the airworthiness and environmental certification of aircraft and related products, parts and
> appliances, as well as for the certification of design and production o rganisations; the Commission Delegated
> Regulation (EU) 2019/945 of 12 March 2019 on unmanned aircraft systems and on third -country operato rs
> of unmanned aircraft systems; the Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2019/947 of 24 May 2019
> on the rules and procedures for the operation of unmanned aircraft ; the Commission Regulation (EU) No
> 965/2012 of 5 October 2012 laying down technical requirements and administrative procedures related to
> air operations pursuant to Regulation (EC) No 216/2008 of the Europe an Parliament and of the Council; and
> the Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 923/2012 of 26 September 2012 laying down the
> common rules of the air and operational provisions regarding services and procedures in air navigation and
> amending Implement ing Regulation (EU) No 1035/2011 and Regulations (EC) No 1265/2007, (EC) No
> 1794/2006, (EC) No 730/2006, (EC) No 1033/2006 and (EU) No 255/2010.
> 44 Amending the Commission Regulation (EU) No 139/2014 of 12 February 2014 laying down requirements
> and adminis trative procedures related to aerodromes pursuant to Regulation (EC) No 216/2008 of the
> European Parliament and of the Council Text with EEA relevance 12

Air Carrier operating licence are set out in Regulation (EC) 1008/2008 45 . This Regulation 

covers the transport of passengers, cargo and mail and after the adoption of the new Basic 

Regulation, which enlarged the application of Union rules to unmanned aircraft, is also 

applicable to drone operators. However, the existing air carrier licencing rules , which were 

originally designed to cover large Comm ercial Air Transport undertakings, might be 

disproportionate for drone operators. The Commission therefore intends to review this 

Regulation in order to ensure a fair market access based on common requirements , which 

better reflect the economic and financi al situation of drone undertakings , for example on 

financial conditions or “Ownership and Control” .

Flagship action 6: The Commission intends to develop balanced economic and 

financial requirements for licensing of drone operators. 

4. Ensuring sustainability and societal acceptance  

> 49.

The societal and environmental impact of Innovative Air Mobility operations must be 

recognised and should be tackled upfront with a set of Union instruments as social 

acceptance is key for the success of Innovative Aerial Services . Drone services should be 

promoted on the basis of inclusivity , affordable access and sustainability, and not be 

restricted to the “wealthy few”.  

> 50.

As part of the preparation of an adequate regulatory framework for Innovative Air Mobility ,

EASA has conducted a comprehensive study on the societal acceptance of U rban Air 

Mobility operations across the European Union 46 . According to the results of the survey 

conducted by EASA, 83% of respondents have a positive initial attitude towards U rban Air 

Mobility , with 71% ready to try out such services. Cases in the common interest, such as 

emergency services or medical transportation received strong support. Furthermore, the 

results were homogeneous across the various cities which were covered in the survey.  

> 51.

Nonetheless, some important concerns associated with soci et al acceptance of Urban Air 

Mobility were found in the study, with noise and safety concerns ranking first, privacy, 

environmental issues and security following. Hence, more in -depth follow -up studies on 

environ mental and soci et al acceptance , including on the environmental impact of drones 

should be conducted at European and national level s, broadening the effort already made 

by EASA, followed by a Working Group with participants from all countries to jointly 

evaluate possible solutions.  

> 52.

Local communities, cities, regions have a deciding role for ensuring the alignment of 

Innovative Aerial Services with the needs and preferences of their citizens. They have a key 

role in deciding to what extent drone operations can be conducted in their territories. For 

example, they are in a good position to assess which critical infrastructure should be 

protected, whether operations should be allowed in day or night -time , what should the 

measures in place be in term s of noise and visual abatements. Many European cities are 

already global frontrunners when it comes to transport innovation involving drones and the 

implementation of ambitious climate and mobility targets. Tools such as t he Sustainable 

Urban Mobility Plans (SUMPS) 47 should be leveraged by Member States as a mechanism 

to integrate alternative delivery solutions offered by U rban Air Mobility in urban mobility     

> 45 Regulation (EC) No 1008/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 September 2008 on
> com mon rules for the operation of air services in the Community ,OJ L 293, 31.10.2008 , p.3.
> 46 https://www.easa.europa.eu/sites/default/files/dfu/uam -full -report.pdf
> 47 COM (2013) 913 final (ANNEX 1) of 17.12.2013 13

planning and help to address mobility challenges for the entire functional urban area, 

including synergies with spatial, energy and climate plans.  

> 53.

The role of municipalities is also pivotal i n terms of regional planning in urban and rural 

areas and creation of dedicated infrastructure to accommodating vertiports or take -off and 

landing sites. Local administrations should be involved and be able to convey a message of 

certainty and transparency to society about what, how, when and where I nnovative Air 

Mobility will be deployed. Citizens’ participation in regulatory sandboxes, living labs and 

dem onstrations should be encouraged to include local/regional aspects in the final decision 

regarding I nnovative Air Mobility deployment . 

> 54.

The location of the required new enabling infrastructure (e.g., vertiports, 

telecommunication and energy distribution equ ipment, including for new energy supplies 

such hydrogen) in the urban environment should be systematically analysed, finding a 

balance between location requirements, affordability and other aspects, such as nuisance to 

neighbours and visual pollution to av oid jeopardising social acceptance. Some vertiports 

could reuse existing helipads or airports (including small aerodromes). Connectivity to local 

airports and other modal hubs, including with public means of transport, should be 

prioritised.  

> 55.

Noise mitigat ion measures to avoid or limit the impact on over -flown citizens , houses, qui et

and natural areas should be fully taken into consideration by drone operators and local 

authorities when designing routes, procedures, and other operational practices.  

> 56.

EASA should also continue the development of suitable drone and eVTOL noise modelling 

methodologies, which should be taken into account by the Commission for the next 

amendment of Annex II of the Environment Noise Directive 48 for the purposes of adapting 

co mmon noise assessment methods to scientific and technical progress . 

> 57.

There is a need to better define and communicate on I nnovative Air Mobility opportunities, 

and create a modus operandi to ensure collaboration between European, national, and local 

authori ties to manage societal and environmental impacts. To ensure broader acceptance ,

comprehensive and transparent information about the technology and the type of operations 

involved and about the environmental impact should be provided to the people concerned, 

and competent authorities should seek to involve them in the planned implementation 

process through the utilisation of local participatory consultation mechanisms . To achieve 

this, the Commission 49 , on the basis of the European Parliament initiat ive, will fund the 

development by EASA of an online platform as a “ pilot project Sustainable I AM Hub ” that 

would provide support to the authorities, cities, industry and other stakeholders for 

Innovative Air Mobility implementation . This European cross -sectorial governance 

platform for Innovative Air Mobility should enable engagement, alignment, and 

coordination between the different stakeholders . This platform should also contribute to 

increasing public knowledge on the environmenta l impact of drones. 

Flagship action 7: The Commission will f und the creation of an online platform to 

support a sustainable IAM implementation by authorities, commun ities ,

municipalities , industry and stakeholders .       

> 48 Directive 2002/49/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 June 2002 relating to the
> assessment and management of environmental noise, OJ L 189, 18.7.2002, p. 12 –25
> 49 Commission Decision of 4.7.2022 on the financing of pilot projects and preparatory actions in the field of
> transport for 2022 ,C(2022) 4509 final .

14 

58. Finally, the drone sector is expected to increase at a fast pace and the end -of -life stage of 

these aircraft also raises important environmental challenges. In line with the Circular 

Economy Action Plan adopted by the Commission 50 and the Sustainable and Smart 

Mobility Strategy, the drone sector s hould move towards Circular Economy models 

covering notably the production of the aircraft, batteries and other electronic components 

to ensure their recycling and ensure that scope 2 and scope 3 emissions are reduced to a 

minimum. This is all the more imp ortant as improved circular use of materials, also offer 

the opportunity to create new supply chains, jobs and to increase the resilience, 

competitiveness and innovation of European manufacturers. 

5. Promoting the human dimension (knowledge, training, skills, 

competences) 

59. Guaranteeing the safety of recreational and professional drone operations means remote 

pilots must have received an adequate theoretical and practical training, according to the 

risk level of the operations. To ensure that remote pilots have the requisite level of 

knowledge and skills in line with continuous advancing technological development, n ew 

skills and competences such as those of drone specialists are needed . Initially, the ‘certified’ 

category will involve t wo different types of pilot licences . One for flying a ‘VTOL aircraft’ 

with an on -board pilot and one for flying an ‘unmanned aircraft’ as a remote pilot who may 

control one drone at a time, or control several drones simultaneously , also of different types 

and from different o perators . Training should also be given as a priority to I nnovative Air 

Mobility operators’ personnel in view of future autonomous operations .

Flagship action 8: The Commission intends to adopt new training and competences 

requirements for remote pilots and pilots of VTOL aircraft 51 .

60. Maintain ing European leadership in the different drone sector segments i.e. aerial services, 

Innovative Air Mobility , U-space, also requires a highly educated, qualified and 

experienced workforce. Education and training progra mmes specific to drone technologies, 

the regulatory framework and the development of SUMPs should be set up in all Member 

States. Such academic and vocational programmes for both young learners and workers 

across Europe would foster the competences and technological progress but also increase 

the public awareness and acceptance of drone utility . The involvement of social partners 

could also contribute to this development. 

61. Partnerships between research, universities and industry on education should facili tate the 

movement of experts between these sectors, which at the end would be very beneficial for 

the development of the European drone sector. This should also include skills development 

via the Large Scale Partnership on Aerospace and Defence 52 in the fra mework of the Pact 

for Skills. 

62. To overcome the risk of shortage of regulatory experts in drones and drone operations at 

both local and national authorities’ level , Member States should support National Aviation 

Authoritie s (NAAs) to gain the competences that reflect the highly digital and automated 

nature of the technologies underpinning drone operations and U -space services provision .

Beyond these technical competences, NAAs should adapt to the changing environment and       

> 50 https://op.europa.eu/en/publication -detail/ -/publication/45cc30f6 -cd57 -11ea -adf7 -01aa75ed71a1
> 51 Amending the Commission Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011 of 3 November 2011 laying down technical
> requirements and administrative procedures related to civil avia tion aircrew pursuant to Regulation (EC) No
> 216/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council .
> 52 Pact for Skills Aerospace and Defence (https://ec.europa.eu/social/BlobServlet?docId=23158&langId=en )15

should be put in the position to smoothly manage SORA approvals, U -space airspace 

establishment and certification & compliance monitoring of UAS operators, Common 

Information Services and U -space service providers.  

> 63.

Member States should ensure sufficient training for relevant personnel, including local 

authorities, to increase their preparedness to identify and respond to non -cooperative drone 

threats. 

B. Strengthening European civil , security and defence industry capabilities 

and synergies  

> 64.

Given drone technology’s po tential for developing both innovative civil ian as well as 

defence and security use cases , the drone sector can make an important contribution to 

Europe’s open strategic autonomy. It is therefore of utmost importan ce that European 

companies maintain and enhance their competitiveness, both as regards the production of 

drones and the provision of services using them.  

> 65.

This requires having in place the right enabling framework throughout the innovation cycle, 

from resear ch, to testing and demonstration activities, as well as retaining European 

leadership when it comes to setting standards for rapidly evolving drone technologies.  

> 66.

In addition, r eaping synergies between the civil and military use of drones and drone -related 

technologies, including counter -drone solutions to detect and mitigate threats posed by 

drone operations , can be an important success factor . Already today, m any critical drone 

technologies for security and defence increasingly originate in the civilian do main and use 

critical components of a dual -use nature. To accelerate innovation across domains and foster 

technological sovereignty, better exchange between civilian and defence research and 

innovation communities is needed. This will require a more effici ent use of resources and a 

readiness to explore the opportunities of dual -use. It also means reducing strategic 

dependencies and vulnerabilities of the value and supply chains associated with these 

technologies .

1. Providing funding and financing  

> 67.

The Commissi on has funded various drones -related research and innovation projects 

through successive EU Research & Innovation ( R& I) framework programmes. The support 

for research in the drone sector has been substantial in the past and critical for an early 

deployment.  

> 68.

From 2003 onwards, the Union invested a total budget of almost € 980 million in the 

development or use of drones for innovative applications . It funded 320 projects relating to 

the drone sector under the R&I . 

> 69.

The effort will continue under the current Horizon Europe R&I framework programme 53 

that includes the co -funded SESAR 3 Joint Undertaking 54 initiative which aims to develop 

a research and innovation ecosystem covering the entire ATM and U -space airspace value 

chains, enabling the collaborati on and coordination needed between air navigation services 

providers and airspace users to ensure a single harmonised Union ATM system for both 

manned and unmanned operations. Horizon Europe also includes specific research and      

> 53 https://ec.europa.eu/info/research -and -innovation/funding/funding -opportunities/funding -programmes -and -
> open -calls/horizon -europe_en
> 54 SESAR Joint Undertaking is co -funded by the European Union through the Horizon Europe research and
> innovation programme and industry .

16 

innovation funding on drone and counter -drone capabilities, including for civil security (law 

enforcement, border management and civil protection) 55 . Moreover, across Horizon Europe 

work programmes the development of sector and use -case specific drone applications is 

supported. 56 

70. The E uropean Defence Fund (EDF) 57 and its precursor programmes incentivises and 

supports collaborative, cross -border research and development in the area of defence. 

Complementing and amplifying Member States’ efforts, EDF promotes cooperation among 

companies an d research actors of all sizes and geographic origin in the EU. The EDF 

precursor programmes have already funded nine drone -related projects in the framework of 

defence research and development projects with total budget of close to EUR 200 million. 

71. A budg et of close to € 8 billion for 2021 -2027 is dedicated to the European Defence Fund: 

€ 2,7 billion to fund collaborative defence research and € 5.3 billion to fund collaborative 

capability development projects complementing national contributions. This is 

implemented through annual work programmes that are developed in close cooperation with 

the Member States. The indicative multiannual perspective for 2021 -2027 identifies e.g. 

development of a MALE (medium altitude long endurance) , RPAS (remotely piloted 

ai rcraft system) prototype , a HAPS (high altitude platform systems) prototype, a tactical 

RPAS prototype and Detect and Avoid 58 capabilities for extensive integration in platforms. 

Flagship action 9: The Commission intends to continue to provide funding for R &I on 

drones and their integration into the airspace under the Horizon Europe programme 

and the European Defence Fund. 

72. The European Investment Bank (EIB) finances drone projects by using a wide range of 

adapted financial products such as loans or venture d ebt. Funding can be used for research 

and development, or /and to ramp -up drone production and operations. The joint 

Commission and EIB initiative, the Drone Investment Advisory Platform 59 , facilitates the 

access to the EIB , its advisory services and funding mechanisms .

73. In 2022, EIB launched the Strategic European Security Initiative which aims to mobilise 

investment in support of Europe’s dual -use security and defence systems by backing 

Europe’s technology industry and civilian security infrastructure with focus on 

cybersecurity and disruptive emerging technologies. 

74. The InvestEU Advisory Hub, which complements the InvestEU Fund 60 , is supporting the 

identification, preparation and development of investment projects, including drones, across 

the European Union. 

75.  While there is  already a  substantial EU funding available  through Horizon Europe, E DF, 

EIB and other funding programmes , these funds often target a specific development phase              

> 55 In Pillar II “Global Challenges and European Industrial Competitiveness ”,Cluster 3 “Civil Security for
> Society ”.
> 56 For instance, under the Horizon Europe Work Programme for Cluster 6 “ Food, Bioeconomy, Natural
> Resources, Agriculture and Environment ” the development of dro ne applications for sustainable agricultural
> production, forestry, environmental monitoring and rural communities is supported.
> 57 https://defence -industry -space.ec.europa.eu/eu -defence -industry/european -defence -fund -edf_en
> 58 Detect and Avoid (DAA) systems are technologies that allow drones to integrate safely into civilian airspace,
> avoiding collisions with other aircraft and obstacles.
> 59 https://www.eib.org/en/press/ news /commission -and -eib -announce -launch -of -european -drone -investment -
> advisory -platform
> 60 https://investeu.europa.eu/what -investeu -programme_en

17 

of the value chain or are specific to the civil or military sector. This can lea d to the lack of 

financing at some technology readiness levels or a fragmented research efforts taking place 

in silos. To address this problem,  a coordinated series of calls  of  existing EU instruments 

and EIB loans should  support a new  flagship project on  ‘drone technologies’ , for example 

a cargo drone, that would prove the concept of synergies along the pathway from R&D to 

deployment through public procurement .61 .

Flagship action 10 : The Commission intends to set up a coordinated series of calls 

under the existing EU instruments and EIB loans to support a new flagship project on 

‘drone technologies’. 

76. Experience during the first year of the new M ultiannual Financing Framework , in the 

context of civil, defence and space industries, identified points of blockage in the 

application of the relevant common provisions in the programmes’ basic acts. Removing 

obstacles (while still respecting provisions of basic acts) may allow to bet ter exploit possible 

synergies: horizontally between R&I programmes (e.g. the Horizon Europe specific 

programme and the European Institute of Innovation and Technology with the E uropean 

Defence Fund ), vertically (between R&I and deployment programmes such as D igital 

Europe Programme or I nternal Security Fund ), as well as with projects funded under shared 

management (such as the E uropean Structural and Investment Funds) or with the R ecovery 

and Resilience Facility . Furthermore, there is no framework for dire ct support for dual -use 

research. Similarly, the European Investment Bank’s lending policy still has restrictions for 

the defence sector. This can lead to fragmented and inefficient EU funding services for dual 

use projects which in the EU often start as c ivil research projects and later develop to dual -

use civil and military products. 

77. In order to facilitate exchanges between civilian and defence sectors, especially in the area 

of critical technologies, there is thus a need to explore the efficiency of the funding 

possibilities under the existing legal framework and to consider the appropriateness to 

develop more flexible EU funding programmes and financing instruments for dual -use 

drone projects. 

Flagship action 11: The Commission will consider possible am endments to the existing 

financing/funding framework 62 to ensure a consistent approach in support of dual -

use research and innovation to improve synergies between civil and defence 

instruments. 

2. Identifying strategic technology building blocks and technolog y enablers 

78. Drones, drone operations and drone traffic management are a complex ecosystem of 

technology components and information exchange platforms, requiring highly optimised,       

> 61 Such a flagship would be an implementation of an action in the recent Commission Communication
> ‘Analysis of Defence Investment Gaps and way forward’: ‘The Commission will work on further measures
> (such as coordinated calls among existing EU instruments and EIB loans) to support critical technologies
> and industrial capacities by developing strategic projects , as well as an implementati on of Action 9 in the
> Synergies Action Plan (‘Drones Technologies’) coherent with the findings of Action 2 of the Synergies
> Action Plan (synergies of financing instruments): ‘The Commission should support new forms of integrated
> programming and planning [. ..]. To this end, it should select and launch new flagship projects that can prove
> the concept of synergies along the pathway from R&D to deployment through market update or public
> procurement ’.
> 62 after taking into account the positions of the European Par liament and Member States expressed in the past in
> the course of the relevant inter -institutional negotiations 18

safe, and secure elements such as flight control systems, cyber -secure datalin ks and 

connectivity, resilient navigation, Detect & Avoid systems , electrical and hybrid 

propulsion, batteries and power management, autonomous flight and mission management 

systems.  

> 79.

It is important to identify critical technology building blocks that contribute decisively to 

the innovative and competitive drone ecosystem. Lack of foresight on the increasing 

importance of remotely piloted systems is in part a reason for some of the EU’s existing 

strategic dependencies on third countries in this sector. The EU needs more structured 

foresight and strategic reflection on critical drone technologies in order to identify priority 

areas to boost research and innovation, reduce existing strategic dependencies and avoid the 

emergence of new ones.  

> 80.

Similarly, it is important to identify key underlying technology enablers such as AI, 

robotics, semi -conductors, batteries , EU space services and mobile telecommunications .

Drone operational and payload communication , as well as drone traffic management 

solutions, will benefit from the bandwidth and ultra -reliable low latency of 5G and future 

6G cellular networks . To satisfy the high bandwidth demands of 5G and upcoming 6G 

systems, it is crucial to efficiently use the limited spectrum resources . 

> 81.

The Commission has alre ady taken steps to ensure that the European knowhow and 

manufacturing capacity would be there to meet European industry needs. For example, the 

Commission has supported the setting up of a European Battery Alliance 63 , which aims to 

ensure that the EU can rely on a domestic battery value chain. It is necessary to ensure that 

the needs of the European drone sector are well covered within this and similar initiatives 

at the European level and globally. 

Flagship action 12 : The Commission intends to develop a S trategic Drone Technology 

Roadmap in order to identify priority areas to boost research and innovation, reduce 

existing strategic dependencies and avoid the emergence of new ones. 

Flagship action 13 : The Commission intends to coordinate with other relevant EU 

actors a common approach with the aim of providing sufficient radio frequencies 

spectrum for drone operations. 

3. Enabling testing and demonstrations  

> 82.

Drones and drone operations at the EU and national level are subject to numerous legal 

requirements that are intended to ensure the safety of the products and the environment in 

which they operate . Flight testing and demonstration plays an important role for safe 

research and development of new drone prototypes when moving from concept to 

deployment or when demonstrating a new business case. Local sites could be used to 

demonstrate the technical capabilities of drones and their use cases and by doing so, help to 

secure the necessary support from local and nation al authorities.  

> 83.

Test and demonstration facilities are scarce and not always available, particularly in the 

more densely populated Member States. Furthermore, the local airspace characteristics and 

seasonal weather conditions might not be meeting the desire d testing or demonstration 

requirements. Performing flight tests in sites located in a Member State other than the one 

of a state of registration, while possible, can become an administrative bottleneck due to 

different procedures in obtaining permission s, thus slowing down progress.   

> 63 https://www.eba250.com 19
> 84.

Better availability and geographic distribution of test sites across the EU would be an 

enabling factor for unmanned technology development, both for the digital infrastructure 

and vehicle technology. It would also be useful t o create a network of such test and 

demonstration sites across Europe. 

Moreover, since airspace and airfield facilities are at a premium, maximum use should be 

made of military facilities to enable dual -use of defined airspace volumes as well as to 

promote harmonised testing between civil, military and operators. 

Flagship action 14: The Commission intends to set up an EU network on civil -defence 

drone testing centres to facilitate exchanges between civilian and defence sectors.  

> 85.

City authorities’ efforts t o speed up the adoption of Innovative Aerial Services should be 

supported , but not only from a financial point of view. ELTIS, th e European urban mobility 

observatory 64 , already facilitates the exchange of information, knowledge , and experience 

in the field of sustainable urban mobility. The UIC 2 initiative 65 involves more than 40 cities 

or regions across the EU that are developing projects ranging from small scale projects 

(medical product deliveries) to larger U rban Air Mobility ecosystems with the goal of 

providing testbeds for I nnovative Air Mobility across Europe.  

> 86.

As new drone technologies develop, testing and demonstrations tend to become more 

complex to organise . This is due in part to the required operational approval process which 

can be long and expensive, sometimes disproportionally so for short -lived trials with no 

immediate commercial application . In addition to working with industry stakeholder to 

facilitate aerial operations, EASA should therefore develop guideli nes to support the 

operational approval of operations conducted for the purpose of test, experimentation, or 

demonstration. 

4. Driving common standards  

> 87.

Drone technologies and their use cases are developing rapidly, with new products coming 

to the market with increasing speed. To stay competitive, the European drone industry needs 

to be able to meet the fast -paced development and production cycles. Standardisation and 

interoperability of the enabling technological building blocks are key enablers for faster 

pro duct development.  

> 88.

Promotion and application of common standards across the European civil , security and 

defence drone sector can contribute to savings in cost and development times, reduce risks, 

increase productivity and facilitate access to new markets . It is necessary to encourage 

quicker standards development in the sector by all actors to ensure that the innovative pace 

of the drone industry can be upheld.       

> 64 https://www.eltis.org/
> 65 UIC2 -UAM Initiative Cities Community ,https://civitas.eu/urban -air -mobility .20
> 89.

The development of 'hybrid standards' 66 , i.e. standards that apply to civil , security and 

defence drone technologies should be actively pursued in areas where technologies are the 

same and application areas are very similar. This can be done by encouraging relevant actors 

such as EASA, EDA, EUROCAE and national military authorities to furt her align 

certification requirements for civil and military applications towards those set by EASA 

while considering military specificities and existing military certification standards. To the 

extent possible, this should be done within existing structure s such as EUSCG and include 

defining and coordinating common standards, commonly agreed testing protocols and best 

practices to reduce costs, increasing interoperability, improving the potential for synergies 

and enhancing comprehensibility. 

Flagship actio n 15 : The Commission will encourage all relevant actors to further align 

certification requirements for civil and military applications towards those set by 

EASA while considering military specificities and existing military certification 

standards. 

Flagsh ip action 16 : The Commission intends to adopt new standard scenarios for civil 

operations that could facilitate corresponding military use cases .67 

5. Increasing counter -drone capabilities and system resilience  

> 90.

Drones are a highly innovative tool that can be used for legitimate but also malicious 

purposes, including organised criminal activities (e.g. smuggling of goods and migrants) as 

well as attacks on public spaces, individuals and critical infrastructure (in cluding energy, 

transport and border facilities). While the EU has regulated the legitimate use of drones, 

there are no specific EU rules and guidelines on countering their unauthorised or even 

criminal use. The rapid pace of innovation and the increasingl y easy access to commercial 

drones and their components means that the threat is likely to grow.  

> 91.

Protecting from malicious and non -cooperative drones also requires access to affordable 

and reliable counter -measure technologies. Some Member States are howe ver still facing 

challenges with liberating the necessary budgets, adapting or creating the necessary 

regulatory framework and identifying the right (technical) solutions to be able to cope with 

the threat of non -cooperating drones. The proposed Directive 68 on the resilience of critical 

entities will oblige Member States to perform risk assessments and use them for the 

identification of critical entities, including in the transport sector. These assessments should 

account for the relevant risks, including th ose of non -cooperative drones.  

> 92.

Through its civil security research and innovation programme (Horizon 2020) , as well as 

the Internal Security Fund (Police) for the period 2014 -2020, the EU co -funded the 

development of counter -drone tools, knowledge and technologies. This effort will continue 

in the current Horizon Europe, the Internal Security Fund (ISF) and the Border Management 

and Visa Instrument (BMVI). These programmes are complimentary as Horizon Europe 

strengthens research and innovation, while th e ISF and BMVI focuses on a wide range of 

practical applications for law enforcement and border management, such as the acquisition 

of equipment, promoting and developing training schemes and ensuring administrative and 

operational coordination and coopera tion.         

> 66 COM(2012) 417 “Security Industrial Policy ”and COM(2021) 70 final “ Action Plan on synergies between
> civil, defence and space industries ”
> 67 Amending the Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2019/947 of 24 May 2019 on the rules and
> procedures for the operation of unmanned aircraft
> 68 COM(2020) 829 final of 16 December 2020

21 

93. Also here, civil , security and defence industry synergies should be identified and exploited 

as they will benefit all relevant sectors. This will improve the competitiveness of European 

industry and strengthen Europe's strategic autonomy, by allowing Member States to rely on 

competitive counter -drone technology of EU origin. 

94. Both the 2020 EU Security Union Strategy 69 and the Counter -Terrorism Agenda 70  state that 

the threat from non -cooperative drones is a serious concern in Europe and needs to be 

addres sed.  In the Counter -Terrorism Agenda in particular,  the Commission committed to 

look into the possibility of releasing guidance on how to secure cities from non -cooperative 

drones .

95. To tie together all the different counter -drone initiatives in the EU, the Commission will 

adopt a counter -drone (C -UAS) package outlining the EU’s future policy in this field. In 

addition of continuing the dedicated actions on operational, technical and financial support 

to Member States, the package will announce, among other t hings, work towards EU 

counter -drone guidelines and examine the need for legislative measures. Support activities 

will include two handbook s on protection against drones : a ‘Handbook on Counter 

Unmanned Aircraft Systems for Critical Infrastructure and Public Spaces ’ and a ‘Handbook 

on Principles for Physical Hardening of Buildings and Sites ’. Furthermore, it will establish 

an enlarged technical expert group on voluntary standards to cover counter -drone solutions. 

Flagship action 17 : The Commission inten ds to adopt a counter -drone (C -UAS) 

package 

96. Unauthorised drones can significantly disrupt airport operations. In the worst case, they can 

also endanger aircrafts and their occupants. Following the incidents that took place at 

London Gatwick airport in Dec ember 2018, the Commission supported EASA in 

developing non -binding guidelines helping authorities and airports to prepare, respond and 

recover from drone incidents 71 . While these guidelines were favourably received by the 

sector, their advisory nature make s them insufficient to mitigate a threat that is likely to 

grow as drones become more ubiquitous and capable. 

Flagship action 18 : The Commission intends to adopt an amendment to the aviation 

security rules aiming to ensure that aviation authorities and airports increase their 

resilience when faced with the risks posed by drones 72 .

97. Developing state -of -the -art drones with higher cybersecurity requirements, particularly in 

the ‘open’ and ‘specific’ categories of operations, could provide a competitive edge for the 

EU industry. Such cyber -resilient drones would not only benefit drone operators but also 

all entities responsible for monitoring the use of airspace. Drones with a higher leve l of 

cybersecurity could be required for operations in some airspace, helping to separate legally 

operated drones from the illegal ones. Drones m anufactured to comply with specific 

requirements, for example , with the requirement for a secured communication link, secure 

identification , or use of open -source code and, leveraging resilient navigation enabled by     

> 69 COM(2020) 605 final of 24 July 2020
> 70 COM (2020) 795 final of 9 D ecember 2020
> 71
> https://www.easa.europa.eu/sites/default/files/dfu/drone_incident_management_at_aerodromes_part1_web
> site_suitable.pdf
> 72 Proposing secondary legislation to Regulation (EC) No 300/2008 of the European Parliament and of the
> Council of 11 March 2008 on common rules in the field of civil aviation security and repealing Regulation
> (EC) No 2320/2002 22

EU space services , could be eligible for a voluntary “European Trusted Drone” label. Such 

label would provid e assurance to user s that the corresponding drones have been vetted and 

found sufficiently secure to be used for more critical or sensitive operations , thereby 

increasing the overall resilience of the system to cyber crime .

Flagship action 19 : The Commission intends to define criteria for a voluntary 

“European Trusted Drone” label. 

Conclusion  

> 98.

The twin green and digital agenda gave a call to leverage new actions for more sustainable 

mobility and innovation to improve the efficiency of the overall economy. Through a

mul tit ude of civil, industrial , security and defence use -cases , drones may contribute to 

accelerat ing the decarbonisation and digitalisation of the entire transport and mobility 

system, reducing its negative impact on the environment and improving the safety and 

health of our citizens.  

> 99.

The drone sector that the EU is striving for must be mindful of its environmental impact in 

terms of noise , energy consumption and visual nuisances in particular. The Commission 

acknowledges that drones will need to be socially acc epted in order to play their full role 

for the benefit of businesses and local communities. This will require the full upfront 

involvement of all parties concerned at local, regional , and national levels to make sure that 

safe and secure drone operations can be deployed, both in urban and rural areas , in a fair 

and sustainable manner . 

> 100.

A growing number of sectors are already engaging with drone technologies . To 

encourage private inves tments and the development of new innovative services for different 

sectors, legal and technical certainty based on a harmonised EU approach should be 

ensured. Key in the Drone Strategy 2.0 are two related drivers: building the Union drone 

services market and strengthening European civil, security and defence industry capabilities 

and synergies . Reaping synergies between the civil , security and military use of drones and 

related technologies, including counter -drone solutions, will contribute to foster the uptake 

of innovative technologies and contribute to the overall development of the sector in 

Europe . 

> 101.

A viable d rone  eco -system  will contribute to leverage European research, innovation ,

and entrepreneurship to achieve the objectives of the European Green Deal and Digital 

Europe, fully in line with our new growth strategy for Europe.  The Commission is putting 

forward a comprehensive set of measures aimed at reinforcing the entire Drone ec o-system 

by 2030 by proposing actions which will facilitate the move from demonstrations to large 

scale commercial operations.  These efforts can only be successful if there is sufficient  buy -

in  from  all those concerned, namely European institutions, Member  States and their 

authorities at all levels of government, stakeholders, businesses as well as citizens ’

engagement .23 

List of Flagship Actions to be implemented by the European Commission to further 

build the European drone services market 

The Commission intends to :

 adopt amendments to the Standardised European Rules of the Air and the Air Traffic 

Management/Air Navigation Services Regulation to safely integrate drone and 

piloted eVTOL operations ;

 promote coordinated research on integrated Communication, Navigation and 

Surveillance technologies; 

 adopt new European standard scenarios for low to medium risk aerial operations ;

 adopt rules for the ‘certified ’ category of drone operations , addressing the initial and 

continued airworthiness of dro nes subject to certification; and the operational 

requirements applicable to manned VTOL -capable aircraft ;

 adopt rules for the design and operations of vertiports under the scope of EASA 

Basic Regulation; 

 develop balanced economic and financial requirement s for licensing of drone 

operators. 

 fund the creation of an online platform to support a sustainable IAM implementation 

by authorities, cities, industry and stakeholders ;

 adopt training and competences requirements for remote pilots and pilots of VTOL 

airc raft .

List of Actions to be implemented by the European Commission to strengthen the 

European drone civil , security and defence industry capabilities and synergies 

The Commission intends to :

 continue to provide funding for R&I on drones and their integration into the airspace 

under the Horizon Europe programme and the European Defence Fund ;

 set up a coordinated series of calls under the existing EU instruments and EIB loans 

to support a new flagship project on ‘drone technologies’ ;

 consider possibl e amendments to the existing financing/funding framework to 

ensure a consistent approach in support of dual -use research and innovation to 

improve synergies between civil and defence instruments; 

 develop a Strategic Drone Technology Roadmap in order to ide ntify priority areas 

to boost research and innovation, reduce existing strategic dependencies and avoid 

the emergence of new ones; 

 coordinate with other relevant EU actors a common approach with the aim of 

providing sufficient radio frequencies spectrum for drone operations; 

 set up an EU network on civil -defence drone testing centres to facilitate exchanges 

between civilian and defence sectors; 

 encourage all relevant actors to further align certification requirements for civil and 

military applications to wards those set by EASA while considering military 

specificities and existing military certification standards ;

 adopt new standard scenarios for civil operations that could facilitate corresponding 

military use cases ;

 adopt a counter -drone package; 24 

 adopt a n amendment to the aviation security rules aiming to ensure that aviation 

authorities and airports increase their resilience when faced with the risks posed by 

drones ;

 define criteria for a voluntary “European Trusted Drone” label.
