Title: Redistricting takes center stage in upcoming Texas special session after DOJ warning

URL Source: https://www.12newsnow.com/article/news/local/redistricting-takes-center-stage-in-texas-special-session/502-9006ce72-6969-40c3-848a-242c370f9661

Published Time: 6:18 PM CDT July 15, 2025

Markdown Content:
‘Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information’ Notice
-----------------------------------------------------

Like many content publishers, we provide online advertising services that use cookies and similar technologies to collect information about your device and online activity on our sites, apps and other online services. These services use this information to try to tailor the ads you see online to your interests. These are called interest-based ads. For more information about our collection, use and disclosure of your personal information when you visit our sites and apps, see our Privacy Policy.

Under certain state laws, including, but not limited to, the California Consumer Privacy Act, California Privacy Rights Act, and the Virginia Consumer Data Protection Act (collectively, “State Privacy Laws”), this collection and use of our users’ information for interest-based advertising purposes may constitute a “sale” of personal information to other parties. Certain State Privacy Laws require that we give you the ability to opt out of the sale or sharing of your personal information or data in connection with these targeting advertising activities. Although State Privacy Laws only extend their protections to residents of their particular states, we respect consumer choice when it comes to privacy rights. Accordingly, we offer all of our users – regardless of whether you are a resident of a state that has adopted a State Privacy Law – the right to opt out of this type of sale or sharing of your personal information. You can exercise this opt-out right by using the toggle switch below.

Opting out will not disable cookies or other technologies that facilitate the proper functioning of our website or collect data for purposes that do not involve targeted advertising. Opting out will not mean that you will stop seeing interest-based ads or other ads online. Specifically, opting out will not prevent you from seeing interest-based ads based on information that, for purposes of State Privacy Laws, was not sold or shared by us, was sold before you opted out, or was sold by third parties outside of our control. You can learn more about interest-based ads and additional opt-out choices here.

In addition, if you are a California resident and have enabled the Global Privacy Control (GPC) signal on a supported web browser, we will treat this as a request to opt-out of the sale or sharing of your personal information for targeted advertising purposes. For more information about what the GPC is and how to enable it, please visit globalprivacycontrol.org.

More information

### Manage Consent Preferences

Always Active

Strictly Necessary Cookies

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

Sale of Personal Data

*   ##### Targeting Cookies

Required Cookies 
These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

*   ##### Performance Cookies

Required Cookies 
These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.
