Title: Clearing the Air of Asthma Triggers - 10 Steps to Making Your Home Asthma-friendly - 402-F-04-017, May 2004

URL Source: https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2013-08/documents/10_steps_en.pdf

Published Time: Fri, 25 Jun 2021 12:25:16 GMT

Markdown Content:
United States Indoor Environments Division EPA 402-F-04-017 Environmental Protection Agency Office of Air and Radiation (6609J) May 2004 

1. .2. Dust mites 

3. (4. 5. Keep pets 6. can trigger asthma. 7. 8. Mold 

9. and dust mites .10. Plan before 

manage them. .

Take it outside. One of the most common asthma triggers in the home is secondhand smoke 

Until you can quit, smoke outside, not in your home or car. 

Good night, little mite! are also triggers for asthma. For mite population control, cover mattresses and pillows with dust-proof (allergen impermeable) zippered covers. Wash sheets and blankets once a week in hot water. 

Play it Safe. Ozone and particle pollution can cause asthma attacks. Watch for the Air Quality Index AQI) during your local weather report. When AQI reports unhealthy levels, limit outdoor activities. 

A little goes a long way. Reduce everyday dust build-up, by regularly dusting with a damp cloth and vacuuming carpet and fabric-covered furniture. 

Stake your claim. Household pets can trigger asthma with skin flakes, urine, and saliva. outdoors, if possible. 

Uninvite unwelcome guests. Cockroaches Don’t invite them into your home by leaving food or garbage out. Always clean up messes and spills and store food in airtight contain-ers. 

Think before you spray. Instead of pesticide sprays, control pests by using baits or traps. If sprays are necessary, always circulate fresh air into the room being treated and keep asthma sufferers out of that room for several hours after any spraying. 

Break the mold. is another asthma trigger. The key to controlling mold is controlling mois-ture. Wash and dry hard surfaces to prevent and remove mold. Replace moldy ceiling tiles and carpet. 

Air it out. Reducing the moisture will control asthma triggers like mold, cockroaches, 

Use exhaust fans or open windows when cooking and showering. Fix leaky plumbing or other unwanted sources of water. 

the attack. Work with your doctor or health care provider to develop a written asthma management plan for your child that includes information on your child’s triggers and how to 

Post a note. Post this plan on your refrigerator to help control asthma triggers and reduce asthma attacks in your home Share it with those who spend time with your child like teachers, babysitters, and coaches. 

# Clearing the Air of Asthma Triggers 10 Steps to Making Your Home Asthma-Friendly
