Title: Here Are The Exact Numbers Of How Many Syrian Refugees Are In Louisiana And Where They Are Located

URL Source: http://thehayride.com/2015/11/here-are-the-exact-numbers-of-how-many-syrian-refugees-are-in-louisiana-and-where-they-are-located

Published Time: 2015-11-16T06:00:03+00:00

Markdown Content:
Nearly two weeks ago, the _Hayride_ exclusively reported on Syrian refugees potentially resettling in the state, it seems that some 14 refugees have already resettled in the state, according to WWL.

Here’s the breakdown of where the Syrians have resettled in the state:

*   7 in Kenner.
*   6 in New Orleans
*   1 in Baton Rouge

Also, the New York Times has released this map, showing exactly where all Syrian refugees between 2012-present have been resettled in the country. Take a look:

With the help of Catholic Charities, which receives federal grant money from the U.S. Department of State/Bureau of Population, Refugees and Migration to help resettle refugees, the refugees are first flown to the country with the State Department paying the International Organization for Migration (IOM) for the airfare.

Then, once the refugees arrive in the country, they could be dispersed across the 180 cities listed above (which includes Baton Rouge, Lafayette and Metairie), where they are to aided within the first 30 to 90 days in settling and finding employment in the area.

After approximately 90 days, refugees are no longer eligible for the State Department-funded support that they were receiving through migrant and refugee services. However, they are able to join support programs through the Department of Health and Human Services.

Additionally, it is unclear how much the screening process for the 10,000 Syrian refugees will cost American taxpayers.

The State Department spent $1.1 billion resettling people from around the world in the country last year. That’s about $16,000 per person.

WWL, the Times Picayune and WBRZ have all claimed that “the blogs” or “many blogs” have stated that 10,000 Syrian refugees had already arrived in New Orleans.

In the _Hayride_‘s initial report, almost two weeks ago, we reported about a Dept. of Homeland Security “list of 180 cities in the country where 10,000 Syrian refugees may be resettled.”

After our exclusive report, FOX8 and WAFB both wrote up stories on how a small number of Syrian refugees had began arriving in New Orleans.

The _Hayride_ then reported the same information, citing our previous story which mentioned that 10,000 Syrian refugees _could potentially be resettled_ in the state. The Hayride never reported that 10,000 Syrians had already resettled in the New Orleans area, despite WWL, WBRZ and the Times Picayune attempting to discredit our exclusive reports.

And though WWL, WBRZ and the Times Picayune have not covered the Syrian refugee crisis until after the Paris terrorist attacks, (The Hayride has been reporting on this issue for weeks now), it is not unrealistic to mention that once a few refugees resettle in an area, trends show that hundreds and even thousands of refugees usually end up resettling in the same area.

If the Louisiana media had a clue, they would know that the state of Minnesota started with a small dosage of Somali Muslim refugees, as noted in the _Hayride_‘s special report. Now, over the course of a decade, there are more than 30,000 Somali Muslim refugees living in the state, changing the demographics of the area dramatically.

Advertisement

Advertisement
