Title: After DNC Changes Debate Rule Participation, Lessig Drops Out

URL Source: https://patch.com/new-hampshire/amherst/after-dnc-changes-debate-rule-participation-lessig-drops-out-0

Published Time: 2015-11-02T20:21:27Z

Markdown Content:
Skip to main content

*   Merrimack, NH
*   Milford, NH
*   Bedford, NH
*   Nashua, NH
*   Londonderry, NH
*   Manchester, NH
*   Windham, NH
*   Salem, NH
*   Westford, MA
*   Chelmsford, MA

*   New Hampshire

*   Top National News
*   See All Communities

Today Larry Lessig announced to supporters, donors, volunteers, staff and friends that his bid for the Democratic nomination for president has effectively come to an end after finding out that he would not be allowed to participate in future debates.

The Democratic National Committee reportedy changed the rules for access to the debates and the change forced Lessig announced that he can no longer pursue the Democratic nomination for President.

“Just at the moment that under the old rules, we were about to qualify for the debates, the Democrats changed the rules,” he said. “That change makes continuing our campaign impossible.”

Find out what's happening in Amherst for free with the latest updates from Patch.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

How Government Shutdown Could Impact Social Security Benefits in New Hampshire

Joseph Hosey

Read More

As described in an essay on Huffington Post by the campaign’s General Consultant, Steve Jarding, under the original rule, a candidate was included in the debates if he or she received 1 percent in 3 polls “in the six weeks prior to the debates.”

Under that standard, Lessig seemed certain to qualify for the second Democratic debate slated for Nov. 14. Last week, a Monmouth poll found Lessig at 1 percent nationally. Since that poll, every poll that has included Lessig’s name has also found him at 1 percent. But under the new rule, a candidate can only be included if he or she received 1 percent in three polls “at least six weeks prior to the debate.”

Find out what's happening in Amherst for free with the latest updates from Patch.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Under this rule, to qualify, Lessig would have had to have qualified by Oct. 10, at a time when most polls were still not including Lessig’s name. As Jarding commented in the post, “It was bad enough that despite Lessig having raised more money than almost half the field, polling companies were not including his name in their polls. But to change the rules midstream is unprecedented.”

In a statement posted online, Lessig said, “I cannot ask you to support a campaign for the Democratic nomination that can’t even get before the members of the Democratic party. And I can’t ask my family or my team to make any further sacrifices for a cause that has no opportunity to earn the support that the nomination will require. The uncertainty around my inclusion in the debates has understandably slowed support for the campaign. Without a commitment from the party that I would be included, we cannot afford to continue the campaign.”

Watch the video here.

Get more local news delivered straight to your inbox.Sign up for free Patch newsletters and alerts.
