Title: 

URL Source: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CDOC-111sdoc15/pdf/CDOC-111sdoc15.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 07 Oct 2024 17:47:23 GMT

Markdown Content:
111th Congress 2d Session S. Doc. 111–15 

# Nomination and Election of the President and Vice President of the United States, 2008 

Including the Manner of Selecting Delegates to National Party Conventions By L. Paige Whitaker, Jack Maskell, Legislative Attorneys, American Law Division, David S. Mao, Section Head, Cassandra Foley and Tara Rainson, Law Librarians, and Stuart Carmody, Reference Assistant, Knowledge Services Group, Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress, for the Committee on Rules and Administration, United States Senate January 2008 U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington: 2010 

For sale by the U.S. Government Printing Office Superintendent of Documents, Mail Stop: SSOP, Washington, DC 20402-9328 (II) COMMITTEE ON RULES AND ADMINISTRATION CHARLES E. SCHUMER, New York, Chairman 

DANIEL K. INOUYE, Hawaii CHRISTOPHER J. DODD, Connecticut DIANNE FEINSTEIN, California RICHARD J. DURBIN, Illinois E. BENJAMIN NELSON, Nebraska PATTY MURRAY, Washington MARK L. PRYOR, Arkansas TOM UDALL, New Mexico MARK R. WARNER, Virginia CARTE P. GOODWIN, West Virginia ROBERT F. BENNETT, Utah MITCH M CCONNELL, Kentucky THAD COCHRAN, Mississippi KAY BAILEY HUTCHISON, Texas C. SAXBY CHAMBLISS, Georgia LAMAR ALEXANDER, Tennessee JOHN ENSIGN, Nevada PAT ROBERTS, Kansas J EAN P ARVIN BORDEWICH , Staff Director 

JASON A. A BEL , Chief Counsel 

VERONICA M. G ILLESPIE , Elections Counsel 

M ARY S UIT J ONES , Republican Staff Director 

PAUL VINOVICH , Republican Chief Counsel 

MICHAEL M ERRELL , Republican Elections Counsel 

SENATE RESOLUTION 589 

In the Senate of the United States July 21, 2010 Resolved, That— (1) the Committee on Rules and Administration shall pre-pare a revised edition of the document entitled Nomination and Election of the President and Vice President of the United States (Senate Document 106–16); (2) the revised document described in paragraph (1) shall be printed as a Senate document; and (3) there shall be printed, beyond the usual number, 600 ad-ditional copies of the revised document described in paragraph (1) for the use of the Committee on Rules and Administration. NANCY ERICKSON ,

Secretary III 

FOREWORD 

This document is a compilation of the constitutional provi-sions, federal and state laws, and rules of the two major po-litical parties governing the nomination and election of the President and Vice President of the United States. It lists the states holding presidential preference primaries and the dates of such primaries; it also describes the manner of se-lecting delegates to the national conventions, the dates such selections are to be made, and the number of delegates to be selected. Two surveys of the rules of the major political par-ties and of the election laws of the fifty states and the Dis-trict of Columbia are included relating to the selection of del-egates to the national nominating conventions and to the nomination and election of electors of the President and Vice President. Abstracts of the laws relating to minor and new parties and independent candidates are also included in the surveys. The information contained here is based on the federal and state laws in effect as of January 1, 2008. Party rules, dele-gate selection plans, and various state laws referred to in this document may have been amended subsequent to publi-cation. The analysis of significant court decisions and ethics laws was prepared by L. Paige Whitaker and Jack Maskell, legis-lative attorneys of the American Law Division, Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress for the Senate Com-mittee on Rules and Administration, under the supervision of Karen J. Lewis, Assistant Director of the American Law Division and T.J. Halstead, Deputy Assistant Director. V

CONTENTS Foreword, III Table of Contents, V Important Dates, VII Part I. Federal Constitutional Provisions and Laws Governing the Election of the President and Vice President of the United States, 1 

A. United States Constitution, 1 B. Election of the President (Title 3, United States Code), 5C. Voting Rights Act Amendments of 1970—Residence Requirements (Title 42, United States Code), 13 D. Campaign Financing, Reporting and Disclosure (Title 2, United States Code), 16 E. Financial Disclosure Requirements of Executive Personnel, Including Candidates for Nomination or Election to the Office of President or Vice President (Title 5, United States Code Appendix), 81 F. Personal Financial Disclosure by Federal Candidates, 107 G. Political Activities: Federal Employees (Title 5, United States Code), 109 H. Political Activities: State and Local Employees (Title 5, United States Code), 113 I. Criminal Code Provisions (Title 18, United States Code), 118 J. Internal Revenue Code, Political Campaign Debts and Contributions (Title 26, United States Code), 126 K. Public Financing of Presidential Elections (Title 26, United States Code), 139 L. Communications Media (Title 47, United States Code), 165 

Part II. Nomination of the President and Vice President, 170 

A. Calendar for Party Caucuses/Conventions and Presidential Primaries, 170 B. Significant Court Decisions Affecting Delegate Selection Procedures and the Convention System, 172 C. FEC Regulations on Delegates and Delegate Committees, 176 D. Guide to the 2008 Democratic Party Delegate Selection Rules, 182 E. Rules of the Republican Party Relating to the Convening of the 2008 National Convention, 246 

Part III. Survey of State Laws, Party Rules, Regulating the Selection of Delegates to the National Nominating Conventions, 269 

A. Delegate Selection for the States, 269 VI Nomination and Election B. Delegate Selection for Citizens Abroad and the Territories, 344 

Part IV. State Laws Relating to the Nomination and Election of Presidential Electors, 346 

A. Table of State Electoral College Votes, 346 B. Summary of State Laws Relating to Presidential Electors, 347 

Part V. Tables Relating to Various Aspects of the Nomination and Election of the President and Vice President, 435 

1. Presidents and Vice Presidents of the United States and the Congresses Coincident with Their Terms, 436 2. Electoral Vote for President, by Major Political Parties—States: 1956 to 2004, 437 3. Popular Vote Cast for President, by Political Parties— Regional and States 1976 to 2004, 438 VII 

IMPORTANT DATES 

August 25–28, 2008—Democratic National Convention in Denver, Colorado. September 1–4, 2008—Republican National Convention in Minneapolis, Minnesota. November 4, 2008—General Election in all States. December 15, 2008—Date of meeting of electors (Electoral College). January 6, 2009—Counting of electoral votes by joint session of Congress. Dates for Party Caucuses/Conventions and Presidential Primaries in 2008 Date State Party Caucus/Convention/Primary January 3 ...... Iowa ...................................... D&R ...... Caucuses January 5 ...... Wyoming .............................. R ............ County Convention January 8 ...... New Hampshire ................... D&R ...... Primary January 15 .... Michigan .............................. D&R ...... Primary January 19 .... Nevada ................................. D&R ...... Caucuses January 19 .... South Carolina ..................... R ............ Primary January 25 .... Hawaii .................................. R ............ Caucuses (1/25–2/7) January 26 .... South Carolina ..................... D ............ Primary January 29 .... Florida .................................. D&R ...... Primary February 1 .... Maine .................................... R ............ Caucuses (2/1–2/3) February 5 .... Alabama ............................... D&R ...... Primary February 5 .... Alaska ................................... D&R ...... Caucuses February 5 .... Arizona ................................. D&R ...... Primary February 5 .... Arkansas .............................. D&R ...... Primary February 5 .... California ............................. D&R ...... Primary February 5 .... Colorado ............................... D&R ...... Caucuses February 5 .... Connecticut .......................... D&R ...... Primary February 5 .... Delaware .............................. D&R ...... Primary February 5 .... Georgia ................................. D&R ...... Primary February 5 .... Idaho ..................................... D ............ Caucuses February 5 .... Illinois .................................. D&R ...... Primary February 5 .... Kansas .................................. D ............ Caucuses February 5 .... Massachusetts ..................... D&R ...... Primary February 5 .... Minnesota ............................ D&R ...... Caucuses February 5 .... Missouri ............................... D&R ...... Primary February 5 .... Montana ............................... R ............ Caucuses February 5 .... New Jersey ........................... D&R ...... Primary February 5 .... New Mexico .......................... D ............ Primary February 5 .... New York ............................. D&R ...... Primary February 5 .... North Dakota ....................... D&R ...... Caucuses February 5 .... Oklahoma ............................. D&R ...... Primary February 5 .... Tennessee ............................. D&R ...... Primary February 5 .... Utah ..................................... D&R ...... Primary February 5 .... West Virginia ....................... R ............ State convention February 9 .... Kansas .................................. R ............ Caucuses February 9 .... Louisiana .............................. D&R ...... D–Primary; R–Caucuses February 9 .... Nebraska .............................. D ............ Caucuses February 9 .... Washington .......................... D&R ...... Caucuses February 10 .. Maine .................................... D ............ Caucuses February 12 .. District of Columbia ............ D&R ...... D–Caucuses; R–Primary February 12 .. Maryland .............................. D&R ...... Primary February 12 .. Virginia ................................ D&R ...... Primary February 19 .. Hawaii .................................. D ............ Caucuses February 19 .. Wisconsin ............................. D&R ...... Primary VIII Dates for Party Caucuses/Conventions and Presidential Primaries in 2008—Continued Date State Party Caucus/Convention/Primary March 4 ......... Rhode Island ........................ D&R ...... Primary March 4 ......... Ohio ...................................... D&R ...... Primary March 4 ......... Texas .................................... D&R ...... Primary March 4 ......... Vermont ............................... D&R ...... Primary March 8 ......... Wyoming .............................. D ............ Caucuses March 11 ....... Mississippi ........................... D&R ...... Primary April 22 ......... Pennsylvania ....................... D&R ...... Primary May 6 ............ Indiana ................................. D&R ...... Primary May 6 ............ North Carolina .................... D&R ...... Primary May 13 .......... Nebraska .............................. R ............ Advisory-only primary May 13 .......... West Virginia ....................... D ............ Primary May 20 .......... Kentucky .............................. D&R ...... Primary May 20 .......... Oregon .................................. D&R ...... Primary May 27 .......... Idaho ..................................... D&R ...... D–Non-binding primary; R– Primary June 3 ............ Montana ............................... D ............ Primary June 3 ............ New Mexico .......................... R ............ Primary June 3 ............ South Dakota ....................... D&R ...... Primary June 28 .......... Nebraska .............................. R ............ State Convention 1

PART I. FEDERAL CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS AND LAWS GOVERNING THE ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT AND VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES A. United States Constitution 

> ARTICLE II—THE PRESIDENT

Section 1. The executive Power shall be vested in a President of the United States of America. He shall hold his Office dur-ing the Term of four Years, and, together with the Vice-President, chosen for the same Term, be elected, as follows: Each State shall appoint, in such Manner as the Legislature thereof may direct, a Number of Electors, equal to the whole Number of Senators and Representatives to which the State may be entitled in the Congress; but no Senator or Rep-resentative, or Person holding an Office of Trust or Profit under the United States, shall be appointed an Elector. The Congress may determine the Time of choosing the Elec-tors, and the Day on which they shall give their Votes; which Day shall be the same throughout the United States. No per-son except a natural born Citizen, or a Citizen of the United States, at the time of the Adoption of this Constitution, shall be eligible to the Office of President; neither shall any Per-son be eligible to that Office who shall not have attained to the Age of thirty-five Years, and been fourteen Years a Resi-dent within the United States. AMENDMENT XII—PRESIDENTIAL ELECTORS The electors shall meet in their respective States and vote by ballot for President and Vice President, one of whom, at least, shall not be an inhabitant of the same State with themselves; they shall name in their ballots the person voted for as President, and in distinct ballots the person voted for as Vice President, and they shall make distinct lists of all persons voted for as President, and of all persons voted for as Vice President, and of the number of votes for each, which lists they shall sign and certify, and transmit sealed to the seat of the government of the United States, directed to the President of the Senate;—The President of the Senate shall, in the presence of the Senate and House of Representatives, open all the certificates and the votes shall then be count-ed;—The person having the greatest number of votes for President, shall be the President, if such number be a major-ity of the whole number of Electors appointed; and if no per-son have such majority; then from the persons having the highest numbers not exceeding three on the list of those voted for as President, the House of Representatives shall choose immediately, by ballot, the President. But in choosing 2 Nomination and Election the President, the votes shall be taken by States, the rep-resentation from each State having one vote; a quorum for this purpose shall consist of a member or members from two-thirds of the States, and a majority of all the States shall be necessary to a choice. And if the House of Representatives shall not choose a President whenever the right of choice shall devolve upon them, before the fourth day of March next following, then the Vice President shall act as President, as in the case of the death or other constitutional disability of the President. The person having the greatest number of votes as Vice President, shall be the Vice President, if such number be a majority of the whole number of Electors ap-pointed, and if no person have a majority, then from the two highest numbers on the list, the Senate shall choose the Vice President; a quorum for the purpose shall consist of two-thirds of the whole number of Senators, and a majority of the whole number shall be necessary to a choice. But no per-son constitutionally ineligible to the office of President shall be eligible to that of Vice President of the United States. AMENDMENT XX—COMMENCEMENT OF THE TERMS OF THE PRESIDENT, VICE PRESIDENT, AND MEMBERS OF CONGRESS 

Section 1. The terms of the President and Vice President shall end at noon on the 20th day of January, and the terms of Senators and Representatives at noon on the 3d day of January, of the years in which such terms would have ended if this article had not been ratified; and the terms of their successors shall then begin. 

Section 2. The Congress shall assemble at least once in every year, and such meeting shall begin at noon on the 3d day of January, and unless they shall by law appoint a different day. 

Section 3. If, at the time fixed for the beginning of the term of the President, the President elect shall have died, the Vice President elect shall become President. If a President shall not have been chosen before the time fixed for the beginning of his term, or if the President elect shall have failed to qual-ify, then the Vice President elect shall act as President until a President shall have qualified; and the Congress may by law provide for the case wherein neither a President elect nor a Vice President elect shall have qualified, declaring who shall then act as President, or the manner in which one who is to act shall be selected, and such person shall act accord-ingly until a President or Vice President shall have qualified. 

Section 4. The Congress may by law provide for the case of the death of any of the persons from whom the House of Representatives may choose a President whenever the right of choice shall have devolved upon them, and for the case of the death of any of the persons from whom the Senate may choose a Vice President whenever the right of choice shall have devolved upon them. 

Section 5. Sections 1 and 2 shall take effect on the 15th day of October following the ratification of this article. 

Section 6. This article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an amendment to the Constitution by the legislatures of three-fourths of the several States within seven years from the date of its submission. 3Nomination and Election AMENDMENT XXII—LIMITATION ON PRESIDENTIAL TERMS 

Section 1. No person shall be elected to the office of the President more than twice, and no person who has held the office of President or acted as President, for more than two years of a term to which some other person was elected President shall be elected to the office of the President more than once. But this Article shall not apply to any person holding the office of President when this Article was pro-posed by the Congress, and shall not prevent any person who may be holding the office of President, or acting as Presi-dent, during the term within which this Article becomes op-erative from holding the office of President or acting as President during the remainder of such term. AMENDMENT XXIII—PRESIDENTIAL ELECTORS FOR DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA 

Section 1. The District constituting the seat of Government of the United States shall appoint in such manner as the Congress may direct: A number of electors of President and Vice President equal to the whole number of Senators and Representatives in Congress to which the District would be entitled if it were a State, but in no event more than the least populous State; they shall be in addition to those appointed by the States, but they shall be considered, for the purposes of the election of President and Vice President, to be electors appointed by a State; and they shall meet in the District and perform such duties as provided by the twelfth article of amendment. 

Section 2. The Congress shall have the power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation. AMENDMENT XXIV—BAN ON POLL TAX 

Section 1. The right of citizens of the United States to vote in any primary or other election for President or Vice Presi-dent, for electors for President or Vice President, or for Sen-ator or Representative in Congress, shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or any State by reason of fail-ure to pay any poll tax or other tax. 

Section 2. The Congress shall have power to enforce this arti-cle by appropriate legislation. AMENDMENT XXV—SUCCESSION TO PRESIDENCY AND VICE PRESIDENCY: INABILITY OF PRESIDENT 

Section 1. In case of the removal of the President from office or of his death or resignation, the Vice President shall be-come President. 

Section 2. Whenever there is a vacancy in the office of the Vice President, the President shall nominate a Vice Presi-dent who shall take office upon confirmation by a majority vote of both Houses of Congress. 

Section 3. Whenever the President transmits to the Presi-dent pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives his written declaration that he is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, and until he transmits to them a written declaration to the con-trary, such powers and duties shall be discharged by the Vice President as Acting President. 4 Nomination and Election 

Section 4. Whenever the Vice President and a majority of ei-ther the principal officers of the executive departments or of such other body as Congress may by law provide, transmit to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives their written declaration that the President is unable to discharge the powers and du-ties of his office, the Vice President shall immediately as-sume the powers and duties of the office as Acting President. Thereafter, when the President transmits to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives his written declaration that no inability ex-ists, he shall resume the powers and duties of his office un-less the Vice President and a majority of either the principal officers of the executive department or of such other body as Congress may by law provide, transmit within four days to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives their written declaration that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office. Thereupon Congress shall decide the issue, as-sembling within forty-eight hours for that purpose if not in session. If the Congress, within twenty-one days after receipt of the latter written declaration, or, if Congress is not in ses-sion, within twenty-one days after Congress is required to assemble, determines by two-thirds vote of both Houses that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, the Vice President shall continue to discharge the same as Acting President; otherwise, the President shall resume the powers and duties of his office. AMENDMENT XXVI—RIGHT TO VOTE—CITIZENS EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE OR OLDER 

Section 1. The right of citizens of the United States, who are eighteen years of age or older, to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of age. 

Section 2. The Congress shall have power to enforce this arti-cle by appropriate legislation. 5Nomination and Election 

B. Election of the President (Title 3, United States Code) 3 U.S.C. § 1. Time of appointing electors 

The electors of President and Vice President shall be ap-pointed, in each State, on the Tuesday next after the first Monday in November, in every fourth year succeeding every election of a President and Vice President. (June 25, 1948, ch. 644, 62 Stat. 672.) 

3 U.S.C. § 2. Failure to make choice on prescribed day 

Whenever any State has held an election for the purpose of choosing electors, and has failed to make a choice on the day prescribed by law, the electors may be appointed on a subse-quent day in such a manner as the legislature of such State may direct. (June 25, 1948, ch. 644, 62 Stat. 672.) 

3 U.S.C. § 3. Number of electors 

The number of electors shall be equal to the number of Sen-ators and Representatives to which the several States are by law entitled at the time when the President and Vice Presi-dent to be chosen come into office; except, that where no ap-portionment of Representatives had been made after any enumeration, at the time of choosing electors, the number of electors shall be according to the then existing apportion-ment of Senators and Representatives. (June 25, 1948, ch. 644, 62 Stat. 672.) 

3 U.S.C. § 4. Vacancies in electoral college 

Each State may, by law, provide for the filing of any vacan-cies which may occur in its college of electors when such col-lege meets to give its electoral vote. (June 25, 1948, ch. 644, 62 Stat. 673.) 

3 U.S.C. § 5. Determination of controversy as to appointment of electors 

If any State shall have provided, by laws enacted prior to the day fixed for the appointment of the electors, for its final de-termination of any controversy or contest concerning the ap-pointment of all or any of the electors of such State, by judi-cial or other methods or procedures, and such determinations made have been made at least six days before the time fixed for the meeting of the electors, such determination made pursuant to such law so existing on said day, and made at least six days prior to said time of meeting of the electors, shall be conclusive, and shall govern in the counting of the electoral votes as provided in the Constitution, and as here-inafter regulated, as far as the ascertainment of the electors appointed by such State is concerned. (June 25, 1948, ch. 644, 62 Stat. 673.) 6 Nomination and Election 

3 U.S.C. § 6. Credentials of electors; transmission to Archivist of the United States and to Congress; public inspection 

It shall be the duty of the executive of each State, as soon as practicable after the conclusion of the appointment of the electors in such State by the final ascertainment, under and in pursuance of the laws of such State providing for such as-certainment, to communicate by registered mail under the seal of the State to the Archivist of the United States a cer-tificate of such ascertainment of the electors appointed, set-ting forth the names of such electors and the canvas or other ascertainment under the laws of such State of the number of votes given or cast for each person for whose appointment any and all votes have been given or cast; and it shall also thereupon be the duty of the executive of each State to de-liver to the electors of such State, on or before the day on which they are required by section 7 of this title to meet, six duplicate-originals of the same certificate under the seal of the State; and if there shall have been any final determina-tion in a State in the manner provided for by law of a con-troversy or contest concerning the appointment of all or any of the electors of such State, it shall be the duty of the execu-tive of such State, as soon as practicable after such deter-mination, to communicate under the seal of the State to the Archivist of the United States a certificate of such deter-mination in form and manner as the same shall have been made; and the certificate or certificates so received by the Archivist of the United States shall be preserved by him for one year and shall be a part of the public records of his office and shall be open to public inspection; and the Archivist of the United States at the first meeting of Congress thereafter shall transmit to the two Houses of Congress copies in full of each and every such certificate so received at the National Archives and Records Administration. (June 25, 1948, ch. 644, § 1, 62 Stat. 673; Oct. 31, 1951, ch. 655, § 6, 65 Stat. 711; Pub. L. 98–497, title I, § 107(e)(1) in part, (2)(A), Oct. 19, 1984, 98 Stat. 2291.) 

3 U.S.C. § 7. Meeting and vote of electors 

The electors of President and Vice President of each State shall meet and give their votes on the first Monday after the second Wednesday in December next following their appoint-ment at such place in each State as the legislature of such State shall direct. (June 25, 1948, ch. 644, 62 Stat. 673.) 

3 U.S.C. § 8. Manner of voting 

The electors shall vote for President and Vice President, re-spectively, in the manner directed by the Constitution. (June 25, 1948, ch. 644, 62 Stat. 674.) 

3 U.S.C. § 9. Certificates of votes for President and Vice President 

The electors shall make and sign six certificates of all the votes given by them, each of which certificates shall contain two distinct lists, one of the votes for President and the other of the votes for Vice President, and shall annex to each of 7Nomination and Election the certificates one of the lists of the electors which shall have been furnished to them by direction of the executive of the State. (June 25, 1948, ch. 644, 62 Stat. 674.) 

3 U.S.C. § 10. Sealing and endorsing certificates 

The electors shall seal up the certificates so made by them, and certify upon each that the lists of all the votes of such State given for President, and of all the votes given Vice President, are contained therein. (June 25, 1948, ch. 644, 62 Stat. 674.) 

3 U.S.C. § 11. Disposition of certificates 

The electors shall dispose of the certificates so made by them and the lists attached thereto in the following manner: First. They shall forthwith forward by registered mail one of the same to the President of the Senate at the seat of gov-ernment. Second. Two of the same shall be delivered to the secretary of state of the State, one of which shall be held subject to the order of the President of the Senate, the other to be pre-served by him for one year and shall be a part of the public records of his office and shall be open to public inspection. Third. On the day thereafter they shall forward by registered mail two of such certificates and lists to the Archivist of the United States at the seat of government, one of which shall be held subject to the order of the President of the Senate. The other shall be preserved by the Archivist of the United States for one year and shall be a part of the public records of his office and shall be open to public inspection. Fourth. They shall forthwith cause the other of the certifi-cates and lists to be delivered to the judge of the district in which the electors shall have assembled. (June 25, 1948, ch. 644, § 1, 62 Stat. 674; Oct. 31, 1951, ch. 655, § 7, 65 Stat. 712; Pub. L. 98–497, title I, § 107(e)(1) in part, Oct. 19, 1984, 98 Stat. 2291.) 

3 U.S.C. § 12. Failure of certificates of electors to reach President of the Senate or Archivist of the United States; demand on state for certificate 

When no certificate of vote and list mentioned in sections 9 and 11 of this title from any State shall have been received by the President of the Senate or by the Archivist of the United States by the fourth Wednesday in December, after the meeting of the electors shall have been held, the Presi-dent of the Senate or, if he be absent from the seat of gov-ernment, the Archivist of the United States shall request, by the most expeditious method available, the secretary of state of the State to send up the certificate and list lodged with him by the electors of such State; and it shall be his duty upon receipt of such request immediately to transmit same by registered mail to the President of the Senate at the seat of government. (June 25, 1948, ch. 644, § 1, 62 Stat. 674; Oct. 31, 1951, ch. 655, § 8, 65 Stat. 712; Pub. L. 98–497, title I, § 107(e)(1) in part, (2)(B), Oct. 19, 1984, 98 Stat. 2291.) 8 Nomination and Election 

3 U.S.C. § 13. Same; demand on district judge for certificate 

When no certificates of votes from any State shall have been received at the seat of government on the fourth Wednesday in December, after the meeting of the electors shall have been held, the President of the Senate or, if he be absent from the seat of government, the Archivist of the United States shall send a special messenger to the district judge in whose custody one certificate of votes from that State has been lodged, and such judge shall forthwith transmit that list by the hand of such messenger to the seat of govern-ment. (June 25, 1948, ch. 644, § 1, 62 Stat. 674; Oct. 31, 1951, ch. 655, § 9, 65 Stat. 712; Pub. L. 98–497, title I, § 107(e)(1) in part, Oct. 19, 1984, 98 Stat. 2291.) 

3 U.S.C. § 14. Forfeiture for messenger’s neglect of duty 

Every person who, having been appointed, pursuant to sec-tion 13 of this title, to deliver the certificates of the votes of the electors to the President of the Senate, and having ac-cepted such appointment, shall neglect to perform the serv-ices required from him, shall forfeit the sum of $1,000. (June 25, 1948, ch. 644, 62 Stat. 675.) 

3 U.S.C. § 15. Counting electoral votes in Congress 

Congress shall be in session on the sixth day of January suc-ceeding every meeting of the electors. The Senate and House of Representatives shall meet in the Hall of the House of Representatives at the hour of 1 o’clock in the afternoon on that day, and the President of the Senate shall be their pre-siding officer. Two tellers shall be previously appointed on the part of the Senate and two on the part of the House of Representatives, to whom shall be handed, as they are opened by the President of the Senate, all the certificates and papers purporting to be certificates of the electoral votes, which certificates and papers shall be opened, pre-sented, and acted upon in the alphabetical order of the States, beginning with the letter A; and said tellers, having then read the same in the presence and hearing of the two Houses, shall make a list of the votes as they shall appear from the said certificates; and the votes having been ascertained and counted according to the rules of this sub-chapter provided, the result of the same shall be delivered to the President of the Senate, who shall thereupon announce the State of the vote, which announcement shall be deemed a sufficient declaration of the persons, if any, elected Presi-dent and Vice President of the United States, and, together with a list of the votes, be entered on the Journals of the two Houses. Upon such reading of any such certificate or paper, the President of the Senate shall call for objections, if any. Every objection shall be made in writing, and shall state clearly and concisely, and without argument, the ground thereof, and shall be signed by at least one Senator and one Member of the House of Representatives before the same shall be received. When all objections so made to any vote or paper from a State shall have been received and read, the Senate shall thereupon withdraw, and such objections shall be submitted to the Senate for its decision; and the Speaker 9Nomination and Election of the House of Representatives shall, in like manner, submit such objections to the House of Representatives for its deci-sion; and no electoral vote or votes from any State which shall have been regularly given by electors, whose appoint-ment has been lawfully certified to according to section 6 of this title from which but one return has been received shall be rejected, but the two Houses concurrently may reject the vote or votes when they agree that such vote or votes have not been so regularly given by electors whose appointment has been so certified. If more than one return or paper pur-porting to be a return from a State shall have been received by the President of the Senate, those votes, and those only, shall be counted which shall have been regularly given by the electors who are shown by the determination mentioned in section 5 of this title to have been appointed, if the deter-mination in said section provided for shall have been made, or by such successors or substitutes, in case of a vacancy in the board of electors so ascertained, as have been appointed to fill such vacancy in the mode provided by the laws of the State; but in case there shall arise the question which of two or more of such State authorities determining what electors have been appointed, as mentioned in section 5 of this title, is the lawful tribunal of such State, the votes regularly given of those electors, and those only, of such State shall be counted whose title as electors the two Houses, acting sepa-rately, shall concurrently decide is supported by the decision of such State so authorized by its law; and in such case of more than one return or paper purporting to be a return from a State, if there shall have been no such determination of the question in the State aforesaid, then those votes, and those only, shall be counted which the two Houses shall con-currently decide were cast by lawful electors appointed in ac-cordance with the laws of the State, unless the two Houses, acting separately, shall concurrently decide such votes not to be the lawful votes of the legally appointed electors of such State. But if the two Houses shall disagree in respect of the counting of such votes, then, and in that case, the votes of the electors whose appointment shall have been certified by the executive of the State, under the seal thereof, shall be counted. When the two Houses have voted, they shall imme-diately again meet, and the presiding officer shall then an-nounce the decision of the questions submitted. No votes or papers from any other State shall be acted upon until the ob-jections previously made to the votes or papers from any State shall have been finally disposed of. (June 25, 1948, ch. 644, 62 Stat. 675.) 

3 U.S.C. § 16. Same; seats for officers and Members of two Houses in joint meeting 

At such joint meeting of the two Houses seats shall be pro-vided as follows: For the President of the Senate the Speak-er’s chair; for the Speaker, immediately upon his left; the Senators, in the body of the Hall upon the right of the pre-siding officer; for the Representatives in the body of the Hall not provided for the Senators; for the tellers, Secretary of the Senate, and Clerk of the House of Representatives, at the Clerk’s desk; for the other officers of the two Houses, in front 10 Nomination and Election of the Clerk’s desk and upon each side of the Speaker’s plat-form. Such joint meeting shall not be dissolved until the count of electoral votes shall be completed and the result de-clared; and no recess shall be taken unless a question shall have arisen in regard to counting any such votes, or other-wise under this subchapter, in which case it shall be com-petent for either House, acting separately, in the manner hereinbefore provided, to direct a recess of such House not beyond the next calendar day, Sunday excepted at the hour of 10’clock in the forenoon. But if the counting of the elec-toral votes and the declaration of the result shall not have been completed before the fifth calendar day next after such first meeting of the two Houses, no further or other recess shall be taken by either House. (June 25, 1948, ch. 644, 62 Stat. 676.) 

3 U.S.C. § 17. Same; limit of debate in each House 

When the two Houses separate to decide upon an objection that may have been made to the counting of any electoral vote or votes from any State, or other question arising in the matter, each Senator and Representative may speak to such objection or question five minutes, and not more than once; but after such debate shall have lasted two hours it shall be the duty of the presiding officer of each House to put the main question without further debate. (June 25, 1948, ch. 644, 62 Stat. 676.) 

3 U.S.C. § 18. Same; parliamentary procedure at joint meeting 

While the two Houses shall be in meeting as provided in this chapter, the President of the Senate shall have power to pre-serve order; and no debate shall be allowed and no question shall be put by the presiding officer except to either House on a motion to withdraw. (June 25, 1948, ch. 644, 62 Stat. 676; Sept. 3, 1954, ch. 1263, § 368, Stat. 1227.) 

3 U.S.C. § 19. Vacancy in offices of both President and Vice President; officers eligible to act 

(a)(1) If, by reason of death, resignation, removal from office, inability, or failure to qualify, there is neither a President nor Vice President to discharge the powers and duties of the office of President, then the Speaker of the House of Rep-resentatives shall, upon his resignation as Speaker and as Representative in Congress, act as President. (2) The same rule shall apply in the case of the death, res-ignation, removal from office, or inability of an individual acting as President under this subsection. (b) If, at the time when under subsection (a) of this section a Speaker is to begin the discharge of the powers and duties of the office of President, there is no Speaker, or the Speaker fails to qualify as Acting President, then the President pro tempore of the Senate shall, upon his resignation as Presi-dent pro tempore and as Senator, act as President. 11 Nomination and Election (c) An individual acting as President under subsection (a) or subsection (b) of this section shall continue to act until the expiration of the then current Presidential term, except that— (1) if his discharge of the powers and duties of the office is founded in whole or in part on the failure of both the Presi-dent-elect and the Vice-President-elect to qualify, then he shall act only until a President or Vice President qualifies; and (2) if his discharge of the powers and duties of the office is founded in whole or in part on the inability of the President or Vice President, then he shall act only until the removal of the disability of one of such individuals. (d)(1) If, by reason of death, resignation, removal from office, inability, or failure to qualify, there is no President pro tem-pore to act as President under subsection (b) of this section, then the officer of the United States who is highest on the following list, and who is not under disability to discharge the powers and duties of the office of President shall act as President: Secretary of State, Secretary of the Treasury, Sec-retary of Defense, Attorney General, Secretary of the Inte-rior, Secretary of Agriculture, Secretary of Commerce, Sec-retary of Labor, Secretary of Health and Human Services, Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, Secretary of Transportation, Secretary of Energy, Secretary of Education, Secretary of Veterans Affairs, Secretary of Homeland Secu-rity. (2) An individual acting as President under this subsection shall continue so to do until the expiration of the then cur-rent Presidential term, but not after a qualified and prior-en-titled individual is able to act, except that the removal of the disability of an individual higher on the list contained in paragraph (1) of this subsection or the ability to qualify on the part of an individual higher on such list shall not termi-nate his service. (3) The taking of the oath of office by an individual specified in the list in paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be held to constitute his resignation from the office by virtue of the holding of which he qualifies to act as President. (e) Subsections (a), (b), and (d) of this section shall apply only to such officers as are eligible to the office of President under the Constitution. Subsection (d) of this section shall apply only to officers appointed, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, prior to the time of the death, resigna-tion, removal from office, inability, or failure to qualify, of the President pro tempore, and only to officers not under im-peachment by the House of Representatives at the time the powers and duties of the office of President devolve upon them. 12 Nomination and Election (f) During the period that any individual acts as President under this section, his compensation shall be at the rate then provided by law in the case of the President (June 25, 1948, ch. 644, § 1, 62 Stat. 677; Pub. L. 89–174, § 6(a), Sept. 9, 1965, 79 Stat. 669; Pub. L. 89–670, § 10(a), Oct. 15, 1966, 80 Stat. 948; Pub. L. 91–375, § 6(b), Aug. 12, 1970, 84 Stat. 775; Pub. L. 95–91, title VII, § 709(g), Aug. 4, 1977, 91 Stat. 609; Pub. L. 96–88, title V, § 508(a), Oct. 17, 1979, 93 Stat. 692; Pub. L. 100–527, § 13(a), Oct. 25, 1988, 102 Stat. 2643; Pub. L. 109–177, title V, § 503, March 9, 2006, 120 Stat. 247.) 

3 U.S.C. § 20. Resignation or refusal of office 

The only evidence of a refusal to accept, or of a resignation of the office of President or Vice President, shall be an in-strument in writing, declaring the same, and subscribed by the person refusing to accept or resigning, as the case may be, and delivered into the office of the Secretary of State. (June 25, 1948, ch. 644, 62 Stat. 678.) 

3 U.S.C. § 21. Definitions 

As used in this chapter the term— (a) ‘‘State’’ includes the District of Columbia. (b) ‘‘executives of each State’’ includes the Board of Commis-sioners of the District of Columbia. (Added Pub. L. 87–389, § 2(a), Oct. 4, 1961, 75 Stat. 820.) 13 Nomination and Election 

C. Voting Rights Act Amendments of 1970—Residence Requirements (Title 42, United States Code) 

> CHAPTER 20.—ELECTIVE FRANCHISE

In 1970 Congress enacted the Voting Rights Act Amend-ments of 1970 (Pub. L. 91–285, 84 Stat. 314), which provided in title II, section 202 for the abolition of durational resi-dency requirements for voting in presidential elections and required the States to provide for absentee registration and voting in presidential elections: 

42 U.S.C. § 1973aa–1. Residence requirements for voting 

(a) Congressional findings. 

The Congress hereby finds that the imposition and applica-tion of the durational residency requirement as a pre-condition to voting for the offices of President and Vice Presi-dent, and the lack of sufficient opportunities for absentee registration and absentee balloting in presidential elec-tions— (1) denies or abridges the inherent constitutional right of citizens to vote for their President and Vice President; (2) denies or abridges the inherent constitutional right of citizens to enjoy their free movement across State lines; (3) denies or abridges the privileges and immunities guaran-teed to the citizens of each State under article IV, section 2, clause 1, of the Constitution; (4) in some instances has the impermissible purpose or effect of denying citizens the right to vote for such offices because of the way they may vote; (5) has the effect of denying to citizens the equality of civil rights, and due process and equal protection of the law that are guaranteed to them under the fourteenth amendment; and (6) does not bear a reasonable relationship to any compelling State interest in the conduct of presidential elections. (b) Congressional declaration: durational residency require-ment, abolishment; absentee registration and balloting stand-ards, establishment. 

Upon the basis of these findings, Congress declares that in order to secure and protect the above-stated rights of citizens under the Constitution, to enable citizens to better obtain the enjoyment of such rights, and to enforce the guarantees of the fourteenth amendment, it is necessary (1) to com-pletely abolish the durational residency requirement as aprecondition to voting for President and Vice President, and (2) to establish nationwide, uniform standards relative to ab-sentee registration and absentee balloting in presidential elections. 14 Nomination and Election (c) Prohibition of denial of rights to vote because of durational residency requirement or absentee balloting. 

No citizen of the United States who is otherwise qualified to vote in any election for President and Vice President shall be denied the right to vote for electors for President and Vice President, or for President and Vice President, in such elec-tion because of the failure of such citizen to comply with any durational residency requirement of such State or political subdivision; nor shall any citizen of the United States be de-nied the right to vote for electors for President and Vice President, or for President and Vice President, in such elec-tion because of the failure of such citizen to be physically present in such State or political subdivision at the time of such election, if such citizen shall have complied with the re-quirements prescribed by the law of such State or political subdivision providing for the casting of absentee ballots in such election. (d) Registration: time for application; absentee balloting; time of application and return of ballots. 

For the purposes of this section, each State shall provide by law for the registration or other means of qualification of all duly qualified residents of such State who apply, not later than thirty days immediately prior to any presidential elec-tion, for registration or qualification to vote for the choice of electors for President and Vice President in such election; and each State shall provide by law for the casting of absen-tee ballots for the choice of electors for President and Vice President, or for President and Vice President, by all duly qualified residents of such State who may be absent from their election district or unit in such State on the day such election is held and who have applied therefor not later than seven days immediately prior to such election and have re-turned such ballots to the appropriate election official of such State not later than the time of closing of the polls in such State on the day of such election. (e) Change of residence; voting in person or by absentee ballot in State of prior residence. 

If any citizen of the United States who is otherwise qualified to vote in any State or political subdivision in any election for President and Vice President has begun residence in such State or political subdivision after the thirtieth day next pre-ceding such election and, for that reason, does not satisfy the registration requirements of such State or political subdivi-sion he shall be allowed to vote for the choice of electors for President and Vice President, or for President and Vice President, in such election, (1) in person in the State or polit-ical subdivision in which he resided immediately prior to his removal if he had satisfied, as of the date of his change of residence, the requirements to vote in that State or political subdivision, or (2) by absentee ballot in the State or political subdivision in which he resided immediately prior to his re-moval if he satisfies, but his nonresident status and the rea-son for his absence, the requirements for absentee voting in that State or political subdivision. 15 Nomination and Election (f) Absentee registration requirement. 

No citizen of the United States who is otherwise qualified to vote by absentee ballot in any State or political subdivision in any election for President and Vice President shall be de-nied the right to vote for the choice of electors for President and Vice President, or for President and Vice President, in such election because of any requirement of registration that does not include a provision for absentee registration. (g) State or local adoption of less restrictive voting practices. 

Nothing in this section shall prevent any State or political subdivision from adopting less restrictive voting practices than those that are prescribed herein. (h) Definition of ‘‘State’’. 

The term ‘‘State’’ as used in this section includes each of the several States and the District of Columbia. (i) False registration, and other fraudulent acts and conspir-acies: application of penalty for false information in reg-istering or voting. 

The provisions of section 1973i(c) of this title shall apply to false registration, and other fraudulent acts and conspir-acies, committed under this section. (Pub. L. 89–110, title II, § 202, as added Pub. L. 91–285, § 6, June 22, 1970, 84 Stat. 316.) 16 Nomination and Election 

D. Campaign Financing, Reporting and Disclosure (Title 2, United States Code) 2 U.S.C. §§ 431. Definitions 

When used in this Act: (1) The term ‘‘election’’ means— (A) a general, special, primary, or runoff election; (B) a convention or caucus of a political party which has au-thority to nominate a candidate; (C) a primary election held for the selection of delegates to a national nominating convention of a political party; and (D) a primary election held for the expression of a preference for the nomination of individuals for election to the office of President. (2) The term ‘‘candidate’’ means an individual who seeks nomination for election, or election, to Federal office, and for purposes of this paragraph, an individual shall be deemed to seek nomination for election, or election— (A) if such individual has received contributions aggregating in excess of $5,000 or has made expenditures aggregating in excess of $5,000; or (B) if such individual has given his or her consent to another person to receive contributions or make expenditures on be-half of such individual and if such person has received such contributions aggregating in excess of $5,000 or has made such expenditures aggregating in excess of $5,000. (3) The term ‘‘Federal office’’ means the office of President or Vice President, or of Senator or Representative in, or Dele-gate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress. (4) The term ‘‘political committee’’ means— (A) any committee, club, association, or other group of per-sons which receives contributions aggregating in excess of $1,000 during a calendar year or which makes expenditures aggregating in excess of $1,000 during a calendar year; or (B) any separate segregated fund established under the pro-visions of section 316(b); or (C) any local committee of a political party which receives contributions aggregating in excess of $5,000 during a cal-endar year, or makes payments exempted from the definition of contribution or expenditure as defined in section 301 (8) and (9) aggregating in excess of $5,000 during a calendar year, or makes contributions aggregating in excess of $1,000 during a calendar year or makes expenditures aggregating in excess of $1,000 during a calendar year. (5) The term ‘‘principal campaign committee’’ means a polit-ical committee designated and authorized by a candidate under section 302(e)(1). (6) The term ‘‘authorized committee’’ means the principal campaign committee or any other political committee author-ized by a candidate under section 302(e)(1) to receive con-tributions or make expenditures on behalf of such candidate. (7) The term ‘‘connected organization’’ means any organiza-tion which is not a political committee but which directly or 17 Nomination and Election indirectly establishes, administers, or financially supports a political committee. (8) (A) The term ‘‘contribution’’ includes— (i) any gift, subscription, loan, advance, or deposit of money or anything of value made by any person for the purpose of influencing any election for Federal office; or (ii) the payment by any person of compensation for the per-sonal services of another person which are rendered to a po-litical committee without charge for any purpose. (B) The term ‘‘contribution’’ does not include— (i) the value of services provided without compensation by any individual who volunteers on behalf of a candidate or po-litical committee; (ii) the use of real or personal property, including a church or community room used on a regular basis by members of a community for noncommercial purposes, and the cost of in-vitations, food, and beverages, voluntarily provided by an in-dividual to any candidate or any political committee of a po-litical party in rendering voluntary personal services on the individual’s residential premises or in the church or commu-nity room for candidate-related or political party-related ac-tivities, to the extent that the cumulative value of such invi-tations, food, and beverages provided by such individual on behalf of any single candidate does not exceed $1,000 with respect to any single election, and on behalf of all political committees of a political party does not exceed $2,000 in any calendar year; (iii) the sale of any food or beverage by a vendor for use in any candidate’s campaign or for use by or on behalf of any political committee of a political party at a charge less than the normal comparable charge, if such charge is at least equal to the cost of such food or beverage to the vendor, to the extent that the cumulative value of such activity by such vendor on behalf of any single candidate does not exceed $1,000 with respect to any single election, and on behalf of all political committees of a political party does not exceed $2,000 in any calendar year; (iv) any unreimbursed payment for travel expenses made by any individual on behalf of any candidate or any political committee of a political party, to the extent that the cumu-lative value of such activity by such individual on behalf of any single candidate does not exceed $1,000 with respect to any single election, and on behalf of all political committees of a political party does not exceed $2,000 in any calendar year; (v) the payment by a State or local committee of a political party of the costs of preparation, display, or mailing or other distribution incurred by such committee with respect to a printed slate card or sample ballot, or other printed listing, of 3 or more candidates for any public office for which an election is held in the State in which such committee is orga-nized, except that this clause shall not apply to any cost in-curred by such committee with respect to a display of any such listing made on broadcasting stations, or in news-papers, magazines, or similar types of general public political advertising; 18 Nomination and Election (vi) any payment made or obligation incurred by a corpora-tion or a labor organization which, under section 316(b), would not constitute an expenditure by such corporation or labor organization; (vii) any loan of money by a State bank, a federally char-tered depository institution, or a depository institution the deposits or accounts of which are insured by the Federal De-posit Insurance Corporation, Federal Savings and Loan In-surance Corporation, or the National Credit Union Adminis-tration, other than any overdraft made with respect to a checking or savings account, made in accordance with appli-cable law and in the ordinary course of business, but such loan— (I) shall be considered a loan by each endorser or guarantor, in that proportion of the unpaid balance that each endorser or guarantor bears to the total number of endorsers or guar-antors; (II) shall be made on a basis which assures repayment, evi-denced by a written instrument, and subject to a due date or amortization schedule; and (III) shall bear the usual and customary interest rate of the lending institution; (viii) any legal or accounting services rendered to or on be-half of— (I) any political committee of a political party if the person paying for such services is the regular employer of the per-son rendering such services and if such services are not at-tributable to activities which directly further the election of any designated candidate to Federal office; or (II) an authorized committee of a candidate or any other po-litical committee, if the person paying for such services is the regular employer of the individual rendering such services and if such services are solely for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this Act or chapter 95 or chapter 96 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954. but amounts paid or incurred by the regular employer for such legal or accounting services shall be reported in accord-ance with section 304(b) by the committee receiving such services; (ix) the payment by a State or local committee of a political party of the costs of campaign materials (such as pins, bumper stickers, handbills, brochures, posters, party tab-loids, and yard signs) used by such committee in connection with volunteer activities on behalf of nominees of such party: 

Provided , That— (1) such payments are not for the costs of campaign mate-rials or activities used in connection with any broadcasting, newspaper, magazine, billboard, direct mail, or similar type of general public communication or political advertising; (2) such payments are made from contributions subject to the limitations and prohibitions of this Act; and (3) such payments are not made from contributions des-ignated to be spent on behalf of a particular candidate or particular candidates; (x) the payment by a candidate, for nomination or election to any public office (including State or local office), or author-ized committee of a candidate, of the costs of campaign mate-19 Nomination and Election rials which include information on or reference to any other candidate and which are used in connection with volunteer activities (including pins, bumper stickers, handbills, bro-chures, posters, and yard signs, but not including the use of broadcasting, newspapers, magazines, billboards, direct mail, or similar types of general public communication or political advertising): Provided, That such payments are made from contributions subject to the limitations and prohibitions of this Act; (xi) the payment by a State or local committee of a political party of the costs of voter registration and get-out-the-vote activities conducted by such committee on behalf of nominees of such party for President and Vice President: Provided, 

That— (1) such payments are not for the costs of campaign mate-rials or activities used in connection with any broadcasting, newspaper, magazine, billboard, direct mail, or similar type of general public communication or political advertising; (2) such payments are made from contributions subject to the limitations and prohibitions of this Act; and (3) such payments are not made from contributions des-ignated to be spent on behalf of a particular candidate or candidates; (xii) payments made by a candidate or the authorized com-mittee of a candidate as a condition of ballot access and pay-ments received by any political party committee as a condi-tion of ballot access; (xiii) any honorarium (within the meaning of section 323 of this Act); and (xiv) any loan of money derived from an advance on a can-didate’s brokerage account, credit card, home equity line of credit, or other line of credit available to the candidate, if such loan is made in accordance with applicable law and under commercially reasonable terms and if the person mak-ing such loan makes loans derived from an advance on the candidate’s brokerage account, credit card, home equity line of credit, or other line of credit in the normal course of the person’s business. (9) (A) The term ‘‘expenditure’’ includes— (i) any purchase, payment, distribution, loan, advance, de-posit, or gift of money or anything of value, made by any per-son for the purpose of influencing any election for Federal of-fice; and (ii) a written contract, promise, or agreement to make an ex-penditure. (B) The term ‘‘expenditure’’ does not include— (i) any news story, commentary, or editorial distributed through the facilities of any broadcasting station, newspaper, magazine, or other periodical publication, unless such facili-ties are owned or controlled by any political party, political committee, or candidate; (ii) nonpartisan activity designed to encourage individuals to vote or to register to vote; (iii) any communication by any membership organization or corporation to its members, stockholders, or executive or ad-ministrative personnel, if such membership organization or corporation is not organized primarily for the purpose of in-20 Nomination and Election fluencing the nomination for election, or election, of any indi-vidual to Federal office, except that the costs incurred by a membership organization (including a labor organization) or by a corporation directly attributable to a communication ex-pressly advocating the election or defeat of a clearly identi-fied candidate (other than a communication primarily de-voted to subjects other than the express advocacy of the elec-tion or defeat of a clearly identified candidate), shall, if such costs exceed $2,000 for any election, be reported to the Com-mission in accordance with section 304(a)(4)(A)(i), and in ac-cordance with section 304(a)(4)(A)(ii) with respect to any gen-eral election; (iv) the payment by a State or local committee of a political party of the costs of preparation, display, or mailing or other distribution incurred by such committee with respect to a printed state card or sample ballot, or other printed listing, of 3 or more candidates for any public office for which an election is held in the State in which such committee is orga-nized, except that this clause shall not apply to costs in-curred by such committee with respect to a display of any such listing made on broadcasting stations, or in news-papers, magazines, or similar types of general public political advertising; (v) any payment made or obligation incurred by a corpora-tion or a labor organization which, under section 316(b), would not constitute an expenditure by such corporation or labor organization; (vi) any costs incurred by an authorized committee or can-didate in connection with the solicitation of contributions on behalf of such candidate, except that this clause shall not apply with respect to costs incurred by an authorized com-mittee of a candidate in excess of an amount equal to 20 per-cent of the expenditure limitation applicable to such can-didate under section 315(b), but all such costs shall be re-ported in accordance with section 304(b); (vii) the payment of compensation for legal or accounting services— (I) rendered to or on behalf of any political committee of a political party if the person paying for such services is the regular employer of the individual rendering such services, and if such services are not attributable to activities which directly further the election of any designated candidate to Federal office; or (II) rendered to or on behalf of a candidate or political com-mittee if the person paying for such services is the regular employer of the individual rendering such services, and if such services are solely for the purpose of ensuring compli-ance with this Act or chapter 95 or chapter 96 of the Inter-nal Revenue Code of 1954 but amounts paid or incurred by the regular employer for such legal or accounting services shall be reported in accord-ance with section 304(b) by the committee receiving such services; (viii) the payment by a State or local committee of a political party of the costs of campaign materials (such as pins, bumper stickers, handbills, brochures, posters, party tab-loids, and yard signs) used by such committee in connection 21 Nomination and Election with volunteer activities on behalf of nominees of such party: 

Provided, That— (1) such payments are not for the costs of campaign mate-rials or activities used in connection with any broadcasting, newspaper, magazine, billboard, direct mail, or similar type of general public communication or political advertising; (2) such payments are made from contributions subject to the limitations and prohibitions of this Act; and (3) such payments are not made from contributions des-ignated to be spent on behalf of a particular candidate or particular candidates; (ix) the payment by a State or local committee of a political party of the costs of voter registration and get-out-the-vote activities conducted by such committee on behalf of nominees of such party for President and Vice President: Provided, 

That— (1) such payments are not for the costs of campaign mate-rials or activities used in connection with any broadcasting, newspaper, magazine, billboard, direct mail, or similar type of general public communication or political advertising; (2) such payments are made from contributions subject to the limitations and prohibitions of this Act; and (3) such payments are not made from contributions des-ignated to be spent on behalf of a particular candidate or candidates; and (x) payments received by a political party committee as a condition of ballot access which are transferred to another political party committee or the appropriate State official. (10) The term ‘‘Commission’’ means the Federal Election Commission. (11) The term ‘‘person’’ includes an individual, partnership, committee, association, corporation, labor organization, or any other organization or group of persons, but such term does not include the Federal Government or any authority of the Federal Government. (12) The term ‘‘State’’ means a State of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or a territory or possession of the United States. (13) The term ‘‘identification’’ means— (A) in the case of any individual, the name, the mailing ad-dress, and the occupation of such individual, as well as the name of his or her employer; and (B) in the case of any other person, the full name and ad-dress of such person. (14) The term ‘‘national committee’’ means the organization which, by virtue of the bylaws of a political party, is respon-sible for the day-to-day operation of such political party at the national level, as determined by the Commission. (15) The term ‘‘State committee’’ means the organization which, by virtue of the bylaws of a political party, is respon-sible for the day-to-day operation of such political party at the State level, as determined by the Commission. (16) The term ‘‘political party’’ means an association, com-mittee, or organization which nominates a candidate for elec-tion to any Federal office whose name appears on the elec-tion ballot as the candidate of such association, committee or organization. 22 Nomination and Election (17) Independent expenditure. The term ‘‘independent ex-penditure’’ means an expenditure by a person— (A) expressly advocating the election or defeat of a clearly identified candidate; and (B) that is not made in concert or cooperation with or at the request or suggestion of such candidate, the candidate’s au-thorized political committee, or their agents, or a political party committee or its agents. (18) The term ‘‘clearly identified’’ means that— (A) the name of the candidate involved appears; (B) a photograph or drawing of the candidate appears; or (C) the identity of the candidate is apparent by unambiguous reference. (19) The term ‘‘Act’’ means the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 as amended. (20) Federal election activity. (A) In general. The term ‘‘Federal election activity’’ means— (i) voter registration activity during the period that begins on the date that is 120 days before the date a regularly sched-uled Federal election is held and ends on the date of the election; (ii) voter identification, get-out-the-vote activity, or generic campaign activity conducted in connection with an election in which a candidate for Federal office appears on the ballot (regardless of whether a candidate for State or local office also appears on the ballot); (iii) a public communication that refers to a clearly identified candidate for Federal office (regardless of whether a can-didate for State or local office is also mentioned or identified) and that promotes or supports a candidate for that office, or attacks or opposes a candidate for that office (regardless of whether the communication expressly advocates a vote for or against a candidate); or (iv) services provided during any month by an employee of a State, district, or local committee of a political party who spends more than 25 percent of that individual’s com-pensated time during that month on activities in connection with a Federal election. (B) Excluded activity. The term ‘‘Federal election activity’’ does not include an amount expended or disbursed by aState, district, or local committee of a political party for— (i) a public communication that refers solely to a clearly identified candidate for State or local office, if the commu-nication is not a Federal election activity described in sub-paragraph (A)(i) or (ii); (ii) a contribution to a candidate for State or local office, pro-vided the contribution is not designated to pay for a Federal election activity described in subparagraph (A); (iii) the costs of a State, district, or local political convention; and (iv) the costs of grassroots campaign materials, including buttons, bumper stickers, and yard signs, that name or de-pict only a candidate for State or local office. (21) Generic campaign activity. The term ‘‘generic campaign activity’’ means a campaign activity that promotes a political party and does not promote a candidate or non-Federal can-didate. 23 Nomination and Election (22) Public communication. The term ‘‘public communication’’ means a communication by means of any broadcast, cable, or satellite communication, newspaper, magazine, outdoor ad-vertising facility, mass mailing, or telephone bank to the general public, or any other form of general public political advertising. (23) Mass mailing. The term ‘‘mass mailing’’ means a mail-ing by United States mail or facsimile of more than 500 pieces of mail matter of an identical or substantially similar nature within any 30-day period. (24) Telephone bank. The term ‘‘telephone bank’’ means more than 500 telephone calls of an identical or substantially simi-lar nature within any 30-day period. (25) Election cycle. For purposes of sections 315(i) and 315A and paragraph (26), the term ‘‘election cycle’’ means the pe-riod beginning on the day after the date of the most recent election for the specific office or seat that a candidate is seeking and ending on the date of the next election for that office or seat. For purposes of the preceding sentence, a pri-mary election and a general election shall be considered to be separate elections. (26) Personal funds. The term ‘‘personal funds’’ means an amount that is derived from— (A) any asset that, under applicable State law, at the time the individual became a candidate, the candidate had legal right of access to or control over, and with respect to which the candidate had— (i) legal and rightful title; or (ii) an equitable interest; (B) income received during the current election cycle of the candidate, including— (i) a salary and other earned income from bona fide employ-ment; (ii) dividends and proceeds from the sale of the candidate’s stocks or other investments; (iii) bequests to the candidate; (iv) income from trusts established before the beginning of the election cycle; (v) income from trusts established by bequest after the be-ginning of the election cycle of which the candidate is the beneficiary; (vi) gifts of a personal nature that had been customarily re-ceived by the candidate prior to the beginning of the election cycle; and (vii) proceeds from lotteries and similar legal games of chance; and (C) a portion of assets that are jointly owned by the can-didate and the candidate’s spouse equal to the candidate’s share of the asset under the instrument of conveyance or ownership, but if no specific share is indicated by an instru-ment of conveyance or ownership, the value of 1 ⁄2 of the prop-erty. (Pub. L. 92–225, title III, §§ 301, Feb. 7, 1972, 86 Stat. 11; Pub. L. 93–443, title II, §§ 201(a), 208(c)(1), Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1272, 1286; Pub. L. 94–283, title I, §§ 102, 115(d), (h), May 11, 1976, 90 Stat. 478, 495, 496; Pub. L. 96–187, title I, §§ 101, Jan. 8, 1980, 93 Stat. 1339; Pub. L. 99–514, §§ 2, Oct. 22, 1986, 100 Stat. 2095; Pub. L. 106–346, 24 Nomination and Election §§ 101(a), Oct. 23, 2000, 114 Stat. 1356; Pub. L. 107–155, title I, §§ 101(b), 103(b)(1), title II, Subtitle B, §§ 211, title III, §§ 304(c), March 27, 2002, 116 Stat. 85, 87, 92, 100.) 

2 U.S.C. § 432. Organization of political committees 

(a) Treasurer vacancy; official authorization .Every political committee shall have a treasurer. No con-tribution or expenditure shall be accepted or made by or on behalf of a political committee during any period in which the office of treasurer is vacant. No expenditure shall be made for or on behalf of a political committee without the authorization of the treasurer or his or her designated agent. (b) Account of contributions; segregated funds. 

(1) Every person who receives a contribution for an author-ized political committee shall, no later than 10 days after re-ceiving such contribution, forward to the treasurer such con-tribution, and if the amount of the contribution is in excess of $50 the name and address of the person making the con-tribution and the date of receipt. (2) Every person who receives a contribution for a political committee which is not an authorized committee shall— (A) if the amount of the contribution is $50 or less, forward to the treasurer such contribution no later than 30 days after receiving the contribution; and (B) if the amount of the contribution is in excess of $50, for-ward to the treasurer such contribution, the name and ad-dress of the person making the contribution, and the date of receipt of the contribution, no later than 10 days after receiv-ing the contribution. (3) All funds of a political committee shall be segregated from, and may not be commingled with, the personal funds of any individual. (c) Recordkeeping. 

The treasurer of a political committee shall keep an account of— (1) all contributions received by or on behalf of such political committee; (2) the name and address of any person who makes any con-tribution in excess of $50, together with the date and amount of such contribution by any person; (3) the identification of any person who makes a contribution or contributions aggregating more than $200 during a cal-endar year, together with the date and amount of any such contribution; (4) the identification of any political committee which makes a contribution, together with the date and amount of any such contribution; and (5) the name and address of every person to whom any dis-bursement is made, the date, amount, and purpose of the disbursement, and the name of the candidate and the office sought by the candidate, if any, for whom the disbursement was made, including a receipt, invoice, or canceled check for each disbursement in excess of $200. 25 Nomination and Election (d) Preservation of records and copies of reports. 

The treasurer shall preserve all records required to be kept by this section and copies of all reports required to be filed by this title for 3 years after the reports are filed. For any report filed in electronic format under section 304(a)(11), the treasurer shall retain a machine-readable copy of the report as the copy preserved under the preceding sentence. (e) Principal and additional campaign committees; designa-tions, status of candidate, authorized committees, etc. 

(1) Each candidate for Federal office (other than the nominee for the office of Vice President) shall designate in writing a political committee in accordance with paragraph (3) to serve as the principal campaign committee of such candidate. Such designation shall be made no later than 15 days after becom-ing a candidate. A candidate may designate additional polit-ical committees in accordance with paragraph (3) to serve as authorized committees of such candidate. Such designation shall be in writing and filed with the principal campaign committee of such candidate in accordance with subsection (f)(1). (2) Any candidate described in paragraph (1) who receives a contribution, or any loan for use in connection with the cam-paign of such candidate for election, or makes a disburse-ment in connection with such campaign, shall be considered, for purposes of this Act, as having received the contribution or loan, or as having made the disbursement, as the case may be, as an agent of the authorized committee or commit-tees of such candidate. (3) (A) No political committee which supports or has supported more than one candidate may be designated as an author-ized committee, except that— (i) the candidate for the office of President nominated by a political party may designate the national committee of such political party as a principal campaign committee, but only if that national committee maintains separate books of ac-count with respect to its function as a principal campaign committee; and (ii) candidates may designate a political committee estab-lished solely for the purpose of joint fundraising by such can-didates as an authorized committee. (B) As used in this section, the term ‘‘support’’ does not in-clude a contribution by any authorized committee in amounts of $2,000 or less to an authorized committee of any other candidate. (4) The name of each authorized committee shall include the name of the candidate who authorized such committee under paragraph (1). In the case of any political committee which is not an authorized committee, such political committee shall not include the name of any candidate in its name. (5) The name of any separate segregated fund established pursuant to section 316(b) shall include the name of its con-nected organization. 26 Nomination and Election (f) Filing with and receipt of designations, statements, and re-ports by principal campaign committee. 

(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, each designation, statement, or report of receipts or disburse-ments made by an authorized committee of a candidate shall be filed with the candidate’s principal campaign committee. (2) Each principal campaign committee shall receive all des-ignations, statements, and reports required to be filed with it under paragraph (1) and shall compile and file such des-ignations, statements, and reports in accordance with this Act. (g) Filing with and receipt of designations, statements, and reports by Secretary of the Senate; forwarding to Commission; filing requirements with Commission; public inspection and preservation of designations, etc. 

(1) Designations, statements, and reports required to be filed under this Act by a candidate for the office of Senator, by the principal campaign committee of such candidate, and by the Republican and Democratic Senatorial Campaign Commit-tees shall be filed with the Secretary of the Senate, who shall receive such designations, statements, and reports, as custodian for the Commission. (2) The Secretary of the Senate shall forward a copy of any designation, statement, or report filed with the Secretary under this subsection to the Commission as soon as possible (but no later than 2 working days) after receiving such des-ignation, statement, or report. (3) All designations, statements, and reports required to be filed under this Act, except designations, statements, and re-ports filed in accordance with paragraph (1), shall be filed with the Commission. (4) The Secretary of the Senate shall make the designations, statements, and reports received under this subsection avail-able for public inspection and copying in the same manner as the Commission under section 311(a)(4), and shall pre-serve such designations, statements, and reports in the same manner as the Commission under section 311(a)(5). (h) Campaign depositories; designations, maintenance of ac-counts, etc.; petty cash fund for disbursements; record of dis-bursements. 

(1) Each political committee shall designate one or more State banks, federally chartered depository institutions, or depository institutions the deposits or accounts of which are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation, or the Na-tional Credit Union Administration, as its campaign deposi-tory or depositories. Each political committee shall maintain at least one checking account and such other accounts as the committee determines at a depository designated by such committee. All receipts received by such committee shall be deposited in such accounts. No disbursements may be made (other than petty cash disbursements under paragraph (2)) by such committee except by check drawn on such accounts in accordance with this section. 27 Nomination and Election (2) A political committee may maintain a petty cash fund for disbursements not in excess of $100 to any person in connec-tion with a single purchase or transaction. A record of all petty cash disbursements shall be maintained in accordance with subsection (c)(5). (i) Reports and records, compliance with requirements based on best efforts. 

When the treasurer of a political committee shows that best efforts have been used to obtain, maintain, and submit the information required by this Act for the political committee, any report or any records of such committee shall be consid-ered in compliance with this Act or chapter 95 or chapter 96 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954. (Pub. L. 92–225, title III, § 302, Feb. 7, 1972, 86 Stat. 12; Pub. L. 93–443, title II, §§ 202, 208(c)(2), Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1275, 1286; Pub. L. 94–283, title I, § 103, May 11, 1976, 90 Stat. 480; Pub. L. 96187, title I, § 102, Jan. 8, 1980, 93 Stat. 1345; Pub. L. 104–79, §§ 1(b), 3(a), Dec. 28, 1995, 109 Stat. 791, 792; Pub. L. 105–61, title VI, § 637, Oct. 10, 1997, 111 Stat. 1316; Pub. L. 108–447, div. H, title V, § 525, Dec. 8, 2004, 118 Stat. 3271.) 

2 U.S.C. § 433. Registration of political committees 

(a) Statements of organizations. 

Each authorized campaign committee shall file a statement of organization not later than 10 days after designation pur-suant to section 432(e)(1). Each separate segregated fund es-tablished under the provisions of section 441b(b) shall file a statement of organization no later than 10 days after estab-lishment. All other committees shall file a statement of orga-nization within 10 days after becoming a political committee within the meaning of section 431(4). (b) Contents of statements. 

The statement of organization of a political committee shall include— (1) the name, address, and type of committee; (2) the name, address, relationship, and type of any con-nected organization or affiliated committee; (3) the name, address, and position of the custodian of books and accounts of the committee; (4) the name and address of the treasurer of the committee; (5) if the committee is authorized by a candidate, the name, address, office sought, and party affiliation of the candidate; and (6) a listing of all banks, safety deposit boxes, or other de-positories used by the committee. (c) Change of information in statements. 

Any change in information previously submitted in a state-ment of organization shall be reported in accordance with section 432(g) no later than 10 days after the date of the change. 28 Nomination and Election (d) Termination, etc., requirements of authorities. 

(1) A political committee may terminate only when such a committee files a written statement, in accordance with sec-tion 432(g), that it will no longer receive any contributions or make any disbursements and that such committee has no outstanding debts or obligations. (2) Nothing contained in this subsection may be construed to eliminate or limit the authority of the Commission to estab-lish procedures for— (A) the determination of insolvency with respect to any polit-ical committee; (B) the orderly liquidation of an insolvent political com-mittee, and the orderly application of its assets for the reduc-tion of outstanding debts; and (C) the termination of an insolvent political committee after such liquidation and application of assets. (Pub. L. 92–225, title III, § 303, Feb. 7, 1972, 86 Stat. 14; Pub. L. 93–443, title II, §§ 203, 208(c)(3), Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1276, 1286; Pub. L. 96–187, title I, § 103, Jan. 8, 1980, 93 Stat. 1347.) 

2 U.S.C. § 434. Reports 

(a) Receipts and disbursements by treasurers of political com-mittee; filing requirements. 

(1) Each treasurer of a political committee shall file reports of receipts and disbursements in accordance with the provi-sions of this subsection. The treasurer shall sign each such report. (2) If the political committee is the principal campaign com-mittee of a candidate for the House of Representatives or for the Senate— (A) in any calendar year during which there is regularly scheduled election for which such candidate is seeking elec-tion, or nomination for election, the treasurer shall file the following reports: (i) a pre-election report, which shall be filed no later than the 12th day before (or posted by any of the following: reg-istered mail, certified mail, priority mail having a delivery confirmation, or express mail having a delivery confirmation, or delivered to an overnight delivery service with an on-line tracking system, if posted or delivered no later than the 15th day before) any election in which such candidate is seeking election, or nomination for election, and which shall be com-plete as of the 20th day before such election; (ii) a post-general election report, which shall be filed no later than the 30th day after any general election in which such candidate has sought election, and which shall be com-plete as of the 20th day after such general election; and (iii) additional quarterly reports, which shall be filed no later than the 15th day after the last day of each calendar quar-ter, and which shall be complete as of the last day of each calendar quarter: except that the report for the quarter end-ing December 31 shall be filed no later than January 31 of the following calendar year; and (B) in any other calendar year the treasurer shall file quar-terly reports, which shall be filed not later than the 15th day after the last day of each calendar quarter, and which shall 29 Nomination and Election be complete as of the last day of each calendar quarter, ex-cept that the report for the quarter ending December 31 shall be filed not later than January 31 of the following cal-endar year. (3) If the committee is the principal campaign committee of a candidate for the office of President— (A) in any calendar year during which a general election is held to fill such office— (i) the treasurer shall file monthly reports if such committee has on January 1 of such year, received contributions aggre-gating $100,000 or made expenditures aggregating $100,000 or anticipates receiving contributions aggregating $100,000 or more or making expenditures aggregating $100,000 or more during such year: such monthly reports shall be filed no later than the 20th day after the last day of each month and shall be complete as of the last day of the month, except that, in lieu of filing the report otherwise due in November and December, a pre-general election report shall be filed in accordance with paragraph (2)(A)(i), a post-general election report shall be filed in accordance with paragraph (2)(A)(ii), and a year end report shall be filed no later than January 31 of the following calendar year; (ii) the treasurer of the other principal campaign committees of a candidate for the office of President shall file apreelection report or reports in accordance with paragraph (2)(A)(i), a post-general election report in accordance with paragraph (2)(A)(ii), and quarterly reports in accordance with paragraph (2)(A)(iii); and (iii) if at any time during the election year a committee filing under paragraph (3)(A)(ii) receives contributions in excess of $100,000 or makes expenditures in excess of $100,000, the treasurer shall begin filing monthly reports under paragraph (3)(A)(i) at the next reporting period; and (B) in any other calendar year, the treasurer shall file ei-ther— (i) monthly reports, which shall be filed no later than the 20th day after the last day of each month and shall be com-plete as of the last day of the month; or (ii) quarterly reports, which shall be filed no later than the 15th day after the last day of each calendar quarter and which shall be complete as of the last day of each calendar quarter. (4) All political committees other than authorized committees of a candidate shall file either— (A) (i) quarterly reports, in a calendar year in which a regularly scheduled general election is held, which shall be filed no later than the 15th day after the last day of each calendar quarter: except that the report for the quarter ending on De-cember 31 of such calendar year shall be filed no later than January 31 of the following calendar year; (ii) a pre-election report, which shall be filed no later than the 12th day before (or posted by any of the following: reg-istered mail, certified mail, priority mail having a delivery confirmation, or express mail having a delivery confirmation, or delivered to an overnight delivery service with an on-line tracking system, if posted or delivered no later than the 15th 30 Nomination and Election day before) any election in which the committee makes a contribution to or expenditure on behalf of a candidate in such election, and which shall be complete as of the 20th day before the election; (iii) a post-general election report, which shall be filed no later than the 30th day after the general election and which shall be complete as of the 20th day after such general elec-tion; and (iv) in any other calendar year, a report covering the period beginning January 1 and ending June 30, which shall be filed no later than July 31 and a report covering the period beginning July 1 and ending December 31, which shall be filed no later than January 31 of the following calendar year; or (B) monthly reports in all calendar years which shall be filed no later than the 20th day after the last day of the month and shall be complete as of the last day of the month, except that, in lieu of filing the reports otherwise due in November and December of any year in which a regularly scheduled general election is held, a pre-general election report shall be filed in accordance with paragraph (2)(A)(i), a post-general election report shall be filed in accordance with paragraph (2)(A)(ii), and a year end report shall be filed no later than January 31 of the following calendar year. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, a national com-mittee of a political party shall file the reports required under subparagraph (B). (5) If a designation, report, or statement filed pursuant to this Act (other than under paragraph (2)(A)(i) or (4)(A)(ii) or subsection (g)(1)) is sent by registered mail, certified mail, priority mail having a delivery confirmation, or express mail having a delivery confirmation, the United States postmark shall be considered the date of filing the designation, report or statement. If a designation, report or statement filed pur-suant to this Act (other than under paragraph (2)(A)(i) or (4)(A)(ii), or subsection (g)(1)) is sent by an overnight deliv-ery service with an on-line tracking system, the date on the proof of delivery to the delivery service shall be considered the date of filing of the designation, report, or statement. (6) (A) The principal campaign committee of a candidate shall notify the Secretary or the Commission, and the Secretary of State, as appropriate, in writing, of any contribution of $1,000 or more received by any authorized committee of such candidate after the 20th day, but more than 48 hours before, any election. This notification shall be made within 48 hours after the receipt of such contribution and shall include the name of the candidate and the office sought by the can-didate, the identification of the contributor, and the date of receipt and amount of the contribution. (B) Notification of expenditure from personal funds. (i) Definition of expenditure from personal funds. In this sub-paragraph, the term ‘‘expenditure from personal funds’’ means— (I) an expenditure made by a candidate using personal funds; and 31 Nomination and Election (II) a contribution or loan made by a candidate using per-sonal funds or a loan secured using such funds to the can-didate’s authorized committee. (ii) Declaration of intent. Not later than the date that is 15 days after the date on which an individual becomes a can-didate for the office of Senator, the candidate shall file a dec-laration stating the total amount of expenditures from per-sonal funds that the candidate intends to make, or to obli-gate to make, with respect to the election that will exceed the State-by-State competitive and fair campaign formula with— (I) the Commission; and (II) each candidate in the same election. (iii) Initial notification. Not later than 24 hours after a can-didate described in clause (ii) makes or obligates to make an aggregate amount of expenditures from personal funds in ex-cess of 2 times the threshold amount in connection with any election, the candidate shall file a notification with— (I) the Commission; and (II) each candidate in the same election. (iv) Additional notification. After a candidate files an initial notification under clause (iii), the candidate shall file an ad-ditional notification each time expenditures from personal funds are made or obligated to be made in an aggregate amount that exceed $10,000 with— (I) the Commission; and (II) each candidate in the same election. Such notification shall be filed not later than 24 hours after the expenditure is made. (v) Contents. A notification under clause (iii) or (iv) shall in-clude— (I) the name of the candidate and the office sought by the candidate; (II) the date and amount of each expenditure; and (III) the total amount of expenditures from personal funds that the candidate has made, or obligated to make, with re-spect to an election as of the date of the expenditure that is the subject of the notification. (C) Notification of disposal of excess contributions. In the next regularly scheduled report after the date of the election for which a candidate seeks nomination for election to, or election to, Federal office, the candidate or the candidate’s authorized committee shall submit to the Commission a re-port indicating the source and amount of any excess con-tributions (as determined under paragraph (1) of section 315(i)) and the manner in which the candidate or the can-didate’s authorized committee used such funds. (D) Enforcement. For provisions providing for the enforce-ment of the reporting requirements under this paragraph, see section 309. (E) The notification required under this paragraph shall be in addition to all other reporting requirements under this Act. (7) The reports required to be filed by this subsection shall be cumulative during the calendar year to which they relate, but where there has been no change in an item reported in 32 Nomination and Election a previous report during such year, only the amount need be carried forward. (8) The requirement for a political committee to file a quar-terly report under paragraph (2)(A)(iii) or paragraph (4)(A)(i) shall be waived if such committee is required to file apreelection report under paragraph (2)(A)(i), or paragraph (4)(A)(ii) during the period beginning on the 5th day after the close of the calendar quarter and ending on the 15th day after the close of the calendar quarter. (9) The Commission shall set filing dates for reports to be filed by principal campaign committees of candidates seeking election, or nomination for election, in special elections and political committees filing under paragraph (4)(A) which make contributions to or expenditures on behalf of a can-didate or candidates in special elections. The Commission shall require no more than one pre-election report for each election and one post-election report for the election which fills the vacancy. The Commission may waive any reporting obligation of committees required to file for special elections if any report required by paragraph (2) or (4) is required to be filed within 10 days of a report required under this sub-section. The Commission shall establish the reporting dates within 5 days of the setting of such election and shall pub-lish such dates and notify the principal campaign committees of all candidates in such election of the reporting dates. (10) The treasurer of a committee supporting a candidate for the office of Vice President (other than the nominee of a po-litical party) shall file reports in accordance with paragraph (3). (11) (A) The Commission shall promulgate a regulation under which a person required to file a designation, statement, or report under this Act— (i) is required to maintain and file a designation, statement, or report for any calendar year in electronic form accessible by computers if the person has, or has reason to expect to have, aggregate contributions or expenditures in excess of a threshold amount determined by the Commission; and (ii) may maintain and file a designation, statement, or report in electronic form or an alternative form if not required to do so under the regulation promulgated under clause (i). (B) The Commission shall make a designation, statement, re-port, or notification that is filed with the Commission under this Act available for inspection by the public in the offices of the Commission and accessible to the public on the Inter-net not later than 48 hours (or not later than 24 hours in the case of a designation, statement, report, or notification filed electronically) after receipt by the Commission. (C) In promulgating a regulation under this paragraph, the Commission shall provide methods (other than requiring a signature on the document being filed) for verifying designa-tions, statements, and reports covered by the regulation. Any document verified under any of the methods shall be treated for all purposes (including penalties for perjury) in the same manner as a document verified by signature. 33 Nomination and Election (D) As used in this paragraph, the term ‘‘report’’ means, with respect to the Commission, a report, designation, or state-ment required by this Act to be filed with the Commission. (12) Software for filing of reports. (A) In general. The Commission shall— (i) promulgate standards to be used by vendors to develop software that— (I) permits candidates to easily record information con-cerning receipts and disbursements required to be reported under this Act at the time of the receipt or disbursement; (II) allows the information recorded under subclause (I) to be transmitted immediately to the Commission; and (III) allows the Commission to post the information on the Internet immediately upon receipt; and (ii) make a copy of software that meets the standards pro-mulgated under clause (i) available to each person required to file a designation, statement, or report in electronic form under this Act. (B) Additional information. To the extent feasible, the Com-mission shall require vendors to include in the software de-veloped under the standards under subparagraph (A) the ability for any person to file any designation, statement, or report required under this Act in electronic form. (C) Required use. Notwithstanding any provision of this Act relating to times for filing reports, each candidate for Fed-eral office (or that candidate’s authorized committee) shall use software that meets the standards promulgated under this paragraph once such software is made available to such candidate. (D) Required posting. The Commission shall, as soon as prac-ticable, post on the Internet any information received under this paragraph. (b) Contents of report. 

Each report under this section shall disclose— (1) the amount of cash on hand at the beginning of the re-porting period; (2) for the reporting period and the calendar year (or election cycle, in the case of an authorized committee of a candidate for Federal office), the total amount of all receipts, and the total amount of all receipts in the following categories: (A) contributions from persons other than political commit-tees; (B) for an authorized committee, contributions from the can-didate; (C) contributions from political party committees; (D) contributions from other political committees; (E) for an authorized committee, transfers from other author-ized committees of the same candidate; (F) transfers from affiliated committees and, where the re-porting committee is a political party committee, transfers from other political party committees, regardless of whether such committees are affiliated; (G) for an authorized committee, loans made by or guaran-teed by the candidate; (H) all other loans; 34 Nomination and Election (I) rebates, refunds, and other offsets to operating expendi-tures; (J) dividends, interest, and other forms of receipts; and (K) for an authorized committee of a candidate for the office of President, Federal funds received under chapter 95 and chapter 96 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (3) the identification of each— (A) person (other than a political committee) who makes a contribution to the reporting committee during the reporting period, whose contribution or contributions have an aggre-gate amount or value in excess of $200 within the calendar year (or election cycle, in the case of an authorized com-mittee of a candidate for Federal office), or in any lesser amount if the reporting committee should so elect, together with the date and amount of any such contribution; (B) political committee which makes a contribution to the re-porting committee during the reporting period, together with the date and amount of any such contribution; (C) authorized committee which makes a transfer to the re-porting committee; (D) affiliated committee which makes a transfer to the re-porting committee during the reporting period and, where the reporting committee is a political party committee, each transfer of funds to the reporting committee from another political party committee, regardless of whether such com-mittees are affiliated, together with the date and amount of such transfer; (E) person who makes a loan to the reporting committee dur-ing the reporting period, together with the identification of any endorser or guarantor of such loan, and the date and amount or value of such loan; (F) person who provides a rebate, refund, or other offset to operating expenditures to the reporting committee in an ag-gregate amount or value in excess of $200 within the cal-endar year (or election cycle, in the case of an authorized committee of a candidate for Federal office), together with the date and amount of such receipt; and (G) person who provides any dividend, interest, or other re-ceipt to the reporting committee in an aggregate value or amount in excess of $200 within the calendar year (or elec-tion cycle, in the case of an authorized committee of a can-didate for Federal office), together with the date and amount of any such receipt; (4) for the reporting period and the calendar year (or election cycle, in the case of an authorized committee of a candidate for Federal office), the total amount of all disbursements, and all disbursements in the following categories: (A) expenditures made to meet candidate or committee oper-ating expenses; (B) for authorized committees, transfers to other committees authorized by the same candidate; (C) transfers to affiliated committees and, where the report-ing committee is a political party committee, transfers to other political party committees, regardless of whether they are affiliated; (D) for an authorized committee, repayment of loans made by or guaranteed by the candidate; 35 Nomination and Election (E) repayment of all other loans; (F) contribution refunds and other offsets to contributions; (G) for an authorized committee, any other disbursements; (H) for any political committee other than an authorized committee— (i) contributions made to other political committees; (ii) loans made by the reporting committees; (iii) independent expenditures; (iv) expenditures made under section 315(d) of this Act; and (v) any other disbursements; and (I) for an authorized committee of a candidate for the office of President, disbursements not subject to the limitation of section 315(b); (5) the name and address of each— (A) person to whom an expenditure in an aggregate amount or value in excess of $200 within the calendar year is made by the reporting committee to meet a candidate or committee operating expense, together with the date, amount, and pur-pose of such operating expenditure; (B) authorized committee to which a transfer is made by the reporting committee; (C) affiliated committee to which a transfer is made by the reporting committee during the reporting period and, where the reporting committee is a political party committee, each transfer of funds by the reporting committee to another polit-ical party committee, regardless of whether such committees are affiliated, together with the date and amount of such transfers; (D) person who receives a loan repayment from the reporting committee during the reporting period, together with the date and amount of such loan repayment; and (E) person who receives a contribution refund or other offset to contributions from the reporting committee where such contribution was reported under paragraph (3)(A) of this subsection, together with the date and amount of such dis-bursement; (6) (A) for an authorized committee, the name and address of each person who has received any disbursement not dis-closed under paragraph (5) in an aggregate amount or value in excess of $200 within the calendar year (or election cycle, in the case of an authorized committee of a candidate for Federal office), together with the date and amount of any such disbursement; (B) for any other political committee, the name and address of each— (i) political committee which has received a contribution from the reporting committee during the reporting period, to-gether with the date and amount of any such contribution; (ii) person who has received a loan from the reporting com-mittee during the reporting period, together with the date and amount of such loan; (iii) person who receives any disbursement during the report-ing period in an aggregate amount or value in excess of $200 within the calendar year (or election cycle, in the case of an authorized committee of a candidate for Federal office) in connection with an independent expenditure by the reporting committee, together with the date, amount, and purpose of 36 Nomination and Election any such independent expenditure and a statement which in-dicates whether such independent expenditure is in support of, or in opposition to, a candidate, as well as the name and office sought by such candidate, and a certification, under penalty of perjury, whether such independent expenditure is made in cooperation, consultation, or concert, with, or at the request or suggestion of, any candidate or any authorized committee or agent of such committee; (iv) person who receives any expenditure from the reporting committee during the reporting period in connection with an expenditure under section 315(d) in the Act, together with the date, amount, and purpose of any such expenditure as well as the name of, and office sought by, the candidate on whose behalf the expenditure is made; and (v) person who has received any disbursement not otherwise disclosed in this paragraph or paragraph (5) in an aggregate amount or value in excess of $200 within the calendar year (or election cycle, in the case of an authorized committee of a candidate for Federal office) from the reporting committee within the reporting period, together with the date, amount, and purpose of any such disbursement; (7) the total sum of all contributions to such political com-mittee, together with the total contributions less offsets to contributions and the total sum of all operating expenditures made by such political committee, together with total oper-ating expenditures less offsets to operating expenditures, for both the reporting period and the calendar year (or election cycle, in the case of an authorized committee of a candidate for Federal office); and (8) the amount and nature of outstanding debts and obliga-tions owed by or to such political committee; and where such debts and obligations are settled for less than their reported amount or value, a statement as to the circumstances and conditions under which such debts or obligations were extin-guished and the consideration therefor. (c) Statements by other than political committees; filing; con-tents; indices of expenditures. 

(1) Every person (other than a political committee) who makes independent expenditures in an aggregate amount or value in excess of $250 during a calendar year shall file a statement containing the information required under sub-section (b)(3)(A) for all contributions received by such person. (2) Statements required to be filed by this subsection shall be filed in accordance with subsection (a)(2), and shall in-clude— (A) the information required by subsection (b)(6)(B)(iii), indi-cating whether the independent expenditure is in support of, or in opposition to, the candidate involved; (B) under penalty of perjury, a certification whether or not such independent expenditure is made in cooperation, con-sultation, or concert, with, or at the request or suggestion of, any candidate or any authorized committee or agent of such candidate; and (C) the identification of each person who made a contribution in excess of $200 to the person filing such statement which 37 Nomination and Election was made for the purpose of furthering an independent ex-penditure. (3) The Commission shall be responsible for expeditiously preparing indices which set forth, on a candidate-by-can-didate basis, all independent expenditures separately, includ-ing those reported under subsection (b)(6)(B)(iii), made by or for each candidate, as reported under this subsection, and for periodically publishing such indices on a timely pre-election basis. (d) Filing by facsimile device or electronic mail. 

(1) Any person who is required to file a statement under sub-section (c) or (g) of this section, except statements required to be filed electronically pursuant to subsection (a)(11)(A)(i) may file the statement by facsimile device or electronic mail, in accordance with such regulations as the Commission may promulgate. (2) The Commission shall make a document which is filed electronically with the Commission pursuant to this para-graph accessible to the public on the Internet not later than 24 hours after the document is received by the Commission. (3) In promulgating a regulation under this paragraph, the Commission shall provide methods (other than requiring a signature on the document being filed) for verifying the docu-ments covered by the regulation. Any document verified under any of the methods shall be treated for all purposes (including penalties for perjury) in the same manner as a document verified by signature. (e) Political committees. 

(1) National and congressional political committees. The na-tional committee of a political party, any national congres-sional campaign committee of a political party, and any sub-ordinate committee of either, shall report all receipts and disbursements during the reporting period. (2) Other political committees to which section 323 applies. (A) In general. In addition to any other reporting require-ments applicable under this Act, a political committee (not described in paragraph (1)) to which section 323(b)(1) applies shall report all receipts and disbursements made for activi-ties described in section 301(20)(A), unless the aggregate amount of such receipts and disbursements during the cal-endar year is less than $5,000. (B) Specific disclosure by State and local parties of certain non-Federal amounts permitted to be spent on Federal elec-tion activity. Each report by a political committee under sub-paragraph (A) of receipts and disbursements made for activi-ties described in section 301(20)(A) shall include a disclosure of all receipts and disbursements described in section 323(b)(2)(A) and (B). (3) Itemization. If a political committee has receipts or dis-bursements to which this subsection applies from or to any person aggregating in excess of $200 for any calendar year, the political committee shall separately itemize its reporting for such person in the same manner as required in para-graphs (3)(A), (5), and (6) of subsection (b). 38 Nomination and Election (4) Reporting periods. Reports required to be filed under this subsection shall be filed for the same time periods required for political committees under subsection (a)(4)(B). (f) Disclosure of electioneering communications. 

(1) Statement required. Every person who makes a disburse-ment for the direct costs of producing and airing election-eering communications in an aggregate amount in excess of $10,000 during any calendar year shall, within 24 hours of each disclosure date, file with the Commission a statement containing the information described in paragraph (2). (2) Contents of statement. Each statement required to be filed under this subsection shall be made under penalty of perjury and shall contain the following information: (A) The identification of the person making the disburse-ment, of any person sharing or exercising direction or control over the activities of such person, and of the custodian of the books and accounts of the person making the disbursement. (B) The principal place of business of the person making the disbursement, if not an individual. (C) The amount of each disbursement of more than $200 dur-ing the period covered by the statement and the identifica-tion of the person to whom the disbursement was made. (D) The elections to which the electioneering communications pertain and the names (if known) of the candidates identified or to be identified. (E) If the disbursements were paid out of a segregated bank account which consists of funds contributed solely by individ-uals who are United States citizens or nationals or lawfully admitted for permanent residence (as defined in section 101(a)(20) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(20))) directly to this account for electioneering com-munications, the names and addresses of all contributors who contributed an aggregate amount of $1,000 or more to that account during the period beginning on the first day of the preceding calendar year and ending on the disclosure date. Nothing in this subparagraph is to be construed as a prohibition on the use of funds in such a segregated account for a purpose other than electioneering communications. (F) If the disbursements were paid out of funds not described in subparagraph (E), the names and addresses of all contrib-utors who contributed an aggregate amount of $1,000 or more to the person making the disbursement during the pe-riod beginning on the first day of the preceding calendar year and ending on the disclosure date. (3) Electioneering communication. For purposes of this sub-section— (A) In general. (i) The term ‘‘electioneering communication’’ means any broadcast, cable, or satellite communication which— (I) refers to a clearly identified candidate for Federal office; (II) is made within— (aa) 60 days before a general, special, or runoff election for the office sought by the candidate; or (bb) 30 days before a primary or preference election, or a convention or caucus of a political party that has authority 39 Nomination and Election to nominate a candidate, for the office sought by the can-didate; and (III) in the case of a communication which refers to a can-didate for an office other than President or Vice President, is targeted to the relevant electorate. (ii) If clause (i) is held to be constitutionally insufficient by final judicial decision to support the regulation provided herein, then the term ‘‘electioneering communication’’ means any broadcast, cable, or satellite communication which pro-motes or supports a candidate for that office, or attacks or opposes a candidate for that office (regardless of whether the communication expressly advocates a vote for or against a candidate) and which also is suggestive of no plausible meaning other than an exhortation to vote for or against a specific candidate. Nothing in this subparagraph shall be construed to affect the interpretation or application of section 100.22(b) of title 11, Code of Federal Regulations. (B) Exceptions. The term ‘‘electioneering communication’’ does not include— (i) a communication appearing in a news story, commentary, or editorial distributed through the facilities of any broad-casting station, unless such facilities are owned or controlled by any political party, political committee, or candidate; (ii) a communication which constitutes an expenditure or an independent expenditure under this Act; (iii) a communication which constitutes a candidate debate or forum conducted pursuant to regulations adopted by the Commission, or which solely promotes such a debate or forum and is made by or on behalf of the person sponsoring the debate or forum; or (iv) any other communication exempted under such regula-tions as the Commission may promulgate (consistent with the requirements of this paragraph) to ensure the appro-priate implementation of this paragraph, except that under any such regulation a communication may not be exempted if it meets the requirements of this paragraph and is de-scribed in section 301(20)(A)(iii). (C) Targeting to relevant electorate. For purposes of this paragraph, a communication which refers to a clearly identi-fied candidate for Federal office is ‘‘targeted to the relevant electorate’’ if the communication can be received by 50,000 or more persons— (i) in the district the candidate seeks to represent, in the case of a candidate for Representative in, or Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress; or (ii) in the State the candidate seeks to represent, in the case of a candidate for Senator. (4) Disclosure date. For purposes of this subsection, the term ‘‘disclosure date’’ means— (A) the first date during any calendar year by which a per-son has made disbursements for the direct costs of producing or airing electioneering communications aggregating in ex-cess of $10,000; and (B) any other date during such calendar year by which a per-son has made disbursements for the direct costs of producing or airing electioneering communications aggregating in ex-40 Nomination and Election cess of $10,000 since the most recent disclosure date for such calendar year. (5) Contracts to disburse. For purposes of this subsection, a person shall be treated as having made a disbursement if the person has executed a contract to make the disbursement. (6) Coordination with other requirements. Any requirement to report under this subsection shall be in addition to any other reporting requirement under this Act. (7) Coordination with Internal Revenue Code. Nothing in this subsection may be construed to establish, modify, or oth-erwise affect the definition of political activities or election-eering activities (including the definition of participating in, intervening in, or influencing or attempting to influence a political campaign on behalf of or in opposition to any can-didate for public office) for purposes of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. (g) Time for reporting certain expenditures. 

(1) Expenditures aggregating $1,000. (A) Initial report. A person (including a political committee) that makes or contracts to make independent expenditures aggregating $1,000 or more after the 20th day, but more than 24 hours, before the date of an election shall file a re-port describing the expenditures within 24 hours. (B) Additional reports. After a person files a report under subparagraph (A), the person shall file an additional report within 24 hours after each time the person makes or con-tracts to make independent expenditures aggregating an ad-ditional $1,000 with respect to the same election as that to which the initial report relates. (2) Expenditures aggregating $10,000. (A) Initial report. A person (including a political committee) that makes or contracts to make independent expenditures aggregating $10,000 or more at any time up to and including the 20th day before the date of an election shall file a report describing the expenditures within 48 hours. (B) Additional reports. After a person files a report under subparagraph (A), the person shall file an additional report within 48 hours after each time the person makes or con-tracts to make independent expenditures aggregating an ad-ditional $10,000 with respect to the same election as that to which the initial report relates. (3) Place of filing; contents. A report under this subsection— (A) shall be filed with the Commission; and (B) shall contain the information required by subsection (b)(6)(B)(iii), including the name of each candidate whom an expenditure is intended to support or oppose. (4) Time of filing for expenditures aggregating $1,000. Not-withstanding subsection (a)(5), the time at which the state-ment under paragraph (1) is received by the Commission or any other recipient to whom the notification is required to be sent shall be considered the time of filing of the statement with the recipient. (h) Reports from Inaugural Committees. 

The Federal Election Commission shall make any report filed by an Inaugural Committee under section 510 of title 41 Nomination and Election 36, United States Code, accessible to the public at the offices of the Commission and on the Internet not later than 48 hours after the report is received by the Commission. (Pub. L. 92–225, title III, § 304, Feb. 7, 1972, 86 Stat. 14, 15; Pub. L. 93–443, title II, §§ 204(a)–(d), 208(c)(4), Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1276, 1286; Pub. L. 94–283, title I, § 104, May 11, 1976, 90 Stat. 480; Pub. L. 96–187, title I, § 104, Jan. 8, 1980, 93 Stat. 1348; Pub. L. 104–79, §§ 1(a), 3(b), Dec. 28, 1995, 109 Stat. 791, 792; Pub. L. 106–58, title VI, §§ 639(a), 641(a), Sept. 29, 1999, 113 Stat. 476, 477; Pub. L. 106–346, § 101(a), Oct. 23, 2000, 114 Stat. 1356; Pub. L. 107155, title I, § 103(a), title II, subtitle A, § 201(a), subtitle B, § 212, title III, §§ 304(b), 306, 308(b), title V, §§ 501, 503, March 27, 2002, 116 Stat. 87, 88, 93, 99, 102, 104, 114, 115; Pub. L. 108–199, div. F, title VI, § 641, Jan. 23, 2004, 118 Stat. 359.) 

2 U.S.C. § 437. Reports on convention financing 

Each committee or other organization which— (1) represents a State, or a political subdivision thereof, or any group of persons, in dealing with officials of a national political party with respect to matters involving a convention held in such State or political subdivision to nominate a can-didate for the office of President or Vice President, or (2) represents a national political party in making arrange-ments for the convention of such party held to nominate a candidate for the office of President or Vice President, shall within 60 days following the end of the convention (but not later than 20 days prior to the date on which presi-dential and vice presidential electors are chosen), file with the Commission a full and complete financial statement, in such form and detail as it may prescribe, of the sources from which it derived its funds, and the purposes for which such funds were expended. (Pub. L. 92–225, title III, § 305, formerly § 307, Feb. 7, 1972, 86 Stat. 16; Pub. L. 93–443, title II, § 208(c)(6), Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1286; renumbered § 305 and amended Pub. L. 96– 187, title I, §§ 105(a)(2), 112(a), Jan. 8, 1980, 93 Stat. 1354, 1366.) 

2 U.S.C. § 437c. Federal Election Commission 

(a) Establishment; membership; term of office; vacancies’ qualifications; compensation; chairman and vice chairman. 

(1) There is established a commission to be known as the Federal Election Commission. The Commission is composed of the Secretary of the Senate and the Clerk of the House of Representatives or their designees, ex officio and without the right to vote, and 6 members appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate. No more than 3 members of the Commission appointed under this para-graph may be affiliated with the same political party. (2)(A) Members of the Commission shall serve for a single term of 6 years, except that the members first appointed— (i) two of the members, not affiliated with the same political party, shall be appointed for terms ending on April 30, 1977; (ii) two of the members, not affiliated with the same political party, shall be appointed for terms ending on April 30, 1979; and 42 Nomination and Election (iii) two of the members, not affiliated with the same polit-ical party, shall be appointed for terms ending on April 30, 1981. (B) A member of the Commission may serve on the Commis-sion after the expiration of his or her term until his or her successor has taken office as a member of the Commission. (C) An individual appointed to fill a vacancy occurring other than by the expiration of a term of office shall be appointed only for the unexpired term of the member he or she suc-ceeds. (D) Any vacancy occurring in the membership of the Com-mission shall be filled in the same manner as in the case of the original appointment. (3) Members shall be chosen on the basis of their experience, integrity, impartiality, and good judgment and members (other than the Secretary of the Senate and the Clerk of the House of Representatives) shall be individuals who, at the time appointed to the Commission, are not elected or ap-pointed officers or employees in the executive, legislative, or judicial branch of the Federal Government. Such members of the Commission shall not engage in any other business, vo-cation, or employment. Any individual who is engaging in any other business, vocation, or employment at the time of his or her appointment to the Commission shall terminate or liquidate such activity no later than 90 days after such ap-pointment. (4) Members of the Commission (other than the Secretary of the Senate and the Clerk of the House of Representatives) shall receive compensation equivalent to the compenstation paid at level IV of the Executive Schedule (5 U.S.C. 5315). (5) The Commission shall elect a chairman and a vice chair-man from among its members (other than the Secretary of the Senate and the Clerk of the House of Representatives) for a term of one year. A member may serve as chairman only once during any term of office to which such member is appointed. The chairman and the vice chairman shall not be affiliated with the same political party. The vice chairman shall act as chairman in the absence or disability of the chairman or in the event of a vacancy in such office. (b) Administration, enforcement, and formulation of policy; exclusive jurisdiction of civil enforcement; Congressional au-thorities or functions with respect to elections for Federal of-fice. 

(1) The Commission shall administer, seek to obtain compli-ance with, and formulate policy with respect to, this Act and chapter 95 and chapter 96 of title 26. The Commission shall have exclusive jurisdiction with respect to the civil enforce-ment of such provisions. (c) Voting requirements; delegation of authorities. 

All decisions of the Commission with respect to the exercise of its duties and powers under the provisions of this Act shall be made by a majority vote of the members of the Com-mission. A member of the Commission may not delegate to any person his or her vote or any decisionmaking authority or duty vested in the Commission by the provisions of this 43 Nomination and Election Act, except that the affirmative vote of 4 members of the Commission shall be required in order for the Commission to take any action in accordance with paragraph (6), (7), (8), or (9) of section 437d(a) of this title or with chapter 95 or chap-ter 96 of title 26. (d) Meetings. 

The Commission shall meet at least once each month and also, at the call of any members. (e) Rules for conduct of activities; judicial notice of seal; prin-cipal office. 

The Commission shall prepare written rules for the conduct of its activities, shall have an official seal which shall be ju-dicially noticed, and shall have its principal office in or near the District of Columbia (but it may meet or exercise any of its powers anywhere in the United States). (f) Staff director and general counsel; appointment and com-pensation; appointment and compensation of personnel and procurement of intermittent services by staff director; use of assistance personnel, and facilities of Federal agencies and departments; counsel for defense of actions. 

(1) The Commission shall have a staff director and a general counsel who shall be appointed by the Commission. The staff director shall be paid at a rate not to exceed the rate of basic pay in effect for level IV of the Executive Schedule (5 U.S.C. 5315). The general counsel shall be paid at a rate not to ex-ceed the rate of basic pay in effect for level V of the Execu-tive Schedule (5 U.S.C. 5316). With the approval of the Com-mission, the staff director may appoint and fix the pay of such additional personnel as he or she considers desirable without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service. (2) With the approval of the Commission, the staff director may procure temporary and intermittent services to the same extent as is authorized by section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, but at rates for individuals not to exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay in effect for grade GS–15 of the General Schedule (5 U.S.C. 5332). (3) In carrying out its responsibilities under this Act, the Commission shall, to the fullest extent practicable, avail itself of the assistance, including personnel and facilities of other agencies and departments of the United States. The heads of such agencies and departments may make available to the Commission such personnel, facilities and other assist-ance, with or without reimbursement, as the Commission may request. (4) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (2), the Commission is authorized to appear in and defend against any action instituted under this Act, either (A) by attorneys employed in its office, or (B) by counsel whom it may ap-point, on a temporary basis as may be necessary for such purpose, without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and whose compensation it may fix without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 44 Nomination and Election 53 of such title. The compensation of counsel so appointed on a temporary basis shall be paid out of any funds otherwise available to pay the compensation of employees of the Com-mission. (Pub. L. 92–225, title III, § 306, formerly § 310, as added Pub. L. 93–443, title II, § 208(a), Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1280; renumbered § 309 and amended Pub. L. 94–283, title I, §§ 101(a)–(d), 105, May 11, 1976, 90 Stat. 475, 481; renum-bered § 306 and amended Pub. L. 96–187, title I, §§ 105(a) (3), (6), 112(b), Jan. 8, 1980, 93 Stat. 1354–56, 1366; Pub. L. 99–514, § 2, Oct. 22, 1986, 100 Stat. 2095; Pub. L. 105–61, Title V, § 512(a), Oct. 10, 1997, 111 Stat. 1305.) 

2 U.S.C. § 437d. Powers of commission 

(a) Specific authorities. 

The Commission has the power— (1) to require by special or general orders, any person to sub-mit, under oath, such written reports and answers to ques-tions as the Commission may prescribe; (2) to administer oaths or affirmations; (3) to require by subpena, signed by the chairman or the vice chairman, the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of all documentary evidence relating to the execution of its duties; (4) in any proceeding or investigation, to order testimony to be taken by deposition before any person who is designated by the Commission and has the power to administer oaths and, in such instances, to compel testimony and the protec-tion of evidence in the same manner as authorized under paragraph (3); (5) to pay witnesses the same fees and mileage as are paid in like circumstances in the courts of the United States; (6) to initiate (through civil actions for injunctive, declara-tory, or other appropriate relief), defend (in the case of any civil action brought under section 309(a)(8) of this Act) or ap-peal any civil action in the name of the Commission to en-force the provisions of this Act and chapter 95 and chapter 96 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, through its general counsel; (7) to render advisory opinions under section 308 of this Act; (8) to develop such prescribed forms and to make, amend, and repeal such rules, pursuant to the provisions of chapter 5 of title 5, United States Code, as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act and chapter 95 and chapter 96 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and (9) to conduct investigations and hearings expeditiously, to encourage voluntary compliance, and to report apparent vio-lations to the appropriate law enforcement authorities. (b) Judicial orders for compliance with subpenas and orders of Commission; contempt of court. 

Upon petition by the Commission, any United States district court within the jurisdiction of which any inquiry is being carried on may, in case of refusal to obey a subpena or order of the Commission issued under subsection (a), issue an order requiring compliance. Any failure to obey the order of 45 Nomination and Election the court may be punished by the court as a contempt there-of. (c) Civil liability for disclosure of information. 

No person shall be subject to civil liability to any person (other than the Commission or the United States) for dis-closing information at the request of the Commission. (d) Concurrent transmissions to Congress or Member of budg-et estimates, etc.; prior submission of legislative recommenda-tions, testimony, or comments on legislation. 

(1) Whenever the Commission submits any budget estimate or request to the President or the Office of Management and Budget, it shall concurrently transmit a copy of such esti-mate or request to the Congress. (2) Whenever the Commission submits any legislative rec-ommendation, or testimony, or comments on legislation, re-quested by the Congress or by any Member of the Congress, to the President or the Office of Management and Budget, it shall concurrently transmit a copy thereof to the Congress or to the Member requesting the same. No officer or agency of the United States shall have any authority to require the Commission to submit its legislative recommendations, testi-mony, or comments on legislation, to any office or agency of the United States for approval, comments, or review, prior to the submission of such recommendations, testimony, or com-ments to the Congress. (e) Exclusive civil remedy for enforcement. 

Except as provided in section 309(a)(8) of this Act, the power of the Commission to initiate civil actions under subsection (a)(6) of this section shall be the exclusive civil remedy for the enforcement of the provisions of this Act. (Pub. L. 92–225, title III, § 307, formerly § 311, as added Pub. L. 93–443, title II, § 208(a), Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1282; renumbered § 310 and amended Pub. L. 94–283, title I, §§ 105, 107, 115(b), May 11, 1976, 90 Stat. 481, 495; Pub. L. 96–187, title I, §§ 105(3), 106, Jan. 8, 1980, 93 Stat. 1354, 1356; Pub. L. 99–514, § 2, Oct. 22, 1986, 100 Stat. 2095.) 

2 U.S.C. § 437f. Advisory opinion 

(a) Requests by persons, candidates, or authorized commit-tees; subject matter; time for response. 

(1) Not later than 60 days after the Commission receives from a person a complete written request concerning the ap-plication of this Act, chapter 95 or chapter 96 of title 26, or a rule or regulation prescribed by the Commission, with re-spect to a specific transaction or activity by the person, the Commission shall render a written advisory opinion relating to such transaction or activity to the person. (2) If an advisory opinion is requested by a candidate, or any authorized committee of such candidate, during the 60-day period before any election for Federal office involving the re-questing party, the Commission shall render a written advi-sory opinion relating to such request no later than 20 days after the Commission receives a complete written request. 46 Nomination and Election (b) Procedures applicable to initial proposal of rules or regu-lations, and advisory opinions. 

Any rule of law which is not stated in this Act or in chapter 95 or chapter 96 of title 26 may be initially proposed by the Commission only as a rule or regulation pursuant to proce-dures established in section 438(d) of this title. No opinion of an advisory nature may be issued by the Commission or any of its employees except in accordance with the provisions of this section. (c) Persons entitled to rely upon opinions; scope of protection for good faith reliance. 

(1) Any advisory opinion rendered by the Commission under subsection (a) of this section may be relied upon by— (A) any person involved in the specific transaction or activity with respect to which such advisory opinion is rendered; and (B) any person involved in any specific transaction or activity which is indistinguishable in all its material aspects from the transaction or activity with respect to which such advi-sory opinion is rendered. (2) Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, any person who relies upon any provision or finding of an advisory opin-ion in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (1) and who acts in good faith in accordance with the provisions and findings of such advisory opinion shall not, as a result of any such act, be subject to any sanction provided by this Act or by chapter 95 or chapter 96 of title 26. (d) Requests made public; submission of written comments by interested public. 

The Commission shall make public any request made under subsection (a) of this section for an advisory opinion. Before rendering an advisory opinion, the Commission shall accept written comments submitted by any interested party within the 10-day period following the date the request is made public. (Pub. L. 92–225, title III, § 308, formerly § 313, as added Pub. L. 93–443, title II, § 208(a), Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1283; renumbered § 312 and amended Pub. L. 94–283, title I, §§ 105, 108, May 11, 1976, 90 Stat. 481, 482; renumbered § 308 and amended Pub. L. 96–187, title I, §§ 105(a)(4), 107, Jan. 8, 1980, 93 Stat. 1354, 1357–58; Pub. L. 99–514, § 2, Oct. 22, 1986, 100 Stat. 2095.) 

2 U.S.C. § 437g. Enforcement 

(a) Administrative and judicial practice and procedure. 

(1) Any person who believes a violation of this Act or of chap-ter 95 or chapter 96 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 has occurred, may file a complaint with the Commission. Such complaint shall be in writing, signed and sworn to by the person filing such complaint, shall be notarized, and shall be made under penalty of perjury and subject to the provisions of section 1001 of title 18, United States Code. Within 5 days after receipt of a complaint, the Commission shall notify, in writing, any person alleged in the complaint to have committed such a violation. Before the Commission conducts any vote on the complaint, other than a vote to dis-47 Nomination and Election miss, any person so notified shall have the opportunity to demonstrate, in writing, to the Commission within 15 days after notification that no action should be taken against such person on the basis of the complaint. The Commission may not conduct any investigation or take any other action under this section solely on the basis of a complaint of a person whose identity is not disclosed to the Commission. (2) If the Commission, upon receiving a complaint under paragraph (1) or on the basis of information ascertained in the normal course of carrying out its supervisory responsibil-ities, determines, by an affirmative vote of 4 of its members, that it has reason to believe that a person has committed, or is about to commit, a violation of this Act or chapter 95 or chapter 96 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, the Com-mission shall, through its chairman or vice chairman, notify the person of the alleged violation. Such notification shall set forth the factual basis for such alleged violation. The Com-mission shall make an investigation of such alleged violation, which may include a field investigation or audit, in accord-ance with the provisions of this section. (3) The general counsel of the Commission shall notify the respondent of any recommendation to the Commission by the general counsel to proceed to a vote on probable cause pursu-ant to paragraph (4)(A)(i). With such notification, the general counsel shall include a brief stating the position of the gen-eral counsel on the legal and factual issues of the case. With-in 15 days of receipt of such brief, respondent may submit a brief stating the position of such respondent on the legal and factual issues of the case, and replying to the brief of general counsel. Such briefs shall be filed with the Secretary of the Commission and shall be considered by the Commis-sion before proceeding under paragraph (4). (4)(A)(i) Except as provided in clauses (ii) and subparagraph (C), if the Commission determines, by an affirmative vote of 4 of its members, that there is probable cause to believe that any person has committed, or is about to commit, a violation of this Act or of chapter 95 or chapter 96 of the Internal Rev-enue Code of 1954, the Commission shall attempt, for a pe-riod of at least 30 days, to correct or prevent such violation by informal methods of conference, conciliation, and persua-sion, and to enter into a conciliation agreement with any per-son involved. Such attempt by the Commission to correct or prevent such violation may continue for a period of not more than 90 days. The Commission may not enter into a concilia-tion agreement under this clause except pursuant to an af-firmative vote of 4 of its members. A conciliation agreement, unless violated, is a complete bar to any further action by the Commission, including the bringing of a civil proceeding under paragraph (6)(A). (ii) If any determination of the Commission under clause (i) occurs during the 45-day period immediately preceding any election, then the Commission shall attempt, for a period of at least 15 days, to correct or prevent the violation involved by the methods specified in clause (i). (B)(i) No action by the Commission or any person, and no in-formation derived, in connection with any conciliation at-tempt by the Commission under subparagraph (A) may be 48 Nomination and Election made public by the Commission without the written consent of the respondent and the Commission. (ii) If a conciliation agreement is agreed upon by the Com-mission and the respondent, the Commission shall make public any conciliation agreement signed by both the Com-mission and the respondent. If the Commission makes a de-termination that a person has not violated this Act or chap-ter 95 or chapter 96 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, the Commission shall make public such determination. (C)(i) Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), in the case of a vio-lation of any requirement of section 304(a) of the Act (2 U.S.C. 434(a)), the Commission may— (I) find that a person committed such a violation on the basis of information obtained pursuant to the procedures described in paragraphs (1) and (2); and (II) based on such finding, require the person to pay a civil money penalty in an amount determined under a schedule of penalties which is established and published by the Commis-sion and which takes into account the amount of the viola-tion involved, the existence of previous violations by the per-son, and such other factors as the Commission considers ap-propriate. (ii) The Commission may not make any determination ad-verse to a person under clause (i) until the person has been given written notice and an opportunity to be heard before the Commission. (iii) Any person against whom an adverse determination is made under this subparagraph may obtain a review of such determination in the district court of the United States for the district in which the person resides, or transacts busi-ness, by filing in such court (prior to the expiration of the 30-day period which begins on the date the person receives noti-fication of the determination) a written petition requesting that the determination be modified or set aside. (5)(A) If the Commission believes that a violation of this Act or of chapter 95 or chapter 96 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 has been committed, a conciliation agreement en-tered into by the Commission under paragraphs (4)(A) may include a requirement that the person involved in such con-ciliation agreement shall pay a civil penalty which does not exceed the greater of $5,000 or an amount equal to any con-tribution or expenditure involved in such violation. (B) If the Commission believes that a knowing and willful violation of this Act or of chapter 95 or chapter 96 of the In-ternal Revenue Code of 1954 has been committed, a concilia-tion agreement entered into by the Commission under para-graph (4)(A) may require that the person involved in such conciliation agreement shall pay a civil penalty which does not exceed the greater of $10,000 or an amount equal to 200 percent of any contribution or expenditure involved in such violation (or, in the case of a violation of section 320, which is not less than 300 percent of the amount involved in the violation and is not more than the greater of $50,000 or 1,000 percent of the amount involved in the violation). (C) If the Commission by an affirmative vote of 4 of its mem-bers, determines that there is probable cause to believe that a knowing and willful violation of this Act which is subject 49 Nomination and Election to subsection (d), or a knowing and willful violation of chap-ter 95 or chapter 96 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, has occurred or is about to occur, it may refer such apparent violation to the Attorney General of the United States with-out regard to any limitations set forth in paragraph (4)(A). (D) In any case in which a person has entered into a concilia-tion agreement with the Commission under paragraph (4)(A), the Commission may institute a civil action for relief under paragraph (6)(A) if it believes that the person has violated any provision of such conciliation agreement. For the Com-mission to obtain relief in any civil action, the Commission need only establish that the person has violated, in whole or in part, any requirement of such conciliation agreement. (6)(A) If the Commission is unable to correct or prevent any violation of this Act or of chapter 95 or chapter 96 of the In-ternal Revenue Code of 1954, by the methods specified in paragraph (4), the Commission may, upon an affirmative vote of 4 of its members, institute a civil action for relief, in-cluding a permanent or temporary injunction, restraining order, or any other appropriate order (including an order for a civil penalty which does not exceed the greater of $5,000 or an amount equal to any contribution or expenditure in-volved in such violation) in the district court of the United States for the district in which the person against whom such action is brought is found, resides, or transacts busi-ness. (B) In any civil action instituted by the Commission under subparagraph (A), the court may grant a permanent or tem-porary injunction, restraining order, or other order, including a civil penalty which does not exceed the greater of $5,000 or an amount equal to any contribution or expenditure in-volved in such violation, upon a proper showing that the per-son involved has committed, or is about to commit (if the re-lief sought is a permanent or temporary injunction or a re-straining order), a violation of this Act or chapter 95 or chap-ter 96 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954. (C) In any civil action for relief instituted by the Commission under subparagraph (A), if the court determines that the Commission has established that the person involved in such civil action has committed a knowing and willful violation of this Act or of chapter 95 or chapter 96 of the Internal Rev-enue Code of 1954, the court may impose a civil penalty which does not exceed the greater of $10,000 or an amount equal to 200 percent of any contribution or expenditure in-volved in such violation (or, in the case of a violation of sec-tion 320, which is not less than 300 percent of the amount involved in the violation and is not more than the greater of $50,000 or 1,000 percent of the amount involved in the viola-tion). (7) In any action brought under paragraph (5) or (6), sub-penas for witnesses who are required to attend a United States district court may run into any other district. (8)(A) Any party aggrieved by an order of the Commission dismissing a complaint filed by such party under paragraph (1), or by a failure of the Commission to act on such com-plaint during the 120-day period beginning on the date the 50 Nomination and Election complaint is filed, may file a petition with the United States District Court for the District of Columbia. (B) Any petition under subparagraph (A) shall be filed, in the case of a dismissal of a complaint by the Commission, within 60 days after the date of the dismissal. (C) In any proceeding under this paragraph the court may declare that the dismissal of the complaint or the failure to act is contrary to law, and may direct the Commission to conform with such declaration within 30 days, failing which the complainant may bring, in the name of such complain-ant, a civil action to remedy the violation involved in the original complaint. (9) Any judgment of a district court under this subsection may be appealed to the court of appeals, and the judgment of the court of appeals affirming or setting aside, in whole or in part, any such order of the district court shall be final, subject to review by the Supreme Court of the United States upon certiorari or certification as provided in section 1254 of title 28, United States Code. (10) Repealed. Pub. L. 98–620 title IV, 402(1)(A), Nov. 8, 1984, 98 Stat. 3357. (11) If the Commission determines after an investigation that any person has violated an order of the court entered in a proceeding brought under paragraph (6), it may petition the court for an order to hold such person in civil contempt, but if it believes the violation to be knowing and willful it may petition the court for an order to hold such person in criminal contempt. (12)(A) Any notification or investigation made under this sec-tion shall not be made public by the Commission or by any person without the written consent of the person receiving such notification or the person with respect to whom such in-vestigation is made. (B) Any member or employee of the Commission, or any other person, who violates the provisions of subparagraph (A) shall be fined not more than $2,000. Any such member, employee, or other person who knowingly and willfully vio-lates the provisions of subparagraph (A) shall be fined not more than $5,000. (b) Notice to persons not filing required reports prior to insti-tutions of enforcement action; publication of identity of per-sons and unfiled reports. 

Before taking any action under subsection (a) against any person who has failed to file a report required under section 304(a)(2)(A)(iii) for the calendar quarter immediately pre-ceding the election involved, or in accordance with section 304(a)(2)(A)(i), the Commission shall notify the person of such failure to file the required reports. If a satisfactory re-sponse is not received within 4 business days after the date of notification, the Commission shall, pursuant to section 311(a)(7), publish before the election the name of the person and the report or reports such person has failed to file. (c) Reports by the Attorney General of apparent violations. 

Whenever the Commission refers an apparent violation to the Attorney General, the Attorney General shall report to 51 Nomination and Election the Commission any action taken by the Attorney General regarding the apparent violation. Each report shall be trans-mitted within 60 days after the date the Commission refers an apparent violation, and every 30 days thereafter until the final disposition of the apparent violation. (d) Penalties; defenses; mitigation of offenses. 

(1)(A) Any person who knowingly and willfully commits a violation of any provision of this Act which involves the mak-ing, receiving, or reporting of any contribution, donation, or expenditure— (i) aggregating $25,000 or more during a calendar year shall be fined under title 18, United States Code, or imprisoned for not more than 5 years, or both; or (ii) aggregating $2,000 or more (but less than $25,000) dur-ing a calendar year shall be fined under such title, or impris-oned for not more than 1 year, or both. (B) In the case of a knowing and willful violation of section 316(b)(3), the penalties set forth in this subsection shall apply to a violation involving an amount aggregating $250 or more during a calendar year. Such violation of section 316(b)(3) may incorporate a violation of section 317(b), 320, or 321. (C) In the case of a knowing and willful violation of section 322, the penalties set forth in this subsection shall apply without regard to whether the making, receiving, or report-ing of a contribution or expenditure of $1,000 or more is in-volved. (D) Any person who knowingly and willfully commits a viola-tion of section 320 involving an amount aggregating more than $10,000 during a calendar year shall be— (i) imprisoned for not more than 2 years if the amount is less than $25,000 (and subject to imprisonment under subpara-graph (A) if the amount is $25,000 or more); (ii) fined not less than 300 percent of the amount involved in the violation and not more than the greater of— (I) $50,000; or (II) 1,000 percent of the amount involved in the violation; or (iii) both imprisoned under clause (i) and fined under clause (ii). (2) In any criminal action brought for a violation of any pro-vision of this Act or of chapter 95 or chapter 96 of the Inter-nal Revenue Code of 1954, any defendant may evidence their lack of knowledge or intent to commit the alleged violation by introducing as evidence a conciliation agreement entered into between the defendant and the Commission under sub-section (a)(4)(A) which specifically deals with the act or fail-ure to act constituting such violation and which is still in ef-fect. (3) In any criminal action brought for a violation of any pro-vision of this Act or of chapter 95 or chapter 96 of the Inter-nal Revenue Code of 1954, the court before which such ac-tion is brought shall take into account, in weighing the seri-ousness of the violation and in considering the appropriate-ness of the penalty to be imposed if the defendant is found guilty, whether— 52 Nomination and Election (A) the specific act or failure to act which constitutes the vio-lation for which the action was brought is the subject of a conciliation agreement entered into between the defendant and the Commission under subparagraph (a)(4)(A); (B) the conciliation agreement is in effect; and (C) the defendant is, with respect to the violation involved, in compliance with the conciliation agreement. (Pub. L. 92–225, title III, § 309, formerly § 314 as added Pub. L. 93–443, title II, § 208(a), Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1284; re-numbered § 313 and amended Pub. L. 94–283, title I, §§ 105, 109, May 11, 1976, 90 Stat. 481, 483; renumbered § 309 and amended Pub. L. 96–187, title I, §§ 105(4), 108, Jan. 8, 1980, 93 Stat. 1354, 1358; Pub. L. 98–620, title IV, subtitle A, § 402(1)(A), Nov. 8, 1984, 98 Stat. 3357; Pub. L. 99–514 § 2, Oct. 22, 1986, 100 Stat. 2095; Pub. L. 106–58, title VI, § 640(a), (b), Sept. 29, 1999, 113 Stat. 476; Pub. L. 107–155, title III, §§ 312(a), 315(a), (b), March 27, 2002, 116 Stat. 106, 108.) 

2 U.S.C. § 437h. Judicial review 

Actions, including declaratory judgments, for construction of constitutional questions; eligible plaintiffs; certification of such questions to courts of appeal sitting en banc. 

The Commission, the national committee of any political party, or any individual eligible to vote in any election for the office of President may institute such actions in the ap-propriate district court of the United States, including ac-tions for declaratory judgment, as may be appropriate to con-strue the constitutionality of any provision of this Act. The district court immediately shall certify all questions of con-stitutionality of this Act to the United States court of ap-peals for the circuit involved, which shall hear the matter sitting en banc. 

Appeal to Supreme Court; time for appeal. 

Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any decision on matter certified under subsection (a) of this section shall be reviewable by appeal directly to the Supreme Court of the United States. Such appeal shall be brought no later than 20 days after the decision of the court of appeals. The Commission, the national committee of any political party, or any individual eligible to vote in any election for the office of President may institute such actions in the ap-propriate district court of the United States, including ac-tions for declaratory judgment, as may be appropriate to con-strue the constitutionality of any provision of this Act. The district court immediately shall certify all questions of con-stitutionality of this Act to the United States court of ap-peals for the circuit involved, which shall hear the matter sitting en banc. (Pub. L. 92–225, title III, § 310, formerly § 315, as added Pub. L. 93–443, title II, § 208, Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1285; renumbered § 314 and amended Pub. L. 94–283, title I, §§ 105, 115(e), May 11, 1976, 90 Stat. 481, 496; renumbered § 310 and amended Pub. L. 96–187, §§ 105(a)(4), 112(c), Jan. 8, 1980, 93 Stat. 1354, 1366; Pub. L. 98–620, title IV, Sub-53 Nomination and Election title A, § 402(1) (B), Nov. 8, 1984, 98 Stat. 3357; Pub. L. 100– 352, § 6(a), June 27, 1988, 102 Stat. 663.) 

2 U.S.C. § 438. Administrative provisions 

(a) Duties of Commission. The Commission shall— (1) prescribe forms necessary to implement this Act; (2) prepare, publish, and furnish to all persons required to file reports and statements under this Act a manual recom-mending uniform methods of bookkeeping and reporting; (3) develop a filing, coding, and cross-indexing system con-sistent with the purpose of this Act; (4) within 48 hours after the time of the receipt by the Com-mission of reports and statements filed with it, make them available for public inspection, and copying, at the expense of the person requesting such copying, except that any infor-mation copied from such reports or statements may not be sold or used by any person for the purpose of soliciting con-tributions or for commercial purposes, other than using the name and address of any political committee to solicit con-tributions from such committee. A political committee may submit 10 pseudonyms on each report filed in order to pro-tect against the illegal use of names and addresses of con-tributors, provided such committee attaches a list of such pseudonyms to the appropriate report. The Secretary or the Commission shall exclude these lists from the public record; (5) keep such designations, reports, and statements for a pe-riod of 10 years from the date of receipt, except that designa-tions, reports, and statements that relate solely to can-didates for the House of Representatives shall be kept for 5 years from the date of their receipt; (6)(A) compile and maintain a cumulative index of designa-tions, reports, and statements filed under this Act, which index shall be published at regular intervals and made avail-able for purchase directly or by mail; (B) compile, maintain, and revise a separate cumulative index of reports and statements filed by multi-candidate committees, including in such index a list of multi-candidate committees; and (C) compile and maintain a list of multi-candidate commit-tees, which shall be revised and made available monthly; (7) prepare and publish periodically lists of authorized com-mittees which fail to file reports as required by this Act; (8) prescribe rules, regulations, and forms to carry out the provisions of this Act, in accordance with the provisions of subsection (d); and (9) transmit to President and to each House of the Congress no later than June 1 of each year, a report which states in detail the activities of the Commission in carrying out its du-ties under this Act, and any recommendations for any legis-lative or other action the Commission considers appropriate. (b) Audits and field investigations. 

The Commission may conduct audits and field investigations of any political committee required to file a report under sec-tion 304 of this Act. All audits and field investigations con-cerning the verification for, and receipt and use of, any pay-ments received by a candidate or committee under chapter 54 Nomination and Election 95 or chapter 96 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 shall be given priority. Prior to conducting any audit under this subsection, the Commission shall perform an internal review of reports filed by selected committees to determine if the re-ports filed by a particular committee meet the threshold re-quirements for substantial compliance with the Act. Such thresholds for compliance shall be established by the Com-mission. The Commission may, upon an affirmative vote of 4 of its members, conduct an audit and field investigation of any committee which does meet the threshold requirements established by the Commission. Such audit shall be com-menced within 30 days of such vote, except that any audit of an authorized committee of a candidate, under the provi-sions of this subsection, shall be commenced within 6 months of the election for which such committee is authorized. (c) Statutory provisions applicable to forms and information-gathering activities. 

Any forms prescribed by the Commission under subsection (a)(1), and any information-gathering activities of the Com-mission under this Act, shall not be subject to the provisions of section 3512 of title 44, United States Code. (d) Rules, regulations, or forms; issuance, procedures applica-ble, etc. 

(1) Before prescribing any rule, regulation, or form under this section or any other provision of this Act, the Commis-sion shall transmit a statement with respect to such rule, regulation, or form to the Senate and the House of Rep-resentatives, in accordance with this subsection. Such state-ment shall set forth the proposed rule, regulation, or form, and shall contain a detailed explanation and justification of it. (2) If either House of the Congress does not disapprove by resolution any proposed rule or regulation submitted by the Commission under this section within 30 legislative days after the date of the receipt of such proposed rule or regula-tion or within 10 legislative days after the date of receipt of such proposed form, the Commission may prescribe such rule, regulation, or form. (3) For purposes of this subsection, the term ‘‘legislative day’’ means, with respect to statements transmitted to the Senate, any calendar day on which the Senate is in session, and with respect to statements transmitted to the House of Represent-atives, any calendar day on which the House of Representa-tives is in session. (4) For purposes of this subsection, the terms ‘‘rule’’ and ‘‘regulation’’ mean a provision or series of interrelated provi-sions stating a single, separable rule of law. (5) (A) A motion to discharge a committee of the Senate from the consideration of a resolution relating to any such rule, regulation, or form or a motion to proceed to the consider-ation of such a resolution, is highly privileged and shall be decided without debate. (B) Whenever a committee of the House of Representatives reports any resolution relating to any such form, or regula-tion, it is at any time thereafter in order (even though a pre-vious motion to the same effect has been disagreed to) to 55 Nomination and Election move to proceed to the consideration of the resolution. The motion is highly privileged and is not debatable. An amend-ment to the motion is not in order, and is not in order to move to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed with. (e) Scope of protection for good faith reliance upon rules or regulations. 

Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any person who relies upon any rule or regulation prescribed by the Commis-sion in accordance with the provisions of this section and who acts in good faith in accordance with such rule or regu-lation shall not, as a result of such act, be subject to any sanction provided by this Act or by chapter 95 or chapter 96 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954. (f) Promulgation of rules, regulations, and forms by Commis-sion and Internal Revenue Service; report to Congress on co-operative efforts. 

In prescribing such rules, regulations, and forms under this section, the Commission and the Internal Revenue Service shall consult and work together to promulgate rules, regula-tions, and forms which are mutually consistent. The Com-mission shall report to the Congress annually on the steps it has taken to comply with this subsection. (Feb. 7, 1972, Pub. L. 92–225, title III, § 311, 86 Stat. 16– 18; Oct. 15, 1974, Pub. L. 93–443, title II, §§ 208(a), (c)(7)– (10), 209(a)(1), 23.31(b), 88 Stat. 1279, 1286, 1287; May 11, 1976, Pub. L. 94–283, title I, §§ 105, 110, 90 Stat. 481, 486; Jan. 8, 1980, Pub. L. 96–187, title I, §§ 105(4), 109, 93 Stat. 1354, 1362; Dec. 28, 1995, Pub. L. 104–79, § 3(c), 109 Stat. 792; Oct. 29, 2002, Pub. L. 107–252, title VIII, Subtitle A, § 801(b), 116 Stat. 1726.) 

2 U.S.C. § 438a. Maintenance of website of election reports 

(a) In general. The Federal Election Commission shall main-tain a central site on the Internet to make accessible to the public all publicly available election-related reports and in-formation. (b) Election-related report. In this section, the term ‘‘election-related report’’ means any report, designation, or statement required to be filed under the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971. (c) Coordination with other agencies. Any Federal executive agency receiving election-related information which that agency is required by law to publicly disclose shall cooperate and coordinate with the Federal Election Commission to make such report available through, or for posting on, the site of the Federal Election Commission in a timely manner. (Pub. L. 107–155, title V, § 502, March 27, 2002, 116 Stat. 115.) 

2 U.S.C. § 439. Statements filed with state officers 

(a) Appropriate State; defined. 

(1) A copy of each report and statement required to be filed by any person under this Act shall be filed by such person 56 Nomination and Election with the Secretary of State (or equivalent State officer) of the appropriate State, or, if different, the officer of such State who is charged by State law with maintaining State election campaign reports. The chief executive officer of such State shall designate any such officer and notify the Commission of any such designation. (2) For purposes of this subsection, the term ‘‘appropriate State’’ means— (A) for statements and reports in connection with the cam-paign for nomination for election of a candidate to the office of President or Vice President, each State in which an ex-penditure is made on behalf of the candidate; and (B) for statements and reports in connection with the cam-paign for nomination for election, or election, of a candidate to the office of Senator or Representative in, or Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress, the State in which the candidate seeks election; except that political committees other than authorized committees are only required to file, and Secretaries of State required to keep, that portion of the report applicable to candidates seeking election in that State. (b) Duties of State officers. 

The Secretary of State (or equivalent State officer), or the of-ficer designated under subsection (a)(1) of this section, shall— (1) receive and maintain in an orderly manner all reports and statements required by this Act to be filed therewith; (2) keep such reports and statements (either in original filed form or in facsimile copy by microfilm or otherwise) for 2 years after their date of receipt; (3) make each report and statement filed therewith available as soon as practicable (but within 48 hours of receipt) for public inspection and copying during regular business hours, and permit copying of any such report or statement by hand or by duplicating machine at the request of any person, ex-cept that such copying shall be at the expense of the person making the request; and (4) compile and maintain a current list of all reports and statements pertaining to each candidate. (c) Waiver; electronic access. 

Subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall not apply with respect to any State that, as determined by the commission, has a system that permits electonic access to, and duplica-tion of, reports and statements that are filed with the Com-mission. (Pub. L. 92–225, title III, § 312, formerly § 309, Feb. 7, 1972, 86 Stat. 18; renumbered § 317 and amended Pub. L. 94–443, title II, § 208(a), (c)(11), Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1279, 1287; renumbered § 316 Pub. L. 94–283, title I, § 105, May 11, 1976, 90 Stat. 481; renumbered § 312 and amended Pub. L. 96–187, title I, §§ 105(a)(4), 110, Jan. 8, 1980, 93 Stat. 1354, 1364–65; Pub. L. 104–79, § 2, Dec. 28, 1995, 109 Stat. 791.) 57 Nomination and Election 

2 U.S.C. § 439a. Use of contributed amounts for certain purposes 

(a) Permitted uses. A contribution accepted by a candidate, and any other donation received by an individual as support for activities of the individual as a holder of Federal office, may be used by the candidate or individual— (1) for otherwise authorized expenditures in connection with the campaign for Federal office of the candidate or indi-vidual; (2) for ordinary and necessary expenses incurred in connec-tion with duties of the individual as a holder of Federal of-fice; (3) for contributions to an organization described in section 170(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986; (4) for transfers, without limitation, to a national, State, or local committee of a political party; (5) for donations to State and local candidates subject to the provisions of State law; or (6) for any other lawful purpose unless prohibited by sub-section (b) of this section. (b) Prohibited use. (1) In general. A contribution or donation described in sub-section (a) shall not be converted by any person to personal use. (2) Conversion. For the purposes of paragraph (1), a con-tribution or donation shall be considered to be converted to personal use if the contribution or amount is used to fulfill any commitment, obligation, or expense of a person that would exist irrespective of the candidate’s election campaign or individual’s duties as a holder of Federal office, includ-ing— (A) a home mortgage, rent, or utility payment; (B) a clothing purchase; (C) a noncampaign-related automobile expense; (D) a country club membership; (E) a vacation or other noncampaign-related trip; (F) a household food item; (G) a tuition payment; (H) admission to a sporting event, concert, theater, or other form of entertainment not associated with an election cam-paign; and (I) dues, fees, and other payments to a health club or rec-reational facility. (Pub. L. 92–225, title III, § 313, as added Pub. L. 107–155, title III, § 301, March 27, 2002, 116 Stat. 95; Pub. L. 108–447, div. H, title V, § 532, Dec. 8, 2004, 118 Stat. 3272.) 

2 U.S.C. § 441a. Limitations on contributions and expenditures 

(a) Dollar limits on contributions. 

(1) Except as provided in subsection (i) and section 315A, no person shall make contributions— (A) to any candidate and his authorized political committees with respect to any election for Federal office which, in the aggregate, exceed $2,000; (B) to the political committees established and maintained by a national political party, which are not the authorized 58 Nomination and Election political committees of any candidate, in any calendar year which, in the aggregate, exceed $25,000; (C) to any other political committee (other than a committee described in subparagraph (D)) in any calendar year which, in the aggregate, exceed $5,000; or (D) to a political committee established and maintained by a State committee of a political party in any calendar year which, in the aggregate, exceed $10,000. (2) No multicandidate political committee shall make con-tributions— (A) to any candidate and his authorized political committees with respect to any election for Federal office which, in the aggregate, exceed $5,000; (B) to the political committees established and maintained by a national political party, which are not the authorized political committees of any candidate, in any calendar year, which, in the aggregate, exceed $15,000; or (C) to any other political committee in any calendar year which, in the aggregate, exceed $5,000. (3) During the period which begins on January 1 of an odd-numbered year and ends on December 31 of the next even-numbered year, no individual may make contributions aggre-gating more than— (A) $37,500, in the case of contributions to candidates and the authorized committees of candidates; (B) $57,500, in the case of any other contributions, of which not more than $37,500 may be attributable to contributions to political committees which are not political committees of national political parties. (4) The limitations on contributions contained in paragraphs (1) and (2) do not apply to transfers between and among po-litical committees which are national, State, district, or local committees (including any subordinate committee thereof) of the same political party. For purposes of paragraph (2), the term ‘‘multicandidate political committee’’ means a political committee which has been registered under section 303 for a period of not less than 6 months, which has received con-tributions from more than 50 persons, and, except for any State political party organization, has made contributions to 5 or more candidates for Federal office. (5) For purposes of the limitations provided by paragraph (1) and paragraph (2), all contributions made by political com-mittees established or financed or maintained or controlled by any corporation, labor organization, or any other person, including any parent, subsidiary, branch, division, depart-ment, or local unit of such corporation, labor organization, or any other person, or by any group of such persons, shall be considered to have been made by a single political com-mittee, except that (A) nothing in this sentence shall limit transfers between political committees of funds raised through joint fund raising efforts; (B) for purposes of the lim-itations provided by paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) all con-tributions made by a single political committee established or financed or maintained or controlled by a national com-mittee of a political party and by a single political committee established or financed or maintained or controlled by the State committee of a political party shall not be considered 59 Nomination and Election to have been made by a single political committee; and (C) nothing in this section shall limit the transfer of funds be-tween the principal campaign committee of a candidate seek-ing nomination or election to a Federal office and the prin-cipal campaign committee of that candidate for nomination or election to another Federal office if (i) such transfer is not made when the candidate is actively seeking nomination or election to both such offices; (ii) the limitations contained in this Act on contributions by persons are not exceeded by such transfer; and (iii) the candidate has not elected to re-ceive any funds under chapter 95 or chapter 96 of the Inter-nal Revenue Code of 1954. In any case in which a corpora-tion and any of its subsidiaries, branches, divisions, depart-ments, or local units, or a labor organization and any of its subsidiaries, branches, divisions, departments, or local units establish or finance or maintain or control more than one separate segregated fund, all such separate segregated funds shall be treated as a single separate segregated fund for pur-poses of the limitations provided by paragraph (1) and para-graph (2). (6) The limitations on contributions to a candidate imposed by paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection shall apply sepa-rately with respect to each election, except that all elections held in any calendar year for the office of President of the United States (except a general election for such office) shall be considered to be one election. (7) For purposes of this subsection— (A) contributions to a named candidate made to any political committee authorized by such candidate to accept contribu-tions on his behalf shall be considered to be contributions made to such candidate; (B)(i) expenditures made by any person in cooperation, con-sultation, or concert, with, or at the request or suggestion of, a candidate, his authorized political committees, or their agents, shall be considered to be a contribution to such can-didate; (ii) expenditures made by any person (other than a candidate or candidate’s authorized committee) in cooperation, con-sultation, or concert with, or at the request or suggestion of, a national, State, or local committee of a political party, shall be considered to be contributions made to such party com-mittee; and (iii) the financing by any person of the dissemination, dis-tribution, or republication, in whole or in part, of any broad-cast or any written, graphic, or other form of campaign mate-rials prepared by the candidate, his campaign committees, or their authorized agents shall be considered to be an expendi-ture for purposes of this paragraph; and (C) if— (i) any person makes, or contracts to make, any disburse-ment for any electioneering communication (within the meaning of section 304(f)(3)); and (ii) such disbursement is coordinated with a candidate or an authorized committee of such candidate, a Federal, State, or local political party or committee thereof, or an agent or offi-cial of any such candidate, party, or committee; 60 Nomination and Election such disbursement or contracting shall be treated as a con-tribution to the candidate supported by the electioneering communication or that candidate’s party and as an expendi-ture by that candidate or that candidate’s party; and (D) contributions made to or for the benefit of any candidate nominated by a political party for election to the office of Vice President of the United States shall be considered to be contributions made to or for the benefit of the candidate of such party for election to the office of President of the United States. (8) For purposes of the limitations imposed by this section, all contributions made by a person, either directly or indi-rectly, on behalf of a particular candidate, including con-tributions which are in any way earmarked or otherwise di-rected through an intermediary or conduit to such candidate, shall be treated as contributions from such person to such candidate. The intermediary or conduit shall report the origi-nal source and the intended recipient of such contribution to the Commission and to the intended recipient. (b) Dollar limits on expenditures by candidates for office of President of the United States. 

(1) No candidate for the office of President of the United States who is eligible under section 9003 of the Internal Rev-enue Code of 1954 (relating to condition for eligibility for payments) or under section 9033 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (relating to eligibility for payments) to receive payments from the Secretary of the Treasury may make ex-penditures in excess of— (A) $10,000,000, in the case of a campaign for nomination for election to such office, except the aggregate of expenditures under this subparagraph in any one State shall not exceed the greater of 16 cents multiplied by the voting age popu-lation of the State (as certified under subsection (e)), or $200,000; or (B) $20,000,000 in the case of a campaign for election to such office. (2) For purposes of this subsection— (A) expenditures made by or on behalf of any candidate nom-inated by a political party for election to the office of Vice President of the United States shall be considered to be ex-penditures made by or on behalf of the candidate of such party for election to the office of President of the United States; and (B) an expenditure is made on behalf of a candidate, includ-ing a vice presidential candidate, if it is made by— (i) an authorized committee or any other agent of the can-didate for purposes of making any expenditure; or (ii) any person authorized or requested by the candidate, an authorized committee of the candidate, or an agent of the candidate, to make the expenditure. (c) Increases on limits based on increases in price index. 

(1)(A) At the beginning of each calendar year (commencing in 1976), as there become available necessary data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the Department of Labor, the Secretary of Labor shall certify to the Commission and pub-61 Nomination and Election lish in the Federal Register the percent difference between the price index for the 12 months preceding the beginning of such calendar year and the price index for the base period. (B) Except as provided in subparagraph (C), in any calendar year after 2002— (i) a limitation established by subsections (a)(1)(A), (a)(1)(B), (a)(3), (b), (d), or (h) shall be increased by the percent dif-ference determined under subparagraph (A); (ii) each amount so increased shall remain in effect for the calendar year; and (iii) if any amount after adjustment under clause (i) is not a multiple of $100, such amount shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of $100. (C) In the case of limitations under subsections (a)(1)(A), (a)(1)(B), (a)(3), and (h), increases shall only be made in odd-numbered years and such increases shall remain in effect for the 2-year period beginning on the first day following the date of the last general election in the year preceding the year in which the amount is increased and ending on the date of the next general election. (2) For purposes of paragraph (1)— (A) the term ‘‘price index’’ means the average over a calendar year of the Consumer Price Index (all items—United States city average) published monthly by the Bureau of Labor Sta-tistics; and (B) the term ‘‘base period’’ means— (i) for purposes of subsections (b) and (d), calendar year 1974; and (ii) for purposes of subsections (a)(1)(A), (a)(1)(B), (a)(3), and (h), calendar year 2001. (d) Expenditures by national committee, State committee, or subordinate committee of State committee in connection with general election campaign of candidates for Federal office. 

(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law with respect to limitations on expenditures or limitations on contribu-tions, the national committee of a political party and a State committee of a political party, including any subordinate committee of a State committee, may make expenditures in connection with the general election campaign of candidates for Federal office, subject to the limitations contained in paragraphs (2), (3), and (4) of this subsection. (2) The national committee of a political party may not make any expenditure in connection with the general election cam-paign of any candidate for President of the United States who is affiliated with such party which exceeds an amount equal to 2 cents multiplied by the voting age population of the United States (as certified under subsection (e)). Any ex-penditure under this paragraph shall be in addition to any expenditure by a national committee of a political party serv-ing as the principal campaign committee of a candidate for the office of President of the United States. (3) The national committee of a political party, or a State committee of a political party, including any subordinate committee of a State committee, may not make any expendi-ture in connection with the general election campaign of a 62 Nomination and Election candidate for Federal office in a State who is affiliated with such party which exceeds— (A) in the case of a candidate for election to the office of Sen-ator, or of Representative from a State which is entitled to only one Representative, the greater of— (i) 2 cents multiplied by the voting age population of the State (as certified under subsection (e)); or (ii) $20,000; and (B) in the case of a candidate for election to the office of Rep-resentative, Delegate, or Resident Commissioner in any other State, $10,000. (4) Independent versus coordinated expenditures by party. (A) In general. On or after the date on which a political party nominates a candidate, no committee of the political party may make— (i) any coordinated expenditure under this subsection with respect to the candidate during the election cycle at any time after it makes any independent expenditure (as defined in section 301(17)) with respect to the candidate during the election cycle; or (ii) any independent expenditure (as defined in section 301(17)) with respect to the candidate during the election cycle at any time after it makes any coordinated expenditure under this subsection with respect to the candidate during the election cycle. (B) Application. For purposes of this paragraph, all political committees established and maintained by a national polit-ical party (including all congressional campaign committees) and all political committees established and maintained by a State political party (including any subordinate committee of a State committee) shall be considered to be a single political committee. (C) Transfers. A committee of a political party that makes coordinated expenditures under this subsection with respect to a candidate shall not, during an election cycle, transfer any funds to, assign authority to make coordinated expendi-tures under this subsection to, or receive a transfer of funds from, a committee of the political party that has made or in-tends to make an independent expenditure with respect to the candidate. (e) Certification and publication of estimated voting age pop-ulation. 

During the first week of January 1975, and every subse-quent year, the Secretary of Commerce shall certify to the Commission and publish in the Federal Register an estimate of the voting age population of the United States, of each State, and of each congressional district as of the first day of July next preceding the date of certification. The term ‘‘voting age population’’ means resident population, 18 years of age or older. (f) Prohibited contributions and expenditures. 

No candidate or political committee shall knowingly accept any contribution or make any expenditure in violation of the provisions of this section. No officer or employee of a political committee shall knowingly accept a contribution made for 63 Nomination and Election the benefit or use of a candidate, or knowingly make any ex-penditure on behalf of a candidate, in violation of any limita-tion imposed on contributions and expenditures under this section. (g) Attribution of multi-State expenditures to candidate’s ex-penditures limitation in each State. 

The commission shall prescribe rules under which any ex-penditure by a candidate for presidential nominations for use in 2 or more States shall be attributed to such candidate’s expenditure limitation in each such State, based on the vot-ing age population in such State which can reasonably be ex-pected to be influenced by such expenditure. (h) Senatorial candidates. 

Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, amounts to-taling not more than $35,000 may be contributed to a can-didate for nomination for election, or for election, to the United States Senate during the year in which an election is held in which he is such a candidate, by the Republican or Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, or the na-tional committee of a political party, or any combination of such committees. (i) Increased limit to allow response to expenditures from per-sonal funds. 

(1) Increase. (A) In general. Subject to paragraph (2), if the opposition personal funds amount with respect to a candidate for elec-tion to the office of Senator exceeds the threshold amount, the limit under subsection (a)(1)(A) (in this subsection re-ferred to as the ‘applicable limit’) with respect to that can-didate shall be the increased limit. (B) Threshold amount. (i) State-by-State competitive and fair campaign formula. In this subsection, the threshold amount with respect to an election cycle of a candidate described in subparagraph (A) is an amount equal to the sum of— (I) $150,000; and (II) $0.04 multiplied by the voting age population. (ii) Voting age population. In this subparagraph, the term ‘‘voting age population’’ means in the case of a candidate for the office of Senator, the voting age population of the State of the candidate (as certified under section 315(e)). (C) Increased limit. Except as provided in clause (ii), for pur-poses of subparagraph (A), if the opposition personal funds amount is over— (i) 2 times the threshold amount, but not over 4 times that amount— (I) the increased limit shall be 3 times the applicable limit; and (II) the limit under subsection (a)(3) shall not apply with re-spect to any contribution made with respect to a candidate if such contribution is made under the increased limit of sub-paragraph (A) during a period in which the candidate may accept such a contribution; 64 Nomination and Election (ii) 4 times the threshold amount, but not over 10 times that amount— (I) the increased limit shall be 6 times the applicable limit; and (II) the limit under subsection (a)(3) shall not apply with re-spect to any contribution made with respect to a candidate if such contribution is made under the increased limit of sub-paragraph (A) during a period in which the candidate may accept such a contribution; and (iii) 10 times the threshold amount— (I) the increased limit shall be 6 times the applicable limit; (II) the limit under subsection (a)(3) shall not apply with re-spect to any contribution made with respect to a candidate if such contribution is made under the increased limit of sub-paragraph (A) during a period in which the candidate may accept such a contribution; and (III) the limits under subsection (d) with respect to any ex-penditure by a State or national committee of a political party shall not apply. (D) Opposition personal funds amount. The opposition per-sonal funds amount is an amount equal to the excess (if any) of— (i) the greatest aggregate amount of expenditures from per-sonal funds (as defined in section 304(a)(6)(B)) that an oppos-ing candidate in the same election makes; over (ii) the aggregate amount of expenditures from personal funds made by the candidate with respect to the election. (E) Special rule for candidate’s campaign funds. (i) In general. For purposes of determining the aggregate amount of expenditures from personal funds under subpara-graph (D)(ii), such amount shall include the gross receipts advantage of the candidate’s authorized committee. (ii) Gross receipts advantage. For purposes of clause (i), the term ‘‘gross receipts advantage’’ means the excess, if any, of— (I) the aggregate amount of 50 percent of gross receipts of a candidate’s authorized committee during any election cycle (not including contributions from personal funds of the can-didate) that may be expended in connection with the elec-tion, as determined on June 30 and December 31 of the year preceding the year in which a general election is held, over (II) the aggregate amount of 50 percent of gross receipts of the opposing candidate’s authorized committee during any election cycle (not including contributions from personal funds of the candidate) that may be expended in connection with the election, as determined on June 30 and December 31 of the year preceding the year in which a general election is held. (2) Time to accept contributions under increased limit. (A) In general. Subject to subparagraph (B), a candidate and the candidate’s authorized committee shall not accept any contribution, and a party committee shall not make any ex-penditure, under the increased limit under paragraph (1)— (i) until the candidate has received notification of the opposi-tion personal funds amount under section 304(a)(6)(B); and (ii) to the extent that such contribution, when added to the aggregate amount of contributions previously accepted and 65 Nomination and Election party expenditures previously made under the increased lim-its under this subsection for the election cycle, exceeds 110 percent of the opposition personal funds amount. (B) Effect of withdrawal of an opposing candidate. A can-didate and a candidate’s authorized committee shall not ac-cept any contribution and a party shall not make any ex-penditure under the increased limit after the date on which an opposing candidate ceases to be a candidate to the extent that the amount of such increased limit is attributable to such an opposing candidate. (3) Disposal of excess contributions. (A) In general. The aggregate amount of contributions ac-cepted by a candidate or a candidate’s authorized committee under the increased limit under paragraph (1) and not other-wise expended in connection with the election with respect to which such contributions relate shall, not later than 50 days after the date of such election, be used in the manner described in subparagraph (B). (B) Return to contributors. A candidate or a candidate’s au-thorized committee shall return the excess contribution to the person who made the contribution. (j) Limitation on repayment of personal loans. 

Any candidate who incurs personal loans made after the ef-fective date of the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 2002 in connection with the candidate’s campaign for election shall not repay (directly or indirectly), to the extent such loans exceed $250,000, such loans from any contributions made to such candidate or any authorized committee of such candidate after the date of such election. (Pub. L. 92–225, title III, § 315, formerly § 320 as added Pub. L. 94–283, title I, § 112(2), May 11, 1976, 90 Stat. 486; re-numbered § 315, Pub. L. 96–187, title I, § 105(5), Jan. 8, 1980, 93 Stat. 1354; amended Pub. L. 99–514, § 2, Oct. 22, 1986, 100 Stat. 2095; Pub. L. 107–155, title I, § 102, title II, subtitle A, § 202, subtitle B, §§ 213, 214(a), title III, §§ 304(a), 307(a)–(d), 316, 319(b), March 27, 2002, 116 Stat. 86, 90, 94, 97, 102, 108, 112.) 

2 U.S.C. § 441a–1. Modification of certain limits for house candidates in response to personal fund expenditures of opponents 

(a) Availability of increased limit. (1) In general. Subject to paragraph (3), if the opposition per-sonal funds amount with respect to a candidate for election to the office of Representative in, or Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress exceeds $350,000— (A) the limit under subsection (a)(1)(A) with respect to the candidate shall be tripled; (B) the limit under subsection (a)(3) shall not apply with re-spect to any contribution made with respect to the candidate if the contribution is made under the increased limit allowed under subparagraph (A) during a period in which the can-didate may accept such a contribution; and (C) the limits under subsection (d) with respect to any ex-penditure by a State or national committee of a political party on behalf of the candidate shall not apply. 66 Nomination and Election (2) Determination of opposition personal funds amount. (A) In general. The opposition personal funds amount is an amount equal to the excess (if any) of— (i) the greatest aggregate amount of expenditures from per-sonal funds (as defined in subsection (b)(1)) that an opposing candidate in the same election makes; over (ii) the aggregate amount of expenditures from personal funds made by the candidate with respect to the election. (B) Special rule for candidate’s campaign funds. (i) In general. For purposes of determining the aggregate amount of expenditures from personal funds under subpara-graph (A), such amount shall include the gross receipts ad-vantage of the candidate’s authorized committee. (ii) Gross receipts advantage. For purposes of clause (i), the term ‘‘gross receipts advantage’’ means the excess, if any, of— (I) the aggregate amount of 50 percent of gross receipts of a candidate’s authorized committee during any election cycle (not including contributions from personal funds of the can-didate) that may be expended in connection with the elec-tion, as determined on June 30 and December 31 of the year preceding the year in which a general election is held, over (II) the aggregate amount of 50 percent of gross receipts of the opposing candidate’s authorized committee during any election cycle (not including contributions from personal funds of the candidate) that may be expended in connection with the election, as determined on June 30 and December 31 of the year preceding the year in which a general election is held. (3) Time to accept contributions under increased limit. (A) In general. Subject to subparagraph (B), a candidate and the candidate’s authorized committee shall not accept any contribution, and a party committee shall not make any ex-penditure, under the increased limit under paragraph (1)— (i) until the candidate has received notification of the opposi-tion personal funds amount under subsection (b)(1); and (ii) to the extent that such contribution, when added to the aggregate amount of contributions previously accepted and party expenditures previously made under the increased lim-its under this subsection for the election cycle, exceeds 100 percent of the opposition personal funds amount. (B) Effect of withdrawal of an opposing candidate. A can-didate and a candidate’s authorized committee shall not ac-cept any contribution and a party shall not make any ex-penditure under the increased limit after the date on which an opposing candidate ceases to be a candidate to the extent that the amount of such increased limit is attributable to such an opposing candidate. (4) Disposal of excess contributions. (A) In general. The aggregate amount of contributions ac-cepted by a candidate or a candidate’s authorized committee under the increased limit under paragraph (1) and not other-wise expended in connection with the election with respect to which such contributions relate shall, not later than 50 days after the date of such election, be used in the manner described in subparagraph (B). 67 Nomination and Election (B) Return to contributors. A candidate or a candidate’s au-thorized committee shall return the excess contribution to the person who made the contribution. (b) Notification of expenditures from personal funds. (1) In general. (A) Definition of expenditure from personal funds. In this paragraph, the term ‘‘expenditure from personal funds’’ means— (i) an expenditure made by a candidate using personal funds; and (ii) a contribution or loan made by a candidate using per-sonal funds or a loan secured using such funds to the can-didate’s authorized committee. (B) Declaration of intent. Not later than the date that is 15 days after the date on which an individual becomes a can-didate for the office of Representative in, or Delegate or Resi-dent Commissioner to, the Congress, the candidate shall file a declaration stating the total amount of expenditures from personal funds that the candidate intends to make, or to ob-ligate to make, with respect to the election that will exceed $350,000. (C) Initial notification. Not later than 24 hours after a can-didate described in subparagraph (B) makes or obligates to make an aggregate amount of expenditures from personal funds in excess of $350,000 in connection with any election, the candidate shall file a notification. (D) Additional notification. After a candidate files an initial notification under subparagraph (C), the candidate shall file an additional notification each time expenditures from per-sonal funds are made or obligated to be made in an aggre-gate amount that exceeds $10,000. Such notification shall be filed not later than 24 hours after the expenditure is made. (E) Contents. A notification under subparagraph (C) or (D) shall include— (i) the name of the candidate and the office sought by the candidate; (ii) the date and amount of each expenditure; and (iii) the total amount of expenditures from personal funds that the candidate has made, or obligated to make, with re-spect to an election as of the date of the expenditure that is the subject of the notification. (F) Place of filing. Each declaration or notification required to be filed by a candidate under subparagraph (C), (D), or (E) shall be filed with— (i) the Commission; and (ii) each candidate in the same election and the national party of each such candidate. (2) Notification of disposal of excess contributions. In the next regularly scheduled report after the date of the election for which a candidate seeks nomination for election to, or election to, Federal office, the candidate or the candidate’s authorized committee shall submit to the Commission a re-port indicating the source and amount of any excess con-tributions (as determined under subsection (a)) and the man-ner in which the candidate or the candidate’s authorized committee used such funds. 68 Nomination and Election (3) Enforcement. For provisions providing for the enforce-ment of the reporting requirements under this subsection, see section 309. (Pub. L. 92–225, title III, § 315A, as added Pub. L. 107–155, title III, § 319(a), March 27, 2002, 116 Stat. 109.) 

2 U.S.C. § 441b. Contributions or expenditures by national banks, corporations, or labor organizations 

(a) It is unlawful for any national bank, or any corporation organized by authority of any law of Congress, to make a contribution or expenditure in connection with any election to any political office, or in connection with any primary elec-tion or political convention or caucus held to select can-didates for any political office, or for any corporation what-ever, or any labor organization, to make a contribution or ex-penditure in connection with any election at which presi-dential and vice presidential electors or a Senator or Rep-resentative in, or a Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, Congress are to be voted for, or in connection with any pri-mary election or political convention or caucus held to select candidates for any of the foregoing offices, or for any can-didate, political committee, or other person knowingly to ac-cept or receive any contribution prohibited by this section, or any officer or any director of any corporation or any national bank or any officer of any labor organization to consent to any contribution or expenditure by the corporation, national bank, or labor organization, as the case may be, prohibited by this section. (b) (1) For the purposes of this section the term ‘‘labor organiza-tion’’ means any organization of any kind, or any agency or employee representation committee or plan, in which em-ployees participate and which exists for the purpose, in whole or in part, of dealing with employers concerning griev-ances, labor disputes, wages, rates of pay, hours of employ-ment, or conditions of work. (2) For purposes of this section and section 12(h) of the Pub-lic Utility Holding Company Act (15 U.S.C. 791(h)), the term ‘‘contribution or expenditure’’ includes a contribution or ex-penditure, as those terms are defined in section 301, and also includes any direct or indirect payment, distribution, loan, advance, deposit, or gift of money, or any services, or anything of value (except a loan of money by a national or State bank made in accordance with the applicable banking laws and regulations and in the ordinary course of business) to any candidate, campaign committee, or political party or organization, in connection with any election to any of the of-fices referred to in this section or for any applicable election-eering communication, but shall not include (A) communica-tions by a corporation to its stockholders and executive or administrative personnel and their families or by a labor or-ganization to its members and their families on any subject; (B) nonpartisan registration and get-out-the-vote campaigns by a corporation aimed at its stockholders and executive or administrative personnel and their families, or by a labor or-ganization aimed at its members and their families; and (C) the establishment, administration, and solicitation of con-69 Nomination and Election tributions to a separate segregated fund to be utilized for po-litical purposes by a corporation, labor organization, mem-bership organization, cooperative, or corporation without cap-ital stock. (3) It shall be unlawful— (A) for such a fund to make a contribution or expenditure by utilizing money or anything of value secured by physical force, job discrimination, financial reprisals, or the threat of force, job discrimination, or financial reprisal; or by dues, fees, or other moneys required as a condition of membership in a labor organization or as a condition of employment, or by moneys obtained in any commercial transaction; (B) for any person soliciting an employee for a contribution to such a fund to fail to inform such employee of the political purposes of such fund at the time of such solicitation; and (C) for any person soliciting an employee for a contribution to such a fund to fail to inform such employee, at the time of such solicitation, of his right to refuse to so contribute without any reprisal. (4) (A) Except as provided in subparagraphs (B), (C), and (D), it shall be unlawful— (i) for a corporation, or a separate segregated fund estab-lished by a corporation, to solicit contributions to such a fund from any person other than its stockholders and their fami-lies and its executive or administrative personnel and their families, and (ii) for a labor organization, or a separate segregated fund es-tablished by a labor organization, to solicit contributions to such a fund from any person other than its members and their families. (B) It shall not be unlawful under this section for a corpora-tion, a labor organization, or a separate segregated fund es-tablished by such corporation or such labor organization, to make 2 written solicitations for contributions during the cal-endar year from any stockholder, executive or administrative personnel, or employee of a corporation or the families of such persons. A solicitation under this subparagraph may be made only by mail addressed to stockholders, executive or administrative personnel, or employees at their residence and shall be so designed that the corporation, labor organiza-tion, or separate segregated fund conducting such solicitation cannot determine who makes a contribution of $50 or less as a result of such solicitation and who does not make such a contribution. (C) This paragraph shall not prevent a membership organi-zation, cooperative, or corporation without capital stock, or a separate segregated fund established by a membership orga-nization, cooperative, or corporation without capital stock, from soliciting contributions to such a fund from members of such organization, cooperative, or corporation without capital stock. (D) This paragraph shall not prevent a trade association or a separate segregated fund established by a trade association from soliciting contributions from the stockholders and exec-utive or administrative personnel of the member corpora-tions of such trade association and the families of such stock-holders or personnel to the extent that such solicitation of 70 Nomination and Election such stockholders and personnel, and their families, has been separately and specifically approved by the member corporation involved, and such member corporation does not approve any such solicitation by more than one such trade association in any calendar year. (5) Notwithstanding any other law, any method of soliciting voluntary contributions or of facilitating the making of vol-untary contributions to a separate segregated fund estab-lished by a corporation, permitted by law to corporations with regard to stockholders and executive or administrative personnel, shall also be permitted to labor organizations with regard to their members. (6) Any corporation, including its subsidiaries, branches, di-visions, and affiliates, that utilizes a method of soliciting vol-untary contributions or facilitating the making of voluntary contributions, shall make available such method, on written request and at a cost sufficient only to reimburse the cor-poration for the expenses incurred thereby, to a labor organi-zation representing any members working for such corpora-tion, its subsidiaries, branches, divisions, and affiliates. (7) For purposes of this section, the term ‘‘executive or ad-ministrative personnel’’ means individuals employed by acorporation who are paid on a salary, rather than hourly, basis and who have policymaking, managerial, professional, or supervisory responsibilities. (c) Rules relating to electioneering communications. (1) Applicable electioneering communication. For purposes of this section, the term ‘‘applicable electioneering communica-tion’’ means an electioneering communication (within the meaning of section 304(f)(3)) which is made by any entity de-scribed in subsection (a) of this section or by any other per-son using funds donated by an entity described in subsection (a) of this section. (2) Exception. Notwithstanding paragraph (1), the term ‘‘ap-plicable electioneering communication’’ does not include acommunication by a section 501(c)(4) organization or a polit-ical organization (as defined in section 527(e)(1) of the Inter-nal Revenue Code of 1986) made under section 304(f)(2)(E) or (F) of this Act if the communication is paid for exclusively by funds provided directly by individuals who are United States citizens or nationals or lawfully admitted for perma-nent residence (as defined in section 101(a)(20) of the Immi-gration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(20))). For pur-poses of the preceding sentence, the term ‘‘provided directly by individuals’’ does not include funds the source of which is an entity described in subsection (a) of this section. (3) Special operating rules. (A) Definition under paragraph (1). An electioneering com-munication shall be treated as made by an entity described in subsection (a) if an entity described in subsection (a) di-rectly or indirectly disburses any amount for any of the costs of the communication. (B) Exception under paragraph (2). A section 501(c)(4) orga-nization that derives amounts from business activities or re-ceives funds from any entity described in subsection (a) shall be considered to have paid for any communication out of such amounts unless such organization paid for the commu-71 Nomination and Election nication out of a segregated account to which only individ-uals can contribute, as described in section 304(f)(2)(E). (4) Definitions and rules. For purposes of this subsection— (A) the term ‘‘section 501(c)(4) organization’’ means— (i) an organization described in section 501(c)(4) of the Inter-nal Revenue Code of 1986 and exempt from taxation under section 501(a) of such Code; or (ii) an organization which has submitted an application to the Internal Revenue Service for determination of its status as an organization described in clause (i); and (B) a person shall be treated as having made a disbursement if the person has executed a contract to make the disburse-ment. (5) Coordination with Internal Revenue Code. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to authorize an organiza-tion exempt from taxation under section 501(a) of the Inter-nal Revenue Code of 1986 to carry out any activity which is prohibited under such Code. (6) Special rules for targeted communications. (A) Exception does not apply. Paragraph (2) shall not apply in the case of a targeted communication that is made by an organization described in such paragraph. (B) Targeted communication. For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term ‘‘targeted communication’’ means an election-eering communication (as defined in section 304(f)(3)) that is distributed from a television or radio broadcast station or provider of cable or satellite television service and, in the case of a communication which refers to a candidate for an office other than President or Vice President, is targeted to the relevant electorate. (C) Definition. For purposes of this paragraph, a communica-tion is ‘‘targeted to the relevant electorate’’ if it meets the re-quirements described in section 304(f)(3)(C). (Pub. L. 92–225, title III, § 316, formerly § 321, as added Pub. L. 94–283, title I, § 112(2), May 11, 1976, 90 Stat. 490; renumbered § 316 and amended Pub. L. 96–187, title I, §§ 105(5), 112(d), Jan. 8, 1980, 93 Stat. 1354, 1366; Pub. L. 107–155, title II, §§ 203, 204, 214(d), Mar. 27, 2002, 116 Stat. 91, 92, 95.) 

2 U.S.C. § 441c. Contributions by government contractors 

(a) Prohibition. 

It shall be unlawful for any person— (1) who enters into any contract with the United States or any department or agency thereof either for the rendition of personal services or furnishing any material, supplies, or equipment to the United States or any department or agency thereof or for selling any land or building to the United States or any department or agency thereof, if payment for the performance of such contract or payment for such mate-rial, supplies, equipment, land, or building is to be made in whole or in part from funds appropriated by the Congress, at any time between the commencement of negotiations for and the later of (A) the completion of performance under; or (B) the termination of negotiations for, such contract or fur-nishing of material, supplies, equipment, land, or buildings, directly or indirectly to make any contribution of money or 72 Nomination and Election other things of value, or to promise expressly or impliedly to make any such contribution to any political party, com-mittee, or candidate for public office or to any person for any political purpose or use; or (2) knowingly to solicit any such contribution from any such person for any such purpose during any such period. (b) Separate segregated funds. 

This section does not prohibit or make unlawful the estab-lishment or administration of, or the solicitation of contribu-tions to, any separate segregated fund by any corporation, labor organization, membership organization, cooperative, or corporation without capital stock for the purpose of influ-encing the nomination for election, or election of any person to Federal office, unless the provisions of section 441b of this title prohibit or make unlawful the establishment or admin-istration of, or the solicitation of contributions to, such fund. Each specific prohibition, allowance, and duty applicable to a corporation, labor organization, or separate fund under sec-tion 441b of this title applies to a corporation, labor organi-zation, or separate segregated fund to which this subsection applies. (c) ‘‘Labor organization’’ defined. 

For purposes of this section, the term ‘‘labor organization’’ has the meaning given it by section 441b(b)(1) of this title. (Pub. L. 92–225, title III, § 317, formerly § 322, as added Pub. L. 94–283, title I, § 112(2), May 11, 1976, 90 Stat. 492; renumbered § 317 Pub. L. 96–187, title I, § 105(a)(5), Jan. 8, 1980, 93 Stat. 1354.) 

2 U.S.C. § 441d. Publication and distribution of statements and solicitations; charge for newspaper or magazine space 

(a) Whenever a political committee makes a disbursement for the purpose of financing any communication through any broadcasting station, newspaper, magazine, outdoor adver-tising facility, mailing, or any other type of general public political advertising, or whenever any person makes a dis-bursement for the purpose of financing communications ex-pressly advocating the election or defeat of a clearly identi-fied candidate, or solicits any contribution through any broadcasting station, newspaper, magazine, outdoor adver-tising facility, mailing, or any other type of general public political advertising or makes a disbursement for an election-eering communication (as defined in section 304(f)(3)), such communication— (1) if paid for and authorized by a candidate, an authorized political committee of a candidate, or its agents, shall clearly state that the communication has been paid for by such au-thorized political committee, (2) if paid for by other persons but authorized by a can-didate, an authorized political committee of a candidate, or its agents, shall clearly state that the communication is paid for by such other persons and authorized by such authorized political committee; 73 Nomination and Election (3) if not authorized by a candidate, an authorized political committee of a candidate, or its agents, shall clearly state the name and permanent street address, telephone number, or World Wide Web address of the person who paid for the communication and state that the communication is not au-thorized by any candidate or candidate’s committee. (b) No person who sells space in a newspaper or magazine to a candidate or to the agent of a candidate for use in con-nection with such candidate’s campaign, may charge any amount for such space which exceeds the amount charged for comparable use of such space for other purposes. (c) Specification. Any printed communication described in subsection (a) shall— (1) be of sufficient type size to be clearly readable by the re-cipient of the communication; (2) be contained in a printed box set apart from the other contents of the communication; and (3) be printed with a reasonable degree of color contrast be-tween the background and the printed statement. (d) Additional requirements. (1) Communications by candidates or authorized persons. (A) By radio. Any communication described in paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection (a) which is transmitted through radio shall include, in addition to the requirements of that para-graph, an audio statement by the candidate that identifies the candidate and states that the candidate has approved the communication. (B) By television. Any communication described in paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection (a) which is transmitted through tele-vision shall include, in addition to the requirements of that paragraph, a statement that identifies the candidate and states that the candidate has approved the communication. Such statement— (i) shall be conveyed by— (I) an unobscured, full-screen view of the candidate making the statement, or (II) the candidate in voice-over, accompanied by a clearly identifiable photographic or similar image of the candidate; and (ii) shall also appear in writing at the end of the communica-tion in a clearly readable manner with a reasonable degree of color contrast between the background and the printed statement, for a period of at least 4 seconds. (2) Communications by others. Any communication described in paragraph (3) of subsection (a) which is transmitted through radio or television shall include, in addition to the requirements of that paragraph, in a clearly spoken manner, the following audio statement: ‘‘ ll is responsible for the content of this advertising.’’ (with the blank to be filled in with the name of the political committee or other person pay-ing for the communication and the name of any connected or-ganization of the payor). If transmitted through television, the statement shall be conveyed by an unobscured, full-screen view of a representative of the political committee or other person making the statement, or by a representative of such political committee or other person in voice-over, and shall also appear in a clearly readable manner with a rea-74 Nomination and Election sonable degree of color contrast between the background and the printed statement, for a period of at least 4 seconds. (Pub. L. 92–225, title III, § 318, formerly § 323, as added Pub. L. 94–283, title I, § 112(2), May 11, 1976, 90 Stat. 493; renumbered § 318 and amended, Pub. L. 96–187, title I, §§ 105(5), 111, Jan. 8, 1980, 93 Stat. 1354, 1365; Pub. L. 107–155, title III, § 311, March 27, 2002, 116 Stat. 105.) 

2 U.S.C. § 441e. Contributions and donations by foreign nationals 

(a) Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for— (1) a foreign national, directly or indirectly, to make— (A) a contribution or donation of money or other thing of value, or to make an express or implied promise to make a contribution or donation, in connection with a Federal, State, or local election; (B) a contribution or donation to a committee of a political party; or (C) an expenditure, independent expenditure, or disburse-ment for an electioneering communication (within the mean-ing of section 304(f)(3)); or (2) a person to solicit, accept, or receive a contribution or do-nation described in subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph (1) from a foreign national. (b) As used in this section, the term ‘‘foreign national’’ means— (1) a foreign principal, as such term is defined by section 1(b) of the Foreign Agents Registration Act of 1938 (22 U.S.C. 611(b)), except that the term ‘‘foreign national’’ shall not in-clude any individual who is a citizen of the United States; or (2) an individual who is not a citizen of the United States or a national of the United States (as defined in section 101(a)(22) of the Immigration and Nationality Act) and who is not lawfully admitted for permanent residence, as defined by section 101(a)(20) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(20)). (Pub. L. 92–225, title III, § 319, formerly § 324, as added Pub. L. 94–283, title I, § 112(2), May 11, 1976, 90 Stat. 493; renumbered § 319, Pub. L. 96–187, title I, § 105(5), Jan. 8, 1980, 93 Stat. 1354; Pub. L. 107–155, title III, §§ 303, 317, March 27, 2002, 116 Stat. 96, 109.) 

2 U.S.C. § 441f. Contributions in name of another prohibited 

No person shall make a contribution in the name of another person or knowingly permit his name to be used to effect such a contribution, and no person shall knowingly accept a contribution made by one person in the name of another per-son. (Pub. L. 92–225, title III, § 320, formerly § 325, as added Pub. L. 94–283, title I, § 112(2), May 11, 1976, 90 Stat. 494; renumbered § 320 Pub. L. 96–187, title I, § 105(a)(5), Jan. 8, 1980, 93 Stat. 1354.) 75 Nomination and Election 

2 U.S.C. § 441g. Limitation on contribution of currency 

No person shall make contributions of currency of the United States or currency of any foreign country to or for the benefit of any candidate which, in the aggregate, exceed $100, with respect to any campaign of such candidate for nomination for election, or for election, to Federal office. (Pub. L. 92–225, title III, § 321, formerly § 326, as added Pub. L. 94–283, title I, § 112(2), May 11, 1976, 90 Stat. 494; renumbered § 321 Pub. L. 96–187, title I, § §105(a)(5), Jan. 8, 1980, 93 Stat. 1354.) 

2 U.S.C. § 441h. Fraudulent misrepresentation of campaign authority 

(a) In general. No person who is a candidate for Federal of-fice or an employee or agent of such a candidate shall— (1) fraudulently misrepresent himself or any committee or organization under his control as speaking or writing or oth-erwise acting for or on behalf of any other candidate or polit-ical party or employee or agent thereof on a matter which is damaging to such other candidate or political party or em-ployee or agent thereof; or (2) willfully and knowingly participate in or conspire to par-ticipate in any plan, scheme, or design to violate paragraph (1). (b) Fraudulent solicitation of funds. No person shall— (1) fraudulently misrepresent the person as speaking, writ-ing, or otherwise acting for or on behalf of any candidate or political party or employee or agent thereof for the purpose of soliciting contributions or donations; or (2) willfully and knowingly participate in or conspire to par-ticipate in any plan, scheme, or design to violate paragraph (1). (Pub. L. 92–225, title III, § 322, formerly § 327, as added Pub. L. 94–283, title I, § 112(2), May 11, 1976, 90 Stat. 494; renumbered § 322, Pub. L. 96–187, title I, § 105(5), Jan. 8, 1980, 93 Stat. 1354; Pub. L. 107–155, title III, § 309, March 27, 2002, 116 Stat. 104.) 

2 U.S.C. § 441i. Soft money of political parties 

(a) National committees. (1) In general. A national committee of a political party (in-cluding a national congressional campaign committee of a political party) may not solicit, receive, or direct to another person a contribution, donation, or transfer of funds or any other thing of value, or spend any funds, that are not subject to the limitations, prohibitions, and reporting requirements of this Act. (2) Applicability. The prohibition established by paragraph (1) applies to any such national committee, any officer or agent acting on behalf of such a national committee, and any entity that is directly or indirectly established, financed, maintained, or controlled by such a national committee. (b) State, district, and local committees. (1) In general. Except as provided in paragraph (2), an amount that is expended or disbursed for Federal election ac-tivity by a State, district, or local committee of a political party (including an entity that is directly or indirectly estab-76 Nomination and Election lished, financed, maintained, or controlled by a State, dis-trict, or local committee of a political party and an officer or agent acting on behalf of such committee or entity), or by an association or similar group of candidates for State or local office or of individuals holding State or local office, shall be made from funds subject to the limitations, prohibitions, and reporting requirements of this Act. (2) Applicability. (A) In general. Notwithstanding clause (i) or (ii) of section 301(20)(A), and subject to subparagraph (B), paragraph (1) shall not apply to any amount expended or disbursed by a State, district, or local committee of a political party for an activity described in either such clause to the extent the amounts expended or disbursed for such activity are allo-cated (under regulations prescribed by the Commission) among amounts— (i) which consist solely of contributions subject to the limita-tions, prohibitions, and reporting requirements of this Act (other than amounts described in subparagraph (B)(iii)); and (ii) other amounts which are not subject to the limitations, prohibitions, and reporting requirements of this Act (other than any requirements of this subsection). (B) Conditions. Subparagraph (A) shall only apply if— (i) the activity does not refer to a clearly identified candidate for Federal office; (ii) the amounts expended or disbursed are not for the costs of any broadcasting, cable, or satellite communication, other than a communication which refers solely to a clearly identi-fied candidate for State or local office; (iii) the amounts expended or disbursed which are described in subparagraph (A)(ii) are paid from amounts which are do-nated in accordance with State law and which meet the re-quirements of subparagraph (C), except that no person (in-cluding any person established, financed, maintained, or con-trolled by such person) may donate more than $10,000 to a State, district, or local committee of a political party in a cal-endar year for such expenditures or disbursements; and (iv) the amounts expended or disbursed are made solely from funds raised by the State, local, or district committee which makes such expenditure or disbursement, and do not include any funds provided to such committee from— (I) any other State, local, or district committee of any State party, (II) the national committee of a political party (including a national congressional campaign committee of a political party), (III) any officer or agent acting on behalf of any committee described in subclause (I) or (II), or (IV) any entity directly or indirectly established, financed, maintained, or controlled by any committee described in sub-clause (I) or (II). (C) Prohibiting involvement of national parties, Federal can-didates and officeholders, and State parties acting jointly. Notwithstanding subsection (e) (other than subsection (e)(3)), amounts specifically authorized to be spent under subpara-graph (B)(iii) meet the requirements of this subparagraph only if the amounts— 77 Nomination and Election (i) are not solicited, received, directed, transferred, or spent by or in the name of any person described in subsection (a) or (e); and (ii) are not solicited, received, or directed through fund-raising activities conducted jointly by 2 or more State, local, or district committees of any political party or their agents, or by a State, local, or district committee of a political party on behalf of the State, local, or district committee of a polit-ical party or its agent in one or more other States. (c) Fundraising costs. An amount spent by a person de-scribed in subsection (a) or (b) to raise funds that are used, in whole or in part, for expenditures and disbursements for a Federal election activity shall be made from funds subject to the limitations, prohibitions, and reporting requirements of this Act. (d) Tax-exempt organizations. A national, State, district, or local committee of a political party (including a national con-gressional campaign committee of a political party), an entity that is directly or indirectly established, financed, main-tained, or controlled by any such national, State, district, or local committee or its agent, and an officer or agent acting on behalf of any such party committee or entity, shall not so-licit any funds for, or make or direct any donations to— (1) an organization that is described in section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and exempt from taxation under section 501(a) of such Code (or has submitted an ap-plication for determination of tax exempt status under such section) and that makes expenditures or disbursements in connection with an election for Federal office (including ex-penditures or disbursements for Federal election activity); or (2) an organization described in section 527 of such Code (other than a political committee, a State, district, or local committee of a political party, or the authorized campaign committee of a candidate for State or local office). (e) Federal candidates. (1) In general. A candidate, individual holding Federal office, agent of a candidate or an individual holding Federal office, or an entity directly or indirectly established, financed, maintained or controlled by or acting on behalf of 1 or more candidates or individuals holding Federal office, shall not— (A) solicit, receive, direct, transfer, or spend funds in connec-tion with an election for Federal office, including funds for any Federal election activity, unless the funds are subject to the limitations, prohibitions, and reporting requirements of this Act; or (B) solicit, receive, direct, transfer, or spend funds in connec-tion with any election other than an election for Federal of-fice or disburse funds in connection with such an election un-less the funds— (i) are not in excess of the amounts permitted with respect to contributions to candidates and political committees under paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of section 315(a); and (ii) are not from sources prohibited by this Act from making contributions in connection with an election for Federal of-fice. (2) State law. Paragraph (1) does not apply to the solicita-tion, receipt, or spending of funds by an individual described 78 Nomination and Election in such paragraph who is or was also a candidate for a State or local office solely in connection with such election for State or local office if the solicitation, receipt, or spending of funds is permitted under State law and refers only to such State or local candidate, or to any other candidate for the State or local office sought by such candidate, or both. (3) Fundraising events. Notwithstanding paragraph (1) or subsection (b)(2)(C), a candidate or an individual holding Federal office may attend, speak, or be a featured guest at a fundraising event for a State, district, or local committee of a political party. (4) Permitting certain solicitations. (A) General solicitations. Notwithstanding any other provi-sion of this subsection, an individual described in paragraph (1) may make a general solicitation of funds on behalf of any organization that is described in section 501(c) of the Inter-nal Revenue Code of 1986 and exempt from taxation under section 501(a) of such Code (or has submitted an application for determination of tax exempt status under such section) (other than an entity whose principal purpose is to conduct activities described in clauses (i) and (ii) of section 301(20)(A)) where such solicitation does not specify how the funds will or should be spent. (B) Certain specific solicitations. In addition to the general solicitations permitted under subparagraph (A), an indi-vidual described in paragraph (1) may make a solicitation explicitly to obtain funds for carrying out the activities de-scribed in clauses (i) and (ii) of section 301(20)(A), or for an entity whose principal purpose is to conduct such activities, if— (i) the solicitation is made only to individuals; and (ii) the amount solicited from any individual during any cal-endar year does not exceed $20,000. (f) State candidates. (1) In general. A candidate for State or local office, individual holding State or local office, or an agent of such a candidate or individual may not spend any funds for a communication described in section 301(20)(A)(iii) unless the funds are sub-ject to the limitations, prohibitions, and reporting require-ments of this Act. (2) Exception for certain communications. Paragraph (1) shall not apply to an individual described in such paragraph if the communication involved is in connection with an elec-tion for such State or local office and refers only to such indi-vidual or to any other candidate for the State or local office held or sought by such individual, or both. (Pub. L. 92–225, title III, § 323, as added Pub. L. 107–155, title I, § 101(a), March 27, 2002, 116 Stat. 82.) 

2 U.S.C. § 441k. Prohibition of contributions by minors 

An individual who is 17 years old or younger shall not make a contribution to a candidate or a contribution or donation to a committee of a political party. (Pub. L. 92–225, title III, § 324, as added Pub. L. 107–155, title III, § 318, March 27, 2002, 116 Stat. 109.) 79 Nomination and Election 

2 U.S.C. § 442. Authority to procure technical support and other services and incur travel expenses; payment of such expenses 

For the purpose of carrying out his duties under the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971, the Secretary of the Senate is authorized, from and after July 1, 1972, (1) to procure technical support services, (2) to procure the temporary or intermittent services of individual technicians, experts, or consultants, or organizations thereof, in the same manner and under the same conditions, to the extent applicable, as a standing committee of the Senate may procure such serv-ices under section 72a(i) of this title, (3) with the prior con-sent of the Government department or agency concerned and the Committee on Rules and Administration, to use on a re-imbursable basis the services of personnel of any such de-partment or agency, and (4) to incur official travel expenses. Payments to carry out the provisions of this paragraph shall be made from funds included in the appropriation ‘‘Miscella-neous Items’’ under the heading ‘‘Contingent Expenses of the Senate’’ upon vouchers approved by the Secretary of the Sen-ate. All sums received by the Secretary under authority of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 shall be covered into the Treasury as miscellaneous receipts. (Pub. L. 92–342, §101, July 10, 1972, 86 Stat. 435.) 

2 U.S.C. § 451. Extension of credit by regulated industries 

The Secretary of Transportation, the Federal Communica-tions Commission, and the Interstate Commerce Commission shall each promulgate, within ninety days after February 7, 1972, its own regulations with respect to the extension of credit, without security, by any person regulated by such Board or Commission to any candidate for Federal office, or to any person on behalf of such a candidate, for goods fur-nished or services rendered in connection with the campaign of such candidate for nomination for election, or election, to such office. (Pub. L. 92–225, title IV, § 401, Feb. 7, 1972, 86 Stat. 19; Pub. L. 93–443, title II, § 201(b)(1), Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1275; Pub. L. 103–272, § 4(a), July 5, 1994, 108 Stat. 1360; Pub. L. 104–88, Title III, § 313, Dec. 29, 1995, 109 Stat. 948; Pub. L. 104–287, § 6(g), Oct. 11, 1996, 110 Stat. 3399.) 

2 U.S.C. § 452. Prohibition against use of certain federal funds for election activities 

No part of any funds appropriated to carry out the Economic Opportunity Act of 1964 [42 U.S.C. 2701 et seq.] shall be used to finance directly or indirectly, any activity designed to influence the outcome of any election to Federal office, or any voter registration activity, or to pay the salary of any of-ficer or employee of the Community Services Administration who, in his official capacity as such an officer or employee, engages in any such activity. (Pub. L. 92–225, title IV, § 401, Feb. 7, 1972, 86 Stat. 19; Pub. L. 93–443, title II, § 201(b)(2), Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1275.) 80 Nomination and Election 

2 U.S.C. § 453. State laws affected 

(a) In general. Subject to subsection (b), the provisions of this Act, and of rules prescribed under this Act, supersede and preempt any provision of State law with respect to election to Federal office. (b) State and local committees of political parties. Notwith-standing any other provision of this Act, a State or local com-mittee of a political party may, subject to State law, use ex-clusively funds that are not subject to the prohibitions, limi-tations, and reporting requirements of the Act for the pur-chase or construction of an office building for such State or local committee. (Pub. L. 92–225, title IV, § 403, Feb. 7, 1972, 86 Stat. 20; Pub. L. 93–443, title III, § 301, Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1289; Pub. L. 107–155, title I, § 103(b)(2), March 27, 2002, 116 Stat. 87.) 

2 U.S.C. § 454. Partial invalidity 

If any provision of this Act, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the validity of the re-mainder of the Act and the application of such provision to other persons and circumstances shall not be affected there-by. (Pub. L. 92–225, title IV, § 404, Feb. 7, 1972, 86 Stat. 20.) 

2 U.S.C. § 455. Period of limitations 

(a) No person shall be prosecuted, tried, or punished for any violation of title III of this Act unless the indictment is found or the information is instituted within 5 years after the date of the violation. (b) Notwithstanding any other provision of law— (1) the period of limitations referred to in subsection (a) shall apply with respect to violations referred to in such sub-section committed before, on, or after the effective date of this section; and (2) no criminal proceeding shall be instituted against any person for any act or omission which was a violation of any provision of title III of this Act, as in effect on December 31, 1974, if such act or omission does not constitute a violation of any such provision, as amended by the Federal Election Campaign Act Amendments of 1974. Nothing in this subsection shall affect any proceeding pend-ing in any court of the United States on the effective date of this section. (Pub. L. 92–225, title IV, § 406, as added Pub. L. 93–443, title III, § 302, Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1289; Pub. L. 94–283, title I, § 115(f)(1), May 11, 1976, 90 Stat. 495; Pub. L. 107– 155, title III, § 313(a), March 27, 2002, 116 Stat. 106.) 81 Nomination and Election 

E. Financial Disclosure Requirements of Executive Personnel, Including Candidates for Nomination or Election to the Office of President or Vice President (Title 5, United States Code Appendix) 5 U.S.C. App. § 101. Persons required to file 

(a) Within thirty days of assuming the position of an officer or employee described in subsection (f), an individual shall file a report containing the information described in section 102(b) unless the individual has left another position de-scribed in subsection (f) within thirty days prior to assuming such new position or has already filed a report under this title with respect to nomination for the new position or as a candidate for the position. (b)(1) Within five days of the transmittal by the President to the Senate of the nomination of an individual (other than an individual nominated for appointment to a position as a For-eign Service Officer or a grade or rank in the uniformed services for which the pay grade prescribed by section 201 of title 37, United States Code, is O–6 or below) to a position, appointment to which requires the advice and consent of the Senate, such individual shall file a report containing the in-formation described in section 102(b). Such individual shall, not later than the date of the first hearing to consider the nomination of such individual, make current the report filed pursuant to this paragraph by filing the information re-quired by section 102(a)(1)(A) with respect to income and honoraria received as of the date which occurs five days be-fore the date of such hearing. Nothing in this Act shall pre-vent any Congressional committee from requesting, as a con-dition of confirmation, any additional financial information from any Presidential nominee whose nomination has been referred to that committee. (2) An individual whom the President or the President-elect has publicly announced he intends to nominate to a position may file the report required by paragraph (1) at any time after that public announcement, but not later than is re-quired under the first sentence of such paragraph. (c) Within thirty days of becoming a candidate as defined in section 301 of the Federal Campaign Act of 1971 in a cal-endar year for nomination or election to the office of Presi-dent, Vice President, or Member of Congress, or on or before May 15 of that calendar year, whichever is later, but in no event later than 30 days before the election, and on or before May 15 of each successive year an individual continues to be a candidate, an individual other than an incumbent Presi-dent, Vice President, or Member of Congress shall file a re-port containing the information described in section 102(b). Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, in any calendar year in which an individual continues to be a candidate for any office but all elections for such office relating to such candidacy were held in prior calendar years, such individual need not file a report unless he becomes a candidate for an-82 Nomination and Election other vacancy in that office or another office during that year. (d) Any individual who is an officer or employee described in subsection (f) during any calendar year and performs the du-ties of his position or office for a period in excess of sixty days in that calendar year shall file on or before May 15 of the succeeding year a report containing the information de-scribed in section 102(a). (e) Any individual who occupies a position described in sub-section (f) shall, on or before the thirtieth day after termi-nation of employment in such position, file a report con-taining the information described in section 102(a) covering the preceding calendar year if the report required by sub-section (d) has not been filed and covering the portion of the calendar year in which such termination occurs up to the date the individual left such office or position, unless such individual has accepted employment in another position de-scribed in subsection (f). (f) The officers and employees referred to in subsections (a), (d), and (e) are— (1) the President; (2) the Vice President; (3) each officer or employee in the executive branch, includ-ing a special Government employee as defined in section 202 of title 18, United States Code, who occupies a position clas-sified above GS–15 of the General Schedule or, in the case of positions not under the General Schedule, for which the rate of basic pay is equal to or greater than 120 percent of the minimum rate of basic pay payable for GS–15 of the General Schedule, each member of a uniformed service whose pay grade is at or in excess of O–7 under section 201 of title 37, United States Code; and each officer or employee in any other position determined by the Director of the Office of Government Ethics to be of equal classification; (4) each employee appointed pursuant to section 3105 of title 5, United States Code; (5) any employee not described in paragraph (3) who is in a position in the executive branch which is excepted from the competitive service by reason of being of a confidential or policymaking character, except that the Director of the Office of Government Ethics may, by regulation, exclude from the application of this paragraph any individual, or group of in-dividuals, who are in such positions, but only in cases in which the Director determines such exclusion would not af-fect adversely the integrity of the Government or the public’s confidence in the integrity of the Government; (6) the Postmaster General, the Deputy Postmaster General, each Governor of the Board of Governors of the United States Postal Service and each officer or employee of the United States Postal Service or Postal Rate Commission who occupies a position for which the rate of basic pay is equal to or greater than 120 percent of the minimum rate of basic pay payable for GS–15 of the General Schedule; (7) the Director of the Office of Government Ethics and each designated agency ethics official; (8) any civilian employee not described in paragraph (3), em-ployed in the Executive Office of the President (other than 83 Nomination and Election a special government employee) who holds a commission of appointment from the President; (9) a Member of Congress as defined under section 109(12); (10) an officer or employee of the Congress as defined under section 109(13); (11) a judicial officer as defined under section 109(10); and (12) a judicial employee as defined under section 109(8). (g)(1) Reasonable extensions of time for filing any report may be granted under procedures prescribed by the supervising ethics office for each branch, but the total of such extensions shall not exceed ninety days. (2)(A) In the case of an individual who is serving in the Armed Forces, or serving in support of the Armed Forces in an area while that area is designated by the President by Executive order as a combat zone for purposes of section 112 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, the date for the filing of any report shall be extended so that the date is 180 days after the later of— (i) the last day of the individual’s service in such area during such designated period; or (ii) the last day of the individual’s hospitalization as a result of injury received or disease contracted while serving in such area. (B) The Office of Government Ethics, in consultation with the Secretary of Defense, may prescribe procedures under this paragraph. (h) The provisions of subsections (a), (b), and (e) shall not apply to an individual who, as determined by the designated agency ethics official or Secretary concerned (or in the case of a Presidential appointee under subsection (b), the Director of the Office of Government Ethics), the congressional ethics committees, or the Judicial Conference, is not reasonably ex-pected to perform the duties of his office or position for more than sixty days in a calendar year, except that if such indi-vidual performs the duties of his office or position for more than sixty days in a calendar year— (1) the report required by subsections (a) and (b) shall be filed within fifteen days of the sixtieth day, and (2) the report required by subsection (e) shall be filed as pro-vided in such subsection. (i) The supervising ethics office for each branch may grant a publicly available request for a waiver of any reporting re-quirement under this section for an individual who is ex-pected to perform or has performed the duties of his office or position less than one hundred and thirty days in a cal-endar year, but only if the supervising ethics office deter-mines that— (1) such individual is not a full-time employee of the Govern-ment, (2) such individual is able to provide services specially need-ed by the Government, (3) it is unlikely that the individual’s outside employment or financial interests will create a conflict of interest, and (4) public financial disclosure by such individual is not nec-essary in the circumstances. (Pub. L. 95–521, title I, § 101 Oct. 26, 1978, 92 stat. 1824; Pub. L. 96–19, § 2 (a)(1), (b), (c)(1), 4 (b)(1), (d)–(f), 5, June 84 Nomination and Election 13, 1979, 93 Stat. 37, 38, 40; Pub. L. 101–194, title I, § 202, Nov. 30, 1989, 103 Stat. 1725; Pub. L. 101–280, § 3 (1), (2), May 4, 1990, 104 Stat. 152; Pub. L. 102–25, title VI, § 605(a), Apr. 6, 1991, 105 Stat. 110; Pub. L. 102–398, § 4(a)(1), Oct. 2, 1992, 106 Stat. 1356.) 

5 U.S.C. App. § 102. Contents of reports 

(a) Each report filed pursuant to section 101 (d) and (e) [5 U.S.C. App. § 101 (d), (e)] shall include a full and complete statement with respect to the following: (1)(A) The source, type, and amount or value of income (other than income referred to in subparagraph (B)) from any source (other than from current employment by the United States Government), and the source, date, and amount of honoraria from any source, received during the preceding calendar year, aggregating $200 or more in value and, effec-tive January 1, 1991, the source, date, and amount of pay-ments made to charitable organizations in lieu of honoraria, and the reporting individual shall simultaneously file with the applicable supervising ethics office, on a confidential basis, a corresponding list of recipients of all such payments, together with the dates and amounts of such payments. (B) The source and type of income which consists of divi-dends, rents, interest, and capital gains, received during the preceding calendar year which exceeds $200 in amount or value, and an indication of which of the following categories the amount or value of such item of income is within: (i) not more than $1,000, (ii) greater than $1,000 but not more than $2,500, (iii) greater than $2,500 but not more than $5,000, (iv) greater than $5,000 but not more than $15,000, (v) greater than $15,000 but not more than $50,000, (vi) greater than $50,000 but not more than $100,000, (vii) greater than $100,000 but not more than $1,000,000, (viii) greater than $1,000,000 but not more than $5,000,000 or (ix) greater than $5,000,000. (2)(A) The identity of the source, a brief description, and the value of all gifts aggregating more than the minimal value as established by section 7342(a)(5) of title 5, United States Code, or $250, whichever is greater, received from any source other than a relative of the reporting individual dur-ing the preceding calendar year, except that any food, lodg-ing, or entertainment received as personal hospitality of an individual need not be reported, and any gift with a fair market value of $100 or less, as adjusted at the same time and by the same percentage as the minimal value is ad-justed, need not be aggregated for purposes of this subpara-graph. (B) The identity of the source and a brief description (includ-ing a travel itinerary, dates, and nature of expenses pro-vided) of reimbursements received from any source aggre-gating more than the minimal value as established by sec-tion 7342(a)(5) of title 5, United States Code, or $250, which-ever is greater and received during the preceding calendar year. 85 Nomination and Election (C) In an unusual case, a gift need not be aggregated under subparagraph (A) if a publicly available request for a waiver is granted. (3) The identity and category of value of any interest in prop-erty held during the preceding calendar year in a trade or business, or for investment or the production of income, which has a fair market value which exceeds $1,000 as of the close of the preceding calendar year, excluding any personal liability owed to the reporting individual by a spouse, or by a parent, brother, sister, or child of the reporting individual or of the reporting individual’s spouse, or any deposits aggre-gating $5,000 or less in a personal savings account. For pur-poses of this paragraph, a personal savings account shall in-clude any certificate of deposit or any other form of deposit in a bank, savings and loan association, credit union, or similar financial institution. (4) The identity and category of value of the total liabilities owed to any creditor other than a spouse, or a parent, broth-er, sister, or child of the reporting individual or of the report-ing individual’s spouse which exceed $10,000 at any time during the preceding calendar year, excluding— (A) any mortgage secured by real property which is a per-sonal residence of the reporting individual or his spouse; and (B) any loan secured by a personal motor vehicle, household furniture, or appliances, which loan does not exceed the pur-chase price of the item which secures it. With respect to revolving charge accounts, only those with an outstanding liability which exceeds $10,000 as of the close of the preceding calendar year need be reported under this paragraph. (5) Except as provided in this paragraph, a brief description, the date, and category of value of any purchase, sale or ex-change during the preceding calendar year which exceeds $1,000— (A) in real property, other than property used solely as a per-sonal residence of the reporting individual or his spouse; or (B) in stocks, bonds, commodities futures, and other forms of securities. Reporting is not required under this paragraph of any trans-action solely by and between the reporting individual, his spouse, or dependent children. (6)(A) The identity of all positions held on or before the date of filing during the current calendar year (and, for the first report filed by an individual, during the two-year period pre-ceding such calendar year) as an officer, director, trustee, partner, proprietor, representative, employee, or consultant of any corporation, company, firm, partnership, or other busi-ness enterprise, any nonprofit organization, any labor orga-nization, or any educational or other institution other than the United States. This subparagraph shall not require the reporting of positions held in any religious, social, fraternal, or political entity and positions solely of an honorary nature. (B) If any person, other than the United States Government, paid a nonelected reporting individual compensation in ex-cess of $5,000 in any of the two calendar years prior to the calendar year during which the individual files his first re-86 Nomination and Election port under this title, the individual shall include in the re-port— (i) the identity of each source of such compensation; and (ii) a brief description of the nature of the duties performed or services rendered by the reporting individual for each such source. The preceding sentence shall not require any individual to include in such report any information which is considered confidential as a result of a privileged relationship, estab-lished by law, between such individual and any person nor shall it require an individual to report any information with respect to any person for whom services were provided by any firm or association of which such individual was a mem-ber, partner, or employee unless such individual was directly involved in the provision of such services. (7) A description of the date, parties to, and terms of any agreement or arrangement with respect to (A) future employ-ment; (B) a leave of absence during the period of the report-ing individual’s Government service; (C) continuation of pay-ments by a former employer other than the United States Government; and (D) continuing participation in an em-ployee welfare or benefit plan maintained by a former em-ployer. (8) The category of the total cash value of any interest of the reporting individual in a qualified blind trust, unless the trust instrument was executed prior to July 24, 1995 and precludes the beneficiary from receiving information on the total cash value of any interest in the qualified blind trust. (b)(1) Each report filed pursuant to subsections (a), (b), and (c) of section 101 shall include a full and complete statement with respect to the information required by— (A) paragraph (1) of subsection (a) for the year of filing and preceding calendar year, (B) paragraphs (3) and (4) of subsection (a) as of the date specified in the report but which is less than thirty-one days before the filing date, and (C) paragraphs (6) and (7) of subsection (a) as of the filing date but for periods described in such paragraphs. (2)(A) In lieu of filling out one or more schedules of a finan-cial disclosure form, an individual may supply the required information in an alternative format, pursuant to either rules adopted by the supervising ethics office for the branch in which such individual serves or pursuant to a specific written determination by such office for a reporting indi-vidual. (B) In lieu of indicating the category of amount or value of any item contained in any report filed under this title, a re-porting individual may indicate the exact dollar amount of such item. (c) In the case of any individual described in section 101(e), any reference to the preceding calendar year shall be consid-ered also to include that part of the calendar year of filing up to the date of the termination of employment. (d)(1) The categories for reporting the amount or value of the items covered in paragraphs (3), (4), (5), and (8) of subsection (a) are as follows: (A) not more than $15,000; 87 Nomination and Election (B) greater than $15,000 but not more than $50,000; (C) greater than $50,000 but not more than $100,000; (D) greater than $100,000 but not more than $250,000; (E) greater than $250,000 but not more than $500,000; (F) greater than $500,000 but not more than $1,000,000; (G) greater than $1,000,000 but not more than $5,000,000; (H) greater than $5,000,000 but not more than $25,000,000; (I) greater than $25,000,000 but not more than $50,000,000; and (J) greater than $50,000,000. (2) For the purposes of paragraph (3) of subsection (a) if the current value of an interest in real property (or an interest in a real estate partnership) is not ascertainable without an appraisal, an individual may list (A) the date of purchase and the purchase price of the interest in the real property, or (B) the assessed value of the real property of tax purposes, adjusted to reflect the market value of the property used for the assessment if the assessed value is computed at less than 100 percent of such market value, but such individual shall include in his report a full and complete description of the method used to determine such assessed value, instead of specifying a category of value pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection. If the current value of any other item re-quired to be reported under paragraph (3) of subsection (a) is not ascertainable without an appraisal, such individual may list the book value of a corporation whose stock is not publicly traded, the net worth of a business partnership, the equity value of an individually owned business, or with re-spect to other holdings, any recognized indication of value, but such individual shall include in his report a full and complete description of the method used in determining such value. In lieu of any value referred to in the preceding sen-tence, an individual may list the assessed value of the item for tax purposes, adjusted to reflect the market value of the item used for the assessment if the assessed value is com-puted at less than 100 percent of such market value, but a full and complete description of the method used in deter-mining such assessed value shall be included in the report. (e)(1) Except as provided in the last sentence of this para-graph, each report required by section 101 shall also contain information listed in paragraphs (1) through (5) of subsection (a) of this section respecting the spouse or dependent child of the reporting individual as follows: (A) The source of items of earned income earned by a spouse from any person which exceed $1,000 and the source and amount of any honoraria received by a spouse, except that, with respect to earned income (other than honoraria), if the spouse is self-employed in business or a profession, only the nature of such business or profession need be reported. (B) All information required to be reported in subsection (a)(1)(B) with respect to income derived by a spouse or de-pendent child from any asset held by the spouse or depend-ent child and reported pursuant to subsection (a)(3). (C) In the case of any gifts received by a spouse or dependent child which are not received totally independent of the rela-tionship of the spouse or dependent child to the reporting in-dividual, the identity of the source and a brief description of 88 Nomination and Election gifts of transportation, lodging, food, or entertainment and a brief description and the value of other gifts. (D) In the case of any reimbursements received by a spouse or dependent child which are not received totally inde-pendent of the relationship of the spouse or dependent child to the reporting individual, the identify of the source and a brief description of each such reimbursement. (E) In the case of items described in paragraphs (3) through (5) of subsection (a), all information required to be reported under these paragraphs other than items (i) which the re-porting individual certifies represent the spouse’s or depend-ent child’s sole financial interest or responsibility and which the reporting individual has no knowledge of, (ii) which are not in any way, past or present, derived from the income, as-sets, or activities of the reporting individual, and (iii) from which the reporting individual neither derives, nor expects to derive, any financial or economic benefit. (F) For purposes of this section, categories with amounts or values greater than $1,000,000 set forth in sections 102(a)(1)(B) and 102(d)(1) shall apply to the income, assets, or liabilities of spouses and dependent children only if the in-come, assets, or liabilities are held jointly with the reporting individual. All other income, assets, or liabilities of the spouse or dependent children required to be reported under this section in an amount or value greater than $1,000,000 shall be categorized only as an amount or value greater than $1,000,000. Reports required by subsections (a), (b), and (c) of section 101 shall, with respect to the spouse and dependent child of the reporting individual, only contain information listed in paragraphs (1), (3), and (4) of subsection (a), as specified in this paragraph. (2) No report shall be required with respect to a spouse liv-ing separate and apart from the reporting individual with the intention of terminating the marriage or providing for permanent separation; or with respect to any income or obli-gations of an individual arising from the dissolution of his marriage or the permanent separation from his spouse. (f)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), each reporting in-dividual shall report the information required to be reported pursuant to subsections (a), (b), and (c) of this section with respect to the holdings of and the income from a trust or other financial arrangement from which income is received by, or with respect in which a beneficial interest in principal or income is held by, such individual, his spouse, or any de-pendent child. (2) A reporting individual need not report the holdings of or the source of income from any of the holdings of— (A) any qualified blind trust (as defined in paragraph (3)); (B) a trust— (i) which was not created directly by such individual, his spouse, or any dependent child, and (ii) the holdings or sources of income of which such indi-vidual, his spouse, and any dependent child have no knowl-edge of; or (C) an entity described under the provisions of paragraph (8), but such individual shall report the category of the amount 89 Nomination and Election of income received by him, his spouse, or any dependent child from the trust or other entity under subsection (a)(1)(B) of this section. (3) For purposes of this subsection, the term ‘‘qualified blind trust’’ includes any trust in which a reporting individual, his spouse, or any minor or dependent child has a beneficial in-terest in the principal or income, and which meets the fol-lowing requirements: (A)(i) The trustee of the trust and any other entity des-ignated in the trust instrument to perform fiduciary duties is a financial institution, an attorney, a certified public ac-countant, a broker, or an investment advisor who— (I) is independent of and not associated with any interested party so that the trustee or other person cannot be controlled or influenced in the administration of the trust by any inter-ested party; and (II) is not and has not been an employee of or affiliated with any interested party and is not a partner of, or involved in any joint venture or other investment with, any interested party; and (III) is not a relative of any interested party. (ii) Any officer or employee of a trustee or other entity who is involved in the management or control of the trust— (I) is independent of and not associated with any interested party so that such officer or employee cannot be controlled or influenced in the administration of the trust by any inter-ested party; (II) is not a partner of, or involved in any joint venture or other investment with, any interested party; and (III) is not a relative of any interested party. (B) Any asset transferred to the trust by an interested party is free of any restriction with respect to its transfer or sale unless such restriction is expressly approved by the super-vising ethics office of the reporting individual. (C) The trust instrument which establishes the trust pro-vides that— (i) except to the extent provided in subparagraph (B) of this paragraph, the trustee in the exercise of his authority and discretion to manage and control the assets of the trust shall not consult or notify any interested party; (ii) the trust shall not contain any asset the holding of which by an interested party is prohibited by any law or regulation; (iii) the trustee shall promptly notify the reporting individual and his supervising ethics office when the holdings of any particular asset transferred to the trust by any interested party are disposed of or when the value of such holding is less than $1,000; (iv) the trust tax return shall be prepared by the trustee or his designee, and such return and any information relating thereto (other than the trust income summarized in appro-priate categories necessary to complete an interested party’s tax return), shall not be disclosed to any interested party; (v) an interested party shall not receive any report on the holdings and sources of income of the trust, except a report at the end of each calendar quarter with respect to the total cash value of the interest of the interested party in the trust or the net income or loss of the trust or any reports nec-90 Nomination and Election essary to enable the interested party to complete an indi-vidual tax return required by law or to provide the informa-tion required by subsection (a)(1) of this section, but such re-port shall not identify any asset or holding; (vi) except for communications which solely consist of re-quests for distributions of cash or other unspecified assets of the trust, there shall be no direct or indirect communication between the trustee and an interested party with respect to the trust unless such communication is in writing and unless it relates only (I) to the general financial interest and needs of the interested party (including, but not limited to, an in-terest in maximizing income or long-term capital gain), (II) to the notification of the trustee of a law or regulation subse-quently applicable to the reporting individual which pro-hibits the interested party from holding an asset, which noti-fication directs that the asset not be held by the trust, or (III) to directions to the trustee to sell all of an asset initially placed in the trust by an interested party which in the deter-mination of the reporting individual creates a conflict of in-terest or the appearance thereof due to the subsequent as-sumption of duties by the reporting individual (but nothing herein shall require any such direction); and (vii) the interested parties shall make no effort to obtain in-formation with respect to the holdings of the trust, including obtaining a copy of any trust tax return filed or any informa-tion relating thereto except as otherwise provided in this subsection. (D) The proposed trust instrument and the proposed trustee is approved by the reporting individual’s supervising ethics office. (E) For purposes of this subsection, ‘‘interested party’’ means a reporting individual, his spouse, and any minor or depend-ent child; ‘‘broker’’ has the meaning set forth in section 3(a)(4) of the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78c(a)(4)); and ‘‘investment adviser’’ includes any investment adviser who, as determined under regulations prescribed by the supervising ethics office, is generally involved in his role as such an adviser in the management or control of trusts. (F) Any trust qualified by a supervising ethics office before the effective date of title II of the Ethics Reform Act of 1989 shall continue to be governed by the law and regulations in effect immediately before such effective date. (4)(A) An asset placed in a trust by an interested party shall be considered a financial interest of the reporting individual, for the purposes of any applicable conflict of interest stat-utes, regulations, or rules of the Federal Government (in-cluding section 208 of title 18, United States Code), until such time as the reporting individual is notified by the trust-ee that such asset has been disposed of, or has a value of less than $1,000. (B)(i) The provisions of subparagraph (A) shall not apply with respect to a trust created for the benefit of a reporting individual, or the spouse, dependent child, or minor child of such a person, if the supervising ethics office for such report-ing individual finds that— (I) the assets placed in the trust consist of a well-diversified portfolio of readily marketable securities; 91 Nomination and Election (II) none of the assets consist of securities of entities having substantial activities in the area of the reporting individual’s primary area of responsibility; (III) the trust instrument prohibits the trustee, notwith-standing the provisions of paragraphs (3)(C)(iii) and (iv) of this subsection, from making public or informing any inter-ested party of the sale of any securities; (IV) the trustee is given power of attorney, notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (3)(C)(v) of this subsection, to prepare on behalf of any interested party the personal in-come tax returns and similar returns which may contain in-formation relating to the trust; and (V) except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, the trust instrument provides (or in the case of a trust established prior to the effective date of this Act which by its term does not permit amendment, the trustee, the reporting individual, and any other interested party agree in writing) that the trust shall be administered in accordance with the require-ments of this subsection and the trustee of such trust meets the requirements of paragraph (3)(A). (ii) In any instance covered by subparagraph (B) in which the reporting individual is an individual whose nomination is being considered by a congressional committee, the report-ing individual shall inform the congressional committee con-sidering his nomination before or during the period of such individual’s confirmation hearing of his intention to comply with this paragraph. (5)(A) The reporting individual shall, within thirty days after a qualified blind trust is approved by his supervising ethics office, file with such office a copy of— (i) the executed trust instrument of such trust (other than those provisions which relate to the testamentary disposition of the trust assets), and (ii) a list of the assets which were transferred to such trust, including the category of value of each asset as determined under subsection (d) of this section. This subparagraph shall not apply with respect to a trust meeting the requirements for being considered a qualified blind trust under paragraph (7) of this subsection. (B) The reporting individual shall, within thirty days of transferring an asset (other than cash) to a previously estab-lished qualified blind trust, notify his supervising ethics of-fice of the identity of each such asset and the category of value of each asset as determined under subsection (d) of this section. (C) Within thirty days of the dissolution of a qualified blind trust, a reporting individual shall— (i) notify his supervising ethics office of such dissolution, and (ii) file with such office a copy of a list of the assets of the trust at the time of such dissolution and the category of value under subsection (d) of this section of each such asset. (D) Documents filed under subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C) of this paragraph and the lists provided by the trustee of assets placed in the trust by an interested party which have been sold shall be made available to the public in the same man-ner as a report is made available under section 105 and the 92 Nomination and Election provisions of that section shall apply with respect to such documents and lists. (E) A copy of each written communication with respect to the trust under paragraph (3)(C)(vi) shall be filed by the person initiating the communication with the reporting individual’s supervising ethics office within five days of the date of the communication. (6)(A) A trustee of a qualified blind trust shall not knowingly and willfully, or negligently, (i) disclose any information to an interested party with respect to such trust that may not be disclosed under paragraph (3) of this subsection; (ii) ac-quire any holding the ownership of which is prohibited by the trust instrument; (iii) solicit advice from any interested party with respect to such trust, which solicitation is prohib-ited by paragraph (3) of this subsection or the trust agree-ment; or (iv) fail to file any document required by this sub-section. (B) A reporting individual shall not knowingly and willfully, or negligently, (i) solicit or receive any information with re-spect to a qualified blind trust of which he is an interested party that may not be disclosed under paragraph (3)(C) of this subsection or (ii) fail to file any document required by this subsection. (C)(i) The Attorney General may bring a civil action in any appropriate United States district court against any indi-vidual who knowingly and willfully violates the provisions of subparagraph (A) or (B) of this paragraph. The court in which such action is brought may assess against such indi-vidual a civil penalty in any amount not to exceed $10,000. (ii) The Attorney General may bring a civil action in any ap-propriate United States district court against any individual who negligently violates the provisions of subparagraph (A) or (B) of this paragraph. The court in which such action is brought may assess against such individual a civil penalty in any amount not to exceed $5,000. (7) Any trust may be considered to be a qualified blind trust if— (A) the trust instrument is amended to comply with the re-quirements of paragraph (3) or, in the case of a trust instru-ment which does not by its terms permit amendment, the trustee, the reporting individual, and any other interested party agree in writing that the trust shall be administered in accordance with the requirements of this subsection and the trustee of such trust meets the requirements of para-graph (3)(A); except that in the case of any interested party who is a dependent child, a parent or guardian of such child may execute the agreement referred to in this subparagraph; (B) a copy of the trust instrument (except testamentary pro-visions) and a copy of the agreement referred to in subpara-graph (A), and a list of the assets held by the trust at the time of approval by the supervising ethics office, including the category of value of each asset as determined under sub-section (d) of this section, are filed with such office and made available to the public as provided under paragraph (5)(D) of this subsection; and (C) the supervising ethics office determines that approval of the trust arrangement as a qualified blind trust is in the 93 Nomination and Election particular case appropriate to assure compliance with appli-cable laws and regulations. (8) A reporting individual shall not be required to report the financial interests held by a widely held investment fund (whether such fund is a mutual fund, regulated investment company, pension or deferred compensation plan, or other in-vestment fund), if— (A)(i) the fund is publicly traded; or (ii) the assets of the fund are widely diversified; and (B) the reporting individual neither exercises control over nor has the ability to exercise control over the financial in-terests held by the fund. (g) Political campaign funds, including campaign receipts and expenditures, need not be included in any report filed pursuant to this title (h) A report filed pursuant to subsection (a), (d), or (e) of sec-tion 101 need not contain the information described in sub-paragraphs (A), (B), and (C) of subsection (a)(2) with respect to gifts and reimbursements received in a period when the reporting individual was not an officer or employee of the Federal Government. (i) A reporting individual shall not be required under this title to report— (1) financial interests in or income derived from— (A) any retirement system under title 5, United States Code (including the Thrift Savings Plan under subchapter III of chapter 84 of such title); or (B) any other retirement system maintained by the United States for officers or employees of the United States, includ-ing the President, or for members of the uniformed services; or (2) benefits received under the Social Security Act. (Pub. L. 95–521, title I, § 102 Oct. 26, 1978, 92 Stat. 1825; Pub. L. 96–19, §§ 3(a)(1), (b), 6(a), 7(a)–(d)(1), (f), 9(b), (c)(1), (j), June 13, 1979, 93 Stat. 39–43; Pub. L. 97–51, § 130(b), Oct. 1, 1981, 95 Stat. 966; Pub. L. 98–150, § 10, Nov. 11, 1983, 97 Stat. 962; Pub. L. 101–194, title II, § 202, Nov. 30, 1989, 103 Stat. 1727; Pub. L. 101–280, § 3(3), May 4, 1990, 104 Stat. 152; Pub. L. 102–90, Title III, § 314(a), Aug. 14, 1991, 105 Stat. 469; Pub. L. 104–65, §§ 20, 22(a), (b), Dec. 19, 1995, 109 Stat. 704, 705.) 

5 U.S.C. App. § 103. Filing of reports 

(a) Except as otherwise provided in this section, the reports required under this title shall be filed by the reporting indi-vidual with the designated agency ethics official at the agen-cy by which he is employed (or in the case of an individual described in section 101(e), was employed) or in which he will serve. The date any report is received (and the date of receipt of any supplemental report) shall be noted on such report by such official. (b) The President, the Vice President, and independent coun-sel and persons appointed by independent counsel under chapter 40 of title 28, United States Code, shall file reports required under this title with the Director of the Office of Government Ethics. 94 Nomination and Election (c) Copies of the reports required to be filed under this title by the Postmaster General, the Deputy Postmaster General, the Governors of the Board of Governors of the United States Postal Service, designated agency ethics officials, employees described in section 105(a)(2)(A) or (B), 106(a)(1)(A) or (B), or 107(a)(1)(A) or (b)(1)(A)(i), of title 3, United States Code, can-didates for the office of President or Vice President and offi-cers and employees in (and nominees to) offices or positions which require confirmation by the Senate or by both Houses of Congress other than individuals nominated to be judicial officers and those referred to in subsection (f) shall be trans-mitted to the Director of the Office of Government Ethics. The Director shall forward a copy of the report of each nomi-nee to the congressional committee considering the nomina-tion. (d) Reports required to be filed under this title by the Direc-tor of the Office of Government Ethics shall be filed in the Office of Government Ethics and, immediately after being filed, shall be made available to the public in accordance with this title. (e) Each individual identified in section 101(c) who is a can-didate for nomination or election to the Office of President or Vice President shall file the reports required by this title with the Federal Election Commission. (f) Reports required of members of the uniformed services shall be filed with the Secretary concerned. (g) Each supervising ethics office shall develop and make available forms for reporting the information required by this title. (h)(1) The reports required under this title shall be filed by a reporting individual with— (A)(i)(I) the Clerk of the House of Representatives, in the case of a Representative in Congress, a Delegate to Congress, the Resident Commissioner from Puerto Rico, an officer or employee of the Congress whose compensation is disbursed by the Chief Administrative Officer of the House of Rep-resentatives, an officer or employee of the Architect of the Capitol, United States Capitol Police, the United States Bo-tanic Garden, the Congressional Budget Office, the Govern-ment Printing Office, the Library of Congress, or the Copy-right Royalty Tribunal (including any individual terminating service, under section 101(e), in any office or position re-ferred to in this subclause), or an individual described in sec-tion 101(c) who is a candidate for nomination or election as a Representative in Congress, a Delegate to Congress, or the Resident Commissioner from Puerto Rico; and (II) the Secretary of the Senate, in the case of a Senator, an officer or employee of the Congress whose compensation is disbursed by the Secretary of the Senate, an officer or em-ployee of the General Accounting Office, the Office of Tech-nology Assessment, or the Office of the Attending Physician (including any individual terminating service, under section 101(e), in any office or position referred to in this subclause), or an individual described in section 101(c) who is a can-didate for nomination or election as a Senator; and (ii) in the case of an officer or employee of the Congress as described under section 101(f)(10) who is employed by an 95 Nomination and Election agency or commission established in the legislative branch after the date of the enactment of the Ethics Reform Act of 1989— (I) the Secretary of the Senate or the Clerk of the House of Representatives, as the case may be, as designated in the statute establishing such agency or commission; or (II) if such statute does not designate such committee, the Secretary of the Senate for agencies and commissions estab-lished in even numbered calendar years, and the Clerk of the House of Representatives for agencies and commissions es-tablished in odd numbered calendar years; and (B) the Judicial Conference with regard to a judicial officer or employee described under paragraphs (11) and (12) of sec-tion 101(f) (including individuals terminating service in such office or position under section 101(e) or immediately pre-ceding service in such office or position). (2) The date any report is received (and the date of receipt of any supplemental report) shall be noted on such report by such committee. (i) A copy of each report filed under this title by a Member or an individual who is a candidate for the office of Member shall be sent by the Clerk of the House of Representatives or Secretary of the Senate, as the case may be, to the appro-priate State officer designated under section 316(a) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 of the State rep-resented by the Member or in which the individual is a can-didate, as the case may be, within the 30-day period begin-ning on the day the report is filed with the Clerk or Sec-retary. (j)(1) A copy of each report filed under this title with the Clerk of the House of Representatives shall be sent by the Clerk to the Committee on Standards of Official Conduct of the House of Representatives within the 7-day period begin-ning on the day the report is filed. (2) A copy of each report filed under this title with the Sec-retary of the Senate shall be sent by the Secretary to the Se-lect Committee on Ethics of the Senate within the 7-day pe-riod beginning on the day the report is filed. (k) In carrying out their responsibilities under this title with respect to candidates for office, the Clerk of the House of Representatives and the Secretary of the Senate shall avail themselves of the assistance of the Federal Election Commis-sion. The Commission shall make available to the Clerk and the Secretary on a regular basis a complete list of names and addresses of all candidates registered with the Commission, and shall cooperate and coordinate its candidate information and notification program with the Clerk and the Secretary to the greatest extent possible. (Pub. L. 95–521, title I, 103, Oct. 26, 1978, 92 Stat. 1831; Pub. L. 96–19, §§ 4(b)(2), 9(a), June 13, 1979, 93 Stat. 40, 42; Pub. L. 101–194, title II, § 202, Nov. 30, 1989, 103 Stat. 1736; Pub. L. 101–280, § 3(1), (4), May 4, 1990, 104 Stat. 152, 153; Pub. L. 102–90, title III, § 313(1), Aug. 14, 1991, 105 Stat. 469; Pub. L. 104–186, title II, § 216(1), Aug. 20, 1996, 110 Stat. 1747; Pub. L. 109–55, title I, § 1003(a), Aug. 2, 2005, 119 Stat. 572.) 96 Nomination and Election 

5 U.S.C. App. 4 § 104. Failure to file or filing false reports 

(a) The Attorney General may bring a civil action in any ap-propriate United States district court against any individual who knowingly and willfully falsifies or who knowingly and willfully fails to file or report any information that such indi-vidual is required to report pursuant to section 102. The court in which such action is brought may assess against such individual a civil penalty in any amount, not to exceed $10,000. (b) The head of each agency, each Secretary concerned, the Director of the Office of Government Ethics, each congres-sional ethics committee, or the Judicial Conference, as the case may be, shall refer to the Attorney General the name of any individual which such official or committee has rea-sonable cause to believe has willfully failed to file a report or has willfully falsified or willfully failed to file information required to be reported. Whenever the Judicial Conference refers a name to the Attorney General under this subsection, the Judicial Conference also shall notify the judicial council of the circuit in which the named individual serves of the re-ferral. (c) The President, the Vice President, the Secretary con-cerned, the head of each agency, the Office of Personnel Management, a congressional ethics committee, and the Ju-dicial Conference, may take any appropriate personnel or other action in accordance with applicable law or regulation against any individual failing to file a report or falsifying or failing to report information required to be reported. (d)(1) Any individual who files a report required to be filed under this title more than 30 days after the later of— (A) the date such report is required to be filed pursuant to the provisions of this title and the rules and regulations pro-mulgated thereunder; or (B) if a filing extension is granted to such individual under section 101(g), the last day of the filing extension period, shall, at the direction of and pursuant to regulations issued by the supervising ethics office, pay a filing fee of $200. All such fees shall be deposited in the miscellaneous receipts of the Treasury. The authority under this paragraph to direct the payment of a filing fee may be delegated by the super-vising ethics office in the executive branch to other agencies in the executive branch. (2) The supervising ethics office may waive the filing fee under this subsection in extraordinary circumstances. (Pub. L. 95–521, title I, § 104; Oct. 26, 1978, 92 Stat. 1832; Pub. L. 96–19, § 8(a), June 13, 1979, 93 Stat. 41; Pub. L. 101–194, title II, § 202, Nov. 30, 1989, 103 Stat. 1737; Pub. L. 101–280, § 3(1), (5), May 4, 1990, 104 Stat. 152, 154; Pub. L. 101–650, Title IV, § 405, Dec.1, 1990, 104 Stat. 5124.) 

5 U.S.C. App. § 105. Custody of and public access to reports 

(a) Each agency, each supervising ethics office in the execu-tive or judicial branch, the Clerk of the House of Representa-tives, and the Secretary of the Senate shall make available to the public, in accordance with subsection (b), each report 97 Nomination and Election filed under this title with such agency or office or with the Clerk or the Secretary of the Senate, except that— (1) this section does not require public availability of a report filed by any individual in the Office of the Director of Na-tional Intelligence, the Central Intelligence Agency, the De-fense Intelligence Agency, the National Imagery and Map-ping Agency, or the National Security Agency, or any indi-vidual engaged in intelligence activities in any agency of the United States, if the President finds or has found that, due to the nature of the office or position occupied by such indi-vidual, public disclosure of such report would, be revealing the identity of the individual or other sensitive information, compromise the national interest of the United States; and such individuals may be authorized, notwithstanding section 104(a), to file such additional reports as are necessary to pro-tect their identity from public disclosure if the President first finds or has found that such filing is necessary in the na-tional interest; and (2) any report filed by an independent counsel whose identity has not been disclosed by the division of the court under chapter 40 of title 28, United States Code, and any report filed by any person appointed by that independent counsel under such chapter, shall not be made available to the public under this title. (b)(1) Except as provided in the second sentence of this sub-section, each agency, each supervising ethics office in the ex-ecutive or judicial branch, the Clerk of the House of Rep-resentatives, and the Secretary of the Senate shall, within thirty days after any report is received under this title by such agency or office or by the Clerk or the Secretary of the Senate, as the case may be, permit inspection of such report by or furnish a copy of such report to any person requesting such inspection or copy. With respect to any report required to be filed by May 15 of any year, such report shall by made available for public inspection within 30 calendar days after May 15 of such year or within 30 days of the date of filing of such a report for which an extension is granted pursuant to section 101(g). The agency, office, Clerk, or Secretary of the Senate, as the case may be may require a reasonable fee to be paid in any amount which is found necessary to recover the cost of reproduction or mailing of such report excluding any salary of any employee involved in such reproduction or mailing. A copy of such report may be furnished without charge or at a reduced charge if it is determined that waiver or reduction of the fee is in the public interest. (2) Notwithstanding paragraph (1), a report may not be made available under this section to any person nor may any copy thereof be provided under this section to any person ex-cept upon a written application by such person stating— (A) that person’s name, occupation and address; (B) the name and address of any other person or organiza-tion on whose behalf the inspection or copy is requested; and (C) that such person is aware of the prohibitions on the ob-taining or use of the report. Any such application shall be made available to the public throughout the period during which the report is made available to the public. (3) 98 Nomination and Election (A) This section does not require the immediate and uncondi-tional availability of reports filed by an individual described in section 109(8) or 109(10) of this Act if a finding is made by the Judicial Conference, in consultation with United States Marshall Service, that revealing personal and sen-sitive information could endanger that individual. (B) A report may be redacted pursuant to this paragraph only— (i) to the extent necessary to protect the individual who filed the report; and (ii) for as long as the danger to such individual exists. (C) The Administrative Office of the United States Courts shall submit to the Committees on the Judiciary of the House of Representatives and of the Senate an annual report with respect to the operation of this paragraph including— (i) the total number of reports redacted pursuant to this paragraph; (ii) the total number of individuals whose reports have been redacted pursuant to this paragraph; and (iii) the types of threats against individuals whose reports are redacted, if appropriate. (D) The Judicial Conference, in consultation with the Depart-ment of Justice, shall issue regulations setting forth the cir-cumstances under which redaction is appropriate under this paragraph and the procedures for redaction. (E) This paragraph shall expire on December 31, 2005, and apply to filings through calendar year 2005. (c)(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain or use a report— (A) for any unlawful purpose; (B) for any commercial purpose, other than by news and communications media for dissemination to the general pub-lic; (C) for determining or establishing the credit rating of any individual; or (D) for use, directly or indirectly, in the solicitation of money for any political, charitable, or other purpose. (2) The Attorney General may bring a civil action against any person who obtains or uses a report for any purpose pro-hibited in paragraph (1) of this subsection. The court in which such action is brought may assess against such person a penalty in any amount not to exceed $10,000. Such remedy shall be in addition to any other remedy available under statutory or common law. (d) Any report filed with or transmitted to an agency or su-pervising ethics office or to the Clerk of the House of Rep-resentatives or the Secretary of the Senate pursuant to this title shall be retained by such agency or office or by the Clerk or the Secretary of the Senate, as the case may be. Such report shall be made available to the public for a period of six years after receipt of the report. After such six-year pe-riod the report shall be destroyed unless needed in an ongo-ing investigation, except that in the case of an individual who filed the report pursuant to section 101(b) and was not subsequently confirmed by the Senate, or who filed the re-port pursuant to section 101(c) and was not subsequently elected, such reports shall be destroyed one year after the in-99 Nomination and Election dividual either is no longer under consideration by the Sen-ate or is no longer a candidate for nomination or election to the Office of President, Vice President, or as a Member of Congress, unless needed in an ongoing investigation. (Pub. L. 95–521, title I, § 105, Oct. 26, 1978, 92 Stat. 1832; Pub. L. 101–194, title II, § 202, Nov. 30, 1989, 103 Stat. 1737; Pub. L. 101–280, § 3(6), May 4, 1990, 104 Stat. 154; Pub. L. 102–90, title III, § 313(2), Aug. 14, 1991, 105 Stat. 469; Pub. L. 103–359, title V, § 501(m), Oct. 14, 1994, 108 Stat. 3430; Pub. L. 104–201, div A, title XI, § 1122(b)(2), Sept. 23, 1996, 110 Stat. 2687; Pub. L. 105–318, § 7, Oct. 30, 1998, 112 Stat. 3011; Pub. L. 107–126, Jan. 16, 2002, 115 Stat. 2404; Pub. L. 108–458, title I, § 1079(c), Dec. 17, 2004, 118 Stat. 3696.) 

5 U.S.C. App. 4 § 106. Review of reports 

(a)(1) Each designated agency ethics official or Secretary con-cerned shall make provisions to ensure that each report filed with him under this title is reviewed within sixty days after the date of such filing, except that the Director of the Office of Government Ethics shall review only those reports re-quired to be transmitted to him under this title within sixty days after the date of transmittal. (2) Each congressional ethics committee and the Judicial Conference shall make provisions to ensure that each report filed under this title is reviewed within sixty days after the date of such filing. (b)(1) If after reviewing any report under subsection (a), the Director of the Office of Government Ethics, the Secretary concerned, the designated agency ethics official, a person designated by the congressional ethics committee, or a per-son designated by the Judicial Conference, as the case may be, is of the opinion that on the basis of information con-tained in such report the individual submitting such report is in compliance with applicable laws and regulations, he shall state such opinion on the report, and shall sign such report. (2) If the Director of the Office of Government Ethics, the Secretary concerned, the designated agency ethics official, a person designated by the congressional ethics committee, or a person designated by the Judicial Conference, after review-ing any report under subsection (a)— (A) believes additional information is required to be sub-mitted, he shall notify the individual submitting such report what additional information is required and the time by which it must be submitted, or (B) is of the opinion, on the basis of information submitted, that the individual is not in compliance with applicable laws and regulations, he shall notify the individual, afford a rea-sonable opportunity for a written or oral response, and after consideration of such response, reach an opinion as to wheth-er or not, on the basis of information submitted, the indi-vidual is in compliance with such laws and regulations. (3) If the Director of the Office of Government Ethics, the Secretary concerned, the designated agency ethics official, a person designated by a congressional ethics committee, or a person designated by the Judicial Conference, reaches an 100 Nomination and Election opinion under paragraph (2)(B) that an individual is not in compliance with applicable laws and regulations, the official or committee shall notify the individual of that opinion and, after an opportunity for personal consultation (if practicable), determine and notify the individual of which steps, if any, would in the opinion of such official or committee be appro-priate for assuring compliance with such laws and regula-tions and the date by which such steps should be taken. Such steps may include, as appropriate— (A) divestiture, (B) restitution, (C) the establishment of a blind trust, (D) request for an exemption under section 208(b) of title 18, United States Code, or (E) voluntary request for transfer, reassignment, limitation of duties, or resignation. The use of any such steps shall be in accordance with such rules or regulations as the supervising ethics office may pre-scribe. (4) If steps for assuring compliance with applicable laws and regulations are not taken by the date set under paragraph (3) by an individual in a position in the executive branch (other than in the Foreign Service or the uniformed services), appointment to which requires the advice and consent of the Senate, the matter shall be referred to the President for ap-propriate action. (5) If steps for assuring compliance with applicable laws and regulations are not taken by the date set under paragraph (3) by a member of the Foreign Service or the uniformed services, the Secretary concerned shall take appropriate ac-tion. (6) If steps for assuring compliance with applicable laws and regulations are not taken by the date set under paragraph (3) by any other officer or employee, the matter shall be re-ferred to the head of the appropriate agency, the congres-sional ethics committee, or the Judicial Conference, for ap-propriate action; except that in the case of the Postmaster General or Deputy Postmaster General, the Director of the Office of Government Ethics shall recommend to the Gov-ernors of the Board of Governors of the United States Postal Service the action to be taken. (7) Each supervising ethics office may render advisory opin-ions interpreting this title within its respective jurisdiction. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the individual to whom a public advisory opinion is rendered in accordance with this paragraph, and any other individual covered by this title who is involved in a fact situation which is indistin-guishable in all material aspects, and who acts in good faith in accordance with the provisions and findings of such advi-sory opinion shall not, as a result of such act, be subject to any penalty or sanction provided by this title. (Pub. L. 95–521, title I, § 106, Oct. 26, 1978, 92 Stat. 1833; Pub. L. 101–194, title II, § 202, Nov. 30, 1989, 103 Stat. 1739; Pub. L. 101–280, § 3(1), (7), May 4, 1990, 104 Stat. 152, 155.) 101 Nomination and Election 

5 U.S.C. App. 4 § 107. Confidential reports and other additional requirements 

(a)(1) Each supervising ethics office may require officers and employees under its jurisdiction (including special Govern-ment employees as defined in section 202 of title 18, United States Code) to file confidential financial disclosure reports, in such form as the supervising ethics office may prescribe. The information required to be reported under this sub-section by the officers and employees of any department or agency shall be set forth in rules or regulations prescribed by the supervising ethics office, and may be less extensive than otherwise required by this title or more extensive when determined by the supervising ethics office to be necessary and appropriate in light of sections 202 through 209 of title 18, United States Code, regulations promulgated thereunder, or the authorized activities of such officers or employees. Any individual required to file a report pursuant to section 101 shall not be required to file a confidential report pursuant to this subsection, except with respect to information which is more extensive than information otherwise required by this title. Subsections (a), (b), and (d) of section 105 shall not apply with respect to any such report. (2) Any information required to be provided by an individual under this subsection shall be confidential and shall not be disclosed to the public. (3) Nothing in this subsection exempts any individual other-wise covered by the requirement to file a public financial dis-closure report under this title from such requirement. (b) The provisions of this title requiring the reporting of in-formation shall supersede any general requirement under any other provision of law or regulation with respect to the reporting of information required for purposes of preventing conflicts of interest or apparent conflicts of interest. Such provisions of this title shall not supersede the requirements of section 7342 of title 5, United States Code. (c) Nothing in this Act requiring reporting of information shall be deemed to authorize the receipt of income, gifts, or reimbursements; the holding of assets, liabilities, or posi-tions; or the participation in transactions that are prohibited by law, Executive order, rule, or regulation. (Pub. L. 95–521, title I, § 107, Oct. 26, 1978, 92 Stat. 1834; Pub. L. 96–19, § 9 (d), (g), June 13, 1979, 93 Stat. 42, 43; Pub. L. 101–194, title II, § 202, Nov. 30, 1989, 103 Stat. 1740.) 

5 U.S.C. App. 4 § 108. Authority of Comptroller General 

(a) The Comptroller General shall have access to financial disclosure reports filed under this title for the purpose of car-rying out his statutory responsibilities. (b) No later than December 31, 1992, and regularly there-after, the Comptroller General shall conduct a study to de-termine whether the provisions of this title are being carried out effectively. (Pub. L. 95–521, title I, § 108, Oct. 26, 1978, 92 Stat. 1835; Pub. L. 96–19, § 9 (t), June 13, 1979, 93 Stat. 44; Pub. L. 101–194, title II, § 202, Nov. 30, 1989, 103 Stat. 1741.) 102 Nomination and Election 

5 U.S.C. App. § 109. Definitions 

For the purposes of this title, the term— (1) ‘‘congressional ethics committees’’ means the Select Com-mittee on Ethics of the Senate and the Committee on Stand-ards of Official Conduct of the House of Representatives; (2) ‘‘dependent child’’ means, when used with respect to any reporting individual, any individual who is a son, daughter, stepson, or stepdaughter and who— (A) is unmarried and under age 21 and is living in the household of such reporting individual; or (B) is a dependent of such reporting individual within the meaning of section 152 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986; (3) ‘‘designated agency ethics official’’ means an officer or em-ployee who is designated to administer the provisions of this title within an agency; (4) ‘‘executive branch’’ includes each Executive agency (as de-fined in section 105 of title 5, United States Code), other than the General Accounting Office, and any other entity or administrative unit in the executive branch; (5) ‘‘gift’’ means a payment, advance, forbearance, rendering, or deposit of money, or any thing of value, unless consider-ation of equal or greater value is received by the donor, but does not include— (A) bequest and other forms of inheritance; (B) suitable mementos of a function honoring the reporting individual; (C) food, lodging, transportation, and entertainment provided by a foreign government within a foreign country or by the United States Government, the District of Columbia, or a State or local government or political subdivision thereof; (D) food and beverages which are not consumed in connec-tion with a gift of overnight lodging; (E) communications to the offices of a reporting individual, including subscriptions to newspapers and periodicals; or (F) consumable products provided by home-State businesses to the offices of a reporting individual who is an elected offi-cial, if those products are intended for consumption by per-sons other than such reporting individual; (6) ‘‘honoraria’’ has the meaning given such term in section 505 of this Act; (7) ‘‘income’’ means all income from whatever source derived, including but not limited to the following items: compensa-tion for services, including fees, commissions, and similar items; gross income derived from business (and net income if the individual elects to include it); gains derived from deal-ings in property; interest; rents; royalties; dividends; annu-ities; income from life insurance and endowment contracts; pensions; income from discharge of indebtedness; distributive share of partnership income; and income from an interest in an estate or trust; (8) ‘‘judicial employee’’ means any employee of the judicial branch of the Government, of the United States Sentencing Commission, of the Tax Court, of the Claims Court, of the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims, or of the United States Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces, who is not a judicial officer and who is authorized to perform adjudicatory 103 Nomination and Election functions with respect to proceedings in the judicial branch, or who occupies a position for which the rate of basic pay is equal to or greater than 120 percent of the minimum rate of basic pay payable for GS–15 of the General Schedule; (9) ‘‘Judicial Conference’’ means the Judicial Conference of the United States; (10) ‘‘judicial officer’’ means the Chief Justice of the United States, the Associate Justices of the Supreme Court, and the judges of the United States courts of appeals, United States district courts, including the district courts in Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, and the Virgin Islands, Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, Court of International Trade, TaxCourt, Claims Court, Court of Appeals for Vet-erans Claims, United States Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces, and any court created by Act of Congress, the judges of which are entitled to hold office during good behavior; (11) ‘‘legislative branch’’ includes— (A) the Architect of the Capitol; (B) the Botanic Gardens; (C) the Congressional Budget Office; (D) the General Accounting Office; (E) the Government Printing Office; (F) the Library of Congress; (G) the United States Capitol Police; (H) the Office of Technology Assessment; and (I) any other agency, entity, office, or commission established in the legislative branch; (12) ‘‘Member of Congress’’ means a United States Senator, a Representative in Congress, a Delegate to Congress, or the Resident Commissioner from Puerto Rico; (13) ‘‘officer or employee of the Congress’’ means— (A) any individual described under subparagraph (B), other than a Member of Congress or the Vice President, whose compensation is disbursed by the Secretary of the Senate or the Chief Administrative Officer of the House of Representatives; (B) (i) each officer or employee of the legislative branch who, for at least 60 days, occupies a position for which the rate of basic pay is equal to or greater than 120 percent of the minimum rate of basic pay payable for GS–15 of the General Schedule; and (ii) at least one principal assistant designated for purposes of this paragraph by each Member who does not have an em-ployee who occupies a position for which the rate of basic pay is equal to or greater than 120 percent of the minimum rate of basic pay payable for GS–15 of the General Schedule; (14) ‘‘personal hospitality of any individual’’ means hospi-tality extended for a nonbusiness purpose by an individual, not a corporation or organization, at the personal residence of that individual or his family or on property or facilities owned by that individual or his family; (15) ‘‘reimbursement’’ means any payment or other thing of value received by the reporting individual, other than gifts, to cover travel-related expenses of such individual other than those which are— 104 Nomination and Election (A) provided by the United States Government, the District of Columbia, or a State or local government or political sub-division thereof; (B) required to be reported by the reporting individual under section 7342 of title 5, United States Code; or (C) required to be reported under section 304 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 U.S.C. 434); (16) ‘‘relative’’ means an individual who is related to the re-porting individual, as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, step-father, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, step-sister, half brother, half sister, or who is the grandfather or grandmother of the spouse of the reporting individual, and shall be deemed to include the fiance or fiancee of the report-ing individual; (17) ‘‘Secretary concerned’’ has the meaning set forth in sec-tion 101(a)(9) of title 10, United States Code, and, in addi-tion, means— (A) the Secretary of Commerce, with respect to matters con-cerning the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administra-tion; (B) the Secretary of Health and Human Services, with re-spect to matters concerning the Public Health Service; and (C) the Secretary of State, with respect to matters con-cerning the Foreign Service; (18) ‘‘supervising ethics office’’ means— (A) the Select Committee on Ethics of the Senate, for Sen-ators, officers and employees of the Senate, and other officers or employees of the legislative branch required to file finan-cial disclosure reports with the Secretary of the Senate pur-suant to section 103(h) of this title; (B) the Committee on Standards of Official Conduct of the House of Representatives, for Members, officers and employ-ees of the House of Representatives and other officers or em-ployees of the legislative branch required to file financial dis-closure reports with the Clerk of the House of Representa-tives pursuant to section 103(h) of this title; (C) the Judicial Conference for judicial officers and judicial employees; and (D) the Office of Government Ethics for all executive branch officers and employees; and (19) ‘‘value’’ means a good faith estimate of the dollar value if the exact value is neither known nor easily obtainable by the reporting individual. (Pub. L. 95–521, title I, § 109, Oct. 26, 1978, 92 Stat. 1836; Pub. L. 101–194, title II, § 202, Nov. 30, 1989, 103 Stat. 1741; Pub. L. 101–280, § 3(1), (8), May 4, 1990, 104 Stat. 152, 155; Pub. L. 102–378, § 4(a)(2), Oct. 2, 1992, 106 Stat. 1357; Pub. L. 103–160, div A, title XI, § 1182(d)(3), Nov. 30, 1993, 107 Stat. 1773; Pub. L. 103–337, div A, title IX, § 924(d)(3), Oct. 5, 1994, 108 Stat. 2832; Pub. L. 104–186, title II, § 216(2), Aug. 20, 1996, 110 Stat. 1747; Pub. L. 105– 368, title V, § 512(b)(1)(D), Nov. 11, 1998, 112 Stat. 3342.) 105 Nomination and Election 

5 U.S.C. App. 4 § 110. Notice of actions taken to comply with ethics agreements 

(a) In any case in which an individual agrees with that indi-vidual’s designated agency ethics official, the Office of Gov-ernment Ethics, a Senate confirmation committee, a congres-sional ethics committee, or the Judicial Conference, to take any action to comply with this Act or any other law or regu-lation governing conflicts of interest of, or establishing stand-ards of conduct applicable with respect to, officers or employ-ees of the Government, that individual shall notify in writing the designated agency ethics official, the Office of Govern-ment Ethics, the appropriate committee of the Senate, the congressional ethics committee, or the Judicial Conference, as the case may be, of any action taken by the individual pursuant to that agreement. Such notification shall be made not later than the date specified in the agreement by which action by the individual must be taken, or not later than three months after the date of the agreement, if no date for action is so specified. (b) If an agreement described in subsection (a) requires that the individual recuse himself or herself from particular cat-egories of agency or other official action, the individual shall reduce to writing those subjects regarding which the recusal agreement will apply and the process by which it will be de-termined whether the individual must recuse himself or her-self in a specific instance. An individual shall be considered to have complied with the requirements of subsection (a) with respect to such recusal agreement if such individual files a copy of the document setting forth the information de-scribed in the preceding sentence with such individual’s des-ignated agency ethics official or the appropriate supervising ethics office within the time prescribed in the last sentence of subsection (a). (Pub. L. 95–521, title I, § 110, as added Pub. L. 101–194, title II, § 202, Nov. 30, 1989, 103 Stat. 1744; amended Pub. L. 101–280, § 3(1), May 4, 1990, 104 Stat. 152.) 

5 U.S.C. App. 4 § 111. Administration of provisions 

The provisions of this title [5 U.S.C. App. 4 § 101 et seq.] shall be administered by— (1) the Director of the Office of Government Ethics, the des-ignated agency ethics official, or the Secretary concerned, as appropriate, with regard to officers and employees described in paragraphs (1) through (8) of section 101(f) [5 U.S.C. App. § 101(f) (1)–(8)]; (2) the Select Committee on Ethics of the Senate and the Committee on Standards of Official Conduct of the House of Representatives, as appropriate, with regard to officers and employees described in paragraphs (9) and (10) of section 101(f) [5 U.S.C. App. 4 § 101(f) (9), (10)]; and (3) the Judicial Conference in the case of an officer or em-ployee described in paragraphs (11) and (12) of section 101(f) [5 U.S.C. App. 4 § 101(f) (11), (12)]. The Judicial Conference may delegate any authority it has under this title [5 U.S.C. App. 4 § 101 et seq.] to an ethics committee established by the Judicial Conference. 106 Nomination and Election (Pub. L. 95–521, title I, § 111, as added Pub. L. 101–194, title II, § 202, Nov. 30, 1989, 103 Stat. 1744; amended Pub. L. 101–280, § 3 (1), (9), May 4, 1990, 104 Stat. 152, 157.) 107 Nomination and Election 1 By Jack Maskell, Legislative Attorney, Congressional Research Service, Li-brary of Congress. 2 P.L. 95–521, Title I, 92 Stat. 1824, October 26, 1978. For current provi-sions of the Act, as amended, see codification at 5 U.S.C. app. §§ 101 et seq .3 5 U.S.C. app. § 101(c). See 5 C.F.R. § 2634.201(d). 4 2 U.S.C. § 431(2), referenced as ‘‘section 301 of the Federal Campaign Act of 1971’’ in 5 U.S.C. app. § 101(c). 5 5 U.S.C. app. § 101(c). 6 5 U.S.C. app. § 103(e). 7 5 U.S.C. app. § 103(h)(1)(A)(i)(I). 8 5 U.S.C. App. § 103(h)(1)(A)(i)(II). 9 Compare 5 U.S.C. app. § 102(a) (content of disclosure for incumbent offi-cers and officials) with 5 U.S.C. app. § 102(b) (content of disclosure for new entrants, nominees, and candidates). 

F. Personal Financial Disclosure By Federal Candidates 1

Under the provisions of the Ethics in Government Act of 1978, as amended, 2 all ‘‘candidates’’ to federal elective office, that is candidates for nomination or election to the offices of President, Vice President, or Member of Congress, are re-quired to file personal financial disclosure reports, which are to be available to the public. 3 The term ‘‘candidate’’ is de-fined under the Ethics in Government Act as one who is con-sidered to be a ‘‘candidate’’ to federal office under the Fed-eral Election Campaign Act of 1971, as amended—generally one who ‘‘seeks nomination for election or election, to Federal office’’ by receiving contributions or making expenditures, or authorizing another to receive contributions or make expend-itures on his or her behalf, in excess of $5,000. 4Once one has qualified as a ‘‘candidate’’ under the Federal Election Campaign Act, and has not otherwise filed a per-sonal financial disclosure statement as an incumbent in a federal office, such candidate must file a disclosure report within 30 days of becoming a candidate (or on or before May 15 of that calendar year, whichever is later, but in no event later than 30 days before the election). 5 Candidates for nomi-nation or election to the offices of President and Vice Presi-dent are to file their personal financial disclosure statements with the Federal Election Commission; 6 candidates for the House of Representatives are instructed to file with the Clerk of the House of Representatives; 7 and candidates for the Senate are to file with the Secretary of the Senate. 8The financial disclosure reports filed by federal candidates are not as extensive as the financial disclosure reports filed by incumbent officers and employees of the federal govern-ment, including Members of Congress (who must file publicly by May 15 of every year) 9 Rather, the candidate reports are similar in content to the reports filed by new entrants and nominees to covered positions in the federal government. The candidate financial disclosure reports need not identify nor disclose (as is required for incumbent federal officials and of-ficeholders) personal ‘‘gifts’’ to the candidate or the can-didate’s spouse; the details of financial transactions exceed-ing $1,000 in value; nor the cash value of an interest in a 108 Nomination and Election 10 Compare 5 U.S.C. app. § 102(b)(1) to 5 U.S.C. app. §§ 102(a)(2) (gifts and reimbursements), 102(a)(5) (financial transactions), and 102(a)(8) (cash in-terests in blind trusts). For presidential and vice presidential candidates, see specifically, 5 C.F.R. § 2634.308(b). 11 5 U.S.C. app. § 102(b)(1), referencing contents of disclosure set out in 5 U.S.C. app. §§ 102(a)(1) (income), 102(a)(3) (assets and ownerships), 102(a)(4) (liabilities), 102(a)(6) (positions held), and 102(a)(7) (agreements for future employment or leaves of absences). See also 5 C.F.R. § 2634.308(b)(1)–(5). 12 5 U.S.C. app. § 102(e); 5 C.F.R. § 2634.309(b). qualified ‘‘blind trust.’’ 10 The candidate reports must detail the following, as provided in 5 U.S.C. app. § 102(b): 

• earned income and unearned income exceeding $200, for the filing year and the preceding calendar year; 

• ownership interests in assets and income producing property over $1,000 in value, and liabilities of over $10,000 owed (other than on a personal residence), as of the date specified in the report, but which is less than 31 days before the filing date; 

• the identity of positions held in private entities during the current calendar year and the two preceding years; 

• and any agreements for future employment, leaves of absence, continuing payments from or participation in ben-efit plans of former employers. 11 Certain information must also be filed concerning income, assets, and liabilities of the candidate’s spouse and depend-ant children. 12 109 Nomination and Election 

G. Political Activities: Federal Employees (Title 5, United States Code; Including Selected Provisions of the Hatch Act) 5 U.S.C. § 7321. Political participation 

It is the policy of the Congress that employees should be en-couraged to exercise fully, freely, and without fear of penalty or reprisal, and to the extent not expressly prohibited by law, their right to participate or to refrain from participating in the political processes of the Nation. (Pub. L. 103–94, § 2(a), Oct. 6, 1993, 107 Stat. 1001.) 

5 U.S.C. § 7322. Definitions 

For the purpose of this subchapter— (1) ‘‘employee’’ means any individual, other than the Presi-dent and the Vice President, employed or holding office in— (A) an Executive agency other than the General Accounting Office; (B) a position within the competitive service which is not in an Executive agency; or (C) the government of the District of Columbia, other than the Mayor or a member of the City Council or the Recorder of Deeds; but does not include a member of the uniformed services; (2) ‘‘partisan political office’’ means any office for which any candidate is nominated or elected as representing a party any of whose candidates for Presidential elector received votes in the last preceding election at which Presidential electors were selected, but shall exclude any office or position within a political party or affiliated organization; and (3) ‘‘political contribution’’— (A) means any gift, subscription, loan, advance, or deposit of money or anything of value, made for any political purpose; (B) includes any contract, promise, or agreement, express or implied, whether or not legally enforceable, to make a con-tribution for any political purpose; (C) includes any payment by any person, other than a can-didate or a political party or affiliated organization, of com-pensation for the personal services of another person which are rendered to any candidate or political party or affiliated organization without charge for any political purpose; and (D) includes the provision of personal services for any polit-ical purpose. (Pub. L. 103–94, § 2(a), Oct. 6, 1993, 107 Stat. 1001.) 

5 U.S.C. § 7323. Political activity authorized; prohibitions 

(a) Subject to the provisions of subsection (b), an employee may take an active part in political management or in polit-ical campaigns, except an employee may not— (1) use his official authority or influence for the purpose of interfering with or affecting the result of an election; (2) knowingly solicit, accept, or receive a political contribu-tion from any person, unless such person is— 110 Nomination and Election (A) a member of the same Federal labor organization as de-fined under section 7103(4) of this title or a Federal em-ployee organization which as of the date of enactment of the Hatch Act Reform Amendments of 1993 had a multi-candidate political committee (as defined under section 315(a)(4) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 U.S.C. 441a(a)(4))); (B) not a subordinate employee; and (C) the solicitation is for a contribution to the multicandidate political committee (as defined under section 315(a)(4) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 U.S.C. 441a(a)(4))) of such Federal labor organization as defined under section 7103(4) of this title or a Federal employee organization which as of the date of the enactment of the Hatch Act Re-form Amendments of 1993 had a multicandidate political committee (as defined under section 315(a)(4) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 U.S.C. 441a(a)(4))); or (3) run for the nomination or as a candidate for election to a partisan political office; or (4) knowingly solicit or discourage the participation in any political activity of any person who— (A) has an application for any compensation, grant, contract, ruling, license, permit, or certificate pending before the em-ploying office of such employee; or (B) is the subject of or a participant in an ongoing audit, in-vestigation, or enforcement action being carried out by the employing office of such employee. (b) (1) An employee of the Federal Election Commission (except one appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate), may not request or receive from, or give to, an employee, a Member of Congress, or an officer of a uniformed service a political contribution. (2) (A) No employee described under subparagraph (B) (except one appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate), may take an active part in political management or political campaigns. (B) The provisions of subparagraph (A) shall apply to— (i) an employee of— (I) the Federal Election Commission or the Election Assist-ance Commission; (II) the Federal Bureau of Investigation; (III) the Secret Service; (IV) the Central Intelligence Agency; (V) the National Security Council; (VI) the National Security Agency; (VII) the Defense Intelligence Agency; (VIII) the Merit Systems Protection Board; (IX) the Office of Special Counsel; (X) the Office of Criminal Investigation of the Internal Rev-enue Service; (XI) the Office of Investigative Programs of the United States Customs Service; (XII) the Office of Law Enforcement of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms; (XIII) the National Imagery and Mapping Agency; or 111 Nomination and Election (XIV) the Office of the Director of National Intelligence; or (ii) a person employed in a position described under section 3132(a)(4), 5372, 5372a, or 5372b of title 5, United States Code. (3) No employee of the Criminal Division or National Secu-rity Division of the Department of Justice (except one ap-pointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate), may take an active part in political manage-ment or political campaigns. (4) For purposes of this subsection, the term ‘‘active part in political management or in a political campaign’’ means those acts of political management or political campaigning which were prohibited for employees of the competitive serv-ice before July 19, 1940, by determinations of the Civil Serv-ice Commission under the rules prescribed by the President. (c) An employee retains the right to vote as he chooses and to express his opinion on political subjects and candidates. (Pub. L. 103–94, § 2(a), Oct. 6, 1993, 107 Stat. 1002; Pub. L. 103–359, title V, § 501(k), Oct. 14, 1994, 108 Stat. 3430; Pub. L. 104–201, div A, title XI, § 1122(a)(1), Sept. 23, 1996, 110 Stat. 2687; Pub. L. 106–554, § 1(a)(3), Dec. 21, 2000, 114 Stat. 2763; Pub. L. 107–252, title VIII, § 811(a), Oct. 29, 2002, 116 Stat. 1727; Pub. L. 108–458, title I, § 1079(a), Dec. 17, 2004, 118 Stat. 3695; Pub. L. 109–177, title V, § 506(b)(2), March 9, 2006, 120 Stat. 249.) 

5 U.S.C. § 7324. Political activities on duty; prohibition 

(a) An employee may not engage in political activity— (1) while the employee is on duty; (2) in any room or building occupied in the discharge of offi-cial duties by an individual employed or holding office in the Government of the United States or any agency or instru-mentality thereof; (3) while wearing a uniform or official insignia identifying the office or position of the employee; or (4) using any vehicle owned or leased by the Government of the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof. (b)(1) An employee described in paragraph (2) of this sub-section may engage in political activity otherwise prohibited by subsection (a) if the costs associated with that political ac-tivity are not paid for by money derived from the Treasury of the United States. (2) Paragraph (1) applies to an employee— (A) the duties and responsibilities of whose position continue outside normal duty hours and while away from the normal duty post; and (B) who is— (i) an employee paid from an appropriation for the Executive Office of the President; or (ii) an employee appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, whose position is located within the United States, who determines policies to be pur-sued by the United States in relations with foreign powers or in the nationwide administration of Federal laws. (Pub. L. 103–94, § 2(a), Oct. 6, 1993, 107 Stat. 1003.) 112 Nomination and Election 

5 U.S.C. § 7325. Political activity permitted; employees residing in certain municipalities 

The Office of Personnel Management may prescribe regula-tions permitting employees, without regard to the prohibi-tions in paragraphs (2) and (3) of section 7323(a) and para-graph (2) of section 7323(b) of this title, to take an active part in political management and political campaigns involv-ing the municipality or other political subdivision in which they reside, to the extent the Office considers it to be in their domestic interest, when— (1) the municipality or political subdivision is in Maryland or Virginia and in the immediate vicinity of the District of Co-lumbia, or is a municipality in which the majority of voters are employed by the Government of the United States; and (2) the Office determines that because of special or unusual circumstances which exist in the municipality or political subdivision it is in the domestic interest of the employees and individuals to permit that political participation. (Pub. L. 103–94, § 2(a), Oct. 6, 1993, 107 Stat. 1004; Pub. L. 104– 93, Title III, § 308, Jan. 6, 1996, 109 Stat. 966.) 

5 U.S.C. § 7326. Penalties 

An employee or individual who violates section 7323 or 7324 of this title shall be removed from his position, and funds ap-propriated for the position from which removed thereafter may not be used to pay the employee or individual. However, if the Merit System Protection Board finds by unanimous vote that the violation does not warrant removal, a penalty of not less than 30 days’ suspension without pay shall be im-posed by direction of the Board. (Pub. L. 103–94, § 2(a), Oct. 6, 1993, 107 Stat. 1004.) 

5 U.S.C. § 7351. Gifts to superiors 

(a) An employee may not— (1) solicit a contribution from another employee for a gift to an official superior; (2) make a donation as a gift or give a gift to an official supe-rior; or (3) accept a gift from an employee receiving less pay than himself. (b) An employee who violates this section shall be subject to appropriate disciplinary action by the employing agency or entity. (c) Each supervising ethics office (as defined in section 7353(d)(1)) is authorized to issue regulations implementing this section, including regulations exempting voluntary gifts or contributions that are given or received for special occa-sions such as marriage or retirement or under other cir-cumstances in which gifts are traditionally given or ex-changed. (Pub. L. 89–554, Sept. 6, 1966, 80 Stat. 527; Pub. L. 101– 194, title III, § 301, Nov. 30, 1989, 103 Stat. 1745; Pub. L. 101–280, § 4(a), May 4, 1990, 104 Stat. 157.) 113 Nomination and Election 

H. Political Activities: State and Local Employees (Title 5, United States Code) 5 U.S.C. § 1501. Definitions 

For the purpose of this chapter— (1) ‘‘State’’ means a State or territory or possession of the United States; (2) ‘‘State or local agency’’ means the executive branch of a State, municipality, or other political subdivision of a State, or an agency or department thereof; (3) ‘‘Federal agency’’ means an Executive agency or other agency of the United States, but does not include a member bank of the Federal Reserve System; and (4) ‘‘State or local officer or employee’’ means an individual employed by a State or local agency whose principal employ-ment is in connection with an activity which is financed in whole or in part by loans or grants made by the United States or a Federal agency, but does not include— (A) an individual who exercises no functions in connection with that activity; or (B) an individual employed by an educational or research in-stitution, establishment, agency or system which is sup-ported in whole or in part by a State or political subdivision thereof, or by a recognized religious, philanthropic, or cul-tural organization. (Pub. L. 89–554, Sept. 6, 1966, 80 Stat. 403; Pub. L. 93–443, title IV, § 401(c), Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1290.) 

5 U.S.C. § 1502. Influencing elections; taking part in political campaigns; prohibitions; exceptions 

(a) A State or local officer or employee may not— (1) use his official authority or influence for the purpose of interfering with or affecting the result of an election or a nomination for office; (2) directly or indirectly coerce, attempt to coerce, command, or advise a State or local officer or employee to pay, lend, or contribute anything of value to a party, committee, organiza-tion, agency, or person for political purposes; or (3) be a candidate for elective office. (b) A State or local officer or employee retains the right to vote as he chooses and to express his opinions on political subjects and candidates. (c) Subsection (a)(3) of this section does not apply to— (1) the Governor or Lieutenant Governor of a State or an in-dividual authorized by law to act as Governor; (2) the mayor of a city; (3) a duly elected head of an executive department of a State or municipality who is not classified under a State or munic-ipal merit or civil service system; or (4) an individual holding elective office. (Pub. L. 89–554, Sept. 6, 1966, 80 Stat. 404; Pub. L. 93–443, title IV, § 401(a), Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1290.) 114 Nomination and Election 

5 U.S.C. § 1503. Nonpartisan candidacies permitted 

Section 1502(a)(3) of this title does not prohibit any State or local officer or employee from being a candidate in any elec-tion if none of the candidates is to be nominated or elected at such election as representing a party any of whose can-didates for presidential elector received votes in the last pre-ceding election at which presidential electors were selected. (Pub. L. 89–554, Sept. 6, 1966, 80 Stat. 404; Pub. L. 93–443, title IV, § 401(b)(1), Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1290.) 

5 U.S.C. § 1504. Investigations; notice of hearing 

When a Federal agency charged with the duty of making a loan or grant of funds of the United States for use in an ac-tivity by a State or local officer or employee has reason to believe that the officer or employee has violated section 1502 of this title, it shall report the matter to the Special Counsel. On receipt of the report, or on receipt of other information which seems to the Special Counsel to warrant an investiga-tion, the Special Counsel shall investigate the report and such other information and present his findings and any charges based on such findings to the Merit Systems Protec-tion Board, which shall— (1) fix a time and place for a hearing; and (2) send, by registered or certified mail, to the officer or em-ployee charged with the violation and to the State or local agency employing him a notice setting forth a summary of the alleged violation and giving the time and place of the hearing. The hearing may not be held earlier than 10 days after the mailing of the notice. (Pub. L. 89–544, Sept. 6, 1966, 80 Stat. 405; Pub. L. 95–454, title IX, § 906(a)(7), Oct. 13, 1978, 92 Stat. 1225.) 

5 U.S.C. § 1505. Hearings; adjudications; notice of determinations 

Either the State or local officer or employee or the State or local agency employing him, or both, are entitled to appear with counsel at the hearing under section 1504 of this title, and be heard. After this hearing, the Merit Systems Protec-tion Board shall— (1) determine whether a violation of section 1502 of this title has occurred; (2) determine whether the violation warrants the removal of the officer or employee from his office or employment; and (3) notify the officer or employee and the agency of the deter-mination by registered or certified mail. (Pub. L. 89–544, Sept. 6, 1966, 80 Stat. 405; Pub. L. 95–454, title IX, § 906(a)(6), Oct. 13, 1978, 92 Stat. 1225.) 

5 U.S.C. § 1506. Orders; withholding loans or grants; limitations 

(a) When the Merit Systems Protection Board finds— (1) that a State or local officer or employee has not been re-moved from his office or employment within 30 days after notice of a determination by the Board that he has violated section 1502 of this title and that the violation warrants re-moval; or 115 Nomination and Election (2) that the State or local officer or employee has been re-moved and has been appointed within 18 months after his removal to an office or employment in the same State in a State or local agency which does not receive loans or grants from a Federal agency; the Board shall make and certify to the appropriate Federal agency an order requiring that agency to withhold from its loans or grants to the State or local agency to which notice was given an amount equal to 2 years’ pay at the rate the officer or employee was receiving at the time of the violation. When the State or local agency to which appointment within 18 months after removal has been made is one that receives loans or grants from a Federal agency, the Board order shall direct that the withholding be made from that State or local agency. (b) Notice of the order shall be sent by registered or certified mail to the State or local agency from which the amount is ordered to be withheld. After the order becomes final, the Federal agency to which the order is certified shall withhold the amount in accordance with the terms of the order. Ex-cept as provided by section 1508 of this title, a determination or order of the Board becomes final at the end of 30 days after mailing the notice of the determination or order. (c) The Board may not require an amount to be withheld from a loan or grant pledged by a State or local agency as security for its bonds or notes if the withholding of that amount would jeopardize the payment of the principal or in-terest on the bonds or notes. (Pub. L. 89–554, Sept. 6, 1966, 80 Stat. 405; Pub. L. 95–454, title IX, § 906(a)(6), Oct. 13, 1978, 92 Stat. 1225.) 

5 U.S.C. § 1507. Subpoenas and depositions 

(a) The Merit Systems Protection Board may require by sub-pena the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the pro-duction of documentary evidence relating to any matter be-fore it as a result of this chapter. Any member of the Board may sign subpenas, and members of the Board and its exam-iners when authorized by the Board may administer oaths, examine witnesses, and receive evidence. The attendance of witnesses and the production of documentary evidence may be required from any place in the United States at the des-ignated place of hearing. In case of disobedience to a sub-pena, the Board may invoke the aid of a court of the United States in requiring the attendance and testimony of wit-nesses and the production of documentary evidence. In case of contumacy or refusal to obey a subpena issued to a person, the United States District Court within whose jurisdiction the inquiry is carried on may issue an order requiring him to appear before the Board, or to produce documentary evi-dence if so ordered, or to give evidence concerning the matter in question; and any failure to obey the order of the court may be punished by the court as a contempt thereof. (b) The Board may order testimony to be taken by deposition at any stage of a proceeding or investigation before it as a result of this chapter. Depositions may be taken before an in-dividual designated by the Board and having the power to administer oaths. Testimony shall be reduced to writing by 116 Nomination and Election the individual taking the deposition, or under his direction, and shall be subscribed by the deponent. Any person may be compelled to appear and depose and to produce documentary evidence before the Board as provided by this section. (c) A person may not be excused from attending and testi-fying or from producing documentary evidence or in obedi-ence to a subpena on the ground that the testimony or evi-dence, documentary or otherwise, required of him may tend to incriminate him or subject him to a penalty or forfeiture for or on account of any transaction, matter, or thing con-cerning which he is compelled to testify, or produce evidence, documentary or otherwise, before the Board in obedience to a subpena issued by it. A person so testifying is not exempt from prosecution and punishment for perjury committed in so testifying. (Pub. L. 89–554, Sept. 6, 1966, 80 Stat. 406; Pub. L. 95–454, title IX, § 906(a)(6), Oct. 13, 1978, 92 Stat. 1225.) 

5 U.S.C. § 1508. Judicial review 

A party aggrieved by a determination or order of the Merit Systems Protection Board under section 1504, 1505, or 1506 of this title may, within 30 days after the mailing of notice of the determination or order, institute proceedings for re-view thereof by filing a petition in the United States District Court for the district in which the State or local officer or employee resides. The institution of the proceedings does not operate as a stay of the determination or order unless— (1) the court specifically orders a stay; and (2) the officer or employee is suspended from his office or em-ployment while the proceedings are pending. A copy of the petition shall immediately be served on the Board and thereupon the Board shall certify and file in the court a transcript of the record on which the determination or order was made. The court shall review the entire record including questions of fact and questions of law. If applica-tion is made to the court for leave to adduce additional evi-dence, and it is shown to the satisfaction of the court that the additional evidence may materially affect the result of the proceedings and that there were reasonable grounds for failure to adduce this evidence in the hearing before the Board the court may direct that the additional evidence be taken before the Board in the manner and on the terms and conditions fixed by the court. The Board may modify its find-ings of fact or its determination or order in view of the addi-tional evidence and shall file with the court the modified findings, determination, or order; and the modified findings of fact, if supported by substantial evidence, are conclusive. The court shall affirm the determination or order, or the modified determination or order, if the court determines that it is in accordance with the law. If the court determines that the determination or order or the modified determination or order, is not in accordance with law, the court shall remand the proceeding to the Board with directions either to make a determination or order determined by the court to be law-ful or to take such further proceedings as, in the opinion of the court, the law requires. The judgment and decree of the court are final, subject to review by the appropriate United 117 Nomination and Election States Court of Appeals as in other cases, and the judgment and decree of the court of appeals are final, subject to review by the Supreme Court of the United States on certiorari or certification as provided by section 1254 of title 28. If a pro-vision of this section is held to be invalid as applied to a party by a determination or order of the Board, the deter-mination or order becomes final and effective as to that party as if the provision had not been enacted. (Pub. L. 89–554, Sept. 6, 1966, 80 Stat. 406; Pub. L. 95–454, title IX, § 906(a)(6), Oct. 13, 1978, 92 Stat. 1225.) 118 Nomination and Election 

I. Criminal Code Provisions (Title 18, United States Code) 

> CHAPTER 11—BRIBERY, GRAFT, AND CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

18 U.S.C. § 210. Offer to procure appointive public office 

Whoever pays or offers or promises any money or thing of value, to any person, firm, or corporation in consideration of the use or promise to use any influence to procure any ap-pointive office or place under the United States for any per-son, shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than one year, or both. (June 25, 1948, ch. 645, 62 Stat. 694; § 210, formerly § 214, renumbered § 210, Pub. L. 87–849, § 1(b), Oct. 23, 1962, 76 Stat. 1125; Pub. L. 103–322, title XXXIII, § 330016(1)(H), Sept. 13, 1994, 108 Stat. 2147.) 

18 U.S.C. § 211. Acceptance or solicitation to obtain appointive public office 

Whoever solicits or receives, either as a political contribu-tion, or for personal emolument, any money or thing of value, in consideration of the promise of support or use of in-fluence in obtaining for any person any appointive office or place under the United States, shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than one year, or both. Whoever solicits or receives any thing of value in consider-ation of aiding a person to obtain employment under the United States either by referring his name to an executive department or agency of the United States or by requiring the payment of a fee because such person has secured such employment shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than one year, or both. This section shall not apply to such services rendered by an employment agency pursuant to the written request of an executive department or agency of the United States. (June 25, 1948, ch. 645, 62 Stat. 694; § 211, formerly § 215, Sept. 13, 1951, ch. 380, 65 Stat. 320; and renumbered § 211, Pub. L. 87–849, § 1(b), Oct. 23, 1962, 76 Stat. 1125; Pub. L. 103–322, title XXXIII, § 330016(1)(H), Sept. 13, 1994, 108 Stat. 2147.) CHAPTER 29—ELECTIONS AND POLITICAL ACTIVITIES 

18 U.S.C. § 592. Troops at polls 

Whoever, being an officer of the Army or Navy, or other per-son in the civil, military, or naval service of the United States, orders, brings, keeps, or has under his authority or control any troops or armed men at any place where a gen-eral or special election is held, unless such force be necessary to repel armed enemies of the United States, shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than five years, or both; and be disqualified from holding any office of honor, profit, or trust under the United States. This section shall not prevent any officer or member of the armed forces of the United States from exercising the right of suffrage in any election district to which he may belong, 119 Nomination and Election if otherwise qualified according to the laws of the State in which he offers to vote. (June 24, 1948, ch. 645, 62 Stat. 719; Pub. L. 103–322, title XXXIII, § 330016(1)(K), Sept. 13, 1994, 108 Stat. 2147.) 

18 U.S.C. § 593. Interference by armed forces 

Whoever, being an officer or member of the armed forces of the United States, prescribes or fixes or attempts to pre-scribe or fix, whether by proclamation, order or otherwise, the qualifications of voters at any election in any State; or Whoever, being such officer or member, prevents or attempts to prevent by force, threat, intimidation, advice, or otherwise any qualified voter of any State from fully exercising the right of suffrage at any general or special election; or Whoever, being such officer or member, orders or compels or attempts to compel any election officer in any State to re-ceive a vote from a person not legally qualified to vote; or Whoever, being such officer or member, imposes or attempts to impose any regulations for conducting any general or spe-cial election in a State, different from those prescribed by law; or Whoever, being such officer or member, interferes in any manner with an election officer’s discharge of his duties— Shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than five years, or both; and disqualified from holding any office of honor, profit or trust under the United States. This section shall not prevent any officer or member of the Armed Forces from exercising the right of suffrage in any district to which he may belong, if otherwise qualified ac-cording to the laws of the State of such district. (June 25, 1948, ch. 645, 72 Stat. 719; Pub. L. 103–322, title XXXIII, § 330016(1)(K), Sept. 13, 1994, 108 Stat. 2147.) 

18 U.S.C. § 594. Intimidation of voters 

Whoever intimidates, threatens, coerces, or attempts to in-timidate, threaten, or coerce, any other persons for the pur-pose of interfering with the right of such other person to vote or to vote as he may choose, or of causing such other person to vote for, or not to vote for, any candidate for the office of President, Vice President, Presidential elector, Member of the Senate, Member of the House of Representatives, Dele-gate from the District of Columbia, or Resident Commis-sioner, at any election held solely or in part for the purpose of electing such candidate, shall be fined or imprisoned not more than one year, or both. (June 25, 1948, ch. 645, 62 Stat. 720; Pub. L. 91–405, title II, § 204(d)(5), Sept. 22, 1970, 84 Stat. 853; Pub. L. 103–322, title XXXIII, § 330016(1)(H), Sept. 13, 1994, 108 Stat. 2147.) 

18 U.S.C. § 595. Interference by administrative employees of Federal, State, or Territorial Governments 

Whoever, being a person employed in any administrative po-sition by the United States, or by any department or agency thereof, or by the District of Columbia or any agency or in-strumentality thereof, or by any State, Territory, or Posses-120 Nomination and Election sion of the United States, or any political subdivision, mu-nicipality, or agency thereof, or agency of such political sub-division or municipality (including any corporation owned or controlled by any State, Territory or Possession of the United States or by any such political subdivision, municipality, or agency), in connection with any activity which is financed in whole or in part by loans or grants made by the United States, or any department or agency thereof, uses his official authority for the purpose of interfering with, or affecting, the nomination or the election of any candidate for the office of President, Vice President, Presidential elector, Member of the Senate, Member of the House of Representatives, Dele-gate from the District of Columbia, or Resident Commis-sioner, shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than one year, or both. This section shall not prohibit or make unlawful any act by any officer or employee of any educational or research insti-tution, establishment, agency, or system which is supported in whole or in part by any state or political subdivision thereof, or by the District of Columbia or by any Territory or Possession of the United States; or by any recognized reli-gious, philanthropic or cultural organization. (June 25, 1948, ch. 645, 62 Stat. 720; Pub. L. 91–405, title II, § 204(d)(6), 84 Stat. 853; Pub. L. 103–322, title XXXIII, § 330016(1)(H), (L), Sept. 13, 1994, 108 Stat. 2147.) 

18 U.S.C. § 596. Polling armed forces 

Whoever, within or without the Armed Forces of the United States, polls any member of such forces, either within or without the United States, either before or after he executes any ballot under any Federal or State law, with reference to his choice of or his vote for any candidate, or states, pub-lishes, or releases any result of any purported poll taken from or among the members of the Armed Forces of the United States or including within it the statement of choice for such candidate or of such votes cast by any member of the Armed Forces of the United States, shall be fined under this title, or imprisoned for not more than one year, or both. The word ‘‘poll’’ means any request for information, verbal or written, which by its language or form of expression requires or implies the necessity of an answer, where the request is made with the intent of compiling the result of the answers obtained, either for the personal use of the person making the request, or for the purpose of reporting the same to any person, persons, political party, unincorporated association or corporation, or for the purpose of publishing the same orally, by radio, or in written or printed form. (June 25, 1948, ch. 645, 62 Stat. 720; Pub. L. 103–322, title XXXIII, § 330016(1)(H), Sept. 13, 1994, 108 Stat. 2147.) 

18 U.S.C. § 597. Expenditures to influence voting 

Whoever makes or offers to make an expenditure to any per-son, either to vote or withhold his vote, or to vote for or against any candidate; and Whoever solicits, accepts, or receives any such expenditure in consideration of his vote or the withholding of his vote— Shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 121 Nomination and Election one year, or both; and if the violation was willful, shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than two years, or both. (June 24, 1948, ch. 645, 62 Stat. 721; Pub. L. 103–322, title XXXIII, § 330016(1)(H), Sept. 13, 1994, 108 Stat. 2147; Pub. L. 104–294, title VI, § 601(a)(12), Oct. 11, 1996, 110 Stat. 3498.) 

18 U.S.C. § 598. Coercion by means of relief appropriations 

Whoever uses any part of any appropriation made by Con-gress for work relief, relief, or for increasing employment by providing loans and grants for public-works projects, or exer-cises or administers any authority conferred by any Appro-priation Act for the purpose of interfering with, restraining, or coercing any individual in the exercise of his right to vote at any election, shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than one year, or both. (June 25, 1948, ch. 645, 62 Stat. 721; Pub. L. 103–322, title XXXIII, § 330016(1)(H), Sept. 13, 1994, 108 Stat. 2147.) 

18 U.S.C. § 599. Promise of appointment of candidate 

Whoever, being a candidate, directly or indirectly promises or pledges the appointment, or the use of his influence or support for the appointment of any person to any public or private position or employment, for the purpose of procuring support in his candidacy shall be fined under this title or im-prisoned not more than one year, or both; and if the violation was willful, shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than two years, or both. (June 25, 1948, ch. 645, 62 Stat. 721; Pub. L. 103–322, title XXXIII, § 330016(1)(H), (L), Sept. 13, 1994, 108 Stat. 2147.) 

18 U.S.C. § 600. Promise of employment or other benefit for political activity 

Whoever, directly or indirectly, promises any employment, position, compensation, contract, appointment, or other ben-efit, provided for or made possible in whole or in part by any Act of Congress, or any special consideration in obtaining any such benefit, to any person as a consideration, favor, or reward for any political activity or for the support of or oppo-sition to any candidate or any political party in connection with any general or special election to any political office, or in connection with any primary election or political conven-tion or caucus held to select candidates for any political of-fice, shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than one year, or both. (June 25, 1948, ch. 645, 62 Stat. 721; Pub. L. 92–225, title II, § 202, Feb. 7, 1972, 86 Stat. 9; Pub. L. 94–453, § 3, Oct. 2, 1976, 90 Stat. 1517; Pub. L. 94–453, § 3, Oct. 2, 1976, 90 Stat. 1517; Pub. L. 103–322, title XXXIII, § 330016(1)(L), Sept. 13, 1994, 108 Stat. 2147.) 122 Nomination and Election 

18 U.S.C. § 601. Deprivation of employment or other benefit for political contribution 

(a) Whoever, directly or indirectly, knowingly causes or at-tempts to cause any person to make a contribution of a thing of value (including services) for the benefit of any candidate or any political party, by means of the denial or deprivation, or the threat of the denial or deprivation, of— (1) any employment, position, or work in or for any agency or other entity of the Government of the United States, a State, or a political subdivision of a State, or any compensa-tion or benefit of such employment, position, or work; or (2) any payment or benefit of a program of the United States, a State, or a political subdivision of a State; if such employment, position, work, compensation, payment, or benefit is provided for or made possible in whole or in part by an Act of Congress, shall be fined under this title or im-prisoned not more than one year, or both. (b) As used in this section— (1) the term ‘‘candidate’’ means an individual who seeks nomination for election, or election, to Federal, State, or local office, whether or not such individual is elected, and, for pur-poses of this paragraph, an individual shall be deemed to seek nomination for election, or election, to Federal, State, or local office, if he has (A) taken the action necessary under the law of a State to qualify himself for nomination for elec-tion, or election, or (B) received contributions or made ex-penditures, or has given his consent for any other person to receive contributions or make expenditures, with a view to bringing about his nomination for election, or election, to such office; (2) the term ‘‘election’’ means (A) a general, special primary, or runoff election, (B) a convention or caucus of a political party held to nominate a candidate, (C) a primary election held for the selection of delegates to a nominating convention of a political party, (D) a primary election held for the ex-pression of a preference for the nomination of persons for election to the office of President, and (E) the election of del-egates to a constitutional convention for proposing amend-ments to the Constitution of the United States or of any State; and (3) the term ‘‘State’’ means a State of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or any territory or possession of the United States. (June 25, 1948, ch. 645, 62 Stat. 721; Pub. L. 94–453, § 1, Oct. 2, 1976, 90 Stat. 1516; Pub. L. 94–453, § 1, Oct. 2, 1976, 90 Stat. 1516; Pub. L. 103–322, title XXXIII, § 330016(1)(L), Sept. 13, 1994, 108 Stat. 2147.) 

18 U.S.C. § 602. Solicitation of political contributions 

(a) It shall be unlawful for— (1) a candidate for the Congress; (2) an individual elected to or serving in the office of Senator or Representative in, or Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress; (3) an officer or employee of the United States or any depart-ment or agency thereof; or 123 Nomination and Election (4) a person receiving any salary or compensation for serv-ices from money derived from the Treasury of the United States; to knowingly solicit any contribution within the meaning of section 301(8) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 from any other such officer, employee, or person. Any person who violates this section shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than three years, or both. (b) The prohibition in subsection (a) shall not apply to any activity of an employee (as defined in section 7322(1) of title 5) or any individual employed in or under the United States Postal Service or the Postal Rate Commission, unless that activity is prohibited by section 7323 or 7324 of such title. (June 25, 1948, ch. 645, 62 Stat. 722; Pub. L. 96–187, title II, § 201, Jan. 8, 1980, 93 Stat. 1367; Pub. L. 96–187, title II, § 201(a)(3), Jan. 8, 1980, 93 Stat. 1367; Pub. L. 103–94, § 4(a), Oct. 6, 1993, 107 Stat. 1004; Pub. L. 103–322, title XXXIII, § 330016(1)(K), Sept. 13, 1994, 108 Stat. 2147.) 

18 U.S.C. § 603. Making political contributions 

(a) It shall be unlawful for an officer or employee of the United States or any department or agency thereof, or a per-son receiving any salary or compensation for service from money derived from the Treasury of the United States, to make any contribution within the meaning of section 301(8) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 to any other such officer, employee or person or to any Senator or Rep-resentative in, or Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress, if the person receiving such contribution is the em-ployer or employing authority of the person making the con-tribution. Any person who violates this section shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than three years, or both. (b) For purposes of this section, a contribution to an author-ized committee as defined in section 302(e)(1) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 shall be considered a con-tribution to the individual who has authorized such com-mittee. (c) The prohibition in subsection (a) shall not apply to any activity of an employee (as defined in section 7322(1) of title 5) or any individual employed in or under the United States Postal Service or the Postal Rate Commission, unless that activity is prohibited by section 7323 or 7324 of such title. (June 25, 1948, ch. 645, 62 Stat. 722; Oct. 31, 1951, ch. 655, § 20(b), 65 Stat. 718; Pub. L. 96–187, title II, § 201, Jan. 8, 1980, 93 Stat. 1367; Pub. L. 96–187, title II, § 201(a)(4), Jan. 8, 1980, 93 Stat. 1367; Pub. L. 103–94, § 4(b), Oct. 6, 1993, 107 Stat. 1005; Pub. L. 103–322, title XXXIII, § 330016(1)(K), Sept. 13, 1994, 108 Stat. 2147.) 

18 U.S.C. § 604. Solicitation for persons on relief 

Whoever solicits or receives or is in any manner concerned in soliciting or receiving any assessment, subscription, or contribution for any political purpose from any person known by him to be entitled to, or receiving compensation, employ-ment, or other benefit provided for or made possible by any Act of Congress appropriating funds for work relief or relief 124 Nomination and Election purposes, shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than one year, or both. (June 25, 1948, ch. 645, 62 Stat. 722; Pub. L. 103–322, title XXXIII, § 330016(1)(H), Sept. 13, 1994, 108 Stat. 2147.) 

18 U.S.C. § 605. Disclosure of names of persons on relief 

Whoever, for political purposes, furnishes or discloses any list or names of persons receiving compensation, employment or benefits provided for or made possible by any Act of Con-gress appropriating, or authorizing the appropriation of funds for work relief or relief purposes, to a political can-didate, committee, campaign manager, or to any person for delivery to a political candidate, committee, or campaign manager; and Whoever receives any such list or names for political pur-poses— Shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than one year, or both. (June 25, 1948, ch. 645, 62 Stat. 722; Pub. L. 103–322, title XXXIII, § 330016(1)(H), Sept. 13, 1994, 108 Stat. 2147.) 

18 U.S.C. § 606. Intimidation to secure political contributions 

Whoever, being one of the officers or employees of the United States mentioned in section 602 of this title, discharges, or promotes, or degrades, or in any manner changes the official rank or compensation of any other officer or employee, or promises or threatens so to do, for giving or withholding or neglecting to make any contribution of money or other valu-able thing for any political purpose, shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than three years, or both. (June 25, 1948, ch. 645, 62 Stat. 722; Pub. L. 103–322, title XXXIII, § 330016(1)(K), Sept. 13, 1994, 108 Stat. 2147.) 

18 U.S.C. § 607. Place of solicitation 

(a) Prohibition. (1) In general. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit or receive a donation of money or other thing of value in con-nection with a Federal, State, or local election from a person who is located in a room or building occupied in the dis-charge of official duties by an officer or employee of the United States. It shall be unlawful for an individual who is an officer or employee of the Federal Government, including the President, Vice President, and Members of Congress, to solicit or receive a donation of money or other thing of value in connection with a Federal, State, or local election, while in any room or building occupied in the discharge of official duties by an officer or employee of the United States, from any person. (2) Penalty. A person who violates this section shall be fined not more than $5,000, imprisoned not more than 3 years, or both. (b) The prohibition in subsection (a) shall not apply to the re-ceipt of contributions by persons on the staff of a Senator or Representative in, or Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, 125 Nomination and Election the Congress or Executive Office of the President, provided, that such contributions have not been solicited in any man-ner which directs the contributor to mail or deliver a con-tribution to any room, building, or other facility referred to in subsection (a), and provided that such contributions are transferred within seven days of receipt to a political com-mittee within the meaning of section 302(e) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971. (June 25, 1948, ch. 645, § 1, 62 Stat. 722; Pub. L. 96–187, title II, § 201(a)(5), Jan. 8, 1980, 93 Stat. 1367; Pub. L. 103– 322, title XXXIII, § 330016(1)(K), Sept. 13, 1994, 108 Stat. 2147; Pub. L. 107–155, title III, § 302, March 27, 2002, 116 Stat. 96.) 

18 U.S.C. § 608. Absent uniformed services voters and overseas voters 

(a) Whoever knowingly deprives or attempts to deprive any person of a right under the Uniformed and Overseas Citizens Absentee Voting Act shall be fined in accordance with this title or imprisoned not more than five years, or both. (b) Whoever knowingly gives false information for the pur-pose of establishing the eligibility of any person to register or vote under the Uniformed and Overseas Citizens Absentee Voting Act, or pays or offers to pay, or accepts payment for registering or voting under such Act shall be fined in accord-ance with this title or imprisoned not more than five years, or both. (Pub. L. 99–410, title II, § 202(a), Aug. 28, 1986, 100 Stat. 929.) 

18 U.S.C. § 609. Use of military authority to influence vote of member of Armed Forces 

Whoever, being a commissioned, noncommissioned, warrant, or petty officer of an Armed Force, uses military authority to influence the vote of a member of the Armed Forces or to re-quire a member of the Armed Forces to march to a polling place, or attempts to do so, shall be fined in accordance with this title or imprisoned not more than five years, or both. Nothing in this section shall prohibit free discussion of polit-ical issues or candidates for public office. (Pub. L. 99–410, title II, § 202(a), Aug. 28, 1986, 100 Stat. 929.) 126 Nomination and Election 

J. Internal Revenue Code, Political Campaign Debts and Contributions (Title 26, United States Code) 26 U.S.C. § 84. Transfer of appreciated property to political organization 

(a) General rule. 

If— (1) any person transfers property to a political organization, and (2) the fair market value of such property exceeds its ad-justed basis, then for purposes of this chapter the transferor shall be treated as having sold such property to the political organi-zation on the date of the transfer, and the transferor shall be treated as having realized an amount equal to the fair market value of such property on such date. (b) Basis of property. 

In the case of a transfer of property to a political organiza-tion to which subsection (a) applies, the basis of such prop-erty in the hands of the political organization shall be the same as it would be in the hands of the transferor, increased by the amount of gain recognized to the transferor by reason of such transfer. (c) Political organization defined. 

For purposes of this section, the term ‘‘political organization’’ has the meaning given to such term by section 527(e)(1). (Pub. L. 92–625, § 13(a)(1), Jan. 3, 1975, 88 Stat. 2120.) 

26 U.S.C. § 271. Debts owed by political parties, etc. 

(a) General rule. 

In the case of a taxpayer (other than a bank as defined in section 581) no deduction shall be allowed under section 166 (relating to bad debts) or under section 165(g) (relating to worthlessness of securities) by reason of the worthlessness of any debt owed by a political party. (b) Definitions. 

(1) Political party. —For purposes of subsection (a), the term ‘‘political party’’ means— (A) a political party; (B) a national, State, or local committee of a political party; or (C) a committee, association, or organization which accepts contributions or makes expenditures for the purpose of influ-encing or attempting to influence the election of presidential or vice presidential electors or of any individual whose name is presented for election to any Federal, State, or local elec-tive public office whether or not such individual is elected. (2) Contributions. —For purposes of paragraph (1)(C), the term ‘‘contributions’’ includes a gift, subscription, loan, ad-vance, or deposit of money, or anything of value, and in-127 Nomination and Election cludes a contract, promise, or agreement to make a contribu-tion, whether or not legally enforceable. (3) Expenditures. —For purposes of paragraph (1)(C), the term ‘‘expenditures’’ includes a payment, distribution, loan, advance, deposit, or gift of money, or anything of value, and includes a contract promise or agreement to make an ex-penditure, whether or not legally enforceable. (c) Exception. 

In the case of a taxpayer who uses an accrual method of ac-counting, subsection (a) shall not apply to a debt which ac-crued as a receivable on a bona fide sale of goods or services in the ordinary course of the taxpayer’s trade or business if— (1) for the taxable year in which such receivable accrued, more than 30 percent of all receivables which accrued in the ordinary course of the trades and businesses of the taxpayer were due from political parties, and (2) the taxpayer made substantial continuing efforts to col-lect on the debt. (Aug. 16, 1954, ch. 736, 68A Stat. 82; Pub. L. 94–455, title XXI, § 2104(a), Oct. 4, 1976, 90 Stat. 1901.) 

26 U.S.C. § 276. Certain indirect contributions to political parties 

(a) Disallowance of Deduction. 

No deduction otherwise allowable under this chapter shall be allowed for any amount paid or incurred for— (1) advertising in a convention program of a political party, or in any other publication if any part of the proceeds of such publication directly or indirectly inures (or is intended to inure) to or for the use of a political party or a political can-didate; (2) admission to any dinner or program, if any part of the proceeds of such dinner or program directly or indirectly in-ures (or is intended to inure) to or for the use of a political party or a political candidate; or (3) admission to an inaugural ball, inaugural gala, inaugural parade, or inaugural concert, or to any similar event which is identified with a political party or a political candidate. (b) Definitions. 

For purposes of this section— (1) Political party. —The term ‘‘political party’’ means— (A) a political party; (B) a National, State, or local committee of a political party; or (C) a committee, association, or organization, whether incor-porated or not, which directly or indirectly accepts contribu-tions (as defined in section 271(b)(2)) or makes expenditures (as defined in section 271(b)(3)) for the purpose of influencing or attempting to influence the selection, nomination, or elec-tion of any individual to any Federal, State, or local elective public office, or the election of presidential and vice-presi-dential electors, whether or not such individual or electors are selected, nominated, or elected. 128 Nomination and Election (2) Proceeds inuring to or for the use of political can-didates. —Proceeds shall be treated as inuring to or for the use of a political candidate only if— (A) such proceeds may be used directly or indirectly for the purpose of furthering his candidacy for selection, nomination, or election to any elective public office, and (B) such proceeds are not received by such candidate in the ordinary course of a trade or business (other than the trade or business of holding elective public office). (c) Cross reference. 

For disallowance of certain entertainment, etc., expenses, see section 274. (Pub. L. 89–368, title III, § 301(a), Mar. 15, 1966, 80 Stat. 66; Pub. L. 90–364, title I, § 108(a), June 28, 1968, 82 Stat. 269; Pub. L. 93–443, § 406(d), Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1296.) 

26 U.S.C. § 527. Political organizations 

(a) General rule. A political organization shall be subject to taxation under this subtitle only to the extent provided in this section. A political organization shall be considered an organization exempt from income taxes for the purpose of any law which refers to organizations exempt from income taxes. (b) Tax imposed. 

(1) In general. A tax is hereby imposed for each taxable year on the political organization taxable income of every political organization. Such tax shall be computed by multiplying the political organization taxable income by the highest rate of tax specified in section 11(b). (2) Alternative tax in case of capital gains. If for any taxable year any political organization has a net capital gain, then, in lieu of the tax imposed by paragraph (1), there is hereby imposed a tax (if such a tax is less than the tax imposed by paragraph (1)) which shall consist of the sum of— (A) a partial tax, computed as provided by paragraph (1), on the political organization taxable income determined by re-ducing such income by the amount of such gain, and (B) an amount determined as provided in section 1201(a) on such gain. (c) Political organization taxable income defined. 

(1) Taxable income defined. For purposes of this section, the political organization taxable income of any organization for any taxable year is an amount equal to the excess (if any) of— (A) the gross income for the taxable year (excluding any ex-empt function income), over (B) the deductions allowed by this chapter which are directly connected with the production of the gross income (excluding exempt function income), computed with the modifications provided in paragraph (2). (2) Modifications. For purposes of this subsection— (A) there shall be allowed a specific deduction of $100, (B) no net operating loss deduction shall be allowed under section 172, and 129 Nomination and Election (C) no deduction shall be allowed under part VIII of sub-chapter B (relating to special deductions for corporations). (3) Exempt function income. For purposes of this subsection, the term ‘‘exempt function income’’ means any amount re-ceived as— (A) a contribution of money or other property, (B) membership dues, a membership fee or assessment from a member of the political organization, (C) proceeds from a political fundraising or entertainment event, or proceeds from the sale of political campaign mate-rials, which are not received in the ordinary course of any trade or business, or (D) proceeds from the conducting of any bingo game (as de-fined in section 513(f)(2) to the extent such amount is seg-regated for use only for the exempt function of the political organization. (d) Certain uses not treated as income to candidate. For pur-poses of this title, if any political organization— (1) contributes any amount to or for the use of any political organization which is treated as exempt from tax under sub-section (a) of this section, (2) contributes any amount to or for the use of any organiza-tion described in paragraph (1) or (2) of section 509(a) which is exempt from tax under section 501(a), or (3) deposits any amount in the general fund of the Treasury or in the general fund of any State or local government, such amount shall be treated as an amount not diverted for the personal use of the candidate or any other person. No de-duction shall be allowed under this title for the contribution or deposit of any amount described in the preceding sen-tence. (e) Other definitions. For purposes of this section— (1) Political organization. The term ‘‘political organization’’ means a party, committee, association, fund, or other organi-zation (whether or not incorporated) organized and operated primarily for the purpose of directly or indirectly accepting contributions or making expenditures, or both, for an exempt function. (2) Exempt function. The term ‘‘exempt function’’ means the function of influencing or attempting to influence the selec-tion, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual to any Federal, State, or local public office or office in a polit-ical organization, or the election of Presidential or Vice-Pres-idential electors, whether or not such individual or electors are selected, nominated, elected, or appointed. Such term in-cludes the making of expenditures relating to an office de-scribed in the preceding sentence which, if incurred by the individual, would be allowable as a deduction under section 162(a). (3) Contributions. The term ‘‘contributions’’ has the meaning given to such term by section 271(b)(2). (4) Expenditures. The term ‘‘expenditures’’ has the meaning given to such term by section 271(b)(3). (5) Qualified state or local political organization. 130 Nomination and Election (A) In general. The term ‘‘qualified State or local political or-ganization’’ means a political organization— (i) all the exempt functions of which are solely for the pur-poses of influencing or attempting to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual to any State or local public office or office in a State or local polit-ical organization, (ii) which is subject to State law that requires the organiza-tion to report (and it so reports)— (I) information regarding each separate expenditure from and contribution to such organization, and (II) information regarding the person who makes such con-tribution or receives such expenditure, which would other-wise be required to be reported under this section, and (iii) with respect to which the reports referred to in clause (ii) are (I) made public by the agency with which such re-ports are filed, and (II) made publicly available for inspection by the organization in the manner described in section 6104(d). (B) Certain State law differences disregarded. An organiza-tion shall not be treated as failing to meet the requirements of subparagraph (A)(ii) solely by reason of 1 or more of the following: (i) The minimum amount of any expenditure or contribution required to be reported under State law is not more than $300 greater than the minimum amount required to be re-ported under subsection (j). (ii) The State law does not require the organization to iden-tify 1 or more of the following: (I) The employer of any person who makes contributions to the organization. (II) The occupation of any person who makes contributions to the organization. (III) The employer of any person who receives expenditures from the organization. (IV) The occupation of any person who receives expenditures from the organization. (V) The purpose of any expenditure of the organization. (VI) The date any contribution was made to the organization. (VII) The date of any expenditure of the organization. (C) De minimis errors. An organization shall not fail to be treated as a qualified State or local political organization solely because such organization makes de minimis errors in complying with the State reporting requirements and the public inspection requirements described in subparagraph (A) as long as the organization corrects such errors within a reasonable period after the organization becomes aware of such errors (D) Participation of Federal candidate or office holder. The term ‘‘qualified State or local political organization’’ shall not include any organization otherwise described in subpara-graph (A) if a candidate for nomination or election to Federal elective public office or an individual who holds such office— (i) controls or materially participates in the direction of the organization, (ii) solicits contributions to the organization (unless the Sec-retary determines that such solicitations resulted in de mini-131 Nomination and Election mis contributions and were made without the prior knowl-edge and consent, whether explicit or implicit, of the organi-zation or its officers, directors, agents, or employees), or (iii) directs, in whole or in part, disbursements by the organi-zation. (f) Exempt organization which is not political organization must include certain amounts in gross income. (1) In general. If an organization described in section 501(c) which is exempt from tax under section 501(a) expends any amount during the taxable year directly (or through another organization) for an exempt function (within the meaning of subsection (e)(2)), then, notwithstanding any other provision of law, there shall be included in the gross income of such organization for the taxable year, and shall be subject to tax under subsection (b) as if it constituted political organization taxable income, an amount equal to the lesser of— (A) the net investment income of such organization for the taxable year, or (B) the aggregate amount so expended during the taxable year for such an exempt function. (2) Net investment income. For purposes of this subsection, the term ‘‘net investment income’’ means the excess of— (A) the gross amount of income from interest, dividends, rents, and royalties, plus the excess (if any) of gains from the sale or exchange of assets over the losses from the sale or exchange of assets, over (B) the deductions allowed by this chapter which are directly connected with the production of the income referred to in subparagraph (A). For purposes of the preceding sentence, there shall not be taken into account items taken into account for purposes of the tax imposed by section 511 (relating to tax on unrelated business income). (3) Certain separate segregated funds. For purposes of this subsection and subsection (e)(1), a separate segregated fund (within the meaning of section 610 of title 18 or of any simi-lar State statute, or within the meaning of any State statute which permits the segregation of dues moneys for exempt functions (within the meaning of subsection (e)(2)) which is maintained by an organization described in section 501(c) which is exempt from tax under section 501(a) shall be treat-ed as a separate organization. (g) Treatment of newsletter funds. 

(1) In general. For purposes of this section, a fund estab-lished and maintained by an individual who holds, has been elected to, or is a candidate (within the meaning of para-graph (3)) for nomination or election to, any Federal, State, or local elective public office for use by such individual exclu-sively for the preparation and circulation of such individual’s newsletter shall, except as provided in paragraph (2), be treated as if such fund constituted a political organization. (2) Additional modifications. In the case of any fund de-scribed in paragraph (1)— (A) the exempt function shall be only the preparation and circulation of the newsletter, and 132 Nomination and Election (B) the specific deduction provided by subsection (c)(2)(A) shall not be allowed. (3) Candidate. For purposes of paragraph (1), the term ‘‘can-didate’’ means, with respect to any Federal, State, or local elective public office, an individual who— (A) publicly announces that he is a candidate for nomination or election to such office, and (B) meets the qualifications prescribed by law to hold such office. (h) Special rule for principal campaign committees. (1) In general. In the case of a political organization which is a principal campaign committee, paragraph (1) of sub-section (b) shall be applied by substituting ‘‘the appropriate rates’’ for ‘‘the highest rate’’. (2) Principal campaign committee defined. (A) In general. For purposes of this subsection, the term ‘‘principal campaign committee’’ means the political com-mittee designated by a candidate for Congress as his prin-cipal campaign committee for purposes of— (i) section 302(e) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 U.S.C. 432(e)), and (ii) this subsection. (B) Designation. A candidate may have only 1 designation in effect under subparagraph (A)(ii) at any time and such des-ignation— (i) shall be made at such time and in such manner as the Secretary may prescribe by regulations, and (ii) once made, may be revoked only with the consent of the Secretary. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require any designation where there is only one political committee with respect to a candidate. (i) Organizations must notify Secretary that they are section 527 organizations. (1) In general. Except as provided in paragraph (5), an orga-nization shall not be treated as an organization described in this section— (A) unless it has given notice to the Secretary electronically that it is to be so treated, or (B) if the notice is given after the time required under para-graph (2), the organization shall not be so treated for any pe-riod before such notice is given or, in the case of any mate-rial change in the information required under paragraph (3), for the period beginning on the date on which the material change occurs and ending on the date on which such notice is given. (2) Time to give notice. The notice required under paragraph (1) shall be transmitted not later than 24 hours after the date on which the organization is established or, in the case of any material change in the information required under paragraph (3), not later than 30 days after such material change. (3) Contents of notice. The notice required under paragraph (1) shall include information regarding— 133 Nomination and Election (A) the name and address of the organization (including any business address, if different) and its electronic mailing ad-dress, (B) the purpose of the organization, (C) the names and addresses of its officers, highly com-pensated employees, contact person, custodian of records, and members of its Board of Directors, (D) the name and address of, and relationship to, any related entities (within the meaning of section 168(h)(4), (E) whether the organization intends to claim an exemption from the requirements of subsection (j) or section 6033, and (F) such other information as the Secretary may require to carry out the internal revenue laws. (4) Effect of failure. In the case of an organization failing to meet the requirements of paragraph (1) for any period, the taxable income of such organization shall be computed by taking into account any exempt function income (and any de-ductions directly connected with the production of such in-come) or, in the case of a failure relating to a material change, by taking into account such income and deductions only during the period beginning on the date on which the material change occurs and ending on the date on which no-tice is given under this subsection. For purposes of the pre-ceding sentence, the term ‘‘exempt function income’’ means any amount described in a subparagraph of subsection (c)(3), whether or not segregated for use for an exempt function. (5) Exceptions. This subsection shall not apply to any organi-zation— (A) to which this section applies solely by reason of sub-section (f)(1), (B) which reasonably anticipates that it will not have gross receipts of $25,000 or more for any taxable year, or (C) which is a political committee of a State or local can-didate or which is a State or local committee of a political party. (6) Coordination with other requirements. This subsection shall not apply to any person required (without regard to this subsection) to report under the Federal Election Cam-paign Act of 1971 (2 U.S.C. 431 et seq.) as a political com-mittee. (j) Required disclosure of expenditures and contributions. (1) Penalty for failure. In the case of— (A) a failure to make the required disclosures under para-graph (2) at the time and in the manner prescribed therefor, or (B) a failure to include any of the information required to be shown by such disclosures or to show the correct informa-tion, there shall be paid by the organization an amount equal to the rate of tax specified in subsection (b)(1) multi-plied by the amount to which the failure relates. For pur-poses of subtitle F, the amount imposed by this paragraph shall be assessed and collected in the same manner as pen-alties imposed by section 6652(c). (2) Required disclosure. A political organization which ac-cepts a contribution, or makes an expenditure, for an exempt 134 Nomination and Election function during any calendar year shall file with the Sec-retary either— (A) (i) in the case of a calendar year in which a regularly scheduled election is held— (I) quarterly reports, beginning with the first quarter of the calendar year in which a contribution is accepted or expendi-ture is made, which shall be filed not later than the fifteenth day after the last day of each calendar quarter, except that the report for the quarter ending on December 31 of such calendar year shall be filed not later than January 31 of the following calendar year, (II) a pre-election report, which shall be filed not later than the twelfth day before (or posted by registered or certified mail not later than the fifteenth day before) any election with respect to which the organization makes a contribution or expenditure, and which shall be complete as of the twen-tieth day before the election, and (III) a post-general election report, which shall be filed not later than the thirtieth day after the general election and which shall be complete as of the twentieth day after such general election, and (ii) in the case of any other calendar year, a report covering the period beginning January 1 and ending June 30, which shall be filed no later than July 31 and a report covering the period beginning July 1 and ending December 31, which shall be filed no later than January 31 of the following cal-endar year, or (B) monthly reports for the calendar year, beginning with the first month of the calendar year in which a contribution is accepted or expenditure is made, which shall be filed not later than the twentieth day after the last day of the month and shall be complete as if the last day of the month, except that, in lieu of filing the reports otherwise due in November and December of any year in which a regularly scheduled general election is held, a pre-general election report shall be filed in accordance with subparagraph (A)(i)(II), a post-gen-eral election report shall be filed in accordance with subpara-graph (A)(i)(III), and a year end report shall be filed not later than January 31 of the following calendar year. (3) Contents of report. A report required under paragraph (2) shall contain the following information: (A) The amount, date, and purpose of each expenditure made to a person if the aggregate amount of expenditures to such person during the calendar year equals or exceeds $500 and the name and address of the person (in the case of an indi-vidual, including the occupation and name of employer of such individual). (B) The name and address (in the case of an individual, in-cluding the occupation and name of employer of such indi-vidual) of all contributors which contributed an aggregate amount of $200 or more to the organization during the cal-endar year and the amount and date of the contribution. Any expenditure or contribution disclosed in a previous re-porting period is not required to be included in the current reporting period. (4) Contracts to spend or contribute. For purposes of this subsection, a person shall be treated as having made an ex-135 Nomination and Election penditure or contribution if the person has contracted or is otherwise obligated to make the expenditure or contribution. (5) Coordination with other requirements. This subsection shall not apply— (A) to any person required (without regard to this sub-section) to report under the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 U.S.C. 431 et seq.) as a political committee, (B) to any State or local committee of a political party or po-litical committee of a State or local candidate, (C) to any organization which is a qualified State or local po-litical organization, (D) to any organization which reasonably anticipates that it will not have gross receipts of $25,000 or more for any tax-able year, (E) to any organization to which this section applies solely by reason of subsection (f)(1), or (F) with respect to any expenditure which is an independent expenditure (as defined in section 301 of such Act). (6) Election. For purposes of this subsection, the term ‘‘elec-tion’’ means— (A) a general, special, primary, or runoff election for a Fed-eral office, (B) a convention or caucus of a political party which has au-thority to nominate a candidate for Federal office, (C) a primary election held for the selection of delegates to a national nominating convention of a political party, or (D) a primary election held for the expression of a preference for the nomination of individuals for election to the office of President. (7) Electronic filing. Any report required under paragraph (2) with respect to any calendar year shall be filed in electronic form if the organization has, or has reason to expect to have, contributions exceeding $50,000 or expenditures exceeding $50,000 in such calendar year. (k) Public availability of notices and reports. (1) In general. The Secretary shall make any notice de-scribed in subsection (i)(1) or report described in subsection (j)(7) available for public inspection on the Internet not later than 48 hours after such notice or report has been filed (in addition to such public availability as may be made under section 6104(d)(7)). (2) Access. The Secretary shall make the entire database of notices and reports which are made available to the public under paragraph (1) searchable by the following items (to the extent the items are required to be included in the no-tices and reports): (A) Names, States, zip codes, custodians of records, directors, and general purposes of the organizations. (B) Entities related to the organizations. (C) Contributors to the organizations. (D) Employers of such contributors. (E) Recipients of expenditures by the organizations. (F) Ranges of contributions and expenditures. (G) Time periods of the notices and reports. Such database shall be downloadable. 136 Nomination and Election (l) Authority to waive. The Secretary may waive all or any portion of the— (1) tax assessed on an organization by reason of the failure of the organization to comply with the requirements of sub-section (i), or (2) amount imposed under subsection (j) for a failure to com-ply with the requirements thereof, on a showing that such failure was due to reasonable cause and not due to willful neglect. (Pub. L. 93–625, 10(a), Jan. 3, 1975, 88 Stat. 2116; Pub. L. 94–455, Title XIX, 1901(b)(33)(C), Oct. 4, 1976, 90 Stat. 1801; Pub. L. 95502, Title III, 302(a), Oct. 21, 1978, 92 Stat. 1702; Pub. L. 95–600, Title III, § 301(b)(6), Nov. 6, 1978, 92 Stat. 2821; Pub. L. 97–34, Title I, § 128(a), Aug. 13, 1981, 95 Stat. 203; Pub. L. 98–369, Div A, Title IV, § 474(r)(16), Title VII, § 722(c), July 18, 1984, 98 Stat. 843, 973; Pub. L. 99–514, Title I, § 112(b)(1), Oct. 22, 1986, 100 Stat. 2108; Pub. L. 100–647, Title I, § 1001(b)(3)(B), Nov. 10, 1988, 102 Stat. 3349; Pub. L. 106–230, § 1(a), 2(a), July 1, 2000, 114 Stat. 477, 479; Pub. L. 107–276, §§ 1(a), 2(a), (b), 5(a), 6(a)–(c), 6(e)–(g), Nov. 2, 2002, 116 Stat. 1929, 1932, 1933, 1934.) 

26 U.S.C. § 2501. Imposition of tax 

(a) Taxable transfers. 

(1) General rule. A tax, computed as provided in section 2502, is hereby imposed for each calendar year on the trans-fer of property by gift during such calendar year by any indi-vidual, resident or nonresident. (2) Transfers of intangible property. Except as provided in paragraph (3), paragraph (1) shall not apply to the transfer of intangible property by a nonresident not a citizen of the United States. (3) Exception. (A) Certain individuals. Paragraph (2) shall not apply in the case of a donor to whom section 877(b) applies for the tax-able year which includes the date of the transfer. (B) Credit for foreign gift taxes. The tax imposed by this sec-tion solely by reason of this paragraph shall be credited with the amount of any gift tax actually paid to any foreign coun-try in respect of any gift which is taxable under this section solely by reason of this paragraph. (4) Transfers to political organizations. Paragraph (1) shall not apply to the transfer of money or other property to a po-litical organization (within the meaning of section 527(e)(1) for the use of such organization. (5) Transfers of certain stock. (A) In general. In the case of a transfer of stock in a foreign corporation described in subparagraph (B) by a donor to whom section 877(b) applies for the taxable year which in-cludes the date of the transfer— (i) section 2511(a) shall be applied without regard to whether such stock is situated within the United States, and (ii) the value of such stock for purposes of this chapter shall be its U.S.-asset value determined under subparagraph (C). 137 Nomination and Election (B) Foreign corporation described. A foreign corporation is described in this subparagraph with respect to a donor if— (i) the donor owned (within the meaning of section 958(a)) at the time of such transfer 10 percent or more of the total com-bined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote of the foreign corporation, and (ii) such donor owned (within the meaning of section 958(a), or is considered to have owned (by applying the ownership rules of section 958(b)), at the time of such transfer, more than 50 percent of— (I) the total combined voting power of all classes of stock en-titled to vote of such corporation, or (II) the total value of the stock of such corporation. (C) U.S.-asset value. For purposes of subparagraph (A), the U.S.-asset value of stock shall be the amount which bears the same ratio to the fair market value of such stock at the time of transfer as— (i) the fair market value (at such time) of the assets owned by such foreign corporation and situated in the United States, bears to (ii) the total fair market value (at such time) of all assets owned by such foreign corporation. (b) Certain residents of possessions considered citizens of the United States. A donor who is a citizen of the United States and a resident of a possession thereof shall, for purposes of the tax imposed by this chapter, be considered a ‘citizen’ of the United States within the meaning of that term wherever used in this title unless he acquired his United States citi-zenship solely by reason of (1) his being a citizen of such pos-session of the United States, or (2) his birth or residence within such possession of the United States. (c) Certain residents of possessions considered nonresidents not citizens of the United States. A donor who is a citizen of the United States and a resident of a possession thereof shall, for purposes of the tax imposed by this chapter, be considered a ‘nonresident not a citizen of the United States’ within the meaning of that term wherever used in this title, but only if such donor acquired his United States citizenship solely by reason of (1) his being a citizen of such possession of the United States, or (2) his birth or residence within such possession of the United States. (d) Cross references. (1) For increase in basis of property acquired by gift for gift tax paid, see section 1015(d). (2) For exclusion of transfers of property outside the United States by a nonresident who is not a citizen of the United States, see section 2511(a). (Aug. 16, 1954, ch. 736, 68A Stat. 403; Pub. L. 85–866, title I, §§ 43(b), 102(b), Sept. 2, 1958, 72 Stat. 1641, 1674; Pub. L. 86–779, § 4(d), Sept. 14, 1960, 74 Stat. 1000; Pub. L. 89–809, title I, § 109(a), Nov. 13, 1966, 80 Stat. 1574; Pub. L. 91–614, title I, § 102(a)(1), Dec. 31, 1970, 84 Stat. 1838; Pub. L. 93– 625, § 14(a), Jan. 3, 1975, 88 Stat. 2121; Pub. L. 94–455, title XIX, §§ 1902(a)(10), 1906(b)(13)(A), Oct. 4, 1976, 90 Stat. 1805, 1834; Pub. L. 97–34, title IV, § 442(a)(1) Aug. 13, 1981, 95 Stat. 320; Pub. L. 100–647, title III, § 3031(a)(2), 102 Stat. 3635; Nov. 5, 1990, Pub. L. 101–508, title XI, § 11601(b)(2), 138 Nomination and Election Nov. 10, 1988, 104 Stat. 1388–490; Pub. L. 104–191, title V, § 511(e)(2), (f)(2)(B), Aug. 21, 1996, 110 Stat. 2098, 2100; Pub. L. 105–34, title XVI, § 1602(g)(5), Aug. 5, 1997, 111 Stat. 1095; Pub. L. 108–357, title VIII, § 804(d), Oct. 22, 2004, 118 Stat. 1571.) 139 Nomination and Election 

K. Public Financing of Presidential Elections (Title 26, United States Code) 26 U.S.C. § 6096. Designation by individuals 

(a) In general. 

Every individual (other than a nonresident alien) whose in-come tax liability for the taxable year is $3 or more may des-ignate that $3 shall be paid over to the Presidential Election Campaign Fund in accordance with the provisions of section 9006(a). In the case of a joint return of husband and wife having an income tax liability of $6 or more, each spouse may designate that $3 shall be paid to the fund. (b) Income tax liability. 

For purposes of subsection (a), the income tax liability of an individual for any taxable year is the amount of the tax im-posed by chapter 1 on such individual for such taxable year (as shown on his return), reduced by the sum of the credits (as shown on his return) allowable under part IV of sub-chapter A of chapter 1 (other than subpart C thereof). (c) Manner and time of designation. 

A designation under subsection (a) may be made with re-spect to any taxable year— (1) at the time of filing the return of the tax imposed by chapter 1 for such taxable year, or (2) at any other time (after the time of filing the return of the tax imposed by chapter 1 for such taxable year) specified in regulations prescribed by the Secretary. Such designation shall be made in such manner as the Sec-retary prescribes by regulations except that, if such designa-tion is made at the time of filing the return of the tax im-posed by chapter 1 for such taxable year, such designation shall be made either on the first page of the return or on the page bearing the taxpayer’s signature. (Pub. L. 89–809, title III, § 302(a), Nov. 13, 1966, 80 Stat. 1587; Pub. L. 92–178, title VIII, § 802(a), Dec. 10, 1971, 85 Stat. 573; Pub. L. 93–53, § 6(a), July 1, 1973, 87 Stat. 138; Pub. L. 94–12, title II, §§ 203(b) (4), 208(d)(4), Mar. 29, 1975, 89 Stat. 30, 35; Pub. L. 94–455, title IV, § 401(a)(2)(C), title V, § 504(c)(2), title XIX, § 1906(b)(13)(A), Oct. 4, 1976, 90 Stat. 1555, 1565, 1834; Pub. L. 95–30, title II, § 202(d)(6), May 23, 1977, 91 Stat. 151; Pub. L. 95–618, title I, § 101(b)(4), Nov. 9, 1978, 92 Stat. 3180; Pub. L. 96–223, title II, § 231(b) (2), (3)(C), Apr. 2, 1980, 94 Stat. 272, 276; Pub. L. 97–34, title II, § 221(c)(1), title III, § 331(e)(1), Aug. 13, 1981, 95 Stat. 247, 295; Pub. L. 97–414, § 4(c)(2), Jan. 4, 1982, 96 Stat. 2056; Pub. L. 98–369, title IV, § 474(r)(31), July 18, 1984, 98 Stat. 845; Pub. L. 103–66, title XIII, § 13441(a), Aug. 10, 1993, 107 Stat. 567.) CHAPTER 95—PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION CAMPAIGN FUND 

26 U.S.C. § 9001. Short title 

This chapter may be cited as the ‘‘Presidential Election Cam-paign Fund Act’’. (Pub. L. 92–178, title VIII, § 801, Dec. 10, 1971, 85 Stat. 563.) 140 Nomination and Election 

26 U.S.C. § 9002. Definitions 

For purposes of this chapter— (1) The term ‘‘authorized committee’’ means, with respect to the candidates of a political party for President and Vice President of the United States, any political committee which is authorized in writing by such candidates to incur expenses to further the election of such candidates. Such au-thorization shall be addressed to the chairman of such polit-ical committee, and a copy of such authorization shall be filed by such candidates with the Commission. Any with-drawal of any authorization shall also be in writing and shall be addressed and filed in the same manner as the authoriza-tion. (2) The term ‘‘candidate’’ means, with respect to any presi-dential election, an individual who (A) has been nominated for election to the office of President of the United States or the office of Vice President of the United States by a major party, or (B) has qualified to have his name on the election ballot (or to have the names of electors pledged to him on the election ballot) as the candidate of a political party for elec-tion to either such office in 10 or more States. For purposes of paragraphs (6) and (7) of this section and purposes of sec-tion 9004(a)(2), the term ‘‘candidate’’ means, with respect to any preceding presidential election, an individual who re-ceived popular votes for the office of President in such elec-tion. The term ‘‘candidate’’ shall not include any individual who has ceased actively to seek election to the office of Presi-dent of the United States or to the office of Vice President of the United States, in more than one State. (3) The term ‘‘Commission’’ means the Federal Election Com-mission established by section 309(a)(1) of the Federal Elec-tion Campaign Act of 1971. (4) The term ‘‘eligible candidates’’ means the candidates of a political party for President and Vice President of the United States who have met all applicable conditions for eligibility to receive payments under this chapter set forth in section 9003. (5) The term ‘‘fund’’ means the Presidential Election Cam-paign Fund established by section 9006(a). (6) The term ‘‘major party’’ means, with respect to any presi-dential election, a political party whose candidate for the of-fice of President in the preceding presidential election re-ceived, as the candidate of such party, 25 percent or more of the total number of popular votes received by all candidates for such office. (7) The term ‘‘minor party’’ means, with respect to any presi-dential election, a political party whose candidate for the of-fice of President in the preceding presidential election re-ceived, as the candidate of such party, 5 percent or more but less than 25 percent of the total number of popular votes re-ceived by all candidates for such office. (8) The term ‘‘new party’’ means, with respect to any presi-dential election, a political party which is neither a major party nor a minor party. (9) The term ‘‘political committee’’ means any committee, as-sociation, or organization (whether or not incorporated) which accepts contributions or makes expenditures for the 141 Nomination and Election purpose of influencing, or attempting to influence, the nomi-nation or election of one or more individuals to Federal, State, or local elective public office. (10) The term ‘‘presidential election’’ means the election of presidential and vice-presidential electors. (11) The term ‘‘qualified campaign expense’’ means an ex-pense— (A) incurred (i) by the candidate of a political party for the office of President to further his election to such office or to further the election of the candidate of such political party for the office of Vice President, or both, (ii) by the candidate of a political party for office of Vice President to further his election to such office or to further the election of the can-didate of such political party for the office of President, or both, or (iii) by an authorized committee of the candidates of a political party for the offices of President and Vice Presi-dent to further the election of either or both of such can-didates to such offices, (B) incurred within the expenditure report period (as defined in paragraph (12)), or incurred before the beginning of such period to the extent such expense is for property, services, or facilities used during such period, and (C) neither the incurring nor payment of which constitutes a violation of any law of the United States or of the State in which such expense is incurred or paid. An expense shall be considered as incurred by a candidate or an authorized committee if it is incurred by a person au-thorized by such candidate or such committee, as the case may be, to incur such expense on behalf of such candidate or such committee. If an authorized committee of the can-didates of a political party for President and Vice President of the United States also incurs expenses to further the elec-tion of one or more other individuals to Federal, State, or local elective public office, expenses incurred by such com-mittee which are not specifically to further the election of such other individual or individuals shall be considered as incurred to further the election of such candidates for Presi-dent and Vice President in such proportion as the Commis-sion prescribes by rules or regulations. (12) The term ‘‘expenditure report period’’ with respect to any presidential election means— (A) in the case of a major party, the period beginning with the first day of September before the election, or, if earlier, with the date on which such major party at its national con-vention nominated its candidate for election to the office of President of the United States, and ending 30 days after the date of the presidential election; and (B) in the case of a party which is not a major party, the same period as the expenditure report period of the major party which has the shortest expenditure report period for such presidential election under subparagraph (A). (Pub. L. 92–178, title VIII, § 801, Dec. 10, 1971, 85 Stat. 563, Pub. L. 93–443, title IV, § 404(c)(1)–(3), Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1292; Pub. L. 94–283, title I, § 115(c)(1), title III, § 306(a)(1), May 11, 1976, 90 Stat. 495, 499.) 142 Nomination and Election 

26 U.S.C. § 9003. Condition for eligibility for payments 

(a) In general. 

In order to be eligible to receive any payments under section 9006, the candidates of a political party in a presidential election shall, in writing— (1) agree to obtain and furnish to the Commission such evi-dence as it may request of the qualified campaign expenses of such candidates, (2) agree to keep and furnish to the Commission such records, books, and other information as it may request, and (3) agree to an audit and examination by the Commission under section 9007 and to pay any amounts required to be paid under such section. (b) Major parties. 

In order to be eligible to receive any payments under section 9006, the candidates of a major party in a presidential elec-tion shall certify to the Commission, under penalty or per-jury, that— (1) such candidates and their authorized committees will not incur qualified campaign expenses in excess of the aggregate payments to which they will be entitled under section 9004, and (2) no contributions to defray qualified campaign expenses have been or will be accepted by such candidates or any of their authorized committees except to the extent necessary to make up any deficiency in payments received out of the fund on account of the application of section 9006(d), and no contributions to defray expenses which would be qualified campaign expenses but for subparagraph (C) of section 9002(11) have been or will be accepted by such candidates or any of their authorized committees. Such certification shall be made within such time prior to the day of the presidential election as the Commission shall prescribe by rules or regulations. (c) Minor and new parties. 

In order to be eligible to receive any payments under section 9006, the candidates of a minor or new party in a presi-dential election shall certify to the Commission, under pen-alty of perjury, that— (1) such candidates and their authorized committees will not incur qualified campaign expenses in excess of the aggregate payments to which the eligible candidates of a major party are entitled under section 9004, and (2) such candidates and their authorized committees will ac-cept and expend or retain contributions to defray qualified campaign expenses only to the extent that the qualified cam-paign expenses incurred by such candidates and their au-thorized committees certified to under paragraph (1) exceed the aggregate payments received by such candidates out of the fund pursuant to section 9006. Such certification shall be made within such time prior to the day of the presidential election as the Commission shall prescribe by rules or regulations. 143 Nomination and Election (d) Withdrawal by candidate. 

In any case in which an individual ceases to be a candidate as a result of the operation of the last sentence of section 9002(2), such individual— (1) shall no longer be eligible to receive any payments under section 9006, except that such individual shall be eligible to receive payments under such section to defray qualified cam-paign expenses incurred while actively seeking election to the office of President of the United States or to the office of Vice President of the United States in more than one State; and (2) shall pay to the Secretary, as soon as practicable after the date upon which such individual ceases to be a can-didate, an amount equal to the amount of payments received by such individual under section 9006 which are not used to defray qualified campaign expenses. (e) Closed captioning requirement. 

No candidate for the office of President or Vice President may receive amounts from the Presidential Election Cam-paign Fund under this chapter or chapter 96 unless such candidate has certified that any television commercial pre-pared or distributed by the candidate will be prepared in a manner which ensures that the commercial contains or is ac-companied by closed captioning of the oral content of the commercial to be broadcast in line 21 of the vertical blanking interval, or is capable of being viewed by deaf and hearing impaired individuals via any comparable successor tech-nology to line 21 of the vertical blanking interval. (Pub. L. 92–178, title VIII, § 801, Dec. 10, 1971, 85 Stat. 564; Pub. L. 93–53, § 6(c), July 1, 1973, 87 Stat. 139; Pub. L. 93– 443, title IV, §§ 404(c)(4), (5), 405(b), Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1292, 1294; Pub. L. 94–283, title III, § 306(a)(2), May 11, 1976, 90 Stat. 500; Pub. L. 94–455, title XIX, § 1906(b)(13)(A), Oct. 4, 1976, 90 Stat. 1834; Pub. L. 102– 393, title V, § 534(a), Oct. 6, 1992, 106 Stat. 1764.) 

26 U.S.C. § 9004. Entitlement of eligible candidates to payments 

(a) In general. 

Subject to the provisions of this chapter— (1) The eligible candidates of each major party in a presi-dential election shall be entitled to equal payments under section 9006 in an amount which, in the aggregate, shall not exceed the expenditure limitations applicable to such can-didates under section 320(b)(1)(B) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971. (2)(A) The eligible candidates of a minor party in a presi-dential election shall be entitled to payments under section 9006 equal in the aggregate to an amount which bears the same ratio to the amount under paragraph (1) for a major party as the number of popular votes received by the can-didate for President of the minority party, as such candidate, in the preceding presidential election bears to the average number of popular votes received by the candidates for Presi-dent of the major parties in the preceding presidential elec-tion. 144 Nomination and Election (B) If the candidate of one or more political parties (not in-cluding a major party) for the office of President was a can-didate for such office in the preceding presidential election and received 5 percent or more but less than 25 percent of the total number of popular votes received by all candidates for such office, such candidate and his running mate for the office of Vice President, upon compliance with the provisions of section 9003 (a) and (c), shall be treated as eligible can-didates entitled to payments under section 9006 in an amount computed as provided in subparagraph (A) by taking into account all the popular votes received by such candidate for the office of President in the preceding presidential elec-tion. If eligible candidates of a minor party are entitled to payments under this subparagraph, such entitlement shall be reduced by the amount of the entitlement allowed under subparagraph (A). (3) The eligible candidates of a minor party or a new party in a presidential election whose candidate for President in such election receives, as such candidate, 5 percent or more of the total number of popular votes cast for the office of President in such election shall be entitled to payments under section 9006 equal in the aggregate to an amount which bears the same ratio to the amount allowed under paragraph (1) for a major party as the number of popular votes received by such candidate in such election bears to the average number of popular votes received in such election by the candidates for President of the major parties. In the case of eligible candidates entitled to payments under paragraph (2), the amount allowable under this paragraph shall be lim-ited to the amount, if any, by which the entitlement under the preceding sentence exceeds the amount of the entitle-ment under paragraph (2). (b) Limitations. 

The aggregate payments to which the eligible candidates of a political party shall be entitled under subsections (a)(2) and (3) with respect to a presidential election shall not ex-ceed an amount equal to the lower of— (1) the amount of qualified campaign expenses incurred by such eligible candidates and their authorized committees, re-duced by the amount of contributions to defray qualified campaign expenses received and expended or retained by such eligible candidates and such committees, or (2) the aggregate payments to which the eligible candidates of a major party are entitled under subsection (a)(1), reduced by the amount of contributions described in paragraph (1) of this subsection. (c) Restriction. 

The eligible candidates of a political party shall be entitled to payments under subsection (a) only— (1) to defray qualified campaign expenses incurred by such eligible candidates or their authorized committees, or (2) to repay loans the proceeds of which were used to defray such qualified campaign expenses, or otherwise to restore funds (other than contributions to defray qualified campaign expenses received and expended by such candidates or such 145 Nomination and Election committees) used to defray such qualified campaign ex-penses. (d) Expenditures from personal funds. 

In order to be eligible to receive any payment under section 9006, the candidate of a major, minor, or new party in an election for the office of President shall certify to the Com-mission, under penalty of perjury, that such candidate will not knowingly make expenditures from his personal funds, or the personal funds of his immediate family, in connection with his campaign for election to the office of President in excess of, in the aggregate, $50,000. For purposes of this sub-section, expenditures from personal funds made by a can-didate of a major, minor, or new party for the office of Vice President shall be considered to be expenditures by the can-didate of such party for the office of President. (e) Definition of immediate family. 

For purposes of subsection (d), the term ‘‘immediate family’’ means a candidate’s spouse, and any child, parent, grand-parent, brother, half-brother, sister, or half-sister of the can-didate, and the spouses of such persons. (Pub. L. 92–178, title VIII, § 801, Dec. 10, 1971, 85 Stat. 565; Pub. L. 93–443, title IV, § 404(a), (b), Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1291, 1292; Pub. L. 94–283, title III, §§ 301(a), 307(d), May 11, 1976, 90 Stat. 497, 501.) 

26 U.S.C. § 9005. Certification by Commission 

(a) Initial certifications. 

(a) Not later than 10 days after the candidates of a political party for President and Vice President of the United States have met all applicable conditions for eligibility to receive payments under this chapter set forth in section 9003, the Commission shall certify to the Secretary of the Treasury for payment to such eligible candidates under section 9006 pay-ment in full of amounts to which such candidates are enti-tled under section 9004. (b) Finality of certifications and determinations. 

Initial certifications by the Commission under subsection (a), and all determinations made by it under this chapter, shall be final and conclusive, except to the extent that they are subject to examination and audit by the Commission under section 9007 and judicial review under section 9011. (Pub. L. 92–178, title VIII, § 801, Dec. 10, 1971, 85 Stat. 566; Pub. L. 93–443, title IV, § 404(c)(6), (7), 405(a), Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1202, 1293; Pub. L. 94–455, title XIX, § 1906(b)(13)(C), Oct. 4, 1976, 90 Stat. 1834.) 

26 U.S.C. § 9006. Payments to eligible candidates 

(a) Establishment of campaign fund. 

There is hereby established on the books of the Treasury of the United States a special fund to be known as the ‘‘Presi-dential Election Campaign Fund’’. The Secretary of the Treasury shall, from time to time, transfer to the fund an amount not in excess of the sum of the amounts designated (subsequent to the previous presidential election) to the fund 146 Nomination and Election by individuals under section 6096. There is appropriated to the fund for each fiscal year, out of amounts in the general fund of the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, an amount equal to the amounts so designated during each fiscal year, which shall remain available to the fund without fiscal year limitation. (b) Payments from the fund. 

Upon receipt of a certification from the Commission under section 9005 for payment to the eligible candidates of a polit-ical party, the Secretary of the Treasury shall pay to such candidates out of the fund the amount certified by the Com-mission. Amounts paid to any such candidates shall be under the control of such candidates. (c) Insufficient amounts in fund. 

If at the time of a certification by the Commission under sec-tion 9005 for payment to the eligible candidates of a political party, the Secretary determines that the moneys in the fund are not, or may not be, sufficient to satisfy the full entitle-ments of the eligible candidates of all political parties, he shall withhold from such payment such amount as he deter-mines to be necessary to assure that the eligible candidates of each political party will receive their pro rata share of their full entitlement. Amounts withheld by reason of the preceding sentence shall be paid when the Secretary deter-mines that there are sufficient moneys in the fund to pay such amounts, or portions thereof, to all eligible candidates from whom amounts have been withheld, but, if there are not sufficient moneys in the fund to satisfy the full entitle-ment of the eligible candidates of all political parties, the amounts so withheld shall be paid in such manner that the eligible candidates of each political party receive their pro rata share of their full entitlement. In any case in which the Secretary determines that there are insufficient moneys in the fund to make payments under subsection (b), section 9008(b)(3), and section 9037(b), moneys shall not be made available from any other source for the purpose of making such payments. (Pub. L. 92–178, title VIII, § 801, Dec. 10, 1971, 85 Stat. 567; Pub. L. 93–53, § 6(b), July 1, 1973, 87 Stat. 138; Pub. L. 93– 443, title IV, §§ 403(a), 404(c)(8), Oct. 15, 1975, 88 Stat. 1291, 1292; Pub. L. 94–283, title III, § 302, May 11, 1976, 90 Stat. 498; Pub. L. 94–455, title XIX, § 1906(b)(13)(A), (B), Oct. 4, 1976, 90 Stat. 1834.) 

26 U.S.C. § 9007. Examinations and audits; repayments 

(a) Examinations and audits. 

After each presidential election, the Commission shall con-duct a thorough examination and audit of the qualified cam-paign expenses of the candidates of each political party for President and Vice President. (b) Repayments. 

(1) If the Commission determines that any portion of the payments made to the eligible candidates of a political party under section 9006 was in excess of the aggregate payments 147 Nomination and Election to which candidates were entitled under section 9004, it shall so notify such candidates, and such candidates shall pay to the Secretary of the Treasury an amount equal to such portion. (2) If the Commission determines that the eligible candidates of a political party and their authorized committees incurred qualified campaign expenses in excess of the aggregate pay-ments to which the eligible candidates of a major party were entitled under section 9004, it shall notify such candidates of the amount of such excess and such candidates shall pay to the Secretary of the Treasury an amount equal to such amount. (3) If the Commission determines that the eligible candidates of a major party or any authorized committee of such can-didates accepted contributions (other than contributions to make up deficiencies in payments out of the fund on account of the application of section 9006(c)) to defray qualified cam-paign expenses (other than qualified campaign expenses with respect to which payment is required under paragraph (2)), it shall notify such candidates of the amount of the contribu-tions so accepted, and such candidates shall pay to the Sec-retary of the Treasury an amount equal to such amount. (4) If the Commission determines that any amount of any payment made to the eligible candidates of a political party under section 9006 was used for any purpose other than— (A) to defray the qualified campaign expenses with respect to which such payment was made, or (B) to repay loans the proceeds of which were used, or other-wise to restore funds (other than contributions to defray qualified campaign expenses which were received and ex-pended) which were used, to defray such qualified campaign expenses, it shall notify such candidates of the amount so used, and such candidates shall pay to the Secretary of the Treasury an amount equal to such amount. (5) No payment shall be required from the eligible can-didates of a political party under this subsection to the ex-tent that such payment, when added to other payments re-quired from such candidates under this subsection, exceeds the amount of payments received by such candidates under section 9006. (c) Notification. 

No notification shall be made by the Commission under sub-section (b) with respect to a presidential election more than 3 years after the day of such election. (d) Deposit of repayments. 

All payments received by the Secretary of the Treasury under subsection (b) shall be deposited by him in the general fund of the Treasury. (Pub. L. 92–178, title VIII, § 801, Dec. 10, 1971, 85 Stat. 568; Pub. L. 93–53, § 6(c), July 1, 1973, 87 Stat. 139; Pub. L. 93– 443, title IV, § 404(c)(9)–(11), Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1292; Pub. L. 94–283, title III, § 307(e), May 11, 1976, 90 Stat. 502; Pub. L. 94–455, title XIX, § 1906(b)(13)(B), (C), Oct. 4, 1976, 90 Stat. 1834.) 148 Nomination and Election 

26 U.S.C. § 9008. Payments for presidential nominating conventions 

(a) Establishment of accounts. 

The Secretary shall maintain in the fund, in addition to any account which he maintains under section 9006(a), a sepa-rate account for the national committee of each major party and minor party. The Secretary shall deposit in each such account an amount equal to the amount which each such committee may receive under subsection (b). Such deposits shall be drawn from amounts designated by individuals under section 6096 and shall be made before any transfer is made to any account for any eligible candidate under section 9006(a). (b) Entitlement to payments from the fund. 

(1) Major parties.— Subject to the provisions of this section, the national committee of a major party shall be entitled to payments under paragraph (3), with respect to any presi-dential nominating convention, in amounts which, in the ag-gregate, shall not exceed $4,000,000. (2) Minor parties.— Subject to the provisions of this section, the national committee of a minor party shall be entitled to payments under paragraph (3), with respect to any presi-dential nominating convention, in amounts which, in the ag-gregate, shall not exceed an amount which bears the same ratio to the amount the national committee of a major party is entitled to receive under paragraph (1) as the number of popular votes received by the candidate for President of the minor party, as such candidate, in the preceding presidential election bears to the average number of popular votes re-ceived by the candidates for President of the United States of the major parties in the preceding presidential election. (3) Payments.— Upon receipt of certification from the Com-mission under subsection (g), the Secretary shall make pay-ments from the appropriate account maintained under sub-section (a) to the national committee of a major party or minor party which elects to receive its entitlement under this subsection. Such payments shall be available for use by such committee in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (c). (4) Limitation.— Payments to the national committee of amajor party or minor party under this subsection from the account designated for such committee shall be limited to the amounts in such account at the time of payment. (5) Adjustment of entitlements.— The entitlements estab-lished by this subsection shall be adjusted in the same man-ner as expenditure limitations established by section 315(b) and section 315(d) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 are adjusted pursuant to the provisions of section 315(c) of such Act. (c) Use of funds.— No part of any payment made under sub-section (b) shall be used to defray the expenses of any can-didate or delegate who is participating in any presidential nominating convention. Such payments shall be used only— (1) to defray expenses incurred with respect to a presidential nominating convention (including the payment of deposits) 149 Nomination and Election by or on behalf of the national committee receiving such pay-ments; or (2) to repay loans the proceeds of which were used to defray such expenses, or otherwise to restore funds (other than con-tributions to defray such expenses received by such com-mittee) used to defray such expenses. (d) Limitation of expenditures. 

(1) Major parties.— Except as provided by paragraph (3), the national committee of a major party may not make expendi-tures with respect to a presidential nominating convention which, in the aggregate, exceed the amount of payments to which such committee is entitled under subsection (b)(1). (2) Minor parties.— Except as provided by paragraph (3), the national committee of a minor party may not make expendi-tures with respect to a presidential nominating convention which, in the aggregate, exceed the amount of the entitle-ment of the national committee of a major party under sub-section (b)(1). (3) Exception.— The Commission may authorize the national committee of a major party or minor party to make expendi-tures which, in the aggregate, exceed the limitation estab-lished by paragraph (1) or paragraph (2) of this subsection. Such authorization shall be based on a determination by the Commission that, due to extraordinary and unforeseen cir-cumstances, such expenditures are necessary to assure the effective operation of the presidential nominating convention by such committee. (4) Provision of legal or accounting services.— For purposes of this section, the payment, by any person other than the na-tional committee of a political party (unless the person pay-ing for such services is a person other than the regular em-ployer of the individual rendering such services) of com-pensation to any individual for legal or accounting services rendered to or on behalf of the national committee of a polit-ical party shall not be treated as an expenditure made by or on behalf of such committee with respect to its limitations on presidential nominating convention expenses. (e) Availability of payments. 

The national committee of a major party or minor party may receive payments under subsection (b)(3) beginning on July 1 of the calendar year immediately preceding the calendar year in which a presidential nominating convention of the political party involved is held. (f) Transfer to the fund. 

If, after the close of a presidential nominating convention and after the national committee of the political party in-volved has been paid the amount which it is entitled to re-ceive under this section, there are moneys remaining in the account of such national committee, the Secretary shall transfer the moneys so remaining to the fund. (g) Certification by Commission. 

Any major party or minor party may file a statement with the Commission in such form and manner and at such times 150 Nomination and Election as it may require, designating the national committee of such party. Such statement shall include the information re-quired by section 303(b) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971, together with such additional information as the Commission may require. Upon receipt of a statement filed under the preceding sentences, the Commission promptly shall verify such statement according to such procedures and criteria as it may establish and shall certify to the Secretary for payment in full to any such committee of amounts to which such committee may be entitled under subsection (b). Such certifications shall be subject to an examination and audit which the Commission shall conduct no later than De-cember 31 of the calendar year in which the presidential nominating convention involved is held. (h) Repayments. 

The Commission shall have the same authority to require re-payments from the national committee of a major party or a minor party as it has with respect to repayments from any eligible candidate under section 9007(b). The provisions of section 9007(c) and section 9007(d) shall apply with respect to any repayment required by the Commission under this subsection. (Added Pub. L. 92–178, title VIII, § 801, Dec. 10, 1971, 85 Stat. 569; Pub. L. 93–443, title IV, § 406(a), Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1294; Pub. L. 94–283, title III, §§ 303, 307(a), May 11, 1976, 90 Stat. 498, 501; Pub. L. 96–187, title II, § 202, Jan. 8, 1980, 93 Stat. 1368; Pub. L. 98–355, § 1(a), (b) July 11, 1984, 98 Stat. 394.) 

26 U.S.C. § 9009. Reports to Congress; regulations 

(a) Reports. 

The Commission shall, as soon as practicable after each pres-idential election, submit a full report to the Senate and House of Representatives setting forth— (1) the qualified campaign expenses (shown in such detail as the Commission determines necessary) incurred by the can-didates of each political party and their authorized commit-tees; (2) the amounts certified by it under section 9005 for pay-ment to the eligible candidates of each political party; (3) the amount of payments, if any, required from such can-didates under section 9007, and the reasons for each pay-ment required; and (4) the expenses incurred by the national committee of a major party or minor party with respect to a presidential nominating convention; (5) the amounts certified by it under section 9008(g) for pay-ment to each such committee; and (6) the amount of payments, if any, required from such com-mittees under section 9008(h), and the reasons for each such payment. Each report submitted pursuant to this section shall be printed as a Senate document. 151 Nomination and Election (b) Regulations, etc. 

The Commission is authorized to prescribe such rules and regulations in accordance with the provisions of subsection (c), to conduct such examinations and audits (in addition to the examinations and audits required by section 9007(a)), to conduct such investigations, and to require the keeping and submission of such books, records, and information, as it deems necessary to carry out the functions and duties im-posed on it by this chapter. (c) Review of regulations. 

(1) The Commission before prescribing any rule or regulation under subsection (b), shall transmit a statement with respect to such rule or regulation to the Senate and to the House of Representatives, in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. Such statement shall set forth the proposed rule or regulation and shall contain a detailed explanation and justification of such rule or regulation. (2) If either such House does not, through appropriate action, disapprove the proposed rule or regulation set forth in such statement no later than 30 legislative days after receipt of such statement, then the Commission may prescribe such rule or regulation. Whenever a committee of the House of Representatives reports any resolution relating to any such rule or regulation, it is at any time thereafter in order (even though a previous motion to the same effect has been dis-agreed to) to move to proceed to the consideration of the res-olution. The motion is highly privileged and is not debatable. An amendment to the motion is not in order, and it is not in order to move to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to. The Commission may not pre-scribe any rule or regulation which is disapproved by either such House under this paragraph. (3) For purposes of this subsection, the term ‘‘legislative days’’ does not include any calendar day on which both Houses of the Congress are not in session. (4) For purposes of this subsection, the term ‘‘rule or regula-tion’’ means a provision or series of interrelated provisions stating a single separable rule of law. (Added Pub. L. 92–178, title VIII, § 801, Dec. 10, 1971, 85 Stat. 569; Pub. L. 93–443, title IV, §§ 404(c)(12), (13), 406(b)(1), 409, Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1292, 1293, 1296, 1303; Pub. L. 94–283, title III, § 304(a), May 11, 1976, 90 Stat. 498.) 

26 U.S.C. § 9010. Participation by Commission in judicial proceedings 

(a) Appearance by counsel. 

The Commission is authorized to appear in and defend against any action filed under section 9011, either by attor-neys employed in its office or by counsel whom it may ap-point without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and whose compensation it may fix without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title. 152 Nomination and Election (b) Recovery of certain payments. 

The Commission is authorized through attorneys and counsel described in subsection (a) to appear in the district courts of the United States to seek recovery of any amounts deter-mined to be payable to the Secretary of the Treasury as a result of examination and audit made pursuant to section 9007. (c) Declaratory and injunctive relief. 

The Commission is authorized through attorneys and counsel described in subsection (a) to petition the courts of the United States for declaratory or injunctive relief concerning any civil matter covered by the provisions of this subtitle or section 6096. Upon application of the Commission, an action brought pursuant to this subsection shall be heard and de-termined by a court of three judges in accordance with the provisions of section 2284 of title 28, United States Code, and any appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court. (d) Appeal. 

The Commission is authorized on behalf of the United States to appeal from, and to petition the Supreme Court for certio-rari to review, judgments or decrees entered with respect to actions in which it appears pursuant to the authority pro-vided in this section. (Added Pub. L. 92–178, title VIII, § 801, Dec. 10, 1971, 85 Stat. 569; Pub. L. 93–443, title IV, § 404(c)(14)–(18), Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1293; Pub. L. 94–455, title XIX, § 1906(b)(13)(C), Oct. 4, 1976, 90 Stat. 1834; Pub. L. 98–620, title IV, § 402(28)(E), Nov. 8, 1984, 98 Stat. 3359.) 

26 U.S.C. § 9011. Judicial review 

(a) Review of certification, determination, or other action by the Commission. 

Any certification, determination, or other action by the Com-mission made or taken pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to review by the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia upon petition filed in such Court by any interested person. Any petition filed pur-suant to this section shall be filed within thirty days after the certification, determination, or other action by the Com-mission for which review is sought. (b) Suits to implement chapter. 

(1) The Commission, the national committee of any political party, and individuals eligible to vote for President are au-thorized to institute such actions, including actions for de-claratory judgment or injunctive relief, as may be appro-priate to implement or construe any provision of this chap-ter. (2) The district courts of the United States shall have juris-diction of proceedings instituted pursuant to this subsection and shall exercise the same without regard to whether a per-son asserting rights under provisions of this subsection shall have exhausted any administrative or other remedies that may be provided at law. Such proceedings shall be heard and determined by a court of three judges in accordance with the 153 Nomination and Election provisions of section 2284 of title 28, United States Code, and any appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court. (Pub. L. 92–178, title VIII, § 801, Dec. 10, 1971, 85 Stat. 570; Pub. L. 93–443, title IV, § 404(c)(19)–(21), Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1293; Pub. L. 98–620, title IV, § 402(28)(F), Nov. 8, 1984, 98 Stat. 3359.) 

26 U.S.C. § 9012. Criminal penalties 

(a) Excess expenses. 

(1) It shall be unlawful for an eligible candidate of a political party for President and Vice President in a presidential elec-tion or any of his authorized committees knowingly and will-fully to incur qualified campaign expenses in an amount which exceeds the qualified campaign expenses in excess of the aggregate payments to which the eligible candidates of a major party are entitled under section 9004 with respect to such election. It shall be unlawful for the national com-mittee of a major party or minor party knowingly and will-fully to incur expenses with respect to a presidential nomi-nating convention in excess of the expenditure limitation ap-plicable with respect to such committee under section 9008(d), unless the incurring of such expenses is authorized by the Commission under section 9008(d)(3). (2) Any person who violates paragraph (1) shall be fined not more than $5,000, or imprisoned not more than one year or both. In the case of a violation by an authorized committee, any officer or member of such committee who knowingly and willfully consents to such violation shall be fined not more than $5,000, or imprisoned not more than one year, or both. (b) Contributions. 

(1) It shall be unlawful for an eligible candidate of a major party in a presidential election or any of his authorized com-mittees knowingly and willfully to accept any contribution to defray qualified campaign expenses, except to the extent nec-essary to make up any deficiency in payments received out of the fund on account of the application of section 9006(c), or to defray expenses which would be qualified campaign ex-penses but for subparagraph (C) of section 9002(11). (2) It shall be unlawful for an eligible candidate of a political party (other than a major party) in a presidential election or any of his authorized committees knowingly and willfully to accept and expend or retain contributions to defray qualified campaign expenses in an amount which exceeds the qualified campaign expenses incurred with respect to such election by such eligible candidate and his authorized committees. (3) Any person who violates paragraph (1) or (2) shall be fined not more than $5,000, or imprisoned not more than one year, or both. In the case of a violation by an authorized committee, any officer or member of such committee who knowingly and willfully consents to such violation shall be fined not more than $5,000, or imprisoned not more than one year, or both. (c) Unlawful use of payments. 

(1) It shall be unlawful for any person who receives any pay-ment under section 9006, or to whom any portion of any pay-154 Nomination and Election ment received under such section is transferred, knowingly and willfully to use, or authorize the use of, such payment or such portion for any purpose other than— (A) to defray the qualified campaign expenses with respect to which such payment was made, or (B) to repay loans the proceeds of which were used, or other-wise to restore funds (other than contributions to defray qualified campaign expenses which were received and ex-pended) which were used, to defray such qualified campaign expenses. (2) It shall be unlawful for the national committee of a major party or minor party which receives any payment under sec-tion 9008(b)(3) to use, or authorize the use of, such payment for any purpose other than a purpose authorized by section 9008(c). (3) Any person who violates paragraph (1) shall be fined not more than $10,000, or imprisoned not more than five years, or both. (d) False statements, etc. 

(1) It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly and will-fully— (A) to furnish any false, fictitious, or fraudulent evidence, books, or information to the Commission under this subtitle, or to include in any evidence, books, or information so fur-nished any misrepresentation of a material fact, or to falsify or conceal any evidence, books, or information relevant to a certification by the Commission or an examination and audit by the Commission under this chapter; or (B) to fail to furnish to the Commission any records, books, or information requested by it for purposes of this chapter. (2) Any person who violates paragraph (1) shall be fined not more than $10,000, or imprisoned not more than five years, or both. (e) Kickbacks and illegal payments. 

(1) it shall be unlawful for any person knowingly and will-fully to give or accept any kickback or any illegal payment in connection with any qualified campaign expense of eligible candidates or their authorized committees. It shall be unlaw-ful for the national committee of a major party or minor party knowingly and willfully to give or accept any kickback or any illegal payment in connection with any expense in-curred by such committee with respect to a presidential nominating convention. (2) Any person who violates paragraph (1) shall be fined not more than $10,000, or imprisoned not more than five years, or both. (3) In addition to the penalty provided by paragraph (2), any person who accepts any kickback or illegal payment in con-nection with any qualified campaign expense of eligible can-didates or their authorized committees, or in connection with any expense incurred by the national committee of a major party or minor party with respect to a presidential nomi-nating convention shall pay to the Secretary of the Treasury, for deposit in the general fund of the Treasury, an amount equal to 125 percent of the kickback or payment received. 155 Nomination and Election (f) Unauthorized expenditures and contributions. 

(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), it shall be unlawful for any political committee which is not an authorized com-mittee with respect to the eligible candidates of a political party for President and Vice President in a presidential elec-tion knowingly and willfully to incur expenditures to further the election of such candidates, which would constitute quali-fied campaign expenses if incurred by an authorized com-mittee of such candidates, in an aggregate amount exceeding $1,000. (2) This subsection shall not apply to (A) expenditures by a broadcaster regulated by the Federal Communications Com-mission, or by a periodical publication, in reporting the news or in taking editorial positions, or (B) expenditures by any organization described in section 501(c) which is exempt from tax under section 501(a) in communicating to its mem-bers the views of that organization. (3) Any political committee which violates paragraph (1) shall be fined not more than $5,000, and any officer or mem-ber of such committee who knowingly and willfully consents to such violation and any other individual who knowingly and willfully violates paragraph (1) shall be fined not more than $5,000, or imprisoned not more than one year, or both. (g) Unauthorized disclosure of information. 

(1) It shall be unlawful for any individual to disclose any in-formation obtained under the provisions of this chapter ex-cept as may be required by law. (2) Any person who violates paragraph (1) shall be fined not more than $5,000, or imprisoned not more than one year, or both. (Pub. L. 92–178, title VII, § 801, Dec. 10, 1971, 85 Stat. 570; Pub. L. 93–53, § 6(c), July 1, 1973, 87 Stat. 139; Pub. L. 93– 443, title IV, §§ 404(c)(22), 406(b)(2)–(6), Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1293, 1296; Pub. L. 94–283, title III, § 307(f), May 11, 1976, 90 Stat. 502; Pub. L. 94–455, title XIX, § 1906(b)(13)(C), Oct. 4, 1976, 90 Stat. 1834.) CHAPTER 96—PRESIDENTIAL PRIMARY MATCHING PAYMENT ACCOUNT 

26 U.S.C. § 9031. Short title 

This chapter may be cited as the ‘‘Presidential Primary Matching Payment Account Act’’. (Pub. L. 93–443, title IV, § 408(c), Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1297.) 

26 U.S.C. § 9032. Definitions 

For purposes of this chapter— (1) The term ‘‘authorized committee’’ means, with respect to the candidates of a political party for President and Vice President of the United States, any political committee which is authorized in writing by such candidates to incur expenses to further the election of such candidates. Such au-thorization shall be addressed to the chairman of such polit-ical committee, and a copy of such authorization shall be filed by such candidates with the Commission. Any with-156 Nomination and Election drawal of any authorization shall also be in writing and shall be addressed and filed in the same manner as the authoriza-tion. (2) The term ‘‘candidate’’ means an individual who seeks nomination for election to be President of the United States. For purposes of this paragraph, an individual shall be con-sidered to seek nomination for election if he (A) takes the ac-tion necessary under the law of a State to qualify himself for nomination for election, (B) receives contributions or incurs qualified campaign expenses, or (C) gives his consent for any other person to receive contributions or to incur qualified campaign expenses on his behalf. The term ‘‘candidate’’ shall not include any individual who is not actively conducting campaigns in more than one State in connection with seek-ing nomination for election to be President of the United States. (3) The term ‘‘Commission’’ means the Federal Election Com-mission established by section 309(a)(1) of the Federal Elec-tion Campaign Act of 1971. (4) Except as provided by section 9034(a), the term ‘‘contribu-tion’’— (A) means a gift, subscription, loan, advance, or deposit of money, or anything of value, the payment of which was made on or after the beginning of the calendar year imme-diately preceding the calendar year of the presidential elec-tion with respect to which such gift, subscription, loan, ad-vance, or deposit of money, or anything of value, is made, for the purpose of influencing the result of a primary election, (B) means a contract, promise, or agreement, whether or not legally enforceable, to make a contribution for any such pur-pose. (C) means funds received by a political committee which are transferred to that committee from another committee, and (D) means the payment by any person other than a can-didate, or his authorized committee, of compensation for the personal services of another person which are rendered to the candidate or committee without charge, but (E) does not include— (i) except as provided in subparagraph (D), the value of per-sonal services rendered to or for the benefit of a candidate by an individual who receives no compensation for rendering such service to or for the benefit of the candidate, or (ii) payments under section 9037. (5) The term ‘‘matching payment account’’ means the Presi-dential Primary Matching Payment Account established under section 9037(a). (6) The term ‘‘matching payment period’’ means the period beginning with the beginning of the calendar year in which a general election for the office of President of the United States will be held and ending on the date on which the na-tional convention of the party whose nomination a candidate seeks nominates its candidate for the office of President of the United States, or, in the case of a party which does not make such nomination by national convention, ending on the earlier of (A) the date such party nominates its candidate for the office of President of the United States, or (B) the last 157 Nomination and Election day of the last national convention held by a major party during such calendar year. (7) The term ‘‘primary election’’ means an election, including a runoff election or a nominating convention or caucus held by a political party, for the selection of delegates to a na-tional nominating convention of a political party, or for the expression of a preference for the nomination of persons for election to the office of President of the United States. (8) The term ‘‘political committee’’ means any individual, committee, association, or organization (whether or not in-corporated) which accepts contributions or incurs qualified campaign expenses for the purpose of influencing, or at-tempting to influence, the nomination of any person for elec-tion to the office of President of the United States. (9) The term ‘‘qualified campaign expense’’ means a pur-chase, payment, distribution, loan, advance, deposit, or gift of money or of anything of value— (A) incurred by a candidate, or his authorized committee, in connection with his campaign for nomination for election, and (B) neither the incurring nor payment of which constitutes a violation of any law of the United States or of the State in which the expense is incurred or paid. For purposes of this paragraph, an expense is incurred by a candidate or by an authorized committee if it is incurred by a person specifically authorized in writing by the candidate or committee, as the case may be, to incur such expense on behalf of the candidate or the committee. (10) The term ‘‘State’’ means each State of the United States and the District of Columbia. (Pub. L. 93–443, title IV, § 408(c), Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1297; Pub. L. 94–283, title I, § 115(c)(2), title III, § 306(b)(1), May 11, 1976, 90 Stat. 495, 500.) 

26 U.S.C. § 9033. Eligibility for payments 

(a) Conditions. 

To be eligible to receive payments under section 9037, a can-didate shall, in writing— (1) agree to obtain and furnish to the Commission any evi-dence it may request of qualified campaign expenses. (2) agree to keep and furnish to the Commission any records, books, and other information it may request, and (3) agree to an audit and examination by the Commission under section 9038 and to pay any amounts required to be paid under such section. (b) Expense limitation; declaration of intent; minimum con-tributions. 

To be eligible to receive payments under section 9037, a can-didate shall certify to the Commission that— (1) the candidate and his authorized committees will not incur qualified campaign expenses in excess of the limita-tions on such expenses under section 9035, (2) the candidate is seeking nomination by a political party for election to the office of President of the United States, 158 Nomination and Election (3) the candidate has received matching contributions which in the aggregate, exceed $5,000 in contributions from resi-dents of each of at least 20 States, and (4) the aggregate of contributions certified with respect to any person under paragraph (3) does not exceed $250. (c) Termination of payments. 

(1) General rule.— Except as provided by paragraph (2), no payment shall be made to any individual under section 9037— (A) if such individual ceases to be a candidate as a result of the operation of the last sentence of section 9032(2); or (B) more than 30 days after the date of the second consecu-tive primary election in which such individual receives less than 10 percent of the number of votes cast for all can-didates of the same party for the same office in such primary election, if such individual permitted or authorized the ap-pearance of his name on the ballot, unless such individual certifies to the Commission that he will not be an active can-didate in the primary involved. (2) Qualified campaign expenses; payments to secretary.— Any candidate who is ineligible under paragraph (1) to receive any payments under section 9037 shall be eligible to con-tinue to receive payments under section 9037 to defray quali-fied campaign expenses incurred before the date upon which such candidate becomes ineligible under paragraph (1). (3) Calculation of voting percentage.— For purposes of para-graph (1)(B), if the primary elections involved are held in more than one State on the same date, a candidate shall be treated as receiving that percentage of the votes on such date which he received in the primary election conducted on such date in which he received the greatest percentage vote. (3) Reestablishment of eligibility.— 

(A) In any case in which an individual is ineligible to receive payments under section 9037 as a result of the operation of paragraph (1)(A), the Commission may subsequently deter-mine that such individual is a candidate upon a finding that such individual is actively seeking election to the office of President of the United States in more than one State. The Commission shall make such determination without requir-ing such individual to reestablish his eligibility to receive payments under subsection (a). (B) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (1)(B), a candidate whose payments have been terminated under paragraph (1)(B) may again receive payments (including amounts he would have received but for paragraph (1)(B)) if he receives 20 percent or more of the total numbers of votes cast for candidates of the same party in a primary election held after the date on which the election was held which was the basis for terminating payments to him. (Pub. L. 93–443, title IV, § 408(c), Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1299; Pub. L. 94–283, title III, §§ 305(c), 306(b)(2), May 11, 1976, 90 Stat. 499, 500.) 

26 U.S.C. § 9034. Entitlement of eligible candidates to payments 

(a) In general. 159 Nomination and Election Every candidate who is eligible to receive payments under section 9033 is entitled to payments under section 9037 in an amount equal to the amount of each contribution received by such candidate on or after the beginning of the calendar year immediately preceding the calendar year of the presidential election with respect to which such candidate is seeking nomination, or by his authorized committees, disregarding any amount of contributions from any person to the extent that the total of the amounts contributed by such person on or after the beginning of such preceding calendar year ex-ceeds $250. For purposes of this subsection and section 9033(b), the term ‘‘contribution’’ means a gift of money made by a written instrument which identifies the person making the contribution by full name and mailing address, but does not include a subscription, loan, advance, or deposit of money, or anything of value or anything described in sub-paragraph (B), (C), or (D) of section 9032(4). (b) Limitations. 

The total amount of payments to which a candidate is enti-tled under subsection (a) shall not exceed 50 percent of the expenditure limitation applicable under section 320(b)(1)(A) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971. (Pub. L. 93–443, title IX, § 408(c), Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1299; Pub. L. 94–283, title III, § 307(b), May 11, 1976, 90 Stat. 501.) 

26 U.S.C. § 9035. Qualified campaign expense limitation 

(a) Expenditure limitations. 

No candidate shall knowingly incur qualified campaign ex-penses in excess of the expenditure limitation applicable under section 320(b)(1)(A) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971, and no candidate shall knowingly make expendi-tures from his personal funds, or the personal funds of his immediate family, in connection with his campaign for nomi-nation for election to the office of President in excess of, in the aggregate, $50,000. (b) Definition of immediate family. 

For purposes of this section, the term ‘‘immediate family’’ means a candidate’s spouse, and any child, parent, grand-parent, brother, half-brother, sister, or half-sister of the can-didate, and the spouses of such persons. (Pub. L. 93–443, title IV, § 408(c), Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1300; Pub. L. 94–283, title III, §§ 305(a), 307(c), May 11, 1976, 90 Stat. 499, 501.) 

26 U.S.C. § 9036. Certification by Commission 

(a) Initial certifications. 

Not later than 10 days after a candidate establishes his eligi-bility under section 9033 to receive payments under section 9037, the Commission shall certify to the Secretary for pay-ment to such candidate under section 9037 payment in full of amounts to which such candidate is entitled under section 9034. The Commission shall make such additional certifi-cations as may be necessary to permit candidates to receive payments for contributions under section 9037. 160 Nomination and Election (b) Finality of determinations. 

Initial certifications by the Commission under subsection (a), and all determinations made by it under this chapter, are final and conclusive, except to the extent that they are sub-ject to examination and audit by the Commission under sec-tion 9038 and judicial review under section 9041. (Pub. L. 93–443, title IV, § 408(c), Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1300.) 

26 U.S.C. § 9037. Payments to eligible candidates 

(a) Establishment of account. 

The Secretary shall maintain in the Presidential Election Campaign Fund established by section 9006(a), in addition to any account which he maintains under such section, a sepa-rate account to be known as the Presidential Primary Match-ing Payment Account. The Secretary shall deposit into the matching payment account, for use by the candidate of any political party who is eligible to receive payments under sec-tion 9033, the amount available after the Secretary deter-mines that amounts for payments under section 9006(c) and for payments under section 9008(b)(3) are available for such payments. (b) Payments from the matching payment account. 

Upon receipt of a certification from the Commission under section 9036, but not before the beginning of the matching payment period, the Secretary shall promptly transfer the amount certified by the Commission from the matching pay-ment account to the candidate. In making such transfers to candidates of the same political party, the Secretary shall seek to achieve an equitable distribution of funds available under subsection (a), and the Secretary shall take into ac-count in seeking to achieve an equitable distribution, the se-quence in which such certifications are received. (Pub. L. 93–443, title IV, § 408(c), Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1300; Pub. L. 94–455, title XIX, § 1906(b)(13)(A), Oct. 4, 1976, 90 Stat. 1834.) 

26 U.S.C. § 9038. Examinations and audits; repayments 

(a) Examinations and audits. 

After each matching payment period, the Commission shall conduct a thorough examination and audit of the qualified campaign expenses of every candidate and his authorized committees who received payments under section 9037. (b) Repayments. 

(1) If the Commission determines that any portion of the payments made to a candidate from the matching payment account was in excess of the aggregate amount of payments to which such candidate was entitled under section 9034, it shall notify the candidate, and the candidate shall pay to the Secretary an amount equal to the amount of excess pay-ments. (2) If the Commission determines that any amount of any payment made to a candidate from the matching payment account was used for any purpose other than— 161 Nomination and Election (A) to defray the qualified campaign expenses with respect to which such payment was made, or (B) to repay loans the proceeds of which were used, or other-wise to restore funds (other than contributions to defray qualified campaign expenses which were received and ex-pended) which were used, to defray qualified campaign ex-penses, it shall notify such candidate of the amount so used, and the candidate shall pay to the Secretary an amount equal to such amount. (3) Amounts received by a candidate from the matching pay-ment account may be retained for the liquidation of all obli-gations to pay qualified campaign expenses incurred for a pe-riod not exceeding 6 months after the end of the matching payment period. After all obligations have been liquidated, that portion of any unexpended balance remaining in the candidate’s accounts which bears the same ratio to the total unexpended balance as the total amount received from the matching payment account bears to the total of all deposits made into the candidate’s accounts shall be promptly repaid to the matching payment account. (c) Notification. 

No notification shall be made by the Commission under sub-section (b) with respect to a matching payment period more than 3 years after the end of such period. (d) Deposit of repayments. 

All payments received by the Secretary under subsection (b) shall be deposited by him in the matching payment account. (Pub. L. 93–443, title IV, § 408(c), Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1300; Pub. L. 94–455, title XIX, § 1906(b)(13)(A), Oct. 4, 1976, 90 Stat. 1834.) 

26 U.S.C. § 9039. Reports to Congress; regulations 

(a) Reports. 

The Commission shall, as soon as practicable after each matching payment period, submit a full report to the Senate and House of Representatives setting forth— (1) the qualified campaign expenses (shown in such detail as the Commission determines necessary) incurred by the can-didates of each political party and their authorized commit-tees, (2) the amounts certified by it under section 9036 for pay-ment to each eligible candidate, and (3) the amount of payments, if any, required from candidates under section 9038, and the reasons for each payment re-quired. Each report submitted pursuant to this section shall be printed as a Senate document. (b) Regulations, etc. 

The Commission is authorized to prescribe rules and regula-tions in accordance with the provisions of subsection (c), to conduct examinations and audits (in addition to the exami-nations and audits required by section 9038(a)), to conduct investigations, and to require the keeping and submission of 162 Nomination and Election any books, records, and information, which it determines to be necessary to carry out its responsibilities under this chap-ter. (c) Review of regulations. 

(1) The Commission, before prescribing any rule or regula-tion under subsection (b), shall transmit a statement with respect to such rule or regulation to the Senate and to the House of Representatives, in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. Such statement shall set forth the pro-posed rule or regulation and shall contain a detailed expla-nation and justification of such rule or regulation. (2) If either House does not, through appropriate action, dis-approve the proposed rule or regulation set forth in such statement no later than 30 legislative days after receipt of such statement, then the Commission may prescribe such rule or regulation. Whenever a committee of the House of Representatives reports any resolution relating to any such rule or regulation, it is at any time thereafter in order (even though a previous motion to the same effect has been dis-agreed to) to move to proceed to the consideration of the res-olution. The motion is highly privileged and is not debatable. An amendment to the motion is not in order, and it is not in order to move to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to. The Commission may not pre-scribe any rule or regulation which is disapproved by either House under this paragraph. (3) For purposes of this subsection, the term ‘‘legislative days’’ does not include any calendar day on which both Houses of the Congress are not in session. (4) For purposes of this subsection, the term ‘‘rule or regula-tion’’ means a provision or series of interrelated provisions stating a single separable rule of law. (Pub. L. 93–443, title IV, § 408(c), Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1301; Pub. L. 94–283, title III, § 304(b), May 11, 1976, 90 Stat. 499.) 

26 U.S.C. § 9040. Participation by Commission in judicial proceedings 

(a) Appearance by counsel. 

The Commission is authorized to appear in and defend against any action instituted under this section, either by at-torneys employed in its office or by counsel whom it may ap-point without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and whose compensation it may fix without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title. (b) Recovery of certain payments. 

The Commission is authorized, through attorneys and coun-sel described in subsection (a), to institute actions in the dis-trict courts of the United States to seek recovery of any amounts determined to be payable to the Secretary as a re-sult of an examination and audit made pursuant to section 9038. 163 Nomination and Election (c) Injunctive relief. 

The Commission is authorized, through attorneys and coun-sel described in subsection (a), to petition the courts of the United States for such injunctive relief as is appropriate to implement any provision of this chapter. (d) Appeal. 

The Commission is authorized on behalf of the United States to appeal from, and to petition the Supreme Court for certio-rari to review, judgments or decrees entered with respect to actions in which it appears pursuant to the authority pro-vided in this section. (Pub. L. 93–443, title IV, § 408(c), Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1302; Pub. L. 94–455, title XIX, § 1906(b)(13)(A), Oct. 4, 1976, 90 Stat. 1834.) 

26 U.S.C. § 9041. Judicial review 

(a) Review of agency action by the Commission. 

Any agency action by the Commission made under the provi-sions of this chapter shall be subject to review by the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit upon petition filed in such court within 30 days after the agency action by the Commission for which review is sought. (b) Review procedures. 

The provisions of chapter 7 of title 5, United States Code, apply to judicial review of any agency action, as defined in section 551(13) of title 5, United States Code, by the Com-mission. (Pub. L. 93–443, title IV, § 408(c), Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1302.) 

26 U.S.C. § 9042. Criminal penalties 

(a) Excess campaign expenses. 

Any person who violates the provisions of section 9035 shall be fined not more than $25,000, or imprisoned not more than 5 years, or both. Any officer or member of any political com-mittee who knowingly consents to any expenditure in viola-tion of the provisions of section 9035 shall be fined not more than $25,000, or imprisoned not more than 5 years, or both. (b) Unlawful use of payments. 

(1) It is unlawful for any person who receives any payment under section 9037, or to whom any portion of any such pay-ment is transferred, knowingly and willfully to use, or au-thorize the use of, such payment or such portion for any pur-pose other than— (A) to defray qualified campaign expenses, or (B) to repay loans, the proceeds of which were used, or other-wise to restore funds (other than contributions to defray qualified campaign expenses which were received and ex-pended) which were used, to defray qualified campaign ex-penses. (2) Any person who violates the provisions of paragraph (1) shall be fined not more than $10,000, or imprisoned not more than 5 years, or both. 164 Nomination and Election (c) False statements, etc. 

(1) It is unlawful for any person knowingly and willfully— (A) to furnish any false, fictitious, or fraudulent evidence, books, or information to the Commission under this chapter, or to include in any evidence, books, or information so fur-nished any misrepresentation of a material fact, or to falsify or conceal any evidence, books, or information relevant to a certification by the Commission or an examination and audit by the Commission under this chapter, or (B) to fail to furnish to the Commission any records, books, or information requested by it for purposes of this chapter. (2) Any person who violates the provisions of paragraph (1) shall be fined not more than $10,000, or imprisoned not more than 5 years, or both. (d) Kickbacks and illegal payments. 

(1) It is unlawful for any person knowingly and willfully to give or accept any kickback or any illegal payment in connec-tion with any qualified campaign expense of a candidate, or his authorized committees, who receives payments under section 9037. (2) Any person who violates the provisions of paragraph (1) shall be fined not more than $10,000, or imprisoned not more than 5 years, or both. (3) In addition to the penalty provided by paragraph (2), any person who accepts any kickback or illegal payment in con-nection with any qualified campaign expense of a candidate or his authorized committees shall pay to the Secretary for deposit in the matching payment account an amount equal to 125 percent of the kickback or payment received. (Pub. L. 93–443, title IV, § 408(c), Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1302.) 165 Nomination and Election 

L. Communications Media (Title 47, United States Code) 47 U.S.C. § 312. Administrative sanctions 

(a) Revocation of station license or construction permit. The Commission may revoke any station license or construc-tion permit— (1) for false statements knowingly made either in the appli-cation or in any statement of fact which may be required pursuant to section 308 [47 USCS § 308]; (2) because of conditions coming to the attention of the Com-mission which would warrant it in refusing to grant a license or permit on an original application; (3) for willful or repeated failure to operate substantially as set forth in the license; (4) for willful or repeated violation of, or willful or repeated failure to observe any provision of this Act or any rule or regulation of the Commission authorized by this Act or by a treaty ratified by the United States; (5) for violation of or failure to observe any final cease and desist order issued by the Commission under this section; (6) for violation of section 1304, 1343, or 1464 of title 18 of the United States Code; or (7) for willful or repeated failure to allow reasonable access to or to permit purchase of reasonable amounts of time for the use of a broadcasting station, other than a noncommer-cial educational broadcast station, by a legally qualified can-didate for Federal elective office on behalf of his candidacy. (b) Cease and desist orders. Where any person (1) has failed to operate substantially as set forth in a license, (2) has vio-lated or failed to observe any of the provisions of this Act, or section 1304, 1343, or 1464 of title 18 of the United States Code, or (3) has violated or failed to observe any rule or reg-ulation of the Commission authorized by this Act or by a treaty ratified by the United States, the Commission may order such person to cease and desist from such action. (c) Order to show cause. Before revoking a license or permit pursuant to subsection (a), or issuing a cease and desist order pursuant to subsection (b), the Commission shall serve upon the licensee, permittee, or person involved an order to show cause why an order of revocation or a cease and desist order should not be issued. Any such order to show cause shall contain a statement of the matters with respect to which the Commission is inquiring and shall call upon said licensee, permittee, or person to appear here before the Com-mission at a time and place stated in the order, but in no event less than thirty days after the receipt of such order, and give evidence upon the matter specified therein; except that where safety of life or property is involved, the Commis-sion may provide in the order for a shorter period. If after hearing, or a waiver thereof, the Commission determines that an order of revocation or a cease and desist order should issue, it shall issue such order, which shall include a state-ment of the findings of the Commission and the grounds and reasons therefor and specify the effective date of the order, 166 Nomination and Election and shall cause the same to be served on said licensee, per-mittee, or person. (d) Burden of proof. In any case where a hearing is con-ducted pursuant to the provisions of this section, both the burden of proceeding with the introduction of evidence and the burden of proof shall be upon the Commission. (e) Procedure for issuance of cease and desist order. The pro-visions of section 9(b) of the Administrative Procedure Act [5 USCS 558(c)] which apply with respect to the institution of any proceeding for the revocation of a license or permit shall apply also with respect to the institution, under this section, of any proceeding for the issuance of a cease and desist order. (f) ‘‘Willful’’ and ‘‘repeated’’ defined. For purposes of this sec-tion: (1) The term ‘‘willful’’, when used with reference to the com-mission or omission of any act, means the conscious and de-liberate commission or omission of such act, irrespective of any intent to violate any provision of this Act or any rule or regulation of the Commission authorized by this Act or by a treaty ratified by the United States. (2) The term ‘‘repeated’’, when used with reference to the commission or omission of any act, means the commission or omission of such act more than once or, if such commission or omission is continuous, for more than one day. (g) Limitation on silent station authorizations. If a broad-casting station fails to transmit broadcast signals for any consecutive 12-month period, then the station license grant-ed for the operation of that broadcast station expires at the end of that period, notwithstanding any provision, term, or condition of the license to the contrary, except that the Com-mission may extend or reinstate such station license if the holder of the station license prevails in an administrative or judicial appeal, the applicable law changes, or for any other reason to promote equity and fairness. Any broadcast license revoked or terminated in Alaska in a proceeding related to broadcasting via translator, microwave, or other alternative signal delivery is reinstated. (June 19, 1934, ch. 652, title III, § 312, 48 Stat. 1086; July 16, 1952, ch 879, § 10, 66 Stat. 716; Pub. L. 86–752, § 6, Sept. 13, 1960, 74 Stat. 893; Pub. L. 92225, title I, § 103(a)(2)(A), Feb. 7, 1972, 86 Stat. 4; Pub. L. 97–259, title I, § 117, Sept. 13, 1982, 96 Stat. 1095; Pub. L. 104–104, title IV, § 403(1), Feb. 8, 1996, 110 Stat. 132; Pub. L. 106–554, § 1(a)(4), Dec. 21, 2000, 114 Stat. 2763; Pub. L. 108–447, div J, title IX, title II, § 213(3), Dec. 8, 2004, 118 Stat. 3431.) 

47 U.S.C. § 315. Candidates for public office 

(a) Equal opportunities requirement; censorship prohibition; allowance of station use; news appearances exception; public interest; public issues discussion opportunities. If any li-censee shall permit any person who is a legally qualified can-didate for any public office to use a broadcasting station, he shall afford equal opportunities to all other such candidates for that office in the use of such broadcasting station: Pro-vided, That such licensee shall have no power of censorship over the material broadcast under the provisions of this sec-167 Nomination and Election tion. No obligation is imposed under this subsection upon any licensee to allow the use of its station by any such can-didate. Appearance by a legally qualified candidate on any— (1) bona fide newscast, (2) bona fide news interview, (3) bona fide news documentary (if the appearance of the candidate is incidental to the presentation of the subject or subjects covered by the news documentary), or (4) on-the-spot coverage of bona fide news events (including but not limited to political conventions and activities inci-dental thereto), shall not be deemed to be use of a broadcasting station with-in the meaning of this subsection. Nothing in the foregoing sentence shall be construed as relieving broadcasters, in con-nection with the presentation of newscasts, news interviews, news documentaries, and on-the-spot coverage of news events, from the obligation imposed upon them under this Act to operate in the public interest and to afford reasonable opportunity for the discussion of conflicting views on issues of public importance. (b) Charges. 

(1) In general. The charges made for the use of any broad-casting station by any person who is a legally qualified can-didate for any public office in connection with his campaign for nomination for election, or election, to such office shall not exceed— (A) subject to paragraph (2), during the forty-five days pre-ceding the date of a primary or primary runoff election and during the sixty days preceding the date of a general or spe-cial election in which such person is a candidate, the lowest unit charge of the station for the same class and amount of time for the same period; and (B) at any other time, the charges made for comparable use of such station by other users thereof. (2) Content of broadcasts. (A) In general. In the case of a candidate for Federal office, such candidate shall not be entitled to receive the rate under paragraph (1)(A) for the use of any broadcasting station un-less the candidate provides written certification to the broad-cast station that the candidate (and any authorized com-mittee of the candidate) shall not make any direct reference to another candidate for the same office, in any broadcast using the rights and conditions of access under this Act, un-less such reference meets the requirements of subparagraph (C) or (D). (B) Limitation on charges. If a candidate for Federal office (or any authorized committee of such candidate) makes a ref-erence described in subparagraph (A) in any broadcast that does not meet the requirements of subparagraph (C) or (D), such candidate shall not be entitled to receive the rate under paragraph (1)(A) for such broadcast or any other broadcast during any portion of the 45-day and 60-day periods de-scribed in paragraph (1)(A), that occur on or after the date of such broadcast, for election to such office. (C) Television broadcasts. A candidate meets the require-ments of this subparagraph if, in the case of a television 168 Nomination and Election broadcast, at the end of such broadcast there appears simul-taneously, for a period no less than 4 seconds— (i) a clearly identifiable photographic or similar image of the candidate; and (ii) a clearly readable printed statement, identifying the can-didate and stating that the candidate has approved the broadcast and that the candidate’s authorized committee paid for the broadcast. (D) Radio broadcasts. A candidate meets the requirements of this subparagraph if, in the case of a radio broadcast, the broadcast includes a personal audio statement by the can-didate that identifies the candidate, the office the candidate is seeking, and indicates that the candidate has approved the broadcast. (E) Certification. Certifications under this section shall be provided and certified as accurate by the candidate (or any authorized committee of the candidate) at the time of pur-chase. (F) Definitions. For purposes of this paragraph, the terms ‘‘authorized committee’’ and ‘‘Federal office’’ have the mean-ings given such terms by section 301 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 U.S.C. 431). (c) Definitions. 

For purposes of this section— (1) the term ‘‘broadcasting station’’ includes a community an-tenna television system; and (2) the terms ‘‘licensee’’ and ‘‘station licensee’’ when used with respect to a community antenna television system mean the operator of such system. (d) Rules and regulations. The Commission shall prescribe appropriate rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of this section. 

(e) Political record. 

(1) In general. A licensee shall maintain, and make available for public inspection, a complete record of a request to pur-chase broadcast time that— (A) is made by or on behalf of a legally qualified candidate for public office; or (B) communicates a message relating to any political matter of national importance, including— (i) a legally qualified candidate; (ii) any election to Federal office; or (iii) a national legislative issue of public importance. (2) Contents of record. A record maintained under paragraph (1) shall contain information regarding— (A) whether the request to purchase broadcast time is ac-cepted or rejected by the licensee; (B) the rate charged for the broadcast time; (C) the date and time on which the communication is aired; (D) the class of time that is purchased; (E) the name of the candidate to which the communication refers and the office to which the candidate is seeking elec-tion, the election to which the communication refers, or the issue to which the communication refers (as applicable); 169 Nomination and Election (F) in the case of a request made by, or on behalf of, a can-didate, the name of the candidate, the authorized committee of the candidate, and the treasurer of such committee; and (G) in the case of any other request, the name of the person purchasing the time, the name, address, and phone number of a contact person for such person, and a list of the chief executive officers or members of the executive committee or of the board of directors of such person. (3) Time to maintain file. The information required under this subsection shall be placed in a political file as soon as possible and shall be retained by the licensee for a period of not less than 2 years. (June 19, 1934, ch. 652, title III, § 315, 48 Stat. 1088; July 16, 1952, ch. 879, § 11, 66 Stat. 717; Pub. L. 86–274, § 1, Sept. 14, 1959, 73 Stat. 557; Pub. L. 92–225, title I, §§ 103(a)(1), (2)(B), 104(c), Feb. 7, 1972, 86 Stat. 4, 7; Pub. L. 93–443, title IV, § 402, Oct. 15, 1974, 88 Stat. 1291; Pub. L. 107–155, title III, § 305(a), (b), title V, § 504, March 27, 2002, 116 Stat. 100, 115.) 170 Nomination and Election 

PART II. NOMINATION OF THE PRESIDENT AND VICE PRESIDENT A. Calendar for Party Caucuses/Conventions and Presidential Primaries in 2008    

> Date State Party Caucus/Convention/Primary

January 3 ...... Iowa ...................................... D&R ...... Caucuses January 5 ...... Wyoming .............................. R ............ County Convention January 8 ...... New Hampshire ................... D&R ...... Primary January 15 .... Michigan .............................. D&R ...... Primary January 19 .... Nevada ................................. D&R ...... Caucuses January 19 .... South Carolina ..................... R ............ Primary January 25 .... Hawaii .................................. R ............ Caucuses (1/25–2/7) January 26 .... South Carolina ..................... D ............ Primary January 29 .... Florida .................................. D&R ...... Primary February 1 .... Maine .................................... R ............ Caucuses (2/1–2/3) February 5 .... Alabama ............................... D&R ...... Primary February 5 .... Alaska ................................... D&R ...... Caucuses February 5 .... Arizona ................................. D&R ...... Primary February 5 .... Arkansas .............................. D&R ...... Primary February 5 .... California ............................. D&R ...... Primary February 5 .... Colorado ............................... D&R ...... Caucuses February 5 .... Connecticut .......................... D&R ...... Primary February 5 .... Delaware .............................. D&R ...... Primary February 5 .... Georgia ................................. D&R ...... Primary February 5 .... Idaho ..................................... D ............ Caucuses February 5 .... Illinois .................................. D&R ...... Primary February 5 .... Kansas .................................. D ............ Caucuses February 5 .... Massachusetts ..................... D&R ...... Primary February 5 .... Minnesota ............................ D&R ...... Caucuses February 5 .... Missouri ............................... D&R ...... Primary February 5 .... Montana ............................... R ............ Caucuses February 5 .... New Jersey ........................... D&R ...... Primary February 5 .... New Mexico .......................... D ............ Primary February 5 .... New York ............................. D&R ...... Primary February 5 .... North Dakota ....................... D&R ...... Caucuses February 5 .... Oklahoma ............................. D&R ...... Primary February 5 .... Tennessee ............................. D&R ...... Primary February 5 .... Utah ..................................... D&R ...... Primary February 5 .... West Virginia ....................... R ............ State convention February 9 .... Kansas .................................. R ............ Caucuses February 9 .... Louisiana .............................. D&R ...... D—Primary; R—Caucuses February 9 .... Nebraska .............................. D ............ Caucuses February 9 .... Washington .......................... D&R ...... Caucuses February 10 .. Maine .................................... D ............ Caucuses February 12 .. District of Columbia ............ D&R ...... D—Caucuses; R—Primary February 12 .. Maryland .............................. D&R ...... Primary February 12 .. Virginia ................................ D&R ...... Primary February 19 .. Hawaii .................................. D ............ Caucuses February 19 .. Wisconsin ............................. D&R ...... Primary March 4 ......... Rhode Island ........................ D&R ...... Primary March 4 ......... Ohio ...................................... D&R ...... Primary March 4 ......... Texas .................................... D&R ...... Primary March 4 ......... Vermont ............................... D&R ...... Primary March 8 ......... Wyoming .............................. D ............ Caucuses March 11 ....... Mississippi ........................... D&R ...... Primary April 22 ......... Pennsylvania ....................... D&R ...... Primary May 6 ............ Indiana ................................. D&R ...... Primary May 6 ............ North Carolina .................... D&R ...... Primary 171 Nomination and Election Date State Party Caucus/Convention/Primary May 13 .......... Nebraska .............................. R ............ Advisory-only primary May 13 .......... West Virginia ....................... D ............ Primary May 20 .......... Kentucky .............................. D&R ...... Primary May 20 .......... Oregon .................................. D&R ...... Primary May 27 .......... Idaho ..................................... D&R ...... D—Non-binding primary; R—Primary June 3 ............ Montana ............................... D ............ Primary June 3 ............ New Mexico .......................... R ............ Primary June 3 ............ South Dakota ....................... D&R ...... Primary June 28 .......... Nebraska .............................. R ............ State Convention 172 Nomination and Election 1 By L. Paige Whitaker, Legislative Attorney, Congressional Research Serv-ice, Library of Congress. 2 357 U.S. 449 (1958). 3 Id. at 460–461. 4 502 F.2d. 1123 (3rd Cir. 1971). 5 Id. at 1125. 6 376 U.S. 1, 8 (1964). 7 525 F.2d 567 (D.C. Cir. 1975), cert. den. 424 U.S. 186 (1976). 8 Id. at 588. 

B. Significant Court Decisions Affecting Delegate Selection Procedures and the Convention System 1

As a result of the freedom of association provided by the First Amendment, political parties have traditionally enjoyed significant liberty in their efforts to advance their political goals. As the Supreme Court stated in the 1958 case of 

NAACP v. Alabama ex rel. Patterson : 2It is beyond debate that freedom to engage in association for the advance-ment of beliefs and ideas is an inseparable aspect of the ‘‘liberty’’ assured by the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, which embraces freedom of speech . . . Of course, it is immaterial whether the beliefs sought to be advanced by association pertain to political, economic, religious, or cul-tural matters, and state action which may have the effect of curtailing the freedom to associate is subject to the closest scrutiny. 3Subsequently, however, a conflict has developed between this freedom of political parties and the freedom of each indi-vidual to participate equally in the political process. The Third Circuit summarized this conflict in Redfern v. Dela-ware Republican State Committee : 4This appeal involves, but unfortunately does not resolve, the conflict be-tween two constitutionally protected interests; the right of freedom of asso-ciation for the achievement of desired political ends—protected by the first amendment—and the right to have one’s vote in an election for public office given equal weight with that of other voters—protected by the equal protec-tion clause of the fourteenth amendment. 5As a result of this conflict, there have been several chal-lenges to party rules by those claiming that delegate appor-tionment guidelines, under certain circumstances, violate the ‘‘one person, one vote’’ standard established by the Supreme Court in the landmark case of Wesberry v. Sanders . 6For example, in Ripon Society v. National Republican Party , 7the District of Columbia Circuit addressed this issue, holding that the particular nature and goals of a political party were such as to make permissible some deviation from the one person, one vote standard. 8 In this case, the Ripon Society, an organization associated with the National Republican Party, and party members from several states who claimed to be underrepresented under the formula for apportionment of delegates to the 1976 Republican National Convention, brought suit challenging this formula. The challenge was pri-marily directed to that part of the formula which appor-tioned 607 delegates, representing 27 percent of the total of approximately 2,242 delegates to the Convention, on the basis of a Republican vote in the 1972 Presidential election and on the basis of Republican victories in the 1972 and 173 Nomination and Election 9 Id. at 570–73. 10 Ripon Soc’y Inc. v. National Republican Party, 369 F. Supp. 368 (D.D.C. 1974). 11 Id. at 580. 12 419 U.S. 477 (1975). 13 See id. at 479–80, n. 1. 1974 senatorial, gubernatorial, and congressional elections. Plaintiffs claimed that this formula unfairly discriminated against party members residing in states which had not fashioned such Republican victories, denying them their con-stitutional right of equal representation under the ‘‘one-per-son, one-vote’’ doctrine. 9 The lower court had found that the use of the uniform victory bonuses was improper and en-joined their use in the apportionment of delegates to the 1976 convention. 10 On a rehearing en banc , however, the Court of Appeals reversed its earlier decision and ruled in favor of the proposed allocation formula. After reviewing pertinent precedents, the Ripon court con-cluded: The Supreme Court’s inquiry into these matters has led it to the conclusion that where the assembly exercises formal governmental powers one person, one vote is ordinarily required. A similar inquiry in other contexts may well reveal that the public and private interests in making decisions through some other scheme of representation outweigh the interests served by nu-merically equal apportionment. 11 In its seminal 1975 decision, Cousins v. Wigoda ,12 the Su-preme Court ruled that a national political party enjoyed ‘‘a constitutionally protected right of political association’’ in its selection of delegates for the national nominating convention, which had primacy over the state’s interest in protecting the integrity of the electoral process. Because the election of the President and Vice President was of national interest, ac-cording to the Court, the state lacked a compelling reason for exercising control over the party’s delegate selection process. The Cousins case arose in 1972 between two groups of dele-gates to the Democratic National Convention, both of whom maintained that they represented the Chicago area of Illi-nois. The Cousins delegates challenged the seating of 59 of these delegates—known as the Wigoda delegates—before the National Democratic Party’s Credentials Committee, claim-ing that the procedures under which the Wigoda delegates were selected violated party rules, including affirmative ac-tion guidelines involving participation by minorities, women, and youth. 13 The Democratic Party ultimately unseated the Wigoda delegates and seated the Cousins delegates—who had been chosen in party caucuses—in their stead. Subse-quently, contempt proceedings were brought against the Cousins delegates claiming that their seating violated Illi-nois law requiring delegates to be selected through a pri-mary election. Ruling in favor of the Cousins delegates and reversing an Il-linois appellate court decision, the Supreme Court held that the State of Illinois’ interest in protecting the integrity of its electoral process cannot be considered compelling in the con-text of the selection of delegates for the national nominating 174 Nomination and Election 14 See id. at 491. 15 414 U.S. 51 (1973). 16 Cousins, 419 U.S. at 487 (citing Kusper v. Pontikes, 414 U.S. 51, 56–57 (1973)). 17 Id. at 489–90 (quoting Wigoda v. Cousins, 342 F.Supp. 82, 86 (ND III. 1972)). 18 450 U.S. 107 (1981). 19 See id. at 121–25. 20 530 U.S. 567 (2000). convention. 14 Citing its 1957 decision in Kusper v. 

Pontikes , 15 the Court recognized that a person’s right to as-sociate with a political party of choice is integral to the free-dom of association guaranteed under the First Amend-ment. 16 In addition, the Court found that the competing state interest in protecting the integrity of its electoral proc-ess is not compelling because suffrage was already exercised at the primary to elect delegates to the Convention. Accord-ing to the Court: Delegates perform a task of supreme importance to every citizen of the Na-tion regardless of their State of residence. The vital business of the Conven-tion is the nomination of the Party’s candidates for the offices of President and Vice President of the United States. . . . The States themselves have no constitutionally mandated role in the great task of the selection of Presi-dential and Vice-Presidential candidates. If the qualifications and eligibility of delegates to National Political Party Conventions were left to state law ‘‘each of the fifty states could establish the qualifications of its delegates to the various party conventions without regard to party policy, an obviously intolerable result.’’ 17 Since its decision in Cousins , the Court has generally contin-ued to uphold the rights of the political parties in cases of conflict with state law. For example, in its 1981 decision in 

Democratic Party of United States v. Wisconsin ex rel. La Follette , 18 the Supreme Court overruled a Wisconsin Su-preme Court decision finding supremacy of the state law pro-viding for an open primary election—which allowed voting without requiring declaration of a party preference and with-out regard to party affiliation—against conflicting Demo-cratic Party rules that prohibited delegates from being se-lected by anyone but registered Democrats. The Court found that states do not have a constitutionally mandated role in regulating the task of the national conventions to nominate presidential and vice presidential candidates and, in deter-mining the qualifications and eligibility of such delegates to the national conventions, no primacy is to be accorded to a state’s election laws over a national party’s rules. 19 Similarly, in its more recent 2000 decision, California Demo-cratic Party v. Jones , 20 the Court determined that California could not require the Democratic and Republican parties to nominate their candidates through a blanket primary system whereby each voter’s ballot lists all candidates—regardless of party affiliation—and permits the voter to choose among them (as opposed to a closed primary where only a party’s members can vote for its nominees). While the Court found that the state had a major role to play in structuring and monitoring the election process—including primary elec-tions—when it regulated the internal processes of political 175 Nomination and Election 21 Id. at 572–73 (citing Eu v. San Francisco County Democratic Central Comm., 489 U.S. 214 (1989); Democratic Party of United States v. Wis-consin ex rel. La Follette, 450 U.S. 107 (1981)). 22 Id . at 574 (quoting Tashjian v. Republican Party, 479 U.S. 208, 214–215 (1986)). 23 Id . (quoting Democratic Party of United States v. Wisconsin ex rel. La Follette, 450 U.S. 107, 122 (1981)). 24 Id . at 574–575 (quoting Democratic Party of United States v. Wisconsin ex rel. La Follette, 450 U.S. 107, 122, n. 22 (1981) (quoting L. Tribe, AMER-ICAN CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 791 (1978)). 25 Id. at 575. 26 Id. at 586. parties, it had to do so ‘‘within limits imposed by the Con-stitution.’’ 21 The First Amendment, according to the Court, protects ‘‘the freedom to join together in furtherance of common political beliefs.’’ 22 But this freedom, the Court cautioned, ‘‘nec-essarily presupposes the freedom to identify the people who constitute the association, and to limit the association to those people only.’’ 23 In other words, the Court stated, a cor-ollary of the right to associate is also the right not to asso-ciate: ‘‘Freedom of association would prove an empty guar-antee if associations could not limit control over their deci-sions to those who share the interests and persuasions that underlie the association’s being.’’ 24 Therefore, the Court determined that members of a recog-nized political party had a constitutional right to select their nominees, announcing that ‘‘[i]n no area is the political asso-ciation’s right to exclude more important than in the process of selecting its nominee.’’ 25 In concluding, the Court found that the California statute was not narrowly tailored and did not advance a compelling state interest. Indeed, the Court announced that the statute would result in nominees who do not share the beliefs of the parties, thereby creating a bur-den that ‘‘is both severe and unnecessary.’’ 26 176 Nomination and Election 

C. FEC Regulations on Delegates and Delegate Committees 11 CFR Parts 100 and 110 Contributions to and Expenditures by Delegates to National Nominating Conventions 11 CFR § 100.5 Political committee (2 U.S.C. § 431 (4), (5), (6)). 

# * * * * * * *(e) * * * (5) Delegate committee. A delegate committee is a group of persons that receives contributions or makes expenditures for the sole purpose of influencing the selection of one or more delegates to a national nominating convention. The term ‘‘delegate committee’’ includes a group of delegates, a group of individuals seeking selection as delegates and agroup of individuals supporting delegates. A delegate com-mittee that qualifies as a political committee under 11 CFR 100.5 must register with the Commission pursuant to 11 CFR Part 102 and report its receipts and disbursements in accordance with 11 CFR Part 104. (See definition of ‘‘dele-gate’’ at 11 CFR 110.14(b)(1).) * * * * * * *

11 CFR § 110.1 Contributions by persons other than multicandidate political committees (2 U.S.C. § 441a(a)(1)). 

# * * * * * * *(m) Contributions to delegates and delegate committees. (1) Contributions to delegates for the purpose of furthering their selection under 11 CFR 110.14 are not subject to the limita-tions of this section. (2) Contributions to delegate committees under 11 CFR 110.14 are subject to the limitations of this section. 

11 CFR § 110.2 Contributions by multicandidate political committees (2 U.S.C. § 441a(a)(2)). 

# * * * * * * *(j) Contributions to delegates and delegate committees. (1) Contributions to delegates for the purpose of furthering their selection under 11 CFR 110.14 are not subject to the limita-tions of this section. (2) Contributions to delegate committees under 11 CFR 110.14 are subject to the limitations of this section. 

11 CFR § 110.14 Contributions to and expenditures by delegates and delegate committees. 

(a) Scope. This section sets forth the prohibitions, limitations and reporting requirements under the Act applicable to all levels of a delegate selection process. (b) Definitions—(1) Delegate. Delegate means an individual who becomes or seeks to become a delegate, as defined by 177 Nomination and Election State law or party rule, to a national nominating convention or to a State, district, or local convention, caucus or primary that is held to select delegates to a national nominating con-vention. (2) Delegate committee. A delegate committee is a group of persons that receives contributions or makes expenditures for the sole purpose of influencing the selection of one or more delegates to a national nominating convention. The term ‘‘delegate committee’’ includes a group of delegates, a group of individuals seeking selection as delegates and agroup of individuals supporting delegates. A delegate com-mittee that qualifies as a political committee under 11 CFR 100.5 must register with the Commission pursuant to 11 CFR Part 102 and report its receipts and disbursements in accordance with 11 CFR Part 104. (c) Funds received and expended; Prohibited funds. (1) Funds received or disbursements made for the purpose of furthering the selection of a delegate to a national nominating conven-tion are contributions or expenditures for the purpose of in-fluencing a federal election, see 11 CFR 100.2 (c)(3) and (e), except that— (i) Payments made by an individual to a State committee or subordinate State committee as a condition for ballot access as a delegate are not contributions or expenditures. Such payments are neither required to be reported under 11 CFR Part 104 nor subject to limitation under 11 CFR 110.1; and (ii) Payments made by a State committee or subordinate State party committee for administrative expenses incurred in connection with sponsoring conventions or caucuses dur-ing which delegates to a national nominating convention are selected are not contributions or expenditures. Such pay-ments are neither required to be reported under 11 CFR Part 104 nor subject to limitation under 11 CFR 110.1 and 110.2. (2) All funds received or disbursements made for the purpose of furthering the selection of a delegate to a national nomi-nating convention, including payments made under para-graphs (c)(1)(i) and (c)(1)(ii) of this section, shall be made from funds permissible under the Act. See 11 CFR Parts 110, 114 and 115. (d) Contributions to a delegate. (1) The limitations on con-tributions to candidates and political committees under 11 CFR 110.1 and 110.2 do not apply to contributions made to a delegate for the purpose of furthering his or her selection; however, such contributions do count against the limitation on contributions made by an individual in a calendar year under 11 CFR 110.5. (2) Contributions to a delegate made by the authorized com-mittee of a presidential candidate count against the presi-dential candidate’s expenditure limitation under 11 CFR 110.8(a). (3) A delegate is not required to report contributions received for the purpose of furthering his or her selection. (e) Expenditures by delegate to advocate only his or her selec-tion. (1) Expenditures by a delegate that advocate only his or her selection are neither contributions to a candidate, sub-ject to limitation under 11 CFR 110.1, nor chargeable to the 178 Nomination and Election expenditure limits of any Presidential candidate under 11 CFR 110.8(a). Such expenditures may include, but are not limited to: Payments for travel and subsistence during the delegate selection process, including the national nominating convention, and payments for any communications advo-cating only the delegate’s selection. (2) A delegate is not required to report expenditures made to advocate only his or her selection. (f) Expenditures by a delegate referring to a candidate for public office— (1) Volunteer activities that do not use public political advertising. (i) Expenditures by a delegate to defray the costs of certain campaign materials (such as pins, bump-er stickers, handbills, brochures, posters and yard signs) that advocate his or her selection and also include information on or reference to a candidate for the office of President or any other public office are neither contributions to the candidate referred to nor subject to limitation under 11 CFR 110.1 pro-vided that: (A) The materials are used in connection with volunteer ac-tivities; and (B) The expenditures are not for costs incurred in the use of broadcasting, newspapers, magazines, billboards, direct mail or similar types of general public communication or political advertising. (ii) Such expenditures are not chargeable to the expenditure limitation of a presidential candidate under 11 CFR 110.8(a). (iii) A delegate is not required to report expenditures made pursuant to this paragraph. (2) Use of public political advertising. A delegate may make expenditures to defray costs incurred in the use of broad-casting, newspapers, magazines, billboards, direct mail or similar types of general public communication or political ad-vertising to advocate his or her selection and also include in-formation on or reference to a candidate for the office of President or any other public office. (i) Such expenditures are independent expenditures under 11 CFR 100.16 if they are made for a communication expressly advocating the election or defeat of a clearly identified Fed-eral candidate that is not a coordinated communication under 11 CFR 109.21. (A) The portion of the expenditure allocable to a Federal can-didate is subject to the contribution limitations of 11 CFR 110.1. (B) A Federal candidate’s authorized committee must report the portion of the expenditure allocable to the candidate as a contribution pursuant to 11 CFR Part 104. (C) The portion of the expenditure allocable to a presidential candidate is chargeable to the presidential candidate’s ex-penditure limitation under 11 CFR 110.8(a). (ii) Such expenditures are independent expenditures under 11 CFR 100.16 if they are made for a communication ex-pressly advocating the election or defeat of a clearly identi-fied Federal candidate that is not a coordinated communica-tion under 11 CFR 109.21. (A) Such independent expenditures must be made in accord-ance with the requirements of 11 CFR Part 109. 179 Nomination and Election (B) The delegate shall report the portion of the expenditure allocable to the Federal candidate as an independent expend-iture in accordance with 11 CFR 109.10. (3) Republication of candidate materials. Expenditures made to finance the dissemination, distribution or republication, in whole or in part, of any broadcast or materials prepared by a Federal candidate are in-kind contributions to the can-didate. (i) Such expenditures are subject to the contribution limits of 11 CFR 110.1. (ii) The Federal candidate must report the expenditure as a contribution pursuant to 11 CFR Part 104. (iii) Such expenditures are not chargeable to the presidential candidate’s expenditure limitation under 11 CFR 110.8 un-less they were coordinated communications under 11 CFR 109.21. (4) For purposes of this paragraph, ‘‘direct mail’’ means any mailing(s) by commercial vendors or any mailing(s) made from lists that were not developed by the delegate. (g) Contributions made to and by a delegate committee. (1) The limitations on contributions to political committees under 11 CFR 110.1 and 110.2 apply to contributions made to and by a delegate committee. (2) Contributions to a delegate committee count against the limitation on contributions made by an individual in a cal-endar year under 11 CFR 110.5. (3) A delegate committee shall report contributions it makes and receives pursuant to 11 CFR Part 104. (h) Expenditures by a delegate committee to advocate only the selection of one or more delegates. (1) Expenditures by a dele-gate committee that advocate only the selection of one or more delegates are neither contributions to a candidate, sub-ject to limitation under 11 CFR 110.1 nor chargeable to the expenditure limits of any Presidential candidate under 11 CFR 110.8(a). Such expenditures may include but are not limited to: Payments for travel and subsistence during the delegate selection process, including the national nominating convention, and payments for any communications advo-cating only the selection of one or more delegates. (2) A delegate committee shall report expenditures made pursuant to this paragraph. (i) Expenditures by a delegate committee referring to a can-didate for public office —(1) Volunteer activities that do not use public political advertising. (i) Expenditures by a dele-gate committee to defray the costs of certain campaign mate-rials (such as pins, bumper stickers, handbills, brochures, posters and yard signs) that advocate the selection of a dele-gate and also include information on or reference to a can-didate for the office of President or any other public office are neither contributions to the candidate referred to, nor subject to limitation under 11 CFR 110.1 provided that: (A) The materials are used in connection with volunteer ac-tivities; and (B) The expenditures are not for costs incurred in the use of broadcasting, newspapers, magazines, billboards, direct mail or similar types of general public communication or political advertising. 180 Nomination and Election (ii) Such expenditures are not chargeable to the expenditure limitation of a presidential candidate under 11 CFR 110.8(a). (iii) A delegate committee shall report expenditures made pursuant to this paragraph. (2) Use of public political advertising. A delegate committee may make expenditures to defray costs incurred in the use of broadcasting, newspapers, magazines, billboards, direct mail or similar types of general public communication or po-litical advertising to advocate the selection of one or more delegates and also include information on or reference to a candidate for the office of President or any other public of-fice. If such expenditures are in-kind contributions or inde-pendent expenditures under paragraphs (i) or (ii) below, the delegate committee shall allocate the portion of the expendi-tures relating to the delegate(s) and candidate(s) referred to in the communications between them and report the portion allocable to each. (i) Such expenditures are in-kind contributions to a Federal candidate if they are coordinated communications under 11 CFR 109.21. (A) The portion of the expenditure allocable to a Federal can-didate is subject to the contribution limitations of 11 CFR 110.1. The delegate committee shall report the portion allo-cable to the Federal candidate as a contribution in-kind. (B) The Federal candidate’s authorized committee shall re-port the portion of the expenditure allocable to the candidate as a contribution pursuant to 11 CFR Part 104. (C) The portion of the expenditure allocable to a presidential candidate is chargeable to the presidential candidate’s ex-penditure limitation under 11 CFR 110.8(a). (ii) Such expenditures are independent expenditures under 11 CFR 100.16 if they are made for a communication ex-pressly advocating the election or defeat of a clearly identi-fied Federal candidate that is not a coordinated communica-tion under 11 CFR 109.21. (A) Such independent expenditures must be made in accord-ance with the requirements of 11 CFR Part 100.16. (B) The delegate committee shall report the portion of the ex-penditure allocable to the Federal candidate as an inde-pendent expenditure in accordance with 11 CFR 109.10. (3) Republication of candidate materials. Expenditures made to finance the dissemination, distribution or republication, in whole or in part, of any broadcast or materials prepared by a Federal candidate are in-kind contributions to the can-didate. (i) Such expenditures are subject to the contribution limita-tions of 11 CFR 110.1. The delegate committee shall report the expenditure as a contribution in-kind. (ii) The Federal candidate’s authorized committee shall re-port the expenditure as a contribution pursuant to 11 CFR Part 104. (iii) Such expenditures are not chargeable to the presidential candidate’s expenditure limitation under 11 CFR 110.8 un-less they were coordinated communications under 11 CFR 109.21. (4) For purposes of this paragraph, ‘‘direct mail’’ means any mailing(s) by commercial vendors or any mailing(s) made 181 Nomination and Election from lists that were not developed by the delegate committee or any participating delegate. (j) Affiliation of delegate committees with a Presidential can-didate’s authorized committee. (1) For purposes of the con-tribution limits of 11 CFR 110.1 and 110.2, a delegate com-mittee shall be considered to be affiliated with a Presidential candidate’s authorized committee if both such committees are established, financed, maintained or controlled by the same person, such as the Presidential candidate, or the same group of persons. (2) Factors the Commission may consider in determining whether a delegate committee is affiliated under paragraph (j)(1) of this section with a Presidential candidate’s author-ized committee may include, but are not limited to: (i) Whether the Presidential candidate or any other person associated with the Presidential authorized committee played a significant role in the formation of the delegate committee; (ii) Whether any delegate associated with a delegate com-mittee is or has been a staff member of the Presidential au-thorized committee; (iii) Whether the committees have common or overlapping of-ficers or employees; (iv) Whether the Presidential authorized committee provides funds or goods in a significant amount or on an ongoing basis to the delegate committee, such as through direct or in-direct payments for administrative, fundraising, or other costs, but not including the transfer to a committee of its al-located share of proceeds jointly raised pursuant to 11 CFR 102.17 or 9034.8; (v) Whether the Presidential candidate or any other person associated with the Presidential authorized committee sug-gested, recommended or arranged for contributions to be made to the delegate committee; (vi) Similar patterns of contributions received by the commit-tees; (vii) Whether one committee provides a mailing list to the other committee; (viii) Whether the Presidential authorized committee or any person associated with that committee provides ongoing ad-ministrative support to the other committee; (ix) Whether the Presidential authorized committee or any person associated with that committee directs or organizes the specific campaign activities of the delegate committee; and (x) Whether the Presidential authorized committee or any person associated with that committee files statements or re-ports on behalf of the delegate committee. (k) Affiliation between delegate committees. Delegate commit-tees will be considered to be affiliated with each other if they meet the criteria for affiliation set forth at 11 CFR 100.5(g). 182 Nomination and Election 

D. Guide to the 2008 Delegate Selection Rules and the Call for the 2008 Democratic Convention* 

This Guide was prepared to aid state Democratic parties with developing their Delegate Selection Plans for the 2008 Democratic National Convention. Provisions of the 2008 Del-egate Selection Rules (‘‘Rules’’) and the Call for the 2008 Convention (‘‘Call’’) are explained in simple language. The explanations given below, also indicate how and where state Plans should reflect the necessary language. This infor-mation should assist state parties in writing their Plans to comply with the Rules, the Call, and the DNC Rules and By-laws Committee Regulations (‘‘Regs.’’) To help illustrate ex-actly how a rule or regulation is reflected in a fully-written Plan, references to any corresponding rules, regulations and the Model Plan are also included below. The interpretations of the rules as presented in this Guide are for informational purposes only and should not be used in place of the rules. CONTENTS 2008 DELEGATE SELECTION RULES Rule 1 ................................... Publication and Submission of State Party Rules. 184 Rule 2 ................................... Participation ................................ 185 Rule 3 ................................... Scheduling of Delegate Selection Meetings. 187 Rule 4 ................................... An Open Party ............................ 188 Rule 5 ................................... Non-Discrimination .................... 189 Rule 6 ................................... Affirmative Action ...................... 189 Rule 7 ................................... Inclusion Programs ..................... 191 Rule 8 ................................... National Convention Delegate Apportionment. 191 Rule 9 ................................... Unpledged and Pledged Party Leaders and Elected Official Delegates. 192 Rule 10 ................................ Selection of At-Large Delegates 194 Rule 11 ................................ Timing of the Delegate Selection Process. 194 Rule 12 ................................ Presidential Preference .............. 195 Rule 13 ................................ Fair Reflection of Presidential Preferences. 197 Rule 14 ................................ Petition Requirements and Fil-ing Deadlines. 198 Rule 15 ................................ Quorum Requirements ............... 199 Rule 16 ................................ Proxy Voting ................................ 200 Rule 17 ................................ Unit Rule and Slate-Making ...... 200 Rule 18 ................................ Alternates and Vacancies ........... 200 Rule 19 ................................ DNC Rules and Bylaws Com-mittee. 201 Rule 20 ................................ Challenges ................................... 202 Rule 21 ................................ State Legislative Changes .......... 205 CALL FOR THE 2008 DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL CONVENTION Article I. ............................... Distribution of Delegate Votes ... 207 Article II. ............................. Qualifications of State Delegates 210 Article III. ............................ Delegates to be Selected No Later Than June 21, 2008. 211 Article IV. ............................ Certification Requirements for Delegates and Alternates. 211 Article V. ............................. The 2008 Democratic National Convention Committee, Inc. 213 Article VI. ............................ Presidential Candidates ............. 214 183 Nomination and Election CONTENTS—Continued Article VII. .......................... Standing Committees on Plat-form, Rules, and Credentials of the 2008 Democratic Na-tional Convention. 215 Article VIII. ......................... Procedural Rules of the 2008 Democratic National Conven-tion. 221 APPENDIX A ....................................................... 229 B ....................................................... 239 C ....................................................... 242 D ....................................................... 244 * Delegate Selection Rules adopted by the Democratic National Committee, August 19, 2006; call for the 2008 Democratic Convention adopted by the Democratic National Committee, February 2, 2007. 184 Nomination and Election 

2008 DELEGATE SELECTION RULES 

These rules were adopted by the Democratic National Com-mittee (‘‘DNC’’) on August 19, 2006. They provide certain standards that states must use as guidelines in the process of selecting delegates to the Convention. Within this frame-work for ensuring the process is conducted in a fair and open manner, a state party is allowed to devise its own particular system for choosing delegates and alternates. 

1. Publication and Submission of State Party Rules 

A. State parties shall adopt Affirmative Action and Delegate Selection Plans which contain explicit rules and procedures governing all aspects of the delegate selection process. These rules shall include, but are not limited to: 1. Procedures for electing and certifying delegates and alter-nates at all levels; 2. Timing of primary/caucuses/conventions; 3. Procedures providing for equal division in each state’s con-vention delegation; 4. Procedures providing for the selection of the chair of the delegation; 5. Particulars concerning the scheduling of delegate selection meetings including methods by which each meeting or event will be publicized; 6. Affirmative Action Plans in detail including affirmative action obligations of presidential candidates; 7. All petition requirements and filing deadlines for delegate and alternate candidates and for presidential candidates; 8. Procedures for ascertaining delegate/alternate preference at all stages; 9. Procedures for presidential candidate right of approval; 10. Method of awarding delegates and alternates to presi-dential candidates; 11. Methods and timetable for the selection of permanent standing committee members; 12. Methods and timetable for the selection of temporary standing committee members; 13. Procedures for challenges of the delegate selection and affirmative action processes; 14. Methods and timetable for the selection of convention pages; and 15. Other appropriate provisions from these Rules, the Call and the Regulations. B. The following items are to be routinely included at an ap-propriate place in each state plan: 1. Eligibility requirements for participation in the delegate selection process in conformance with Rule 2 [Rule 2] ;2. Prohibition of cost and fees [Rule 2.D.] ;3. Prohibition of participation by those participating in an-other party’s process [Rule 2.E.] ;4. One-meeting limitation for first-stage participants [Rule 3.E.] ;185 Nomination and Election 1 Unless otherwise explicitly specified, reference in these Rules to ‘‘day’’ or ‘‘days’’ means ‘‘calendar days.’’ If the last day of a period falls on a Saturday, Sunday or a federally recognized holiday, the time shall be extended to the next business day. 5. ‘‘Six basic elements’’ of an open party [Rule 4] ;6. Non-discrimination principles [Rule 5] ;7. Requirement that all steps take place within calendar year of convention [Rule 11.] ;8. Required identification of preference of candidates for del-egate and alternate [Rule 12.A.] ;9. Protection against coerced vote [Rule 12.1] ;10. Quorum requirements [Rule 15] ;11. Proxy voting rules, if any [Rule 16] ;12. Unit rule prohibition [Rule 17.A.] ;13. Slate making limitations [Rule 17.B.] ; and 14. Succession of alternates to delegate status and filling of vacancies in delegate positions [Rule 18] .C. Each state party shall provide for a thirty (30) day 1 pe-riod of public comment to solicit opinion on the state’s Af-firmative Action Plan and Delegate Selection Plan prior to adoption. All written public comments submitted to the state Democratic Committee shall be submitted along with the plans to the Rules and Bylaws Committee of the Democratic National Committee (‘‘DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee’’). D. State Delegate Selection and Affirmative Action Plans shall be submitted to the DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee for approval on or before May 1, 2007. E. The DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee shall act on the proposed plans as soon as practicable, but in no case later than September 16, 2007, or four months before the respec-tive state’s first determining step, whichever is earlier. Its decision shall be final and binding. F. Implementation of state Affirmative Action Plans shall begin no later than September 16, 2007, or four months be-fore the respective state’s first determining step, whichever is earlier. G. State Delegate Selection Plans shall specify the methods and timetable to be followed in selecting permanent and tem-porary members of standing committees of the national con-vention. These procedures shall be in conformity with the rules to be contained in the Call for the 2008 Convention. H. The Democratic National Committee (‘‘DNC’’) and the state parties shall publish and make available at no cost their rules, the 2008 National Delegate Selection Rules, and a clear and concise explanation of how Democratic voters can participate in the delegate selection process. The DNC shall prepare and provide at no cost to state parties a clear and concise explanation of the 2008 Delegate Selection Rules. This shall be done no later than October 1 of the calendar year immediately preceding the calendar year of the national convention. 

2. Participation 

A. Participation in the delegate selection process shall be open to all voters who wish to participate as Democrats. 186 Nomination and Election 1. Democratic voters shall be those persons who publicly de-clare their Party preference and have that preference pub-licly recorded. 2. Implementation of this administrative matter shall be del-egated to the DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee. B. Nothing in these rules shall be interpreted to encourage or permit states with party registration and enrollment, or states that limit participation to Democrats only, to amend their systems to open participation to members of other par-ties. C. State parties shall take all feasible steps to encourage non-affiliated and new voters to register or enroll, to provide simple procedures through which they may do so and to eliminate excessively long waiting periods for voters wishing to register or to change their party enrollment status. In all caucuses or conventions conducted pursuant to these rules, all Democrats who comply with Rule 2.A, 2.A.(1), 2.A.(2). shall be allowed to participate. D. At no stage of the delegate selection process shall any per-son be required, directly or indirectly, to pay a cost or fee as a condition for participating in the delegate selection process. Voluntary contributions to the Party may be made, but under no circumstances shall a contribution be mandatory for participation. E. No person shall participate or vote in the nominating process for a Democratic presidential candidate who also participates in the nominating processes of any other party for the corresponding elections. F. In accordance with Article Nine, Section 12 of the Charter of the Democratic Party of the United States, votes shall not be taken by secret ballot at any stage of the delegate selec-tion process, including processes leading up to the selection of DNC Members or State Chairs and Vice Chairs, who serve as DNC members by virtue of their office, except that use of such voting by secret ballot may be used in a state run or state party run primary which constitutes the first deter-mining stage of the delegate election process and in which all individual voters are eligible to participate in accordance with the provisions of this Rule 2. G. The casting of ballots over the Internet may be used as a method of voting in a vote only for presidential preference in a state party-run primary constituting the first deter-mining stage in the presidential nominating process, and only if such casting of ballots over the Internet: 1. Is used in a system in which voters may cast their ballots in person on the day of such primary and by mail, and in which casting of ballots over the Internet is an alternate means of voting; 2. Is accompanied by a comprehensive, proactive education and outreach program on the use of Internet voting that is set forth in the state’s delegate selection plan and approved by the DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee; 3. Is conducted in accordance with a plan approved by the DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee that is included in the state’s delegate selection plan, and that provides adequate measures to achieve security, reliability, access to eligible voters and transparency, including contractual and other 187 Nomination and Election safeguards to secure exclusive ownership and control by the state party of voting data; 4. Is accomplished through a system which provides the voter with an opportunity to verify the voter’s ballot and cor-rect any error before the voter’s vote is cast; which can be permanently maintained by the voter at the voter’s option in paper, electronic or other form; and which produces a paper record of the voter’s vote that is preserved and maintained by the state party in the event of a manual audit, until the expiration of the time for filing an implementation challenge under these Rules. H. In states using government-run voting systems in the del-egate selection process, State Delegate Selection Plans shall include provable positive steps (as defined in Rule 21) taken or to be taken by the state party to: 1. Promote the acquisition of accessible precinct based optical scan systems wherever possible; 2. Seek enactment of legislation, rules and policies at the state and local level to ensure that direct recording electronic systems include a voter verified paper record; 3. Seek enactment of legislation, rules and policies at the state and local level to ensure that both optical scan and di-rect recording electronic systems include recognized security measures such as: a. Automatic routine manual audits comparing paper records to electronic records following every election and prior to cer-tification of results where possible; b. Parallel testing on Election Day; c. Physical and electronic security for equipment; d. Banning use of wireless components and connections; e. Public disclosure of software design; f. Use of transparent and random selection for all auditing procedures; g. Effective procedures for addressing evidence of fraud or error. 

3. Scheduling of Delegate Selection Meetings 

A. All official Party meetings and events related to the na-tional convention delegate selection process, including cau-cuses, conventions, committee meetings, filing dates, and Party enrollment periods, shall be scheduled for dates, times and public places which would be most likely to encourage the participation of all Democrats, and must begin and end at reasonable hours. B. All such meetings or events which are the first meeting or event in the delegate selection process shall be scheduled at times and dates which are uniform throughout the state, except where it is established by the state party and ap-proved by the DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee that such uniform times and dates would significantly reduce partici-pation in the delegate selection process. C. The times, dates, places, and rules for the conduct of all caucuses, conventions, meetings and other events involved in the delegate selection process shall be effectively publicized by the Party organization, official, candidate or member call-ing the same. 188 Nomination and Election D. Concise statements in advance of all meetings and events concerning the relationship between the business to be con-ducted and the delegate selection process shall be effectively publicized by the Party organization, official, candidate or member calling the same. E. No person shall participate in more than one meeting which is the first meeting in the delegate selection process. 

4. An Open Party 

A. The Democratic National Committee reaffirms its commit-ment to the 1964 resolution, and requires the national and state parties to incorporate the Six Basic Elements, as up-dated, into their Party rules and to take appropriate steps to secure their implementation. B. The 1964 Democratic National Convention adopted a reso-lution which conditioned the seating of delegates at future conventions on the assurances that discrimination in any state party affairs on the ground of race, color, creed or na-tional origin did not occur. The 1968 Convention adopted the 1964 Convention resolution for inclusion in the Call for the 1972 Convention. In 1966, the Special Equal Rights Com-mittee, which had been created in 1964, adopted six anti-dis-crimination standards—designated as the Six Basic Ele-ments, which, as updated, are as follows: 1. All public meetings at all levels of the Democratic Party in each state should be open to all members of the Demo-cratic Party regardless of race, sex, age, color, creed, national origin, religion, ethnic identity, sexual orientation, economic status or physical disability (hereinafter collectively referred to as ‘‘status’’). 2. No test for membership in, nor any oaths of loyalty to, the Democratic Party in any state should be required or used which has the effect of requiring prospective or current mem-bers of the Democratic Party to acquiesce in, condone or sup-port discrimination based on ‘‘status.’’ 3. The time and place for all public meetings of the Demo-cratic Party on all levels should be publicized fully and in such manner as to assure timely notice to all interested per-sons. Such meetings must be held in places accessible to all Party members and large enough to accommodate all inter-ested persons. 4. The Democratic Party, on all levels, should support the broadest possible registration without discrimination based on ‘‘status.’’ 5. The Democratic Party in each state should publicize fully and in such a manner as to assure notice to all interested parties a full description of the legal and practical proce-dures for selection of Democratic Party officers and rep-resentatives on all levels. Publication of these procedures should be done in such fashion that all prospective and cur-rent members of each state Democratic Party will be fully and adequately informed of the pertinent procedures in time to participate in each selection procedure at all levels of the Democratic Party organization. 6. The Democratic Party in each state should publicize fully and in such a manner as to assure notice to all interested parties a complete description of the legal and practical 189 Nomination and Election qualifications of all positions as officers and representatives of the state Democratic Party. Such publication should be done in timely fashion so that all prospective candidates or applicants for any elected or appointed position within each state Democratic Party will have full and adequate oppor-tunity to compete for office. C. These provisions demonstrate the intention of the Demo-cratic Party to ensure a full opportunity for all ‘‘status’’ (as defined in Rule 4.B.(1)) members to participate in the dele-gate selection process. 

5. Non-Discrimination 

A. In order that the Democratic Party at all levels be an open Party which includes rather than excludes people from participation, a program of effective affirmative action is hereby adopted. B. Discrimination on the basis of ‘‘status’’ in the conduct of Democratic Party affairs is prohibited. C. In order to continue the Democratic Party’s ongoing ef-forts to include groups historically underrepresented in the Democratic Party’s affairs, by virtue of race, ethnicity, age, sexual orientation or disability, each state party shall de-velop and submit Party outreach programs, including re-cruitment, education and training, in order to achieve full participation by such groups and diversity in the delegate se-lection process and at all levels of Party affairs. 

6. Affirmative Action 

A. The promises of a democratically elected government and the right to vote have not always been extended equally to all Americans. Historically, certain groups of Americans have been explicitly denied the right to vote or have been sub-jected to discriminatory and exclusionary practices with the intended effect of denying them voting rights. In recognition of this past history of discriminatory denial of the franchise and in order to encourage full participation by all Democrats in the delegate selection process and in all Party affairs, the national and state Democratic Parties shall adopt and imple-ment affirmative action programs with specific goals and timetables for African Americans, Hispanics, Native Ameri-cans, Asian/Pacific Americans and women. 1. The goal of such affirmative action shall be to encourage participation in the delegate selection process and in Party organizations at all levels by the aforementioned groups as indicated by their presence in the Democratic electorate. 2. This goal shall not be accomplished either directly or indi-rectly by the Party’s imposition of mandatory quotas at any level of the delegate selection process or in any other Party affairs. 3. In the selection of each state’s at-large delegation, priority of consideration shall be given to African Americans, His-panics, Native Americans, Asian/Pacific Americans and women, if such priority of consideration is needed to fulfill the affirmative action goals outlined in the state’s Delegate Selection Plan. Such remedial action is necessary in order to overcome the effects of past discrimination. Use of the at-large delegation to fulfill the plan’s affirmative action goals 190 Nomination and Election does not obviate the need for the state party to conduct out-reach activities such as recruitment, education and training. Priority of consideration shall also be given to other groups as described in Rule 5.(C), which are underrepresented in Democratic Party affairs, in order to assist in the achieve-ment of full participation by these groups. B. Performance under an approved Affirmative Action Plan and composition of the convention delegation shall be consid-ered relevant evidence in the challenge to any state delega-tion. If a state party has adopted and implemented an ap-proved affirmative action program, the state party shall not be subject to challenge based solely on delegation composi-tion or primary results. C. State Delegate Selection Plans shall provide for equal di-vision between delegate men and delegate women and alter-nate men and alternate women within the state’s entire con-vention delegation. For purposes of this rule, the entire dele-gation includes all pledged delegates and alternates and unpledged delegates (including unpledged party leaders and elected official delegates and unpledged add-on delegates). 1. State Delegate Selection Plans shall, as far as mathemati-cally practicable, also provide for equal division between dis-trict-level delegate men and delegate women and district-level alternate men and alternate women. 2. The DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee shall have con-tinuing jurisdiction to ensure compliance with this equal di-vision requirement. No at-large delegate or alternate from a state shall be placed on the temporary roll of the 2008 Demo-cratic National Convention unless the Rules and Bylaws Committee has certified to the Secretary of the Democratic National Committee that such state’s delegation complies with this equal division rule. It shall be the duty of the DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee to determine such compliance as soon as practicable following the certification of the State’s at-large delegates and alternates. 3. Notwithstanding sub-paragraph A.(2) above, equal division at any level of delegate or committee positions between dele-gate men and delegate women or committeemen and com-mitteewomen shall not constitute a violation of any provision thereof. D. For purposes of providing adequate notice of the delegate selection process under Rule 3, the times, dates, places and rules for the conduct of all caucuses, conventions, meetings and other events involved in the delegate selection process shall be effectively publicized, bilingually where necessary, to encourage the participation of minority groups. E. State Democratic Parties shall ensure that district lines used in the delegate selection process are not gerrymandered to discriminate against African Americans, Hispanics, Native Americans, Asian/Pacific Americans or women. F. Each state Affirmative Action Plan shall provide for the appointment of a representative state Affirmative Action Committee by March 1, 2007. Before the state party submits its Plan to the DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee, the Af-firmative Action Committee shall review the proposed out-reach program required in Rule 5.C. 191 Nomination and Election G. Each state affirmative action program shall include out-reach provisions to encourage the participation and represen-tation of persons of low and moderate income, and a specific plan to help defray expenses of those delegates otherwise un-able to participate in the national convention. H. State parties in their Delegate Selection Plans shall im-pose reasonable specific affirmative action obligations upon candidates consistent with the delegate selection system em-ployed by the state. 1. State parties shall require presidential candidates to sub-mit statements that specify what steps such candidates will take to encourage full participation in their delegate selec-tion process, including, but not limited to, procedures by which persons may file as candidates for delegate or alter-nate. Provided further that presidential candidates submit such full participation statements to the DNC Rules and By-laws Committee at the same time they are submitted to state parties. 2. State parties shall require presidential candidates to sub-mit demographic information with respect to candidates for delegate and alternate pledged to them. I. Each state party shall certify to the Rules and Bylaws Committee whether each Presidential candidate (including uncommitted status) has used best efforts to ensure that their respective delegations at each level within a state’s del-egation shall fulfill the requirements of Rule 6 and Rule 7 established by the state’s Delegate Selection Plan and that the respective delegations of each presidential candidate within the state’s delegation shall be equally divided be-tween men and women. 

7. Inclusion Programs 

The Democratic National Committee recognizes that other groups of Americans in addition to those described in Rule 6 may be under-represented in Party affairs. These groups include members of the LGBT community and people with disabilities. The National and State Parties shall adopt and implement Inclusion Programs in order to achieve the full participation of members of these and other groups in the delegate selection process and in all party affairs, as indi-cated by their presence in the Democratic electorate. As is already the practice in some states, State Parties may use goals to achieve these ends; however, in no event may such participation be accomplished by the use of quotas. 

8. National Convention Delegate Apportionment 

A. Apportionment of district-level delegates within states shall be based on one of the following: 1. A formula giving equal weight to total population and to the average of the vote for the Democratic candidates in the two most recent presidential elections; 2. A formula giving equal weight to the vote for the Demo-cratic candidates in the most recent presidential and guber-natorial elections; 3. A formula giving equal weight to the average of the vote for the Democratic candidates in the two most recent presi-192 Nomination and Election dential elections and to Democratic Party registration or en-rollment as of January 1, 2008; or 4. A formula giving one-third ( 1 ⁄3 ) weight to each of the for-mulas in items (1), (2), and (3). B. Apportionment for each body selecting delegates to state, district, and county conventions shall be based upon popu-lation and/or some measure of Democratic strength. C. The Call for the 2008 Convention shall state the base del-egation for each delegation. Seventy-five percent (75%) of each state’s base delegation shall be elected at the congres-sional district level or smaller. Twenty-five percent (25%) of each state’s base delegation shall be elected at large. Dele-gates so elected shall hereafter be termed ‘‘district-level’’ and ‘‘at-large’’ delegates, respectively. Each State Democratic Chair shall certify all delegates in writing to the Secretary of the DNC. D. In those states with more than one congressional district, after the election of district-level delegates and prior to the selection of at-large delegates, each State Democratic Chair shall certify pledged party leader and elected official dele-gates equal to 15% of the state’s base delegation selected pursuant to Rule 9. E. The election of district-level and at-large delegates and al-ternates may take place at the same meeting, provided that district-level delegates are selected first. In states with one congressional district the election of delegates selected in ac-cordance with Rules 8.B., 8.C., and 9.A., may be conducted simultaneously. In all cases, affirmative action and fair re-flection guidelines must be met and the Democratic Chair of each such state shall make the certifications required by subsection 8.D. 

9. Unpledged and Pledged Party Leaders and Elected Official Delegates 

A. The procedure to be used for certifying unpledged party leader and elected official delegates is as follows: Not later than March 1, 2008, the Secretary of the Demo-cratic National Committee shall officially confirm to each State Democratic Chair the names of the following unpledged delegates who legally reside in their respective state and who shall be recognized as part of their state’s del-egation unless any such member has publicly expressed sup-port for the election of, or has endorsed, a presidential can-didate of another political party: 1. The individuals recognized as members of the DNC (as set forth in Article Three, Sections 2 and 3 of the Charter of the Democratic Party of the United States); and, 2. The Democratic President and the Democratic Vice Presi-dent of the United States, if applicable; and, 3. All Democratic members of the United States House of Representatives and all Democratic members of the United States Senate; and, 4. The Democratic Governor, if applicable; and, 5. All former Democratic Presidents, all former Democratic Vice Presidents, all former Democratic Leaders of the U.S. Senate, all former Democratic Speakers of the U.S. House of Representatives and Democratic Minority Leaders, as appli-193 Nomination and Election cable, and all former Chairs of the Democratic National Committee. B. Following the selection of district-level delegates, and prior to the selection of pledged party leader and elected offi-cial delegates, unpledged add-on delegates shall be selected according to the following procedures: 1. Unpledged add-on delegates may be selected by either the same selecting body which will select the state’s party leader and elected official delegates, or by the same selecting body which will select the state’s at-large delegates and alter-nates. 2. The equal division and affirmative action provisions of Rule 10.A. apply to the selection of unpledged add-on dele-gates. 3. The list from which the selecting body chooses the unpledged add-on delegates shall contain the same minimum number of names for every such add-on position to be filled as the minimum number of names required by the state’s delegate selection plan to remain on the list of bona fide sup-porters for each at-large and pledged party leader and elect-ed official delegate pursuant to Rule 12.E.(2). 4. Unpledged add-on delegates are not entitled to alternates, and neither shall the delegation be entitled to a replacement, except in the case of death. 5. Unpledged add-on delegates may be selected whether or not they previously filed a statement of candidacy for a dele-gate position or submitted a pledge of support for a presi-dential candidate. C. Following the selection of unpledged add-on delegates under 9.B., pledged party leader and elected official dele-gates are to be selected subject to the following procedures: 1. Persons shall be considered for pledged party leader and elected official delegates and alternates according to the fol-lowing priority: big city mayors and state-wide elected offi-cials to be given equal consideration; state legislative lead-ers, state legislators, and other state, county and local elect-ed officials and party leaders. 2. These slots shall be allocated on the same basis as the state’s at-large delegates. 3. If persons eligible for pledged party leader and elected offi-cial delegate positions have not made known their presi-dential preference under the procedures established by the state pursuant to Rule 12 for candidates for district-level and at-large delegate positions, their preferences shall be ascertained through alternative procedures established by the state party, which shall require a signed pledge of sup-port for a presidential candidate. Such an alternative system shall have a final deadline for submitting a pledge of support after the selection of all district-level delegates has been completed and must provide an opportunity for disapproval by the presidential candidate or the candidate’s authorized representative. D. A state’s party leader and elected official delegates may be chosen by a state convention or by a committee consisting of a quorum of district-level delegates. They may also be cho-sen by the State Party Committee, as recognized by the Democratic National Committee, but only if the state’s Dele-194 Nomination and Election gate Selection Plan is in full compliance with these rules, and provided: 1. Membership on the State Party Committee is apportioned on the basis of population and/or some measure of Demo-cratic strength; 2. Members of the State Party Committee have been elected through open processes in conformity with the basic proce-dural guarantees utilized for delegate selection; 3. Such delegates are elected at a public meeting subsequent to the election of district-level delegates; 4. Members of the State Party Committee exercising such authority shall have been elected no earlier than the date of the previous presidential election; and 5. Membership of the State Party Committee complies with the equal division requirements of Article 9, Section 16 of the Charter of the Democratic Party of the United States. E. Except as provided in 9.A. above, no person shall serve as an automatic delegate at any level of the delegate selection process by virtue of holding a public or party office. 

10. Selection of At-Large Delegates 

A. The selection of at-large delegates shall be used, if nec-essary, to achieve the equal division of positions between men and women and the representation goals established in the state party’s Affirmative Action Plan. Such goals apply to the state’s entire delegation considered as a whole. For purposes of this rule, the entire delegation includes all unpledged as well as all pledged delegates. Delegates and al-ternates shall each, as a group, be equally divided and, to the extent possible, each as a group shall reflect the rep-resentation goals established in the state’s Affirmative Ac-tion Plan. B. A state’s at-large delegates and alternates shall be se-lected by one of the bodies, subject to the same conditions specified in Rule 9.D. above, provided, however, the State Party Committee may choose such delegates and alternates only if the state’s Delegate Selection Plan is in full compli-ance with these rules. C. At-large delegates and alternates (including pledged party leader and elected official delegates, which shall include those to be allocated to uncommitted status) in primary states shall be allocated according to the state-wide primary vote or, in states holding no state-wide primary, according to the division of preferences among convention and caucus par-ticipants. In non-primary states which do not hold state con-ventions authorized to elect delegates, at-large delegates shall be apportioned according to the division of preferences among district-level delegates at the time of district-level se-lection. If a presidential candidate entitled to an allocation under this rule is no longer a candidate at the time at-large delegates are selected, his/her allocation shall be proportion-ately divided among the other preferences entitled to an allo-cation. 

11. Timing of the Delegate Selection Process 

A. No meetings, caucuses, conventions or primaries which constitute the first determining stage in the presidential 195 Nomination and Election nomination process (the date of the primary in primary states, and the date of the first tier caucus in caucus states) may be held prior to the first Tuesday in February or after the second Tuesday in June in the calendar year of the na-tional convention. Provided, however, that the Iowa precinct caucuses may be held no earlier than 22 days before the first Tuesday in February; that the Nevada first-tier caucuses may be held no earlier than 17 days before the first Tuesday in February; that the New Hampshire primary may be held no earlier than 14 days before the first Tuesday in February; and that the South Carolina primary may be held no earlier than 7 days before the first Tuesday in February. In no in-stance may a state which scheduled delegate selection proce-dures on or between the first Tuesday in February and the second Tuesday in June 1984 move out of compliance with the provisions of this rule. B. All steps in the delegate selection process, including the filing of presidential candidates, must take place within the calendar year of the Democratic National Convention (except as otherwise provided in these rules or specifically allowed by the DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee). 

12. Presidential Preference 

A. All candidates for delegate and alternate in caucuses, con-ventions, committees and on primary ballots shall be identi-fied as to presidential preference or uncommitted status at all levels of a process which determines presidential pref-erence. B. All persons wishing to be elected to a district-level or at-large delegate position must file a statement of candidacy designating the presidential or uncommitted preference of the delegate candidate and a signed pledge of support for the presidential candidate (including uncommitted status) the person favors, if any, with the state party by a date certain as specified in the state’s Delegate Selection Plan. Persons wishing to be elected as pledged party leader and elected of-ficial delegates shall comply with Rule 9.C.(3). C. All candidates considered for district-level alternate posi-tions must meet the same requirements as candidates for district-level delegate positions, except that the state may allow candidates who were not chosen at the delegate level to be considered at the alternate level. D. Prior to the selection of national convention delegates and alternates, the state party shall convey to the presidential candidate, or that candidate’s authorized representative(s), a list of all persons who have filed for delegate or alternate po-sitions pledged to that presidential candidate. All such dele-gate and alternate candidates shall be considered bona fide supporters of the presidential candidate whom they have pledged to support, unless the presidential candidate, or that candidate’s authorized representative(s), signifies otherwise in writing to the state party by a date certain as specified in the state’s Delegate Selection Plan. 1. Presidential candidates shall certify in writing to the Democratic State Chair the name(s) of their authorized rep-resentative(s) by a date certain. 196 Nomination and Election 2. In states where delegates are voted upon on the ballot, the date by which the presidential candidate, or that candidate’s authorized representative(s), signifies approval or dis-approval of the list of delegate and alternate candidates in writing to the state party as required by Rule 12.D., must allow sufficient time to ensure that names removed from the list do not appear on the ballot. E. National convention delegate and alternate candidates re-moved from the list of bona fide supporters by a presidential candidate, or that candidate’s authorized representative(s), may not be elected as a delegate or alternate at that level pledged to that presidential candidate (including uncommit-ted status). 1. Presidential candidates may not remove any candidate for a district-level delegate or alternate position from the list of bona fide supporters unless, at a minimum, three (3) names remain for every such position to which the presidential can-didate is entitled. Provided, however, that in states where in-dividual district-level delegates and alternates are voted upon on the ballot, the presidential candidate, or that can-didate’s authorized representative(s), may approve a number of delegate candidates or alternate candidates equal to or greater than the number of delegates or alternates allocated to the district. 2. Presidential candidates (including uncommitted status), in consultation with the state party, may remove any candidate for at-large and pledged party leader and elected official del-egate or alternate position from the list of bona fide sup-porters as long as, at a minimum, one (1) name remains for every national convention delegate or alternate position to which the presidential candidate is entitled, except that a state may provide in its delegate selection plan, if the plan is approved by the Rules and Bylaws Committee, that presi-dential candidates (including uncommitted status), may re-move any candidate for an at-large and party leader and elected official delegate or alternate position from the list of bona fide supporters as long as, at a minimum, two (2) names remain for every position to which the presidential candidate is entitled. F. State parties shall ensure that state Delegate Selection Plans provide fair and adequate time for persons to file for delegate or alternate positions, and for presidential can-didates, or their authorized representative(s), to review the list of persons who have filed, and to remove from that list persons not confirmed by the presidential candidate or his/ her representative(s) as bona fide supporters of the presi-dential candidate. G. Except in states where individual delegates and alter-nates are selected on the ballot, district-level national con-vention delegates and alternates pledged to a presidential candidate (including uncommitted status) shall be selected or nominated by a caucus of persons from the unit electing the delegates and alternates who sign statements of support for that presidential candidate. Uncommitted delegates and al-ternates shall be elected by the uncommitted caucus from the appropriate unit. 197 Nomination and Election H. A district-level delegate and alternate candidate may run for election only within the district in which he or she is reg-istered to vote. For purposes of these rules, all delegates and alternates at any level of the delegate selection process must be bona fide Democrats who have the interests, welfare and success of the Democratic Party of the United States at heart, who subscribe to the substance, intent and principles of the Charter and the Bylaws of the Democratic Party of the United States, and who will participate in the Convention in good faith. I. No delegate at any level of the delegate selection process shall be mandated by law or Party rule to vote contrary to that person’s presidential choice as expressed at the time the delegate is elected. J. Delegates elected to the national convention pledged to a presidential candidate shall in all good conscience reflect the sentiments of those who elected them. K. 1. Based on the right of the Democratic Party to freely as-semble and to determine the criteria for its candidates, it is determined that all candidates for the Democratic nomina-tion for President or Vice President shall: a. be registered to vote, and shall have been registered to vote in the last election for the office of President and Vice President; and b. have demonstrated a commitment to the goals and objec-tives of the Democratic Party as determined by the National Chair and will participate in the Convention in good faith. 2. It is further determined that these requirements are in addition to the requirements set forth by the United States Constitution and any law of the United States. 

13. Fair Reflection of Presidential Preferences 

A. Delegates shall be allocated in a fashion that fairly re-flects the expressed presidential preference or uncommitted status of the primary voters or, if there is no binding pri-mary, the convention and/or caucus participants. B. States shall allocate district-level delegates and alternates in proportion to the percentage of the primary or caucus vote won in that district by each preference, except that pref-erences falling below a fifteen percent (15%) threshold shall not be awarded any delegates. Subject to section F. of this rule, no state shall have a threshold above or below fifteen percent (15%). States which use a caucus/convention system, shall specify in their Delegate Selection Plans the caucus level at which such percentages shall be determined. C. A presidential candidate or his/her authorized representa-tive(s) should act in good faith to slate delegate and alter-nate candidates, however, in any event, if a presidential can-didate (including uncommitted status) has qualified to re-ceive delegates and alternates but has failed to slate a suffi-cient number of delegate and alternate candidates, then ad-ditional delegates and alternates for that preference will be selected in a special post-primary procedure. The State Party will administer special post-primary procedures according to rules approved by the DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee 198 Nomination and Election and such procedures should be set forth in the state’s dele-gate selection plan, where applicable. D. District-level delegates and alternates shall be allocated according to the following procedures: Step 1: Tabulate the percentage of the vote that each presi-dential preference (including uncommitted status) receives in the congressional district to three decimals. Step 2: Retabulate the percentage of the vote to three deci-mals, received by each presidential preference excluding the votes of presidential preferences whose percentage in Step 1 falls below 15%. Step 3: Multiply the number of delegates to be allocated by the percentage received by each presidential preference. Step 4: Delegates shall be allocated to each presidential pref-erence based on the whole numbers which result from the multiplication in Step 3. Step 5: Remaining delegates, if any, shall be awarded in order of the highest fractional remainders in Step 3. E. At-large and pledged party leader and elected official dele-gate and alternate positions shall be allocated to presidential preferences by reference to primary or convention votes or to the division of preference among district-level delegates or alternates, as the case may be, as specified in Rule 10.C., ex-cept that a preference falling below a threshold of fifteen percent (15%) shall not be awarded any delegates or alter-nates at this level. Such delegates and alternates in primary states shall be allocated to presidential preference (including uncommitted status) according to the statewide primary vote. F. In all situations where no preference reaches the applica-ble threshold, the threshold shall be the percentage of the vote received at each level of the delegate selection process by the front-runner minus 10 percent. G. Under no circumstances shall the use of single-delegate districts be permitted. H. For the purpose of fairly reflecting the division of pref-erences, the non-binding advisory presidential preference portion of primaries shall not be considered a step in the del-egate selection process and is considered detrimental. State parties must take steps to educate the public that non-bind-ing presidential preference event is meaningless, and state parties and presidential candidates should take all steps pos-sible not to participate. 1. In a state that uses a caucus and/or convention to deter-mine presidential preference of voters, the plan must provide for the timely reporting of the election results to the state party. 

14. Petition Requirements and Filing Deadlines 

A. If a state requires the filing of petitions with the signa-tures of registered/enrolled voters as the sole method to place a presidential candidate’s name on the primary ballot in con-nection with the Democratic presidential nominating process, such number of valid signatures shall not exceed 5,000. B. If a state requires the payment of a fee by a presidential candidate in connection with the Democratic presidential nominating process, such fee shall not exceed $2,500. 199 Nomination and Election C. If a state requires the filing of a petition with the signa-tures of registered/enrolled voters in order to have a dele-gate/alternate candidate gain access to the primary ballot in connection with the Democratic presidential nominating process, the number of valid signatures shall not exceed ei-ther one half of one percent (.5%) of the registered/enrolled Democrats in such district or one half of one percent (.5%) of the total votes in such district for all Democratic presi-dential candidates (including uncommitted) during the im-mediately preceding presidential nominating process, which-ever is lower, but in no event shall the number of valid sig-natures required exceed 500. D. Subject to the prior sections of this rule, the number of valid signatures required of a presidential candidate to file a petition to gain access to the primary ballot, and the num-ber of valid signatures required of a delegate/alternate can-didate to gain access to the primary ballot, and the fees re-quired to be paid to the state by a presidential candidate and by a delegate/alternate candidate to gain access to the pri-mary ballot, in connection with the Democratic presidential nominating process, shall not exceed those in effect in the particular state as of January 1, 1994. E. No deadline for the filing of petitions for participation in the presidential nomination process by a presidential can-didate shall be less than 30 days in advance of the primary or caucus nor more than 75 days in advance of the primary or caucus. F. No candidate for delegate or alternate shall be required to file a statement of candidacy or a pledge of support as re-quired by Rule 12.B. prior to 30 days before such delegate or alternate candidate is to be selected or elected in a pri-mary, caucus or pre-primary caucus; provided, however, that in states holding a presidential primary where individual district-level delegates or alternates are to be voted upon on the ballot, no candidate for delegate or alternate shall be re-quired to submit or file a statement of candidacy or a pledge of support prior to 90 days before the date on which they are to be voted upon. G. No candidate for at-large or pledged party leader and elected official delegate or alternate shall be required to file a statement of candidacy or a pledge of support required by Rule 12.B. prior to 30 days before the date when the delegate or alternate is to be selected or voted upon. H. No state’s delegate selection rules may require the filing of district-level delegate or alternate candidates pledged to a presidential candidate or uncommitted status as a condition of access by a presidential candidate to the primary ballot for voting upon presidential preference. 

15. Quorum Requirements 

No less than forty percent (40%) of the members of any Party body above the first level of the delegate selection process shall constitute a quorum for any business per-taining to the selection of convention delegates. 200 Nomination and Election 

16. Proxy Voting 

To insure full participation in the delegate selection process, state party rules may, at their discretion, provide for proxy voting. Such rules shall allow an accredited participant in a caucus, convention or committee meeting, after having ap-peared at such meeting and having established credentials, to register the non-transferable proxy with another duly ac-credited participant at that meeting (except where an accred-ited alternate is present and eligible to serve as a replace-ment). No such rule shall allow a person to hold more than three (3) proxies at a time. 

17. Unit Rule and Slate-Making 

A. The unit rule, or any rule or practice whereby all mem-bers of a Party unit or delegation may be required to cast their votes in accordance with the will of a majority of the body, shall not be used at any stage of the delegate selection process. B. Any individual or group of Democrats may sponsor or en-dorse a slate of candidates for convention delegates. But no slate may, by virtue of such endorsement, receive a pref-erential place on a delegate selection ballot or be publicly identified on the ballot as the official Democratic Party orga-nization slate, and all slates must meet identical qualifying requirements for appearing on a ballot at all levels of the delegate selection process. 

18. Alternates and Vacancies 

A. Alternate delegates shall be selected by primary, conven-tion or committee processes subject to the same National Party Rules applicable to the selection of delegates, except that the provisions of Rules 9.A. and 9.B. shall not apply to the election of alternates. Each State Democratic Chair shall certify all alternates in writing to the Secretary of the DNC. B. If a given presidential preference is entitled to one or more delegate positions in a state but would not otherwise be entitled to an alternate position, that preference shall be allotted one at-large alternate position. C. The proportions of alternates elected at the district level, and at-large, and as pledged party leader and elected official alternates, may be the same as the proportions of delegates elected in those categories. D. Each state Delegate Selection Plan shall specifically pro-vide how and under what conditions an alternate is to re-place or act in lieu of (collectively referred to as ‘‘replace’’ or ‘‘replaces’’) a delegate. 1. Delegate Selection Plans may specify one or any combina-tion of the following alternatives for permanent and tem-porary replacements: a. The delegate chooses the alternate; b. The delegation chooses the alternate; c. The alternate who receives the highest number of votes; or d. Such other process as protects the interests of presidential candidates, delegates and alternates. 2. A permanent replacement occurs when a delegate resigns or dies prior to and during the National Convention and the 201 Nomination and Election alternate replaces the delegate for the remainder of the Na-tional Convention. Any alternate who permanently replaces a delegate shall be certified in writing to the Secretary of the DNC by the State Democratic Chair. He/She shall be of the same presidential preference (including uncommitted status) and sex of the delegate he/she replaces, and to the extent possible shall be from the same political subdivision within the state as the delegate; except in the case where the presi-dential candidate has only one alternate, in which case, that alternate shall become the certified delegate. 3. A temporary replacement occurs when a delegate is to be absent for a limited period of time during the convention and an alternate temporarily acts in the delegate’s place. Any al-ternate who temporarily replaces a delegate must be of the same presidential preference (including uncommitted status) as the delegate he/she replaces, and to the extent possible shall be of the same sex and from the same political subdivi-sion within the state as the delegate. E. Delegates elected under the provisions of Rules 9.A. and 9.B. shall not be entitled to name a replacement under Rule 18.D. nor shall the state be entitled to a replacement except in case of death. F. A vacant alternate position shall be filled by the delega-tion. The replacement shall be of the same presidential pref-erence (or uncommitted status), of the same sex and, to the extent possible, from the same political subdivision as the al-ternate being replaced. Each replacement of a vacant alter-nate position shall be certified in writing to the Secretary of the DNC by the State Democratic Chair. 

19. DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee 

A. The DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee will assist in the administration and enforce affirmative action and delegate selection requirements for the national and state Democratic Parties. B. The DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee shall implement the Delegate Selection Rules in a manner consistent with these rules. C. The DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee will provide state parties with a model Delegate Selection and Affirmative Ac-tion Plan. D. The DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee shall: 1. review Affirmative Action and Delegate Selection Plans submitted by state parties and approve or recommend changes in such plans; 2. conduct periodic evaluations and provide technical assist-ance to state parties on affirmative action and delegate selec-tion implementation; 3. hear and recommend solutions to affirmative action com-plaints unresolved by appropriate state party bodies. E. The DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee shall retain juris-diction over the approval of amendments to state Delegate Selection Plans and state delegation compliance with equal division requirements, even after the Convention Credentials Committee assumes jurisdiction over challenges to the cre-dentials of delegates. 202 Nomination and Election F. No later than December 15, 2006, the DNC Rules and By-laws Committee shall send to state parties its regulations adopted pursuant to these rules and a checklist. G. The DNC shall allocate sufficient financial resources and staff to implement this rule. 

20. Challenges 

A. Jurisdictional Challenges. Any challenges to a state party organization in respect to its status as the body entitled to sponsor a delegation from that state must be presented to the DNC at any time up to thirty (30) days prior to the initi-ation of the state’s delegate selection process. Such a chal-lenge must be brought by at least fifteen (15) Democrats from the state. B. Submission, Non-Implementation and Violation Chal-lenges. Failure to submit or implement an approved affirma-tive action program by the deadline specified in these rules shall constitute grounds for a challenge with the burden of proof on the challenged party. 1. At any time up to thirty (30) days prior to the initiation of the state’s delegate selection process, any group of not less than fifteen (15) Democrats in that state can challenge the affirmative action program on the basis of non-implementa-tion of a specific requirement of a state plan, which chal-lenge shall include reasonable documentation of alleged vio-lations. (In such challenges, the challenging party shall have the burden of proof, but the challenged party shall present its case first.) a. In the absence of any such challenge, the implementation of any such program shall be presumptively in compliance. b. If challenged and upheld, the compliance of such imple-mentation programs shall be conclusive but not as to compli-ance or non-compliance that may occur after the date of the challenge. 2. Challenges regarding alleged violation of an approved Del-egate Selection Plan shall first be brought to the appropriate state Democratic Party body for a decision to be rendered within twenty-one (21) days. After due notice, any aggrieved party shall have the right to appeal to the DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee within ten (10) days following the deci-sion of the state body according to procedures established by the DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee. 3. The DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee shall either certify compliance, certify non-compliance or require corrective ac-tion after which compliance or non-compliance shall be cer-tified. C. 1 a. Violation of timing: In the event the Delegate Selec-tion Plan of a state party provides or permits a meeting, cau-cus, convention or primary which constitutes the first deter-mining stage in the presidential nominating process to be held prior to or after the dates for the state as provided in Rule 11 of these rules, or in the event a state holds such a meeting, caucus, convention or primary prior to or after such dates, the number of pledged delegates elected in each cat-egory allocated to the state pursuant to the Call for the Na-tional Convention shall be reduced by fifty percent (50%), and the number of alternates shall also be reduced by fifty 203 Nomination and Election percent (50%). In addition, none of the members of the Democratic National Committee and no other unpledged del-egate allocated pursuant to Rule 8.A. from that state shall be permitted to vote as members of the state’s delegation. In determining the actual number of delegates or alternates by which the state’s delegation is to be reduced, any fraction below .5 shall be rounded down to the nearest whole num-ber, and any fraction of .5 or greater shall be rounded up to the next nearest whole number. b. A presidential candidate who campaigns in a state where the state party is in violation of the timing provisions of these rules, or where a primary or caucus is set by a state’s government on a date that violates the timing provisions of these rules, may not receive pledged delegates or delegate votes from that state. Candidates may, however, campaign in such a state after the primary or caucus that violates these rules. ‘‘Campaigning’’ for purposes of this section includes, but is not limited to, purchasing print, internet, or electronic advertising that reaches a significant percentage of the vot-ers in the aforementioned state; hiring campaign workers; opening an office; making public appearances; holding news conferences; coordinating volunteer activities; sending mail, other than fundraising requests that are also sent to poten-tial donors in other states; using paid or volunteer phoners or automated calls to contact voters; sending emails or estab-lishing a website specific to that state; holding events to which Democratic voters are invited; attending events spon-sored by state or local Democratic organizations; or paying for campaign materials to be used in such a state. The Rules and Bylaws Committee will determine whether candidate ac-tivities are covered by this section. 2. Violation of proportional representation: In the event the Delegate Selection Plan of a state party provides or permits the pledged delegates or alternates to be allocated to a presi-dential preference (including uncommitted status) other than as provided under Rule 13 of these rules, or in the event a state party, in fact, allocates its pledged delegates or alter-nates to a presidential preference (including uncommitted status) other than as provided under Rule 13 of these rules, the delegation of the state shall be reduced by the same amount and as provided in section C.(1) of this rule. 3. Violation of the threshold: In the event the Delegate Selec-tion Plan of a state party provides or permits a threshold other than fifteen percent (15%) as set forth in Rule 13 of these rules, or in the event a state party in fact permits the implementation of a threshold other than fifteen percent (15%) as provided in Rule 13 of these rules, the delegation of the state shall be reduced by the same amount and as pro-vided in section C.(1) of this rule. 4. Upon a determination of the DNC Rules and Bylaws Com-mittee that a state is in violation as set forth in subsections (1), (2) or (3) of section C. of this rule, the reductions re-quired under those subsections shall become effective auto-matically and immediately and without further action of the DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee, the Executive Com-mittee of the DNC, the DNC or the Credentials Committee of the Democratic National Convention. 204 Nomination and Election 5. Nothing in the preceding subsections of this rule shall be construed to prevent the DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee from imposing additional sanctions, including, without limi-tation, those specified in subsection (6) of this section C., against a state party and against the delegation from the state which is subject to the provisions of any of subsections (1) through (3) of this section C., including, without limita-tion, establishing a committee to propose and implement a process which will result in the selection of a delegation from the affected state which shall (i) be broadly representative, (ii) reflect the state’s division of presidential preference and uncommitted status and (iii) involve as broad participation as is practicable under the circumstances. 6. Nothing in these rules shall prevent the DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee from imposing sanctions the Committee deems appropriate with respect to a state which the Com-mittee determines has failed or refused to comply with these rules, where the failure or refusal of the state party is not subject to subsections (1), (2) or (3) of this section C. Possible sanctions include, but are not limited to: reduction of the state’s delegation; pursuant to Rule 21.C., recommending the establishment of a committee to propose and implement a process which will result in the selection of a delegation from the affected state which shall (i) be broadly representative, (ii) reflect the state’s division of presidential preference and uncommitted status and (iii) involve as broad participation as is practicable under the circumstances; reducing, in part or in whole, the number of the state’s temporary and perma-nent members to the Standing Committees; reducing, in part or in whole, the number of guests, VIP and other passes/tick-ets to the National Convention and related functions; assign-ment of location of the state’s delegates and alternates in the Convention hall; and assignment of the state’s housing and other convention related facilities. 7. In the event a state shall become subject to subsections (1), (2) or (3) of section C. of this rule as a result of state law but the DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee, after an inves-tigation, including hearings if necessary, determines the state party and the other relevant Democratic party leaders and elected officials took all provable, positive steps and acted in good faith to achieve legislative changes to bring the state law into compliance with the pertinent provisions of these rules and determines that the state party and the other relevant Democratic party leaders and elected officials took all provable, positive steps and acted in good faith in at-tempting to prevent legislative changes which resulted in state law that fails to comply with the pertinent provisions of these rules, the DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee may determine that all or a portion of the state’s delegation shall not be reduced. The state party shall have the burden of proving by clear and convincing evidence that it and the other relevant Democratic party leaders and elected officials took all provable, positive steps and acted in good faith to achieve legislative changes to bring the state law into com-pliance with the pertinent provisions of these rules and that it and the other relevant Democratic party leaders and elect-ed officials took all provable, positive steps and acted in good 205 Nomination and Election faith in attempting to prevent the legislative changes which resulted in state law that fails to comply with the pertinent provisions of these rules. 8. A state party may provide in its Delegate Selection Plan the specific method and procedures by which it will reduce its delegation pursuant to this Rule 20 in the event the state party or delegation becomes subject to this Rule 20 by which categories of delegates must be reduced by fifty percent (50%), which specific methods and procedures shall be sub-ject to the review and approval of the DNC Rules and By-laws Committee. In the event a state’s Delegate Selection Plan does not provide for the specific method and procedures referred to in the immediately preceding sentence, or in the event the state’s Delegate Selection Plan is either not ap-proved by the DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee or the spe-cific method and procedures referred to in the first sentence of this subsection (8) are not approved by the DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee, or in the event a state’s Delegate Se-lection Plan specifies the method and procedures which have been approved by the DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee, but the state party fails or refuses to implement those spe-cific methods and procedures, and in the event the state’s delegation is required to be reduced pursuant to this Rule 20, then the DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee shall, by lot-tery, or other appropriate method determined by the DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee, determine which delegates and alternates shall not be a part of the state’s delegation in order to achieve the reduction of the state’s delegation pursuant to this Rule 20. Any reduction of delegates under this provision shall be accomplished in a manner which com-plies with the requirement of proportional representation as provided for in Rule 13. 9. Except as provided by subsection (7) of this section C., the fact that a state party took provable, positive steps as pro-vided in Rule 21 of these rules shall not preclude the state’s delegation from being subject to the sanctions set forth in subsections (1), (2), (3), (4) and (5) of this section C. D. Unresolved Challenges and Report to the Credentials Committee. The DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee shall re-port its activities, together with all challenges and com-plaints, to the Credentials Committee of the Democratic Na-tional Convention. In cases involving unresolved challenges which are appealed to the Credentials Committee, the bur-den of proof shall rest with the party presenting the chal-lenge. 

21. State Legislative Changes 

A. Subject to Rule 18.C. of these Rules, wherever any part of any section contained in these rules conflicts with existing state laws, the state party shall take provable positive steps to achieve legislative changes to bring the state law into compliance with the provisions of these rules. B. Provable positive steps shall be taken in a timely fashion and shall include: the drafting of corrective legislation; pub-lic endorsement by the state party of such legislation; efforts to educate the public on the need for such legislation; active support for the legislation by the state party lobbying state 206 Nomination and Election legislators, other public officials, Party officials and Party members; and encouraging consideration of the legislation by the appropriate legislative committees and bodies. C. A state party may be required by a vote of the DNC Exec-utive Committee upon a recommendation of the DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee to adopt and implement an alter-native Party-run delegate selection system which does not conflict with these rules, regardless of any provable positive steps the state may have taken. 207 Nomination and Election 1 See Appendix B for the allocation of delegates and alternates. C ALL For the 2008 Democratic National Convention 

Adopted by the Democratic National Committee February 2, 2007.                                          

> TABLE OF CONTENTS ARTICLES I. Distribution of Delegate Votes ......... 207 II. Qualifications of State Delegates ..... 210 III. Delegate Selection Deadline ............. 211 IV. Certification Requirements ............... 211 V. The 2008 Democratic National Con-vention Committee, Inc. 213 VI. Presidential Candidates .................... 214 VII. Standing Committees on Platform, Rules, and Credentials of the 2008 Democratic National Convention. 215 VIII. Procedural Rules of the 2008 Demo-cratic National Convention. 221 Appendix A. Relationship Between the 2008 Rules of Procedure of the Creden-tials Committee and the 2008 Del-egate Selection Rules. 229 Rules of Procedure of the Creden-tials Committee of the 2008 Democratic National Convention. 230 Appendix B. Delegate/Alternate Allocation ........... 239 Appendix C. Allocation of Convention Pages ........ 242 Appendix D. Allocation of Standing Committee Members. 244

To Whom It May Concern: 

By authority of the Democratic National Committee, the Na-tional Convention of the Democratic Party is hereby sched-uled to convene on August 25, 2008, in Denver, Colorado, at an hour to be announced, to select nominees for the offices of President and Vice President of the United States of America, to adopt and promulgate a platform and to take such other actions with respect to such other matters as the Convention may deem advisable. 

Article I. Distribution of Delegate Votes 

The distribution of votes, delegates and alternates to the 2008 Democratic National Convention shall be in accordance with the following: A. The number of Convention votes for delegates to the Con-vention shall be as set forth in the compilation included in this resolution and determined as provided in paragraphs B, C, D, E, F, G, H 1 , and I. B. A base of 3,000 delegate votes is distributed among the 50 states and the District of Columbia according to a formula giving equal weight to the sum of the vote for the Democratic candidates in the three (3) most recent presidential elections and to population by electoral vote. The formula is expressed mathematically as follows: 208 Nomination and Election 1 SDV 1996 + SDV 2000 + SDV 2004 SEV A = – + ....................................................................................... + ........... ,       

> 2TDV 1996 + TDV 2000 + TDV 2004 538 A = Allocation Factor SDV = State Democratic Vote SEV = State Electoral Vote TDV = Total Democratic Vote

To determine the base delegation for each state and the Dis-trict of Columbia, the allocation factors as determined by the above formula are multiplied by 3,000. Fractions of .5 and above are rounded up to the next highest integer. C. 1. For purposes of this paragraph C, the period of time in which the first determining stage of the presidential nomina-tion process takes place during 2008 shall be divided into Stages as follows: Stage I: The earliest date specified in Rule 11 of the Dele-gate Selection Rules through March 31, 2008, inclusive. Stage II: April 1 through April 30, 2008, inclusive. Stage III: May 1 through June 10, 2008, inclusive. 2. A percentage of the base delegate votes determined pursu-ant to paragraphs B and E shall be added to the number of base pledged delegates otherwise determined pursuant to those paragraphs, for the purpose of increasing the size of the base pledged delegation, as follows: a. for any state in which the meeting, caucus, convention or primary which constitutes the first determining stage in the presidential nomination process in that state for a date in 2008 occurs in a Stage (as defined in (1) above) that is high-er in number than the Stage corresponding to the period in which the corresponding event occurred in 2004, the percent-age referred to in the preceding sentence shall be determined by the Stage corresponding to the period in which the state’s meeting, convention, caucus or primary constituting the first determining stage in the presidential nominating process oc-curs in 2008, as follows: Stage II: 15 percent Stage III: 30 percent b. for any state (other than a state described in subsection C(2)(a)) in which the meeting, caucus, convention or primary which constitutes the first determining stage in the presi-dential nomination process in that state occurs in 2008 on a date in Stage II, the percentage shall be 5 percent; and in which the meeting, caucus, convention or primary which con-stitutes the first determining stage in the presidential nomi-nation process in that state occurs in 2008 on a date in Stage III, the percentage shall be 10 percent. D. Fifteen percent (15%) of the base delegate votes deter-mined pursuant to paragraphs B and E shall be added to the number of votes allocated for the purpose of representing pledged Party and Elected Official delegates. For purposes of this paragraph, the number of base delegate votes deter-mined pursuant to paragraph B shall be the number deter-mined thereunder after rounding. Fractions of .5 and above resulting from the multiplication required by this paragraph are rounded up to the next highest integer. E. American Samoa, Guam and the Virgin Islands will each receive three (3) at-large delegate votes. Democrats Abroad 209 Nomination and Election 2 Former Chairpersons of the Democratic National Committee shall include National Chairs and General Chairs. 3 The Mayor of the District of Columbia, if a Democrat, shall be treated as a Democratic Governor. 4 The District of Columbia’s Statehood Senators, if Democrats, shall be treated as Democratic United States Senators. 5 The District of Columbia shall select its Statehood Representative, if a Democrat, as one of its two (2) unpledged add-on delegates. will receive six (6) at-large and one (1) pledged Party and Elected Official delegate votes. Puerto Rico will receive forty-four (44) base delegate votes. F. Unpledged votes shall be allocated to each delegation to accommodate the members of the Democratic National Com-mittee from that state or territory in which they legally re-side. The size of such a member’s vote (i.e., whole or frac-tional) shall be the same size as that which he or she is al-lowed to cast at meetings of the Democratic National Com-mittee. Additional unpledged delegates shall be allocated for other officers serving in three (3) positions created by the Democratic National Committee in accordance with Article 3, Section 1.e. of the Charter of the Democratic Party of the United States. G. Unpledged votes shall be allocated to provide for the Democratic President, the Democratic Vice President, and all former Democratic Presidents, all former Democratic Vice Presidents, all former Democratic Leaders of the United States Senate, all former Democratic Speakers of the United States House of Representatives and Democratic Minority Leaders, as applicable, and all former Chairpersons of the Democratic National Committee. 2 Such delegates shall be seated with the state delegations from the state in which they have their voting residences. H. Additional unpledged votes shall be added if needed to provide for the Democratic Governor 3 (if any) from that state or territory and for the Democratic Members of the United States House of Representatives and Democratic United States Senators from that state or territory (if any). 4I. In addition to the delegates allocated to the delegations pursuant to paragraphs B, C, D, E, F, G, and H each state, territory or commonwealth shall select a number of unpledged add-on delegates equivalent to one (1) such dele-gate for every four (4) votes on the Democratic National Committee from that state, territory or commonwealth, pur-suant to Rule 9.B. of the Delegate Selection Rules. Fractions of .5 and above are rounded up to the next highest integer. Notwithstanding the above calculation, the District of Co-lumbia shall be allocated two (2) unpledged add-on dele-gates. 5J. Each state, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico may select a number of alternates equivalent to one (1) alternate for every six (6) Convention votes received by it pursuant to paragraphs B, C, D, and E, provided, however, that each such delegation shall have at least four (4) alternates. Amer-ican Samoa, Democrats Abroad, Guam and the Virgin Is-lands shall each have one (1) alternate. Fractions of .5 and above are rounded up to the next highest integer. It is fur-ther provided that each state shall have the number of addi-210 Nomination and Election tional at-large alternates necessary to provide at least one alternate for each presidential candidate who is entitled to delegates from that state, if the DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee determines that the number of alternates allo-cated to the state is not sufficient for each presidential can-didate to have at least one alternate. K. Members of the Democratic National Committee and dele-gates selected pursuant to paragraphs G, H and I will be in-eligible to serve as delegates under any other category and may hold no more than one (1) vote. Democratic Governors, Democratic Members of the United States House of Rep-resentatives and Democratic United States Senators who are members of the Democratic National Committee shall serve as delegates by virtue of their membership on the National Committee. 

Article II. Qualifications of State Delegates 

A. Notice is hereby given that delegates, alternates and standing committee members to the Democratic National Convention shall be elected in accordance with the Charter and Bylaws of the Democratic Party of the United States, the Delegate Selection Rules for the 2008 Democratic Na-tional Convention, the Call for the 2008 Democratic National Convention, and the Regulations of the DNC Rules and By-laws Committee. The DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee shall have the final authority to regulate the delegate selec-tion process, subject to the authority of the Convention Cre-dentials Committee and the Democratic National Conven-tion. It shall be the duty of the DNC Rules and Bylaws Com-mittee to administer the delegate selection process and en-sure compliance with the rules, including equal division, and report to the Secretary of the Democratic National Com-mittee those states which are in non-compliance. Only dele-gates and alternates selected under a delegate selection pro-cedure approved by the DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee and in accordance with the rules shall be placed on the Tem-porary Roll of the 2008 Democratic National Convention. Only standing committee members and convention pages chosen pursuant to a state delegate selection plan found in compliance with the rules by the DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee shall be qualified to serve in their respective ca-pacities. B. It is understood that a State Democratic Party, in electing and certifying delegates and alternates to the Democratic National Convention, thereby undertakes to assure all Democratic voters in the state full, timely and equal oppor-tunity to participate in the delegate selection process and in all Party affairs and to implement affirmative action pro-grams toward that end, and that the delegates and alter-nates to the Convention shall be selected in accordance with the Delegate Selection Rules for the 2008 Democratic Na-tional Convention adopted by the Democratic National Com-mittee on August 19, 2006. Furthermore, voters in the state will have the opportunity to cast their election ballots for the Presidential and Vice Presidential nominees selected by said Convention, and for electors pledged formally and in good conscience to the election of these Presidential and Vice 211 Nomination and Election Presidential nominees, under the label and designation of the Democratic Party of the United States, and that the dele-gates it certified will not publicly support or campaign for any candidate for President or Vice President other than the nominees of the Democratic National Convention. C. It is presumed that the delegates to the Democratic Na-tional Convention, when certified pursuant to the Call, are bona fide Democrats who are faithful to the interests, wel-fare and success of the Democratic Party of the United States, who subscribe to the substance, intent and principles of the Charter and the Bylaws of the Democratic Party of the United States, and who will participate in the Convention in good faith. Therefore, no additional assurances shall be re-quired of delegates to the Democratic National Convention in the absence of a credentials contest or challenge. 

Article III. Delegate Selection Deadline 

All state parties are required to take all steps necessary and appropriate to complete the process of selecting delegates to the 2008 Democratic National Convention no later than June 21, 2008. 

Article IV. Certification Requirements 

A. Pledged Delegates and Alternates: Each state’s Demo-cratic Chair shall certify in writing to the Secretary of the Democratic National Committee the election of his or her state’s delegates and alternates to the Democratic National Convention within three (3) days after their election. For the purposes of this Call, the Chair of a committee constituted pursuant to Rule 20.C. of the Delegate Selection Rules, shall be recognized to act in place of the state’s Democratic Chair. B. Unpledged Delegates: 1. Pursuant to Rule 9.A. of the Delegate Selection Rules, offi-cial confirmation by the Secretary of the Democratic Na-tional Committee to each State Democratic Chair shall con-stitute verification of the following unpledged delegates: members of the Democratic National Committee; the Demo-cratic President, Vice President and Democratic Governor, if applicable; all Democratic members of the United States House of Representatives and all Democratic members of the United States Senate; and all former Democratic Presidents, Vice Presidents, Democratic Leaders of the United States Senate, Speakers and Democratic Minority Leaders of the United States House of Representatives, and Chairs of the Democratic National Committee. 2. Each state’s Democratic Chair shall certify in writing to the Secretary of the Democratic National Committee the se-lection of the state’s unpledged add-on delegates to the Democratic National Convention selected pursuant to Article I.H. within three (3) days after their selection. C. Replacements: 1. Pledged Delegates and Alternates: Replacement of a dele-gate (due to resignation or death) by an alternate and re-placement of a vacant alternate position shall be certified in writing by the State’s Democratic Chair to the Secretary of the Democratic National Committee (pursuant to Rule 18 of the Delegate Selection Rules) within three (3) days after the 212 Nomination and Election 6 See Appendix C for the allocation of Convention Pages. replacement is selected. Certification of replacements will be accepted by the Secretary up to 48 hours before the first offi-cial session of the Convention is scheduled to convene. 2. Unpledged Delegates: a. Members of Congress and Democratic Governors shall not be entitled to name a replacement. In the event of any changes or vacancies in a state’s Democratic congressional delegation following the official confirmation and prior to the commencement of the National Convention, the Secretary shall recognize only such changes as have been officially rec-ognized by the Democratic Caucus of the United States House of Representatives or the Democratic Conference of the United States Senate. In the event of a change or va-cancy in a state’s office of Governor following the official con-firmation and prior to the commencement of the National Convention, the Secretary shall recognize only such changes as have been officially recognized by the Democratic Gov-ernors’ Association. b. Members of the Democratic National Committee and unpledged add-on delegates selected pursuant to Article I.H. shall not be entitled to a replacement, nor shall the state be entitled to a replacement, except in the case of death of such delegates. In cases where a state’s DNC membership changes following the Secretary’s official confirmation, but prior to the commencement of the 2008 Democratic National Convention, acknowledgment by the Secretary of the certifi-cation of the new DNC member shall constitute verification of the corresponding change of unpledged delegates. c. Delegates allocated pursuant to Articles I.F. and I.H. of this Call shall not be entitled to name a replacement, nor shall the state be entitled to a replacement. D. Delegation Chair: Each delegation shall select one (1) per-son to serve as Delegation Chair. The State Chair shall cer-tify the Delegation Chair. Such certification shall be in writ-ing to the Secretary of the Democratic National Committee within three (3) days after the position is filled, which shall be no later than the date by which the state certifies its standing committee members. E. Convention Pages: 1. A base of 150 Convention Pages shall be allocated among the 56 delegations as follows: 6a. Each of the 50 States, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico shall have a minimum of two (2) pages. b. One (1) additional page will be allocated to a state for every fifty (50) additional delegate votes. Fractions of .5 and above are rounded up to the next highest integer. c. American Samoa, Democrats Abroad, Guam and the Vir-gin Islands shall each be allocated one (1) page. 2. The National Chairperson of the Democratic National Committee may select not more than twenty-five (25) pages to assist him/her and the Democratic National Convention Committee in carrying out the work of the Convention. 3. The State Chair shall certify the person(s) to serve as the Delegation’s Convention Page(s), as allocated to the delega-tion by this section. Such certification shall be in writing to 213 Nomination and Election the Secretary of the Democratic National Committee and shall be made no later than the time the state certifies its standing committee members pursuant to Article VIII.B.3. of this Call. The National Chairperson of the Democratic Na-tional Committee shall certify the person(s) to serve as the Chair’s Convention Page(s), as allocated to the National Chairperson by this section. Such certification shall be in writing to the Secretary of the Democratic National Com-mittee and shall be made within three (3) days after these positions are filled, but in any event, no later than June 21, 2008. F. Certification Requirements: Each certification required herein will include full name, address and other information as required by the Secretary of the Democratic National Committee. 

Article V. The 2008 Democratic National Convention Committee, Inc. 

A. The Democratic National Committee, acting under its au-thority to plan, arrange, manage and conduct the Democratic National Convention, hereby ratifies the establishment and organization of the 2008 Democratic National Convention Committee, Inc. (the ‘‘DNCC’’) for the 2008 Democratic Na-tional Convention. B. The DNCC shall exercise the authority of the Democratic National Committee and the Democratic National Conven-tion in entering into contracts relating to all business and fi-nancial matters connected with the conduct of the 2008 Democratic National Convention. C. The DNCC shall make every effort to exercise its author-ity in accordance with the following guidelines, subject to Rule 20.C. of the Delegate Selection Rules: 1. Contractors: The DNCC shall as a policy seek to engage the services of unionized firms, including those owned by mi-norities, women and people with disabilities. 2. Housing: The DNCC shall design and implement a fair and equitable system by which hotel facilities shall be allo-cated to eligible state delegations and to presidential can-didates. 3. Delegate and Alternate Seating in Convention Hall: The DNCC shall design and implement a fair and equitable sys-tem by which the location of each eligible state delegation’s seating in the Convention Hall shall be determined. Alter-nates shall be afforded preferential seating, as close to dele-gate seating as arrangements will permit. Members of Demo-cratic National Convention Standing Committees who are not already delegates or alternates shall be afforded guest seating for each session of the Convention proceedings. 4. Delegates’ and Alternates’ Credentials: The state’s dele-gate and alternate credentials shall be distributed to the Chair of the state delegation from the DNCC’s credentials of-fice. 5. Floor Access: Floor access shall be given to delegates, al-ternates replacing delegates, the highest ranking Democratic official in each state that does not have a Democratic Gov-ernor, each State Democratic Party’s Executive Director, such number of representatives of the presidential can-214 Nomination and Election didates as may be deemed necessary by the DNCC, and such press personnel and other personnel as may be determined by the DNCC to be necessary for the proper functioning of the Convention and which does not compromise security and safety requirements. 6. Visitor’s Seating: Seats for members-elect of the Demo-cratic National Committee as certified by the state’s Demo-cratic Chair, guests and other observers shall be allocated for and shall be fairly apportioned to the states according to each state’s relative delegate strength. The Delegation Chair and the State Democratic Chair shall each be given one half of the credentials for guest seats apportioned to the state pursuant to this paragraph. Presidential preference shall be taken into account in the distribution of guest credentials. 7. Communications: a. Microphones: Each state shall be provided one (1) floor microphone which shall be located at the position of the Chair of the state delegation. Each delegate shall have ac-cess to the microphone. b. Telephones: Adequate provisions shall be made for com-munication between the floor and the Chair of the Conven-tion so as to advise the Chair of the identity of any delegate seeking recognition to speak and the purpose for which rec-ognition is sought. One (1) such telephone shall be installed for each state delegation. c. General: No communication equipment other than that au-thorized by these guidelines or by the DNCC shall be per-mitted on the floor of the Convention. 8. Facilities for Presidential Candidates: The National Chair-person of the Democratic National Committee, in consulta-tion with the Chief Executive Officer of the DNCC and rep-resentatives of the presidential candidates, shall design and implement a fair and equitable system whereby facilities in the Convention Hall and its immediate environs shall be fairly apportioned to presidential campaigns so as not to af-ford an undue advantage to any presidential candidate. The cost of such facilities shall be paid by the presidential cam-paigns. 9. Facilities for News Media and Press Seating: There shall be made available adequate facilities, as close to the Conven-tion floor as conditions permit, for the pencil press, radio, internet, and television, including a limited number of cam-era positions commanding a full view of the proceedings. The cost of such facilities shall not be borne by the DNCC. 10. Security: Coordination for security within the Convention Hall, premises and surrounding area shall be under the au-thority of the DNCC. 11. Financial Reports: The DNCC shall file with the Federal Election Commission (‘‘FEC’’) all financial reports required by the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971, as amended, and applicable FEC regulations. 

Article VI. Presidential Candidates 

The term ‘‘presidential candidate’’ herein shall mean any person who, as determined by the National Chairperson of the Democratic National Committee, has accrued delegates in the nominating process and plans to seek the nomination, 215 Nomination and Election 7 See Appendix D for the allocation of standing committee members. has established substantial support for his or her nomination as the Democratic candidate for the Office of the President of the United States, is a bona fide Democrat whose record of public service, accomplishment, public writings and/or public statements affirmatively demonstrates that he or she is faithful to the interests, welfare and success of the Demo-cratic Party of the United States, and will participate in the Convention in good faith. 

Article VII. Standing Committees on Platform, Rules, and Credentials of the 2008 Democratic National Convention 

The Democratic National Committee, acting under its au-thority to issue the Call and establish the standing commit-tees of the National Convention, hereby creates and orga-nizes the Standing Committees on Platform, Rules, and Cre-dentials of the 2008 Democratic National Convention. The jurisdiction and rules of procedure of each standing com-mittee are set forth in this Call to the 2008 Democratic Na-tional Convention. Each standing committee may, by a ma-jority of the members voting, adopt additional rules of proce-dure for the conduct of its business not inconsistent with this Call. The Democratic National Committee shall publish and make available all relevant requirements and deadlines for submitting proposals for consideration by the standing com-mittees. Such information shall be distributed to the stand-ing committee members and made available to the public as early as practicable before the committees meet. A. Membership: Subject to Rule 20.C. of the Delegate Selec-tion Rules, each standing committee shall be composed of: 1. Base: A base of 161 members, casting 158 votes, allocated to the states and territories in accordance with the same dis-tribution formula used to allocate delegates to the Demo-cratic National Convention. 72. PLEOs: 25 members, each casting one (1) vote who shall be Party Leaders and Elected Officials. 3. Delegate Status: Members of the standing committees need not be delegates or alternates to the Democratic Na-tional Convention. 4. Quorum: A majority of the total votes allocated to a stand-ing committee shall constitute a quorum thereof for the pur-pose of transacting business. Such votes shall be present and represented by the standing committee members. Upon apoint of order of no quorum, the Chair shall ascertain the presence or absence of a quorum by visual estimation and shall not proceed until a quorum is present, provided, how-ever, that a roll call shall be had to determine whether a quorum exists if the Chair is in doubt or upon demand of any member of the standing committee supported by: a. twenty percent (20%) of the members of the committee as evidenced by a petition submitted to the Chair indicating support of the demand by not less than twenty percent (20%) of the members present, or b. by the rising in support of the demand by not less than twenty percent (20%) of the members present, except that a 216 Nomination and Election motion to adjourn or to recess may be offered and voted upon without a quorum present. 5. Proxies: As the standing committees are deliberative bod-ies of the National Convention, proxy voting by standing committee members shall not be permitted. 6. Subcommittees: Any subcommittee of the standing com-mittees of the National Convention shall be composed only of members of standing committees, except that these sub-committees may be chaired by persons other than members of the committee. B. Election: 1. The members of the standing committees allocated to the states and territories shall be elected by each state’s Na-tional Convention delegates present at a meeting of which adequate notice of time and place shall be given and at which a quorum of the states’s delegates shall be present. Such meeting shall be held in accordance with procedures approved by the DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee and con-sistent with this Call. Such meeting shall take place within 14 days after the final selection of a state’s delegation, but no such meeting shall be held after June 21, 2008. 2. The members of the standing committees allocated as Party Leaders and Elected Officials shall be elected by the Executive Committee of the Democratic National Committee during the calendar year of the National Convention upon nomination received from the National Chairperson of the Democratic National Committee, after consultation with the State Chairs from those states from which members are con-templated to be nominated. Said members must be elected at a meeting of the Executive Committee or by mail ballot no later than 30 days prior to the date of the standing com-mittee meeting. 3. Each state’s Democratic Chair shall certify in writing to the Secretary of the Democratic National Committee his or her state’s standing committee members within three (3) days after their selection. The National Chairperson of the Democratic National Committee shall certify in writing to the Secretary of the Democratic National Committee the Party Leader and Elected Official standing committee mem-bers within three (3) days after their election. Certification of each person will include full name, address and other in-formation as required by the Secretary of the Democratic Na-tional Committee. 4. No substitutions will be permitted in the case of standing committee members, except in the case of resignation or death. Substitutions must be made in accordance with the election procedures specified in Article VII.B., C., D. and E., and must be certified in writing to the Secretary of the Democratic National Committee, in accordance with proce-dures specified in Article VII.B.3. Substitutions of standing committee members are encouraged to be made up to forty-eight (48) hours prior to the time the standing committee meets, except in the case of death. 5. Any challenge to the credentials of a standing committee member shall be considered and resolved by the affected standing committee in accordance with Appendix A of this Call. The DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee shall have ju-217 Nomination and Election risdiction over challenges brought before the 56th day pre-ceding the date of commencement of the Democratic National Convention. C. Presidential Preference: 1. The members of the standing committees allocated to the states and territories shall proportionately represent the presidential preference of all candidates (including uncom-mitted status) receiving the threshold percentage used in that state’s delegation to calculate the at-large apportion-ment pursuant to Rule 13.E. of the Delegate Selection Rules, provided, however, that members of the standing committees from primary states shall be allocated to presidential can-didates (including uncommitted status) based on the state-wide popular vote. 2. The presidential preference percentage of each candidate receiving the applicable percentage or more within the dele-gation shall be multiplied by the total number of standing committee positions allocated to that state or territorial dele-gation. If the result of such multiplication does not equal 0.455 or above, the presidential preference in question is not entitled to representation on the standing committee. If the result of such multiplication is 0.455 but less than 1.455, the presidential preference in question is entitled to one (1) posi-tion. Those preferences securing more than 1.455 but less than 2.455 are entitled to two (2) positions, etc. 3. Where the application of this formula results in the total allocation exceeding the total number of committee positions, the presidential candidate whose original figure of represen-tation is farthest from its eventual rounded-off total shall be denied that one (1) additional position. Where the applica-tion of this formula results in the total allocation falling short of the total number of committee positions, the presi-dential candidate whose original figure of representation is closest to the next rounding level shall be allotted an addi-tional committee position. 4. Standing committee positions allocated to a presidential candidate shall be proportionately allocated, to the extent practicable, to each of the three standing committees. When such allocation results in an unequal distribution of standing committee positions by candidate preference, a drawing shall be conducted to distribute the additional positions. D. Presidential Candidate Right of Approval: 1. Each presidential candidate or that candidate’s represent-ative authorized pursuant to Rule 12.D.1. of the 2008 Dele-gate Selection Rules shall be given adequate notice of the meeting of the state’s delegation authorized to select stand-ing committee members. 2. The delegation shall select the standing committee mem-bers submitted by the presidential candidates (including un-committed status), and presidential candidates shall not be required to submit the name of more than one person for each slot awarded to such candidate for members of standing committees. Provided further, that presidential candidates (including uncommitted status) shall use their best efforts to ensure that the name or names of standing committee mem-bers submitted help achieve the affirmative action goals es-tablished by the state’s Delegate Selection Plan. 218 Nomination and Election E. Division Between Men and Women: 1. The membership of each of the standing committees from a state or territory shall be as equally divided among men and women as possible under the state allocation; if the number is even, the membership shall be equally divided be-tween men and women; if the number is odd, the variance between men and women may not exceed one (1), and the advantaged gender must not remain constant for the three standing committees. The DNC Rules and Bylaws Com-mittee shall have continuing jurisdiction to ensure compli-ance with this equal division requirement. No standing com-mittee members from a state shall be officially recognized unless the Rules and Bylaws Committee has certified to the Secretary of the Democratic National Committee that such state’s standing committee delegation complies with this equal division rule. It is the duty of the DNC Rules and By-laws Committee to determine such compliance as soon as practicable following the certification of the state’s standing committee members. 2. The Party Leader and Elected Official membership of the standing committees elected by the Executive Committee of the Democratic National Committee shall be divided among men and women so that the variance between men and women does not exceed one (1), and the advantaged gender must not remain constant for the three standing committees. F. Chairs of Standing Committees: 1. The Chair of each Standing Committee shall be elected by the Executive Committee of the Democratic National Com-mittee upon nomination of the National Chairperson of the Democratic National Committee. Co-Chairs and Vice Chairs may also be elected in this manner. 2. Individuals who are not otherwise members of the stand-ing committees who are elected Chair, Co-Chair or Vice Chair thereof shall not have any voting privileges on the standing committees, except that the Chair may vote in the case of a tie. 3. The Chair of each standing committee shall call and pre-side over each committee meeting, prepare an agenda to pro-vide for orderly conduct of the committee’s business, and su-pervise preparation of such research studies and briefing ma-terials as are required to accomplish the committee’s work. G. Temporary Standing Committee Members: 1. In the event that a standing committee meeting is held prior to the election of a state’s standing committee mem-bers, a state may select temporary members for those stand-ing committee member positions. 2. The selection must take place at an open well publicized meeting of the State Party’s governing body. The procedures for selection must be approved by the DNC Rules and By-laws Committee. 3. Members selected as temporary standing committee mem-bers under this provision serve only in the event that astanding committee is called to meet prior to completion of the state’s delegate selection process. No such member may continue to serve after the permanent standing committee members are selected unless he or she is elected as a perma-219 Nomination and Election nent member pursuant to the provisions in Section B of this Article. 4. Substitutions in a state’s list of temporary standing com-mittee members may only be made up to 10 days prior to the time the standing committee meets. H. Platform Committee: 1. The Platform Committee shall be responsible for drafting and recommending the Platform of the Democratic Party to the Democratic National Convention. 2. The Chair of the Platform Committee, in consultation with the National Chairperson of the Democratic National Com-mittee, shall determine the number, place and time for con-ducting hearing(s) and/or forum(s) and name the presiding panel, who need not be members of the Platform Committee, for each hearing and/or forum. Any person may submit a written statement concerning the Platform to the Platform Committee at any time prior to the Platform Committee meeting, and may request permission to testify at a public hearing and/or forum. 3. No later than thirty (30) days before the first meeting of the Platform Committee, written notice of the date, time, place, and the tentative agenda of such meeting shall be sent to all members of the Platform Committee. A special or emergency meeting of the Platform Committee may be held upon call of the Chair of the Platform Committee with rea-sonable notice to the members. 4. Prior to the first meeting of the Platform Committee, the National Chairperson of the Democratic National Committee shall distribute to the members of the Platform Committee a document outlining the issues to be considered by the com-mittee. 5. The National Chairperson of the Democratic National Committee, in consultation with the Chair of the Platform Committee, shall appoint fifteen (15) persons to serve on a Platform Drafting Subcommittee and the National Chair-person of the Democratic National Committee shall appoint the Chair thereof. In addition, one (1) non-voting member may be appointed by each presidential candidate to serve on the Drafting Subcommittee. The Platform Drafting Sub-committee is considered a subcommittee of the Platform Committee as defined in Article I.A.6 provided, however, that members of the Platform Drafting Subcommittee need not be members of the Platform Committee. The Drafting Subcommittee shall be responsible for the drafting of the re-port of the Platform Committee under the direction and with the approval of the full Platform Committee. 6. Upon the request of members representing twenty percent (20%) of the total votes of the Platform Committee, a minor-ity report shall be prepared for distribution to the Conven-tion delegates and alternates as part of the committee’s re-port. The committee staff shall assist in the preparation of such report. 7. The report of the Platform Committee and any minority reports shall be distributed to all delegates and alternates, and to the public as soon as practicable after their adoption. I. Rules Committee: 220 Nomination and Election 1. The Rules Committee shall issue a report to the Demo-cratic National Convention recommending the Permanent Rules of the Convention, the Convention agenda, the perma-nent officers of the Democratic National Convention, amend-ments to the Charter of the Democratic Party of the United States, and resolutions providing for the consideration of any other matter not provided for in the Permanent Rules of the Convention and not contained in the reports of other stand-ing committees. The foregoing notwithstanding, no amend-ment to the Charter of the Democratic Party shall be effec-tive unless and until it is subsequently ratified by a vote of the majority of the entire membership of the Democratic Na-tional Committee. 2. No later than thirty (30) days before the first meeting of the Rules Committee, written notice of the date, time, place, and the tentative agenda of such meeting shall be sent to all members of the Rules Committee. A special or emergency meeting of the Rules Committee may be held upon call of the Chair of the Rules Committee with reasonable notice to the members. 3. Upon the request of members representing twenty percent (20%) of the total votes of the Rules Committee, a minority report shall be prepared for distribution to the Convention delegates and alternates as part of the committee’s report. The committee staff shall assist in the preparation of such report. 4. The report of the Rules Committee and any minority re-ports shall be distributed to all delegates, alternates, and to the public as soon as practicable after their adoption. J. Credentials Committee and Procedures for Challenging Delegates or State Delegations: 1. The Credentials Committee shall determine and resolve questions concerning the seating of delegates and alternates to the Convention pursuant to the resolution entitled the ‘‘Relationship Between the 2008 Rules of Procedure of the Credentials Committee and the 2008 Delegate Selection Rules,’’ which includes the ‘‘Rules of Procedure of the Cre-dentials Committee of the 2008 Democratic National Con-vention’’ hereby approved and adopted by the Democratic National Committee, and set forth in full in the Appendix to this Call. The committee shall report to the Convention for final determination and resolution of all such questions. This committee does not have authority over the allocation and distribution of convention credentials, including passes for delegates, alternates, guests or press. 2. Challenges to the seating of any delegate or alternate shall be in accordance with the Rules of Procedure of the Credentials Committee. Any challenge to the seating of a delegate or alternate that is not made in conformity with these rules shall be deemed waived. 3. Upon the request of members representing twenty percent (20%) of the total votes of the Credentials Committee, a mi-nority report shall be prepared for distribution to the Con-vention delegates and alternates as part of the committee’s report; provided, however, that no member elected to the committee by a state delegation may join in such request as to a proposed minority report relating to a credentials chal-221 Nomination and Election lenge to any delegate or alternate from his or her state. The committee staff shall assist in the preparation of such report. 4. The report of the Credentials Committee and any minority reports shall be distributed to all delegates, alternates, and the public as soon as practicable after their adoption. 

Article VIII. Procedural Rules of the 2008 Democratic National Convention 

The following Procedural Rules shall serve as the Temporary Rules of Procedure for the 2008 Democratic National Con-vention and are recommended to the Rules Committee and to the Convention as the Permanent Rules of Procedure for the conduct of the 2008 Democratic National Convention. A. Temporary Chair: 1. The National Chairperson of the Democratic National Committee shall call the Convention to order and shall pre-side until the Permanent Chair of the Convention shall be chosen in accordance with these rules. 2. The National Chairperson of the Democratic National Committee shall appoint a Temporary Secretary and such other temporary officers as may be required to assist in the conduct of the business of the Convention. These officers shall be composed equally of men and women. B. Temporary Roll: 1. The Secretary of the Democratic National Committee shall determine a Temporary Roll of delegates to the Convention which shall consist only of those persons selected and cer-tified as delegates in accordance with the Rules and pursu-ant to this Call, unless a credentials contest shall have aris-en with respect to any such person(s), in which case the Sec-retary shall include on the Temporary Roll the name of the credentials contestant recommended for inclusion by the Cre-dentials Committee in its report. 2. Persons whose names are included on the Temporary Roll of delegates shall be permitted to vote on all matters before the Convention until after the adoption of the report of the Credentials Committee; provided that no person shall be per-mitted to vote on his or her credentials contest. C. Order of Business: The order of business for the Demo-cratic National Convention shall be as provided in these rules and in any special order of business adopted under Sec-tion D. of these rules. The Chair of the Convention may, at appropriate times, interrupt the order of business provided for in these rules for introductions, announcements, address-es, presentations, resolutions of tribute and appreciation, or remarks appropriate to the business of the Convention. 1. Report of the Committee on Credentials: The Report of the Credentials Committee shall be acted upon before the consid-eration of other business. a. The Temporary Chair shall recognize the Chair of the Cre-dentials Committee for up to thirty (30) minutes to present the committee’s report unless a longer period of time shall be provided in a special order of business agreed upon by the Convention. The Chair of the committee may present com-mittee amendments, yield part of his or her time to others and may yield for the presentation and disposition of minor-ity reports without losing the right to the floor. 222 Nomination and Election b. The Temporary Chair shall arrange for the orderly presen-tation of amendments and of minority reports offered at the direction of the committee. Twenty (20) minutes shall be al-lowed for the presentation of each committee amendment or minority report unless a longer period for any committee amendment or minority report is provided in special orders of business agreed to by the Convention. Time shall be allot-ted equally to proponents and opponents of each committee amendment or minority report. The questions shall be put on each committee amendment or minority report immediately following its presentation without intervening motion. c. Upon conclusion of the consideration and disposition of committee amendments and minority reports, the Temporary Chair shall put the question on the adoption of the report of the Credentials Committee with amendments previously adopted, if any, without intervening motion. A favorable ma-jority vote of the Convention delegates eligible to vote shall constitute adoption of the report. d. In the event that the committee’s report shall not be adopted when the question is put, the committee shall imme-diately reconvene to reconsider its report and shall present a new report to the Convention as soon as possible. 2. Report of Rules Committee: The Temporary Chair may then recognize the Chair of the Rules Committee to present the committee’s report for the Rules of the Convention and minority reports, if any, in the same manner as that pro-vided for the presentation of the Report of the Credentials Committee. However, the Temporary Chair may, in the in-terest of conducting an orderly proceeding, opt to place be-fore the Convention the election of the Permanent Chair, the Co-Chairs and the Secretary, prior to the presentation of the Rules Committee report. 3. Convention Chair: The Convention shall proceed to elect the Permanent Convention Chair in the following manner: a. In accordance with the requirements of the 1984 Demo-cratic National Convention Resolution which calls for alter-nating the Convention Chair by gender, the Permanent Chair of the 2008 Democratic National Convention shall be a female. b. The Chair of the Rules Committee shall be recognized to offer a nomination for Convention Chair as recommended by the Committee on Rules. Nominations from the floor shall then be received. c. When there are no further nominations or upon adoption of a motion to close nominations, the Temporary Chair of the Convention shall conduct a vote for Permanent Convention Chair. d. A majority vote of the delegates present and voting shall be required to elect the Convention Chair. Balloting shall continue until a Chair is elected. The Permanent Chair shall then take the gavel. 4. Convention Co-Chairs: The Convention shall proceed to elect Co-Chairs and a Secretary in the same manner in which it elected the Chair. The Co-Chairs shall be divided equally between men and women. 5. Committee on Platform: The Permanent Chair shall recog-nize the Chair of the Platform Committee to present the 223 Nomination and Election committee’s report and minority reports, if any, in the same manner as that provided for the presentations of the reports of the Credentials and Rules Committees. 6. Nomination of the Democratic Candidate for President: The Permanent Chair shall receive nominations from the floor for the Democratic candidate for the Office of President of the United States in the following manner: a. Requests to nominate a presidential candidate shall be in writing and shall have affixed thereto the written approval of the proposed nominee and the name of the individuals who shall be recognized to make the nominating and sec-onding speeches on behalf of a presidential candidate and shall be delivered to the Convention Secretary at a location as specified by the Secretary no later than 6:00 p.m. of the day preceding the day designated for the commencement of presidential nominations. b. Each such request must be accompanied by a petition in-dicating support for the proposed nominee signed by dele-gates representing not less than 300 or more than 600 dele-gate votes, not more than 50 of which may come from one (1) delegation. A delegate may not sign more than one (1) nominating petition for president and for vice president. c. The order for nominating presidential candidates shall be determined by the National Chairperson of the Democratic National Committee, the Permanent Chair of the Convention and each presidential candidate, or his or her authorized representative, who qualifies to be nominated pursuant to this section. d. Each presidential candidate shall be allowed a total of twenty (20) minutes for the presentation of his or her name in nomination by nominating and seconding speeches, the time to run without interruption from the recognition of the nominator. e. Delegates and alternates shall maintain order during and following nominations for the Office of President and dem-onstrations shall not be permitted. 7. Roll Call for Presidential Candidate: a. After nominations for presidential candidates have closed, the Convention shall proceed to a roll call vote by states on the selection of the presidential candidate. The roll call vot-ing shall follow the alphabetical order of the states with the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico and the territories treated as states for the purpose of the alphabetical roll call. b. A majority vote of the Convention’s delegates shall be re-quired to nominate the presidential candidate. c. Delegates may vote for the candidate of their choice whether or not the name of such candidate was placed in nomination. Any vote cast other than a vote for a presi-dential candidate meeting the requirements of Article VI of this Call and Rule 12.K. of the 2008 Delegate Selection Rules shall be considered a vote for ‘‘Present.’’ d. Balloting will continue until a nominee is selected. The nominee shall become the candidate of the Democratic Party of the United States for the Office of President upon the con-clusion of his or her acceptance speech. 8. Acceptance Speech by Presidential Candidate: Imme-diately after the selection of the Democratic nominee for 224 Nomination and Election President, the Permanent Chair shall invite the nominee to deliver an acceptance speech to the Convention. 9. Nomination for the Democratic Candidate for Vice Presi-dent: The selection of a nominee for the Office of Vice Presi-dent of the United States shall be conducted in the same manner as that heretofore provided for the selection of the nominee for President of the United States except that a re-quest to nominate must be delivered to the Convention Sec-retary at a location as specified by the Secretary not later than 9:00 a.m. of the day designated for the commencement of Vice Presidential nominations. 10. Roll Call Ballot for Vice Presidential Candidate: a. After nominations for Vice Presidential candidates have closed, the Convention shall proceed to a roll call vote by states on the selection of the Vice Presidential candidate. The roll call voting procedure shall be conducted in the same manner as that heretofore provided for the selection of the nominee for President of the United States. b. A majority vote of the Convention’s delegates shall be re-quired to select the Vice Presidential candidate. Delegates may vote for the candidate of their choice whether or not the name of such candidate was placed in nomination. Balloting will continue until after a nominee is selected. 11. Acceptance Speech by Vice Presidential Candidate: Im-mediately after the selection of the Democratic nominee for Vice President, the Permanent Chair shall invite the nomi-nee to deliver an acceptance speech to the Convention. The nominee shall become the candidate of the Democratic Party of the United States for the office of Vice President upon completion of his or her acceptance speech to the Convention. D. Special Orders of Business: It shall be in order at any time for the Rules Committee at the request of the Chair of the Convention, or pursuant to its rules, to report a resolu-tion providing a special order of business for debate of any resolution, motion, committee report or minority report or for the consideration of any matter. E. Powers and Duties of the Chair: 1. It shall be the responsibility of the Chair to conduct and expedite the business of the Convention and to preserve order and decorum in its proceedings. 2. The Chair is authorized to appoint such Convention offi-cers as may be required to assist in the conduct of the busi-ness of the Convention, such officers to be composed equally of men and women; to appoint any delegate temporarily to perform the duties of the Chair; and to take such lawful ac-tion as may be necessary and appropriate to preserve order throughout the Convention Hall; and to take any other ac-tions consistent with the Charter and the Bylaws of the Democratic Party of the United States and this Call. F. Voting: 1. Secret Ballot: No secret ballots shall be permitted at any stage of the Convention or its committee proceedings. 2. Proxy Voting: Neither delegate nor alternate delegate votes may be cast by proxy. 3. Roll Call Votes: a. Voting shall be by voice vote or, when prescribed by these rules, by roll call vote. The roll call voting shall follow the 225 Nomination and Election order as specified in Article VIII.C.7.a. A roll call vote shall also be had if the Chair is in doubt or upon demand of any delegate supported by twenty percent (20%) of the Conven-tion’s delegates as evidenced by one of the following methods: (1) A petition submitted to the Chair indicating support of the demand by delegations which comprise not less than twenty percent (20%) of the Convention’s delegates. In the case of the petition in support of a demand for a roll call vote, a delegation shall be taken to support the demand if a majority of its delegates have signed a petition to do so. (2) By the rising in support of the demand by not less than twenty percent (20%) of the delegates present. b. When a roll call vote is ordered, the roll call shall be called by states, and the Chair of each delegation or his or her designee shall report the vote of his or her delegation and shall send to the Convention Secretary a tally showing the vote of each member of his or her delegation indicating whether such vote was cast in person or by an alternate. Such roll call votes may be conducted by having the Chair for each delegation report by telephone, or electronic voting mechanism, the vote of his or her delegation to the rostrum, provided that the telephone poll shall not be used in the bal-loting for the Presidential and Vice Presidential nominees. Business shall be permitted to proceed during the telephone roll call and votes may be conducted by electronic mecha-nism. After each official vote, the Delegation Chair shall record and tally votes of the delegation on official roll call tally sheets provided by the Convention Secretary. All official roll call tally sheets shall be turned in to the Convention Secretary at a specified location not more than thirty (30) minutes after the close of each voting period. c. All delegates to the National Convention pledged to a pres-idential candidate shall in all good conscience reflect the sen-timents of those who elected them. d. In the case where a pledged delegate is not on the floor of the Convention Hall at the time a vote is taken, an alter-nate may be designated according to the rules to cast the vote. In no case may an alternate cast a vote for a delegate allocated under I.F., I.G., I.H. or I.I. of this Call. e. On a roll call vote by states, the vote cast on behalf of a delegation may be challenged by communication to the Con-vention Secretary by telephone or other means by any voting member of that state’s delegation within ten (10) minutes after the Convention Secretary’s announcement of the state’s vote. The votes of that delegation shall then be recorded as polled without regard to any state law, party rule, resolution or instruction binding the delegation or any member thereof to vote for or against any candidate or proposition. The Con-vention Chair may send a parliamentarian to the delegation to conduct the poll. At the discretion of the Convention Chair, the roll call may continue instead of waiting for the result of the polling. f. On a roll call vote conducted by telephone or other elec-tronic voting mechanism, the vote of a delegation as shown on the video projection system may be challenged by commu-nication to the Convention Secretary by telephone or other means by any voting member of the delegation within ten 226 Nomination and Election (10) minutes after the delegation’s vote is shown on the screen. g. A demand to poll a delegation may be withdrawn at any time before the actual polling has begun. 4. Interruption of Vote: When the question has been put, the vote thereon may not be interrupted for any purpose other than a demand for a roll call vote or a point of order directed to the conduct of the vote. 5. Determination of Question: Except as otherwise provided in these rules, all questions, including the question of nomi-nations of candidates for President and Vice President of the United States, shall be determined by a majority vote of the delegates to the Convention. G. Filling a Vacancy on the National Ticket: In the event of death, resignation or disability of a nominee of the Party for President or Vice President after the adjournment of the Na-tional Convention, the National Chairperson of the Demo-cratic National Committee shall confer with the Democratic leadership of the United States Congress and the Democratic Governors Association and shall report to the Democratic National Committee, which is authorized to fill the vacancy or vacancies. H. Interpretation of the Rules: In interpreting the rules, the Chair may have recourse to the ruling of Chairs of previous Democratic Conventions, to the precedents of the United States House of Representatives and to general parliamen-tary law. I. Appeals: 1. The Chair shall decide all questions of order subject to an appeal by any delegate which may be debated for not more than ten (10) minutes, the time to be equally divided be-tween the delegate appealing the ruling and a delegate in favor of sustaining the ruling of the Chair; provided that an appeal shall not be in order while another appeal is pending or from decisions on recognition or from decisions on dilatori-ness of motions or during a roll call vote or on a question on which an appeal has just been decided or, when in the opin-ion of the Chair, such appeal is clearly dilatory. 2. Before the question is put on any appeal, the Chair shall be entitled to state briefly the reasons for the ruling being appealed. J. Motion to Suspend the Rules: The Chair shall entertain a motion to suspend the rules, which shall be decided without debate and which shall require a vote of two thirds (2/3) of the delegates voting, a quorum being present. K. Motion: 1. No question of privilege or any motion other than those provided under these rules shall be entertained, except the motion to recess (to a time certain or at the call of the Chair), which shall be privileged, and the motion to adjourn, which shall be the highest privilege. 2. Motions to adjourn or to recess shall be in order at any time except when the question has been put or a vote is in progress and shall be decided without debate. The Chair shall not entertain a motion to adjourn or recess when such motion closely follows another such motion if in the opinion of the Chair such motion is dilatory. 227 Nomination and Election L. Amendments: No amendments to resolutions or motions before the Convention shall be permitted, except amend-ments to standing committee reports or resolutions offered at the direction of the standing committee or in a minority re-port of that standing committee; provided that no motion or proposition on a subject different from that under consider-ation shall be admitted in the form of such an amendment. M. Minority Reports: Minority reports of committees shall not be considered unless adopted in writing by members rep-resenting at least twenty percent (20%) of the total votes of a committee. A minority report may be withdrawn at any time prior to or during the Convention. A minority report shall be deemed to be withdrawn when support for the re-port falls below the number of members representing twenty percent (20%) of the total votes of the standing committee as evidenced by the written withdrawal of support by pro-ponents of the report. A committee member may withdraw his or her support for a minority report by written notice to the Secretary of the Democratic National Committee. N. Responsibility: By participating in the Democratic Na-tional Convention, each delegate assumes the responsibility for doing all within his or her power to assure that voters of his or her state will have the opportunity to cast their election ballots for the Presidential and Vice Presidential nominees selected by the Convention or, should a vacancy arise, pursuant to Article VIII.G. of these rules, and ex-pressly agrees that he or she will not publicly support or campaign for any candidate for President or Vice President other than the nominees of the Democratic National Conven-tion, or, should a vacancy arise, the nominee(s) selected pur-suant to Article VIII.G. O. Debate: Unless otherwise provided in these rules or in a resolution providing for a special order of business, debate on any question shall be limited to a total of twenty (20) min-utes and shall be equally divided between proponents and opponents unless they and the Chair agree upon an addi-tional or lesser amount of time. P. Quorum: A majority of the delegates to the Convention shall constitute a quorum thereof for the purpose of transacting business. Upon a point of order of no quorum being made, the Chair shall ascertain the presence or ab-sence of a quorum by visual estimation and shall not proceed until a quorum is present; provided that a motion to adjourn may be offered and voted upon without a quorum present. Q. References to the ‘‘Chair’’: All references to the authority and responsibilities of the ‘‘Chair’’ shall pertain to the Tem-porary Chair, the Permanent Chair, the Co-Chairs and any other person assuming the duties of the Chair as appropriate during the Convention. R. Equal Division: The Charter of the Democratic Party of the United States provides that the National Convention shall be composed of delegates and alternates equally di-vided between men and women. This Call, in compliance with the Charter, and pursuant to Rule 6.C. of the 2008 Del-egate Selection Rules, mandates that delegates and alter-nates from each state and jurisdiction shall be equally di-228 Nomination and Election vided between men and women with a variance of no more than one (1). S. Non-Discrimination: Discrimination on the basis of race, sex, age, color, creed, national origin, religion, ethnic iden-tity, sexual orientation, economic status or physical disability in the conduct of Democratic Party affairs is prohibited. T. Territories: The term ‘‘territories’’ shall refer to American Samoa, Democrats Abroad, Guam and the Virgin Islands in this Call. U. Journal of Proceedings: 1. A record of all actions taken each day by the Convention shall be printed and made available to all delegates and al-ternates the following day by the Convention Secretary. 2. The Secretary of the Democratic National Committee will provide a journal of the full proceedings of the Convention, which shall be printed within the year following the Conven-tion. 229 Nomination and Election 

Appendix A 

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE 2008 R ULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE AND THE 2008 D ELEGATE SE-LECTION RULES Under Rule 20.B. of the 2008 Delegate Selection Rules, the Rules and Bylaws Committee has jurisdiction over chal-lenges pertaining to the submission, non-implementation and violation of state Delegate Selection and Affirmative Action Plans. The following ‘‘Rules of Procedure of the Credentials Committee of the 2008 Democratic National Convention’’ de-scribes the procedure for considering challenges once the Credentials Committee assumes responsibility for the chal-lenge process as otherwise described in Rule 20.B. All delegates and alternates to the 2008 Democratic National Convention shall be selected in accordance with the 2008 Delegate Selection Rules and the 2008 Call. Only delegates and alternates selected under a delegate selection system ap-proved by the DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee pursuant to the 2008 Delegate Selection Rules shall be placed on the Temporary Roll of the 2008 Democratic National Convention. All challenges to the credentials of delegates and alternates to the 2008 Democratic National Convention shall be proc-essed in accordance with the ‘‘Rules of Procedure of the Cre-dentials Committee of the 2008 Democratic National Con-vention.’’ 230 Nomination and Election RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE OF THE 2008 D EMOCRATIC NATIONAL CONVENTION 

1. Jurisdiction of the Credentials Committee 

The Credentials Committee shall have jurisdiction to hear and decide: A. Any challenge brought before the DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee and not resolved before the 56th calendar day preceding the date of commencement of the Democratic Na-tional Convention; and, B. Any challenge alleging: 1. Failure to implement a final order of the DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee; or 2. Failure to implement a plan approved by the DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee, if such challenge is initiated on or after the 56th day preceding the date of commencement of the Democratic National Convention, except with regard to Rule 19.E. of the Delegate Selection Rules. 

2. Parties 

A. Challenging Parties: A challenge to the credentials of any delegate or alternate to the 2008 Democratic National Con-vention shall be brought by at least fifteen (15) Democrats who are residents of the state and level at which delegates to the National Convention are elected in which the chal-lenge arises, and who fulfill (1), or if there is no Democratic Party enrollment or registration in the state, then either (2) or (3) below: 1. Registration or enrollment as Democrats in those states which employ such procedures. Persons not registered to vote or persons registered as unaffiliated voters or enrolled as members of other parties or as independents shall not have standing to bring a challenge. 2. Participation in Democratic Party affairs. Persons who have participated in the affairs of another political party during the preceding 12-month period shall not have stand-ing to bring a challenge. Participation in a party’s affairs shall include, but not be limited to, voting in the imme-diately preceding primary of that political party. 3. Any person who lacks standing under paragraphs (1) and (2) and who demonstrates that he or she attempted to par-ticipate in the affairs of the Democratic Party in good faith shall have standing to challenge. 4. Each challenge shall include a statement indicating that each challenger subscribes to the substance, intent and prin-ciples of the Charter and Bylaws of the Democratic Party of the United States. Each challenger must have been person-ally injured with respect to his or her participation in the delegate selection process by any violation complained of or shall be so situated that he or she clearly will be personally injured by such violation. B. Challenged Parties: 1. Where delegates or alternates to the Convention have been selected from the level at which delegates to the Na-tional Convention are elected in which the challenge arises, the challenged party or parties shall be a delegate or alter-nate or a group of delegates or alternates or the entire dele-gation from that level. 231 Nomination and Election 2. Where delegates or alternates to the Convention have not yet been selected from the level at which delegates to the National Convention are elected in which the challenge arises, the challenged party shall be the Democratic Party organization responsible for that level; provided that where any state law or state party rule, regulation, decision or other state party action or omission is challenged, the State Democratic Party shall also be named as a challenged party. If during the tendency of the challenge, any delegate(s) or al-ternate(s) to the Convention are selected from the level in-volved, such delegate(s) or alternate(s) shall be joined as challenged parties if any relief with respect to their creden-tials at the Convention is sought. 3. The State Democratic Party shall be joined as a chal-lenged party if a challenged party so requests. C. Intervening Parties: 1. A State Democratic Party may intervene as of right in any challenge proceeding for the purpose of protecting any inter-est it may have with respect to that proceeding. 2. A presidential candidate may intervene as of right in any challenge proceeding for the purpose of protecting any inter-est he or she may have with respect to that proceeding. 3. For good cause shown, any other person having standing under Section 2.A. may be permitted to be heard as an ami-cus curiae or, in appropriate circumstances, to intervene, for all or limited purposes, by leave of the Chair of the Creden-tials Committee or the Hearing Officer. 

3. Filing, Service of Documents and Computation of Time 

A. Filing: Any challenge, answer and accompanying docu-ments to be considered in the processing of any challenge shall be filed by hand delivery (receipt to be retained), cer-tified mail (return receipt requested), or by an overnight de-livery service (signature required) to: Chair, 2008 Conven-tion Credentials Committee, c/o Democratic National Com-mittee, 430 South Capitol Street, S.E., Washington, DC 20003 with a copy to the Chair of the Democratic Party of the state in which the challenge arises. The original and a copy of each document shall be filed. Filing shall be deemed complete upon receipt, or in the case of hand delivery, upon delivery. B. Service: Any document filed in any proceeding pursuant to these rules shall be served at the same time by the filing party upon all other parties to the proceeding, with a copy to the Chair of the Democratic Party of the state in which the challenge arises. Service shall be made by hand delivery (receipt to be obtained), certified mail (return receipt re-quested), or an overnight delivery service (signature re-quired) to each party or his or her attorney, if any. Any docu-ment filed pursuant to these rules shall be accompanied by a certificate of service signed by the filing party or by his or her attorney, if any. Service shall be deemed complete, in the case of hand-delivery, on the date of receipt by the served party or, in the case of service by certified mail or an over-night delivery service, on the first business day on which de-livery is attempted. 232 Nomination and Election C. Time: 1. In computing any period of time prescribed by these rules, the day of the act or event from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. Weekends and holidays shall be included. 2. The Chair of the Credentials Committee shall have au-thority for good cause, on application or sua sponte, to en-large or shorten any period of time prescribed by these rules. An extension of time shall be granted only when compelling need is shown. 

4. Challenges 

A. A credentials challenge shall be commenced by the filing of a written challenge not later than: 1. Fifteen (15) calendar days after the violation occurred, or 2. Fifteen (15) calendar days after the selection of any dele-gate or alternate whose credentials to the Democratic Na-tional Convention are to be put in issue, whichever occurs first. The challenging parties shall, within the period pro-vided by the State Democratic Party in its Delegate Selection Plan, invoke, and shall thereafter exhaust, the remedies pro-vided by State Democratic Party procedures for the viola-tions alleged. B. The challenge shall be verified by the notarized signature of each challenging party, and shall include the following: 1. The name, address and telephone number of each chal-lenging party and allegations of fact fulfilling the require-ments of Section 2.A.; and the name, address and telephone number of each challenging party’s attorney or other rep-resentative authorized to receive documents on behalf of the challenger. 2. The name, address and telephone number of each delegate or alternate whose credentials are challenged, or a statement that such information is unavailable to the challenging par-ties; or, where delegates or alternates have not yet been se-lected, the name, address and telephone number of each challenged party. 3. An identification of the state and level at which delegates to the National Convention are elected in which the chal-lenge arises. 4. A plain, concise and specific statement of each violation of a state delegate selection plan approved by the DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee, or of a final order of the DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee; or a statement that the state does not have an approved delegate selection plan. 5. A plain, concise and specific statement of how each chal-lenging party has been injured with respect to his or her par-ticipation in the delegate selection process by each alleged violation. 6. A plain, concise and specific statement of the remedies each challenging party has invoked with respect to each al-leged violation before filing a credentials challenge with the credentials Committee, and a statement of the expected length of time for exhaustion of the state party procedures. 7. A plain, concise and specific statement of the relief re-quested and the reason therefore. If a challenging party pro-poses that he or she be seated in the state’s delegation, the 233 Nomination and Election challenge shall include a plain, concise and specific state-ment of the reasons why that party has a right to be seated, superior to that of the delegate or alternate whose seat he or she seeks; and a plain, concise and specific statement of how the challenging party has complied with all applicable laws, rules and regulations and has participated in the dele-gate selection process. C. The challenge shall be accompanied by the following docu-ments: 1. A plain, concise and specific statement that contains, by separately numbered paragraphs, each violation alleged and each form of relief sought. 2. A list of the name, address and telephone number of each witness who is likely to be called to testify in support of the challenge. 3. A list of the documents likely to be offered in support of the challenge, together with copies of those documents. 

5. Answer 

A. Within ten (10) calendar days after service of a challenge, each challenged party shall file a written answer, verified by the notarized signature of each challenged party, including the following: 1. The name, address and telephone number of each chal-lenged party and the name, address and telephone number of his or her attorney or other representative authorized to receive documents on behalf of the challenged party. 2. A statement as to whether the standing under Section 2.A. of the challenging parties is in dispute. 3. A response to the challenge, separately admitting or deny-ing each statement therein, or stating that the challenged party is without sufficient information to admit or deny. A response to a statement shall fairly meet its substance, ad-mitting those parts that are true and denying those parts that are false. 4. A plain, concise and specific statement of each and every affirmative defense to the alleged violations. 5. A plain, concise and specific statement of any other rea-sons why the challenged party should prevail. B. The answer shall be accompanied by the following docu-ments: 1. A plain, concise and specific statement that contains, by reference to each numbered paragraph of the challenging statement required by Section 4.C.1., a response to each al-leged violation or request for relief. A response to a propo-sition shall fairly meet its substance, admitting those parts that are true and denying those parts that are false. Wher-ever a proposition is denied in whole or in part, the propo-sition supported by the challenged party on that point shall be stated. 2. A list of the name, address and telephone number of each witness who is likely to be called in opposition to the chal-lenge. 3. A list of the documents likely to be offered in opposition to the challenge, together with copies of those documents. C. Challenged parties may consolidate their answers. 234 Nomination and Election 

6. Dismissal and Decision on the Pleadings 

A. Dismissal: 1. The Chair of the Credentials Committee shall dismiss any challenge, or part of a challenge, which does not fall within the jurisdiction of the Credentials Committee. 2. If a state party has adopted and implemented an approved affirmative action program, the Chair shall dismiss any chal-lenge, or part of a challenge, which is based solely on com-position of the Convention delegation, except in the case of a challenge based upon the failure to achieve equal division. 3. The Chair shall have authority to dismiss any challenge which is brought by persons lacking standing under Section 2.A., or which otherwise fails to comply substantially with these rules, or which is otherwise manifestly insufficient. 4. Any dismissal shall be accompanied by a written opinion by the Chair. B. Decision on the Pleadings: The Chair of the Credentials Committee shall have authority to make a decision on the pleadings where it is plain from the challenge and the an-swer, together with the documents accompanying those pleadings, that there is no genuine issue of material fact be-tween the parties. Any decision on the pleadings shall be ac-companied by a written opinion by the Chair. C. Review of Dismissal or Decision on the Pleadings: Within five (5) calendar days after service of a notice of the entry of a dismissal under Section 6.A. or under Section 1.B., an aggrieved party may file a Petition for Review by the Cre-dentials Committee stating the objections to the Chair’s ac-tion, and may file a brief. Within five (5) calendar days after service of the petition, any other party may file a brief. Con-sideration of the challenge by the Credentials Committee shall proceed as in other cases, except that the challenge shall be given precedence on the committee’s docket. 

7. Decision of State Party Body 

A. The Chair of the Credentials Committee may defer, for such period as is appropriate, proceedings on a challenge in order to give time for the consideration of any challenge or other related matter under State Democratic Party proce-dures. The deferral period shall not be so long as to interfere with the processing and consideration of the challenge by the Credentials Committee if that should prove necessary. B. The State Democratic Party body may take such action with respect to the challenge or other related matter as it is authorized to take under state law and state party rules. C. After a decision by a state party body on a challenge or other related matter, any party to the challenge pending be-fore the Credentials Committee may request the Committee to process the challenge and the Committee shall do so. The party making the request shall file any written decision or order made with respect to the challenge by the state party body. The decision of the state party body shall be given such weight as the Credentials Committee finds warranted in the circumstances. D. Records of proceedings conducted by the state party body with respect to the challenge or other related matter, and other papers relating to the state party proceedings, shall be 235 Nomination and Election admissible in Credentials Committee proceedings on the challenge. 

8. Hearing 

A. With respect to any challenge or part of a challenge not dismissed or decided on the pleadings under Section 6., an open and public hearing shall be held on the specific factual and legal matters in dispute. An electronic or stenographic recording or clerical notes shall be made of the proceedings at any such hearing. B. The hearing shall be held in Washington, D.C. unless the Chair of the Credentials Committee determines that in the interest of justice it should be held elsewhere. C. The hearing shall be conducted by a Hearing Officer ap-pointed by the Chair of the Credentials Committee. The Hearing Officer shall be a Democrat, neutral in the context of the challenge, experienced in the law, known by reputa-tion to be fair and shall not be involved in or identified with any presidential campaign or any group promoting or oppos-ing credentials challenges. The Chair shall make a reason-able effort to secure the agreement of the parties to the Hearing Officer. D. The Hearing Officer shall have all power necessary to conduct the hearing in such manner, consistent with these rules, as to secure the just, speedy and inexpensive deter-mination of the challenge, including the right to require the parties to participate in a pre-hearing conference. E. Prior to the commencement of the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall announce a ruling identifying, on the basis of the papers filed in the challenge and any pre-hearing con-ference, the specific issues in dispute. The Hearing Officer shall have power to rule that on certain issues only docu-mentary evidence shall be received. Any party objecting to a ruling under this paragraph may make a proffer of the evi-dence that would have been presented but for the ruling. F. The Hearing Officer shall hear the evidence, dispose of procedural requests and similar matters and, to the extent possible, obtain stipulations of the parties as to the facts of the challenge. G. A challenging party shall have the burden of proof by clear and convincing evidence on all factual issues necessary to the challenge, except that the burden of proof shall rest with the challenged party in the case of: 1. any unresolved challenges to a state’s affirmative action program filed thirty (30) days or more prior to the initiation of the state’s delegate selection process other than a chal-lenge made on the basis of non-implementation of a specific requirement of a state plan; and, 2. any challenge for failure to submit and implement an ap-proved affirmative action program by the deadline specified in the Delegate Selection Rules. H. The Hearing Officer shall have authority to receive all competent evidence relevant to the specific matters in issue and to assign to it appropriate weight. I. The Hearing Officer shall have authority to order for good cause, on application or sua sponte, that a party produce at the hearing designated evidence in the interest of justice. 236 Nomination and Election Where a party fails to produce such evidence, the Hearing Officer may make findings of fact adverse to the party on all issues to which the evidence would have been material. J. Subject to any ruling under Section 8.E., each party shall have the right to present competent oral and documentary evidence relevant to the specific matters in issue and to con-duct cross-examination. K. The Hearing Officer may require parties to consolidate their challenges or defenses for purposes of the hearing. L. The Hearing Officer shall make and file a written report to the Credentials Committee, which shall include findings of fact, conclusions of law and a recommendation for disposition of the challenge. The reports shall be served on all parties to the challenge. M. Any transcript or other papers in the record from any proceedings before the DNC Rules and Bylaws Committee shall be part of the record. 

9. Consideration by the Credentials Committee 

A. The Credentials Committee shall begin meeting at the call of the Chair in Washington, D.C., or elsewhere at the call of the Chair, to hear challenges. No later than thirty (30) days before the first meeting of the Credentials Committee, written notice of the date, time, place, and the tentative agenda of such meeting shall be sent to all members of the Credentials Committee. A special or emergency meeting of the Credentials Committee may be held upon call of the Chair of the Credentials Committee with reasonable notice to the members. B. All meetings of the Credentials Committee shall be open to the public; provided that the Chair of the Committee shall exclude from the specific area where the committee is con-ducting its business all persons whose presence in that area is not required for the proper conduct of the business. C. Request for hearing by Full Committee: Within two (2) days after service of the Hearing Officer’s report, an ag-grieved party may file a written Petition for Review by the Credentials Committee. The petition shall contain a plain, concise and specific statement of the reasons for appeal and the procedural and/or substantive errors claimed by the peti-tioner. D. Briefs: 1. Within three (3) calendar days after filing the Petition for Review, the petitioner for review may file a brief. 2. Within three (3) calendar days after service of the peti-tioner’s brief, a respondent may file a brief. 3. Any party filing a brief shall file as many copies as there are members of the committee, plus ten (10) copies for the Chair and staff of the committee. E. Argument: 1. Each side of a challenge shall be entitled to present oral argument before the Committee for a period determined by the Chair of the committee, generally not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes. 2. The Chair of the committee may require parties to consoli-date or separate their challenges or defense for purposes of oral argument. 237 Nomination and Election 3. The Chair of the committee shall notify the parties of the time and place of oral argument. F. Resolutions: 1. All proposed resolutions relating to the disposition of a credentials challenge shall be in writing and signed by the proponent and at least one (1) second. Proposed resolutions relating to the seating or unseating of delegates or alternates shall be seconded in writing by at least seven (7) members, no more than two (2) of whom may be members elected by the delegation from the same state as the proponent of the resolution. 2. All proposed resolutions relating to the disposition of a credentials challenge shall be framed so as to be dispositive of the entire challenge and, to that end, shall be specific in stating the action recommended to be taken by the Conven-tion. 3. Following the submission of all proposed resolutions to the Chair, the resolution having the largest number of signed seconds shall become the pending order of business. Twenty (20) minutes of debate shall be allotted to each proposed res-olution, equally divided between the proponents and the op-ponents. At the conclusion of the debate, the resolution shall be put to a vote. In the event the resolution is not adopted, the proposed resolution having the next largest number of signed seconds shall become the pending order of business, and so on until the challenge is disposed. 4. No amendment to any proposed resolution shall be per-mitted, except with the consent of the proponent, and no res-olution or propositions on a subject different from that under consideration shall be admitted in the form of such an amendment. G. Presidential Preference of Delegation: Except where the issue is the expressed presidential preference of the level at which delegates to the National Convention are elected rep-resented by the challenged delegates, any remedy for a viola-tion shall fairly reflect the expressed presidential preference of that level. H. Voting: A member of the Credentials Committee elected by a state delegation shall not vote on a challenge arising in that state. All matters shall be determined by a majority vote of those present and voting, a quorum of the full Com-mittee being present. A quorum shall consist of members present in person representing a majority of the total num-ber of committee votes entitled to be counted in the matter. I. Proxies: Proxy voting shall be prohibited. 

10. Committee Report 

The Report of the Credentials Committee shall be distrib-uted to all delegates, alternates and the public as soon as practicable after its adoption. 

11. Minority Reports 

Upon the request of members representing at least twenty percent (20%) of the total votes of the Credentials Com-mittee, a minority report shall be prepared for distribution to all Convention delegates, alternates and the public as part of the Committee’s report. This minority report shall be dis-238 Nomination and Election tributed at the same time the Credentials Committee Report is distributed. No member elected to the committee by astate delegation may join in such request as to a proposed minority report relating to a credentials challenge to any del-egate from his or her state. The committee staff shall assist in the preparation of such report. 

12. Record 

A. The official record of any proceedings under these rules shall be maintained in the office at the Democratic National Committee in Washington, D.C. and shall be open and avail-able for public inspection and duplication at reasonable times. B. All meetings of the full Credentials Committee shall be transcribed. 

13. Interpretation and Waiver of Rules and Provision for Special Rules 

A. These rules shall be interpreted and applied in the inter-ests of justice and fairness to all parties, speed and economy. To serve these interests, and for good cause, on application or sua sponte, the Chair of the committee shall have the au-thority to waive any provision of these rules other than Sec-tions 1.B. and Section 5. B. In the case of any challenge filed on or after the 56th cal-endar day before the convention begins, the Chair may short-en the time periods specified in these rules for processing the challenge, including the time to file documents and conduct hearings, as the interests of justice and the orderly disposi-tion of challenges dictate; provided, however, that in any event: 1. The challenge and accompanying papers shall be filed not later than three (3) days after the occurrence of the violation alleged. 2. The answer and accompanying papers shall be filed not later than three (3) days after service of the challenge. 239 Nomination and Election APPENDIX B240 Nomination and Election 

> 2008 DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL CONVENTION
> DELEGATE/ALTERNATE ALLOCATION
> (As adopted by the Democratic National Committee at its meeting February 1–3, 2007.)
> State Allocation Factor
> (AF ( 3,000 = # of Base Dele-gates) Pledged Delegate Votes Total Pledged Dele-gate Votes Unpledged Delegate Votes Total Unpledged Delegate Votes Total Dele-gate Votes Total # of Dele-gates Alter-nates Dele-ga-tion Size Allocated Base Delegates  Party Ldrs &Elect-ed Of-ficials (15% Add-on) Dem. Nat’l Comm. Mem-bers (a) Dem. Mem-bers of Con-gress (b) Dem. Gov-er-nors (c) Distin-guished Party Lead-ers (d) Add-on Unpledged (Based on DNC Member Votes) Total Base Dele-gates Dis-trict Level (75% of Base) At-Large (25% of Base) AL ...............................................................  0.014871  45  34  11  7 52  5 2 0 0 1 8 60  60  9 69 AK ...............................................................  0.003647  11  8 3 2 13  4 0 0 0 1 5 18  18  4 22 American Samoa (e) ..................................  0.000000  3 0 3 0 3 4 1 1 0 0 6 9 12  1 13 AZ  ...............................................................  0.016383  49  37  12  7 56  6 4 0 0 1 11  67  67  9 76 AR ...............................................................  0.009921  30  22  8 5 35  5 5 1 0 1 12  47  47  6 53 CA ...............................................................  0.107417  322  241  81  48  370  32  32  0 1 5 70  440  440  62  502 CO ...............................................................  0.016022  48  36  12  7 55  7 5 1 1 1 15  70  70  9 79 CT ...............................................................  0.014158  42  31  11  6 48  7 4 0 1 1 13  61  61  8 69 DE ...............................................................  0.004442  13  10  3 2 15  4 2 1 0 1 8 23  23  4 27 Dems. Abroad (e) .......................................  0.000000  6 0 6 1 7 4 0 0 0 0 4 11  22  1 23 DC ...............................................................  0.004481  13  10  3 2 15  16  3 1 0 2 22  37  37  4 41 FL  ...............................................................  0.053814  161  121  40  24  185  12  10  0 0 3 25  210  210  31  241 GA ...............................................................  0.025172  76  57  19  11  87  7 6 0 1 2 16  103  103  15  118 Guam (e) .....................................................  0.000000  3 0 3 0 3 4 1 0 0 0 5 8 11  1 12 HI ................................................................  0.005757  17  13  4 3 20  4 4 0 0 1 9 29  29  4 33 ID ................................................................  0.005258  16  12  4 2 18  4 0 0 0 1 5 23  23  4 27 IL ................................................................  0.044362  133  100  33  20  153  15  12  1 1 3 32  185  185  26  211 IN ................................................................  0.018984  57  43  14  9 66  5 6 0 1 1 13  79  79  11  90 IA ................................................................  0.012860  39  29  10  6 45  6 4 1 0 1 12  57  57  8 65 KS ...............................................................  0.009457  28  21  7 4 32  5 2 0 0 1 8 40  40  5 45 KY ...............................................................  0.013750  41  31  10  6 47  5 2 0 0 1 8 55  55  8 63 LA ...............................................................  0.016433  49  37  12  7 56  7 3 1 0 1 12  68  68  9 77 ME ..............................................................  0.006988  21  16  5 3 24  4 2 1 2 1 10  34  34  4 38 MD ..............................................................  0.020224  61  46  15  9 70  18  8 1 0 2 29  99  99  12  111 MA ..............................................................  0.027008  81  61  20  12  93  10  12  1 3 2 28  121  121  16  137 MI ...............................................................  0.036887  111  83  28  17  128  19  6 1 0 2 28  156  156  21  177 MN ..............................................................  0.021153  63  47  16  9 72  7 6 0 1 2 16  88  88  12  100 MS ...............................................................  0.009568  29  22  7 4 33  4 2 0 0 1 7 40  40  6 46 MO ..............................................................  0.021010  63  47  16  9 72  8 5 0 1 2 16  88  88  12  100 MT  ..............................................................  0.004309  13  10  3 2 15  4 2 1 0 1 8 23  23  4 27 NE ...............................................................  0.006943  21  16  5 3 24  5 1 0 0 1 7 31  31  4 35

241 Nomination and Election NV ...............................................................  0.007445  22  16  6 3 25  6 1 0 0 1 8 33  33  4 37 NH ..............................................................  0.006427  19  14  5 3 22  4 2 1 0 1 8 30  30  4 34 NJ ...............................................................  0.030941  93  70  23  14  107  8 9 1 0 2 20  127  127  18  145 NM ..............................................................  0.007605  23  17  6 3 26  7 2 1 1 1 12  38  38  4 42 NY ...............................................................  0.067490  202  151  51  30  232  18  24  1 1 4 48  280  280  39  319 NC ...............................................................  0.026300  79  59  20  12  91  9 7 1 0 2 19  110  110  15  125 ND ...............................................................  0.003783  11  8 3 2 13  4 3 0 0 1 8 21  21  4 25 OH  ..............................................................  0.041052  123  92  31  18  141  11  7 1 0 2 21  162  162  24  186 OK ...............................................................  0.011163  33  25  8 5 38  6 1 1 0 1 9 47  47  6 53 OR ...............................................................  0.013852  42  31  11  6 48  7 5 1 0 1 14  62  62  8 70 PA ...............................................................  0.043782  131  98  33  20  151  14  12  0 1 3 30  181  181  25  206 PR ...............................................................  0.000000  44  33  11  7 51  5 0 1 0 1 7 58  58  9 67 RI ................................................................  0.006075  18  13  5 3 21  6 4 0 0 1 11  32  32  4 36 SC ...............................................................  0.012941  39  29  10  6 45  6 2 0 0 1 9 54  54  8 62 SD ...............................................................  0.004082  12  9 3 2 14  4 2 0 1 1 8 22  22  4 26 TN ...............................................................  0.019521  59  44  15  9 68  8 5 1 1 2 17  85  85  11  96 TX ...............................................................  0.056138  168  126  42  25  193  18  12  0 2 3 35  228  228  32  260 UT ...............................................................  0.006762  20  15  5 3 23  4 1 0 0 1 6 29  29  4 33 VT ...............................................................  0.004284  13  10  3 2 15  5 2 0 0 1 8 23  23  4 27 Virgin Islands (e) .......................................  0.000000  3 0 3 0 3 4 1 1 0 0 6 9 12  1 13 VA ...............................................................  0.024034  72  54  18  11  83  12  4 1 1 2 20  103  103  14  117 WA ..............................................................  0.022550  68  51  17  10  78  7 8 1 1 2 19  97  97  13  110 WV ..............................................................  0.007664  23  17  6 3 26  6 3 0 1 1 11  37  37  4 41 WI ...............................................................  0.021377  64  48  16  10  74  8 7 1 0 2 18  92  92  12  104 WY ..............................................................  0.003453  10  7 3 2 12  4 0 1 0 1 6 18  18  4 22 Unassigned .................................................  0.000000  0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 3 3 3 0 3TOTAL ........................................................  ........................  3,056  2,278  778  456  3,512  441  276  28  23  81  849  4,361  4,381  605  4,986 Footnotes: (a) Each member of the Democratic National Committee, as duly certified to the Party Secretary, is a delegate from the state or territory in which he or she legally resides at the time of the 2008 Democratic National Convention. This allocation reflects the current legal residence of all such members, including the officers and those who, pursuant to the Charter of the Democratic Party of the United States, are members by virtue of their status as Party leaders in the U.S. Congress or by virtue of their status as representatives or designees of such Party leaders or of other associations and organizations specified in the Charter. Because such members are subject to change, delegate distribution at the Convention may differ from that set forth above. In addition, the DNC member alloca-tion set forth above reflects the number of votes (not the number of delegates) added to the delegation from each state or territory to take into account such members. Because of fractional votes, the number of such delegates in some states and territories may differ from the number of delegate votes allocated to such states or territories. (b) Members of Congress include all Democratic members of the U.S. Senate and the U.S. House of Representatives, except those Democratic members who are reflected as delegates in other cat-egories pursuant to the rules. Democratic Members of Congress are allocated to the states based upon the residence of those members. The exact number of those delegates is subject to change due to possible deaths, resignations, elections or special elections between now and the time of the 2008 Democratic National Convention, and possible changes in the membership of the Democratic National Committee. (c) The allocation for Democratic Governors does not include those Democratic Governors who are members of the Democratic National Committee and serve as delegates in that capacity. This allo-cation for Democratic Governors is subject to change due to possible deaths, resignations, elections or special elections between now and the time of the 2008 Democratic National Convention, and pos-sible changes in the membership of the Democratic National Committee. (d) Pursuant to Article I.F. of the Call for the 2008 Democratic National Convention, this category includes the Democratic U.S. President and Vice President, former Democratic U.S. Presidents and Vice Presidents, former Democratic Leaders of the U.S. Senate, former Democratic Speakers of the U.S. House of Representatives and Democratic Minority Leaders, as applicable, and former Chairs of the Democratic National Committee. This allocation for Distinguished Party Leaders is subject to change due to possible deaths, resignations, elections or special elections between now and the time of the 2004 Democratic National Convention. (e) American Samoa, Guam, and the Virgin Islands may select six (6) delegates to cast the delegation’s At-Large delegate votes. Democrats Abroad may select twelve (12) delegates to cast the delega-tion’s six (6) At-Large delegate votes and two (2) delegates to cast the one (1) Party Leader and Elected Official (PLEO) delegate vote. 242 Nomination and Election APPENDIX C2008 DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL CONVENTION ALLOCATION OF CONVENTION PAGES TO STATES 

(As adopted by the Democratic National Committee at its meeting February 1–3, 2007.) 

State Pages ALABAMA 2ALASKA 2AMERICAN SAMOA 1ARIZONA 2ARKANSAS 2CALIFORNIA 11 COLORADO 2CONNECTICUT 2DELAWARE 2DEMOCRATS ABROAD 1DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA 2FLORIDA 5GEORGIA 3GUAM 1HAWAII 2IDAHO 2ILLINOIS 5INDIANA 2IOWA 2KANSAS 2KENTUCKY 2LOUISIANA 2MAINE 2MARYLAND 3MASSACHU-SETTS 3MICHIGAN 4MINNESOTA 3MISSISSIPPI 2MISSOURI 3MONTANA 2NEBRASKA 2NEVADA 2NEW HAMP-SHIRE 2NEW JERSEY 4NEW MEXICO 2243 Nomination and Election 2008 DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL CONVENTION—Continued ALLOCATION OF CONVENTION PAGES TO STATES 

(As adopted by the Democratic National Committee at its meeting February 1–3, 2007.) 

State Pages NEW YORK 7NORTH CARO-LINA 3NORTH DA-KOTA 2OHIO 4OKLAHOMA 2OREGON 2PENNSYL-VANIA 5PUERTO RICO 2RHODE ISLAND 2SOUTH CARO-LINA 2SOUTH DA-KOTA 2TENNESSEE 2TEXAS 6UTAH 2VERMONT 2VIRGIN IS-LANDS 1VIRGINIA 3WASHINGTON 3WEST VIRGINIA 2WISCONSIN 3WYOMING 2UNASSIGNED 0TOTAL 150 244 Nomination and Election APPENDIX D2008 DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL CONVENTION ALLOCATION OF STANDING COMMITTEE MEMBERS 

(As adopted by the Democratic National Committee at its meeting February 1–3, 2007.) 

State Members Votes ALABAMA 2 2ALASKA 1 1AMERICAN SAMOA 1 0.25 ARIZONA 2 2ARKANSAS 1 1CALIFORNIA 17 17 COLORADO 2 2CONNECTICUT 2 2DELAWARE 1 1DEMOCRATS ABROAD 1 0.25 DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA 1 1FLORIDA 8 8GEORGIA 4 4GUAM 1 0.25 HAWAII 1 1IDAHO 1 1ILLINOIS 7 7INDIANA 3 3IOWA 2 2KANSAS 1 1KENTUCKY 2 2LOUISIANA 2 2MAINE 1 1MARYLAND 3 3MASSACHUSETTS 4 4MICHIGAN 6 6MINNESOTA 3 3MISSISSIPPI 1 1MISSOURI 3 3MONTANA 1 1NEBRASKA 1 1NEVADA 1 1NEW HAMPSHIRE 1 1NEW JERSEY 5 5NEW MEXICO 1 1NEW YORK 11 11 NORTH CAROLINA 4 4NORTH DAKOTA 1 1245 Nomination and Election 2008 DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL CONVENTION—Continued ALLOCATION OF STANDING COMMITTEE MEMBERS 

(As adopted by the Democratic National Committee at its meeting February 1–3, 2007.) 

State Members Votes OHIO 7 7OKLAHOMA 2 2OREGON 2 2PENNSYLVANIA 7 7PUERTO RICO 2 2RHODE ISLAND 1 1SOUTH CAROLINA 2 2SOUTH DAKOTA 1 1TENNESSEE 3 3TEXAS 9 9UTAH 1 1VERMONT 1 1VIRGIN ISLANDS 1 0.25 VIRGINIA 4 4WASHINGTON 3 3WEST VIRGINIA 1 1WISCONSIN 3 3WYOMING 1 1UNASSIGNED TOTALS 161 158 246 Nomination and Election 1 The Rules of the Republican Party, as adopted by the 2004 Republican Na-tional Convention August 30, 2004. 

E. Rules of the Republican Party Relating to the Convening of the 2008 National Convention 1

Rule No. 13 Membership in Convention 

Subject to the provisions of Rule No. 16, the membership of the next national convention shall consist of: (a) Delegates. (1) Ten (10) delegates at large from each of the fifty (50) states. (2) The national committeeman, the national committee-woman and the chairman of the state Republican Party of, each state and American Samoa, the District of Columbia, Guam, Northern Mariana Islands, Puerto Rico, and the Vir-gin Islands. (3) Three (3) district delegates for each Representative in the United States House of Representatives from each state. (4) Six (6) delegates at large from American Samoa, sixteen (16) delegates at large from the District of Columbia, six (6) delegates at large from Guam, six (6) delegates at large from the Northern Mariana Islands, twenty (20) delegates at large from Puerto Rico, and six (6) delegates at large from the Vir-gin Islands; provided, however, that if Puerto Rico shall be-come a state prior to the next national convention, the num-ber of delegates from Puerto Rico shall be calculated in ac-cordance with the same formula used for the other states. (5) From each state having cast its electoral votes, or a ma-jority thereof, for the Republican nominee for President of the United States in the last preceding election: four and one-half (4 1 ⁄2 ) delegates at large plus a number of the dele-gates at large equal to sixty percent (60%) of the number of electoral votes of that state; provided, however, that if Puer-to Rico shall become a state prior to the next national con-vention, it shall be presumed that it would have cast its elec-toral votes, or a majority thereof, for the Republican nominee in the last preceding election. (In the computation of the number of delegates at large, any sum of the four and one-half (4 1 ⁄2 ) plus the sixty percent (60%) representing a frac-tion shall be increased to the next whole number.) In addi-tion, one (1) delegate at large shall be awarded to a state for any and each of the following public officials elected by such state in the year of the last preceding presidential election or at any subsequent election held prior to January 1 of the year in which the next national convention is held: (i) A Republican governor, provided that no such additional delegate at large award to any state shall exceed one (1); (ii) Membership in the Republican Party of at least one-half ( 1 ⁄2 ) of the Representatives representing a state in the United States House of Representatives; provided that no such additional delegate at large award to any state shall ex-ceed one (1); (iii) Membership in the Republican Party of a majority of the members of any chamber of a state legislature, if such cham-247 Nomination and Election ber has been organized, and is presided over (if the presiding officer is elected by the chamber), by Republicans; provided that no such additional delegate at large award to any state shall exceed one (1). (iv) Membership in the Republican Party of a majority of all chambers of a state legislature, if all such chambers are pre-sided over (if the presiding officer is elected by the chamber), by a Republican; provided that no such additional delegate at large award to any state shall exceed one (1). (6) In addition, one (1) delegate at large shall be awarded to a state for any and each Republican United States Senator elected by such state in the six (6) year period prior to Janu-ary 1 of the year in which the next national convention is held; provided that no such additional delegate at large award to any state shall exceed two (2). (7) In addition, if the District of Columbia shall have cast its electoral votes, or a majority thereof, for the Republican nominee for President of the United States in the last pre-ceding presidential election: four and one-half (4 1 ⁄2 ) delegates at large plus the number of delegates at large equal to thirty percent (30%) of the sixteen (16) delegates at large allotted to the District of Columbia. In the computation of the num-ber of delegates at large, any sum of the four and one-half (4 1 ⁄2 ) plus the thirty percent (30%) representing a fraction shall be increased to the next whole number. (b) Alternate Delegates. One (1) alternate delegate for each delegate to the national convention, except that no alternates shall be selected for Republican National Committee members. (c) Any state party may set the date for any primary, caucus, convention, or meeting for the purpose of voting for a presi-dential candidate and/or selecting delegates to the national convention. To the extent a state party’s rules are in conflict with its state’s laws with respect to this rule, the provisions of this rule and the state party’s rules shall control. To the extent the provisions of the rule are inconsistent with the provisions of Rule No. 15, the provisions of this rule shall be controlling for all purposes. 

Rule No. 14 Participation 

(a) The Republican National Committee shall assist the states in their efforts to inform all citizens as to how they may participate in delegate selection procedures. The states, in cooperation with the Republican National Committee, shall prepare instructive material on delegate selection methods and make it available for distribution. (b) Participation in a Republican primary, caucus, or any meeting or convention held for the purpose of selecting dele-gates and alternate delegates to a county, district, state, or national convention shall in no way be abridged for reasons of sex, race, religion, color, age, or national origin. The Re-publican National Committee and the Republican state com-mittee or governing committee of each state shall take posi-tive action to achieve the broadest possible participation by men and women, young people, minority and heritage 248 Nomination and Election groups, senior citizens, and all other citizens in the delegate selection process. (c) Unless otherwise provided by the laws of the state in which the election occurs, in those states where delegates and alternate delegates are elected through the convention system or a combination of convention and primary systems, the precinct, ward, township, or county meetings shall be open meetings and all citizens who are qualified shall be urged to participate. (d) Each state shall endeavor to have equal representation of men and women in its delegation to the Republican National Convention. (e) The provisions of these rules are not intended to be the basis of any kind of quota system. 

Rule No. 15 Election of Delegates and Alternate Delegates 

(a) Order of Precedence. Delegates at large and their alternate delegates and dele-gates from congressional districts and their alternate dele-gates to the national convention shall be elected in the fol-lowing manner: (1) In accordance with any applicable Republican Party rules of a state, insofar as the same are not inconsistent with these rules; or, (2) To the extent not provided for in the applicable Repub-lican Party rules of a state, in accordance with any applica-ble laws of a state, insofar as the same are not inconsistent with these rules; or, (3) By a combination of the methods set forth in paragraphs (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this rule; or, (4) To the extent not provided by state law or party rules, as set forth in paragraph (c) of this rule. (b) Timing (1) Except with respect to delegates and alternate delegates elected under paragraph (c)(1)(ii) of this rule and if con-sistent with paragraph (d)(4) of this rule: (i) No presidential primary, caucus, convention, or other meeting may be held for the purpose of voting for a presi-dential candidate and/or selecting delegates or alternate del-egates to the national convention, prior to the first Tuesday of February in the year in which the national convention is held; and, (ii) The selection process of choosing those who will select the delegates or alternate delegates shall not begin before Sep-tember 1 of the year before the year in which the national convention is to be held. (c) General. In all elections of delegates or alternate delegates to the na-tional convention, the following rules shall apply: (1) Delegates and alternates to the national convention maybe elected only in one of the following manners: (i) by primary election; (ii) by the Republican state committee, where specifically provided by state law; (iii) by state and congressional district conventions; 249 Nomination and Election (iv) by any method consistent with these rules by which dele-gates and alternate delegates were selected to the most re-cent Republican National Convention from that state; (v) by Rule No. 13(a)(2) of these rules. (2) Only persons eligible to vote who are deemed as a matter of public record to be Republicans pursuant to state law or, if voters are not enrolled by party, by Republican party rules of a state, shall participate in any primary election held for the purpose of electing delegates or alternate delegates to the national convention or in any Republican caucus, mass meeting, or mass convention held for the purpose of selecting delegates to the county, district, or state conventions, and only such legal and qualified voters shall be elected as dele-gates to county, district, and state conventions; provided, however, that in addition to the qualifications provided here-in, the applicable Republican party rules of a state may pre-scribe additional qualifications not inconsistent with law, which additional qualifications shall be adopted before the first Tuesday in September in the year before the year in which the national convention is to be held and published in at least one (1) newspaper having a general circulation throughout the state, such publication to be at least ninety (90) days before such qualifications become effective. (3) No state law shall be observed which permits any person to participate in a primary delegate and alternate delegate selection process that also permits that person at the same primary to participate in the choosing of nominees of any other party for other elective office. Delegates and alternate delegates to the national convention shall in that event be selected pursuant to state party rules that are not incon-sistent with the Rules of the Republican Party; provided, however, that the selection process established by the state party rules shall provide that only persons eligible to vote who are deemed to be Republicans pursuant to state law or state party rules shall participate in such delegate selection process. (4) In any jurisdiction in which Republican representation upon the board of judges or inspectors of elections for pri-mary elections is denied by law, delegates and alternate del-egates shall be elected as provided in paragraph (a)(1) or (a)(4) of this rule. (5) In selecting delegates and alternate delegates to the na-tional convention, no state law shall be observed which hinders, abridges, or denies to any citizen of the United States, eligible under the Constitution of the United States to hold the office of President of the United States or Vice President of the United States, the right or privilege of being a candidate under such state law for the nomination for President of the United States or Vice President of the United States or which authorizes the election of a number of delegates or alternate delegates from any state to the na-tional convention different from that fixed in these rules. (6) Alternate delegates shall be elected to the national con-vention for each unit of representation equal in number to the number of delegates elected therein and shall be chosen in the same manner and at the same time as the delegates and under the same rules; provided, however, that if the law 250 Nomination and Election of any state shall prescribe another method of choosing alter-nate delegates, they may be chosen in accordance with the provisions of the law of the state in which the election oc-curs, except that no alternates shall be selected for Repub-lican National Committee members. (7) Delegates and alternate delegates at large to the national convention when serving as delegates and alternate dele-gates shall be residents of and duly qualified voters in their respective states. All delegates and alternate delegates allo-cated as delegates and alternate delegates at large shall be elected at large in the several states; provided, however, that such allocation and method of election may be varied in any state to the extent, and only to the extent, necessary to avoid conflict with state law applicable to the selection of national convention delegates if such varying allocation and method of election were those pursuant to which delegates at large and alternate delegates at large were elected to the 1988 Re-publican National Convention from that state. (8) Delegates and alternate delegates to the national conven-tion representing congressional districts shall be residents of and qualified voters in said districts respectively when elect-ed and when serving as delegates and alternate delegates. There shall be three (3) delegates and three (3) alternate del-egates allocated to represent each congressional district of the several states, who shall be elected by each such congres-sional district; provided, however, that such number of dele-gates and alternate delegates allocated to represent, and elected by, any congressional district of a state may be re-duced or increased to the extent, and only to the extent, nec-essary to avoid conflict with state law applicable to the selec-tion of national convention delegates if such varying alloca-tion was that pursuant to which district delegates and alter-nate district delegates were elected to the 1988 Republican National Convention from the state. (9) No delegate or alternate delegate to the national conven-tion shall be required to pay an assessment or fee in excess of that provided by the law of the state in which his or her election occurs as a condition of serving as a delegate or al-ternate delegate to the national convention. (10) There shall be no automatic delegates to the national convention who serve by virtue of party position or elective office, except as provided for in Rule No. 13 (a)(2). (11) No delegates or alternate delegates shall be selected pursuant to any Republican Party rule of a state or state law which materially changes the manner of selecting delegates or alternate delegates or the date upon which such state party holds a presidential primary, caucus, convention, or meeting for the purpose of voting for a presidential candidate and/or selecting delegates to the national convention if such changes were adopted or made effective after the first Tues-day in September of the year before the year in which the national convention is to be held. Where it is not possible for a state party to certify the manner and the date upon which it holds a presidential primary, caucus, convention, or meet-ing for the purpose of voting for a presidential candidate and/or selecting delegates to the national convention in effect in that state on the date and in the manner provided in 251 Nomination and Election paragraph (e) of this rule, the process for holding the presi-dential primary, caucus, convention, or meeting for the pur-pose of voting for a presidential candidate and/or selecting delegates to the national convention shall be conducted in the same manner and held upon the same date as was used for the immediately preceding national convention. If it is not possible to hold a presidential primary, caucus, conven-tion, or meeting for the purpose of voting for a presidential candidate and/or selecting delegates to the national conven-tion upon the same date as was used for the immediately preceding national convention, then delegates or alternate delegates shall be selected by congressional district or state conventions pursuant to paragraph (d) of this rule. (d) Conventions. Wherever state law permits or the Republican Party rules of a state require the election of delegates and alternate dele-gates by convention or there is no applicable state law or Re-publican Party rule, delegates and alternate delegates to the national convention shall be elected by congressional district or state conventions pursuant to the following rules: (1) Congressional district or state conventions shall be called by the Republican state committee. (2) Delegates to congressional district conventions may be elected in precinct caucuses, mass meetings, mass conven-tions, or county conventions in which only eligible voters in such precinct, county, or district, as the case may be, shall vote. (3) Notices of the call for any such caucus, meeting, or con-vention shall be published in a newspaper or newspapers of general circulation in the county, district, or state, as the case may be, not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of such caucus, meeting, or convention. (4) No delegates shall be deemed eligible to participate in any congressional district or state convention the purpose of which is to elect delegates to the national convention who are elected prior to the date of the issuance of the call of such national convention. (5) Congressional district conventions shall be composed of delegates who are persons eligible to vote and who are deemed to be Republicans pursuant to state law or party rules. State conventions shall be composed of delegates who are persons eligible to vote and who are deemed to be Repub-licans pursuant to state law or party rules in the respective districts which they represent in said state conventions. Such delegates shall be apportioned by the state Republican Party among counties, parishes, and cities of the state or dis-trict having regard to the Republican vote or the population therein. (6) There shall be no proxies at any district or state conven-tion (which shall not include meetings of a Republican state committee) held for the purpose of selecting delegates to the national convention. If alternate delegates to such selection convention are selected, the alternate delegate and no other shall vote in the absence of the delegate. (e) Certification and filing by the state committees. (1) On or before the first Tuesday in September of the year before the year in which the national convention is to be 252 Nomination and Election held, each Republican state committee shall adopt rules, pro-cedures, policies, and instructive materials (prepared pursu-ant to Rule No. 14(a)) governing the selection of delegates and alternate delegates to the national convention to con-vene during the following year and shall certify and file with the secretary of the Republican National Committee true copies of the same and of all statutes governing the selection of such delegates and alternate delegates. (2) The Republican National Committee may grant a waiver to a state party from certain provisions of this rule in the fol-lowing instance: (i) Where it is not possible for a state party to comply with the first Tuesday in September deadline delineated in para-graph (e)(1) of this rule and not possible for a state party to hold its presidential primary, caucus, convention, or meeting for the purpose of voting for a presidential candidate and/or selecting delegates to the national convention as was used for the immediately preceding national convention or to se-lect delegates or alternate delegates by congressional district or state conventions pursuant to paragraph (d) of this rule, and the Republican National Committee determines that granting such waiver is in the best interests of the Repub-lican Party. 

Rule No. 16 Enforcement of Rules 

(a) If any state or state party violates the Rules of the Re-publican Party relating to the timing of the selection process resulting in the election of the delegates or alternate dele-gates to the next national convention, such state shall suffer a loss of its delegates and alternate delegates to that na-tional convention as follows: (1) If a state or state party violates the Rules of the Repub-lican Party relating to the timing of the selection process re-sulting in the election of delegates or alternate delegates to the national convention before the call to the national con-vention is issued, then the number of delegates to the na-tional convention from that state shall be reduced by fifty percent (50%), and the corresponding alternated delegates shall also be reduced. (2) If a state or state party violates the Rules of the Repub-lican Party relating to the timing of the selection process re-sulting in the election of delegates or alternate delegates to the national convention after the call to the national conven-tion is issued, then the number of delegates to the national convention from that state shall be reduced by ninety per-cent (90%), and the corresponding alternate delegates shall also be reduced. (3) Any sum representing a fraction shall be increased to the nearest whole number, so long as such rounding does not prevent a state from having at least one (1) delegate or alter-nate delegate to the national convention. (b) If a violation has occurred before the issuance of the call to the national convention, the chairman of the Republican National Committee shall notify the offending state of the violation and shall inform the state of the number of dele-253 Nomination and Election gates and alternate delegates it will lose. This reduced num-ber of delegates and alternate delegates will be reflected in the call to the national convention, and will be reported to the secretary of state or responsible election official of the of-fending state and to the chairman of every state party. Said reduced number will be the only number recognized as the official delegation of the state to the national convention. (c) If a violation has occurred after the issuance of the call to the national convention, the chairman of the Republican National Committee shall notify the state of the violation and shall inform the state of the number of delegates and al-ternate delegates it will lose. This reduced number of dele-gates and alternate delegates will be reported to the sec-retary of state or responsible election official of the offending state and to the chairman of every state party, and such re-duced number will be the only number recognized as the offi-cial delegation of the state to the national convention. (d) If the chairman of the Republican National Committee does not act upon a violation of the Rules of the Republican Party relating to the selection and/or allocation of delegates or alternate delegates to the national convention, then astatement may be filed against a state or state party by any three (3) members of the Republican National Committee Standing Committee on Rules who feel that a violation has occurred. (1) A statement filed against a state or state party by any three (3) members of the Standing Committee on Rules shall be written and shall specify the reasons why the members believe the state or state party is in violation. The statement shall be signed and dated by each Rules member filing the statement, and shall be filed with the secretary of the Re-publican National Committee. The secretary of the Repub-lican National Committee shall, within twenty (20) days of receipt, distribute such statement to all members of the Re-publican National Committee. (2) The Standing Committee on Rules shall meet upon the call of the chairman of the Rules Committee, and shall vote upon whether a state or state party is in violation. If by ma-jority vote the Standing Committee on Rules finds a viola-tion, then such state or state party shall suffer the penalties described in paragraph (a) of this rule. (e) If a state or state party is determined to be in violation: (1) No member of the Republican National Committee from the offending state shall be permitted to serve as a delegate or alternate delegate to the national convention. (2) After the Republican National Committee members are excluded from being part of the offending state’s delegation to the national convention, the state party shall determine which of the state’s remaining delegates (and corresponding alternate delegates) are entitled to serve as part of the state’s reduced delegation to the national convention. (3) In addition to the penalties provided for in paragraphs (e)(1) and (2) of this rule, the Republican National Com-mittee Standing Committee on Rules may impose additional sanctions relating to the offending state’s hotel location at the national convention, guest privileges and VIP passes at 254 Nomination and Election the national convention, and seating location in the national convention hall. (f) A state or state party shall have no appeal from either a finding of a violation against it or a penalty imposed upon it under this rule. 

Rule No. 17 Vacancies in a State Delegation 

(a) Where the rules adopted by a state Republican Party pro-vide a method for filling vacancies in its national convention delegation, they shall be filled pursuant to such method. (b) Where the rules adopted by a state Republican Party do not provide a method for filling vacancies in its national con-vention delegation, and where the state laws do provide such a method of replacement, they shall be filled pursuant to such method provided by state laws. (c) Where neither the rules adopted by a state Republican Party nor state laws provide a method for filling vacancies in its national convention delegation, the state party should make every effort to elect those individuals filling the vacan-cies in the delegation in the same manner as the delegates were originally elected or by vote of the state Republican Party executive committee or if the state executive com-mittee has not filled the vacancy by ten (10) days prior to the convention, by vote of the state delegation. This section shall not apply to the delegates allocated to the state in Rule 13(a)(2). 

Rule No. 18 Excess Delegates and Alternate Delegates 

(a) No state shall elect a greater number of persons to act as delegates and alternate delegates than the actual number of delegates and alternate delegates respectively to which it is entitled under the call for the national convention. Pro-vided, however, that if a state is found in violation of the del-egate selection rules under Rule No. 16, then that state shall not elect a greater number of persons to act as delegates and alternate delegates than the actual number of delegates and alternate delegates respectively to which it is entitled under Rule No. 16. No unit of representation may elect any dele-gate or alternate delegate with permission to cast a frac-tional vote. (b) Where more than the authorized number of delegates from any state is certified and forwarded to the secretary of the Republican National Committee in the manner provided in Rule No. 19, a contest shall be deemed to exist and the secretary shall notify the several claimants so reported and shall submit all such credentials and claims to the whole Re-publican National Committee for decision as to which claim-ants reported shall be placed upon the temporary roll of the national convention. 255 Nomination and Election 

Rule No. 19 Certification of Election 

(a) All delegates and alternate delegates shall be elected not later than thirty-five (35) days before the date of the meeting of the national convention, unless otherwise provided by the laws of the state in which the election occurs. (b) Election of delegates and alternate delegates shall be cer-tified: (1) In every case where they are elected by convention, by the chairman and secretary of such convention or by the chairman and secretary of the Republican state committee, and forwarded to the secretary of the Republican National Committee; (2) In every case where they are elected by primary, by the canvassing board or officer created or designated by the law of the state in which the election occurs, to canvass the re-turns and issue certificates of election to delegates or alter-nate delegates to national conventions of political parties, and all certificates shall be forwarded by said duly elected delegates and alternate delegates in the manner herein pro-vided; and, (3) In every case where they are elected by the Republican state committee, by the chairman and secretary of the Re-publican state committee, and forwarded to the secretary of the Republican National Committee. (c) No later than thirty (30) days before the time set for the meeting of the national convention, the credentials of each delegate and alternate delegate shall be filed with the sec-retary of the Republican National Committee for use by the secretary in making up the temporary roll of the national convention, except in the case of delegates or alternate dele-gates elected at a time or times in accordance with the laws of the state in which the election occurs rendering impossible the filing of credentials within the time above specified. 

Rule No. 20 Contests: Resolution by States 

All contests arising in any state electing district delegates by district conventions shall be decided by its state convention or, if the state convention shall not meet prior to the na-tional convention, then by its state committee. Only contests affecting delegates elected at large shall be presented to the Republican National Committee; provided, however, if the contest regarding a district delegate arises out of the irreg-ular or unlawful action of the state committee or state con-vention, the Republican National Committee may take juris-diction thereof and hear and determine the same under the procedures provided in Rules No. 22 and No. 23. 

Rule No. 21 Temporary Roll 

(a) The names of the delegates and alternate delegates pre-senting certificates of election from the officials designated in 256 Nomination and Election Rule No. 19 shall be placed upon the temporary roll of the national convention by the Republican National Committee. (b) No person on the temporary roll of the national conven-tion and whose right to be seated as a delegate or alternate delegate is being contested shall be entitled to vote in the national convention or in any committee thereof until by vote of the national convention the contest as to such person has been finally decided and such person has been permanently seated, except that any such person may be accorded the right to so vote, except in matters involving the credentials of that person, by an affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the Republican National Committee or the Com-mittee on Credentials. 

Rule No. 22 Contest Filing 

(a) Notices of contests shall state the grounds of the contest and shall be filed, no later than thirty (30) days before the time set for the meeting of the national convention, with the secretary of the Republican National Committee and shall be sent, simultaneously, by registered mail to the person or per-sons being contested, except in the case of delegates or alter-nate delegates elected at a time or times in accordance with applicable state law rendering impossible the filing of the no-tice of contest within the time above specified. (b) Notices of contests may be filed only by a resident of the state whose delegation is challenged who was eligible to par-ticipate at any level in the delegate selection process of that state. (c) Only contests that are timely filed under these rules shall be considered. (d) For purposes of the rules relating to contests and creden-tials, the term ‘‘party’’ shall mean a person or persons who shall have filed a notice of contest pursuant to this Rule No. 22, and the person or persons whose right to be seated as a delegate or alternate delegate is the subject of such notice of contest. 

Rule No. 23 Contest Procedure 

(a) The Committee on Contests shall have the power to adopt procedural rules, not inconsistent with these rules, which shall govern the expeditious resolution of contests before the Committee on Contests. When any deadline set out in this rule falls on a Sunday or legal holiday, such deadline shall be extended to the following day. (b) No later than twenty-two (22) days before the convening of the national convention (or, in the case of delegates or al-ternate delegates elected at a time or times in accordance with applicable state law rendering impossible compliance with this requirement, within five (5) days after such elec-tion), each of the parties shall file with the secretary of the Republican National Committee at least three (3) printed or typewritten copies of the statement of position in support of the party’s claim to sit as delegates or alternate delegates to 257 Nomination and Election the national convention together with such affidavits or other evidence as desired. The secretary of the Republican National Committee, upon receiving the statement of posi-tion of a party, shall furnish the opposing party a copy of said statement of position. Each statement of position shall begin with a summary of not more than one thousand (1,000) words setting forth succinctly a synopsis of the statement of position and a specific statement of the points relied upon. (c) The Committee on Contests shall promptly hear the mat-ter; decide which issues are involved, either of law or fact, or both; decide upon its recommendation for resolution of such issues; and submit such issues and its recommenda-tions for resolution to the Republican National Committee. The issues so submitted by the Committee on Contests shall be the sole issues passed upon and determined by the Repub-lican National Committee unless the Republican National Committee shall, by a majority vote, extend or change the same. If the Committee on Contests for any reason shall fail to state the issues either of law or fact, the Republican Na-tional Committee shall decide upon what issues the contest shall be tried, and the hearing shall be limited to such issues unless the Republican National Committee, by a majority vote, shall decide otherwise. (d) The Committee on Contests shall make up a report of each contest filed, showing the grounds of contest; the stat-ute and rule, if any, under which the contest is waged; and the contentions of each party thereto. The report shall con-clude with a statement of the points of issue in the contest, both of fact and law, and a statement of the recommendation of the Committee on Contests as to resolution of such points of issue, and shall be signed by the chairman or his designee. When the Committee on Contests has prepared such report stating the issues of law and fact, a copy of the statement of such issues shall be submitted forthwith to a person in the convention city, whom the parties must appoint at the time of filing the contest to receive such statement, and a copy shall be served forthwith by the chairman of the Committee on Contests upon the parties by the most expeditious method available, providing for written evidence of receipt including, but not limited to, overnight delivery service. (e) The parties shall have eight (8) days to file written objec-tions to the Committee on Contests’ statement of the issues of fact or law, or both, unless the Republican National Com-mittee is called to act upon the contest sooner, in which case such objections shall be made before the meeting of the whole committee. If the parties reside in American Samoa, Guam, Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, or the Virgin Islands, they shall be entitled to ten (10) days to file written objec-tions. The objections shall contain any additional statement of issues of either law or fact, or both, claimed by the party submitting the same to be involved in and necessary to be decided in the contest. (f) When the Republican National Committee is called to pass upon any contest that may arise, the members of the Committee on Credentials shall also be notified of the time and place of such meeting and shall have the right to attend 258 Nomination and Election all hearings of all contests but without the right to partici-pate in the discussion or the vote. 

Rule No. 24 Convention Committee on Credentials 

(a) When the national convention shall have assembled, the secretary of the Republican National Committee shall deliver to the Committee on Credentials all credentials and other papers forwarded under Rule No. 19(c). (b) An appeal may be taken to the Committee on Credentials from any ruling of the Republican National Committee on any contest, by and only by a party to such contest in the proceedings conducted pursuant to Rules No. 22 and No. 23; provided, however, that notice of such appeal must be filed with the secretary of the Republican National Committee within twenty-four (24) hours after the decision, that such notice shall specify the grounds upon which the appeal is taken, and that only the grounds so specified shall be heard by the Committee on Credentials upon such appeal. No evi-dence other than that taken before the Republican National Committee shall be taken up by the Committee on Creden-tials unless it shall, by a majority vote of its members present and voting, so direct. (c) No issue involving the status of one or more delegates or alternate delegates or any contest relating thereto may origi-nate before the Committee on Credentials of the national convention. All contests must first be presented to the Com-mittee on Contests of the Republican National Committee or to the whole Republican National Committee in the manner provided in Rule 18(b). (d) No motion with respect to delegates or alternate dele-gates from more than one (1) state or territory shall be in order before the Committee on Credentials. 

PROCEEDINGS OF NATIONAL CONVENTION Temporary Rules Rule No. 25 Order of Business 

The convention shall proceed in the order of business pre-pared and printed by the Republican National Committee. 

Rule No. 26 Committee Reports 

(a) The report of the Committee on Credentials shall be dis-posed of before the report of the Committee on Rules and Order of Business is acted upon; the report of the Committee on Rules and Order of Business shall be disposed of before the report of the Committee on Resolutions is acted upon; and the report of the Committee on Resolutions shall be dis-posed of before the convention proceeds to the nomination of 259 Nomination and Election candidates for President of the United States and Vice Presi-dent of the United States. (b) The report of any such committee listed in Rule No. 26(a) shall be considered as read if made available to the delegates prior to its consideration. 

Rule No. 27 Definition of ‘‘States’’ 

Whenever used in these rules, ‘‘state’’ or ‘‘states’’ shall be taken to include American Samoa, the District of Columbia, Guam, Northern Mariana Islands, Puerto Rico, and the Vir-gin Islands, except in Rule No. 13 and unless the context in which the word ‘‘state’’ or ‘‘states’’ is used clearly makes such inclusion inappropriate. 

Rule No. 28 Admission to Convention Hall 

(a) No person except members of the several delegations, offi-cers of the convention, members of the Republican National Committee and incumbent Republican governors, incumbent Republican United States Senators, and incumbent Repub-lican members of the United States House of Representa-tives, shall be admitted to the section of the convention hall restricted to delegates. (b) Press and staff shall be admitted to the section(s) of the hall authorized for them. (c) The chairman of the Republican National Committee shall insure that guest passes to the convention are distrib-uted in an equitable fashion. Each delegate and alternate delegate to the convention shall receive at least one guest pass to each session of the convention. (d) Each state, through its Republican National Committee members, shall be allocated full sets of additional guest passes equal to thirty-three percent (33%) of the total num-ber of delegate and alternate delegate membership for that state, rounded to the next whole number. 

Rule No. 29 Voting 

(a) Each delegate to the convention shall be entitled to one (1) vote, which may be cast by an alternate delegate in the absence of the delegate, and an individual holding more than one (1) of the following positions: national committeeman; national committeewoman; or state chairman of any state, shall not be entitled to more than one (1) delegate seat and shall not be entitled to more than one (1) vote. (b) In the absence of any delegate at large or any delegate from any congressional district, the roll of alternate dele-gates for the state or district shall be called in the order in which the names are placed upon the roll of the convention, unless the law governing the state or district electing the ab-sent delegate, the state or district convention, or the Repub-lican state committee or governing committee shall otherwise 260 Nomination and Election provide, or the delegation shall otherwise direct at the time of certification, in which event the alternate delegates from the state or district shall vote in the order established pursu-ant to the foregoing, as set forth in the delegation’s certifi-cation. The form of certificate provided by the Republican National Committee shall provide a means by which an order for voting by alternate delegates may be specified. 

Rule No. 30 Rules of Order 

The Rules of the House of Representatives of the United States shall be the rules of the convention, except that the current authorized edition of Robert’s Rules of Order: Newly Revised (‘‘Robert’s Rules of Order’’), shall be the rules for committees and subcommittees of the convention, insofar as they are applicable and not inconsistent with the rules here-in set forth; provided, however, that the convention may adopt its own rules concerning the reading of committee re-ports and resolutions. 

Rule No. 31 Length of Debate 

No delegate shall speak more than once or longer than five (5) minutes upon the same question, unless by leave of the convention, except in the presentation of the name of a can-didate for nomination for President of the United States or Vice President of the United States. 

Rule No. 32 Suspension of Rules 

A motion to suspend the rules shall always be in order, but only when made by authority of a majority of the delegates from any state and seconded by a majority of the delegates from each of five (5) or more other states severally. 

Rule No. 33 Platform Resolutions 

All proposed resolutions relating to the platform shall be submitted in writing to the Committee on Resolutions with-out reading and without debate. 

Rule No. 34 Minority Reports; Amendments 

(a) No resolution or amendment pertaining to the report of the Committee on Resolutions or the Committee on Rules and Order of Business shall be reported out or made a part of any report of such committee or otherwise read or debated before the convention, unless the same shall have been sub-mitted to the chairman, vice chairman, or secretary of such committee or to the secretary of the convention in writing not later than one hour after the time at which such com-261 Nomination and Election mittee votes on its report to the convention and shall have been accompanied by a petition evidencing the affirmative written support of a minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the membership of such committee. (b) No amendment pertaining to the report of the Committee on Credentials affecting delegates or alternate delegates from more than one (1) state shall be in order. 

Rule No. 35 Motion to Table 

It shall be in order to lay on the table a proposed amend-ment to a pending measure and such motion, if adopted, shall not carry with it or prejudice such original measure. 

Rule No. 36 Previous Question 

When the previous question shall be demanded by a majority of the delegates from any state, and the demand is likewise seconded by a majority of delegates from each of two (2) or more other states severally, and the call is sustained by a majority of the delegates to the convention, the question shall then be proceeded with and disposed of according to the Rules of the House of Representatives of the United States in similar cases. 

Rule No. 37 Roll Call 

(a) Upon all subjects before the convention requiring a roll call, the states shall be called in alphabetical order. (b) In the balloting, the vote of each state shall be announced by the chairman of such state’s delegation, or his or her des-ignee; and in case the vote of any state shall be divided, the chairman shall announce the number of votes for each can-didate, or for or against any proposition; but if exception is taken by any delegate from that state to the correctness of such announcement by the chairman of that delegation, the chairman of the convention shall direct the roll of members of such delegation to be called, and the result shall be re-corded in accordance with the vote of the several delegates in such delegation. (c) In balloting, if any delegation shall pass when its name is called, then at the conclusion of the roll call all delegations which passed shall be called in the order herein before estab-lished. No delegation shall be allowed to change its vote until all delegations which passed shall have been given a second opportunity to vote. (d) Except in a roll call for nomination for President of the United States and Vice President of the United States, or where the majority of delegates of fifteen (15) or more states severally have requested that a roll call be conducted by voice call of the roll, the chairman of the convention may order that the balloting on any subject placed before the con-vention requiring a roll call be conducted by electronic, tele-262 Nomination and Election phonic or computer device which will display votes to the convention simultaneously. Each delegation chairman shall record and tally any such votes of the delegation on official roll call tally sheets provided by the secretary of the conven-tion, showing the individual vote of the delegates, and file such tally sheets with the secretary of the convention not more than thirty (30) minutes after the completion of the roll call vote. 

Rule No. 38 Unit Rule 

No delegate or alternate delegate shall be bound by any at-tempt of any state or congressional district to impose the unit rule. 

Rule No. 39 Record Vote 

If a majority of the delegates of any six (6) states severally shall demand a roll call vote, the same shall be taken of the states in the order hereinbefore established. 

Rule No. 40 Nominations 

(a) In making the nominations for President of the United States and Vice President of the United States and voting thereon, the roll of the states shall be called separately in each case; provided, however, that if there is only one can-didate for nomination for Vice President of the United States who has demonstrated the support required by paragraph (b) of this rule, a motion to nominate for such office by acclama-tion shall be in order and no calling of the roll with respect to such office shall be required. (b) Each candidate for nomination for President of the United States and Vice President of the United States shall demonstrate the support of a majority of the delegates from each of five (5) or more states, severally, prior to the presen-tation of the name of that candidate for nomination. (c) The total time of the nominating speech and seconding speeches for any candidate for nomination for President of the United States or Vice President of the United States shall not exceed fifteen (15) minutes. (d) When at the close of a roll call any candidate for nomina-tion for President of the United States or Vice President of the United States has received a majority of the votes enti-tled to be cast in the convention, the chairman of the conven-tion shall declare that the candidate has been nominated. (e) If no candidate shall have received such majority, the chairman of the convention shall direct the roll of the states be called again and shall repeat the calling of the roll until a candidate shall have received a majority of the votes enti-tled to be cast in the convention. (f) For the 2004 Republican National Convention, notwith-standing any other provision of these rules or any Rule of 263 Nomination and Election the House of Representatives, it shall be in the discretion of the Chair to suspend the roll call conducted to nominate the candidate for President of the United States at any time in order to conduct other Convention business under the estab-lished order of business. 

Rule No. 41 Convention Committees 

(a) The delegates elected to the convention from each state, promptly once all such delegates are elected, shall elect from the delegation a delegation chairman and their members of the Committees on Resolutions, Credentials, Rules and Order of Business, and Permanent Organization of the con-vention, consisting of one (1) man and one (1) woman for each committee, and shall file notice of such selection with the secretary of the Republican National Committee; pro-vided, however, that no delegate may serve on more than one (1) committee of the convention. Alternate delegates may not serve as delegation chairmen or as members of the conven-tion committees, except when the number of delegates at-tending the convention is less than the number of committee positions to be filled, then an alternate delegate can serve, except as noted above. (b) Committees and subcommittees may set time limits for speaking on any question by a simple majority vote; pro-vided, however, that not less than twenty (20) minutes, equally divided between proponents and opponents on any question, shall be allowed in any case on any debatable mo-tion, order, or appeal. (c) Upon request of twenty percent (20%) of the members of a committee or subcommittee of the convention, a vote shall be recorded in the manner provided by these rules, and no votes in the committees or subcommittees of the convention shall be taken by secret ballot. (d) No later than twenty-five (25) days prior to the national convention, members of the Committee on Rules and Order of Business and members of the Republican National Com-mittee shall be provided a copy of the existing Rules of the Republican Party along with all recommended changes to those rules approved as of that date by the Standing Com-mittee on Rules of the Republican National Committee since the previous national convention. Any changes shall be prominently noted. A letter shall be attached to the docu-ment stating that all proposed rules are still subject to change prior to the meeting of the Committee on Rules and Order of Business. After this information is provided, any additional recommendations regarding changes in the Rules of the Republican Party approved by the Republican Na-tional Committee shall be provided to the members of the Committee on Rules and Order of Business as soon as prac-ticable. (e) No later than 25 days prior to the National Convention, all members of each of the various convention committees shall be provided the most current listing of their fellow com-mittee members, with complete contact information. 264 Nomination and Election 

Rule No. 42 Temporary Rules 

Rules No. 25 through No. 42 shall be the temporary rules of the next national convention and its committees and sub-committees. 

PROMULGATION OF CALL 

The Secretary of the Republican National Committee is here-by directed to promulgate this Call by sending a copy thereof to the Republican National Committeeman, Republican Na-tional Committeewoman, Chairman of the Republican State Central Committee or Governing Committee of the Repub-lican Party in each state, and by sending to the Republican National Committee member senior in point of service for each state an additional copy of this Call, which copy shall be forwarded by said member to the secretary of the Repub-lican State Central Committee or Governing Committee of the Republican Party in said member’s state. The effective date of issuance of this call shall be November 9, 2007. 

APPORTIONMENT OF DELEGATES 

The apportionment of delegates to the Republican National Convention is made in accordance with Rule No. 13, Rule No. 15, and Rule No. 16 of The Rules of the Republican Party as adopted by the Republican National Convention at New York, New York on August 30, 2004. Rule No. 13 establishes the Membership of the national con-vention stipulating the formula to determine the number of delegates and alternates to be allocated to each state subject to the provisions of Rule No. 16. Rule No. 15(b) and Rule No. 19(a) establish the window dur-ing which delegates and alternates to the national conven-tion must be elected/allocated as no earlier than the first Tuesday of February in the year in which the national con-vention is held and no later than thirty-five (35) days before the beginning of the national convention (February 5, 2008– July 28, 2008). Rule No. 16(b) establishes the penalty for any State that vio-lates the timing window for the selection and/or allocation of national convention delegates, which is a 50% reduction in the total number of delegates and alternates otherwise allo-cated to that state under Rule No. 13 if that process is cer-tified to the Republican National Committee prior to the issuance of the Call. Any reduction in the number of dele-gates and alternates allocated to a state based on assessing a Rule No. 16 penalty is reflected in this Call. After the Republican National Committee members are ex-cluded from being part of the offending State’s delegation to the national convention as required by Rule No. 16(e)(1), the State Party of any penalized State shall determine which delegates and alternate delegates are entitled to serve as part of the State’s reduced delegation to the national conven-tion, per Rule No. 16(e)(2). If a State attempts to credential more delegates and alter-nate delegates than authorized under this Call, an automatic contest shall be deemed to exist under Rule No. 18(b). At 265 Nomination and Election such time, the Republican National Committee has the au-thority to decide, per Rule No. 18(b), which of those dele-gates and alternate delegates reported by the State shall be placed upon the temporary roll of the national convention. In order to fairly and equitably implement this authority, if necessary, the Republican National Committee shall elimi-nate one delegate and one alternate delegate from each of the State’s Congressional Districts and the remainder from the State’s At-Large total in order to ensure compliance with that State’s delegate/alternate delegate totals as authorized in this Call. This determination shall be in addition to elimi-nating the three National Committee members from that State, as required under Rule No. 16. Based upon the delegate allocation formula listed in Rule No. 13, along with the enforcement provisions of Rule Nos. 15 and 16, the apportionment of delegates to the 2008 Re-publican National Convention is as follows: Alabama ...................... 3 RNC Delegates; 24 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (21) Total Delegates: 48 Total Alternate Delegates: 45 Alaska ......................... 3 RNC Delegates; 23 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (3) Total Delegates: 29 Total Alternate Delegates: 26 American Samoa ........ 3 RNC Delegates; 6 Delegates at Large; 0 Congres-sional District Delegates Total Delegates: 9 Total Alternate Delegates: 6 Arizona ....................... 3 RNC Delegates; 26 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (24) Total Delegates: 53 Total Alternate Delegates: 50 Arkansas ..................... 3 RNC Delegates; 19 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (12) Total Delegates: 34 Total Alternate Delegates: 31 California .................... 3 RNC Delegates; 11 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (159) Total Delegates: 173 Total Alternate Delegates: 170 Colorado ...................... 3 RNC Delegates; 22 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (21) Total Delegates: 46 Total Alternate Delegates: 43 Connecticut ................. 3 RNC Delegates; 12 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (15) Total Delegates: 30 Total Alternate Delegates: 27 Delaware ..................... 3 RNC Delegates; 12 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (3) Total Delegates: 18 Total Alternate Delegates: 15 District of Columbia .. 3 RNC Delegates; 16 Delegates at Large; 0 Con-gressional District Delegates Total Delegates: 19 Total Alternate Delegates: 16 Florida ........................ 3 RNC Delegates; 36 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (75) Rule No. 13 Delegate Allocation: 114 Deduct RNC Members As Delegates: ¥3Deduct Rule No. 16 Penalty of 50%: ¥54 Total Delegates: 57 Total Alternate Delegates: 57 266 Nomination and Election Georgia ....................... 3 RNC Delegates; 30 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (39) Total Delegates: 72 Total Alternate Delegates: 69 Guam .......................... 3 RNC Delegates; 6 Delegates at Large; 0 Congres-sional District Delegates Total Delegates: 9 Total Alternate Delegates: 6 Hawaii ........................ 3 RNC Delegates; 11 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (6) Total Delegates: 20 Total Alternate Delegates: 17 Idaho ........................... 3 RNC Delegates; 23 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (6) Total Delegates: 32 Total Alternate Delegates: 29 Illinois ......................... 3 RNC Delegates; 10 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (57) Total Delegates: 70 Total Alternate Delegates: 67 Indiana ....................... 3 RNC Delegates; 27 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (27) Total Delegates: 57 Total Alternate Delegates: 54 Iowa ............................ 3 RNC Delegates; 22 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (15) Total Delegates: 40 Total Alternate Delegates: 37 Kansas ........................ 3 RNC Delegates; 24 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (12) Total Delegates: 39 Total Alternate Delegates: 36 Kentucky .................... 3 RNC Delegates; 24 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (18) Total Delegates: 45 Total Alternate Delegates: 42 Louisiana .................... 3 RNC Delegates; 23 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (21) Total Delegates: 47 Total Alternate Delegates: 44 Maine .......................... 3 RNC Delegates; 12 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (6) Total Delegates: 21 Total Alternate Delegates: 18 Maryland .................... 3 RNC Delegates; 10 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (24) Total Delegates: 37 Total Alternate Delegates: 34 Massachusetts ............ 3 RNC Delegates; 10 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (30) Total Delegates: 43 Total Alternate Delegates: 40 Michigan ..................... 3 RNC Delegates; 12 Delegates at Large: 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (45) Rule No. 13 Delegate Allocation: 60 Deduct RNC Members As Delegates: ¥3Deduct Rule No. 16 Penalty of 50%: ¥27 Total Delegates: 30 Total Alternate Delegates: 30 Minnesota ................... 3 RNC Delegates; 14 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (24) Total Delegates: 41 Total Alternate Delegates: 38 Mississippi .................. 3 RNC Delegates; 24 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (12) Total Delegates: 39 Total Alternate Delegates: 36 Missouri ...................... 3 RNC Delegates; 28 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (27) Total Delegates: 58 Total Alternate Delegates: 55 267 Nomination and Election Montana ...................... 3 RNC Delegates; 19 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (3) Total Delegates: 25 Total Alternate Delegates: 22 Nebraska .................... 3 RNC Delegates; 21 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (9) Total Delegates: 33 Total Alternate Delegates: 30 Nevada ........................ 3 RNC Delegates; 22 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (9) Total Delegates: 34 Total Alternate Delegates: 31 New Hampshire ......... 3 RNC Delegates; 15 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (6) Rule No. 13 Delegate Allocation: 24 Deduct RNC Members As Delegates: ¥3Deduct Rule No. 16 Penalty of 50%: ¥9Total Delegates: 12 Total Alternate Delegates: 12 New Jersey ................. 3 RNC Delegates; 10 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (39) Total Delegates: 52 Total Alternate Delegates: 49 New Mexico ................ 3 RNC Delegates; 20 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (9) Total Delegates: 32 Total Alternate Delegates: 29 New York .................... 3 RNC Delegates; 11 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (87) Total Delegates: 101 Total Alternate Delegates: 98 No. Mariana Islands .. 3 RNC Delegates; 6 Delegates at Large; 0 Congres-sional District Delegates Total Delegates: 9 Total Alternate Delegates: 6 North Carolina ........... 3 RNC Delegates; 27 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (39) Total Delegates: 69 Total Alternate Delegates: 66 North Dakota ............. 3 RNC Delegates; 20 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (3) Total Delegates: 26 Total Alternate Delegates: 23 Ohio ............................. 3 RNC Delegates; 31 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (54) Total Delegates: 88 Total Alternate Delegates: 85 Oklahoma ................... 3 RNC Delegates; 23 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (15) Total Delegates: 41 Total Alternate Delegates: 38 Oregon ........................ 3 RNC Delegates; 12 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (15) Total Delegates: 30 Total Alternate Delegates: 27 Pennsylvania .............. 3 RNC Delegates; 14 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (57) Total Delegates: 74 Total Alternate Delegates: 71 Puerto Rico ................. 3 RNC Delegates; 20 Delegates at Large; 0 Con-gressional District Delegates Total Delegates: 23 Total Alternate Delegates: 20 Rhode Island .............. 3 RNC Delegates; 11 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (6) Total Delegates: 20 Total Alternate Delegates: 17 South Carolina ........... 3 RNC Delegates; 26 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (18) Rule No. 13 Delegate Allocation: 47 Deduct RNC Members As Delegates: ¥3268 Nomination and Election Deduct Rule No. 16 Penalty of 50%: ¥20.5 Total Delegates: 23.5 (rounded up to 24) Total Alternate Delegates: 23.5 (rounded up to 24) South Dakota ............. 3 RNC Delegates; 21 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (3) Total Delegates: 27 Total Alternate Delegates: 24 Tennessee ................... 3 RNC Delegates; 25 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (27) Total Delegates: 55 Total Alternate Delegates: 52 Texas ........................... 3 RNC Delegates; 41 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (96) Total Delegates: 140 Total Alternate Delegates: 137 U.S. Virgin Islands .... 3 RNC Delegates; 6 Delegates at Large; 0 Congres-sional District Delegates Total Delegates: 9 Total Alternate Delegates: 6 Utah ............................ 3 RNC Delegates; 24 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (9) Total Delegates: 36 Total Alternate Delegates: 33 Vermont ...................... 3 RNC Delegates; 11 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (3) Total Delegates: 17 Total Alternate Delegates: 14 Virginia ....................... 3 RNC Delegates; 27 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (33) Total Delegates: 63 Total Alternate Delegates: 60 Washington ................ 3 RNC Delegates; 10 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (27) Total Delegates: 40 Total Alternate Delegates: 37 West Virginia ............. 3 RNC Delegates; 18 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (9) Total Delegates: 30 Total Alternate Delegates: 27 Wisconsin .................... 3 RNC Delegates; 13 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (24) Total Delegates: 40 Total Alternate Delegates: 37 Wyoming ..................... 3 RNC Delegates; 22 Delegates at Large; 3 Dele-gates from each Congressional District (3) Rule No. 13 Delegate Allocation: 28 Deduct RNC Members As Delegates: ¥3Deduct Rule No. 16 Penalty of 50%: ¥11 Total Delegates: 14 Total Alternate Delegates: 14 Total Number of Delegates: ¥2,380 

Sara Gear Boyd, Secretary Robert M. ‘‘Mike’’ Duncan, Chairman 269 Nomination and Election 

PART III. SURVEY OF STATE LAWS, PARTY RULES, REGULATING THE SELECTION OF DELEGATES TO THE NATIONAL NOMINATING CONVENTIONS A. Delegate Selection for the States ALABAMA 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 60 Republican: 48 A. MANNER OF SELECTION Political parties may provide for the selection of delegates to national conventions by the holding of a presidential pref-erence primary or by popular election of the delegates or oth-erwise. In the event a presidential preference primary is called by the governing body of any party, notice of such ac-tion shall be given to the Secretary of State as part of the notice required by Section 17–13–46. The notice shall pre-scribe the procedure for the listing of the names of presi-dential candidates on the primary ballot and for the selection of delegates pledged under party rules to vote for the respec-tive presidential candidates. A presidential preference pri-mary, when called, shall appear in the first or top position on the primary ballot. When no presidential preference pri-mary is to be utilized, delegates may be elected in the pri-mary election in the same manner as other party officers, ex-cept that subject to such rules and procedures as the respec-tive political parties may adopt, any delegate candidate may be permitted to list opposite his or her name on the primary ballot the surname of the presidential candidate to whom he or she is pledged or the word ‘‘uncommitted.’’ When dele-gates are to be so elected, the candidates for such position or positions shall appear in the first or top position on the primary ballot (§ 17–13–43, Code of Alabama). When the governing body of any political party desires to enter the primary election ordered to be held under this chapter, the governing body for the state shall give public notice thereof by filing a copy of the resolution of such gov-erning body with the Secretary of State of Alabama. Such notice may be given to the Secretary of State by the chair-man of the county executive committee where the primary election affects only one county, and a copy of such notice shall be filed with the judge of probate of such county. (§ 17– 13–46). B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY A presidential preference primary shall be held on the first Tuesday in February each year in which a President is to be elected beginning in the year 2008 (February 5, 2008) (§§ 17– 13–100 and 17–133). The Alabama presidential primary is 270 Nomination and Election AL/AK/AZ Delegates an open type of primary. Any registered voter can vote for one person of one party. A petition or petitions in support of a presidential candidacy must be filed with the state party chairperson of the appro-priate political party. The petition or petitions must be signed by a total of not less than 500 qualified electors of the state or by not less than 50 qualified electors in each con-gressional district in which there shall be a separate petition to be signed. The candidate filing is required 90 days prior to the presidential preference primary election (§ 17–13–102). Each candidate upon filing his qualifying petition shall pay a filing fee that is prescribed by his political party (§ 17–13– 103). Whenever the chairman shall receive petitions, timely filed, which appear to qualify the name of a candidate for President to be placed on the ballot, he or she shall forthwith notify the prospective candidate by the most expeditious means of communication and shall advise such prospective candidate that unless the candidate withdraws his or her name from the ballot no later than 60 days before the pri-mary, it will appear on the ballot of the party at such presi-dential preference primary. If a candidate signifies the desire to withdraw his or her name within the above time limit, it shall not be printed on the ballot (§§ 17–13–104, 17–13–105). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS None. (Party resolution and rules provide appropriate in-structions to delegates.) 

ALASKA 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 18 Republican: 29 A. MANNER OF SELECTION Delegates to the national conventions of the respective polit-ical parties are selected at the state conventions of the par-ties according to party rules. B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY The State of Alaska repealed its presidential preference pri-mary statute in 1984. C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS None. 

ARIZONA 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 67 Republican: 53 A. MANNER OF SELECTION The selection of delegates to the political party national con-ventions shall be as provided in the bylaws of each state party (Arizona Revised Statutes § 16–243(A)). 271 Nomination and Election AZ/AR Delegates B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY A presidential preference primary will be held on the fourth Tuesday in February in the year in which a President is to be elected (February 19, 2008), unless the Governor issues a proclamation that the presidential preference election is to be held earlier. Such proclamation for an earlier date must be issued no later than 150 days before the date of the ear-lier preference election (Arizona Revised Statutes, § 16– 241(A),(B)). To be eligible to participate in the presidential preference election, a political party must be entitled to continued rep-resentation on the state ballot pursuant to § 16–804 of the Arizona Revised Statutes, that is, a party whose candidate for presidential electors received in the last election not less than 5% of the votes cast (§§ 16–244(A)(1), 16–804). Addition-ally, the Secretary of State may determine that a party is el-igible for continued recognition, notwithstanding its showing in the previous election, if on October 1 of the year imme-diately preceding the presidential preference primary, the party has registered voters equal to at least two-thirds of one percent of the total number of registered voters in the state (§ 16–244(B)). A new political party may participate when it becomes eligible for recognition under Arizona Revised Stat-utes § 16–801 (by filing a petition signed by qualified electors equal to not less than one and one-third per cent of the total votes cast for presidential electors at the last preceding gen-eral election) (§ 16–244(A)(2)). Such petition must be filed with the Secretary of State no later than 115 days prior to the presidential preference election. A candidate for nomination as a party’s candidate for the of-fice of President must file with the secretary of state a nomi-nation paper not less than 40 days nor more than 70 days before the presidential preference election and not later than 5:00 p.m. on the last day for filing (§ 16–242). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS Delegates at the party’s convention shall use their ‘‘best ef-forts’’ for the party’s presidential nominee candidate who re-ceived the largest number of votes in the state preference primary until a candidate is nominated, the candidate re-leases the delegate from obligation, the candidate withdraws from the race, or at least one ballot has been taken at the convention (§ 16–243(B)). 

ARKANSAS 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 47 Republican: 34 A. MANNER OF SELECTION Each political party in the state desiring to select delegates to attend a quadrennial national nominating convention of the party to select a nominee for the office of President of the United States shall hold a presidential preferential primary election in the state, and the delegates to the national party convention shall be apportioned to the presidential can-didates whose names were on the ballot at the presidential 272 Nomination and Election AR/CA Delegates preference primary or to ‘‘uncommitted’’ in the proportion that the votes cast for each candidate or for ‘‘uncommitted’’ bear to the total votes cast at the election, rounded to the closest whole number (Arkansas Statutes Annotated, § 7–8– 201). B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY Presidential preferential primary elections shall be held on the first Tuesday in February of the year in which the con-vention is held (February 5, 2008). Any person desiring his or her name on the presidential preferential primary ballot as a candidate for his or her party’s nomination shall file a party certificate with the Secretary of State beginning at 12:00 noon on the first Monday in November and ending at 12:00 noon on the fourteenth day thereafter before the presi-dential primary election. The presidential primary is an open type of primary. The delegates to the national conventions shall be apportioned to the votes cast for the presidential candidates (§ 7–8–201). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS Delegates are apportioned to the votes cast for the presi-dential candidate. § 7–8–201. 

CALIFORNIA 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 441 Republican: 173 A. MANNER OF SELECTION Delegates to national conventions of the political parties are selected at the Presidential primary. The Chair of the State party committee notifies the Secretary of State as to the number of delegates to represent the state in the convention. The Democratic, Republican, American Independent, and Peace and Freedom Parties have procedures and rules as to delegate selection codified in detail in the California Election Code, Division 6, §§ 6000–6849. The Secretary of State places the name of a candidate on the presidential primary ballot when he determines the candidate is generally advocated or recognized throughout the United States or California as ac-tively seeking the nomination of the party. After notification, the Secretary of State may add names to the ballot, but may not take off names unless the candidate signs a timely affi-davit of non-candidacy. An unselected candidate may be nominated by petition by a certain percentage of the reg-istered voters of that party. Newly qualified political parties shall conduct their primary elections in accordance with pro-cedures of any other political party that has a detailed statu-tory provision. (§ 5006) A new political party will be qualified to participate in a pri-mary election when (1) it received at least 2 percent of the vote for any of its candidates statewide in the preceding gu-bernatorial election; (2) when it appears to the Secretary of State that the party’s registration equals at least 1 percent of the entire vote of the State in the last gubernatorial elec-273 Nomination and Election CA/CO/CT Delegates tion, or (3) by petition by at least 10 percent of the entire vote of the State in the last gubernatorial election (§ 5100). B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY The presidential primary shall be held on the first Tuesday in February in any year evenly divisible by the number four (February 5, 2008). (§ 1202) C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS 

Republicans: 

Each delegate to the Republican National Convention shall use his best efforts at the convention for the party’s presi-dential nominee candidate from California to whom the dele-gate has pledged support until such person is nominated for President, receives less than 10 percent of the votes for nom-ination, releases the delegate from his obligation, or until two convention nominating ballots have been taken. There-after, each delegate shall be free to vote as he chooses, and no rule may be adopted by a delegation requiring the delega-tion to vote as a body or causing the vote of any delegate to go uncounted or unreported (§ 6461(c)). 

COLORADO 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 71 Republican: 46 A. MANNER OF SELECTION Minor parties must set out in their constitution or bylaws a method for nominating candidates and selecting delegates to conventions (Colorado Revised Statutes § 1–4–1301). Minor parties may nominate candidates by petition signed by at least ten thousand registered electors submitted to the sec-retary of state no later than March 1 of the election year for which the minor political party seeks to qualify. B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY The State of Colorado repealed its presidential preference primary statute in 2003. C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS None. 

CONNECTICUT 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 61 Republican: 30 A. MANNER OF SELECTION National convention delegates and alternates are selected in accordance with party rules. Political parties may hold cau-cuses for the selection of delegates prior to the day of the presidential primary (Connecticut General Statutes Anno-tated, § 9–486). Not later than the 14th day before the day of the primary, the chairman of each party shall certify in writing to the Secretary the number of delegates to which 274 Nomination and Election CT Delegates such party is entitled pursuant to its rules. If such rules pro-vide that such delegates are to be chosen from districts, the chairman shall also certify the number of delegates allocated to each district and the number to be selected at large, if any. If such rules prescribe a formula for the allocation of delegates to candidates based upon the percentages of the total votes cast for such candidates at the primary, the chair-man shall also certify such formula and all information nec-essary for the application of such formula to the results of the primary. The chairman shall furnish to the Secretary, upon request, a written interpretation or explanation of any application of such formula (§ 9–473). 

Allocation of Delegates: 

If a party’s chairman has certified a formula in accordance with the provisions of section 9–473, the Secretary shall cal-culate the number of delegates allocated to each of such par-ty’s candidates, pursuant to such formula, except as provided in section 9–484 (§ 9–483). If a party’s chairman did not certify a formula pursuant to section 9–473, or if the application of the formula so certified requires all delegates to be allocated to the candidate receiv-ing the greatest number of votes notwithstanding such can-didate’s percentage of the total votes cast for all candidates, the Secretary shall determine the number of delegates to be so allocated to each candidate of each such party in accord-ance with the provisions of this section (§ 9–484(a)). Such determination shall be made separately for delegates to be selected at large and delegates to be selected from each district. Any percentage required to be determined, in ac-cordance with the provisions of this section, shall be rounded off to the nearest one-tenth of one percent. As used in this section, ‘‘minimum percentage’’ means the ratio, expressed as a percentage, that the number one bears to the total number of delegates to be selected, but in no event shall such per-centage exceed twenty-five percent. (§ 9–484(b)). The Secretary shall calculate the minimum percentage, as defined in subsection (b) of this section, using the number of delegates to be selected at large and, if applicable, the num-ber of delegates to be selected from each district respectively. Except as provided in this subsection, a candidate’s percent-age of the total votes cast for all candidates in the State or in a district must equal or exceed such minimum percentage in order for such candidate to be allocated any at large dele-gates or any delegates from such district, as the case may be. The Secretary shall determine each candidate’s percentage of the total votes cast for all candidates in the State and in each district. In the event two or more candidates have re-ceived a percentage of such total votes cast equal to or great-er than the minimum percentage, the Secretary shall cal-culate an adjusted percentage, which shall be each such can-didate’s percentage of the total votes cast for all such can-didates, excluding the votes cast for all other candidates. The Secretary shall then calculate the product of each such can-didate’s adjusted percentage and the total number of dele-gates to be selected, rounding off such product to the nearest integer. Such product shall be the number of delegates allo-275 Nomination and Election CT Delegates cated to each such candidate except as hereinafter provided. (1) If the rounding off of such products to the nearest inte-gers causes the sum of all delegates so allocated to be great-er than the total number of delegates to be selected at large or from the district, then one delegate shall be subtracted from the number allocated to the candidate who received the greatest mathematical gain from such rounding off, and if necessary one delegate shall also be substracted from the number allocated to the candidate who received the next greatest gain, and so on until the sum of all delegates allo-cated to candidates equals the total number of delegates to be so selected. (2) If the rounding off of such products to the nearest integers causes the sum of all delegates so allocated to be fewer than the total number of delegates to be selected at large or from the district, then one delegate shall be added to the number allocated to the candidate who suffered the greatest mathematical loss from such rounding off, and if necessary one delegate shall also be added to the number allocated to the candidate who suffered the next greatest such loss, and so on until the sum of all delegates allocated to candidates equals the total number of delegates to be so selected (§ 9–484(c)). In the event one or no candidate has received a percentage of the total number of votes cast for all candidates equal to or greater than the minimum percentage, the Secretary shall calculate an adjusted percentage for each of the candidates receiving the greatest and second greatest number of votes cast for all candidates. The adjusted percentage shall be such candidate’s percentage of the total number of votes cast for both such candidates, excluding the total number of votes cast for all other candidates. The Secretary shall determine the number of delegates allocated to each candidate by using the same procedure as prescribed in subsection (c) of this section (§ 9–484(d)). 

Certification of Delegates; Release of Delegates: 

Forthwith upon completion of the procedures prescribed by section 9–483 or 9–484, as the case may be, the Secretary shall certify to the chairman, each candidate and the na-tional committee of the party, the number of such party’s at large and district delegates allocated to each candidate in ac-cordance with the provisions of said sections. Each party shall select a number of delegates, both at large and from each district, pursuant to its rules and in accordance with such certification, provided it shall select a number of dele-gates committed to support each candidate which is not less than the number so allocated to such candidate. If, prior to a party’s selection of delegates, a candidate to whom one or more of such party’s delegates are allocated files with the Secretary a written statement, by him signed, to the effect that he has released all Connecticut delegates allocated to him, delegates committed to such candidate shall not be se-lected by such party. Forthwith upon the selection of dele-gates, the chairman shall certify to the Secretary the name and address of each delegate, the district from which he was selected or that he was selected at large, and the name of the candidate to whom he is committed or that he is uncom-276 Nomination and Election CT Delegates mitted, as the case may be. If, as a consequence of any such candidate’s release of delegates, the number of delegates dif-fers from the number so allocated in accordance with the Secretary’s certification, the chairman shall include in his certification a statement to such effect and an accounting of the differences (§ 9–485(a)). The Secretary shall forward a copy of such certification to the national committee of the party and to each candidate to whom at least one delegate is committed. If such certification indicates that the party has not complied with the provisions of this section in its selection of delegates, the Secretary shall so inform the chairman, each such candidate and the national committee of the party. If any such candidate files with the Secretary a written objection to any delegate com-mitted to him according to the chairman’s certification, the Secretary shall inform the chairman and the national com-mittee of the party of such objection. Any dispute over the selection of delegates by a party shall be resolved in such manner as its rules may prescribe (§9–485(b)). B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY A primary is held on the first Tuesday in February of each year in which the President of the United States is to be elected (February 5, 2008). (§9–464). The presidential pri-mary is a closed type of primary. The name of a candidate shall be placed on the ballot at a primary of a party either: (a) by direction of the Secretary of State when he determines within the time specified that the candidacy of such person for such party’s nomination for president is generally and se-riously advocated or recognized according to reports in the national or state news media, unless such candidate files a request to omit his name; or (b) by petition to the Secretary of State (§9–465). 1. Candidate List: 

The secretary shall, at ten o’clock a.m. on the seventy-fourth day preceding the day of the primary, publicly announce a list of candidates whose names are to be placed on the ballot of each party at such primary pursuant to subsection (a) of section 9–465. Forthwith upon announcing such list, said secretary shall notify each such candidate, by registered mail with return receipt requested, that his name will be included on the ballot unless he files with the Secretary, not later than four o’clock p.m. of the thirty-sixth day before the pri-mary, a written request, signed by the candidate, to the fol-lowing effect: ‘‘I request that my name be omitted from the ballot at Connecticut’s forthcoming . . . (name of party) pres-idential preference primary’’. The name of any candidate who files a request as provided by this section, within the time specified, shall be omitted from the ballot, but no such with-drawal shall be honored if it is received later than the time specified by his section (§9–466). 2. Issuance of Petition: 

On or after twelve o’clock noon of the seventy-fourth day pre-ceding the day of the primary, any person seeking the nomi-nation of a party for president, whose name is not included 277 Nomination and Election CT Delegates in the list of candidates announced by the Secretary pursu-ant to section 9–466, or any person advocating the nomina-tion of such person, by such party, may obtain petition pages from the Secretary in the manner provided by this section. Such pages shall be in a form prescribed by the Secretary and shall conform, as nearly as may be, to the requirements for primary petition forms provided in section 9–410. Any person requesting the petition pages shall give to the Sec-retary, in writing, his name and address, the name and ad-dress of the candidate for whom the petition is to be cir-culated and the party holding the primary, and shall also file, or cause to be filed, with said Secretary a written state-ment, signed by such candidate, to the effect that he con-sents to the inclusion of his name on the primary ballot of such party. Upon completion of these requirements, the Sec-retary shall give to the person so requesting such petition pages a number of pages sufficient to contain at least two times the number of signatures required in accordance with the provisions of section 9–468. The Secretary shall also fill in on each petition page the name and address of the can-didate, the words ‘‘nomination for president of the United States’’ as the designation of the office sought, and the name of the party conducting the primary (§9–467). 3. Candidate Petition for Ballot Inclusion: 

Such petitions shall be circulated, filed with the registrars of voters, and verified by said registrars, as nearly as may be, in accordance with the provisions of sections 9–410 and 9– 412. Each page of such a petition shall be filed with the reg-istrar of voters of the party holding the primary in the town of voting residence of the signers thereof, not later than four o’clock p.m. of the forty-sixth day preceding the day of the primary; and such registrar shall verify the signatures on each such page and forward it to the secretary not later than four o’clock p.m. of the forty-second day preceding the day of the primary. If, prior to such last day for filing such pages with the registrar, such a petition was issued under section 9–467, the office or office facilities of each registrar of such party in each town shall open not later than one o’clock p.m. and remain open until at least four o’clock p.m., and each such registrar or his deputy assistant registrar shall be present therein (§ 9–468). The Secretary shall complete tab-ulation of the signatures on each petition not later than the thirty-sixth day preceding the day of the primary. The sec-retary shall place on the ballot of each party at the primary the name of each candidate whose petition has been signed by a number of enrolled members of such party equal to at least one per cent of the total number of enrolled members of such party in the state, according to the most recent en-rollment records on file in the office of the Secretary. No can-didate who has filed a statement of consent pursuant to the provisions of section 9–467 and whose name is placed on the ballot pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be per-mitted to withdraw his name from such ballot (§9–469). 278 Nomination and Election CT Delegates 4. Order of Names on Ballot: 

The Secretary shall determine by lot, in a public ceremony held on the thirty-fifth day preceding the day of the primary, the order in which the names of the candidates will appear on the ballot of each party at such primary; provided that the category ‘‘uncommitted’’ shall appear last on such ballots. Notwithstanding any provision of the general statutes to the contrary, no candidate shall be designated on the ballot as the party-endorsed candidate. The names of such candidates shall appear, in the order so determined by the Secretary, in the first vertical column of the voting machine. Such column shall be designated ‘‘Nomination for President of the United States’’; provided if the number of candidates is such that there is an insufficient number of places in such column, the Secretary shall determine whether the names of the can-didates shall also extend, in the order so determined, to the second and succeeding columns as may be necessary, or shall appear on the first and succeeding horizontal rows as may be necessary. Such columns or rows shall be designated as hereinabove provided. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the form of the ballot shall be prescribed by the Sec-retary and shall conform, as nearly as may be, to the provi-sions of section 9–437 (§9–470). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The Secretary shall certify to the chairman, each candidate and the national committee of the party, the number of such party’s at large and district delegates allocated to each can-didate in accordance with the provisions of said sections. Each party shall select a number of delegates, both at large and from each district, pursuant to its rules and in accord-ance with such certification, provided it shall select a num-ber of delegates committed to support each candidate which is not less than the number so allocated to such candidate. If, prior to a party’s selection of delegates, a candidate to whom one or more of such party’s delegates are allocated files with the Secretary a written statement, by him signed, to the effect that he has released all Connecticut delegates allocated to him, delegates committed to such candidate shall not be selected by such party. Forthwith upon the selection of delegates, the chairman shall certify to the Secretary the name and address of each delegate, the district from which he was selected or that he was selected at large, and the name of the candidate to whom he is committed or that he is uncommitted, as the case may be. If, as a consequence of any such candidate’s release of delegates, the number of del-egates differs from the number so allocated in accordance with the Secretary’s certification, the chairman shall include in his certification a statement to such effect and an account-ing of the differences. The Secretary shall forward a copy of such certification to the national committee of the party and to each candidate to whom at least one delegate is committed. If such certification indicates that the party has not complied with the provisions of this section in its selection of delegates, the secretary shall so inform the chairman, each such candidate and the na-tional committee of the party. If any such candidate files 279 Nomination and Election CT/DE Delegates with the Secretary a written objection to any delegate com-mitted to him according to the chairman’s certification, the secretary shall inform the chairman and the national com-mittee of the party of such objection. Any dispute over the selection of delegates by a party shall be resolved in such manner as its rules may prescribe. If, subsequent to the primary, a candidate to whom one or more of such party’s delegates are allocated either dies or files with the Secretary a written statement, by him signed, to the effect that he has released all Connecticut delegates committed to him, the commitment of any such delegate to the candidate shall be deemed to have been released (§ 9– 485). 

DELAWARE 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 23 Republican: 18 A. MANNER OF SELECTION Delegates and alternate delegates to a national convention of a political party shall be apportioned, selected and/or elected in such a manner as the rules of the party may provide. The chair of any political party shall certify and forward to the State Election Commissioner a copy of the party rules at least 30 days prior to the last day on which candidates for the President must provide notification of their candidacy. (Delaware Code Annotated—Title 15, § 3185). B. PRESIDENTIAL PRIMARY ELECTION 

Political Party Candidates 

A presidential primary election for major political parties shall be conducted on the first Tuesday in February in the calendar year of a presidential election (February 5, 2008) (§ 3181(a)). A political party may choose not to participate in a presi-dential primary if the party notifies the State Election Com-mission in writing prior to the close of business on August 1 of the year preceding any year in which the President is to be elected. (Title 15, § 3181(b)). A candidate is eligible for the primary election if the can-didate is affiliated with a party appearing on the ballot of the previous general election, and has become eligible to re-ceive federal ‘‘matching payments,’’ or has filed a petition with the State Election Commission with at least 500 signa-tures of registered voters of that party. (Title 15, § 3184). Notification of candidacy shall be no later than December 10 in the year preceding the year in which the President of the United States is elected (Title 15, 3183(a)). The chairperson of each political party participating in the presidential pri-mary shall, 7 working days after the deadline set above, pro-vide the State Election Commissioner with a list of all per-sons affiliated with such party, not already on the ballot, who have become eligible by the close of business on the pre-ceding day to receive payments from the Presidential Pri-mary Matching Payment Account of the Internal Revenue 280 Nomination and Election DE/DC Delegates Code and who have not previously announced their with-drawal from the national presidential race and/or who have not announced the suspension of their presidential campaign (Title 15, 3183(b)). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS None. 

DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 37 Republican: 19 A. MANNER OF SELECTION No candidate for delegate or alternate may be listed on the primary ballot unless such candidate was properly selected according to the rules of his political party. (District of Co-lumbia Code, § 1–1001.05(b)(3)(B)). Candidates for delegate and alternates where permitted by political party rules to a particular political party national convention convened to nominate that party’s candidate for President shall be listed on the ballot of the presidential preference primary held as: (1) Full slates of candidates for delegates supporting a can-didate for nomination for President if there shall have been filed with the Board, no later than 60 days before the date of such presidential primary, a petition on behalf of such slate’s candidacy signed by the candidates on the slate, and by at least 1,000, or 1 percent, whichever is less, of the quali-fied electors of the District of Columbia who are registered under § 1–1001.07 and are of the same political party as the candidates on such slate; (2) Full slates of candidates for delegates not committed to support any named candidate for nomination for President if there shall have been filed with the Board, no later than 60 days before the date of such presidential primary, a petition on behalf of such slate’s candidacy signed by the candidates on the slate and by at least 1,000, or 1 percent, whichever is less, of the qualified electors of the District of Columbia who have registered under § 1–1001.07 and are of the same political party as the candidates on such slate; (3) An individual candidate for delegate supporting a can-didate for nomination for President if there shall have been filed with the Board, no later than 60 days before the date of such presidential primary, a petition on behalf of such candidate, signed by the candidate and by at least 1,000, or 1 percent, whichever is less, of the qualified electors of the District of Columbia who have registered under § 1–1001.07 and are of the same political party as the candidate; or (4) An individual not committed to support any named can-didate for nomination for President if there shall have been filed with the Board, no later than 60 days before the date of such presidential primary, a petition on behalf of such candidate, signed by the candidate and by at least 1,000, or 1 percent, whichever is less, of the qualified electors of the District of Columbia who have registered under § 1–1001.07 281 Nomination and Election DC/FL Delegates and are of the same political party as the candidate (§ 1– 1001.05(b)(3)(A)). B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY The District of Columbia Board of Elections shall, on the sec-ond Tuesday in February, (February 12, 2008) of each presi-dential election year, conduct a presidential preference pri-mary in which the registered qualified voters therein may express their preference for candidates of each political party of the District of Columbia for nomination for President (§ 1– 1001.05(b)(1)). No person shall be listed on the ballot as a candidate for nomination for President in such primary unless there shall have been filed with the Board no later than 60 days before the date of such presidential primary election a petition on behalf of his or her candidacy signed by at least 1,000, or 1 percent, whichever is less, of the qualified electors of the Dis-trict of Columbia who are registered under § 1–1001.07, and of the same political party as the nominee (§ 1– 1001.05(b)(2)). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The delegates and alternates, of each political party in the District of Columbia to the national convention of that party convened for the nomination of that party for President, elected at the presidential preference primary, shall only be obliged to vote for the candidate whom he or she has been selected to represent in accordance with properly promul-gated rules of the political party, on the first ballot cast at the convention for nominees for President, or until such time as such candidate to whom the delegate is committed with-draws his candidacy, whichever first occurs (§ 1– 1001.05(b)(5)). 

FLORIDA 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 210 Republican: 57 A. MANNER OF SELECTION The State of Florida shall hold a presidential preference pri-mary for the selection of delegates on the second Tuesday in January, January 8, 2008 (Florida Statutes Annotated, § 103.101). B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY Each political party other than a minor political party shall, on the second Tuesday in January in each year the number of which is a multiple of 4 (January 8, 2008), elect one per-son to be the candidate for nomination of such party for President of the United States or select delegates to the na-tional nominating convention, as provided by party rule (§ 103.101(1)). The Florida presidential primary is a closed type of primary. By October 31 of the year preceding the Florida presidential preference primary, each political party shall submit to the Secretary of State a list of its presi-dential candidates to be placed on the presidential pref-282 Nomination and Election FL Delegates erence primary ballot or candidates entitled to have dele-gates appear on the presidential preference primary ballot. The Secretary of State shall prepare and publish a list of the names of the presidential candidates submitted. The Sec-retary of State shall submit such list of names of presidential candidates to the selection committee on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November each year a presidential preference primary election is held. Each person designated as a presidential candidate shall have his name appear, or have his delegates’ names appear, on the presidential pref-erence primary ballot unless all committee members of the same political party as the candidate agree to delete such candidate’s name from the ballot. The presidential candidate selection committee shall meet in Tallahassee on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November each year a presidential preference primary is held. The selection com-mittee shall publicly announce and submit to the Depart-ment of State no later than 5 p.m. on the following day the names of presidential candidates who shall have their names appear, or who are entitled to have their delegates’ names appear, on the presidential preference primary ballot. The Department of State shall immediately notify each presi-dential candidate designated by the committee. Such notifi-cation shall be in writing, by registered mail, with return re-ceipt requested. Any presidential candidate whose name does not appear on the list submitted to the Secretary of State may request that the selection committee place his name on the ballot. Such request shall be made no later than the sec-ond Tuesday after the first Monday in November (§103.101(2)). A candidate’s name shall be printed on the presidential pref-erence primary ballot unless he submits to the Department of State, prior to the second Tuesday after the first Monday in November, an affidavit stating that he is not now, and does not presently intend to become, a candidate for Presi-dent at the upcoming nominating convention. If a candidate withdraws pursuant to this subsection, the Department of State shall notify the State executive committee that the candidate’s name will not be placed on the ballot. The De-partment of State shall, no later than the third Tuesday after the first Monday in November, certify to each super-visor of elections the name of each candidate for political party nomination to be printed on the ballot (§103.101(3)). The names of candidates for political party nominations for President of the United States shall be printed on official ballots for the presidential preference primary election and shall be marked, counted, canvassed, returned, and pro-claimed in the same manner and under the same conditions, so far as they are applicable, as in the other State elections. If party rule requires the delegates’ names to be printed on the official presidential preference primary ballot, the name of the president candidates for that political party may not be printed separately, but the ballot may reflect the presi-dential candidate to whom the delegate is pledged. If, how-ever, a political party has only one presidential candidate, neither the name of the candidate nor the names of the can-didate’s delegates shall be printed on the ballot (§103.101(4)). 283 Nomination and Election FL/GA Delegates The state executive committee of each party, by rule adopted at least 120 days prior to the presidential preference primary election, shall determine the number, and establish proce-dures to be followed in the selection, of delegates and dele-gate alternates from among each candidate’s supporters. A copy of any rule adopted by the executive committee shall be filed with the Department of State within 7 days after its adoption and shall become a public record. The Department of State shall review the procedures and shall notify the State executive committee of each political party of any bal-lot limitations. The Department of State may promulgate rules for the orderly conduct of the presidential preference primary ballot. Delegates must qualify no later than the sec-ond Friday in November in the manner provided by party rule. All delegates shall be allocated as provided by party rule (§103.101 (5), (6), (7)). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS None. 

GEORGIA 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 104 Republican: 72 A. MANNER OF SELECTION There is no specific statutory provision regulating the elec-tion or selection of delegates to national conventions. The law does state, ‘‘each political party shall establish and maintain a State executive committee exercising statewide jurisdiction and control over party affairs, and a county exec-utive committee in each county in which it holds a primary, exercising county-wide jurisdiction and control over party af-fairs. A party may establish and maintain such other com-mittees as it may from time to time deem advisable. The membership of such committees shall be selected in the man-ner determined by the State executive committee. Each com-mittee shall be presided over by a chairman and shall have a secretary and each other officers as deemed advisable. Georgia will have a presidential primary on February 5, 2008. The State executive committee of each political party or body shall determine the method and procedures by which dele-gates and delegate alternates to the national nominating conventions are selected, as well as adopt any other rule not inconsistent with this article. (Code of Georgia, §21–2–195). B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY A presidential preference primary shall be held in 2008 and every four years thereafter for each political party or body which has cast for its candidates for President and Vice President in the last presidential election more than 20 per-cent of the total vote cast for President and Vice President in the state, so that the electors may express their pref-erence for one person to be the candidate for nomination by his party or body for the office of President of the United States; provided, however, that no elector shall vote in the 284 Nomination and Election GA/HI Delegates primary of more than one political party or body in the same presidential preference primary. Such primary was held on February 5, 2008, and on the first Tuesday in February every four years thereafter. A State political party or body may by rule choose to elect any portion of its delegates to that party’s or body’s presidential nominating convention in the primary; and, if a State political party or body chooses to elect any portion of its delegates, such state political party or body shall establish the qualifying period for those can-didates for delegate and delegate alternate positions which are to be elected in the primary and for any party officials to be elected in the primary and shall also establish the date on which State and county party executive committees shall certify to the Secretary of State or the superintendent, as the case may be, the names of any such candidates who are to be elected in the primary; provided, however, that such dates shall not be later than November 1, in the year preceding the year in which the presidential preference primary is to be held. (§ 21–2–191). Not later than November 1 in the year preceding the year in which a presidential preference primary is to be held, the state executive committee of each party which is to conduct a presidential preference primary shall submit to the Sec-retary of State a list of the names of the candidates of such party to appear on the presidential preference primary bal-lot. Such lists shall be published by the Secretary of State in a newspaper of general circulation in the state during the first week of December in the year in which the presidential preference primary is to be held. (§ 21–2–193). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS Any person selected as a delegate or delegate alternate to such national convention shall file a qualification oath with the Secretary of State pledging support at the convention to the candidate of their political party or body for the office of President of the United States for whom they are selected to support. The oath shall state that the delegate or delegate alternate affirms to support such candidate until the can-didate is either nominated by such convention, or receives less than thirty-five percent of the votes for nomination by such convention during any balloting, or until the candidate releases the delegates from such pledge. No delegate shall be required to vote for such candidate after two convention nominating ballots have been completed (§ 21–2–196). 

HAWAII 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 29 Republican: 20 A. MANNER OF SELECTION The delegates to the national conventions from Hawaii are elected at state conventions held by the political parties. B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY None. 285 Nomination and Election HI/ID Delegates C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS None. 

IDAHO 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 23 Republican: 32 A. MANNER OF SELECTION Each State convention shall write and adopt rules and regu-lations governing the conduct of their respective convention. At their convention each political party may in the year of presidential elections elect delegates to the national conven-tion in the manner prescribed by national party rules (Idaho Code, § 34–707). Delegates are also elected at a presidential preference pri-mary held on the fourth Tuesday in May of each presidential year, i.e., May 27, 2008 (§ 34–731). No later than ten (10) days prior to the presidential primary election, each can-didate for nomination by a party for President, or a des-ignated representative of such candidate, shall file with the Secretary of State a list of names and addresses of persons proposed by that candidate to be delegates to the national convention of the party of that candidate. The number of names set forth on such list of proposed delegates shall be equal to the number of delegates and alternates to the na-tional party convention as are allotted to Idaho for that year by the national committee of that party. No person’s name shall be placed on such a list of proposed delegates unless that person has attained the age of eighteen (18) years at the time said delegates’ list is filed, is a citizen of the United States, is a qualified elector of the State of Idaho, and has resided in the State of Idaho for at least one (1) year next preceding filing of said list. The qualifications of each person, whose name appears on such list of proposed delegates, shall be verified by an affidavit of the candidate, or a representa-tive of the candidate, and said affidavit shall be attached to said list so filed. The form of said affidavit shall be deter-mined by the Secretary of State (§ 34–735). Upon completion of the State canvass of the results of the presidential primary, the Secretary of State shall certify to the State chairman of each political party participating in the presidential primary the number of votes received by each candidate of that party and the number of votes for an uncommitted delegation received by that party (§ 34–736(1)). Each political party shall then select as many delegates and alternates to the national party convention as are allotted to it by the national committee of that party, according to the provisions of the following subsections of this section (§ 34– 736(2)). Eighty percent of such delegates and eighty percent of such alternates to a national party convention shall be selected by a party at its state convention, or as the party rules other-wise provide, from among: (a) the persons named on the lists of proposed delegates to the national conventions filed with the Secretary of State by 286 Nomination and Election ID Delegates that party’s respective candidates for nomination by the party for President of the United States; and (b) the persons selected by that party at its state convention, or as the party rules otherwise provide, to comprise any un-committed delegation (§ 34–736(3)). The number of delegates and the number of alternatives se-lected by a party from a candidate’s list of proposed dele-gates, or selected by that party to comprise any uncommitted delegation, shall bear the same proportion to eighty percent (80 percent) of the total number of delegates and alternates allotted to such party as the total vote received by each can-didate or uncommitted delegation bears to the total com-bined vote cast in said primary election for all candidates and uncommitted delegation, if any, receiving more than five percent (5 percent) of the votes cast for that party. Upon de-termination of the number of delegates and alternates that shall be selected from each candidate’s list of proposed dele-gates and that shall be selected to comprise an uncommitted delegation, if any, the party shall then select delegates and alternates to that party’s national convention in that respec-tive number from each such list and to comprise the uncom-mitted delegation, if any. The delegates and alternates com-prising any such uncommitted delegation shall be selected as the party rules determine (§ 34–736(4)). Twenty percent of the delegates and twenty percent of the alternates to a national party convention as are allotted to a party by the national committee of that party shall be se-lected as delegates and alternates to the national convention of that party as the party rules may determine (§ 34–736(5)). In the event a candidate in the presidential preference pri-mary fails to file with the Secretary of State a list of pro-posed delegates to his party’s national convention, or to the extent that such a list of proposed delegates provided by such candidate fails to name a sufficient number of persons qualified for the office of delegate, such number of delegates and alternates, as would be selected from said candidate’s list of proposed delegates according to the election results, shall be selected by the party as delegates and alternates to that party’s national convention, as the party rules may de-termine (§ 34–736(6)). In calculating the apportionment of delegate votes in con-junction with the selection of delegates and alternates, as provided for in this section, such proportions of delegate votes shall be expressed as decimal-fractional votes or the nearest whole number of delegate votes as the rules of the particular national party or convention may provide (§ 34– 736(8)). There shall be no unit rule applied to or by the delegation of any party to that party’s national convention. No party or delegation shall commit or instruct delegates and alternates selected from that party’s candidates’ lists of proposed dele-gates or selected as uncommitted delegates and alternates. Other delegates and alternates may be committed and/or in-structed as the party rules may provide (§ 34–736(9)). 287 Nomination and Election ID Delegates B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY A presidential preference primary shall be held on the fourth Tuesday in May of each presidential year (May 27, 2008). Each qualified elector shall have the opportunity to vote on the official presidential preference primary for one person to be the candidate for nomination by a party for president of the United States. The name of any candidate for a political party nomination for President of the United States shall be printed on the ballots only: (a) if the Secretary of State shall have determined, in his sole discretion, that the person’s candidacy is generally advo-cated or recognized in national news media throughout the United States. For the purpose of promoting the aspect of a regional primary in this regard, the Secretary of State may consult with the chief election officers of neighboring states which conduct a presidential primary election on the fourth Tuesday in May. The Secretary of State shall publish the names of such persons determined by him to be such can-didates, together with their party affiliation, not less than sixty (60) days prior to the date of the presidential pref-erence primary; (b) if a petition for nomination meeting the requirements of subsection 3 of this section is filed with the Secretary of State by members of a political party to which the candidate belongs; (c) the petition referred to in subsection (b) hereof shall: (1) have attached thereto a sheet or sheets containing the signatures of at least a number of qualified electors equal to one percent of the number of votes cast in this State for presidential electors at the previous general election at which a President of the United States was elected; (2) be filed with the Secretary of State not later than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the presidential preference pri-mary; (3) the format of the signature petition sheets shall be pre-scribed by the Secretary of State and shall be patterned after, but not limited to, such sheets as used for State initia-tive and referendum measures; (4) the petitions and signatures so submitted shall be verified in the manner prescribed in section 34–1807, Idaho Code (§ 34–732). The Secretary of State shall forthwith notify each person whom he has nominated and each such person nominated by petition in writing by registered mail that such person’s name will be printed as a candidate on the Idaho presi-dential preference primary ballot. In the event the Secretary of State is informed of a candidate’s death or incapacity, the Secretary of State may, in his sole discretion, remove the name of such nominated candidate from the ballot, but not later than thirty (30) days prior to said election. No declara-tion of candidacy or affidavit of candidacy shall be required of any candidate as a condition for printing the name of that candidate on the official ballot used in the presidential pref-erence primary (§ 34–733). At a presidential preference pri-mary, qualified electors may vote for candidates for nomina-tion for President of the United States from among the can-didates of one political party only. The elector shall be able 288 Nomination and Election ID/IL Delegates to cast his ballot for one of the presidential candidates of his party, or for ‘‘none of the names shown.’’ A vote of the latter kind shall express the preference for an uncommitted delega-tion from Idaho to the national convention of that elector’s party (§ 34–734). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS There shall be no unit rule applied to or by the delegation of any party to the party’s national convention. No party or delegation shall commit or instruct delegates and alternates selected from that party’s candidates’ lists of proposed dele-gates or selected as uncommitted delegates and alternates. Other delegates shall be committed and/or instructed as the party rules may provide (§ 34–736(9)). 

ILLINOIS 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 185 Republican: 70 A. MANNER OF SELECTION Not less than 61 days before the date of the primary the State Board of Elections shall meet and shall examine all pe-titions filed under Article 7, in the office of the State Board of Elections. The State Board of Elections shall then certify to the county clerk of each county, the names of all can-didates whose nomination papers or certificates of nomina-tion have been filed with the Board and direct the County Clerk to place upon the official ballot for the general primary election the names of such candidates in the same manner and in the same order as shown upon the certification (Illi-nois Compiled Statutes Annotated, Chapter 10, § 5/7–14). 

Selection of delegates and alternate delegates. 

Delegates and alternate delegates to national nominating conventions shall be chosen according to one of the following alternative methods of allocating delegates for election. The State central committee of each political party established pursuant to this Article 7 shall certify to the State Board of Elections, not less than 30 days prior to the first date for fil-ing of petitions for election as delegate or alternate delegate to a national nominating convention, which of the following alternatives it wishes to be utilized in allocating the dele-gates and alternate delegates to which Illinois will be enti-tled at its national nominating convention. The State Board of Elections shall meet promptly and, not less than 20 days prior to the first date for filing of such petitions, shall pub-lish and certify to the county clerk in each county the num-ber of delegates or alternate delegates to be elected from each congressional district or from the State at large or State convention of a political party, as the case may be, according to the method chosen by each State central committee. If a State central committee fails to certify to the State Board of Elections its choice of one of the following methods prior to the aforementioned meeting of the State Board of Elections, the State Board of Elections shall certify delegates for that political party pursuant to whichever of the alternates below 289 Nomination and Election IL Delegates was used by that political party in the most recent year in which delegates were selected, subject to any subsequent amendments. Prior to the aforementioned meeting of the State Board of Elections at which the Board shall publish and certify to the county clerk the number of delegates or alternate delegates to be elected from each congressional district or the State at large or State convention, the Secretary of State shall ascer-tain from the call of the national convention of each political party the number of delegates and alternate delegates to which Illinois will be entitled at the respective national nominating conventions. The Secretary of State shall report the number of delegates and alternate delegates to which Il-linois will be entitled at the respective national nominating conventions to the State Board of Elections convened as aforesaid to be utilized by the State Board of Elections in calculating the number of delegates and alternates to be elected from each congressional district in the State at large or State convention, as the case may be. 

Alternative A: The State Board of Elections shall allocate the number of delegates and alternate delegates to which the State is entitled among the congressional districts in the State. (1) Of the number of delegates to which the State is entitled, 10, plus those remaining unallocated under paragraph 2, shall be delegates at large. The State central committee of the appropriate political party shall determine whether the delegates at large shall be elected in the primary from the State at large, selected by the State convention, or chosen by a combination of these two methods. If the State central committee determines that all or a specified number of the delegates at large shall be elected in the primary, the com-mittee shall file with the Board a report of such determina-tion at the same time it certifies the alternative it wishes to use in allocating its delegates. (2) All delegates other than the delegates at large shall be elected from the congressional districts. Two delegates shall be allocated from this number to each district. After reserv-ing 10 delegates to be delegates at large and allocating 2 del-egates to each district, the Board shall allocate the remain-ing delegates to the congressional districts pursuant to the following formula: (a) for each district, the number of remaining delegates shall be multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the vote cast in the congressional district for the party’s nominee in the last presidential election, and the denominator of which is the vote cast in the State for the party’s nominee in the last presidential election; (b) the Board shall first allocate to each district a number of delegates equal to the whole number in the product resulting from the multiplication procedure in subparagraph (a); (c) the Board shall then allocate any remaining delegates, one to each district, in the order of largest fractional remain-der in the product resulting from the multiplication proce-dure in subparagraph (1), omitting those districts for which the product is less than 1.875; 290 Nomination and Election IL Delegates (d) the Board shall then allocate any remaining delegates, one to each district, in the order of the largest fractional re-mainder in the product resulting from the multiplication pro-cedure in subparagraph (1), among those districts for which that product is at least one but less than 1.875. (e) any delegates remaining unallocated shall be delegates at large and shall be selected as determined by the State cen-tral committee under paragraph (a) of this Alternative A. 

(3) The alternative delegates at large shall be allocated in the same manner as the delegates at large. The alternative delegates other than the alternate delegates at large shall be allocated in the same manner as the delegates other than the delegates at large. 

Alternative B: The chairman of the State central committee shall file with the State Board of Elections a statement of the number of delegates and alternate delegates to which the State is entitled and the number of such delegates and alter-nate delegates to be elected from congressional districts. The State Board of Elections shall allocate such number of dele-gates and alternate delegates, as the case may be, among the congressional districts in the State for election from the con-gressional districts. (See the formulae for determining the se-lection of delegates from each congressional district.) (10 ILCS § 5/7–14.1). 

Statements to be filed by delegates and alternate delegates: 

(A) Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (C), a can-didate for delegate or alternate delegate to a national nomi-nating convention shall file with the State Board of Elections at the time of filing the statement of candidacy described in 10 ILCS § 5/7–10, a statement declaring the name of his preference for President of the United States or that he is uncommitted. (B) The following procedure shall apply to candidates for del-egate or alternate delegate to a national nominating conven-tion of a political party whose State Central Committee uses Alternative B of 10 ILCS § 5/7–14.1. If more candidates for delegate or alternate delegate in a congressional district than have been allocated to that district file statements des-ignating the same presidential candidate as their preference for President of the United States, the presidential candidate so designated or his authorized representative may, within 10 days after the last day for filing such statements, file an affidavit designating which of such candidates he wants to be listed on the ballot as being committed to the presidential candidate. Candidates for delegate or alternate delegate not designated on an affidavit by the presidential candidate shall be listed on the ballot as uncommitted. In no event may the designated person’s filing of the affidavit leave fewer can-didates listed on the ballot as being committed to him than the number of delegates or alternate delegates allocated to the district. (C) The State central committee of a political party may choose to file a statement with the State Board of Elections not less than 30 days prior to the first day for filing the statement of candidacy described in 10 ILCS § 5/7–10, speci-fying that a candidate for delegate or alternate delegate shall 291 Nomination and Election IL/IN Delegates not be required to file an official declaration statement pur-suant to this Section. If the State central committee of a political party specifies that any such official declaration statement is not required to be filed by the candidates for delegates and alternate dele-gates to the national nominating convention of any such po-litical party, then no such declaration statement shall be re-quired to be made (10 ILCS § 5/7–10.3). B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY Illinois will hold a presidential preference primary on Feb-ruary 5, 2008 (10 ILCS §§ 5/7–5, 5/2A.1.1.). The presidential primary is an open type of primary. Any candidate for Presi-dent of the United States may have his name printed upon the primary ballot of his political party by filing in the office of the State Board of Elections not more than 99 and not less than 92 days prior to the date of the general election, in any year in which a presidential election is to be held, a petition signed by not less than 3,000 or more than 5,000 primary electors, members of and affiliated with the party of which he is a candidate, and no candidate for President of the United States who fails to comply with the provisions of this Article shall have his name printed upon a primary ballot (10 ILCS § 5/7–11). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS Unless the rules or policies of a national political party oth-erwise provide, the vote for presidential candidate is advi-sory only, and shall be for the sole purpose of securing an expression of the sentiment and will of the party voters with respect to candidates for nomination for said office, and the vote of the State at large shall be taken and considered as advisory to the delegates and alternates at large to the na-tional conventions of respective political parties; and the vote of the respective congressional districts shall be taken and considered as advisory to the delegates and alternates of said congressional districts to the national conventions of the re-spective political parties (10 ILCS § 5/7–11). 

INDIANA 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 79 Republican: 57 A. MANNER OF SELECTION Delegates and alternate delegates are elected at the State conventions of political parties which received at least 2 per-cent of the vote cast for Secretary of State at the last election (Indiana Code Annotated, § 3–8–4–1). (b) Delegates to a state convention shall be chosen at the pri-mary election conducted by the political party on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in May, 2008, and every two (2) years thereafter. If provided in the rules of the state com-mittee of the political party, delegates may be elected from delegate districts in each county. (c) Not later than noon, November 30, of the year preceding the year in which the state convention is to be conducted, 292 Nomination and Election IN Delegates the state chairman of a political party shall certify the fol-lowing to the election division and to each county committee of the party: (1) The number of delegates to be elected in each county. (2) Whether the delegates are to be elected from districts or at large in each county. (3) If a county is to elect delegates from districts, how many districts must be established in each county. (d) The county committee shall establish any delegate dis-tricts required to be established under subsection (c) and file descriptions setting forth the district boundaries with the county election board not later than noon December 31 of the year preceding the year the state convention is to be con-ducted. If the county committee does not timely file district descriptions under this subsection, the county election board shall establish districts not later than the first day that a declaration of candidacy may be filed under IC 3–8–2–4, and apportion the delegates to be elected from each district in ac-cordance with subsection (c). (§ 3–8–4–3). Each major political party shall elect delegates from each county to the party’s State convention at the primary elec-tion (§ 3–10–1–4). B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY A primary election shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in May (May 6, 2008) of each year in which a general election is held (§ 3–10–1–3). A candidate of a major political party for nomination for the office of President shall file with the election division a re-quest that the candidate’s name be placed upon the ballot under the label of the political party whose nomination the candidate is seeking (§ 3–8–3–1). A declaration of candidacy for a primary election must be filed not later than noon seventy-four (74) days and not ear-lier than one hundred four (104) days before the primary election (§ 3–8–24). A request filed under § 3–8–3–1 must be accompanied by a petition signed by at least four thousand five hundred (4,500) voters of the state, including at least five hundred (500) voters from each congressional district (§ 3–8–3–2). The petition must be submitted to the county voter registration office during the period beginning January 1 of the year in which the primary election will be held and ending at noon ten (10) days before the final date for filing a declaration of candidacy under § 3–8–3–2 for the primary election (§ 3–8–3–4). A request or petition filed is not valid unless received in the office of the election division by noon Indianapolis time on the final day for filing a declaration of candidacy under § 3–8–2–4 before a primary election (§ 3–8– 3–5). Immediately after the deadline for filing, the election division shall certify and release to the public a list of the candidates for nomination as President of the United States for each political party who have filed a request for place-ment on the primary ballot under this chapter (§ 3–8–3–6). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS A delegate or alternate delegate selected from a congres-sional district to the national convention of a political party 293 Nomination and Election IN/IA Delegates shall, on the first ballot at the national convention, support the candidate for President of the United States who re-ceived the highest number of votes in the congressional dis-trict at the primary election if the person is in fact a can-didate at the convention. A delegate-at-large or alternate del-egate-at-large to the national convention is not required to support a specific candidate for President on any ballot at the convention (§3–8–3–11). 

IOWA 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 56 Republican: 40 A. MANNER OF SELECTION Delegates to the national conventions of the respective polit-ical parties are selected by custom by State and congres-sional district conventions comprised of delegates selected at county conventions, as set forth in the party rules. Delegates to county conventions of political parties and party committee members shall be elected at precinct caucuses held not later than the fourth Monday in February of each even-numbered year. The date shall be at least eight days earlier than the scheduled date for any meeting, caucus or primary which constitutes the first determining stage of the presidential nominating process in any other State, territory or any other group which has the authority to select dele-gates in the presidential nomination. The State central com-mittees of the political parties shall set the date for their caucuses. The county chairperson of each political party shall issue the call for the caucuses. The county chairperson shall file with the commissioner the meetingplace of each precinct caucus at least seven days prior to the date of holding the caucus. There shall be selected among those present at a precinct caucus a chairperson and a secretary who shall within seven days certify to the county central committee the names of those elected as party committee members and delegates to the county convention. The central committee of each political party shall notify the delegates and committee members so elected and certified of their election and of the time and place of holding the county convention. Such conventions shall be held either preceding or following the primary election but no later than ten days following the primary election and shall be held on the same day throughout the State (Iowa Code Annotated, §43.4). Delegates shall be persons who are or will by the date of the next general election become eligible electors and who are residents of the precinct. The number of delegates from each voting precinct shall be determined by a ratio adopted by the respective party county central committees, and a statement designating the number from each voting precinct in the county shall be filed by such committee not later than the time the list of precinct caucus meetings is required to be filed in the office of the commissioner. If the required state-ment is not filed, the commissioner shall fix the number of delegates from each voting district (§43.90). The State con-294 Nomination and Election IA/KS Delegates vention is held either preceding or following the primary election at a time and place designated by the State central committee (§43.107). There is no specific statute governing selection of national convention delegates. It is stated that ‘‘the State central committee . . . may organize at pleasure for political work as is usual and customary with such com-mittees’’ (§43.111). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS None. 

KANSAS 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 40 Republican: 39 A. MANNER OF ELECTION Each political party shall then select as many delegates and alternates to the national party convention as are allotted it by the national committee of that party, according to § 25– 4506 and amendments thereto. No later than 60 days fol-lowing the presidential preference primary, delegates and al-ternates to a national party convention shall be selected by a party at its state convention, or as otherwise provided by party rules adopted by the committees of the political par-ties. Delegates and alternates to a national party convention shall be selected in the manner prescribed by party rules (Kansas Statutes Annotated, §25–4507). B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY There shall be held a presidential preference primary in the year 2012, and every fourth year thereafter. On or before No-vember 1, 2011, and on or before November 1 every fourth year thereafter, the secretary of state shall certify to the gov-ernor, to the chief clerk of the house of representative and to the secretary of the senate a common date in the next suc-ceeding year on which at least five other states will hold a presidential preference primary election, a delegate or mass convention or caucus of qualified voters at which delegates to a national convention are selected. On or before each such date, if the secretary of state determines that there is no common date on which at least five states are conducting such selection process, the secretary of states shall certify to the governor, the chief clerk of the house of representative and the secretary of the senate on a date, which shall be on or before the first Tuesday in April of the next following year, on which the presidential preference primary election shall be held (§ 25–4501). The presidential primary is an open type of primary. The name of any candidate for a polit-ical party nomination for president of the United States shall be printed on the ballots only if, not later than twelve o’clock noon, February 12 prior to the presidential preference pri-mary or, if such date falls on Saturday, Sunday or a holiday, not later than twelve o’clock noon the following day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or holiday: 295 Nomination and Election KS/KY Delegates (1) The candidate files with the secretary of state a declara-tion of intent to become a candidate accompanied by a fee of one hundred dollars ($100); or (2) There is filed in the office of secretary of state a petition in the form prescribed by K.S.A. 25–205, signed by not less than one thousand (1,000) registered electors, who are affili-ated with the political party of such candidate as shown by the party affiliation list. The secretary of state shall deter-mine the sufficiency of each such petition, and such deter-mination shall be final (§25–4502(b)). (a) Upon completion of the state canvas of the results of the presidential preference primary, the secretary of state shall certify to the state chairperson of each political party partici-pating in the presidential preference primary the number of votes received by each candidate of that party and the num-ber of votes for an uncommitted delegation received by that party. (b) Each political party shall then select as many delegates and alternates to the national party convention as are allot-ted to it by the national committee of that party, according to K.S.A. 25–4506 and this section, and amendments thereto. (c) No later than 60 days following the presidential pref-erence primary, delegates and alternates to a national party convention shall be selected by a party at its state conven-tion, or as otherwise provided by party rules adopted by the committees of the political parties. The number of delegates and the number of alternates to a national party convention shall be determined according to party rules. Delegates and alternates to a national party convention shall be selected in the manner prescribed by party rules. The binding of dele-gates and alternates to a national party convention shall be determined by party rules. All such rules shall be filed with the secretary of state no later than January 2, 1992, and no later than January 2 every fourth year thereafter (§25– 4507). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS None. 

KENTUCKY 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 55 Republican: 45 A. MANNER OF SELECTION No statutory provisions. B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY On the first Tuesday after the third Monday in May, in each presidential election year, the Commonwealth of Kentucky shall conduct presidential primary elections within each po-litical party (May 20, 2008) (Kentucky Revised Statutes An-notated, § 118.561). Kentucky presidential primary is aclosed primary. (§ 118.571). The State board of elections shall convene in Frankfort on the second Tuesday in January preceding a presidential pref-erence primary. At the meeting required by this section, the 296 Nomination and Election KY/LA Delegates board shall nominate as presidential preference primary can-didates all those generally advocated and nationally recog-nized as candidates of the political parties for the office of President of the United States. Immediately upon completion of this requirement, the board shall transmit a list of all such nominees selected to the Secretary of State and shall also release the list to the news media. (§118.581.). Before any candidate’s name is placed upon the official ballot by the Secretary of State for a presidential preference primary in the Commonwealth, the candidate shall remit to the Sec-retary of State the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000), which shall be nonrefundable unless no presidential primary is held. (§118.611.). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS A declaration that the results of the presidential preference primary, in accordance with the division of votes reflected by the official canvass, shall be the official vote cast by each po-litical party at its national convention, on the first ballot only, and shall be designated by KRS 118.551 to 118.651 as an automatic vote, expressing the will of the people of the Commonwealth of Kentucky. After the vote on the first ballot by the political party at its national convention, as required by this section, all responsibility under KRS 118.551 to 118.651 shall terminate and further balloting shall be the prerogative of the political parties as might be prescribed by the rules of such political parties. (§118.631.). 

LOUISIANA 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 68 Republican: 47 A. MANNER OF SELECTION At least 90 days before a presidential preference primary election, the State governing body of each eligible political party shall establish procedures to be followed in the selec-tion of individual delegates and alternates to the convention of that party, including procedures for the selection of com-mitted and uncommitted delegates (Louisiana Revised Stat-utes, title 18, §1280.27(A). A recognized political party shall be controlled and directed by one State central committee and a parish executive committee for each parish (§442). Del-egates shall be allocated among the presidential candidates according to the results of the presidential primary and ac-cording to the guidelines of the political parties (§1280.27(B). 13. Louisiana will have a presidential preference primary election on the second Saturday in February in 2008 and every fourth year thereafter (February 9, 2008) (§ 1280.21). PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY A statewide presidential preference primary election shall be held on the second Saturday in February in 2008 (February 9, 2008) and every fourth year thereafter for the purpose of allowing the electors of each political party in the state which has forty thousand or more registered members to ex-press their preference for a person to be the nominee of the 297 Nomination and Election LA Delegates party for president of the United States. Each elector voting in such election may vote only for a candidate who is affili-ated with the same party as the elector, except that the state central committee of a recognized political party may allow in its bylaws, electors who are not affiliated with any polit-ical party to cast a vote on the ballot of such recognized po-litical party (§ 1280.21). Candidates for presidential nominee shall qualify in accordance with procedures established by the party. Prior to qualification as a candidate of a political party for presidential nominee, a person shall pay a quali-fying fee of seven hundred fifty dollars and any additional fee as authorized by Title 18 § 464(C) or shall have obtained a nominating petition, bearing the handwritten signatures of no less than one thousand registered voters affiliated with the party from each of the congressional districts into which the state is divided. If the candidate is qualifying by paying a fee, the fee shall be paid in cash, by certified or cashier’s check drawn on a state or national bank or credit union, by United States postal money order, or by a money order issued by a state or national bank or credit union. The quali-fying period for presidential candidates shall open on the second Wednesday in December and shall close at 5:00 p.m. on the following Friday. During the qualifying period, presidential candidates shall file notices of candidacy with the Secretary of State. Each sheet of a nominating petition shall set forth the name of the presidential candidate, as it shall appear on the election bal-lot, the address of the candidate, the political party with which he is affiliated, and the date of the presidential pri-mary. Each voter who signs a nominating petition shall include his name and residence address. All persons who obtained signa-tures shall certify that to the best of their knowledge, infor-mation, and belief all of the signatures on the nominating petition are genuine, and all of the statements contained in the petition are true and correct. A nominating petition shall be submitted to the registrars of voters in the parishes where the signers reside not less than thirty days before the end of the qualifying period. The registrar for each parish shall endorse upon the nominating petitions, whether origi-nal or supplemental, the date and time of submission and shall promptly certify the nominating petitions, in the order received, by determining and certifying on each nominating petition which of the signers are registered to vote in the parish. A registrar may stop certifying the signatures on a nominating petition when the total number of the signers he has certified as having signed the petition timely and as being registered to vote equals 15% more than the number of registered voters required from the congressional district. A registrar’s certification shall be conclusive as to number of qualified voters who timely signed a nominating petition, and evidence to the contrary shall not be admitted in an ac-tion objecting to the candidacy of a presidential candidate fil-ing the nominating petition. (§1280.22). At least ninety days prior to a presidential preference pri-mary election, the State governing body of each eligible polit-ical party shall establish procedures to be followed in the se-298 Nomination and Election LA/ME/MD Delegates lection of individual delegates and alternatives to the con-vention of that party, including procedures for the selection of committed and uncommitted delegates. Delegates shall be allocated among the presidential candidates according to the results of the presidential primary and according to guide-lines established by the governing bodies of the respective parties (§ 1280.27). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTION None. 

MAINE 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 34 Republican: 21 A. MANNER OF SELECTION Statute repealed in 1995. B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY The State of Maine repealed its presidential preference pri-mary statute in 1995. C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS None. 

MARYLAND 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 99 Republican: 37 A. MANNER OF SELECTION The State central committee of each political party shall cer-tify to the State Board, not later than October 1 in the year of the election the number of delegates and alternate dele-gates to be selected in the State and the mode or modes of selection (Maryland Code Annotated, § 8–501). B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY There shall be a statewide primary election in the year in which the President of the United States is elected, on the second Tuesday in February (February 12, 2008) (§ 8–201). An individual who desires to run in the primary election may be placed on the ballot only by direction of the Secretary of State or by filing a petition containing the signatures of at least 400 registered voters from each congressional district in the State. The Secretary of State shall certify to the State Board the names of candidates for nomination by a principal political party during the period beginning 90 days before the primary election and ending 80 days before the primary election. The Secretary of State shall certify to the State Board the names of candidates for the Democratic Party nomination on the first business day in the year of the elec-tion. The Secretary of State shall certify the name of a presi-dential candidate on the ballot when the Secretary has de-termined, in the Secretary’s sole discretion and consistent with party rules, that the candidate’s candidacy is generally 299 Nomination and Election MD/MA Delegates advocated or recognized in the news media throughout the United States or in Maryland, unless the candidate executes and files with the Secretary of State an affidavit stating without qualification that the candidate is not and does not intend to become a candidate for the office in the Maryland primary election. A candidate who seeks to be placed on the ballot by the petition process shall file the petition, in the form prescribed by the State Board, on the Monday that is 70 days before the day of the election (§ 8–502). The State central committee of each political party shall cer-tify to the State Board, not later than October 1 in the year preceding the election the number of delegates and alternate delegates to be selected in the State and the mode or modes of selection (§ 8–501). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The State central committee of each political party shall cer-tify to the State Board, not later than October 1 in the year preceding the election, in the case of a principal political party if delegates are to be elected by district, the number of delegates to be elected from each district; provisions for placing on the ballot the name of a presidential candidate, or the word ‘‘uncommitted’’, adjacent to the name of each candidate for delegate; provisions for how, if a candidate for delegate withdraws in accordance with § 5–502 of this article and the withdrawing candidate’s name would have appeared on the ballot adjacent to the name of a presidential can-didate, that presidential candidate will designate a replace-ment candidate for delegate no later than 5 days after the deadline established in § 5–502 of this article; and any other provisions of the national party rules of the party that relate to the election of delegates or alternate delegates at the pri-mary election. Delegates and alternate delegates to the na-tional presidential nominating convention of a political party shall be selected as provided in the national party rules of the party (§ 8–501). 

MASSACHUSETTS 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 121 Republican: 43 A. MANNER OF SELECTION In any year in which candidates for presidential electors are to be elected, the selection of delegates and alternate dele-gates to national conventions of political parties shall be by that system adopted by the State committee, provided such system shall not include the placing of the names of dele-gates on the presidential primary ballot; and provided, fur-ther, that the distribution of delegates under any such sys-tem shall reflect the preference expressed by the voters on the presidential preference portion of the ballot at the presi-dential primary. The system adopted by the State committee shall be set forth in written rules and procedures covering all aspects of the delegate selection process and a copy of such rules and procedures shall be filed with the Secretary of State on or before October first of the year preceding the 300 Nomination and Election MA Delegates year in which presidential electors are to be elected. The number of district delegates and alternate district delegates, not less than two from each congressional district, and the number of delegates and alternate delegates at-large shall be fixed by the State committee, who shall give notice thereof to the Secretary of State on or before the first Tuesday in January (Massachusetts General Laws Annotated, ch. 53, § 70B). A presidential preference primary shall be held on the first Tuesday in March (March 4, 2008) (ch. 53, § 28). The presidential primary is an open primary. B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY The primary shall be held on the first Tuesday in March in any year in which presidential electors are to be elected (ch. 53, § 28). The presidential primary date is set by statute for March 4, 2008. The Secretary of State shall cause to be placed on the official ballot for use at presidential primaries, under separate head-ings, and in the following order: the names of those can-didates or potential candidates for the office of President of the United States whom he shall have determined to be gen-erally advocated or recognized in national news media throughout the United States; the names of any other candi-dates or potential candidates for nomination for President whose names are proposed therefor by nomination papers prepared and furnished by the Secretary of State, signed in the aggregate by at least twenty-five hundred voters; and the names of those candidates or potential candidates for nomi-nation for President whose names appear on written lists signed by the chairman of the State committees of the polit-ical parties, arranged in such order as may be determined by lot under the direction of the Secretary of State, a blank space in which the voter may, if he does not vote for any of the candidates for President whose names are printed on the ballot, insert the name of any person of his choice as a can-didate for President, and a blank space in which a voter may vote no preference. A vote for no preference and for a can-didate whose name has been inserted by the voter shall be counted as a vote for that candidate. The chairman of the State committee of a political party and the Secretary of State shall submit lists or prepare lists of candidates for President, as aforesaid, no later than the first Friday in Jan-uary, and shall notify each such candidate forthwith, by reg-istered mail, of the presence of his name on said lists. No name shall be removed from said lists, nor from the ballot, unless such candidate shall file with the Secretary of State an affidavit stating that he does not desire his name printed upon said ballot at the forthcoming presidential primary. Such affidavit shall be filed with the Secretary of State no later than five o’clock p.m. on the second Friday in January (§ 70E). There shall also be printed on the ballot appropriate instructions to aid the voter with respect to expressing his preference for a candidate for nomination as President (ibid. ). 301 Nomination and Election MA/MI Delegates C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS If there is a roll call vote at the national convention of a po-litical party, all delegates and alternate delegates whose se-lection is subject by party rule to the approval of a presi-dential candidate shall vote on the first such roll call for that presidential candidate unless released by such candidate (§ 70I). 

MICHIGAN 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 157 Republican: 30 A. MANNER OF SELECTION Not later than 4 p.m. on November 14, 2007, the chairperson of each participating political party shall notify the secretary of state if his or her political party will be using a method other than the results of the January 15, 2008 presidential primary to select delegates to his or her respective national convention to nominate a candidate for president of the United States in 2008. At 4 p.m. on November 15, 2007, the secretary of state shall determine, based upon the informa-tion provided by the participating political parties under this subsection, whether the participating political parties in this state will be using a method other than the results of the January 15, 2008 presidential primary to select delegates to their respective national conventions to nominate a can-didate for president of the United States in 2008. If the sec-retary of state determines that all participating political par-ties are using a method other than the results of the Janu-ary 15, 2008 presidential primary, the secretary of state shall cancel the presidential primary that would otherwise be held on January 15, 2008, and any ballots for that presi-dential primary shall be destroyed. Upon request of the sec-retary of state, the chairpersons of the participating political parties shall provide the secretary of state with the informa-tion necessary for the secretary of state to make the deter-mination required by this subsection. A political party that received less than 20% of the total vote cast in this state for the office of president in the last presidential election shall not participate in the presidential primary (§ 168.613a). The allotment of delegates to all precincts in the State shall be made to ensure, as near as is practicable, equal apportion-ment based upon the total vote cast for the candidate of each political party for either President of the United States or Secretary of State; however, each precinct is to have at least one delegate (Michigan Compiled Laws Annotated, §168.623a(3)(4)). B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY A presidential primary shall be conducted under this act on January 15, 2008, and on the fourth Tuesday in February in each following presidential election year (168.613a). Not later than 4 p.m. on the eighteenth Tuesday before the presidential primary, the state chairperson of each partici-pating political party shall file with the secretary of state a list of individuals whom they consider to be potential presi-302 Nomination and Election MI Delegates dential candidates for nomination by that participating polit-ical party in the next presidential election year. The sec-retary of state shall make the lists received under this sub-section available to the public on an internet website main-tained by the department of state. In compiling the list of in-dividuals to be filed with the secretary of state under this subsection, the chairperson of each participating political party shall consider all of the following: (a) references to an individual as a candidate for nomination by the participating political party for the office of president of the United States in state and national news media, including, but not limited to, the internet; (b) presidential campaign activity by the in-dividual or his or her campaign organization in this state and nationally; (c) support for the individual as a candidate for president of the United States by the general public and by members of the participating political party in this state and nationally; (2) after receipt of the list of candidates from the state chairperson of each participating political party under subsection (1) , the secretary of state shall notify each potential presidential candidate on the lists of the provisions of this act relating to the presidential primary (§ 168.614a). Except as otherwise provided in this section, the secretary of state shall cause the name of a presidential candidate noti-fied by the secretary of state under section 614a to be print-ed on the appropriate presidential primary ballot for that participating political party. A presidential candidate noti-fied by the secretary of state under section 614a may file an affidavit with the secretary of state indicating his or her po-litical party preference if different than the participating po-litical party preference contained in the notification from the secretary of state and the secretary of state shall cause that presidential candidate’s name to be printed on the appro-priate presidential primary ballot for that participating polit-ical party. If the affidavit of a presidential candidate indi-cates that the candidate has no political party preference or indicates a political party preference for a political party other than a participating political party, the secretary of state shall not cause that presidential candidate’s name to be printed on a ballot for the presidential primary. A presi-dential candidate notified by the secretary of state under sec-tion 614a may file an affidavit with the secretary of state in-dicating that he or she does not wish to have his or her name printed on a presidential primary ballot and the sec-retary of state shall not cause that presidential candidate’s name to be printed on a ballot for the presidential primary. A presidential candidate shall file an affidavit described in this subsection with the secretary of state no later than 4 p.m. on the fourteenth Tuesday before the presidential pri-mary or the affidavit is void. The name of an individual who is not listed as a potential presidential candidate for a par-ticipating political party under section 614a shall be printed on the ballot for the appropriate participating political party for the presidential primary if he or she files a nominating petition with the secretary of state no later than 4 p.m. on the twelfth Tuesday before the presidential primary. The nominating petition shall contain valid signatures of reg-istered and qualified electors equal to not less than 1 ⁄2 of 1% 303 Nomination and Election MI/MN/MS Delegates of the total votes cast in the state at the previous presi-dential election for the presidential candidate of the partici-pating political party for which the individual is seeking the nomination. However, the total number of signatures re-quired on a nominating petition under this subsection shall not exceed 1,000 times the total number of congressional dis-tricts in this state. A signature on a nominating petition is not valid if obtained before August 15 of the year before the presidential election year in which the individual seeks nom-ination. To be valid, a nominating petition must conform to the requirements of this act regarding nominating petitions, but only to the extent that those requirements do not conflict with the requirements of this subsection. The names of the presidential candidates on each participating political party ballot shall be rotated on the ballot by precinct. Each ballot shall contain a space for an elector to vote uncommitted (§ 168.615a). 

MINNESOTA 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 88 Republican: 41 A. MANNER OF SELECTION The final authority over the affairs of each political party is vested in the party’s State convention to be held at least once every general election year at the call of the State cen-tral committee. Subject to the control of the State conven-tion, the general management of the affairs of the State party is vested in the party’s State central committee (Min-nesota Statutes Annotated, § 202A.12). The rules of each political party shall provide that for each congressional district and each county or legislative district a convention shall be held at least once every general elec-tion year. Each major political party shall also provide for each congressional district and each county or legislative dis-trict an executive committee consisting of a chair and such other officers as may be necessary. The party rules may pro-vide for only one executive committee and one convention where any county and congressional district have the same territorial limits (§ 202A.13). At 7:00 p.m. on the first Tuesday in March in every general election year a party caucus is to be held for every election precinct (§ 202A.14). B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY None. C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS .None. 

MISSISSIPPI 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 40 Republican: 39 304 Nomination and Election MS Delegates A. MANNER OF SELECTION The State executive committee of each political party shall determine the method and procedures by which delegates and delegate alternates to the national nominating conven-tions are to be selected as well as adopt any other rule not inconsistent with this chapter. The State executive com-mittee of the political party shall establish, at least ninety (90) days prior to the second Tuesday in March in years in which a presidential election is held, procedures to be fol-lowed in the nomination of candidates for delegates and dele-gate alternates to the nominating convention of the political party. (Mississippi Code Annotated, § 23–15–1055.) B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY The State of Mississippi will have a presidential preference primary on March 11, 2008. Each political party which has cast for its candidates for President and Vice President in the previous presidential election more than twenty percent (20%) of the total vote cast for President and Vice President in the State, may conduct a presidential preference primary. No elector shall vote in the primary of more than one (1) po-litical party in the same presidential preference primary (§ 23–15–1081). The presidential primary is an open primary. The Secretary of State shall place the name of a candidate upon the presidential preference primary ballot when the Secretary of State shall have determined that such a can-didate is generally recognized throughout the United States or Mississippi as a candidate for the nomination of President of the United States. On or before December 15 immediately preceding a presi-dential preference primary election, the Secretary of State shall publicly announce and distribute to the news media for publication a list of the candidates he intends to place on the ballot at the following presidential preference primary elec-tion. Following this announcement he may add candidates to his selection, but he may not delete any candidate whose name appears on the announced list, unless the candidate dies or has withdrawn as a candidate (§ 23–15–1089). Any person desiring to have his name placed on the presi-dential preference primary ballot shall file a petition or peti-tions in support of his candidacy with the State executive committee of the appropriate political party after January 1 of the year in which the presidential preference primary is to be held and before January 15 of that same year. To com-ply with this section, a candidate may file a petition or peti-tions signed by a total of not less than five hundred (500) qualified electors of the State, or petitions signed by not less than one hundred (100) qualified electors of each congres-sional district of the State, in which case there shall be a separate petition for each congressional district. The peti-tions shall be in such form as the State executive committee may prescribe; provided, that there shall be a space for the county of residence of each signer next to the space provided for the signature. No signature may be counted as valid un-less the county of residence of the signer is provided. Each petition shall contain an affirmation under the penalties of 305 Nomination and Election MS/MO Delegates perjury that each signer is a qualified elector in his congres-sional district or in the state, as appropriate (§ 23–15–1093). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS None. 

MISSOURI 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 88 Republican: 58 A. MANNER OF SELECTION The State of Missouri will be holding its presidential pref-erence primary on February 5, 2008 (Missouri Annotated Statutes, § 15.755). The state party organization which is the state organization recognized by the national organization of that established political party shall, after the primary and before the national convention, conduct a series of caucuses culminating in congressional and state conventions. Dele-gates to the national conventions shall be chosen at the con-gressional district and state conventions pursuant to rules established by the political parties (§ 115.776). B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY A statewide presidential preference primary shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in February of each presidential election year (February 5, 2008) (§ 115.755). On or before the tenth Tuesday prior to the date of the primary, the Secretary of State shall announce the official list of presi-dential candidates for each established political party (§ 115.758). The official list of presidential candidates for each established political party shall include the names of all constitutionally qualified candidates for whom, on or after 8:00 a.m. on the fifteenth Tuesday prior to the presidential primary, and on or before 5:00 p.m., on the eleventh Tuesday prior to the presidential primary, a written request to be in-cluded on the presidential primary ballot is filed with the secretary of state along with receipt of payment to the state committee of the established political party on whose ballot the candidate wishes to appear of a filing fee of one thousand dollars or a written statement, sworn to before an officer au-thorized by law to administer oaths, that the candidate is unable to pay the filing fee and does not have funds in a campaign fund or committee to pay the filing fee and a peti-tion signed by not less than five thousand registered Mis-souri voters, as determined by the secretary of state, that the candidate’s name be placed on the ballot of the specified es-tablished political party for the presidential preference pri-mary (§ 115.761). The names of the candidates shall appear on the primary ballot in the order in which their request to be included on the ballot was received in the office of the Secretary of State, except that, in the case of candidates who file a request to be included on the ballot before 5:00 p.m. on the first day for filing, the Secretary of State shall deter-mine by random drawing the order in which such candidates’ names shall appear on the ballot (§ 115.765). In a presi-dential preference primary, each voter shall be entitled to re-306 Nomination and Election MO/MT Delegates ceive the ballot of one and only one established political party, designated by the voter before receiving such voter’s ballot (§ 115.770). Each election authority shall cause the names of candidates certified by the Secretary of State to ap-pear on the presidential preference primary ballot of each party, followed by a listing for an uncommitted vote (§ 115.767). After the count and canvass of the votes cast, the secretary of state shall notify the state chair of each of the established political parties for whom a candidate was listed, of the num-ber of votes recorded in that established political party’s pri-mary that each candidate and uncommitted listing received (§ 115.773). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS None. 

MONTANA 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 23 Republican: 25 A. MANNER OF SELECTION Each political party has power to make its own rules, pro-vide for and select its own officers, call conventions and pro-vide for the number and qualifications of delegates, adopt platforms, provide for selection of delegates to national con-ventions, provide for the nomination of presidential electors, provide for the selection of national committeemen and women, make nominations to fill vacancies occurring among its candidates nominated for offices to be filled by the State at large or by any district consisting of more than one county where such vacancies are caused by death, resignation or re-moval from the electoral district, and perform all other func-tions inherent in such an organization (Montana Code Anno-tated §13–38–101). Each political party shall elect at each primary election one person of each sex to serve as com-mitteemen for each election precinct (§ 13–38–201). The com-mitteemen in each precinct shall constitute the county cen-tral committee of the respective political parties (§ 13–38– 202(2)). B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY In the years in which a President of the United States is to be elected, a presidential preference primary election will be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in (§ § 13– 10–107(1), 13–10–401) June (June 3, 2008). The presidential primary is an open primary. The regular party primary bal-lots shall be used for the presidential preference primary election. The presidential section of the ballot shall be placed before any other section, national, state, or local (§ 13–10– 402). The presidential preference ballot shall list all can-didates nominated in accordance with the provisions of this part and shall, in addition, include a presidential ballot posi-tion which shall be designated as ‘‘no preference’’ and ablank write-in space (§ 13–10–403). 307 Nomination and Election MT/NE Delegates Before a presidential candidate may qualify for placement on the ballot, he must either be nominated on petitions with the verified signatures of at least 500 qualified electors, for which the Secretary of State is empowered to prescribe the form and content, or have submitted a declaration for nomi-nation to the Secretary of State pursuant to § 13–10–201, where the Secretary of State has determined, by the time that declarations for nomination are to be filed, that the can-didate is eligible to receive payments pursuant to the federal Presidential Primary Matching Payment Account Act, 26 U.S.C. 9031, et seq., or done both (§ 13–10–404). Declarations for nomination must be filed no sooner than 135 days before the election in which the office first appears on the ballot and no later than 5 p.m., 75 days before the date of the pri-mary election (§ 13–10–201(6)). The filing period opens at 8:00 a.m., January 24, 2000 and closes at 5:00 p.m., March 23, 2000. Petitions of nomination for the presidential pref-erence primary election must be presented to the election ad-ministrator of the county in which the signatures are gath-ered. The election administrator must verify the signatures and must forward the petitions to the Secretary of State. The petitions must be submitted to the election administrator at least before the filing deadline. No filing fee is required (§ 13–10–405). The method of selection of delegates to na-tional presidential nominating conventions is to be set by party rules. The use of the results of the presidential pref-erence primary election by the political parties in their dele-gation selection systems is discretionary and is to be deter-mined by party rules (§ 13–10–407). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS None. 

NEBRASKA 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 31 Republican: 33 A. MANNER OF SELECTION The statewide primary shall be held on the first Tuesday after the second Monday in May in even-numbered years for electing delegates to the county, state, and national political party conventions (Nebraska Revised Statutes Annotated, § 32–401). In each presidential election year, the total number of dele-gates and alternate delegates representing this state at the national conventions of the political parties and their method of selection or election shall be determined by the rules of the national political party holding the convention (§ 32– 703). The filing form for nomination of a candidate for election as a delegate to the national convention of a political party shall (1) contain a statement of the candidate’s preference for the candidacy for the office of President of the United States or that he or she is uncommitted, (2) include a pledge that the candidate, if elected, will use his or her best efforts at the convention for the candidate indicated as his or her pref-308 Nomination and Election NE Delegates erence for the office of President until (a) such candidate re-ceives less than thirty-five percent of the votes for nomina-tion by such convention or releases the delegate from such pledge or (b) two convention nominating ballots have been taken, and (3) be filed with the Secretary of State. No filing form for nomination shall be accepted unless signed by the candidate. The Secretary of State shall prescribe the filing form for nomination (§ 32–704). The Secretary of State shall issue certificates of election to persons elected as delegates to national conventions of the political parties. The certificate shall show the number of votes received in the state by each candidate of the political party for President represented by such delegate (§ 32–705). Alternate delegates to the national political convention of a political party shall be selected in accordance with proce-dures adopted by the state central committee of each polit-ical party. A statement setting forth such procedure and cer-tifying its adoption shall be filed in the office of the Sec-retary of State by the state chairperson of the political party not later than February 15 of each presidential election year. The names of those selected as alternate delegates shall be certified to the Secretary of State by the state chairperson immediately following their selection (§ 32–706). B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY In each presidential election year, the statewide primary shall be held on the first Tuesday after the second Monday in May in even-numbered years for voting on a preference for President of the United States (May 13, 2008) (§ 32–401). Any political party may, by the adoption of a rule, require that any individual whose name is placed on such party’s partisan primary election ballot be a registered voter affili-ated with such party (§ 32–702). Any petition to place a person’s name on the primary elec-tion ballot for President of the United States shall contain the names of not less than one hundred voters registered with the appropriate political party from each congressional district of the state. The name of the candidate for President shall be placed upon the ballot only when written consent of such person has been filed with the Secretary of State not less than sixty days before the primary election. The form of the petition shall comply with the requirements of section 32–628 and shall as nearly as possible conform to the form prescribed by the Secretary of State (§ 32–613). The names of persons in the political party (1) who are pre-sented by petition of their supporters to be party candidates for President of the United States or (2) who have been de-termined by the Secretary of State to be generally advocated or recognized as candidates in national news media through-out the United States shall be printed on the primary elec-tion ballot for the office of President of the United States (§ 32–614). When candidates for the office of President of the United States are to be nominated, every registered voter of a polit-ical party shall have the opportunity to vote his or her pref-erence on his or her party nominating ballot for his or her 309 Nomination and Election NE/NV Delegates choice for one person to be the candidate of his or her polit-ical party for President of the United States (§ 32–701). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTION The Secretary of State in consultation with the Attorney General shall have the authority to do all things necessary in the administration of the Election Act, including ballot preparation, separation of ballots, and ballot instructions, to comply with and carry out the intent of national political party rules and court decisions. Whenever the act is in con-formity with national political party rules as to the election of delegates, the election procedures found in the act shall be followed. The state political party shall furnish a copy of the national political party rules regarding selection of delegates to the Secretary of State no later than February 1 of each presidential election year (§ 32–703). 

NEVADA 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 33 Republican: 34 A. MANNER OF SELECTION Delegates and alternates to national conventions of the polit-ical parties are selected by the State conventions of the re-spective political parties. The State convention shall also, if consistent with the rules and regulations of the party, select the national committeeman and committeewoman of the party. In presidential election years, on the call of a national party convention, but one set of party conventions and but one state convention shall be held on such respective dates and places as the State central committee of the party shall designate; or if an earlier date is not designated, then 30 days before the date set for the national convention (Nevada Revised Statutes, § 293.163). At a time and date set by the respective State central com-mittees in each year in which a general election is to be held, the delegates so elected to each party county convention shall convene as the county central committee shall des-ignate, and there organize, elect the delegates to which the registered voters of the party residing in the county are enti-tled in the state convention of the party, and also elect the members of the county central committee of their party for the ensuing term (§ 293.140). The number of delegates to the State convention of each party which shall be chosen at each county convention of such party shall be one delegate for each 150 registered vot-ers of that party, or major fraction of such number residing in such county; but each county shall be entitled to at least one such delegate (§ 293.145). Delegates to county conventions are elected by ballot at mass meetings in each voting precinct. The county central commit-tees of the political parties call for mass precinct meetings to be held on or before the fifth day preceding the dates set by the respective State central committees for the holding of county conventions (§ § 293.130, 293.133, 293.135, 293.140, 293.163). 310 Nomination and Election NV/NH Delegates B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY None. C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS None. 

NEW HAMPSHIRE 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 30 Republican: 12 A. MANNER OF SELECTION At every presidential primary election, the voters of the State shall vote their preference for party candidates for President and, thereby choose the delegates to each presi-dential nominating convention to which the State is entitled (New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated, § 653:5). Each presidential candidate who has filed pursuant to RSA 655:47 shall file with the secretary of state no later than the third Friday following the last day of the filing period for the presidential primary the names and addresses in alphabet-ical order of the delegates and their alternates, one alternate per delegate, who shall represent the candidate as his or her delegation to the national convention (§ 653.50). Declarations of candidacy shall be filed between the first Monday in November and the third Friday in November, or during such other time period as the Secretary of State shall announce (§ 655.47). All delegates and their alternates selected by each candidate in the presidential primary shall file with the Secretary of State the following certification: I, lll , certify that my domicile is in ward lll in the city (or town) of lll , county of lll , State of New Hampshire, and am a qualified voter therein; that I am a registered member of the lll Party; that, if selected, I shall serve as delegate or alternate to the national convention of the lll Party next to be held for the nomination of candidates of said party for President and Vice President of the United States. I further certify that, if selected as delegate or alternate delegate, I will attend such conven-tion unless I shall be prevented by sickness or other occurrence over which I have no control. I pledge myself, if selected as delegate or alternate dele-gate to said convention, whenever I shall vote, to vote for the nomination of (inserting the name of any person) as the candidate for said party for President so long as he shall be a candidate before said convention (§ 655:51). B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY The presidential primary election shall be held on the second Tuesday in March or on a date selected by the Secretary of State which is 7 days or more immediately preceding the date on which any other State shall hold a similar election, whichever is earlier, of each year when a President of the United States is to be elected. The primary shall be held in connection with the regular March town meeting or election or, if held on any other day, at a special election called by the Secretary of State for that purpose (§ 653:9). The presi-dential primary is an open primary in which independent voters may participate if party rules permit (§ 659:14). Declarations of candidacy shall be filed between the first Monday in November and the third Friday in November, or 311 Nomination and Election NH/NJ Delegates during such other time period as the Secretary of State shall announce (§ 655.47). A filing fee of $1,000 is also required, but may be waived upon proof of indigence and the filing of 10 primary petitions from each county signed by registered party voters and of the candidate’s written assent to can-didacy: (§ 655:48). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS All delegates and their alternates selected by each candidate in the presidential primary must certify and pledge that they will vote for the nomination of such candidate for said party for President so long as he shall be a candidate before the national convention (§ 655:51). 

NEW JERSEY 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 127 Republican: 52 A. MANNER OF SELECTION Presidential primary elections for delegates and alternates to national conventions of political parties shall be held in each presidential year on the Tuesday next after the first Monday in February (February 5, 2006) (New Jersey Statutes Anno-tated, § 19:2–1). The chairman of the State committee of each political party shall notify the Attorney General, on or before December 20 of that preceding year, of the number of delegates-at-large and the number of alternates-at-large to be elected to the next national convention of such party by the voters of the party throughout the State, and also of the number of dele-gates and alternates to be chosen to such convention in the respective congressional districts or other territorial subdivi-sions of the State as mentioned in such notification (§ 19:24– 1). Candidates for election as delegates or alternates to the na-tional conventions of political parties shall be nominated by petition in the manner provided for the nomination of can-didates to be voted for at the primary election for the general election (§ 19:24–3). Not less than 100 members of each such political party may file with the Attorney General at least 57 days prior to the presidential primary election in any year of a national convention a petition requesting that the name of a person therein indorsed shall be printed on the presi-dential primary ticket of such political party as candidate for the position of delegate-at-large or alternate-at-large, to be chosen by the party voters throughout the State to the na-tional convention of that party, or as a delegate or alternate to be chosen to that convention by the voters of any congres-sional district (§ 19:24–4). Candidates for the position of delegate or alternate may be grouped together, if they so request in their petitions, and may also have the name of the candidate for President whom they favor placed opposite their individual names or opposite such groups, if they so request in their petitions and if the written consent of such candidate for President is endorsed upon their petitions, under the caption ‘‘Choice for Presi-312 Nomination and Election NJ Delegates dent’’ (§ 19:24–5). A vote for the group shall be tallied as a separate vote for each of the candidates for delegate and al-ternate listed in the group (§ 19:24–6). Notwithstanding any provision of this Title, national and State party rules shall govern the selection of delegates and alternates to national party conventions, provided the State chairman of the political party notifies the Attorney General prior to December 20 of the year preceding each presidential election or January 1 of every other year, as the case may be, in which delegates and alternates are elected of the ap-plicable party rules governing the delegate selection process. The Attorney General shall notify the county clerks prior to December 20 of the year preceding each presidential election or January 10 of every other year, as the case may be, in which delegates and alternates are elected of the applicable party rules, if any, which apply to matters within their juris-diction. Pursuant to this section, the Attorney General shall issue to the county clerks uniform regulations governing the delegate selection process (§ 19:24–2). B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY Primary elections for the general election shall be held in each year on the Tuesday next after the first Monday in June (June 3, 2008) (§ 19:2–1). Not less than 100 members of each such political party may file with the Attorney Gen-eral at least 57 days prior to the presidential primary elec-tion in any year of a national convention a petition request-ing that the name of a person therein indorsed shall be printed on the presidential primary ticket of such political party as candidate for the position of delegate-at-large or al-ternate-at-large, to be chosen by the party voters throughout the State to the national convention of that party, or as a delegate or alternate to be chosen to that convention by the voters of any congressional district (§ 19:24–4). Not less than one thousand voters of any political party may file a petition with the Attorney General on or before the 57th day before a presidential primary election, requesting that the name of the person indorsed therein as a candidate of such party for the office of President of the United States shall be printed upon the official presidential primary ballot of that party for the then ensuing election for delegates and alternates to the national convention of such party. The peti-tion shall be prepared and filed in the form and manner herein required for the indorsement of candidates to be voted for at the primary election for the general election, except that the candidate shall not be permitted to have a designa-tion or slogan following his name, and that it shall not be necessary to have the consent of such candidate for Presi-dent indorsed on the petition (§ 19:25–3). The Attorney Gen-eral shall certify the names so indorsed to the county clerk of each county not later than the 48th day before such presi-dential primary election (§ 19:25–4). No designation or slogan shall be printed on any ballot to be used at the primary in connection with any candidate or group of candidates for of-fice, which designation or slogan includes or refers to the name of any other person unless the written consent of such other person has been filed with the petition of nomination 313 Nomination and Election NJ/NM Delegates of such candidate or group of candidates (§ 19:23–25.1). The signers to petitions for ‘‘Choice for President’’ or delegates and alternates to national conventions may name three per-sons in their petition as a committee on vacancies (§ 19:23– 12). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS None. 

NEW MEXICO 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 38 Republican: 32 A. MANNER OF SELECTION Upon the completion of the State canvass of the results of the presidential primary, the Secretary of State shall certify to the State chairman of each political party participating in the primary and to the credentials committee of the national convention of each such political party, the names of all can-didates and uncommitted category and the total vote and the percentage of the total vote of such candidates or uncommit-ted category received. Each political party shall select as many delegates and alternates to the national party conven-tion as are allotted to it by the national committee of that party (New Mexico Statutes Ann., § 1–8–60). B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY In the year in which the president and vice president of the United States are to be elected, the registered voters of this state shall be given an opportunity to express their pref-erence for the person to be the presidential candidate of their party in either a presidential primary election or in accord-ance with the selection procedure for presidential candidates of each voter’s party (§ 1–8–54). The presidential primary election shall be held on the first Tuesday in June, the same date as the primary election is held in the State (June 3, 2008) (§ 1–8–11). The presidential primary is a closed primary (§ 1–12–7). There shall be con-vened in Santa Fe a committee consisting of the Chief Jus-tice of the Supreme Court, as chairman, the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the Minority Floor Leader of the House of Representatives, the President pro tempore of the Senate, the Minority Floor Leader of the Senate and the state chairmen of those major political parties participating in the presidential primary. This committee shall nominate as presidential primary candidates and certify to the Sec-retary of State not later than February 15 before the presi-dential primary election the names of all those generally ad-vocated and nationally recognized or supported by any major political party in the state as candidates of the major polit-ical parties participating in the presidential primary for the office of President (§ 1–8–56). No later than 5:00 p.m. on the thirtieth day following the nominations by committee, any person seeking the endorse-ment by the national political party for the office of Presi-dent or any group organized in the State on behalf of and 314 Nomination and Election NM Delegates with the consent of such person may submit to the Secretary of State a petition on a form prescribed and furnished by the Secretary of State to have such candidate’s name printed on the presidential primary ballot. The petition shall be signed by a number of registered voters in each of the congressional districts equal to not less than two percent of the total num-ber of votes for President cast in each district at the last pre-ceding presidential election (§ 1–8–57). The secretary of state shall contact each person who has been nominated by the committee or by petition and notify him in writing by certified mail, with return receipt re-quested, that his name will be printed as a candidate on the New Mexico presidential primary ballot unless he requests in writing otherwise at least fifty days prior to the election (§ 1–8–58). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The vote of the delegates or their alternates to the national convention from each such political party from New Mexico shall be cast on the first presidential nomination ballot of the national convention by the chairman of the delegation. The manner of casting the vote of each party delegation shall be as follows: (1) each candidate and the uncommitted category shall be entitled to a share of the total vote allotted to the delegation that is equal to the proportion that the vote he received in the presidential primary bears to the total combined vote re-ceived by all qualified candidates; provided that no candidate shall be excluded who has received at least fifteen percent of the total vote cast for candidates for President of that party, and no candidate shall be excluded in violation of any polit-ical party rule; and (2) the method used to compute the total votes allowed to a candidate or the uncommitted category shall be determined by the party rules on file in the office of the Secretary of State. The provisions of this section with regard to the manner of voting by the New Mexico delegations at the national party conventions apply only to the first nominating ballot cast at such conventions. Such delegations may be released prior to the first ballot from voting in the manner provided by this section upon death of the candidate or upon his written un-conditional release of such votes allotted to him. Any votes so released shall be cast in the manner of votes allotted to the uncommitted category (§ 1–8–60). No person selected as a delegate or alternate shall qualify to attend the national convention of his political party unless he files with the state chairman of his political party at least fifteen days prior to the convening of the applicable national party convention a written declaration of acceptance, signed by himself, in the form herein prescribed and the state chair-man deposits this declaration of acceptance in the office of the secretary of state no later than ten days before con-vening of the applicable national convention. The declaration of acceptance shall be in the form of an affidavit and shall contain the name, residence and post office address of the delegate or alternate delegate; a statement that he is a reg-315 Nomination and Election NM/NY Delegates istered voter in New Mexico affiliated with the political party for which he is a delegate or alternate and that he was a registered voter and affiliated with that party on the day of the governor’s primary election proclamation in the year in which he is a delegate to the national convention; a state-ment that he accepts his selection as a delegate or alternate to the national convention; and if delegates are pledged to specific candidates for the office of president, a pledge to vote as required by § 1–8–60. Any delegate representing the un-committed category may vote for any candidate at the na-tional convention or remain uncommitted (§ 1–8–61). 

NEW YORK 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 280 Republican: 101 A. MANNER OF SELECTION Delegates and alternates to a national convention of a party shall be elected from congressional districts, or partly from the state at large and partly from congressional districts, as the rules of the state committee may provide. Such delegates and alternates from the state at large shall be elected by the state committee or by a state convention of the party, as the rules of the state committee shall prescribe. District dele-gates and alternates to national party conventions and dele-gates, and alternates, if any, to such a state convention shall be elected at a primary. All delegates and alternates to a na-tional party convention shall be enrolled members of such party. When any such rule provides for equal representation of the sexes, the designating petitions and primary ballots shall list candidates for such party positions separately by sex (New York Election law § 2–122). The rules of the state committee of a party may provide that the delegates and alternate delegates to a national conven-tion or national party conference be elected by a combination of all of the following methods: by votes cast at a primary election for candidates for the office of president of the United States in which the names of candidates for such of-fice appear on the ballot; by votes cast at a primary election for candidates for the positions of delegate and alternate del-egate to a national convention in districts no larger than con-gressional districts; and by the state committee or a com-mittee of the state committee at a meeting or convention called for such purpose as the rules of the party may provide (§ 2–122–a). Petitions and certificates shall be filed in the office of the Board of Elections of the county, except as follows: for an of-fice or position to be voted for wholly within the city of New York, in the office of the Board of Elections of that city; for an office or position to be voted for in a district greater than one county, or portions of two or more counties, in the office of the State Board of Elections (§ 6–144). A designating petition may designate candidates for nomina-tion for one or more public offices or for nomination for elec-tion to one or more party positions, or both, but designations 316 Nomination and Election NY Delegates or nominations for which the petitions are required to be filed in different offices may not be combined in the same pe-tition (§ 6–134(1)). B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY In each year in which electors of president and vice presi-dent of the United States are to be elected, an additional pri-mary election, to be known as the winter primary, shall be held on the first Tuesday in February unless otherwise changed by an act of the legislature, for the purpose of elect-ing delegates to the national convention (§ 8–100). The New York presidential primary is a closed primary (§ 8–302(4)). Delegates and alternates to a national convention of a party shall be elected from congressional districts, or partly from the State at large and partly from congressional districts, as the rules of the State committee may provide. Such delegates and alternates from the State at large shall be elected by the state committee or by a State convention of the party, as the rules of the State committee shall prescribe. If the rules of a national party provide for equal representation of the sexes among delegates elected from districts, such district dele-gates shall be elected separately by sex. District delegates and alternates to national party conventions and delegates, and alternates, if any, to such a state convention shall be elected at a primary. All delegates and alternates to a na-tional party convention shall be enrolled members of such party. When any such rule provides for equal representation of the sexes, the designating petitions and primary ballots shall list candidates for such party positions separately by sex (§ 2–122). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS If the rules of a state committee, adopted pursuant to the provisions of this section, provide that the positions of dele-gate and alternate delegate to a national convention appear on the ballot, designation of candidates for such positions shall be made pursuant to the provisions of sections 6–100, 6–118, 6–122, 6–130, 6–132 (except that references to a com-mittee to fill vacancies shall be deemed references to a com-mittee to receive notices), 6–134, 6–144, the provisions with respect to declinations in subdivisions one and two of section 6–146 (except that references to a committee to fill vacancies shall be deemed references to a committee to receive notices), 6–147, 6–154, and subdivision one and the provision with re-spect to declinations in subdivision two and subdivision three of section 6–158 of this chapter. Candidates for the positions of district delegate and alternate district delegate to a na-tional party convention pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be enrolled members of such party and resi-dents of the district in which they are candidates. Desig-nating petitions for candidates for such positions must be signed by at least five hundred enrolled voters of the party residing in the district in which such candidates are des-ignated, or by at least one-half of one percent (0.5%) of the then enrolled voters of such party in such district, whichever is less. The designating petition for any such candidate or candidates shall have printed thereon prior to the affixing of 317 Nomination and Election NY Delegates any signatures thereto, a legend naming the presidential candidate whom such candidates are pledged to support, or a legend that such candidates are uncommitted. Such legend shall be part of the title of such position. No designating pe-tition containing the names of more than one candidate for either such position shall be valid unless all such candidates for such positions have printed on such petition the legend that they are pledged to the same presidential candidate or unless all such candidates for such positions have printed on such petition the legend that they are uncommitted. No des-ignating petition containing the names of more than one can-didate for either such position shall be presumptively valid unless the candidates for delegate as a group and the can-didates for alternate as a group are equally divided between males and females, with a variance no greater than one. In the event that a designating petition is filed for candidates for such positions listed as pledged to support a presidential candidate or as uncommitted, and the name of such presi-dential candidate, or the word uncommitted, will not appear on the ballot at the winter primary election in 2008, then the petition designating such candidates for such positions shall be null and void and the names of such candidates for such positions shall not appear on the ballot. Every board of elec-tions with which designating petitions are filed pursuant to the provisions of this section shall, not later than four days after the last day to file such petitions, file with the state board of elections by express mail or by electronic trans-mission, a complete list of all candidates for delegate and al-ternate delegate together with their residence addresses, the districts in which they are candidates and the name of the presidential candidate whom they are pledged to support or that they are uncommitted. Such boards of elections shall, not later than the day after a certificate of declination or substitution is filed with respect to any such candidate file such information with respect to such candidate with the state board of elections by electronic transmission. The rules of a state committee adopted pursuant to the provisions of this section may provide that no candidate for the positions of delegate and alternate delegate may appear on the ballot as pledged to support a particular presidential candidate, or as uncommitted, unless the name of such candidate for such position appears on a certificate listing the names of those candidates for such positions who have filed statements of candidacy for such positions with the secretary of the state committee within the time prescribed by such rules and who, if their statements of candidacy contained a pledge of sup-port of a presidential candidate, were not rejected by such presidential candidate. Such certificate shall also list the ad-dress and sex of each such candidate for delegate and alter-nate delegate and the district in which such candidate may appear on the ballot. Such certificate shall be filed by the secretary of such state committee, with the board of elections with which the designating petitions for such candidates for such positions are required to be filed, not later than Decem-ber eighteenth, two thousand seven. In the event that a des-ignating petition for candidates for such positions, listed as pledged to support a presidential candidate, contains the 318 Nomination and Election NY/NC Delegates names of one or more persons who have not been permitted by such presidential candidate to appear on the ballot as so pledged pursuant to the provisions of this section, then the names of such candidates shall not appear on the ballot but the names of other candidates on such petition who have been permitted by the presidential candidate to appear on the ballot, shall be placed on the ballot provided that such candidates are otherwise eligible and that such petition is otherwise valid. The state board of elections shall send a copy of the certificate required by section 4–110 of this chap-ter to the secretary of the state committee of each party con-ducting a primary pursuant to the provisions of this section. Every other board of elections with which designating peti-tions for delegate and alternate delegate were filed pursuant to the provisions of this section shall, not later than Decem-ber thirty-first, two thousand seven, send a list of the names and addresses of those candidates who will appear on the ballot to the secretary of each such state committee (§ 2–122– a). 

NORTH CAROLINA 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 110 Republican: 69 A. MANNER OF SELECTION On the Tuesday after the first Monday in May (May 3, 2008) the voters of this State shall be given an opportunity to ex-press their preference for the person to be the presidential candidate of their political party. Any person otherwise qualified who will become qualified by age to vote in the general election held in the same year of the presidential preference primary shall be entitled to reg-ister and vote in the presidential preference primary. Such persons may register not earlier than 60 days nor later than the 25th day prior to the said primary (North Carolina Gen-eral Statutes, §163–213.2). The presidential preference primary actually determines the allocation of delegates to the presidential candidates. Both the Democratic and Republican Parties actually elect dele-gates in a separate caucus process. B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY On May 3, 2008, North Carolina will hold a closed presi-dential preference primary which will be restricted to reg-istered voters of the parties (§§ 163–213.2, 163–213.7). The State Board of Elections shall convene in Raleigh on the first Tuesday in March preceding the presidential preference pri-mary election. At the meeting required by this section, the State Board of Elections shall nominate as presidential pri-mary candidates all candidates affiliated with a political party, recognized pursuant to the provisions of Article 9 of Chapter 163 of the General Statutes, who have become eligi-ble to receive payments from the Presidential Primary Matching Payment Account, as provided in section 9033 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended. Imme-diately upon completion of these requirements, the Board 319 Nomination and Election NC/ND Delegates shall release to the news media all such nominees selected, provided, however, nothing shall prohibit the partial selec-tion of nominees prior to the meeting required by this sec-tion, if all provisions herein have been complied with (§ 163– 213.4). Any person seeking the endorsement by the national political party for the office of President of the United States, or any group organized in this State on behalf of, and with the con-sent of, such person, may file with the State Board of Elec-tions petitions signed by 10,000 persons who, at the time they signed are registered and qualified voters in this State and are affiliated, by such registration, with the same polit-ical party as the candidate for whom the petitions are filed. Such petitions shall be presented to the county board of elec-tions 10 days before the filing deadline and shall be certified promptly by the chairman of the board of elections of the county in which the signatures were obtained and shall be filed by the petitioners with the State Board of Elections no later than 5:00 p.m. on the Monday prior to the date the State Board of Elections is required to meet as directed by § 163–213.4 (§ 163–213.5). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS Upon completion and certification of the primary results by the State Board of Elections, the Secretary of State shall cer-tify the results to the State chairman of each political party. Each political party shall allocate delegate positions in amanner which reflects the division of votes of the party pri-mary consistent with the national party rules of that polit-ical party (§ 163–213.8). 

NORTH DAKOTA 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 21 Republican: 26 A. MANNER OF SELECTION State party conventions are to be held in each presidential election year at a place and time designated by the State party committees. The State party convention is required to elect the requisite number of delegates and alternates to the national party convention. The candidate or candidates for endorsement or election shall be declared endorsed or elected pursuant to the rules of the party involved, and the chair-man and secretary of the convention shall issue certificates of endorsement or election. If any delegate to the national convention is unable to attend that convention, he shall des-ignate, in writing, one of the alternates to attend and rep-resent and act for him. The names of the candidates nomi-nated for presidential electors shall be certified by the chair-man and secretary of the convention to the Secretary of State to be placed upon the general election ballot as pro-vided by law (North Dakota Century Code, § 16.1–03–14). B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY Repealed. 320 Nomination and Election ND/OH Delegates C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS None. 

OHIO 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 161 Republican: 88 A. MANNER OF SELECTION Delegates and alternates to a national party convention are elected at primaries held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in March (March 4, 2008). Candidates for delegate and alternate shall be qualified and the election shall be con-ducted in the manner prescribed in this chapter for the nom-ination of candidates for State and district offices, except as provided in § 3513.151 of the Revised Code and except that whenever any group of candidates for delegate at large or al-ternate at large, or any group of candidates for delegates or alternates from districts, file with the Secretary of State statements as provided by this section, designating the same persons as their first and second choices for President of the United States, such a group of candidates may submit agroup petition containing a declaration of candidacy for each of such candidates. The group petition need be signed only by the number of electors required for the petition of a single candidate. No group petition shall be submitted except by a group of candidates equal in number to the whole number of delegates at large or alternates at large to be elected or equal in number to the whole number of delegates or alter-nates from a district to be elected (Ohio Rev. Code Ann., § 3513.12). Political parties shall be eligible to elect delegates and alter-nates to national conventions or conferences of their respec-tive political parties, other than conventions provided for in § 3513.12 of the Revised Code, if they notify the Secretary of State that they will elect such delegates. Such notification must be made prior to the ninetieth day before the day of the primary election which occurs in any year at which national convention or conference delegates and alternates are elect-ed. Petitions of candidacy for such delegates shall be filed in the form and manner provided by the Secretary of State. Any political party electing delegates to a national conven-tion or conference under this section in an odd-numbered year in which a statewide primary election is not otherwise required shall pay all expenses of that election (§ 3513.122). B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY The primary is held on the first Tuesday after the first Mon-day in March of 2000 and every fourth year thereafter (March 4, 2008) (§ 3513.01). The presidential primary is an open primary. Candidates for delegate and alternate shall be qualified and the election shall be conducted in the manner prescribed in this chapter for the nomination of candidates for state and district offices, except as provided in section 3513.151 [3513.15.1] of the Revised Code and except that whenever any group of candidates for delegate at large or al-ternate at large, or any group of candidates for delegates or 321 Nomination and Election OH/OK Delegates alternates from districts, file with the secretary of state statements as provided by this section, designating the same persons as their first and second choices for President of the United States, such a group of candidates may submit agroup petition containing a declaration of candidacy for each of such candidates. The group petition need be signed only by the number of electors required for the petition of a single candidate (§ 3513.12). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS Each person seeking to be elected as delegate or alternate to the national convention of his political party shall file with his declaration of candidacy and certificate a statement in writing signed by him in which he shall state his first and second choices for nomination as the candidate of his party for the presidency of the United States. The Secretary of State shall not permit any declaration of candidacy and cer-tificate of a candidate for election as such delegate or alter-nate to be filed unless accompanied by such statement in writing. The name of a candidate for the presidency shall not be so used without his written consent. A person who is a first choice for President of candidates seeking election as delegates and alternates shall file with the Secretary of State, prior to the day of the election, a list indicating the order in which certificates of election are to be issued to delegate or alternate candidates to whose can-didacy he had consented, if fewer than all of such candidates are entitled under party rules to be certified as elected. Each candidate for election as such delegate or alternate may also file along with his declaration of candidacy and certificate a statement (§ 3513.12). 

OKLAHOMA 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 47 Republican: 41 A. MANNER OF SELECTION The delegates are to be chosen after the presidential pref-erence primary (February 5, 2008) and are to be proportion-ately allotted to presidential candidates based on the presi-dential primary vote (Oklahoma Statutes Annotated, § 20– 104). B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY A presidential preferential primary for recognized political parties shall be held on the first Tuesday in February in each of the years in which the President and Vice President of the United States are to be elected (February 5, 2008) (§ 20–101). The presidential primary is a closed primary. Candidates for the nomination for President of the United States shall file with the Secretary of the State Election Board. Said candidates shall be members of political parties recognized under the laws of the State of Oklahoma and shall have filed a statement of candidacy with the Federal Election Commission and shall have raised and expended not less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for said office. 322 Nomination and Election OK Delegates The candidates shall be required to swear an oath or affirm that they meet the aforementioned qualifications, and their signatures shall be witnessed by a notary public. Said filing beginning at 8:00 a.m. on the first Monday in December and ending at 5:00 p.m. on the next succeeding Wednesday, or at a time prescribed by the State Election Board for a presi-dential preferential primary to be held on a date other than the first Tuesday in February. A statement of candidacy must be accompanied by a petition supporting a candidate’s filing signed by one percent (1%) of the registered voters in each congressional district eligible to vote for a candidate or one thousand (1,000) registered voters in each congressional district eligible to vote for a candidate, whichever is less, as reflected by the latest January 15 registration report; or by a cashier’s check or certified check in the amount of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Said check shall be forfeited unless a candidate receives more than fifteen percent (15%) of the votes cast. The State Election Board shall cause the names of all candidates who have filed within the proper time to be printed on the official ballots. The bal-lots shall be prepared as provided for by law. Voters shall be restricted to one vote for the candidate of his choice of the political party in which the voter is registered (§ 20–102). Upon the completion of the State canvass of the results of the presidential preferential primary, the Secretary of the State Election Board shall certify to the State chairman of each political party which has candidates participating in the primary: 1. the names of the party’s candidates and the votes each re-ceived, by congressional district as well as statewide; and 2. the total of the votes cast in the political party, by con-gressional district as well as statewide. Each candidate shall be awarded delegates by congressional districts proportion-ately, by the ratio of votes they received to the total votes cast in said congressional district; provided however, no dele-gates shall be awarded to any candidate receiving less than fifteen percent (15%) of the vote, and such votes shall be al-located among the other candidates in proportion to their total vote. If no candidate receives fifteen percent (15%) or more of the vote, then the candidate receiving the highest number of votes in that district shall be awarded all the del-egates from that district. The candidate receiving the largest number of votes statewide shall be awarded all delegate votes authorized by the national committee of the political party which are selected as the at-large delegates at the State convention of said party. If the political parties in-volved in the primary elections will not accept the minimum threshold, or have a different method of allocating the votes of all candidates falling below such threshold, either as to the congressional districts or statewide vote, then these mat-ters may be governed by the respective political parties in-volved. Votes shall be allocated on a basis of not less than one-half ( 1 ⁄2 ) delegate vote or the minimum allowed by the national party rules. Each political party shall then select, by a method to be determined by the party, as many dele-gates to the national party convention as are allotted it by the national committee of that party. No later than 5:00 p.m. 323 Nomination and Election OK/OR Delegates on the tenth day of January, the Attorney General shall sub-mit to the Secretary of the State Election Board notice of the manner in which results of the next following presidential preferential primary are to be certified and to whom said re-sults are to be certified. The State Election Board shall cer-tify results according to the manner prescribed in the notice. The Attorney General shall be required to provide said no-tice in such a way as to be consistent with the methods re-quired by the recognized political parties relative to selection of delegates to their national conventions (§ 20–104). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS Each delegate or alternate delegate to the national conven-tion of his political party shall cast their vote on all ballots for the candidate who received this State’s vote. If that can-didate is for any reason no longer a candidate, the votes of the Oklahoma delegation shall be cast for any candidate of their choice (§ 20–104(G)). No person selected as a delegate or alternate delegate shall qualify to attend the national con-vention of his political party unless he files with the State central committee of his party a signed affidavit of accept-ance stating his name, address, that he is a registered voter of the political party and, pursuant to effectuating the pur-pose and the result of the presidential preferential primary in this State, that he pledges himself to vote for the winning candidate. Any vote cast by a delegate which is not in ac-cordance with his delegate pledge shall be void (§ 20–105). 

OREGON 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 62 Republican: 30 A. MANNER OF SELECTION After a presidential preference primary election, each major political party by convention shall select delegates to the na-tional convention of that party. Delegates to the national convention of a party shall be selected in the manner pro-vided by party rules, which shall provide all electors reg-istered as members of the party equal opportunity to partici-pate in the selection of delegates. Delegates to the national convention of the party shall be se-lected so that the number of delegates who favor a certain candidate shall represent the proportion of votes received by the candidate in relation to the other candidates of that party at the presidential preference primary election. Each person selected as a delegate shall sign a pledge that the person will continue to support at the national convention the candidate for President of the United States the person is selected as favoring until: (a) the candidate is nominated at the convention; (b) the candidate receives less than 35 percent of the votes for nomination at the convention; (c) the candidate releases the delegate from the pledge; or (d) two convention nominating ballots have been taken (Or-egon Revised Statutes, § 248.315). 324 Nomination and Election OR Delegates B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY The primary election shall be held on the third Tuesday in May of each even-numbered year (May 20, 2008) (§ 254.056).The name of a candidate for a major political party nomination for President of the United States shall be printed on the ballot only: By direction of the Secretary of State who in the secretary’s sole discretion has determined that the candidate’s candidacy is generally advocated or is recognized in national news media; or by nominating petition described in this section and filed with the Secretary of State. A petition nominating a candidate under this section shall contain from each congressional district the signatures of at least 1,000 electors who are registered in the district and who are members of the major political party of the can-didate. The electors in each congressional district shall in-clude electors registered in at least 5 percent (5%) of the pre-cincts in each of at least one-fourth of the counties in the congressional district. The petition shall contain the printed name, residence or mailing address and name or number of the precinct, if known, of each elector whose signature ap-pears on the petition. The signatures shall be certified for genuineness by the county clerks under ORS 249.008. Before circulating the nominating petition, the chief sponsor shall file with the Secretary of State a signed copy of the prospec-tive petition. The chief sponsor shall include with the pro-spective petition a statement declaring whether one or more persons will be paid money or other valuable consideration for obtaining signatures of electors on the petition. After the prospective petition is filed, the chief sponsor shall notify the Secretary of State not later than the 10th day after the chief sponsor first has knowledge or should have had knowledge that: (a) Any person is being paid for obtaining signatures, when the statement included with the prospective petition declared that no such person would be paid. (b) No person is being paid for obtaining signatures, when the statement included with the prospective petition declared that one or more such persons would be paid (§ 249.078). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS Delegates to the national convention of the party shall be se-lected so that the number of delegates who favor a certain candidate shall represent the proportion of votes received by the candidate in relation to the other candidates of that party at the presidential preference primary election. Each person selected as a delegate shall sign a pledge that the person will continue to support at the national convention the candidate for President of the United States the person is selected as favoring until: (a) The candidate is nominated at the convention; (b) The candidate receives less than 35 percent of the votes for nomination at the convention; (c) The candidate releases the delegate from the pledge; or (d) Two convention nominating ballots have been taken (§ 248.315). 325 Nomination and Election PA Delegates 

PENNSYLVANIA 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 181 Republican: 74 A. MANNER OF SELECTION A primary for presidential preferences is to be held on the fourth Tuesday in April of the presidential election years, i.e., April 22, 2008 (Pennsylvania Statutes, Annotated, title 25, § 2753). Delegates and alternates to national conventions shall be apportioned, selected or elected in accordance with party rules which must be certified by the party secretary and filed with the Secretary of the Commonwealth at least thirty days prior to the first day on which nomination peti-tions may be circulated (§ 2838.1). Where delegates are elect-ed through the primary, candidates must file nomination pe-titions signed by registered and enrolled party members and the presidential candidate the delegate seeks to represent (§ 2867). The presidential candidate must notify the Sec-retary of the Commonwealth that he authorizes the dele-gates and alternate delegates to pledge their support to him. Such notice must be on a form prescribed by the Secretary and must be received by the Secretary at least fifteen days prior to the first day on which the nomination petitions may be circulated (§ 2839.1) Petitions may not be circulated prior to the thirteenth Tuesday before the primary (§ 2868) and must be filed with the Secretary of the Commonwealth on or before 5:00 p.m. on the tenth Tuesday before the primary (§ 2873). Candidates must also file with their petitions affida-vits showing residence, election district, that he or she is a registered party member, to whom he or she is committed, if committed or ‘‘uncommitted’’ and certain other information (§ 2870). The petition may also include a statement of dele-gate commitment to a presidential candidate (§ 2871). B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY A primary for the expression of presidential preferences and the election of delegates and alternates to the national con-vention, if so provided in party rules, will be held on the fourth Tuesday of April (April 22, 2008) in presidential elec-tion years (§§ 2862, 2753). The presidential primary is aclosed primary. The names of candidates for nomination as President of the United States, and the names of all other candidates for party nominations, and for election as delegates, alternate delegates, members of the committees and other party offi-cers, shall be printed upon the official primary ballot labels of a designated party, upon the filing of separate nomination petitions in their behalf, in form prescribed by the Secretary of the Commonwealth, signed by duly registered and en-rolled members of such party who are qualified electors of the State, or of the political district, as the case may be, within which the nomination is to be made or election is to be held. Nomination petitions of delegates and alternate del-egates to National conventions committed to support a par-ticular presidential candidate must be signed by the par-ticular presidential candidate to whom support is pledged be-326 Nomination and Election PA/RI Delegates fore it can be certified by the Secretary of the Common-wealth. The name of no candidate shall be placed upon the official ballots or ballot labels of a political party to be used at any primary, unless such petition shall have been filed in his behalf. In no event shall any person’s name be printed upon the official ballots or ballot labels of any party for the office of delegate, alternate delegate, member of committee or other party officer, unless he is a duly registered and en-rolled member of said party. (§ 2867). Candidates for nomination as President of the United States are to present a nominating petition containing signatures of 2,000 registered and enrolled party members. (§ 2872.1). A filing fee of $200 is also required (§ 2873). All nomination pe-titions are to be filed on or before the tenth Tuesday prior to the primary (§ 2873(d)). A political party may have a ‘‘no preference’’ column added on the primary election ballot (§ 2962(d)). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS Delegate candidates in the primary may sign a general pledge to support a candidate for nomination (§ 2871). When-ever the rules of a party provide that a candidate for dele-gate or alternate delegate to a national convention of a polit-ical party and may pledge his support to a presidential can-didate, he shall be committed to support and vote for the nomination of that candidate as President as party rules pro-vide, the notation of which shall be printed upon the ballot. No candidate for delegate or alternate delegate shall make a commitment unless he has obtained prior authorization to do so from the presidential candidate to whom he is pledging support. No candidate for delegate or alternate delegate shall be allowed to commit himself to any presidential candidate nor shall the Secretary of the Commonwealth cause any no-tation of commitment to be printed on any ballot unless the presidential candidate forwards notice to the Secretary of the Commonwealth, upon a form prescribed by the Secretary, that he is a candidate for the nomination of President of the United States and that he authorizes delegates and alternate delegates to pledge their support and commit themselves to him. This notice must be received by the Secretary at least fifteen days prior to the first day on which nomination peti-tions may be circulated for the offices which are to be filled at the spring primaries in the years in which candidates for the President of the United States are to be nominated. Nomination petitions for delegates committed to particular presidential candidates shall be obtained only from the presi-dential candidate or his duly authorized representative who is certified by the Secretary of the Commonwealth as being authorized by the candidate to distribute nomination peti-tions bearing his name. (§ 2839.1) 

RHODE ISLAND 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 32 Republican: 20 327 Nomination and Election RI Delegates A. MANNER OF SELECTION Delegates to national conventions are selected in a primary election to be held on the first Tuesday in March (March 4, 2008) (Rhode Island General Laws, § 17–12.1–1). At the pres-idential preference primary there shall be elected such num-ber of delegates and alternates from congressional districts as determined by party rules certified to the Secretary of State by the chairman of the State committee on or before the first Tuesday in January preceding the primary (§ 17– 12.1–2). Candidates for delegate must sign and file a dec-laration of candidacy on forms provided by the Secretary of State during the period between January 2 and January 12 (§ 17–12.1–3). The Secretary of State is to provide declared candidates with nomination papers to be signed by at least 150 party voters (§ 17–12.1–6) and submitted to the local board of the city or town, where the signers appear as voters, for verification on or before 4 p.m. of the 35th day prior to the primary. The local board files the papers with the Sec-retary of State. Delegate candidates may also submit to the Secretary of State documentation of approval from presi-dential candidates on or before 4 p.m. on the 30th day prior to the primary (§ 17–12.1–7). The ballot is to be prepared to clearly show the presidential preference or uncommitted status of delegate candidates (§ 17–12.1–11). The number of delegates and the designation of winning delegates shall be determined pursuant to the rules of such political party filed with the Secretary of State as provided by this chapter (§ 17–12.1–9). B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY Delegates and alternates to the national convention are elected in a primary held on March 4, 2008. The Rhode Is-land primary is an open primary. The Secretary of State shall announce ten days prior to the first day for filing of declaration of candidacy by delegates, the names of those bona fide national candidates for presidential nominee known to him and on or before said date of announcement, shall by registered mail duly notify such candidates of his in-tent to place their names on the ballot (§ 17–12.1–8). Any person seeking the endorsement of a national political party for which a primary is being held shall, between No-vember 15 and November 30, by 4 p.m. in the year prior to the year in which the presidential preference primary is being held provide written notification to the Secretary of State of his or her intention to run in the primary. The can-didate must submit petition papers signed by at least 1,000 eligible voters on or before 4 p.m. of the 74th day before the primary to the local board of the city or town where the sign-ers appear to be voters. If any candidate whose name has been announced as a presi-dential nominee does not thereafter wish his name to appear on the ballot, he shall at least thirty days prior to the date for the primary, file an affidavit with the Secretary of State stating his name may not be placed on the ballot. Names of delegates committed to such withdrawn candidate, who are otherwise qualified, shall appear on the ballot as uncommit-ted (§ 17–12.1–4). 328 Nomination and Election RI/SC Delegates C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS None. 

SOUTH CAROLINA 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 54 Republican: 24 A. MANNER OF SELECTION Party conventions or party primary elections held by political parties certified as such by the State Election Commission under the provisions of this Title to nominate candidates for any of the offices to be filled in a general or special election shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this Title and in accordance with party rules not in conflict with the provisions of this Title or of the Constitution and laws of this State or of the United States. A certified political party wishing to hold a presidential pri-mary election may do so in accordance with the provisions of this title and party rules. However, nothwithstanding any other provision of this title, the state committee of the party shall set the date and the hours that the polls will be open for the presidential primary election and the filing require-ments (South Carolina Code Annotated, § 7–11–20). B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY The state committee of the party shall set the date and the hours that the polls will be open for the presidential primary election and the filing requirements (§ 7–11–20). Each county is entitled to one delegate for each six thousand residents of the county, according to the latest official United States Census, plus two additional members. If a county has a fractional portion of population of at least three thousand residents above its last six thousand resident figure it is en-titled to an additional delegate. When the state convention assembles, it must be called to order by the chairman of the state committee (§ 7–9–100). Political parties nominating candidates by primary or con-vention must verify the qualifications of those candidates prior to certification to the authority charged by law with preparing the ballot. The written certification rquired by this section must contain a statement that each candidate cer-tified meets, or will meet by the time of the general election, or as otherwise required by law, the qualifications for the of-fice for which he has filed. Any candidate who does not, or will not by the time of the general election, or as otherwise required by law, meet the qualifications for the office for which he has filed shall not be nominated and certified, and such candidate’s name shall not be placed on a general, spe-cial, or municipal election ballot. Candidates for President and Vice President must be cer-tified not later than twelve o’clock noon on September tenth to the State Election Commission, or if September tenth falls on Sunday, not later than twelve o’clock noon on the fol-lowing Monday (§ 7–13–350). 329 Nomination and Election SC/SD Delegates C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS None. 

SOUTH DAKOTA 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 22 Republican: 27 A. MANNER OF SELECTION In the years when a President of the United States is to be elected, the political parties shall elect delegates and alter-nates to the national convention of each political party in ac-cordance with the provisions of §§ 12–5–3.6 to 12–5–3.15, in-clusive. If delegates and alternates are not elected at large from the entire State, the constitution or bylaws shall set forth the area boundaries for representation coincident with some geographical division of the State otherwise authorized or provided by law (South Dakota Codified Laws, § 12–5–2). In the event the political party does not choose by its con-stitution, bylaws or its State convention the method of select-ing its delegates and alternates to the national convention, it shall, at its State party convention, meeting in the even nonpresidential years, choose the method of selection from the alternatives as follows: (a) the slate of delegates and alternates receiving the highest number of votes shall be declared elected; (b) the total number of delegates and an equal number of al-ternates to the national convention shall be allocated be-tween the two leading slates of the political party, and the same proportion of the total vote each slate received bears to the total combined votes of both slates. The appropriate number of delegates and alternates from each slate shall be deemed elected in the order in which the names appeared on the ballot; or (c) an allocation may be made among two or more slates which grants representation proportionately to various slates receiving a number of votes stated in the constitution or by-laws of the political party to be significant for purposes of representation of either, area of the State or support for can-didates, or both, which shall be stated in the constitution or bylaws. A certificate of election shall be issued by the State party chairman to each delegate and each alternate entitled thereto by allocation (§ 12–5–3.10). In the event a political party has no prescribed method of se-lection of slates of delegates and alternates to its national convention, the slates of delegates and alternates to the na-tional convention shall be elected by the primary. Names of candidates for delegates and alternates to the national con-vention, in number equal to the entire number of such dele-gates and alternates to be selected, shall be grouped in a slate under the respective designations upon a single nomi-nating petition, which will contain a statement indicating their collective preference choice for President of the United States, if any, or that they have no preference or are uncom-mitted (§ 12–5–3.11). 330 Nomination and Election SD/TN Delegates B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY The primary election on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in June of every even-numbered year (June 3, 2008) (§ 12–2–1). The presidential primary is a closed primary. If a political party chooses to have a primary for selection of its delegates and alternates to the national convention, it shall certify the slates to the Secretary of State by the first Tuesday in March preceding the primary by five o’clock p.m. The slates certified shall be placed on the ballot by the Secretary of State and the position of the slates on the primary ballot shall be chosen by lot by the Secretary of State. The certifi-cation shall be deemed to be filed if mailed by registered mail by five o’clock p.m. on the first Tuesday in March (§ 12– 5–3.8). Any candidate, committee or group supporting a can-didate in any of the presidential primaries, shall, by the last Tuesday in March prior to the presidential primary election, notify the Secretary of State that they intend to have the name of the candidate placed on the presidential primary election ballot or submit a slate of candidates or both (§ 12– 5–3.14). Both major political parties will select their delegates in a separate caucus process. The national convention delegates will be proportionally allotted to the presidential candidates based on the presidential preference primary results. C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS None. 

TENNESSEE 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 85 Republican: 55 A. MANNER OF SELECTION On the first Tuesday in February a presidential preference primary shall be held for each statewide political party to elect delegates to the national conventions of all statewide political parties (February 5, 2008) (Tennessee Code Anno-tated, §§ 2–13–302 and 2–13–205). On the third Thursday in December (§ 2–5–205(c)) next pre-ceding the election, the chair of each statewide political party will certify to the secretary of state and the coordinator of elections the number of delegates and alternates to the na-tional convention allocated by the national party to be elect-ed by the state party. The chair of each statewide political party will further certify to the secretary of state and the co-ordinator of elections: (1) The number of delegates allocated to the state party by the national party to various congres-sional districts within Tennessee; and (2) The number of del-egates-at-large allocated by the national party to the state party. Delegates-at-large and alternates shall be elected in accordance with the rules of the respective parties. If the party executive committee decides to elect the at-large dele-gates and alternates, it shall meet to do so after the second Tuesday in February and before the first Tuesday in March, such election to be by open ballot of the committee members 331 Nomination and Election TN Delegates and no secret balloting shall be permitted. Alternate dele-gates shall be elected proportional to the vote for delegates in the party’s delegate election. All state party allocations must be in accordance with the charter, rules, and bylaws of the respective national or state party. There shall be at least three (3) delegates allocated to each congressional district unless such allocation violates the charter, bylaws or rules of the respective national political parties. Where a political party has allocated three (3) delegates from each congres-sional district by national party rules, at least one-third ( 1 ⁄3 )of the at-large delegates shall be elected by popular vote on the ballot. The respective party executive committees shall meet prior to the date established in 2–5–205(c) to determine how the provisions of this section with respect to the division of delegates by district and at-large and the method of select-ing at-large delegates, and the chair of each party shall cer-tify the decisions of the executive committee to the secretary of state and the coordinator of elections. In no case shall the candidate receiving the greatest number of votes in a pri-mary have apportioned to such candidate a lesser number of delegates than the candidate with the next greatest number of votes. If one (1) candidate with a total number of votes statewide greater than other candidates receives fewer dele-gates from districts than the other candidates then the at-large delegates shall be so apportioned as to reflect the per-centage of the vote received by the candidate with the great-est number of votes and that candidate’s competitors. (§ 2– 13–303). Candidates for election as delegates to the national conven-tion of a political party shall qualify by filing nominating pe-titions no later than twelve o’clock (12:00) noon prevailing time on the second Thursday in December of the presidential election year in the office of the Secretary of State in Nash-ville. Nominating petitions shall be signed by the candidate and one hundred (100) or more registered voters who are eligible to vote to fill the position. Nominating petitions shall bear the name and address of the candidate. The sufficiency of such petitions, including the requisite quantity and authenticity of signatures, shall be verified by the county election commission. If the candidate does not file by the deadline specified in this section, his name shall not be printed on the ballot. Nominating petitions for delegate candidates may be mailed to the Secretary of State and if postmarked by twelve o’clock (12:00) noon prevailing time on the second Thursday in De-cember, shall be considered as being filed in time (§ 2–13– 305). Certified copies of the original nominating petition and declaration of delegate candidacy shall be filed by the Sec-retary of State with the coordinator of elections, with the chairperson of the State executive committee of the can-didate’s party, and with the chairperson of the State election commission. The chairperson of the State election commission shall no later than four thirty p.m. (4:30 p.m.), prevailing time, on the second Thursday in December, certify to the chairperson 332 Nomination and Election TN Delegates of the appropriate county election commission the names of all delegate-candidates who have qualified to have their names printed on the ballot in that county (§ 2–13–310). B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY A presidential preference primary will be held on the first Tuesday in February (February 5, 2008) (§ 2–13–205). The presidential primary is an open primary. The names of candidates for President of the United States shall be printed on the ballot for the presidential preference primary only if they were: (1) The names of persons who the Secretary of State in his sole discretion has determined are generally advocated or recognized as candidates in national news media throughout the United States. The Secretary of State shall submit the names to the State election commission no later than the first Tuesday in December of the year in which the election will be held. If a candidate who has been certified by the Secretary of State wishes to be a candidate in the presi-dential primary of a party other than that for which the Sec-retary of State certified him, he shall signify his political party preference to the State election commission no later than twelve (12:00) noon, prevailing time, on the second Tuesday in January and his name shall be certified only for the ballot of his chosen party, as the case may be. (2) The names of persons for whom nominating petitions, signed by at least twenty-five hundred (2,500) registered vot-ers of the party whose nomination is sought and by the can-didate, are filed not later than twelve o’clock (12:00) noon, prevailing time, on the first Tuesday in December of the year in which the election will be held. The nominating petitions shall be filed with the State election commission and cer-tified duplicates with the coordinator of elections and with the chairperson of the candidate’s party’s State executive committee. No candidate may enter the presidential primary of more than one statewide political party. The Secretary of State shall advise each of the prospective candidates by the most expeditious means available that, un-less he withdraws his name by twelve o’clock (12:00) noon, prevailing time, on the second Tuesday in December of the year in which the election will be held, his name will appear on the ballot of his party in the presidential preference pri-mary. If such a person executes and files with the State elec-tion commission an affidavit stating without qualification that he is not and does not intend to become a candidate for President in the forthcoming presidential election, his name shall not be on the ballot. The Secretary of State shall certify to the county election commission on the second Thursday in December the names which this section requires to be on the ballot for each polit-ical party (§ 2–5–205). On the first Tuesday in December of the year in which the election will be held, the Secretary of State shall notify all nationally recognized candidates for President that their names are to be placed on the Tennessee presidential pref-erence primary ballot. Such notice shall also be given at the same time to all of the statewide political parties. 333 Nomination and Election TN Delegates Any person, who is notified that his name is to be placed on such ballot and who does not desire his name to appear on such ballot, shall execute and file with the Secretary of State an affidavit stating without qualification that he is not and does not intend to become a candidate for President in the forthcoming presidential election. Such person shall file such affidavit with the Secretary of State prior to twelve o’clock (12:00) noon prevailing time on the second Tuesday in De-cember of the year in which the election is to be held. On the third Thursday in December, after twelve o’clock (12:00) noon prevailing time, the Secretary of State shall an-nounce the candidates for President who shall appear on the ballot and shall issue a call for an election for the purpose of electing delegates to the national conventions of all state-wide political parties. (§ 2–13–304). In the event that a delegate-candidate is subject to the provi-sions of § 2–13–308(2), he shall provide the Secretary of State with the presidential candidate’s written consent thereto no later than twelve o’clock (12:00) noon prevailing time at the time he files his nominating petition. In the event that such consent is not granted in writing by the presidential candidate, then the name of the delegate-can-didate shall appear on the ballot as an uncommitted dele-gate-candidate. Each presidential candidate must consent for each district to at least one more and no more than twice the number of delegate-candidates being pledged to him than the number of delegates allocated to the district (§ 2–13–309). Delegates elected from a congressional district shall be allo-cated among the presidential candidates and the uncommit-ted designation as proportionally as is mathematically pos-sible to the number of votes received in the presidential pref-erence selection within such congressional district. If the number of votes received by a presidential candidate in any congressional district is less than fifteen percent of the votes cast in such district, no delegates shall be allocated to such candidate and such votes of less than fifteen percent shall be considered as votes for the uncommitted designation (§ 2–13– 313). Delegates-at-large and alternates shall be allocated among the presidential candidates or as uncommitted des-ignation as proportionally as is mathematically possible to the proportion of the vote received by that candidate. If the total number of votes received by a presidential candidate in the State at large is less than fifteen percent of the votes cast, no delegate-at-large or alternates shall be allocated to such candidate and such votes of less than fifteen percent shall be considered as votes for the uncommitted designation (§ 2–13–314). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The results of the preferential presidential primary shall be binding on the delegates to the national conventions as here-inafter provided. The delegates to the national conventions shall be bound by the results of the preferential presidential primary for the first two ballots and shall vote for the can-didate whom they are pledged. The delegates shall thereafter be bound to support such candidate so long as he, not to ex-ceed two ballots, has twenty percent of the total convention 334 Nomination and Election TN/TX Delegates vote or until such time the candidate of their party releases them from the results of the presidential preference primary (§ 2–13–317). 

TEXAS 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 228 Republican: 140 A. MANNER OF SELECTION The State of Texas will have a presidential preference pri-mary on March 4, 2008 (Texas Election Code Annotated, § 41.007). The results of the presidential preference primary will determine the allocation of most of the national conven-tion delegates who are selected in a caucus process after the primary. If a political party holding a primary election in a presi-dential election year desires to send delegates to a national presidential nominating convention of the party, the party shall select the delegates at a State convention convened on any day in June of the presidential election year. Before the date of the party’s precinct conventions held under Chapter 174, the party’s State executive committee shall choose the date, hour, and place for the State convention. The State convention shall consist of delegates selected at the party’s county and senatorial district conventions held under Chap-ter 174. Before the date of the party’s precinct conventions, the party’s State chairman shall deliver written notice of the date, hour, and place for the State convention to: (1) the Secretary of State; (2) each county chair of the party; and (3) the temporary chair of each senatorial district convention of the party (§ 191.031). If a political party not holding a primary election in a presi-dential election year desires to send delegates to a national presidential nominating convention of the party, the party shall select the delegates at the State convention at which the party is authorized to make nominations for State offices (§ 191.032). B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY The presidential preference primary shall be held on the sec-ond Tuesday in March in each presidential election year (March 4, 2008) (§ 41.007(c)). The presidential primary is an open primary. To be entitled to have its nominees for Presi-dent and Vice President of the United States placed on the general election ballot in a particular presidential election year, a political party must hold a presidential primary elec-tion in this State if: (1) in the presidential election year, the party is required by this code to nominate its candidates for State and county of-fices by primary election; (2) a presidential primary election is authorized under na-tional party rules; and (3) before January 1, of the presidential election year, the national party has determined that it will hold a national presidential nominating convention that year (§ 191.001). 335 Nomination and Election TX/UT Delegates Candidates qualify to have their names on the presidential primary election ballot in the manner provided by party rule. If party rules provide for the filing of applications or signa-ture petitions to qualify candidates for a place on the ballot, the filing deadline may not be later than the regular filing deadline for candidates in the general primary election. A signature on a candidate’s petition is not valid unless it is that of a registered voter and is accompanied by the signer’s residence address, including county, and voter registration number. A person may not sign petitions supporting more than one presidential candidate in the same primary, and, if a person does so, the person’s signature is void as to all peti-tions he signs (§ 191.002). The State chair of each political party holding a presidential primary election shall certify the name of each presidential candidate who qualifies for a place on the presidential primary election ballot and deliver the certification to the Secretary of State not later than the 57th day before presidential primary election day (§ 191.003). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS Each political party holding a presidential primary election shall adopt a rule for allocating delegates based on the re-sults of the presidential primary election. At least 75 percent of the total number of delegates who are to represent this State at the party’s national presidential nominating conven-tion, excluding delegates allocated among party and elected officials, shall be allocated in accordance with the rule among one or more of the candidates whose names appear on the presidential election ballot and, if applicable, the un-committed status (§ 191.007). 

UTAH 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 29 Republican: 36 A. MANNER OF SELECTION No statutory provisions. B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY A Western States Presidential Primary is held the first Tuesday in February in the year in which a presidential elec-tion will be held (February 5, 2008). As a condition for using the state’s election system, each registered political party wishing to participate in Utah’s Western States Presidential Primary shall: (a) declare their intent to participate in Utah’s Western States Presidential Primary; (b) identify one or more registered political parties whose members may vote for the registered political party’s candidates and whether or not persons identified as unaffiliated with a political party may vote for the registered political party’s candidates; and (c) certify that information to the lieutenant governor no later than 5 p.m. on the June 30 of the year before the year in which the presidential primary will be held or the fol-lowing business day if June 30 falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday. (Utah Code Annotated, § 20A–9–802). 336 Nomination and Election UT/VT/VA Delegates C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS None. 

VERMONT 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 23 Republican: 17 A. MANNER OF SELECTION Delegates and alternates to national conventions of political parties are chosen at the respective party State conventions. The State committee of each party shall call a party conven-tion, under regulations prescribed by the committee, to be held during the month of May or June in each presidential year. At such convention, delegates and alternates to the na-tional convention of such party to the number apportioned to their State shall be elected (Vermont Statutes Annotated, Title 17, § 2715). B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY In presidential election years, a presidential primary for each major political party shall be held in all municipalities on the first Tuesday in March (March 4, 2008) (§ 2701). Not later than 5:00 p.m. on the forty-seventh day before the day of the general election, the chairman of the state com-mittee of each major political party shall certify in writing to the secretary of state the names of the presidential and vice-presidential nominees selected at the party’s national convention (§ 2716). The name of any person shall be printed upon the primary ballot as a candidate for nomination by any major political party if petitions signed by at least one thousand voters in accordance with sections 2353, 2354 and 2358 of this title are filed with the secretary of state, together with the writ-ten consent of the person to the printing of the person’s name on the ballot. Petitions shall be filed not later than 5:00 p.m. on the third Monday of January preceding the pri-mary election. The petition shall be in a form prescribed by the secretary of state. A person’s name shall not be listed as a candidate on the primary ballot of more than one party in the same election. Each petition shall be accompanied by a filing fee of $2,000.00 to be paid to the secretary of state and deposited by the secretary of state into the general fund. However, if the petition of a candidate is accompanied by the affidavit of the candidate, which shall be available for public inspection, that the candidate and the candidate’s campaign committee are without sufficient funds to pay the filing fee, the secretary of state shall waive all but $300.00 of the pay-ment of the filing fee by that candidate (§ 2702). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS None. 

VIRGINIA 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 103 Republican: 63 337 Nomination and Election VA/WA Delegates A. MANNER OF SELECTION The duly constituted authorities of the state political party shall have the right to determine the method by which the state party will select its delegates to the national conven-tion to choose the party’s nominees for President and Vice President of the United States including a presidential pri-mary or another method determined by the party. The state chairman shall notify the State Board of the party’s deter-mination at least ninety days before the primary date (Vir-ginia Code Annotated, § 24.2–545(A)). B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY Primaries for the nomination of candidates for the office of President of the United States to be voted on at the Novem-ber 2004 general election, and the November general election in each presidential election year thereafter, shall be held on the second Tuesday in February preceding the November general election (February 12, 2008). (§ 24.2–544). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The State Board shall certify the results of the presidential primary to the state chairman. If the party has determined that its delegates and alternates will be selected pursuant to the primary, the state of delegates and alternates of the can-didate receiving the most votes in the primary shall be deemed elected by the state party. If the party has deter-mined to use another method for selecting delegates and al-ternates, those delegates and alternates shall be bound to vote on the first ballot at the national convention for the can-didate receiving the most votes in the primary unless that candidate releases those delegates and alternates from such vote. (§ 24.2–545). 

WASHINGTON 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 97 Republican: 40 A. MANNER OF SELECTION On the fourth Tuesday in May of each year in which a presi-dent of the United States is to be nominated and elected, a presidential primary shall be held at which voters may vote for the nominee of a major political party for the office of president (May 27, 2008) (Washington Revised Code Anno-tated § 29A.56.020). A major political party may, under na-tional or state party rules, base the allocation of delegates from this state to the national nominating convention of that party in whole or in part on the participation in precinct cau-cuses and conventions conducted under the rules of that party. (§ 29A.56.050). B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY On the fourth Tuesday in May of each year in which a presi-dent of the United States is to be nominated and elected, a presidential primary shall be held at which voters may vote for the nominee of a major political party for the office of president (May 27, 2008) (§ 29A.56.020). The name of any 338 Nomination and Election WA/WV Delegates candidate for a major political party nomination for presi-dent of the United States shall be printed on the presidential preference primary ballot of a major political party only: (1) By direction of the secretary of state, who in the secretary’s sole discretion has determined that the candidate’s can-didacy is generally advocated or is recognized in national news media; or (2) If members of the political party of the candidate have presented a petition for nomination of the candidate that has attached to the petition a sheet or sheets containing the signatures of at least one thousand registered voters who declare themselves in the petition as being affili-ated with the same political party as the presidential can-didate. The petition shall be filed with the secretary of state not later than the sixty days before the presidential pref-erence primary. The signature sheets shall also contain the residence address and name or number of the precinct of each registered voter whose signature appears thereon and shall be certified in the manner prescribed in RCW 29A.72.230 and 29A.72.240. The secretary of state shall place the name of the candidate on the ballot unless the candidate, at least fifty-two days be-fore the presidential preference primary, executes and files with the secretary of state an affidavit stating without quali-fication that he or she is not now and will not become a can-didate for the office of President of the United States at the forthcoming presidential election. The secretary of state shall certify the names of all candidates who will appear on the presidential preference primary ballot to the respective coun-ty auditors on or before the fourth Tuesday in April of each presidential election year (§ 29A.56.030). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS None. 

WEST VIRGINIA 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 37 Republican: 30 A. MANNER OF SELECTION West Virginia will hold a presidential preference primary on May 13, 2008 (West Virginia Code § 3–5–1). The presidential primary is advisory only. Most of the delegates to the na-tional nominating conventions are elected at the presidential primary in a separate election. At the primary election, there shall be elected by the voters of each political party of the State, in accordance with a plan adopted by the State party, persons to be delegates to the national convention of the party to be held next after the date of such primary. The plan adopted by each political party of the State shall state the method, subject to compliance with their national party rules and not inconsistent with the provisions of this section, for the election of persons in each congressional district of the State as delegates to the national convention of the party, for the election or selection of persons in each congres-sional district of the State as alternate delegates to the na-tional convention of the party and for the selection of all re-339 Nomination and Election WV Delegates maining delegates and alternate delegates allocated to the party in their national convention. Not less than 120 days before the primary election to be held in the year one thou-sand nine hundred ninety-two, and in every fourth year thereafter, the governing body of each political party of the State shall certify the plan adopted by the party under sig-nature of the State party chairman and file with the Sec-retary of State. Any questions regarding whether such plan was rightfully adopted by the party shall be resolved by the party based upon party rules. (1) The voters of each political party shall elect in each con-gressional district the number of persons as delegates to the national convention of the party to which the district is enti-tled. (2) If the rules of the national political party do not require the apportionment of delegates on the basis of their commit-ment for President, the persons receiving the highest num-ber of votes as delegates in any congressional district to the number to which the district is entitled, shall be elected dele-gates. After the election of delegates in each congressional district to the number to which the district is entitled, the persons receiving the next highest votes in each congres-sional district and having qualified, as may be provided in the plan adopted by the party, shall be elected as alternate delegates to the number of alternate delegates to which the district is entitled. (3) If the rules of the national political party require that the percentage of votes cast for the various presidential can-didates determine the apportionment of committed can-didates to be elected as delegates or alternates, regardless of whether such committed candidates received the highest number of votes, then the plan adopted by the political party of the state shall prescribe the number of delegates and al-ternates to be elected under such apportionment, the method by which the apportionment shall be made, and the method by which the secretary of state shall determine which dele-gates and alternates are elected. A committed candidate for delegate to national convention is one whose preference for a particular presidential candidate appears on the ballot. (4) In the event the number of persons elected in the pri-mary election in a congressional district is less than the number to which the district is entitled as delegates and al-ternate delegates to the national convention of the political party, the governing body of the political party of the state shall appoint persons from the congressional district to serve as delegates or alternate delegates to the national convention of the party unless the rules of the party otherwise provide. (5) The number of persons which each of the congressional districts in the state are entitled to elect as delegates to the national convention of the political party shall be appor-tioned among the congressional districts in the same propor-tion to the total number of delegates to the party’s national convention elected in all congressional districts in the state as the population of the congressional district bears to the total population of the state based upon the census of popu-lation taken by the bureau of the census of the United States 340 Nomination and Election WV Delegates department of commerce in the year one thousand nine hun-dred ninety, and in every tenth year thereafter. The official primary ballot at the primary election to be held in the year one thousand nine hundred ninety-two, and in every fourth year thereafter shall, following the names of all candidates for delegates to the national convention of the party, contain the words ‘‘For election in accordance with the plan adopted by the party and filed with the secretary of state.’’ Unless and until a political party of the state has adopted and certified a plan for the election of delegates to the national convention of the party and filed the plan with the secretary of state, there shall be elected by the voters of the political party of the state at the primary election to be held in the year one thousand nine hundred ninety-two, and in each fourth year thereafter, the number of persons to which the party is entitled as delegates-at-large, and by the voters of each political party in each congressional district in the state the number of delegates to which the district is en-titled. The persons receiving the highest number of votes in the state as delegates-at-large, to the number to which the state is entitled, shall be elected delegates. The persons re-ceiving the highest number of votes as delegates in any con-gressional district, to the number to which the district is en-titled, shall be elected delegates. Each delegate so elected shall then appoint an individual to serve as alternate dele-gate, and shall by registered letter notify the secretary of state of such appointment within forty days after the pri-mary election (§ 3–5–2). B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY The presidential preference primary shall be held at the vot-ing place in each of the voting precincts in the state on the second Tuesday in May in the year one thousand nine hun-dred eighty-six and in each second year thereafter (May 12, 2008) (§ 3–5–1).In presidential election years, in addition to the candidates required to be nominated at the primary elec-tion, the qualified voters of each political party shall have the opportunity of voting for their choice among those aspir-ing to be the candidates of their respective parties for Presi-dent of the United States. The names of such aspirants shall be printed on the official election ballot of their respective parties upon the filing with the Secretary of State of the cer-tificate of announcement and the filing fee, and the ballot shall be marked and the vote shall be counted, canvassed and returned under the same conditions as to names, certifi-cates and other matters, as the names and certificates of the party aspirants for the party nomination for the office of Governor (§ 3–5–3). The certificate of announcement shall be filed with the prop-er officer not earlier than the second Monday in January next preceding the primary election day, and not later than the last Saturday in January next preceding the primary election day, and must be received before midnight, eastern standard time, of that day or, if mailed, shall be postmarked by the United States Postal Service before that hour. The certificate of announcement shall be in a form prescribed by the Secretary of State (§ 3–5–7). A candidate for President of 341 Nomination and Election WV/WI Delegates the United States shall pay a fee equivalent to one percent of the annual salary of the office for which the candidate an-nounces: Provided, That the filing fee for any candidate for President or Vice President of the United States shall not ex-ceed two thousand five hundred dollars (§ 3–5–8). For candidates for delegate to national convention, the name of the presidential candidate to be listed on the ballot as the preference of the candidate on the first convention ballot; or a statement that the candidate prefers to remain ‘‘uncommit-ted’’ (§ 3–5–7). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS None. 

WISCONSIN 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 92 Republican: 40 A. MANNER OF SELECTION The primary shall be held on the 3rd Tuesday in February to nominate nonpartisan candidates to express preferences for the person to be the presidential candidate for each party in a year in which electors for president and vice president are to be elected (February 19, 2008) (Wisconsin Statutes Annotated § 5.02 (22)). B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY The primary shall be held on the 3rd Tuesday in February to nominate nonpartisan candidates to express preferences for the person to be the presidential candidate for each party in a year in which electors for president and vice president are to be elected (February 19, 2008) (§ 5.02 (22)). The presidential primary is an open primary. National con-vention delegates are selected by the major political parties after the primary in a caucus process. There is a separate ballot for each recognized political party listing the names of all potential candidates of that party and affording, in addition, an opportunity to the voter to nominate another potential candidate by write-in vote or to vote for an uninstructed delegation to the party convention. The order of such presidential candidates shall be deter-mined by lot by or under the supervision of the board. Each voter shall be given the ballots of all the parties partici-pating in the presidential preference vote, but may vote on one ballot only (§ 5.58(2r)). This is an open type of primary. No later than 5 p.m. on the 3rd Tuesday in November, or the next day if Tuesday is a holiday, of the year before each year in which electors for president and vice president are to be elected, the state chairperson of each recognized political party listed on the official ballot at the last gubernatorial election whose candidate for governor received at least 10% of the total votes cast for that office may certify to the board that the party will participate in the presidential preference primary. For each party filing such a certification, the voters of this state shall at the spring primary be given an oppor-342 Nomination and Election WI/WY Delegates tunity to express their preference for the person to be the presidential candidate of that party. On the 2nd Tuesday in December of the year before each year in which electors for president and vice president are to be elected, there shall be convened in the capitol a committee consisting of, for each party filing a certification under this subsection, the state chairperson of that state party organi-zation or the chairpersons designee, one national committee-man and one national committeewoman designated by the state chairperson; the speaker and the minority leader of the assembly or their designees, and the president and the mi-nority leader of the senate or their designees. All designa-tions shall be made in writing to the board. This committee shall organize by selecting an additional member who shall be the chairperson and shall determine, and certify to the board, no later than on the Friday following the date on which the committee convenes under this paragraph, the names of all candidates of the political parties represented on the committee for the office of president of the United States. The committee shall place the names of all can-didates whose candidacy is generally advocated or recognized in the national news media throughout the United States on the ballot, and may, in addition, place the names of other candidates on the ballot. The committee shall have sole dis-cretion to determine that a candidacy is generally advocated or recognized in the national news media throughout the United States. No later than 5 p.m. on the first Tuesday in January of each presidential election year, any person seek-ing the nomination by the national convention of a political party filing a certification under this subsection for the office of president of the United States, or any committee orga-nized in this state on behalf of and with the consent of such person, may submit to the board a petition to have the per-sons name appear on the presidential preference ballot. The petition may be circulated no sooner than the 2nd Tuesday in December preceding such year and shall be signed by a number of qualified electors equal in each congressional dis-trict to not less than 1,000 signatures nor more than 1,500 signatures (§ 8.12). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS None. 

WYOMING 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 18 Republican: 14 A. MANNER OF SELECTION Delegates and alternates are elected by the state convention of each political party (Wyoming Statutes Annotated, § 22– 4–118). Delegates and alternates to the State convention are selected at county conventions (§ 22–4–108). The county convention of each political party shall meet in even-numbered years (§ 22–4–106). Delegates to county con-ventions are members of the county central committee, but 343 Nomination and Election WY Delegates the party may provide an alternate method of selecting such delegates (§ 22–4–107). B. PRESIDENTIAL PREFERENCE PRIMARY None. C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS None. 344 Nomination and Election TERR Delegates 

B. Delegate Selection for Citizens Abroad and the Territories AMERICAN SAMOA [Democrats only] Manner of Selection 

Delegates to Democratic National Convention: 13 A caucus/convention process selects the national convention delegates on March 10, 2008. Delegates to the Republican National Convention: 6 at-large delegates 

DEMOCRATS ABROAD 

Delegates to Democratic National Convention: 23 

Democrats: 

In 2008, the Democrats Abroad will utilize a caucus system on February 5, 2008 to select 23 delegates from certain sites around the globe. 

GUAM 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 12 Republican: 9 

Democrats: 

The national convention delegates will be elected by a one-tier caucus/convention at a mass meeting on May 3, 2008. 

Republicans: 

The delegates will be elected by caucus/convention on Feb-ruary 16, 2008. 

PUERTO RICO 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 67 Republican: 23 

Democrats: 

A caucus for the expression of presidential preferences and the election of national convention delegates and alternatives will be held on June 7, 2008. 

Republicans: 

The Republican Party in Puerto Rico will send 20 at-large delegates to the national convention. 

VIRGIN ISLANDS 

Delegates to National Conventions: Democratic: 13 Republican: 9 345 Nomination and Election TERR Delegates 

Democrats: 

The Democratic Party in the Virgin Islands will select its delegates by a caucus/convention process on February 9, 2008. 

Republicans: 

The Republican Party in the Virgin Islands will select its delegates by a caucus/convention process on April 5, 2008. 346 Nomination and Election 

PART IV. STATE LAWS RELATING TO THE NOMINATION AND ELECTION OF PRESIDENTIAL ELECTORS A. Table of State Electoral College Votes 

Alabama ......................................... 9 Montana ......................................... 3Alaska ............................................. 3 Nebraska ........................................ 5Arizona ........................................... 10 Nevada ............................................ 5Arkansas ......................................... 6 New Hampshire ............................. 4California ........................................ 55 New Jersey ..................................... 15 Colorado .......................................... 9 New Mexico .................................... 5Connecticut .................................... 7 New York ........................................ 31 Delaware ........................................ 3 North Carolina ............................... 15 District of Columbia ...................... 3 North Dakota ................................. 3Florida ............................................ 27 Ohio ................................................ 20 Georgia ........................................... 15 Oklahoma ....................................... 7Hawaii ............................................ 4 Oregon ............................................ 7Idaho ............................................... 4 Pennsylvania .................................. 21 Illinois ............................................. 21 Rhode Island .................................. 4Indiana ........................................... 11 South Carolina ............................... 8Iowa ................................................ 7 South Dakota ................................. 3Kansas ............................................ 6 Tennessee ....................................... 11 Kentucky ........................................ 8 Texas ............................................... 34 Louisiana ........................................ 9 Utah ................................................ 5Maine .............................................. 4 Vermont .......................................... 3Maryland ........................................ 10 Virginia ........................................... 13 Massachusetts ................................ 12 Washington .................................... 11 Michigan ......................................... 17 West Virginia ................................. 5Minnesota ....................................... 10 Wisconsin ....................................... 10 Mississippi ...................................... 6 Wyoming ......................................... 3Missouri .......................................... 11 347 Nomination and Election 

B. Summary of State Laws Relating to Presidential Electors ALABAMA 

Presidential Electors: 9 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

The nomination of electors is by party organization. There is no explicit statutory provision for a primary election to select electors (Code of Alabama, §17–14–31). When presidential electors are to be chosen, the Secretary of State certifies to the judges of probate of the several counties the names of all candidates for President and Vice President who are nomi-nated by any national convention ( ibid. ). The certificate of nomination must be signed by the presiding officer and sec-retary of the convention and by the chairman of the State ex-ecutive or central committees making the nomination ( ibid. ). Each certificate of nomination and nominating petition must be accompanied by a list of names and addresses of persons, who are qualified voters, equal to the number of presidential electors to be chosen ( ibid. ). Such certificates must be filed in the office of the Secretary of State no later than the last day of August preceding the general election ( ibid. ). (2) Minor and new parties 

Candidates for President and Vice President may be nomi-nated by a national convention or other like assembly of any political party (§ 17–14–31). The nominating petitions must be filed in the office of the Secretary of State no later than the last day of August before the general election ( ibid. ). The Secretary of State certifies to the judges of probate of the several counties the names of all candidates for President and Vice President who are nominated by a national conven-tion ( ibid. ). Each certificate of nomination is to be accom-panied by a list of names and addresses of persons equal in number to the number of presidential electors to be chosen. (3) Independent candidates 

The Secretary of State must certify to the judges of probate of the several counties the names of candidates for President and Vice President who are nominated by written petition signed by at least 5,000 qualified voters of the State (§ 17– 14–31). The nominating petition is to be filed in the office of the Secretary of State no later than the last day of August preceding the general election ( ibid. ). 

Pledge 

Each person listed on each certificate of nomination and nominating petition shall agree that, if elected, he or she shall cast a ballot as elector for the nominees listed on such certificate (§ 17–14–31). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS The names of all candidates for President and Vice President shall be printed on the official ballots under the emblem of their respective political parties (§ 17–14–32). The names of 348 Nomination and Election AL/AK Electors the electors of the candidates for President and Vice Presi-dent shall not be printed upon the ballots ( ibid. ). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The electors of President and Vice President are to assemble at the office of the Secretary of State, at the seat of govern-ment at 12:00 o’clock noon on the second Tuesday in Decem-ber next after their election, or at that hour on such other day as may be fixed by Congress, to elect such President and Vice President, and those of them present at that hour must at once proceed by ballot and plurality of voters to supply the places of those who fail to attend on that day and hour (§ 17–14–36). 

ALASKA 

Presidential Electors: 3 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

The nomination of electors is by State party convention or in any other manner prescribed by the bylaws of the party. The chairman and secretary of the State convention or any other party official designated by the party bylaws shall certify a list of names of candidates for electors to the Lieutenant Governor, on or before September 1 in presidential election years (Alaska Statutes, § 15.30.020). (2) Party pledge 

The party shall require from each candidate for election a pledge that as an elector he will vote for the candidates nom-inated by the party of which he is a candidate (§ 15.30.040). (3) Minor parties 

A limited political party may be organized for the purpose of selecting candidates for electors of President and Vice Presi-dent of the United States by filing a petition with the Lieu-tenant Governor at least 90 days before a presidential gen-eral election signed by qualified voters of the State equaling in number at least one percent of the number of voters who cast ballots for President at the last presidential election. The petition shall state that the signers intend to organize a limited political party, that they intend to select candidates for electors of President and Vice President of the United States at the next succeeding presidential election, and the name of the limited political party (§ 15.30.025(a)). A limited political party so organized may not assume aname which is so similar to an existing political party as to confuse or mislead the voters at an election. If the director of elections determines that the name of the limited political party set out in a petition is confusing or misleading, he may refuse to accept the petition for filing (§ 15.30.025(b)). A limited political party organized under this section shall cease to be a political party whenever its presidential can-didate fails to receive at least 3 percent of the number of vot-ers who cast ballots for the office of President at a presi-dential election (§ 15.30.025(c)). Presidential electors may be nominated by political parties in Alaska (§ 15.30.020). 349 Nomination and Election AK/AZ Electors B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS Names of candidates are printed on the ballots and a vote marked for the candidates for President and Vice President is considered and counted as a vote for the presidential elec-tors of the party (§ §15.15.030(7), 15.30.050). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The electors shall meet at the office of the Lieutenant Gov-ernor or other place designated by him at 11:00 in the morn-ing on the first Monday after the second Wednesday in De-cember following their election. They shall proceed to cast their votes for the candidates for the office of President and Vice President of the party which selected them as can-didates for electors and shall perform the duties of electors as required by the Constitution and laws of the United States (§ §15.30.070, 15.30.090). 

ARIZONA 

Presidential Electors: 8 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

Electors are nominated at the general State primary held on the eighth Tuesday prior to the general election, i.e., Sep-tember 2, 2008 (Arizona Revised Statutes, §16–201). The nomination paper of a candidate for presidential elector shall be filed with the Secretary of State no later than 5:00 p.m. on the last date for filing, not less than 90 days or more than 120 days before the primary election (§§ 16–344, 16–311(E)). The chairman of the State committee of a political party which is qualified for continued representation on the ballot as provided in §16–804 shall appoint candidates for the office of presidential elector equal to the number of United States Senators and Representatives in Congress from this State and shall file a nomination paper and affidavit for each can-didate in compliance with the requirements for candidates as provided in §16–311. (§ 16–344). (2) Minor and new parties 

A new political party may become eligible for recognition and shall be represented by an official party ballot at the next ensuing regular primary election and accorded a column on the official ballot at the succeeding general election upon fil-ing with the Secretary of State a petition signed by a num-ber of qualified electors equal to not less than one and one-third percent of the votes cast for governor or presidential electors at the last preceding general election (§ 16–801). (3) Independent candidates 

A nominating petition, signed by at least three percent of the qualified electors of the State who have not signed the nomi-nation petitions of a candidate for the office to be voted for at the last primary election and who are not members of a political party that qualified to be represented on the pri-mary and general election ballot. The nominating petition is to be filed with the Secretary of State no later than 5:00 p.m. not less than 90 nor more than 120 days before the primary election for that office. (§§ 16–341(C), 16–311(A)). 350 Nomination and Election AZ/AR Electors B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS When presidential electors are to be voted for, the candidates therefor of each party shall be grouped and printed together, arranged in each group in alphabetical order, and the entire group of electors of each party shall be enclosed in a scroll or bracket to the right and opposite the center on which shall be printed in bold type the surname of the presidential candidate represented. To the right of and on a line with the surname shall be placed a square in which the voter may in-dicate his choice by the mark X, and one such mark opposite a group of presidential electors shall be counted as a vote for each elector in such group (§ 16–507). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS None. 

ARKANSAS 

Presidential Electors: 6 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

In each year in which a President and Vice President of the United States are chosen, each political party or group in the State shall choose by its State convention electors of Presi-dent and Vice President of the United States (Arkansas Code Annotated, §7–8–302). The State convention of such party or group shall also choose electors at large, if any are to be ap-pointed for the State and such State convention of such party or group shall by its chairman and secretary certify the total list of such electors together with electors at large so chosen to the Secretary of State. The certificate shall be filed no later than September 15 (§ 7–8–302). The filing of such certificate with said Secretary of State, of such choosing of electors shall be deemed and taken to be the choosing and selection of the electors of this State, if such party or group is successful at the polls as herein provided in choosing their candidates for President and Vice President of the United States (§ 7–8–302). The certification by the parties of electors is to be made to the Secretary of State within two days after the state convention. (§ 7–8–302(1)(C)). (2) Minor and new parties 

In order to have the name of a party’s candidates for Presi-dent and Vice President printed on the ballots, a political party shall nominate by primary election. A new political party formed pursuant to petition process may nominate by convention if the presidential election is the first general election after certification as a party. § 7–8–302(5)(A). A po-litical group desiring to have the names of its candidates for President and Vice President printed on the ballot shall file a petition with the Secretary of State by noon of the first Monday in August containing one thousand qualified electors declaring their desire to have the names of their candidate for President and Vice President printed on the ballot. (§ 7– 8–302(B)). (3) Independent candidates 

Any person desiring to have his name placed upon the ballot as an independent candidate without political party affili-351 Nomination and Election AR/CA Electors ation for any State, county, township or district office, shall in any general election in this State file as an independent candidate a notice of candidacy identifying the elective office, and a nominating petition not later than twelve o’clock (12:00) noon on the third Tuesday in March immediately pre-ceding the preferential primary election, and shall furnish at the time he files as an independent candidate [petitions] signed by not less than three percent (3%) of the qualified electors of the State, or 10,000 signatures of qualified elec-tors whichever is the lesser, each of whom shall be a reg-istered voter and such petitions shall be directed to the offi-cial with whom such person is required by law to file nomi-nation certificates to qualify as a candidate, requesting that the name of such person be placed on the ballot for election to the office mentioned in the petition. Such petitions shall be circulated not earlier than sixty (60) calendar days prior to the deadline for filing such petitions to qualify as an inde-pendent candidate (§ § 7–7–103(b), 7–6–102(a)). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS The names of candidates of political parties or groups for electors of the President and Vice President shall not be printed on the general election ballot. In lieu thereof, the names of the candidates for President and Vice President with the particular party designation of each shall be so printed. A vote for the presidential and vice presidential can-didates shall be deemed to be a vote for the electors thereof (§ 7–8–302(4)(A)). If more than one certificate of choice and selection of electors of the same political party or group is filed, the constitu-tional officers of the State shall determine which set was chosen by the authorized convention of a party or group (§ 7– 8–302(2)(A)). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The electors shall meet at the office of the Secretary of State in the State capitol at the time appointed by the laws of the United States at 10:00 a.m., and give their votes for Presi-dent and Vice President of the United States, and perform such duties as are or may be required by law (§ 7–8–306). 

CALIFORNIA 

Presidential Electors: 54 A. NOMINATION (1) Established political parties (Cal. Election Code, § 6901). 

(a) Democratic Party 

In each year of the general election at which electors of President and Vice President of the United States are to be chosen, each congressional nominee shall designate one pres-idential elector and shall file his or her name, residence and business address with the Secretary of State by October 1 of the presidential election year. Each United States senatorial nominee, determined by the last two United States senato-rial elections, shall designate one presidential elector and shall file his or her name, residence and business address with the Secretary of State by October 1 of the presidential 352 Nomination and Election CA Electors election year. In the event there is no United States senato-rial nominee or no congressional nominee in any particular district, the State chairman shall designate one presidential elector for each vacancy and shall file his or her name, resi-dence and business address with the Secretary of State by October 1 of the presidential election year (Cal. Election Code, § 7100). (b) Republican Party 

In each year of the general election at which electors of President and Vice President of the United States are to be chosen, the Republican nominees for Governor, Lieutenant Governor, Treasurer, Controller, Attorney General, and Sec-retary of State, the Republican nominees for United States Senator at the last two United States senatorial elections, the Assembly Republican leader, the Senate Republican lead-er, all elected officers of the Republican State Central Com-mittee, the National Committeeman and National Com-mitteewoman, the President of the Republican County Cen-tral Committee Chairmen’s Association, and the chairman or president of each Republican volunteer organization officially recognized by the Republican State Central Committee shall act as presidential electors, except that Senators, Represent-atives, and persons holding an office of trust or profit of the United States shall not act as electors. The remaining presi-dential elector positions, and any vacant positions, shall be filled by appointment of the Chairman of the Republican State Central Committee in accordance with the bylaws of the committee. The name, residence and business address of each such appointee shall be filed with the Secretary of State by October 1st of the presidential election year. The Repub-lican State Central Committee shall adopt bylaws imple-menting the provisions of this section (Cal. Election Code, § 7300). (2) Minor and new parties 

(c) American Independent Party 

The convention shall nominate electors of President and Vice President and certify to Secretary of State. (Cal. Election Code, § 7578). (d) Peace and Freedom Party 

The convention meeting of the State Central Committee shall nominate electors of President and Vice President, 50 percent of whom shall be women, and 50 percent men. (Cal. Election Code, § 7843). Minor and new parties select their candidates for presi-dential electors at respective State conventions and certify the names of the electors nominated to the Secretary of State in a similar method as any established party. (Cal. Election Code, § 5006). (3) Independent candidates 

Whenever a group of candidates for presidential electors, equal in number to the number of presidential electors to which this State is entitled, files a nomination paper with the Secretary of State pursuant to this chapter, the nomina-tion paper may contain the name of the candidate for Presi-dent of the United States and the name of the candidate for Vice President of the United States for whom all of those 353 Nomination and Election CA/CO Electors candidates for presidential electors pledge themselves to vote (§ 8303). When a group of candidates for presidential electors des-ignates the presidential and vice presidential candidates for whom all of the group pledge themselves to vote, the names of the presidential candidate and vice-presidential candidate designated by that group shall be printed on the ballot pur-suant to Chapter 2. (§ 8304). Nomination papers for a statewide office for which the can-didate is to be nominated shall be signed by voters of the State equal to not less in number than one percent of the en-tire number of registered voters of the State at the time of the close of registration prior to the preceding general elec-tion (§ 8400). Nomination papers shall be prepared, circulated, signed and delivered to the county elections official for examination no earlier than 148 days before the election and no later than 5:00 p.m. 88 days before the election (§ 8403). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS The names of the candidates for President and Vice Presi-dent of the several political parties are printed on the ballot. Names of the candidates for electors shall not be printed on the ballot (§ § 13103, 13109, 13111). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The electors chosen shall assemble at the State Capitol at 2:00 in the afternoon on the first Monday after the second Wednesday in December next following their election (§ 6904). In case of the death or absence of any elector chosen, or if the number of electors is deficient for any other reason, the electors then present shall elect, from the citizens of the State, as many persons as will supply the deficiency (§ 6905). The electors, when convened, if both candidates are alive, shall vote by ballot for that person for President and that person for Vice President of the United States, who are re-spectively, the candidates of the political party which they represent, one of whom, at least, is not an inhabitant of this State (§ 6906). 

COLORADO 

Presidential Electors: 8 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

The nomination of presidential electors may be by State party convention, or a committee authorized by such conven-tion, or by petition for nomination of an independent can-didate (Colorado Revised Statutes, §§ 1–4–302, 1–4–701). Any convention of delegates of a political party or any com-mittee authorized by resolution of such convention may nominate presidential electors. All nominations for vacancies for presidential electors made by the convention or a com-mittee authorized by such convention shall be certified by af-fidavit of the presiding officer and secretary of the conven-tion or committee (§ 1–4–302). 354 Nomination and Election CO Electors (2) Minor and new parties 

A minor political party is a party other than a major political party which has satisfied one of the conditions in § 1–4– 130(1) or has submitted a petition according to 1302. A‘‘major political party’’ means one whose candidate for Gov-ernor at the last preceding gubernatorial election received at least ten percent of the total votes cast. (§ 1–1–104 (22)). ‘‘Po-litical organization’’ means any group of qualified electors who, by petition for nomination of an independent candidate as provided in section 1–4–801, places upon the official gen-eral election ballot nominees for public office (§ 1–1–104(24)). Minor political parties may nominate candidates for presi-dential electors in the same manner as major political par-ties. Groups of voters which do not qualify as a major or minor political party may nominate candidates for presi-dential electors in the same manner as independent can-didates (§ § 1–4–302, 303). (3) Independent (unaffiliated) candidates 

Not later than 120 days before the general election, persons who desire to be an unaffiliated candidate for President and Vice President shall submit to the Secretary of State either a notarized candidate’s statement of intent with a non-re-fundable filing fee, or a petition for nomination pursuant to the provisions of section 1–4–802 which shall include on the petition the names of registered electors who are thus nomi-nated as presidential electors. The acceptance of each of the electors shall be endorsed as appended to the first or last page of the nominating petition or the filing fee (§ 1–4–303). Candidates for public offices to be filled at a general election who do not wish to affiliate with a political party may be nominated, other than by a primary election or a convention, in the following manner: (a) A petition for nominating independent candidates shall be prepared which shall contain the names and addresses of any candidates for the offices to be filled. The petition shall designate in not more than three words the political or other name which the signers select. No name of any political party shall be used, in whole or in part, for this purpose. (b) In the case of nominations for electors of President and Vice President of the United States, the names of the can-didates for President and Vice President may be added to the political or other name designated on the petition. (c) The petition shall be signed by registered electors resid-ing within the district or political subdivision in which the officers are to be elected to the number of at least five thou-sand for the office of President and the office of Vice Presi-dent. (d) No petition, except petitions for candidates for vacancies to unexpired terms of Representatives in Congress and for presidential electors, shall be circulated or any signatures obtained thereon earlier than one hundred sixty five days be-fore the general election. Petitions shall be filed not later than 3 p.m. on the 120th day before the general election or 3 p.m. on the fifty-fifth day preceding the congressional vacancy election. (g) No person shall be placed in nomination by petition un-less the person is a registered elector of the political subdivi-355 Nomination and Election CO Electors sion or district in which the officer is to be elected and un-less he was registered as unaffiliated, as shown on the books of the county clerk and recorder, for at least twelve months prior to the last date the petition maybe filed; except that, if such nomination is for a nonpartisan election, such person shall be a registered elector of such political subdivision or district and be a registered elector, as shown on the books of the county clerk and recorder, on the date of the earliest signature on the petition (§ 1–4–802). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS The names of the presidential electors shall not be printed upon the ballot, but the names of the candidates of their re-spective parties or political groups for President and Vice President shall be printed together in pairs under the title ‘‘Presidential Electors.’’ A vote for any such pair of can-didates shall be a vote for the electors of the party or polit-ical group by which such candidates were named (§ 1–5– 403)(2)). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The electors of President and Vice President of the United States shall convene at the capital of the State, in the office of the Governor at the capitol building, on the first Monday after the second Wednesday in December next after their election at the hour of twelve noon and take the oath re-quired by law for such presidential electors. If there is any vacancy in the office of presidential electors occasioned by death, refusal to act, absence, or other cause, the presi-dential electors present shall immediately proceed to fill such vacancy in the Electoral College. When the vacancies have been filled, they shall proceed to perform the duties re-quired of such presidential electors by the Constitution and laws of the United States, and vote for President and Vice President by open ballot. The Secretary of State shall give notice in writing to each of the presidential electors, at least ten days prior thereto, of the time and place of said meeting. The Secretary of State shall provide such presidential electors with the necessary blanks, forms, certificates, or other papers or documents re-quired to enable them to properly perform their duties. If de-sired, such presidential electors may have the advice of the Attorney General of the State respecting their official duties. Each presidential elector shall vote for the pair of presi-dential and vice presidential candidates who received the highest number of votes at the preceding general election in this State. (§ 1–4–304). Every presidential elector of this State who attends and gives his vote for those officers at the time and place ap-pointed by law shall be entitled to receive the sum of five dollars per day for each day’s attendance at such election and fifteen cents per mile for each mile he travels in going to and returning from the place where the electors meet, by the most usual route traveled, to be paid out of the general fund. The controller shall audit the amount and draw his warrant for the same (§ 1–4–305). 356 Nomination and Election CT Electors 

CONNECTICUT 

Presidential Electors: 8 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

The electors in the several towns in the State, at the State election in 1964, and quadrennially thereafter, shall elect electors of President and Vice President of the United States, not exceeding in number the whole number of Senators and Representatives to which the State is then entitled in the Congress of the United States. Voting shall be conducted and the result declared, and the returns thereof made, as is pro-vided in respect to State elections. The Secretary of State shall, on or before the first Monday of October of the year in which such presidential electors are to be elected, trans-mit blank forms to the several town clerks for the return of the votes; and the lists and returns of the votes shall be made out, certified and directed according to such forms (Connecticut General Statutes Annotated, § 9–175). Generally the nomination of electors of President and Vice President is by political conventions of the respective major parties (§ 9–175). (2) Minor and new parties 

A minor party is a political party or organization which is not a major party and whose candidate for the office in ques-tion received at the last-preceding regular election for such office, under the designation of that political party or organi-zation, at least one percent of the whole number of votes cast for all candidates for such office at such election (§ 9–372(6)). At least one copy of the party rules regulating the manner of nominating its candidates must be filed with the Secretary of State at least 60 days before the nomination (§§ 9–374; 9– 451). (3) Independent candidates 

An individual may also obtain a place on the election ballot label by nominating petition. No name of any candidate shall be printed on any official ballot at any election except the name of a candidate nominated by a major or minor party unless a nominating petition for such candidate is approved by the Secretary of State as provided in sections 9–453a to 9–453p, inclusive (§ 9–379). Application must be accompanied by a signed statement of candidate’s consent and the party designation, if any. Signa-tures of qualified voters are required, equal in number to the lesser of one percent of all votes cast for the same office at the last preceding election for such office, or seven thousand five hundred. The petition should be filed with the town clerk of each town in which it was circulated at least 10 weeks before election with a statement of each circulator of the nominating petition (§ § 9–453b to 9–453d, 9–453i). (4) Write-in presidential and vice presidential candidates 

In the case of a write-in candidate for President of the United States, such candidate may register his candidacy with the Secretary of the State by submitting his name and the names of a vice presidential candidate and candidates for the office of elector in a number not exceeding the whole number of electors to which the State is then entitled. Such 357 Nomination and Election CT Electors registration shall be on a form prescribed by the Secretary of the State, which form shall include a statement of consent to being a candidate by each proposed candidate for elector and by the candidate for Vice President. Such registration shall not include a designation of political party. A candidate for President may register at any time after January first of the election year and not later than four o’clock p.m. on the fourteenth day preceding the election at which the offices of presidential elector and vice presidential elector are being contested. If a candidate has so registered, a vote may be cast by write-in ballot for such candidate by writing in the last name of the candidate for President and the last name of the candidate for Vice President or only the last name of the candidate for President; such write-in ballot shall be counted, and shall be in all respects effective, as a vote for the presidential electors representing such candidates for President and Vice President. No person nominated for the office of President, or presidential elector by a major or minor party or by nominating petition shall register as a write-in candidate for such office under the provisions of this section and any such registration of a write-in candidacy filed by such a person shall be void (§ 9–175(b)). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS When an election is to be held for the choice of presidential electors, if any political party has nominated candidates for President and Vice President of the United States, and presi-dential electors to vote for such presidential and vice presi-dential candidates have been nominated by a political con-vention of such party in this State, or in such other manner as entitles the names of such electors to be placed upon the official ballots to be used in such election, the Secretary of State and any other official charged with the preparation of official ballots to be used in such election, in lieu of placing the names of such presidential electors on such official bal-lots, shall place on such official ballots a space with the words ‘‘Presidential electors for (here insert the last name of the candidate for President, the word ‘and’ and the last name of the candidate for Vice President)’’; and a vote cast therefor shall be counted, and shall be in all respects effective, as a vote for each of the presidential electors representing such candidates for President and Vice President (§ 9–175). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The presidential electors shall meet at the office of the Sec-retary of the State at 12:00 o’clock noon, on the first Monday after the second Wednesday of the December following their election and, as required by the Constitution and laws of the United States, shall cast their ballots for President and Vice President. Each such elector shall cast his ballots for the candidates under whose names he ran on the official election ballot, as provided in section 9–175. If any such elector is ab-sent or if there is a vacancy in the Electoral College for any cause, the electors present shall, before voting for President and Vice President, elect by ballot an elector to fill such va-cancy, and the person so chosen shall be a presidential elec-tor, shall perform the duties of such office and shall cast his 358 Nomination and Election CT/DE/DC Electors ballots for the candidates to whom the elector he is replacing was pledged (§ 9–176). 

DELAWARE 

Presidential Electors: 3 A. NOMINATION (1) Political parties 

The method of nominating candidates for the national Elec-toral College, . . . and for formulation of the party platform may be by convention. (Title 15, § 3113). The presiding officer and secretary of the state convention or committee of each political party eligible to place candidates on the ballot shall submit certificates of nomination for elec-tors of President and Vice-President of the United States to-gether with the name of the candidates for President and Vice-President to the State Commissioner of Elections. (Dela-ware Code Annotated, tit. 15, § 3301(b)). Candidates for political parties who must file for election in accordance with § 3101 of this title, and who either receive the majority vote at the subsequent primary election or are unopposed in the party for the office for which the candidate has filed shall be considered nominated. (tit. 15, § 3301(a)). (2) Unaffiliated Candidates 

Unaffiliated candidates may appear on the general election ballot if such candidate files a declaration of candidacy that he is unaffiliated, has been for at least three months prior to filing, and files a nominating petition signed by not less than 1 percent of the total number of voters registered, as of December 31 of the year immediately preceding the gen-eral election. (tit. 15, § 3002). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS Nominees of any party and qualifying unaffiliated candidates for President and Vice President are placed on the ballot. A vote for the candidates for President and Vice President shall be a vote for the electors of such party, the names of whom are on file with the Secretary of State (tit. 15, §§ 4502; 5704). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The Governor in October next preceding every election of presidential electors shall by proclamation make known the number of presidential electors to be chosen and the day of the election (tit. 15, § 4302). The electors chosen or appointed for the election of a President and Vice President shall meet and give their votes at Dover on the day determined by Con-gress for that purpose (tit. 15, § 4303). 

DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA 

Presidential Electors: 3 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

Each political party which had in the preceding election year at least 7,500 votes cast in the general election for a can-didate of the party to the office of Delegate, Mayor, or chair-359 Nomination and Election DC/FL Electors man or member of the Council, shall be entitled to nominate candidates for presidential electors. The executive committee of the organization recognized by the national committee of each such party as the official organization of that party in the District of Columbia shall nominate by appropriate means the presidential electors for that party. Nominations shall be made by message to the Board of Elections and Eth-ics on or before September 1 next preceding a presidential election. (District of Columbia Code, § 1–1001.08(d)) No person may be elected as a presidential elector in the District unless (a) he is a registered voter in the District, and (b) he has been a bona fide resident of the District for a period of 3 years immediately preceding the date of the presidential election (§ 1–1001.08(g)). (2) Minor and new parties 

A party that does not qualify under subsection (d) may have the names of its candidates for President and Vice President of the United States printed on the general election ballot provided a petition nominating the appropriate number of candidates for presidential electors signed by at least one percent of registered qualified electors of the District of Co-lumbia, as of July 1 of the year in which the election is to be held is presented to the Board on or before the third Tuesday in August preceding the date of the presidential election (§ 1–1001.08(f)). (3) Independent candidates 

No provision. B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS The names of the candidates of each political party for Presi-dent and Vice President shall be placed on the ballot under the party title and device. The names of persons nominated as candidates for electors of President and Vice President shall not appear on the ballot (§ 1–1001.08(e)). Each vote cast for the candidate for President or Vice President whose name appears on the general election ballot shall be counted as a vote cast for the candidates for presidential electors of the party supporting such presidential and vice presidential can-didate (§ 1–1001.106(2)). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS Each person elected as elector of President and Vice Presi-dent shall, in the presence of the Board of Elections, take an oath or solemnly affirm that he will vote for the candidates of the party he has been nominated to represent, and it shall be his duty to vote in such manner in the Electoral College (§ 1–1001.08(g)). 

FLORIDA 

Presidential Electors: 25 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

(1) The Governor shall nominate the presidential electors of each political party. The state executive committee of each political party shall by resolution recommend candidates for presidential electors and deliver a certified copy thereof to 360 Nomination and Election FL Electors the Governor before September 1 of each presidential elec-tion year. The Governor shall nominate only the electors rec-ommended by the state executive committee of the respective political party. Each such elector shall be a qualified elector of the party he or she represents who has taken an oath that he or she will vote for the candidates of the party that he or she is nominated to represent. The Governor shall certify to the Department of State on or before September 1, in each presidential election year, the names of a number of electors for each political party equal to the number of senators and representatives which this state has in Congress. (Florida Statutes Annotated, § 103.021(1)). (2) Minor and new parties 

A minority political party is any such group, as defined above, which on January 1 preceding a primary election does not have registered as members five percent of the total reg-istered electors of the State (§ 97.021(14)). A minor political party may have the names of its candidates for President and Vice President printed, and independent candidates for President and Vice President may have their names printed, on the general election ballots if a petition is signed by one percent of the registered electors of this State, as shown by the compilation by the Department of State for the last pre-ceding general election. A separate petition from each county for which signatures are solicited shall be submitted to the supervisor of elections of the respective county no later than July 15 of each presidential election year. The supervisor shall check the names and, on or before the date of the pri-mary election, shall certify the number shown as registered electors of the county. The supervisor shall be paid by the person requesting the certification the cost of checking the petitions as prescribed in section 99.097. The supervisor shall then forward the certificate to the Department of State which shall determine whether or not the percentage factor required in this section has been met. When the percentage factor required in this section has been met, the Department of State shall order the names of the candidates for whom the petition was circulated to be included on the ballot and shall permit the required number of persons to be certified as electors in the same manner as other party candidates (§ 103.021(3)). Any minor political party which has met the petitioning re-quirements of section 99.096 (signatures of three percent of registered electors) and will have the names of a candidate or candidates for any office or offices to be filled by a state-wide election printed on the general election ballot, and which minor party is affiliated with a national party holding a national convention to nominate candidates for President and Vice President of the United States, may have the names of its candidates for President and Vice President of the United States printed on the general election ballot by filing with the Department of State a certificate naming the candidates for President and Vice President and listing the required number of persons to serve as electors. Notification to the Department of State under this subsection shall be made by September 1 of the year in which the election is held. When the Department of State has been so notified, it 361 Nomination and Election FL/GA Electors shall order the names of the candidates for whom the peti-tion was circulated to be included on the ballot and shall permit the required number of persons to be certified as elec-tors in the same manner as other party candidates (§ 103.021(4)). (3) Write-in candidates 

Persons seeking to qualify for election as write-in candidates for President and Vice President of the United States may have a blank space provided on the general election ballot for their names to be written in by filing an oath with the De-partment of State at any time after the 57th day, but before noon of the 49th day, prior to the date of the primary elec-tion in the year in which a presidential election is held. The Department of State shall prescribe the form to be used in administering the oath. The candidates shall file with the department a certificate naming the required number of per-sons to serve as electors. Such write-in candidates shall not be entitled to have their names on the ballot (§ 103.022). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS On the ballot shall be printed the heading ‘‘Electors for President and Vice President’’ and thereunder the names of the candidates for President and Vice President nominated by the political party which received the highest vote for Governor in the last general election of the Governor in the State, above which shall appear the name of the said party, then shall appear the names of other candidates for Presi-dent and Vice President who have been properly nominated (§ 101.151(3)). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS Each presidential elector shall, on the day fixed by Congress to elect a President and Vice President and at a time fixed by the Governor, give notice to the Governor that he is in Tallahassee and ready to perform the duties of presidential elector. The Governor shall forthwith deliver to the presi-dential electors present a certificate of the names of all the electors; and if, on examination thereof, it should be found that one or more electors are absent, the electors present shall elect by ballot, in the presence of the Governor, a per-son or persons to fill such vacancy or vacancies as may have occurred through the nonattendance of one or more of the electors (§ 103.061). 

GEORGIA 

Presidential Electors: 13 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

Any political party desiring to nominate its presidential elec-tors by convention, any political body desiring to nominate its candidates qualifying with petitions by convention shall through its State executive committee, adopt rules and regu-lations governing the holding of such conventions for such nomination of candidates. Such rules and regulations shall be filed with the Secretary of State, and no amendment to such rules and regulations shall be effective unless filed with 362 Nomination and Election GA Electors the Secretary of State at least 30 days prior to the date of such convention. The State party or body chairman of such political party or body and its secretary shall accompany the filing of such rules and regulations with their certificate cer-tifying that the rules and regulations therein filed are a true and correct copy of the rules and regulations of the party pertaining to the nomination of candidates by the convention method (Code of Georgia Annotated, § 21–2–172). Political bodies shall hold their conventions in accordance with Code Section 21–2–172 and candidates nominated for statewide public office in convention shall file a notice of can-didacy no earlier than 9:00 a.m. fourth Monday in June and no later than 12:00 noon on the Friday following the fourth Monday in June; provided, however, that the political body must file its qualifying petition no later than 12:00 noon on the second Tuesday in July following the convention as pre-scribed in Code Section 21–2–172 in order to qualify its can-didates to be listed on the general election ballot (§ 21–2– 187). (2) Minor and new parties 

Political parties polling less than 20 percent of the vote cast at the preceding general election are known as ‘‘political or-ganizations.’’ ‘‘Political party’’ is defined as a political organization whose candidate at the preceding gubernatorial election polled at least 20 percent of the total vote cast in the State for Gov-ernor or who nominated a candidate for President at the pre-ceding presidential election and whose candidates for presi-dential electors polled at least 20 percent of the total vote cast in the nation for that office (§ 21–2–2 (20), (21), (24), (25)). Any candidate required to have his notice of candidacy be sent with the nomination petition must file his notice of can-didacy and an affidavit no later than 12:00 noon on the Fri-day following the fourth Monday in June prior to the general election (§ 21–2–132). All candidates are required to accompany their notice of can-didacy with a nomination petition unless the candidate is ei-ther a nominee of a political party for the office of presi-dential elector when such party has held a national conven-tion and nominated candidates for President and Vice Presi-dent of the United States, or the nomineee of a political party nominated in a primary held by such party (§ 21–2– 132). The nominating petitions must be signed by not less than 1 percent of the voters eligible to vote in the next elec-tion for the filing of the office the candidate is seeking. (§ 21– 2–170(b)). The persons signing must declare that they are so qualified (§ 21–2–170). Such nominating petition offered by a political body seeking to have the names of their candidates for presidential elec-tors placed on the ballot shall be compiled so that the entire slate of candidates shall be listed together on the same peti-tion (§ 21–2–170(c)). (3) Independent candidates 

A person can become a candidate for Federal or State office by filing a notice of candidacy with the Secretary of State no earlier than 9:00 a.m. on the fourth Monday in June imme-363 Nomination and Election GA/HI Electors diately prior to the election, and no later than 12:00 noon on the Friday following the fourth Monday in June preceding the general election (§ 21–2–132(c)). A nomination petition for a slate of electors must be signed by a number of voters equal to 1 percent of the total number of registered voters eligible to vote in the last presidential election (§ 21–2– 170(b)). The nomination petition is filed at the same time as the notice of candidacy. A candidate must file with the notice of candidacy an affi-davit stating among other things that he is an elector of the county of his residence eligible to vote in the election in which he is a candidate and that he is eligible to hold such office (§ 21–2–132(f)). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS When presidential electors are to be elected, the names of the nominees of each political party or body for such offices shall be arranged alphabetically under the names of the can-didates of the party or body for President and Vice President of the United States. (§ 21–2–285(e)). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The presidential electors shall assemble at the seat of gov-ernment of the State at 12:00 o’clock noon of the day which is, or may be, directed by the Congress of the United States, and shall then and there perform the duties required of them by the Constitution and laws of the United States (§ 21–2– 11). 

HAWAII 

Presidential Electors: 4 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

In each year when electors of President and Vice President of the United States are to be chosen, each of the political parties or parties or groups qualified under section 11–113 of the Hawaii Revised Statutes, shall hold a State party or group convention pursuant to the constitution, bylaws, and rules of the party or group; and nominate as candidates for its party or group as many electors, and a first and second alternate for each elector, or President and Vice President of the United States as the State is then entitled. The electors and alternates shall be registered voters of the State. The names and addresses of the nominees shall be certified by the chairman and secretary of the convention of the respec-tive parties or groups and submitted to the chief election offi-cer not later than 4:30 p.m. on the sixtieth day prior to the general election of the same year. The chief election officer upon receipt thereof shall immediately notify each of the nominees for elector and alternate elector of the nomination (Hawaii Revised Statutes, § 14–21). If more than one certificate of choice and selection of presi-dential electors and alternate electors of the same political party or group is filed with the chief election officer, as chair-man of the contested presidential electors’ committee hereby constituted, the chief election officer shall notify the State 364 Nomination and Election HI Electors Comptroller and Attorney General, who are the remaining members of the committee, of the date, time, and place of the hearing to be held for the purposes of making a determina-tion of which set of electors and alternate electors were law-fully chosen and selected by the political party or group. No-tice of the hearing shall be given to the chairman of the State central committee of each political party and the chair-man of each party or group qualified under section 11–113 of the Hawaii Revised Statutes, contestants for the positions of electors and alternate electors by written notice, and to all other interested parties by publication at least once in anewspaper of general circulation. A determination shall be made by the committee by majority vote not later than 4:30 p.m. on October 30 of the same year and the determination shall be final. Notice of the results shall be given to the nominees duly determined to have been chosen (§ 14–22). (2) Minor and new parties 

(a) The term ‘‘political party’’ means any party which has qualified as a political party under sections 11–62 and 11– 64 and has not been disqualified by this section. A political party shall be an association of voters united for the purpose of promoting a common political end or carrying out a par-ticular line of political policy and which maintains a general organization throughout the State, including a regularly con-stituted central committee and county committees in each county other than Kalawao. (b) Any party which does not meet the following require-ments or the requirements set forth in sections 11–62 to 11– 64, shall be subject to disqualification: (1) A party must have had candidates running for election at the last general election for any of the offices listed in para-graph (2) whose terms had expired. This does not include those offices which were vacant because the incumbent had died or resigned before the end of the incumbent’s term; and (2) The party received at least ten percent of all votes cast: (A) For any of the offices voted by all the voters in the State; (B) In at least fifty percent of the congressional districts; (C) In at least the six senatorial districts with the lowest votes cast for the office of state senator; or (D) In at least fifty percent of the representative districts for the office of state representative. Any group of persons hereafter desiring to form a new polit-ical party in the State shall file with the chief election officer a petition as hereinafter provided. The petition for the for-mation of a new political party shall: (1) Be filed not later than 4:30 p.m. on the one hundred sev-entieth day prior to the next primary; (2) Declare as concisely as may be the intention of signers thereof to form such new statewide political party in the State and state the name of the new party; (3) Contain the signatures of currently registered voters com-prising not less than one percent of the total registered vot-ers of the State as of the last preceding general election; (4) Be accompanied by the names and addresses of the offi-cers of the central committee and of the respective county committee, where they exist, of the new political party and by the party rules; and 365 Nomination and Election HI Electors (5) Be upon the form prescribed and provided by the chief election officer. The petition shall be subject to hearing under chapter 91, if any objections are raised by the chief election officer or any political party. All objections shall be made not later than 4:30 p.m. on the twentieth business day after the petition has been filed. The Chief Election Officer may extend the ob-jection period up to an additional ten business days, if the group of persons desiring to qualify as a political party is provided with notice of extension and the reasons therefore. If no objections are raised by 4:30 p.m. on the twentieth business day, or the extension thereof, the petition shall be approved. If an objection is raised, a decision shall be ren-dered not later than 4:30 p.m. on the thirtieth day after fil-ing of the objection or not later than 4:30 p.m. on the one hundredth day prior to the primary, whichever shall first occur. The chief election officer may check the names of any per-sons on the petition to see that they are registered voters and he may check the validity of their signatures. The peti-tion shall be public information upon filing (§ 11–62). All parties must file their rules with the chief election officer not later than 4:30 p.m. on the one hundred fiftieth day prior to the next primary. All amendments shall be filed with the chief election officer not later than 4:30 p.m. on the thirtieth day after their adoption. The rules and amendments shall be duly certified to by an authorized officer of the party and upon filing, the rules and amendments thereto shall be a public record (§ 11–63). All nominations must be made by primary elections (§ 12–1), except presidential electors who are nominated by State party conventions. Names of such latter nominees shall be submitted to the chief election officer no later than 4:30 p.m. on the sixtieth day prior to the general election (§ 14–21). (3) Independent candidates 

In the case of candidates of parties or groups not qualified to place candidates on the primary or general election bal-lots, the person desiring to place such names on the general election ballot shall file with the chief election officer not later than 4:30 p.m. on the sixtieth day prior to the general election: (a) a sworn application concerning candidates for electors; (b) a petition which shall be upon the form prescribed and provided by the chief election officer containing the signa-tures of currently registered voters which constitute not less than one percent of the votes cast in the State at the last general election. The petition shall contain the names of the candidates, a statement that the persons signing intend to support such candidates, the address of each signatory, the date of his signature and other information as determined by the chief election officer. Prior to being issued the petition form, the person desiring to place the names on the general election ballot shall sub-mit a notarized statement from each candidate of that per-son’s intent to be a candidate for President or Vice President of the United States on the general election ballot in the State of Hawaii. 366 Nomination and Election HI Electors Each applicant, and the candidates named, shall be notified in writing of the applicant’s or candidates’ eligibility or dis-qualification for placement on the ballot not later than 4:30 p.m. on the tenth day after filing. The Chief Election Officer may extend the notification period up to an additional five business days, if the applicants and candidates are provided with notice of the extensions and the reasons therefore. If the applicant, or any other party, individual, or group with a candidate on the presidential ballot, objects to the finding of eligibility or disqualification the person may, not later than 4:30 p.m. on the fifth day after the finding, file a re-quest in writing with the chief election officer for a hearing on the question. A hearing shall be called not later than 4:30 p.m. on the tenth day after the receipt of the request and shall be conducted in accord with chapter 91. A decision shall be issued not later than 4:30 p.m. on the fifth day after the conclusion of the hearing (§ 11–113 (c), (d), (e)). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS In presidential elections, the names of the candidates for President and Vice President shall be used on the ballot in lieu of the names of the presidential electors, and the votes cast for President and Vice President of each political party shall be counted for the presidential electors and alternates nominated by each political party (§ 11–113). A ‘‘national party’’ as used in this section shall mean a party established and admitted to the ballot in at least one State other than Hawaii or one which is determined by the chief election officer to be making a bona fide effort to become a national party. If there is no national party or the national and State parties or factions in either the national or State party do not agree on the presidential and vice presidential candidates, the chief election officer may determine which candidates names shall be placed on the ballot or may leave the candidates names off the ballot completely (§ 11–113(a)). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The electors chosen shall assemble at the State capitol on the first Monday after the second Wednesday in December next following their election, at 2:00 o’clock in the afternoon. In case of the death or absence of any elector chosen, or if the number of electors is deficient for any other reason, the vacancy or vacancies shall be filled by the alternates in the order of their numerical designation for their respective elec-tors causing the vacancy or vacancies, and in the event that vacancy or vacancies still exist, then the electors present shall select from the members of the same political party or group as many persons as will supply the deficiency. Certifi-cates for the alternates or substitutes as presidential electors shall be issued by the Governor. The electors, when con-vened, if both candidates are alive, shall vote by ballot for that person for President and that person for Vice President of the United States, who are, respectively, the candidates of the political party which they represent, one of whom, at least, is not an inhabitant of this State (§ § 14–26 to 14–28). 367 Nomination and Election ID Electors 

IDAHO 

Presidential Electors: 4 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

Major political parties include those parties that had three or more candidates for State office listed under the party name at the last general election or that had a candidate for State or national office who received at least 3 percent of the aggregate vote cast for the office of Governor at the last gu-bernatorial election (Idaho Code Annotated, § 34–501(b)). Presidential electors of such parties are selected at the party State convention in each election year at a time and place determined by the State central committee. The State cen-tral committee chairman shall preside and cause notice to be given to each legislative district central committee and each county central committee at the earliest possible date (§ 34– 707). The State chairman of each political party shall by Sep-tember 1 certify the names of the presidential electors to the Secretary of State (§ 34–711). (2) Minor parties 

A ‘‘political party’’ is defined as an organization of electors under a given name. A political party shall be deemed cre-ated and qualified to participate in elections in any of the following three (3) ways: (a) By having three (3) or more candidates for State or na-tional office listed under the party name at the last general election, provided that those individuals seeking the office of President, Vice President and presidential elector shall be considered one candidate, or (b) By polling at the last general election for any one of its candidates for State or national office at least three percent (3%) of the aggregate vote cast for Governor or for presi-dential electors. (c) By an affiliation of electors who shall have signed a peti-tion which shall: (A) State the name of the proposed party in not more than six (6) words; (B) State that the subscribers thereto desire to place the pro-posed party on the ballot; (C) Have attached thereto a sheet or sheets containing the signatures of at least a number of qualified electors equal to two percent (2%) of the aggregate vote cast for presidential electors in the State at the previous general election at which presidential electors were chosen; (D) Be filed with the Secretary of State on or before August 30 of even-numbered years; (E) The format of the signature petition sheets shall be pre-scribed by the Secretary of State and shall be patterned after, but not limited to, such sheets as used for State initia-tive and referendum measures; (F) The petitions and signatures so submitted shall be verified in the manner prescribed in section 34–1807, Idaho Code. (G) The petitions shall be circulated no earlier than August 30 of the year preceding the general election. 368 Nomination and Election ID Electors Upon certification by the Secretary of State that the petition has met such requirements such party shall, under the party name chosen, have all the rights of a political party whose ticket shall have been on the ballot at the preceding general election. The newly certified party shall proceed to hold a State con-vention in the manner provided by law; provided, that at the initial convention of any such political party, all members of the party shall be entitled to attend the convention and par-ticipate in the election of officers and the nominations of can-didates. Thereafter the conduct of any subsequent convention shall be as provided by law (§ 34–501). (3) Independent candidates 

Persons who desire to be independent candidates for the of-fices of President and Vice President, must file, prior to Au-gust 25 of the election year, declarations of candidacy as independent candidates. Such declarations must state that such persons are offering themselves as independent can-didates and must declare that they have no political party affiliation. The declarations shall have attached thereto a pe-tition signed by a number of qualified electors not less than one percent (1%) of the number of votes cast in this State for presidential electors at the previous general election at which a President of the United States was elected. The candidates for President and Vice President shall be considered as candidates for one office, and only one such pe-tition need be filed for both offices (§ 34–708A). The State chairman of each political party shall certify the names of the presidential and vice presidential candidates and presidential electors to the Secretary of State on or be-fore September 1, in order for them to appear on the general election ballot. The Secretary of State shall certify such can-didates to the county clerks at the same time as certification of political party candidates nominated for State and Federal offices by the voters in the primary election (§ 34–711, Supp.). Independent candidates who have qualified for ballot status pursuant to section 34–708A, Idaho Code, shall certify the names of presidential electors to the Secretary of State on or before September 1, in order for them to appear on the general election ballot. The Secretary of State shall certify the independent presidential electors, and the independent candidates for President and Vice President, to the county clerks on or before September 7 (§ 34–711A). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS The State chairman of each political party shall certify the names of the presidential and vice presidential candidates and presidential electors to the Secretary of State on or be-fore September 1, in order for them to appear on the general election ballot. The Secretary of State shall certify such can-didates to the county clerks at the same time as certification of political party candidates nominated for State and Federal offices by the voters in the primary election (§ 34–711). Inde-pendent candidates who have qualified for ballot status shall certify the names of presidential electors to the Secretary of State on or before September 1, in order for them to appear on the general election ballot. The Secretary of State shall 369 Nomination and Election ID/IL Electors certify the independent presidential electors, and the inde-pendent candidates for President and Vice President, to the county clerks on or before September 7 (§ 34–711A). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The electors chosen to elect a President and Vice President of the United States shall, at 12:00 noon on the day which is or may be directed by the Congress of the United States, meet at the seat of government of the State, and then and there perform the duties enjoined upon them by the Con-stitution and laws of the United States (§ 34–1503). Each elector of President and Vice President of the United States shall, before the hour of twelve (12) o’clock on the day next preceding the day fixed by the law of Congress to elect a President and Vice President, give notice to the Governor and shall forthwith deliver to the electors present a certifi-cate of all the names of the electors; and if any elector named therein fails to appear before nine (9) o’clock on the morning of the day of election of President and Vice Presi-dent as aforesaid, the electors then present shall imme-diately proceed to elect, by ballot, in the presence of the Gov-ernor, persons to fill such vacancies (§ 34–1504). 

ILLINOIS 

Presidential Electors: 22 A. NOMINATIONS (1) Major parties 

The State convention of each political party shall have power to make nominations of candidates of its political party for the electors of President and Vice President (Smith-Hurd Il-linois Annotated Statutes, 10 ILCS § 5/7–9(b). State conven-tions shall be held within 180 days after the general primary in the year 2000 and every four years thereafter. In the year 1998 and every four years therafter, the Chairman of the States Central Committee may issue a call for a State con-vention within 180 days after the general primary. (10 ILCS § 5/7–9(b)). Choosing and election of electors of President and Vice Presi-dent of the United States shall be in the following manner: In each year in which a President and Vice President of the United States are chosen, each political party or group in this State shall choose by its State convention electors of President and Vice President of the United States and such State convention of such party or group shall also choose electors at large, if any are to be appointed for this State and such State convention of such party or group shall by its chairman and secretary certify the total list of such electors together with electors at large so chosen to the State Board of Elections. The filing of such certificate with the Board, of such choosing of electors shall be deemed and taken to be the choosing and selection of the electors of this State, if such party or group is successful at the polls as herein provided in choosing their candidates for President and Vice President of the United States (10 ILCS § 5/21–1(a)). Such certification by the respec-tive political parties or groups in this State of electors of 370 Nomination and Election IL Electors President and Vice President shall be made to the State Board of Elections within 2 days after such State convention (10 ILCS § 5/21–1(c)). (2) Minor parties 

A minor political party is defined as a political party or group which has not polled more than 5 percent of the entire vote cast for governor in the State at the last preceding gen-eral election for Governor (10 ILCS § 5/10–2). It shall nomi-nate its candidates in the same manner as does a new party. (3) New parties 

Any group of persons desiring to form a new political party throughout the State, shall file with the State Board of Elec-tions a petition (a) declaring the intention of the signers to form such a new political party, (b) stating in not more than 5 words the name of such party, (c) containing a complete list of candidates of such party for all offices to be filled in the State at the next election, and (d) signed by one percent (1%) of the number of voters who voted in the preceding statewide general election or 25,000 qualified voters which-ever is less (10 ILCS § 5/10–2). Such petition shall be accom-panied by a candidate’s statement of candidacy, except can-didates for electors for President and Vice President (10 ILCS § 5/10–5), and all certificates of nomination or nomina-tion papers for candidates to be voted for by all the voters of the State shall be presented to the State Board of Elec-tions at least 92 days, but not more than 99 days, before the general election, for endorsement by the board and for subse-quent deposit with the State Board of Elections (10 ILCS § 5/ 10–6). (4) Independent candidates 

Nomination of independent candidates (not candidates of any political party), for any office to be filled by the voters of the State at large may also be made by nomination papers signed in the aggregate for each candidate by 1% of the num-ber of voters who voted in the next preceding statewide gen-eral election or 25,000 qualified voters of the State, which-ever is less (10 ILCS § 5/10–3). Nomination papers are to be filed with the State Board of Elections between 99 and 92 days prior to the date of the primary (10 ILCS § 5/7–12). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS The names of the candidates of the several political parties or groups for electors of President and Vice President shall not be printed on the official ballot to be voted in the election to be held on the day in this Act above named. In lieu of the names of the candidates for such electors of President and Vice President, immediately under the appellation of party name of a party or group in the column of its candidates on the official ballot, to be voted at said election first above named in subsection (1) of section 2A–1.2 and section 2A–2, there shall be printed within a bracket the name of the can-didate for President and the name of the candidate for Vice President of such party or group with a square to the left of such bracket. Each voter in this State from the several lists or sets of electors so chosen and selected by the said respec-tive political parties or groups, may choose and elect one of 371 Nomination and Election IL/IN Electors such lists or sets of electors by placing a cross in the square to the left of the bracket aforesaid of one such parties or groups. Placing a cross within the square before the bracket enclosing the names of President and Vice President shall not be deemed and taken as a direct vote for such candidates for President and Vice President, or either of them, but shall only be deemed and taken to be a vote for the entire list or set of electors chosen by that political party or group so cer-tified to the State Board of Elections as herein provided. Vot-ing by means of placing a cross in the appropriate place pre-ceding the appellation or title of the particular political party or group, shall not be deemed or taken as a direct vote for the candidates for President and Vice President, or either of them, but instead to the presidential vote, as a vote for the entire list or set of electors chosen by that political party or group so certified to the State Board of Elections as herein provided (10 ILCS § 5/21–1(b)). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The electors, elected as aforesaid, shall meet at the office of the Secretary of State in a room to be designated by him in the capitol at Springfield in this State, at the time appointed by the laws of the United States at the hour of 10:00 o’clock in the forenoon of such day, and give their votes for Presi-dent and for Vice President of the United States, in the man-ner herein provided, and perform such duties as are or may be required by law (10 ILCS § 5/21–4). 

INDIANA 

Presidential Electors: 12 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

Major political parties which received at least two percent of the total vote cast for Secretary of State at the last election shall nominate at the state convention candidates for presi-dential electors and alternate electors (Indiana Statutes An-notated §§ 3–8–4–1 and 3–8–4–2). The state chairman of each political party shall certify to the secretary of state the names of the nominees of the party for President and Vice President of the United States and the state of which each nominee is a resident. If candidates for presidential electors are nominated by petitioners instead of by a convention of a political party, the petitioners shall cer-tify with the list of names of electors: (1) the names of their nominees for President and Vice Presi-dent of the United States; and (2) the state of which each nominee is a resident. The names of: (1) all candidates for presidential electors; and (2) all nominees for President and Vice President of the United States; shall be certified by noon on the second Tues-day in September before the general election (§ 3–10–4–5). (2) Minor parties and independent candidates 

A candidate may be nominated for an elected office by peti-tion of voters who are registered to vote at the time of sign-ing the petition and qualified to vote for the candidate (§ 3– 372 Nomination and Election IN/IA Electors 8–6–2). A petition of nomination must be signed by the num-ber of voters equal to two percent (2%) of the total vote cast at the last election for Secretary of State in the election dis-trict that the candidate seeks to represent. (§ 3–8–6–3). A pe-tition of nomination must be submitted to the county voter registration office of each county in which the election dis-trict is located during the period beginning January 1 of the year in which the election will be held and ending at noon July 15 before the election (§ 3–8–6–10). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS Each vote cast or registered for the nominees for President and Vice President of the United States of a political party or group of petitioners is a vote cast or registered for all of the candidates for presidential electors of the party or group and shall be counted. These votes shall be counted, can-vassed, and certified in the same manner as the votes for candidates for other offices (§ 3–10–4–4). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The presidential electors who are elected at a general elec-tion shall assemble in the chamber of the Indiana house of representatives on the first Monday after the second Wednesday in December, or on another day fixed by the Con-gress of the United States, at 10 a.m. to elect the President and Vice President of the United States. The Governor shall deliver to the electors present a certificate of the names of all the electors (§ 3–10–4–7). If a presidential elector fails to appear before 11 a.m. on the day prescribed by section 7 [3– 10–4–7] of this chapter, the electors present shall, by ballot and a majority vote of all those present, fill the vacancy. The election shall be immediately certified by a majority of the electors to the Governor, who shall immediately notify the person of the person’s election (§ 3–10–4–8). The presidential elector, when assembled and after vacancies are filled, shall then vote by ballot for President and Vice President of the United States and perform the duties imposed upon them by the Constitution and statutes of the United States and of this State (§ 3–10–4–9). 

IOWA 

Presidential Electors: 7 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

Electors are nominated by regular state party conventions, which shall be held either preceding or following the primary election at a time and place designated by the party state central committee, either preceding or following the primary election (Iowa Code Annotated, § 43.107). The names of can-didates for President and Vice President of a political party as defined in the law shall be certified to the state commis-sioner by the party state chairperson and secretary of the state central committee at least 81 days prior to the general election (§ 54.5). The state central committee shall also file a list of the names and addresses of the party’s presidential electors, one from each congressional district and two from 373 Nomination and Election IA Electors the state at large not later than 5 p.m. at least 81 days be-fore the general election (§ 54.5). (2) Minor and new parties 

A political organization which did not cast at least 2 percent of the total vote cast for President of the United States or for Governor at the last general election (§ 43.2) may nomi-nate one candidate for each office to be filled at the next gen-eral election. Such nomination shall be by convention or cau-cus (§ 44.1), provided that to qualify for making a nomination for statewide office, such political organization must have at its convention or caucus a minimum of 250 qualified electors with at least one elector from each of 25 counties (§ 44.1). The nomination certificate, signed by the chairman and sec-retary of such convention or caucus, shall be filed with the State Commissioner not more than 99 nor less than 81 days before the general election (§ § 44.2, 44.3, 44.4). Certificates of nomination by such conventions for presi-dential electors in addition to the names and addresses of presidential electors are to contain the names of the can-didates for President and Vice President (§ 44.3). (3) Independent candidates 

Nominations for candidates for President and Vice President and for State offices may be made by nomination papers signed by not less than one thousand five hundred eligible electors. Nomination papers for the offices of President and Vice President shall include the names of the candidates for both offices on each page of the petition. A certificate listing the names of the candidates for presidential electors, one from each congressional district, and two from the state at large, shall be filed in the State Commissioner’s office at the same time nomination papers are filed (§ 45.1). Nomination papers are to be filed in the office of the State Commissioner not more than 99 nor less than 81 days before the general election (§ § 44.4, 54.5). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS The names of candidates for President and Vice President and not the names of the candidates for electors shall be placed on the ballots under the respective party names. A vote for the candidates of any political party or group of peti-tioners for President and Vice President shall be deemed conclusively to be a vote for each candidate nominated in each district and in the State at large by the party for elec-tors (§ § 49.32, 54.2). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The presidential electors shall meet in the capitol, at the seat of government, on the first Monday after the second Wednesday in December next following their election. If, at the time of such meeting, any elector for any cause is absent, those present shall at once proceed to elect, from the citizens of the State, a substitute elector or electors, and certify the choice so made to the Governor, and he shall immediately cause the person or persons so selected to be notified thereof. When so met, the said electors shall proceed, in the manner pointed out by law, with the election, and the Governor shall duly certify the result thereof, under the seal of the State, 374 Nomination and Election IA/KS Electors to the United States Secretary of State, and as required by act of Congress relating to such elections (§ § 54.7, 54.8). 

KANSAS 

Presidential Electors: 6 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

Kansas in 1961 changed the procedure for nominating presi-dential electors of the major political parties from the use of primaries to nomination at delegate or mass conventions or caucuses (Kansas Statutes Annotated, § 25–301). A conven-tion or caucus shall be called by the State chairman of the party, or if there be no State chairman, by the party’s can-didate for Governor at the preceding general election (§ 25– 302). Party nominations for presidential elections can only be made by a delegate or mass convention or caucus of qualified voters belonging to a political party having a national or State organization. Certificates of nomination must be filed by noon on June 10 prior to the general election (§ §25–301, 25–305). (2) Minor and new parties 

Candidates for elective office who are members of any polit-ical party whose candidate for Secretary of State did not poll at least 5 percent of the total vote cast for all candidates for Secretary of State in the preceding general election shall not be entitled to nomination by primary but shall be nominated by a delegate or mass convention (§ 25–202). A convention shall be called as in (1) above. Presidential electors of such parties shall be nominated at State conventions (§ 25–301). Certificates of nomination shall be signed by the presiding officer and a secretary of the convention and filed with the Secretary of State by noon on June 10 prior to the general election (§§ 25–302, 25–305). A new party organized in Kansas and any national political party seeking to organize in the State shall be allowed to make party nominations by mass conventions or caucus only after filing, with the Secretary of State not later than 12:00 noon, June 1, prior to the primary election held on the first Tuesday of August in even numbered years, petitions signed by qualified electors equal in number to at least 2 percent of the total vote cast for all candidates for governor in the last preceding general election. Such petitions shall declare support for the official recognition of a political party, the name of which shall be stated on the declaration (§ 25–302a). Candidates of such parties shall be nominated and their names certified in the same manner as by minor parties. (3) Independent candidates 

Candidates may be nominated by independent nomination papers signed by not less than 5,000 voters (§ 25–303, Supp.). Independent nomination petitions are to be filed with the Secretary of State or the county election officer by noon on the Monday preceding the first Tuesday of August prior to the general election (§ 25–305). 375 Nomination and Election KS/KY Electors B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS The surnames of the candidates of each political party for the offices of President and Vice President, with the political designation thereof placed at the right of the surnames, shall be in one line (§ 25–615). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The electors of President and Vice President of the United States shall convene at the capitol of the State on the first Monday after the second Wednesday in December after their election, at the hour of 12 o’clock noon of that day; and if there shall be any vacancy in the office of electors, occa-sioned by death, refusal to act, neglect to attend, or other cause, the electors present shall immediately proceed to fill, by ballot and by a plurality of votes, such vacancy in the Electoral College, and when the electors shall appear, or the vacancies shall have been filled as above provided, they shall proceed to perform the duties required of such electors by the Constitution and laws of the United States (§ 25–802). 

KENTUCKY 

Presidential Electors: 8 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

Any political organization, as defined in KRS 118.015, not constituting such a political party but which cast two percent (2%) of the vote of the state at the last preceding election for presidential electors, may nominate, by a convention or pri-mary election held by the party in accordance with its con-stitution and bylaws, as many electors of President and Vice President of the United States as this State is entitled to elect (§ 118.325(1)). Such nominations shall be certified in writing by the pre-siding officer and secretary of the convention. The certifi-cates shall state the names of the candidates of the party for President and Vice President (§ 118.325(2)). Such certificates shall be filed with the Secretary of State not earlier than the first Wednesday after the first Monday in November of the year preceding the year in which there is an election for President and Vice President of the United States and not later than the first Tuesday in September preceding the date fixed by law for the election of the electors (§ 118.365(6)). (2) Minor and new parties 

A political organization which cast at least 2 percent of the total vote of the State at the last presidential election may nominate candidates by convention or by a primary election held by the party in accordance with its constitution and by-laws. The certificates of nomination for statewide offices by such a convention or primary election, signed by the pre-siding officer and secretary of the convention or by the prop-er committee chairman and secretary, shall be filed with the Secretary of State as specified for major parties. (§ § 118.015(1), 118.325 (1), (2), 118.365(6)). (3) Independent candidates 

A candidate may become an independent candidate when a nominating petition is filed in his behalf signed by 5,000 376 Nomination and Election KY/LA Electors qualified voters if office is voted for by the entire State (§ 118.315). Petitions should be filed with the Secretary of State (§ 118.356), within the time specified above for major parties. (§ 118.365(6)). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS Candidates for President and Vice President shall be entitled to have their names placed on the ballot for the regular elec-tion if they are candidates of those political parties and orga-nizations which have nominated presidential electors as pro-vided in Kentucky Revised Statutes, § 118.325, where the certificate of nomination of such electors has been filed with the Secretary of State within the appropriate time (§ 118.305). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The electors of President and Vice President of the United States shall convene at the State capitol, at 11:45 a.m. on the first Monday after the second Wednesday in December next after their election, give their votes at or after 12:00 noon, and make return thereof according to law. If any elec-tor fails to attend by 12:00 noon, on the day of the meeting, those in attendance shall fill his place by the election of an-other person, who shall have the same powers as if originally elected by the people (§ 118.445). 

LOUISIANA 

Presidential Electors: 9 A. NOMINATION (1) Political parties 

Nominations for candidates for Presidential electors made by each recognized political party shall be made in such manner as shall be determined by a resolution adopted by the State central committee of the respective recognized political party. Each recognized political party shall nominate a full slate of candidates for elector, one from each congressional district and two from the State at large (Louisiana Revised Statutes Annotated, § 18:1253(A)). The names of candidates nomi-nated by each recognized political party shall be filed with the Secretary of State by sworn statement, which shall be known as a certificate of nomination. The certificate of nomi-nation shall be sworn to, signed, and filed by the chairman and secretary of the State central committee, except when the State central committee orders the nomination of presi-dential electors by a convention, in which case the chairman and secretary of the convention shall swear to, sign, and file the certificate of nomination (§ 18:1253(B)). Each certificate of nomination shall contain: (a) the name and place of residence of each candidate for presidential elector; (b) the particular office of presidential elector for which each is nominated; (c) the name of the recognized political party making the nomination; (d) the names of the candidates for President and Vice Presi-dent supported by the party. In addition, a certificate of 377 Nomination and Election LA Electors nomination filed by the chairman and secretary of a State central committee shall certify the adoption by the State cen-tral committee of the resolution of the committee which au-thorized the method of nomination, the method of nomina-tion used, and the time and place where the nomination took place. A certificate of a nominating convention also shall cer-tify the adoption by the State central committee of the reso-lution which authorized the convention, the time, and place where the convention was held, and the election of the chair-man and secretary. Each certificate of nomination filed with the Secretary of State shall be accompanied by the notarized affidavit of each candidate for elector signifying that the cer-tificate constitutes his acceptance of the nomination (§ 18:1253(C)). The certificate of nomination shall constitute full proof of the nominations it recites and shall entitle the candidates for electors to each receive the number of votes received in the election by the party’s candidate for President (§ 18:1253(D)). If the nominees for the offices of President and Vice Presi-dent nominated by a national convention of a recognized po-litical party, together with a slate of candidates for the of-fices of presidential electors to support such nominees, are not properly certified to the Secretary of State by the state central committee of that party prior to five o’clock p.m. on the first Tuesday in September in a presidential election year, the national chairman of the political party, after noti-fying the chairman of the state central committee of that po-litical party, shall certify a slate of electors to certify the nominees to support such nominees within forty-eight hours thereafter (§ 18:1253(E)). A political party is recognized if one of its candidates for presidential elector received at least 5 percent of the votes cast in the State for presidential elec-tors in the last presidential election or if at least one thou-sand registered voters in the State are registered as being affiliated with the political party or if any one candidate of the political party for any statewide office received at least 5 percent of the votes cast for the statewide office in any general or primary election (§ 18:441(B) and (C)). (2) Independent candidates 

A slate of independent candidates for presidential elector may be nominated by nominating petitions or may qualify by the payment of a qualifying fee of $500. Such qualifying fee shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of R.S. 18:1254(A), Supp. The filing deadline for the qualifying fee is the first Tuesday in September (§ 18:1254(A)). Each quali-fying fee shall be accompanied by the notarized affidavit of each candidate for elector signifying his acceptance of the nomination. An independent candidate for presidential elec-tor may be registered to vote with or without a declaration of party affiliation (§ 18:1254(A)). A nominating petition for a slate of candidates for the offices of presidential elector shall be signed, filed, and certified as provided for State can-didates voted on throughout the State (§ 18:1254(B)). Any slate of candidates for presidential elector that qualifies by payment of a qualifying fee shall be a full slate of can-didates for elector, one from each congressional district and 378 Nomination and Election LA Electors two from the State at large, and shall submit with the quali-fying fee the following information for each candidate: (1) The candidate’s name; (2) The address of his domicile; (3) The office sought; (4) The names of the candidate for President and the can-didate for Vice President whom the candidates for elector support; (5) The recognized political party, if any, with which each candidate for presidential elector is affiliated; (6) In not more than three words, the political principle that he represents; and (7) The date of the election for which he seeks to qualify (§ 18:1254(D)). Certificates of nomination of presidential electors and all nominating petitions shall be filed with the Secretary of State during the period beginning on the first Tuesday in August and ending at 5:00 p.m. on the first Tuesday in Sep-tember of each year in which a presidential election is to be held (§ 18:1255). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS The ballot shall be so arranged that the names of the can-didate for President and the candidate for Vice President nominated by each recognized political party, by nominating petition, or by the filing of notices of candidacy accompanied by a qualifying fee shall appear prominently together with the name of the presidential candidate on top and the name of the vice presidential candidate directly underneath on the vertical type voting machine, and with the name of the presi-dential candidate on the left and the name of the vice presi-dential candidate directly to the right on the horizontal type voting machine. Directly to the left of the names of the presidential and vice presidential candidates on the vertical type voting machine, and on the horizontal type voting machine, shall appear: (a) If nominated by a recognized political party, the name of the party and such national party emblem, if any, or state party device, if any, as the state central committee of the party shall direct, and (b) If nominated by a nominating petition or by the filing of notices of candidacy, the political principal which the can-didates support, as stated on the nominating petition or on the notices of candidacy, if any, and the words ‘‘Nominating Petition’’ or the abbreviation ‘‘Nom. Petition’’ shall appear if nominated by petition. Immediately below the name of the party, or, if nominated by a nominating petition, the words ‘‘Nominating Petition’’ or the abbreviation ‘‘Nom. Petition’’ shall appear the word ‘‘Electors’’. Immediately below the word ‘‘Electors’’ the names of the presidential electors nominated in support of the nominees for president and vice president of that party or political principal shall appear. On a voting machine, there shall be a single lever, button, or candidate selection button with which to mark the ballot opposite each pair of names. On paper ballots, there shall be a single box within which to mark the ballot opposite each pair of names. In preparing 379 Nomination and Election LA/ME Electors the ballots, the secretary of state shall arrange the names of the candidates of recognized political parties alphabetically, according to the names of the parties, followed by the names of the candidate nominated by nominating petitions and by the filing of notices of candidacy, listed alphabetically by des-ignation of political principal (§ 18:1259(B)). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The electors shall meet in the State capitol in Baton Rouge on the day appointed for their meeting by Federal law and shall execute the duties and services enjoined upon them by the Constitution and laws of the United States. Notice of the time and place of the meeting shall be transmitted to each elector by the Secretary of State no later than seven days preceding the day of the meeting (§ 18:1263). 

MAINE 

Presidential Electors: 4 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

Presidential electors are nominated at biennial State conven-tions of the respective parties held in presidential election years between March 1 and August 1 (Maine Revised Stat-utes, title 21–A, § 321(2)). A ‘‘major party’’ is one which at the last gubernatorial election polled the greatest or next greatest number of votes cast in the State for Governor (21– A, M.R.S. § 1(22)). (2) Minor and new parties 

A ‘‘minor party’’ means one other than a major party (21–A M.R.S. § 1(24)). ‘‘Party’’ refers to a political organization which has qualified to participate in a primary or general election pursuant to chapter 5 (21–A M.R.S. § 1(28)). In addition to the procedure under section 302, a party whose designation was not listed on the general election bal-lot in the last preceding gubernatorial or presidential elec-tion qualifies to participate in a primary election, if it meets the requirements of subsections 1, 2, 3 and 4. 1. Declaration of intent. A voter or group of voters who are not enrolled in a party qualified under section 301 must file a declaration of intent to form a party with the Secretary of State. The declaration of intent must be on a form de-signed by the Secretary of State and must include: A. The designation of the proposed party; and B. The name and address of the voter or one of the group of voters who file the declaration of intent. 2. Enrollment of voters. After filing the declaration of in-tent required in subsection 1, the voter or voters proposing to form the party may then enroll voters in the proposed party under sections 141 to 145. 3. Petition. After filing the declaration described in sub-section 1, the voter or a group of voters may then circulate petitions. These petitions must be signed in the same man-ner as primary petitions under section 335, subsections 3 and 4. The circulator of the petition must certify his belief that the signatures on it are genuine and that the signers 380 Nomination and Election ME Electors are registered and enrolled voters. Each page of the petition must have a caption, in conspicuous type, which contains the designation of the proposed party followed by the words ‘‘Pe-tition to participate in the primary election.’’ The Secretary of State shall prepare forms for these petitions. The petitions must be filed in the office of the Secretary of State before 5 p.m. on the 180th day preceding a primary election and must contain the signatures and legal addresses of voters, equal in number to at least 5% of the total vote cast in the State for Governor at the last preceding gubernatorial election (21–A M.R.S. § 303). (3) Independent candidates 

The names of presidential electors must be placed on the pe-tition as a slate. The names of the candidates for President and Vice President must be placed on a petition for the nom-ination of presidential electors. A nomination petition may be signed only by voters of the electoral division which is to make the nomination, except that nomination petitions for presidential electors may be signed by any Maine voter. Other signatures are void. Nomination petitions must be signed by the following numbers of voters: For a slate of candidates for the office of presidential elector, at least 4,000 and not more than 6,000 voters. A nomination petition may not be signed before January 1st of the election year in which it is to be used. A nomination petition must be filed in the office of the Secretary of State by 5 p.m. on the date of the primary election (21–A M.R.S. § 354). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS A vote for a presidential and vice presidential candidate is considered a vote for the electors representing that party (21–A M.R.S. § 801). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The duties of the presidential electors in convention are as follows: 1. When convened as required by section 804, the presi-dential electors shall each cash separate ballots for President and Vice President, at least one of whom must not be a resi-dent of this State. 2. The presidential electors at large shall cast their ballots for the presidential and vice-presidential candidates who re-ceived the largest number of votes in the State. The presi-dential electors of each congressional district shall cast their ballots for the presidential and vice-presidential candidates who received the largest number of votes in each respective congressional district. 3. The presidential electors shall make and subscribe to 6 certificates containing the number of votes cast separately for President and Vice President. They shall attach one of the lists of electors furnished them by the Governor to each certificate. They shall seal each certificate and attached list in an envelope stating that a certificate of the votes of this State for President and Vice President is contained inside. 4. The presidential electors shall send immediately by reg-istered mail one certificate to the President of the Senate of the United States and 2 certificates to the Archivist of the 381 Nomination and Election ME/MD Electors United States in Washington, DC. The presidential electors shall deliver 2 certificates to the Secretary of State, who shall hold onto them subject to the order of the President of the Senate of the United States and shall retain the other for public inspection for one year. The presidential electors shall deliver one certificate to the Chief Judge of the United States District Court for the District of Maine (21–A M.R.S. § 805). 

MARYLAND 

Presidential Electors: 10 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

Each political party shall nominate or provide for the nomi-nation of candidates for presidential electors of the party in accordance with the party rules. The number of candidates nominated by each political party shall be the number that this state is entitled to elect. The names of persons nomi-nated by a political party as candidates for presidential elec-tors shall be certified by the presiding officers of the political party to the State Administrative Board of Election Laws (Md. Ann. Code art. EL, § 8–503). (2) Minor and new parties 

If any political party polls less than one percent of the entire vote cast in the State for the highest office on the ballot in a statewide general election, such party shall cease to be a political party, and in subsequent elections must qualify as a new party to participate in elections (Md. Ann. Code. art. EL, § 4–103). Any group of voters wishing to form a new political party shall do so by filing with the State Administrative Board of Election Laws a petition for formation of a political party which shall declare their intention of organizing a State po-litical party, the name of which shall be stated in the peti-tion together with the name and address of the State chair-man thereof and the names and addresses of at least twenty-five persons who shall be designated as constituting the gov-erning body of the party. Appended to the petition shall be papers bearing the signatures of at least ten thousand quali-fied voters of the State (Md. Ann. Code art. EL, § 4–102(a) and (b)). A petition for the formation of a new political party may not be filed in a presidential election year after the first Monday in August until after voter registration reopens after the general election (Md. Ann. Code art. EL, § 4–102(c)). The constitution and bylaws of the new party shall be adopt-ed by the individuals designated in the petition as the initial governing body within 90 days of filing the last qualifying signature on the petition (Md. Ann. Code art. EL, § 4–102(e)). (3) Independent candidates 

A candidate may be nominated by petition if the candidate is not associated with any political party. The candidate must file petitions signed by at least one percent of the reg-istered voters (Md. Ann. Code art. EL, § 5–703). The petition with the required number of signatures is to be filed with the appropriate board by not later than 5 p.m. on the first Monday in August (Md. Ann. Code § 5–703). 382 Nomination and Election MD/MA Electors B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS Presidential electors shall be elected at large by the voters of the entire state. The names of Presidential electors shall not appear on the ballot. A vote for the candidates for Presi-dent and Vice President of a political party shall be counted as a vote for the electors of that party (Md. Ann. Code art. EL, § 8–504). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The presidential electors elected at the November election shall meet in the State House in Annapolis. After taking the oath prescribed by Article I, § 9 of the Maryland Constitu-tion, they shall cast their votes for the candidates for Presi-dent and Vice President who received a plurality of the votes cast in the State (Md. Ann. Code art. EL, § 8–505). 

MASSACHUSETTS 

Presidential Electors: 12 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

The State committees of the respective political parties at a meeting called for the purpose shall nominate the presi-dential electors. The surnames of the candidates for Presi-dent and Vice President of the United States shall be added to the party or political designation of the candidates for presidential electors. Such surnames and a list of the per-sons nominated for presidential electors together with an ac-ceptance in writing signed by each candidate for elector shall be filed by the state chairmen of the respective political par-ties not later than the second Tuesday of September (Massa-chusetts General Laws Annotated, ch. 53, § 8). Nomination papers for presidential elector are to be filed on the last Tuesday in August in which a presidential election is to be held (ch. 53. § 10). (2) Minor and new parties 

At any primary, caucus or convention, each party having the right to participate in or hold the same may nominate as many candidates for each office for which it has the right to make nominations therein as there are persons to be elected to that office, and no more. A party which makes one or more nominations shall be entitled to have the name of each of its candidates printed on the ballot to be used at the ensu-ing election; but, unless the nomination is made by direct plurality vote in a primary or in several caucuses held in more than one ward or in more than one precinct or group of precincts, a certificate of nomination must be filed with the Secretary of State (ch. 53, § § 1, 5, and 10). Such State convention shall be held not earlier than 4 days after the caucuses at which delegates to such convention were elected, and not later than 48 hours prior to the hour for filing certificate of nomination (ch. 53, § 4). The certificate of nomination with the candidates’ written ac-ceptance, except for presidential electors, should be filed by the secretary of the convention with the Secretary of State within 72 hours succeeding 5 p.m. of the day on which the 383 Nomination and Election MA/MI Electors caucus was held or the session of the convention terminated (ch. 53, § § 5 and 9). Nomination papers should include the party, if any, which a candidate represents (ch. 53, § 8). Names of candidates for President and Vice President shall be added to the party or political designation of candidates for presidential electors (§ 8). Provisions of this paragraph also apply to nomination papers for independent and new party candidates. (3) Independent candidates 

Nomination papers are required for candidates to be voted on by the State at large, signed by voters equal in number to one half of one percent of the entire State vote for Gov-ernor at the last biennial election (ch. 53, § 6). Candidate’s written acceptance must accompany nomination papers (ch. 53, § 9). Nomination papers should be submitted to registrars of signer’s city or town of voting residence for certification on or before 5:00 p.m. of the 7th day before last date for filing (ch. 53, § 7), and should be filed with the Secretary of State (ch. 53, § 9). Nomination papers for presidential elector are to be filed on or before the last Tuesday in August of the year in which a presidential election is to be held (ch. 53, § 10). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS The names of the candidates for presidential electors shall not be printed on the ballot, but in lieu thereof, the sur-names of the candidates of each party for President and Vice President in one line under the designation ‘‘Electors of President and Vice President.’’ A square in which the voter may designate his choice for electors is at the right of each political designation. The candidates for electors are nomi-nated to vote for the party’s candidates for President and Vice President. The vote for such latter candidates on the State ballot, however, shall be deemed as a vote for the can-didates for electors (ch. 54, §§ 43, 43A, 78). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS Candidates for President and Vice President and State chair-men when filing the list of nominees for presidential elector must also file an acceptance in writing signed by each can-didate for presidential elector on a form to be provided by the Secretary of State. The acceptance form shall include a pledge by the presidential elector to vote for the candidate named in the filing (ch. 53, § 8). Persons chosen as presidential electors shall meet at the statehouse on the date fixed by Federal law and organize. A journal of their proceedings shall be kept and shall be depos-ited in the office of the Secretary of State (ch. 54, § 148). 

MICHIGAN 

Presidential Electors: 18 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

Presidential electors are nominated by major parties at their respective regular fall State conventions (Michigan Compiled Laws, § 168.42). Such conventions shall commence not less 384 Nomination and Election MI Electors than 60 days before the November general election at a time and place designated by the party State central committee. The calls for such conventions shall be issued at least 60 days prior to the August primaries (§ 168.591). The primary is held on the Tuesday succeeding the first Monday in August (§ 168.534). August 12, 2008. Each respective State central committee in its call for the State convention shall forward a notice to the chairman of each county committee of the party showing the number of delegates to which each county shall be entitled in the State convention of the party, and the State central committee shall apportion such delegates to the several counties in pro-portion to the number of votes cast for the candidate of the party for Secretary of State in each of said counties, at the last preceding November election. In addition to the propor-tionate number of delegates allocated to each county, the State central committees shall allocate an additional number of delegates equal to the number of incumbent legislators nominated by their party and residing in such county (§ 168.598). County conventions meet to choose delegates to the State conventions which shall be held not less than 8 nor more than 19 days after the August primaries (§ 168.592). The names of all the candidates for electors as well as the candidates of the party for the offices of President and Vice President shall be certified by the State central committee of each party to the Secretary of State and the various county boards of election commissioners within 24 hours after the conclusion of the conventions (§ 168.686). (2) Minor and new parties 

Any political party which failed to have at least one can-didate who received at least 5 percent of the total vote cast for all candidates for the office of Secretary of State in the last preceding State election, either in the State or in any po-litical subdivision affected, shall not make its nominations by the direct primary method. The nomination of candidates of such parties shall be made by means of caucuses and con-ventions (§ § 168.532, 168.686a). A convention for the selec-tion of presidential electors shall commence at least 60 days prior to the November general election (§ § 168.42, 168.591). Such nominations shall be certified by the chairman and sec-retary of the convention or caucus, under oath, and there shall accompany such certifications a written acceptance of nomination by each candidate and affidavit of identity (§ 168.686a). Nomination certificates shall also contain the designation of the party (§ 168.687). In each presidential election year, names of a party’s candidates for President and Vice Presi-dent shall be filed at the same time (§ 168.686). The name of no candidate of a new political party shall be printed upon the official ballots of any election unless the chairperson and secretary of the state central committee of the party shall have filed with the secretary of state not later than 4 p.m. of the 110th day before the November general election, a cer-tificate signed by them bearing the name of the party, to-gether with petitions bearing the signatures of registered and qualified electors equal to not less than one percent of 385 Nomination and Election MI/MN Electors the total number of votes cast for governor at the last elec-tion in which a governor was elected. The petitions shall be signed by at least 100 residents in each of at least one half of the congressional districts of the State and not more than 35 percent of the minimum required number of the signa-tures may be resident electors of any one congressional dis-trict (§ 168.685). New parties shall nominate presidential electors in the same manner as other parties (§ 168.42). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS The names of the candidates for President and Vice Presi-dent are printed on the general State ballot in lieu of the names of the electors. The office title, however, reads ‘‘Elec-tors of President and Vice President of the United States’’ (§ 168.706). A vote for the presidential and vice presidential candidates shall be deemed a vote for their entire list of presidential electors (§ 168.45). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The electors shall convene in the senate chamber at the State capitol at 2:00 p.m. on the first Monday after the sec-ond Wednesday in December after their election (§ 168.47). Those candidates for electors of President and Vice President shall be deemed elected whose names have been certified to the Secretary of State by that political party receiving the greatest number of votes for the office at the ensuing Novem-ber election (§ 168.42). 

MINNESOTA 

Presidential Electors: 10 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

Presidential electors for the major political parties of this state shall be nominated by elegate conventions called and held under the supervision of the respective state central ommittees of the parties of this state. On or before primary election day the chair of the major political party shall cer-tify to the secretary of state the names of the persons ominated as presidential electors, the names of eight alter-nate presidential electors, and the names of the party can-didates for President and Vice President. (Minnesota Stat-utes Annotated, § 208.03). ‘‘Major political party’’ means a political party that main-tains a party organization in the State, political division or precinct in the question and: (a) Which has presented at least one candidate for election to a partisan office at the last preceding State general elec-tion, which candidate received votes in each county in that election and received votes from not less than five percent of the total number of individuals who voted in that election; or (b) Whose members present to the county auditor a petition for a place on the State partisan primary ballot, which peti-tion contains signatures of a number of the party members equal to at least five percent of the total number of individ-uals who voted in the preceding State general election in the 386 Nomination and Election MN/MS Electors county where the application is submitted (§ 200.02, Subd. 7). (2) Minor and new parties 

Candidates for any partisan office who do not seek the nomi-nation of a major Political Party shall be nominated by nomi-nating petition and shall file an affidavit of candidacy (§ 204B.03). On petitions nominating presidential electors, the names of the candidates for President and Vice President shall be added to the political party or political principle stated on the petition. One petition may be filed to nominate a slate of presidential electors equal in number to the num-ber of electors to which the State is entitled (§ 204B.07, Subd. 2). Nominating petitions shall be signed during the period when petitions may be filed as provided in section 204B.09. Anominating petition may be signed only by individuals who are eligible to vote for the candidate who is nominated. No individual may sign more than one nominating petition for candidates for the same office unless more than one can-didate is to be elected to that office. If more than one can-didate is to be elected to the office, an individual may sign as many petitions as there are candidates to be elected. The number of signatures required on a nominating petition for a State office voted on statewide shall be one percent of the total number of individuals voting in the State at the last preceding State general election, or 2,000, whichever is less (§ 204B.08, Subds. 1–3). Candidates for presidential electors may file affidavits and petitions between 70 and 56 days before the State primary day (§ 204B.09, Subd. 1). (3) Independent candidates (See Minor and new parties supra ). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS The names of the party candidates for President and Vice President rather than the names of the persons nominated for presidential elector are printed on the ballot, and a vote for the candidate shall be counted as a vote for each of the party’s electors (§ 208.04). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The presidential electors, elected at the November election, shall meet at 12:00 noon in the executive chamber at the State capitol on the day fixed by Congress for voting for President and Vice President, and then and there perform all the duties imposed upon them as such electors by the Con-stitution and laws of the United States and the State (§ § 208.06–208.08). 

MISSISSIPPI 

Presidential Electors: 7 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

At the State convention, a slate of electors composed of the number of electors allotted to this State, which said electors announce a clearly expressed design and purpose to support 387 Nomination and Election MS Electors the candidates for President and Vice President of the na-tional political party with which the said party of this State has had an affiliation and identity of purpose heretofore, shall be designated and selected for a place upon the pri-mary election ballot (Mississippi Code Annotated, § 23–15– 771). When presidential electors are to be chosen, the Secretary of State of Mississippi shall certify to the circuit clerks of the several counties the names of all candidates for President and Vice President who are nominated by any national con-vention or other like assembly of any political party or by written petition signed by at least one thousand (1,000) qualified voters of this State. The certificate of nomination by a political party convention must be signed by the pre-siding officer and secretary of the convention and by the chairman of the State executive committee of the political party making the nomination. Any nominating petition, to be valid, must contain the signatures as well as the addresses of the petitioners. Such certificates and petitions must be filed with the State Board of Election Commissioners by fil-ing the same in the office of the Secretary of State not less than sixty (60) days previous to the day of the election (§ 23– 15–785). (2) Minor parties, new parties and independent candidates 

Presidential electors may be nominated by an assembly of any political party or by written petition signed by at least 1,000 qualified voters. The Secretary of State shall certify to the county clerks the names of nominated candidates for President and Vice President (§ 23–15–785(1)). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS The State Board of Election Commissioners and any other of-ficial charged with the preparation of official ballots shall place on such official ballots the words ‘‘PRESIDENTIAL ELECTORS FOR (here insert the name of the candidate for President, the word ‘AND’ and the name of the candidate for Vice President)’’ in lieu of placing the names of such presi-dential electors on such official ballots, and a vote cast there-for shall be counted and shall be in all respects effective as a vote for each of the presidential electors representing such candidates for President and Vice President of the United States. In the case of unpledged electors, the State Board of Election Commissioners and any other official charged with the preparation of official ballots shall place on such official ballots the words, ‘‘UNPLEDGED ELECTOR(S)’’ (here insert the name(s) of individual unpledged elector(s) if placed upon the ballot based upon a petition granted in the manner pro-vided by law stating the individual name(s) rather than a slate of electors) (§ 23–15–785(4)). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS Each certificate of nomination and nominating petition must be accompanied by a list of the names and addresses of per-sons, who shall be qualified voters of this State, equal in number to the number of presidential electors to be chosen. Each person so listed shall execute the following statement 388 Nomination and Election MS/MO Electors which shall be attached to the certificate or petition when the same is filed with the State Board of Election Commis-sioners: ‘‘I do hereby consent and do hereby agree to serve as elector for President and Vice President of the United States, if elected to that position, and do hereby agree that, if so elected, I shall cast my ballot as such for lll for President and lll for Vice President of the United States’’ (inserting in said blank spaces the representative names of the persons named as nominees for said respective offices in the certificate to which this statement is attached) (§ 23–15– 785(3)). The electors chosen shall meet at the seat of government of the State on the first Monday after the second Wednesday in December next following their election, and shall there give their votes for President and Vice President of the United States, and shall make return thereof agreeably to the laws of the United States; and should any elector so chosen fail to attend and give his vote, the other electors attending shall appoint some person or persons to fill the vacancy or vacan-cies, who shall attend and vote as electors; and such appoint-ment shall be forthwith reported to the Secretary of State (§ 23–15–789). 

MISSOURI 

Presidential Electors: 11 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

The State committee of any established political party may call a convention of delegates to be apportioned, chosen, or elected in such manner as it may prescribe for the purpose of nominating presidential electors (Vernon’s Annotated Mis-souri Statutes, § 115.625). The term ‘‘established political party’’ for the State means a political party which at either of the last two general elections polled for its candidate for any statewide office more than two percent of the entire vote cast for the office (§ 115.013(10)). Not later than the third Tuesday prior to each presidential election, the State committee of each established political party shall certify in writing to the Secretary of State the names of its nominees for presidential elector. At least one qualified resident of each congressional district shall be named as a nominee for presidential elector by each State committee, and the number of nominees for presidential elec-tor named by each State committee shall equal the number to which the State is entitled (§ 115.399(2)). (2) New parties 

Any group of persons desiring to form a new political party throughout the State shall file a petition with the Secretary of State. The petition shall declare the intention to form a new political party, state the name of the proposed party, give the names and addresses of the chairman and treasurer of the party. If presidential electors are to be nominated by petition, at least one qualified resident of each congressional district shall be named as a nominee for presidential elector. The number of candidates to be nominated shall equal the number of electors to which the State is entitled, and the 389 Nomination and Election MO Electors names of their candidates for President and Vice President shall be printed on each page or a sheet attached to each page of the petition. The names of the candidates for Presi-dent and Vice President may be added to the party name, but the names of the candidates for President and Vice President shall not be printed on the official ballot without their written consent. Their written consent shall accompany and be deemed part of the petition. If the new party is to be formed for the entire State, the petition shall be signed by at least ten thousand registered voters of the state obtained at large (§ 115.315). The filing of a valid petition shall constitute the political group a new party for the purpose of placing its name and the names of the candidates which were submitted pursuant to § 115.327 on the ballot at the next general election or the special election if the petition nominates a candidate to fill a vacancy which is to be filled at a special election. If presi-dential electors are nominated by the petition, the names of the candidates for elector shall not be placed on the official ballot, but the names of their candidates for President and Vice President shall be placed on the official ballot at the next presidential election (§ 115.317). The Secretary of State shall not accept for filing any petition for the formation of a new party which is submitted before 8 a.m. on the day immediately following the general election next preceding the general election for which the petition is submitted or which is submitted after 5 p.m. on the fifteenth Monday immediately preceding the general election for which the petition is submitted (§ 115.329). (3) Independent candidates 

Any person desiring to be an independent candidate for any office to be filled by voters throughout the State shall file a petition with the Secretary of State. The petition shall de-clare the intention to nominate an independent candidate, state the name and address of the independent candidate, and the office for which the candidate is to be nominated. If independent candidates for presidential elector are to be nominated, a number of independent candidates for presi-dential elector equal to the number of electors to which the State is entitled shall be nominated by one petition, and the names of their candidates for President and Vice President shall be printed on each page or a sheet attached to each page of the petition. At least one qualified resident of each congressional district shall be named as a nominee for presi-dential elector, and the name and address of each candidate shall be printed on each page or a sheet attached to each page of the petition. The names of the candidates for Presi-dent and Vice President shall not be printed on the official ballot without their written consent. Their written consent shall accompany and be deemed part of the petition (§ 115.321). If an independent candidate is to be nominated for a state-wide office, the petition shall be signed by at least ten thou-sand registered voters of the state. The name of each person who files a valid petition for nomination as an independent candidate shall be placed on the official ballot as an inde-pendent candidate for the office at the next general election 390 Nomination and Election MO/MT Electors or the special election if the petition nominates a candidate to fill a vacancy which is to be filled at a special election. If presidential electors are nominated by the petition, the names of the candidates for elector shall not be placed on the official ballot, but the names of their candidates for Presi-dent and Vice President shall be placed on the official ballot at the next presidential election (§ 115.321). The Secretary of State shall not accept for filing any petition for the nomination of an independent candidate which is submitted before 8 a.m. on the day immediately following the general election next proceding the general election for which the petition is submitted or which is submitted after 5 p.m. on the fifteenth Monday immediately preceding the general election for which the petition is submitted (§ 115.329). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS In place of the names of candidates for electors of President and Vice President of any political party or group of peti-tioners there shall be printed the names of candidates of each political party for President and Vice President. A vote for any of such candidates for President and Vice President shall be a vote for the electors of the party by which such candidates were named and whose names have been filed with the Secretary of State (information received from office of Missouri Secretary of State; see also §§ 115.317 and 115.321(5)). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS Not later than the third Tuesday before each presidential election, the State committee of each established political party shall certify in writing to the Secretary of State the names of its nominees for presidential elector (§ 115.399(2)). The electors of President and Vice President shall meet and give their votes on the first Monday after the second Wednesday in December following their appointment (3 U.S.C. § 7). The electors are notified of their election, and they assemble at the seat of government by 2 p.m. of the day specified by 3 U.S.C. § 7 to perform the duties enjoined upon them by Federal law. If there is a failure to elect, the elec-tors attending at the time and place shall appoint a suitable person or persons to fill the vacancy or vacancies (§ 128.130). 

MONTANA 

Presidential Electors: 3 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

Every political party that had a candidate for a statewide of-fice who received a total vote that was 5 percent or more of the total votes cast for the successful candidate for Governor in either of the last two general elections shall nominate presidential electors and file certificates of nomination for these candidates with the Secretary of State no later than 75 days before the general election and in the manner and num-ber provided by law. The Secretary of State shall certify to the election administrator the names of the candidates for 391 Nomination and Election MT/NE Electors President and Vice President of the several political parties, which shall be printed on the ballot. The names of can-didates for electors of President and Vice President may not be printed upon the ballot (Montana Code Annotated, § 13– 25–101). (2) Independent or minor party candidates 

An individual who desires to run for President or Vice Presi-dent as an independent candidate or as a candidate of a party which did not receive in an election for a statewide of-fice a total vote that was 5 percent or more of the total votes cast for the successful candidate for Governor in either of the last two general elections shall file a petition for nomination with the Secretary of State 90 days prior to the date of the general election. The petition must first be submitted, at least one week before the deadline for filing, to the election administrator in the county where the signer resides for verification and certification. The petition must have the sig-natures of electors equal to 5 percent or more of the total votes cast for the successful candidate for Governor at the last general election or 5,000 electors, whichever is less. The names of the candidates for the required number of presi-dential electors allowable to Montana shall be certified to the Secretary of State when the petition for nomination is filed (§ 13–10–504). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS The names of candidates for electors or President and Vice President may not be printed on the ballots; only the names of the candidates for President and Vice President should ap-pear on the ballots (§ 13–25–101). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The electors shall meet in Helena at 2:00 p.m. on the first Monday after the second Wednesday in December following their election. They shall vote by separate ballots for one person for President and one for Vice President. They shall cast their ballots for the persons who received the highest number of votes for President and Vice President, respec-tively. They shall make lists of the persons voted for, indi-cate the number of votes for each, certify, seal, and transmit the lists as prescribed by United States laws (§ § 13–25–104 and 13–25–105). 

NEBRASKA 

Presidential Electors: 5 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

Each of the various political parties shall hold a delegate state postprimary convention biennially on a date to be fixed by the state central committee but not later than October 1. Such convention shall nominate candidates for such elective state offices as are excepted from the operation of the direct primary law. Such nominations shall be certified to the Sec-retary of State by the presiding officer and the secretary of the convention, as such, which certificates shall have the same force and effect as nominations in primary elections, 392 Nomination and Election NE Electors and shall be treated accordingly. The convention shall formu-late and promulgate a state platform, select a state central committee and select electors for President and Vice Presi-dent of the United States, the names of whom shall be cer-tified to the Governor and Secretary of State by the officers of such convention. The state convention shall exercise such powers as ordinarily vest in conventions and shall transact such business as shall properly come before it. (Revised Stat-utes of Nebraska, § 32–556). At least 60 days prior to any general election at which can-didates for President and Vice President are to be voted upon by the electors of the state, the appropriate officers of the various national political conventions shall certify the names and addresses of such candidates selected by conven-tion to the Secretary of State. The Secretary of State shall then take appropriate steps to place the names of the presi-dential and vice-presidential candidates on the ballot in ac-cordance with provisions of law (§ 32–561). (2) Minor and new parties 

A party which failed to poll at least 5 percent of the entire vote in the State must use the methods prescribed for a newly formed party in order to get its candidates’ names upon the primary ballot (§ § 32–521, 32–526). In order to form a new political party there shall be pre-sented to the Secretary of State petitions containing signa-tures totaling not less than one percent of the total votes cast for the office of Governor at the most recent general election for such office. The signatures of registered electors on such petitions must be so distributed as to include quali-fied registered electors totaling at least one percent of the votes cast for Governor in the most recent gubernatorial elec-tion in each of the three congressional districts. The petitions must be filed with the Secretary of State at least 90 days be-fore any State primary election held under the laws of this State if the new political party desires to have ballot position in the primary election of that year. If the new political party desires to be established and have ballot position for the general election and not in the primary of that year, such petitions must be filed with the Secretary of State on or before August 1 of that year. Prior to the circulation of such petitions to form a new political party, a sample copy of such petitions must be filed with the Secretary of State by the individual, group or association seeking to establish the new party. In addition, the sample petition shall be accom-panied by a verified list of the names and addresses of the individual or the members of the group or association spon-soring the petition to form a new political party (§ 32– 526(1)). Every circulator of a petition shall be not less than the con-stitutionally prescribed age of an elector, a resident, and a registered voter of the State of Nebraska and of the county wherein the petitioners reside (§ 32–526(3)) . Clerical and technical errors in a petition shall be dis-regarded if the forms prescribed are substantially followed (§ 32–526(4)). Within 10 days after all petitions containing signatures are filed with the Secretary of State, he shall determine the va-393 Nomination and Election NE Electors lidity and sufficiency of such petitions and signatures. If the petitions to form the new political party are determined to be sufficient and valid, the Secretary of State shall issue a certification establishing the new political party. Copies of such certification shall be issued to the person, group or as-sociation forming the new political party. Within 20 days after the certification of establishment of the new political party by the Secretary of State, the person, group or associa-tion forming the party or its new officers shall file with the Secretary of State the constitution and by-laws of such party along with a certified list of the names and addresses of the officers of the new political party (§ 32–526(5)). The petitions to form a new political party shall state the name of the party to be formed, but the name of any then existing political party or any word forming any part of the name of any party then existing shall not be adopted (§ 32– 526(6)). A new political party established prior to the primary elec-tion of that year shall be entitled to have a separate party ballot at the next primary election held thereafter. Such party and its candidates shall be subject to and governed by the statutes governing existing political parties. Candidates for political office may register as members of the new polit-ical party and file for office as candidates under the party label of the new political party in accordance with the filing deadlines as established by law (§ 32–526(7)). Any person signing any name other than his own to any pe-tition or knowingly signing his name more than once, or who is not, at the time of signing or circulating the same, a legal voter and qualified to sign or circulate the same, or any per-son who shall falsely swear to any signature upon any such petition, or any officer or person willfully violating any provi-sion of this section, shall be guilty of a class V misdemeanor (§ 32–526(8)). Candidates for the offices of President and Vice President of newly established political parties or of an independent sta-tus may obtain general election ballot position by filing with the Secretary of State an application with the following in-formation: (a) the name or names to be printed on the ballot; (b) the status of the candidacy, whether independent or par-tisan; (c) the written consent of the designated vice presidential candidate to have his or her name printed on the ballot; (d) a list of names and addresses of the persons to represent the applicant as presidential elector candidates and the writ-ten consent of these persons to become candidates; and (e) a petition signed by qualified voters numbering not less than 2,500. The petitions shall not be circulated until after the date of the primary election in that election year (§ 32– 504(3)). (3) Independent candidates 

Candidates for the offices of President and Vice President of an independent status may obtain general election ballot po-sition by filing with the Secretary of State an application containing the following information: (a) the name or names to be printed on the ballot; 394 Nomination and Election NE Electors (b) the status of the candidacy, whether independent or par-tisan; (c) the written consent of the designated vice presidential candidate to have his or her name printed on the ballot; (d) a list of names and addresses of the persons to represent the applicant as presidential elector candidates and their written consent to become candidates; and (e) a petition signed by qualified voters numbering not less than 2,500. These petitions shall not be circulated until after the date of the primary election in that election year. Voters who voted in the primary of any political party that held a presidential preference primary that year are ineligible to sign the petitions of an independent candidate for President (§ 32–504(3)). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOT At least sixty days prior to any general election at which candidates for President and Vice President are to be voted upon by the electors of the State, the appropriate officers of the various national political conventions shall certify the names and addresses of such candidates selected by conven-tion to the Secretary of State. The Secretary of State then takes appropriate steps to place the names of the presi-dential and vice presidential candidates on the ballot in ac-cordance with provisions of law (§ 32–561). The candidates of political parties nominated at conventions for presidential elector do not appear on the ballot. In their places appear the names of candidates for President and Vice President grouped together in the space entitled ‘‘Presi-dential Ticket’’ (§ 32–813(2)). The canvass of the votes for candidates for President and Vice President and the return thereof is a canvass and return of the votes cast for presi-dential electors of the same party or group of petitioners re-spectively and certificates of election are issued to the elec-tors (§ 32–1038). One presidential elector shall be chosen from each congres-sional district, and two presidential electors shall be chosen at large (§ 32–556). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The electors are issued a certificate of appointment by the Governor directing them to be at the State capitol at noon on the first Monday after the second Wednesday in Decem-ber and report to the Governor as being in attendance. The electors convene at 2 p.m. on such Monday at the executive office in the capitol and proceed to fill any vacancy in the of-fice of elector. The college of electors proceeds with the elec-tion of a President and Vice President and certifies their votes in conformity with the Constitution and laws of the United States (§ § 32–546 to 32–548). Each at large presidential elector shall cast his or her ballot for the presidential and vice-presidential candidates who re-ceived the highest number of votes in the state. Each con-gressional district presidential elector shall cast his or her ballot for the presidential and vice-presidential candidates who received the highest number of votes in his or her con-gressional district (§ 32–548). 395 Nomination and Election NV Electors 

NEVADA 

Presidential Electors: 4 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

Each political party in this State, qualified by law to place upon the general election ballot candidates for the office of President and Vice President of the United States in the year when they are to be elected, shall, at the State conven-tion of the political party held in that year, choose from the qualified electors, who are legally registered members of such political party, the number of presidential electors re-quired by law and no more, who shall be nominated by the delegates at the State convention. Upon the nomination thereof, the chairman and the secretary of the convention shall certify the names and addresses of such nominees to the Secretary of State, who shall record the names in his of-fice as the presidential elector nominees of that political party (Nevada Revised Statutes Annotated, § 298.020(1)). (2) Minor and new parties 

Each minor political party in this state, qualified by law to place upon the general election ballot candidates for the of-fice of President and Vice President of the United States in the year when they are to be elected, shall choose from the qualified electors, the number of presidential electors re-quired by law. The person who is authorized to file the list of candidates of the minor political party with the Secretary of State pursuant to NRS 293.1725 shall certify the names and addresses of the nominees to the Secretary of State, who shall record the names in his office as the nominees of that political party for presidential elector (§ 298.020(2)). (3) Independent candidates 

A person who desires to be an independent candidate for the office of President of the United States must, not later than 5 p.m. on the second Friday in August in each year in which a presidential election is to be held, pay a filing fee of $250 and file with the Secretary of State a declaration of can-didacy and a petition of candidacy, in which he may also des-ignate his nominee for Vice President. The petition must be signed by a number of registered voters equal to not less than 1 percent of the total number of votes cast at the last preceding general election for candidates for Representative in Congress and must request that the names of the pro-posed candidates be placed on the ballot at the general elec-tion that year. The petition may consist of more than one document. Each document must bear the name of a county and only reg-istered voters of that county may sign the document. The documents which are circulated for signature in a county must be submitted to that county clerk for verification in the manner prescribed in NRS 293.1276 to 293.1279, inclusive, not later than 25 working days before the last day to file the petition of candidacy with the Secretary of State. Each per-son signing shall add to his signature the address of the place at which he resides, the date of signing, and the name of the county wherein he is registered to vote. Each docu-ment of the petition must also contain the affidavit of the 396 Nomination and Election NV/NH Electors person who circulated the document that all signatures thereon are genuine to the best of his knowledge and belief and were signed in his presence by persons registered to vote in that county. Each independent candidate so nominated for the office of President shall at the time of filing his petition or within 10 days thereafter, file with the Secretary of State his written designation of the names of the number of presidential elec-tors then authorized by law, whom the independent can-didate desires to act as his electors, all of whom must then be registered voters. Immediately following receipt of each candidate’s written designation of his nominees for electors, the Secretary of State shall record them in his office as the nominees for presidential electors of that independent can-didate. If the candidacy of any person who seeks to qualify pursuant to this section is challenged, all affidavits and documents in support of the challenge must be filed with the first judicial district court not later than 5 p.m. on the fourth Tuesday in August. Any judicial proceeding relating to the challenge must be set for hearing not later than 5 days after the fourth Tuesday in August (§ 298.109). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS The names of the candidates for elector are not printed on the ballot. In the general election only the names of the can-didates of the respective parties for President and Vice Presi-dent are printed on the ballot, but the presidential elector nominees of the political party whose candidates for Presi-dent and Vice President receive the highest number of votes shall be deemed the elected presidential electors and there-after they shall perform the duties of presidential electors re-quired by law and the Constitution of the United States (§ 298.025). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The presidential electors so chosen shall convene at the seat of government on the 1st Monday after the second Wednes-day in December next after their election, at 2:00 p.m., or on such other date the Congress of the United States may by law hereafter provide (§ 298.030). The presidential electors, when convened, shall vote by ballot for one person for Presi-dent and one person for Vice President, one of whom, at least, shall not be an inhabitant of the State. The presi-dential electors shall vote only for the nominees for Presi-dent and Vice President of the party or the independent can-didates that prevailed in the State in the preceding general election (§ 298.050). 

NEW HAMPSHIRE 

Presidential Electors: 4 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

Presidential electors shall be nominated by state party con-ventions as provided in New Hampshire Revised Statutes § 667.21. 397 Nomination and Election NH Electors Not earlier than the third Tuesday of September following any primary and not later than the last Tuesday of October, upon the call of the chairman of the State committee of the party, the nominees of each party for the offices of Governor, U.S. Senator, U.S. Representative, councilors, State senators, county officers, representatives, and State delegates elected, and an incumbent U.S. Senator whose term does not expire during the January following the general election, shall meet in State convention for the purpose of nominating presi-dential electors. Presidential electors nominated by the con-vention shall be certified to the Secretary of State by the chairman and the clerk of the convention. Upon receipt of the foregoing certifications, the Secretary of State shall pub-lish in some paper of general circulation the names of the persons found by him to have been chosen as candidates for presidential electors by the several parties (§ 667:21). (2) Minor and new parties 

As an alternative to nomination by party primary, a can-didate may have his name placed on the ballot by submitting the requisite number of nomination papers. This alternative would appear to apply to political organizations which at the preceding State general election received less than 4 percent of the total number of votes cast for the office of Governor or U.S. Senator (§ § 652:11 and 655:40). For candidates for President and Vice President 3,000 names of legal voters are required, 1,500 from each congressional district in the State (§ 655:42). The nomination papers are to be filed with the Secretary of State no later than 5:00 p.m. on the Wednesday one week before the primary (§ 655:43). Independent candidates have to submit nomination papers as an alternative to nomination by party primary. The nomi-nation papers must contain 3,000 names, of which 1,500 must be from each congressional district. The nomination pa-pers are to be filed with the Secretary of State no later than 5:00 p.m. on the Wednesday one week before the primary (§ 655:40–§ 655:43). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS The names and addresses of the presidential electors shall not be printed on the ballot, but, in lieu thereof, the names of a party’s candidates for President and Vice President shall be printed under the designation ‘‘President and Vice Presi-dent of the United States.’’ (§ 656:4). In the case of the can-didates for President and Vice President, one square shall be placed on the ballot opposite the designation ‘‘President and Vice President of the United States’’ (§ 656:8). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The electors of the President and Vice President shall meet in the State House in Concord on the day fixed by law and by 12:00 o’clock at midday shall give notice to the Governor and council of the number of electors present who accept the office (§ 660:27). The electors shall give their votes for Presi-dent and Vice President on said day and shall proceed ac-cording to law (§ 660:29). 398 Nomination and Election NJ Electors 

NEW JERSEY 

Presidential Electors: 15 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

In presidential years the State committee of a political party shall meet at the call of its chairman, within 1 week fol-lowing the closing of the party’s national convention, for the purpose of nominating candidates for electors of President and Vice President. The State committee shall certify such nomination in a written or printed certificate of nomination (New Jersey Statutes Annotated, § 19:13–15). (2) Minor and new parties 

A political party which fails to poll at any primary election at least 10 percent of the votes cast in the State for members of the general assembly at the next preceding general elec-tion shall not be entitled to have a party column on the offi-cial ballot at the general election for which the primary elec-tion was held. In such a case the names of the candidates so nominated at the primary election shall be printed in the column designated ‘‘nomination by petition’’, followed by the designation of the political party of which the candidates are members (§ 19:5–1). Nomination petitions shall be signed by qualified voters of the State, equal in number to 2 percent of the entire vote cast for members of the general assembly at the last pre-ceding general election, except that no more than 800 signa-tures are required for officers to be elected by the State at large (§ 19:13–5). Petitions nominating electors of President and Vice Presi-dent may contain the names of candidates for President and Vice President for whom such electors are to vote (§ 19:13– 4). (3) Acceptance 

A candidate nominated by petition shall sign a written ac-ceptance thereof under oath, which shall be attached to the nomination petition (§ 19:13–8). (4) Oath of allegiance 

Attached to the nomination papers shall also be the oath of allegiance to the Constitutions and Governments of the United States and of the State of New Jersey (§ 19:13–8). Nominating petitions with attachments should be filed with the Secretary of State before 4:00 p.m. of the 99th day pre-ceding the general election. (§ 19:13–9). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS When presidential electors are to be elected, their names shall not be printed upon the ballot, either paper or voting machine, but in lieu thereof, the names of the candidates of their respective parties or political bodies for President and Vice President of the United States shall be printed together in pairs under the title ‘‘Presidential Electors for.’’ All ballots marked for the candidates for President and Vice President of a party or political body shall be counted as votes for each candidate for presidential elector of such party or political body (§ 19:14–8.1). 399 Nomination and Election NJ/NM Electors C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The electors shall convene at the Statehouse in Trenton at 3:00 p.m. on the day appointed by Congress for that purpose and proceed, after choosing their officers, to perform the du-ties required of them by the Constitution and laws of the United States (§ § 19:36–1, 36–3). 

NEW MEXICO 

Presidential Electors: 5 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

On or before June 1 of each year in which the President and Vice President of the United States are to be elected, the Secretary of State shall send written notice to the State chairman of each qualified political party in New Mexico set-ting forth the method and requirements for nominating and electing presidential electors at the general election (New Mexico Statutes Annotated, § 1–15–1). Presidential electors shall not be nominated at the primary election (§ 1–15–2). Any qualified political party in New Mexico desiring to have candidates for President and Vice President on the general election ballot in a presidential election year shall, at a State party convention held in the year of the election, choose from the voters of the party the number of presidential electors re-quired by law and no more. The presidential electors shall be nominated by the State convention according to the rules of that party on file with the Secretary of State. Upon the nom-ination of presidential electors, the chairman and secretary of the convention shall certify the names and addresses of the nominees not less than fifty-six days before the election to the Secretary of State (§ 1–15–3). (2) Minor parties and new parties 

To qualify as a political party in New Mexico, each political party through its governing body shall adopt rules and regu-lations providing for the organization and government of that party and shall file the rules and regulations with the Secretary of State. Such rules and regulations shall be adopted uniformly throughout the State by the county orga-nizations of that party, where a county organization exists, and shall be filed with the county clerks. Each county polit-ical party organization may adopt such supplementary rules and regulations insofar as they do not conflict with the uni-form State rules and regulations or do not abridge the lawful political rights of any person. Such supplementary rules shall be filed with the county clerk and the Secretary of State in the same manner as other rules are filed (§ 1–7–2). All political parties that appeared on the 1988 New Mexico general election ballot shall continue to be qualified political parties unless disqualified in accordance with this sub-section. Beginning with the general election in 1990, a quali-fied political party shall cease to be qualified for the pur-poses of the Election Code if two successive general elections are held without at least one of the party’s candidates on the ballot or if the total votes cast for the party’s candidates for Governor or President of the United States, provided that the party has a candidate seeking election to either of these 400 Nomination and Election NM Electors offices, in a general election do not equal at least one-half of one percent of the total votes cast for the office of Governor or President of the United States, as applicable. After giving notice by registered mail to the state chairman of the party at his last known address, the secretary of state shall re-move all material dealing with the political party from his file of parties qualified in New Mexico (§ 1–7–2). To re-qualify, the party must again comply with the provisions of the election code dealing with filing requirements for polit-ical parties (§ 1–7–2). The Secretary of State and the county clerk shall not accept the rules and regulations of any political party for filing un-less such rules and regulations provide: (a) a method for nominating candidates for the general elec-tion; (b) a method for calling and conducting conventions; (c) a method for selection of delegates to conventions; (d) a method for selection of State central committee mem-bers, a State chairman and other party officers, and all other members of governing bodies of the party; (e) a method for filling vacancies in party offices, committees and other governing bodies; (f) the powers and duties of party officers, committees and other governing bodies; (g) for the structure of the State and county party organiza-tions; (h) that meetings to elect any party officers, including dele-gates, shall be held at a public place during the week speci-fied by the State party chairman; (i) that notice of such meetings shall be published by the offi-cers of the county party organization in a newspaper of gen-eral circulation at least 14 days prior to the meeting and the notice shall specify the time, date and place for holding the meeting; and (j) a method for amending the party rules and regulations (§ 1–7–3). Each political party shall file its rules and regulations within thirty days after its organization and no later than the first Tuesday in April before any election in which it is authorized to participate (§ 1–7–4). Upon the nomination of presidential electors, the chairman and secretary of the convention shall certify the names and addresses of the nominees not less than fifty-six days before the election to the Secretary of State. The Secretary of State shall record the nominees’ names in his office as the presi-dential elector nominees of that party (§ 1–15–3). (3) Independent candidates 

Nomination as an independent candidate shall be made by filing a declaration of independent candidacy and a nomi-nating petition signed by a number of voters equal to at least 3 percent of the total number of votes cast in the State for governor at the last preceding general election at which a governor was elected. The Secretary of State shall prescribe and furnish the form for the declaration of independent can-didacy for the offices of President and Vice President (§ § 1– 8–48 and 1–8–51(B)). 401 Nomination and Election NM/NY Electors Persons filing declarations of independent candidacy for President shall also file the names and addresses of the re-quired number of presidential electors who intend to vote for the independent candidate in the Electoral College (§ 1–8– 49). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS The names of the presidential elector nominees chosen at a State convention shall not be placed upon the general elec-tion ballot. The Secretary of State shall certify to the various county clerks for inclusion upon the general election ballot the names of the persons nominated by each political party for the offices of President and Vice President. The names of nominees for President and Vice President for each political party shall be printed together in pairs upon the general election ballot. A vote for any such pair of nominees shall be a vote for the electors of the political party by which such nominees were named. The presidential elector nominees of the party whose nominees for President and Vice President of the United States receive the highest number of votes at the general election shall be deemed the elected presidential electors. (§ 1–15–4). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS Presidential electors for the State shall perform the duties of the presidential electors required by law and the Constitu-tion of the United States. Presidential electors of the State shall meet at 11:00 a.m. in the office of the Secretary of State on the day fixed by the laws of the United States for presidential electors to cast their ballots for President and Vice President of the United States. At such meeting the presidential electors shall orga-nize by choosing a presiding officer and a secretary. If the full number of electors required by law are not present at such meeting for any reason, those presidential electors present shall, from a list of names nominated by the State chairman of that party, forthwith choose electors from the voters of the State party. The presidential electors of the State shall meet at noon in the office of the Secretary of State on the day fixed by the laws of the United States for presidential electors to cast their ballots for President and Vice President and shall pro-ceed to vote by ballot for President and Vice President of the United States and to certify the results of such election in accordance with Constitution and laws of the United States. The presidential elector chosen as secretary shall keep ajournal of the proceedings and deposit the journal in the of-fice of the Secretary of State, where it shall be kept on file. All presidential electors shall cast their ballots in the elec-toral college for the candidates of the political party which nominated them as presidential electors. Any presidential elector who casts his ballot in violation of the provisions is guilty of a fourth degree felony (§ § 1–15–5 to 1–15–9). 

NEW YORK 

Presidential Electors: 33 402 Nomination and Election NY Electors A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

Nominations of candidates for the office of elector of Presi-dent and Vice President of the United States, one for each congressional district and two at large, shall be made by the State committee (New York Election Law (McKinney’s), § 6– 102). (2) Minor and new parties 

A political group which at the last preceding gubernatorial election did not poll at least 50,000 votes must make its nominations as an ‘‘independent body’’ (§ 1–104 (3), (12)). When an ‘‘independent body’’ becomes a political party by polling at least 50,000 votes for Governor, nominations shall, prior to and including the first general election thereafter, be made as provided by the rules of the party. A certificate of the nominations containing information on its candidates and the party, plus a copy of its rules, shall be signed by the presiding officer and the secretary and filed not later than seven weeks preceding the general election in the office of the State board of elections if for an office to be voted for in a district greater than one county (§ § 6–128, 6–144). (3) Independent candidates 

A person may become a candidate of an independent body by filing a petition in the office of the State board of elections (§ § 6–138, 6–144). An independent nominating petition for candidates to be voted for by all the voters of the State must be signed by at least 15,000 voters, of whom at least 100 shall reside in each of one-half of the congressional districts of the State (§ 6– 142). A person designated as a candidate for nomination or for party position, or nominated for an office, otherwise than at a primary election, may, in a certificate signed and acknowl-edged by him, decline the designation or nomination. How-ever, if designated or nominated for a public office other than a judicial office by a party of which he is not a duly enrolled member or if designated or nominated for a public office other than a judicial office by more than one party or inde-pendent body or by an independent body alone, the person shall, in a certificate signed and acknowledged by him, ac-cept the designation or nomination as a candidate of each party or independent body other than that of the party of which he is an enrolled member; otherwise, the designation or nomination shall be null and void (§ 6–146). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS At the general election in November preceding the time fixed by law of the United States for the choice of President and Vice President of the United States, as many electors of President and Vice President of the United States shall be elected, as this state shall be entitled to. Each vote cast for the candidates of any party or independent body for Presi-dent and Vice President of the United States and each vote cast for any write-in candidates for such offices shall be deemed to be cast for the candidates for elector of such party or independent body or the candidates for elector named in 403 Nomination and Election NY/NC Electors the certificate of candidacy of such write-in candidates (§ 12– 100). In voting for presidential electors, a voter may vote a write-in ballot for any person whose name does not appear on the ballot as a nominated or designated candidate (§ 8–308). The county board of elections shall publish at least six days be-fore an election a list containing the name and residence of every candidate for public office, except those for the office of presidential electors to be voted for within its jurisdiction. The candidates for the office of presidential electors shall only be described as a specific number of electors, nominated to support the party candidates, naming them, for the office of President and Vice President (§ 4–122(2)). The board of elections shall transmit by mail or cause to be delivered per-sonally to the State board of elections a certified copy of the statement of the canvassing board relating to the offices of electors of President and Vice President (§ 9–214). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The electors shall convene at the State capitol at noon on the first Monday after the second Wednesday in December next following their election. They shall organize and then name in separate ballots the persons voted for as President and Vice President and then make and sign six certificates list-ing separately the votes for President and Vice President (§ § 12–104, 12–106). 

NORTH CAROLINA 

Presidential Electors: 14 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

On Tuesday next after the first Monday in November in the year 1968, and every four years thereafter, or on such days as the Congress of the United States shall direct, an election shall be held in all of the election precincts of the State for the election of electors of President and Vice President of the United States. The number of electors to be chosen shall be equal to the number of Senators and Representatives in Con-gress to which this State may be entitled. Presidential elec-tors shall not be nominated by primary election; instead, they shall be nominated in a State convention of each polit-ical party as defined in G.S. 163–96 unless otherwise pro-vided by the plan of organization of the political party; pro-vided, that in the case of a candidate for President of the United States who has qualified to have his name printed on the general election ballot as an unaffiliated candidate under G.S. 163–122, that candidate shall nominate presidential electors. One presidential elector shall be nominated from each congressional district and two from the State at large (General Statutes of North Carolina, § 163–1(c)). (2) Minor and new parties 

A minor party, or one which had failed to poll for its can-didate for Governor or for presidential electors at least 2 per-cent of the entire vote cast for such officers at the last pre-ceding general election, would have to reorganize in the same manner as is required to create a new party (§ 163–96). 404 Nomination and Election NC Electors Any group may form a new party by filing a petition setting forth its intention to organize a new statewide party with the State Board of Elections on or before noon on June 1 pre-ceding the general election, signed by registered and quali-fied voters equal in number to 2 percent of the total number of voters who voted in the most recent general election for Governor including at least 200 voters from each of four con-gressional districts (§ 163–96). Nominees of this group for State, congressional and national offices only for the first general election after its organization must be furnished to the Board by July 1 prior to the general election. Such nomi-nations shall be made at a nominating convention (§ 163–98). Presidential electors are not to be nominated by primary election but are to be nominated by a State convention un-less otherwise provided by the plan of organization of the po-litical party (§ 163–1(c)). (3) Independent candidates 

Any qualified voter who seeks to have his name printed on the general election ballot as an unaffiliated candidate shall: If the office is a statewide office, file written petitions with the State Board of Elections supporting his candidacy for a specified office. These petitions must be filed with the State Board of Elections on or before 12 noon on the last Friday in June preceding the general election and must be signed by qualified voters of the State equal in number to 2 percent of the voters who voted in the most recent general election for Governor. Each petition shall be presented to the chair-man of the board of elections of the county in which the sig-natures were obtained. The chairman shall examine the names on the petition and place a check mark on the peti-tion by the name of each signer who is qualified and reg-istered to vote in his county and shall attach to the petition his signed certificate. Said certificates shall state that the signatures on the petition have been checked against the registration records and shall indicate the number of signers to be qualified and registered to vote in his county. The chairman shall return each petition, together with the cer-tificate required in this section, to the person who presented it to him for checking. Verification by the chairman of the county board of elections shall be completed within 2 weeks from the date such petitions are presented (§ 163–122). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS The names of candidates for electors of President and Vice President of any political party shall not be placed on the ballot but shall be filed with the Secretary of State. The names of the candidates for President and Vice President are placed on the ballot. A vote for such candidates, however, shall be counted as a vote for the electors of the party by which such candidates were named (§ 163–209). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The electors shall meet at the capitol in Raleigh at noon on the first Monday after the second Wednesday in December next after their election and give their votes on behalf of the State for President and Vice President (§ 163–210). 405 Nomination and Election NC/ND Electors On or before the date fixed for the meeting of the electors, the Governor shall send by registered mail to the Archivist of the United States either three duplicate original certifi-cates, or one original and two copies, under the great seal of the State setting forth the names of the persons chosen as presidential electors for this State and the number of votes cast for each. At the same time he shall deliver to the elec-tors six duplicate-originals of the same certificate, each bear-ing the great seal of the State. At any time prior to receipt of the certificate of the Governor or within 48 hours there-after, any person elected to the office of elector may resign by submitting his resignation, written and duly verified, to the Governor. Failure to so resign shall signify consent to serve and to cast his vote for the candidate of the political party which nominated such elector. In case of the absence, ineligibility or resignation of any elec-tor chosen, or if the proper number of electors shall for any cause be deficient, the first and second alternates nominated under G.S. 163–1(c) shall fill the first two vacancies. If they are absent, or there are more than two vacancies, those present at the required meeting shall forthwith elect from the citizens of the State a sufficient number of persons to fill the deficiency, and the persons chosen shall be deemed quali-fied electors to vote for President and Vice President of the United States (§ 163–210). Any presidential elector having previously signified his con-sent to serve as such, who fails to attend and vote for the candidate of the political party which nominated such elector for President and Vice President of the United States at the time and place indicated above (except in case of sickness or other unavoidable accident) shall forfeit and pay to the State $500, to be recovered by the Attorney General in the Supe-rior Court of Wake County. In addition to such forfeiture, re-fusal or failure to vote for the candidates of the political party which nominated such elector shall constitute a res-ignation from the office of elector, his vote shall not be re-corded, and the remaining electors shall forthwith fill such vacancy as hereinbefore provided (§ 163–212). 

NORTH DAKOTA 

Presidential Electors: 3 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

State party conventions are to nominate the legal number of candidates for their parties for the offices of presidential electors (North Dakota Century Code, § 16.1–03–14). The names of the candidates nominated for presidential electors shall be certified by the chairman and secretary of the con-vention to the Secretary of State to be placed upon the gen-eral election ballot ( ibid. ). All nominations made by a convention are to be certified. And the certificate is to be delivered by the secretary or the president of the convention by registered or certified mail or in person to the Secretary of State (§ 16.1–13–17). (2) Minor and new parties 406 Nomination and Election ND/OH Electors Any party that had printed on the ballot at the last pre-ceding presidential election the names of a set of presidential electors pledged to the election of the party’s candidate for President and whose candidates for presidential electors re-ceived at least five percent of the total vote cast for presi-dential electors within the state at that election must be pro-vided with a separate column on primary election ballots (§ 16.1–13–30). Any other political organization is entitled to endorse can-didates or have candidates petition to be included on the pri-mary ballot in a consolidated column, if a petition signed by at least 7,000 qualified electors is filed with the Secretary of State before 4 p.m. of the 60th day before a primary election. Candidates of that party are entitled to the same rights and privileges as those of other parties (§ 16.1–13–30). (3) Independent candidates 

In order to have his name appear in the ‘‘independent nomi-nations’’ column on the general election ballot, the candidate must file a certificate of nomination by petition with the Sec-retary of State. The certificate of nomination for an office to be filled by qualified electors of the entire State must contain 1,000 signatures (§ 16.1–12–02). The certificate of nomination for presidential electors may contain the names of more than one nominee (§ 16.1–12–03). The certificate of nomination is to be filed with the Secretary of State by 4 p.m. on the six-tieth day before the general election (§ 16.1–12–04). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS In presidential election years the ballot provided for in sec-tion 16.1–06–05 shall include the designation of the office of President and Vice President as the first listing of the con-tinuous listing of the designation of each office to be voted for. The names of presidential electors, presented in one cer-tificate of nomination, shall be arranged in a group enclosed in brackets under the designation of the office of President and Vice President. To the right and opposite the center of each group of electors’ names must be printed in bold type the surname of the presidential candidate represented and in line with such surname shall be placed a single oval. A mark within such oval shall be designated as a vote for all the electors. The appropriate party designation must appear, in smaller type, under the surname of the presidential can-didate represented (§ 16.1–06–07.1). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The electors shall meet at one o’clock p.m. in the office of the Governor in the State Capitol on the first Monday after the second Wednesday in December next following their election for the purpose of casting their ballots. The Secretary of State shall notify the electors of said meeting. They must fill any vacancy in the office of elector by ballot by a plurality of votes (§ § 16.1–14–04, 16.1–14–05). 

OHIO 

Presidential Electors: 21 407 Nomination and Election OH Electors A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties and minor parties 

Candidates for presidential elector are nominated by State conventions at a time and place determined by the State committees of the respective political parties (Ohio Revised Code, title 35, § 3513.11). Names of a party’s candidates for presidential electors shall be certified by the chairman and secretary of the convention to the Secretary of State within 5 days after the holding of the convention. A political party is defined as any group of voters which, at the last preceding regular State election, polled for its can-didate for Governor in the State or nominees for presidential electors at least 5 percent of the entire vote cast for such of-fice or which filed with the Secretary of State, subsequent to any election in which it received less than 5 percent of such vote, a petition signed by qualified electors equal in number to at least 1 percent of the total vote for Governor or nomi-nees for presidential electors at the last preceding election, declaring their intention of organizing a political party, the name of which shall be stated in the declaration, and of par-ticipating in the next succeeding primary election, held in even-numbered years, that occurs more than one hundred twenty days after the date of filing. No such group of electors shall assume a name or designation which is similar, in the opinion of the Secretary of State, to that of an existing polit-ical party as to confuse or mislead the voters at an election. If any political party fails to cast 5 percent of the total vote cast at an election for the office of Governor or President it shall cease to be a political party (§ 3517.01). When a peti-tion is filed with the Secretary of State, the new party comes into legal existence on the date of filing. New parties are en-titled to hold a primary election, held in even-numbered years that would occur more than 120 days after the date of the filing of the petition (§ 3517.012). (2) Independent candidates 

Independent candidates for President and Vice President are to file a joint candidates’ statement and one nominating peti-tion for the two of them. The nominating petition of independent candidates for the offices of President and Vice President of the United States shall be signed by at least 5,000 qualified electors, provided that no petition shall be accepted for filing if it purports to contain more than 15,000 signatures, and must be accom-panied by a slate of presidential electors (§ 3513.257). The nominating petition and the joint candidates’ statement must be filed with the Secretary of State no later than 4 p.m. of the seventy-fifth day before the day of the general election (id. ). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS The names of candidates for electors of President and Vice President shall not be placed on the ballot. In place of their names there shall be printed on the ballot the names of the candidates for President and Vice President, respectively. A vote for any of such candidates shall be a vote for the elec-tors whose names have been certified to the Secretary of 408 Nomination and Election OH/OK Electors State and who are members of the same political party (§ 3505.10). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The electors shall meet at the State capitol, organize, and discharge all the duties enjoined upon electors by the Con-stitution and laws of the United States (§ 3505.39). A presidential elector elected at a general election shall, when discharging the duties enjoined upon him by the Con-stitution or laws of the United States, cast his electoral vote for the nominees for President and Vice President of the po-litical party which certified him to the Secretary of State as a presidential elector pursuant to law (§ 3505.40). 

OKLAHOMA 

Presidential Electors: 8 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

The nominees for presidential elector ‘‘of any recognized po-litical party shall be selected at a statewide convention of said party in a manner to be determined by said party’’ and must be certified by the party’s chairman to the Secretary of the State election board no fewer than 90 days nor more than 180 days prior to the election (Oklahoma Statutes An-notated, title 26, § 10–101). A ‘‘recognized political party’’ is defined to include those par-ties with candidates on the 1974 general election ballot, and ‘‘those parties which shall be formed according to law’’ (26 §§ 1–107, 1–108). A party ceases to be a ‘‘recognized party’’ when its nominee for Governor or nominees for electors for President and Vice President fail to receive at least 10 percent of the vote cast for said offices (26, § 1–109). (2) Minor and new parties (‘‘not recognized’’ political parties) 

The names of a slate of candidates for the office of presi-dential elector pledged to the nominee of a political party not recognized under the laws of the State of Oklahoma for President of the United States shall be printed on the ballot only by observing the following procedure: 1. No later than July 15 of a presidental election year, peti-tions signed by a number of registered voters supporting the candidacy of said nominee for President of the United States equal to at least 3 percent of the total votes cast in the last General Election for President shall be filed with the Sec-retary of the State Election Board. Notice of intention to cir-culate petitions shall be filed with the Secretary of the State Election Board before such petitions may be circulated. The form of said petitions shall be prescribed by the Secretary. Each page of said petitions must contain the names of reg-istered voters from a single county. 2. Within 30 days after receipt of said petitions, the State Election Board shall determine the sufficiency of said peti-tions. 3. If the petitions are found to be sufficient, the nominee for President of the United States shall, no later than Sep-tember 1, certify to the Secretary of the State Election Board 409 Nomination and Election OK/OR Electors the names of the nominees for presidential elector pledged to him and the name of his vice presidential running mate. Each candidate for presidential elector so nominated shall subscribe to an oath stating that, if elected, he will cast his ballot for the candidate who nominated him and for said can-didate’s vice presidential running mate. Said oath shall be filed with the Secretary of the State Election Board no later than September 15 (26, § 10–101.2). (3) Independent candidates 

Slates of uncommitted electors and electors pledged to inde-pendent candidates can qualify for a position on the ballot by filing a petition with the Secretary of the State Election Board by July 15. These petitions must be signed by a num-ber of registered voters equal to 3 percent of the vote cast in the last presidential election. If the State Election Board determines that the petitions are sufficient, the candidate must certify the names of his running mate and the electors pledged to his candidacy (26, §§ 10–101, 10–101.1). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS The names of the electors are bracketed adjacent to the names of the candidates for President and Vice President to whom they are pledged (26, § 10–105). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS Electors committed to a candidate or the candidate of a party must take an oath to cast their ballots for the candidates on whose slate they run (26, § 10–102). Violation of the oath is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars (26, § 10–109). Electors are to meet at 10:00 a.m. of the day appointed by Congress in the office of the Governor to perform such duties as required by law, includ-ing filling any vacancy in the office of electors (26, §§ 10–107, 10–108). 

OREGON 

Presidential Electors: 7 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

An affiliation of electors becomes a major political party when its candidates for presidential elector polled at the last general presidential election at least 15% of the total votes cast for presidential elector, or its candidates for any state office to be voted upon in the state at large for which nomi-nations by political parties are permitted by law polled at the last general election at which such a candidate was list-ed on the ballot at least 15% of the total votes cast for that office (§ 248.006(1)). Each major political party shall select [manner not specified] a number of candidates for elector of President and Vice President equal to the total number of Senators and Representatives to which this State is entitled in Congress (§ 248.355). The party shall certify the names of the candidates for elector to the Secretary of State at least 70 days prior to the presidential election (§ 248.355). (2) Minor and new parties 410 Nomination and Election OR Electors An affiliation of electors becomes a minor political party in the state, a county or other electoral district, qualified to make nominations for public office in that electoral district and in any other electoral district wholly contained within the electoral district, when either of the following event oc-curs: (1) When the affiliation of electors has filed with the Sec-retary of State a petition with the signatures of a least a number of electors equal to one and one-half percent of the total votes cast in the electoral district for all candidates for Governor at the most recent election at which a candidate for Governor was elected to a full term. The petition also shall state the intention to form a new political party and give the designation of it. The filed petition shall contain only original signatures. The petition shall be filed not later than two years following the date the prospective petition is filed. Each signature sheet shall be verified on its face by the signed statement of the circulator that the individuals signed the sheet in the presence of the circulator and that the circulator believes each individual is an elector registered in the electoral district. The Secretary of State shall verify whether the petition contains the required number of signa-tures of electors. The petition shall not be accepted for filing if it contains less than 100 percent of the required number of signatures. The Secretary of State by rule shall designate a statistical sampling technique to verify whether a petition contains the required number of signatures of electors. A pe-tition shall not be rejected for the reason that it contains less than the required number of signatures unless two separate sampling processes both establish that the petition lacks the required number of signatures. The second sampling must contain a larger number of signatures than the first sam-pling. The Secretary of State may employ professional assist-ance to determine the sampling technique. The statistical sampling technique may be the same as that adopted under ORS 250.105. Before circulating the petition, the chief spon-sor of the petition shall file with the Secretary of State a signed copy of the prospective petition. The chief sponsor shall include with the prospective petition a statement de-claring whether one or more persons will be paid money or other valuable consideration for obtaining signatures of elec-tors on the petition. After the prospective petition is filed, the chief sponsor shall notify the filing officer not later than the 10th day after the chief sponsor first has knowledge or should have had knowledge that: (a) Any person is being paid for obtaining signatures, when the statement included with the prospective petition declared that no such person would be paid. (b) No person is being paid for obtaining signatures, when the statement included with the prospective petition declared that one or more such persons would be paid. (2) When the affiliation of electors has polled for any one of its candidates for any public office in the electoral district at least one percent of the total vote cast in the electoral dis-trict for candidates for: 411 Nomination and Election OR Electors (A) Presidential elector at the last general election at which candidates for President and Vice President of the United States were listed on the ballot; or (B) Any single state office to be voted upon in the state at large for which nominations by political parties are per-mitted by law at the most recent election at which a can-didate for the office was elected to a full term (§ 248.008). Such parties may nominate candidates for presidential elec-tors by filing a certificate of nomination with the Secretary of State signed by the presiding officer and secretary of a nominating convention of the party containing the names, addresses, and offices for which nominated, the name of the party, and in the case of presidential electors the names of the candidates they represent may be added (§ 249.720). Cer-tificates should be filed no later than 70 days prior to the election (§ 249.722). (3) Independent candidates 

Independent candidates may be nominated by an assembly of electors or by petition. An assembly of electors is an orga-nized body of not less than 1,000 electors of the State for a statewide nomination (§ 249.735(1)). Notice must be given at least 10 days prior to the assembly in three newspapers of general circulation and must include the names of at least 25 electors. Signatures must be certified by the appropriate county clerks (§ 249.735(2)–(6)). A certificate of nomination must be filed with the Secretary of State no later than the 70th day prior to the general election (§ 249.722). A copy of the minutes, certified by the secretary of the assembly, and the certificate of the county clerk shall be filed with the fil-ing officer with the certificate of nomination (§ 249.735(6)). A certificate of nomination by petition must be in essentially the same form and accompanied by a petition signed by a number of electors in the electoral district equal to not less than 1% of the total votes cast in the electoral district for which the nomination is intended to be made, for all can-didates for presidential electors at the last general election (§ 249.740). Certificates of nomination by assembly or peti-tion must be filed not later than the 70th day prior to the election (§ 249.722). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS The names of candidates for President and Vice President of the United States are printed in groups together, under their political party designations. Each vote for candidates for President and Vice President shall be counted as one vote for the group of presidential electors supporting the candidates for President and Vice President designated by the voter as his choice (§ 254.135). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS Each elector shall at the time of his or her selection sign a pledge that, if elected, he will vote in the Electoral College for the candidates of his or her party for President and Vice President (§ 248.355). Such pledges are to be filed with the Secretary of State at least 70 days before the presidential election ( ibid .). The duties of electors as defined by statute are: 412 Nomination and Election OR/PA Electors The electors of President and Vice President shall convene at the State capitol on the Monday after the second Wednesday in December following their election. If there is any vacancy in the office of an elector caused by death, refusal to act, ne-glect to attend or otherwise, the electors present immediately shall fill it by plurality of voice votes. When all the electors have appeared or the vacancies have been filled, the electors shall perform the duties required of them by the Constitu-tion and laws of the United States (§ 248.370). 

PENNSYLVANIA 

Presidential Electors: 23 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

The nominee of each political party for the office of President shall within 30 days after his nomination by the national convention, nominate as many persons to be the candidates of his party for the office of presidential elector as the State is entitled to. Names of such persons shall be certified imme-diately by the nominee to the Secretary of the Common-wealth. If the candidate for the office of President fails to so nominate, then the party’s nominee for Vice President shall make the nominations (Pennsylvania Statutes Annotated, title 25, § 2878). (2) Minor party or new party or independent candidate 

Any party or political body, one of whose candidates at the general election next preceding the primary polled in each of at least ten counties of the State not less than two per cen-tum of the largest entire vote cast in each of said counties for any elected candidate, and polled a total vote in the State equal to at least two per centum of the largest entire vote cast in the State for any elected candidate, is hereby de-clared to be a political party within the State, and shall nominate all its candidates as party rules provide (§ 2831). All nomination papers circulated and filed by minor political parties shall specify—(1) the name or appellation of the minor political party which the candidates nominated there-by represent and, in the case of electors for President and Vice President of the United States, the names of the can-didates for President and Vice President of such minor polit-ical party; (2) the name of each candidate nominated therein, his profession, business or occupation, if any, and his place of residence with street and number, if any; and (3) the office for which such candidate is nominated. No words shall be used in any nomination paper to designate the name or ap-pellation of the minor political party represented by the can-didate’s name in such nomination paper which are identical with or deceptively similar to the words used for a like pur-pose by any minor political party which has already filed nomination papers for the same office (§ 2872.2). Candidates of political bodies which do not qualify as polit-ical parties should file nomination papers with the Secretary of the Commonwealth (§ § 2911(a), 2913(a)). More than one candidate may be nominated by one nomination paper. Sig-natures are required of electors equal in number to 2 percent of the largest entire vote cast for any elected candidate in 413 Nomination and Election PA/RI Electors the State in the last preceding general election (§ 2911(b), 2911(c)). A filing fee of $200 shall be paid to the Secretary of the Commonwealth (§ 2873). All nomination papers shall specify—(a) The name or appel-lation of the political body which the candidates nominated thereby represent, expressed in not more than three words, and in the case of electors for President and Vice President of the United States, the names of the candidates for Presi-dent and Vice President of such political body; (b) the name of each candidate nominated therein, his profession, business or occupation, if any; and his place of residence with street and number, if any; (c) the office for which such candidate is nominated; and (d) the names and addresses of the com-mittee, not to be less than three (3) nor more than five (5) persons, authorized to fill vacancies, if any shall occur (§ 2912). All nomination papers are to be filed with the Secretary of the Commonwealth (§ 2913). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS The names of electors shall not be printed on the ballot, but in lieu thereof, the names of candidates of their respective parties for President and Vice President (§ 2963(c)). Write-ins for electors are permitted (§ 2963(a)). Votes are counted for electors either as a group or as individuals and certificates of election are issued by the Secretary of the Commonwealth (§ 3166). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The electors shall assemble at the seat of government of the Commonwealth at noon on the day which is or may be di-rected by the Congress of the United States and perform the duties enjoined upon them by the Constitution and laws of the United States (§ 3192). Vacancies are filled by voice vote of those electors present (§ 3193). 

RHODE ISLAND 

Presidential Electors: 4 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

Electors are nominated at a State convention of delegates representing a political party (General Laws of Rhode Island, § 17–12–13). There shall be held not later than October 14 of every even year a State convention for each political party. The nomi-nees of a party for Senator and for Representatives in Con-gress, for the five general offices, and for membership in the general assembly shall be delegates to the State convention of said party. In presidential election years, such conventions shall select the party nominees for presidential electors and their names shall be placed on the ballot labels for the forth-coming election. Such State convention shall also be for the purpose of adopting a platform for its party and for the transaction of such other business as may properly come be-fore said convention (§ 17–12–13). (2) Minor and new parties 414 Nomination and Election RI/SC Electors Candidates of minor parties shall be nominated by the same procedure as for independent candidates. (3) Independent candidates 

The nomination papers of an independent candidate or aminor party candidate for presidential elector shall be signed by 1,000 voters and filed with the Secretary of State by 4 p.m. on the 60th day before the primary election (§ 17–14– 11). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS The voter shall be allowed to vote for all of the presidential electors of a party; provided however, that means shall be furnished whereby the voter can cast a vote in part for the candidates for presidential electors of one party, in part for those of one or more other parties, or in part or in whole for persons not nominated by any party (§ 17–19–3(a)(3)). Absentee ballots that are required by the provisions of law to contain the names of the electors for President and Vice-President shall contain the names of all candidates for Presi-dent and Vice-President preceded by the words ‘‘Electors for’’ in lieu of names of the electors for the officers (§ 17–20–17). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The electors shall meet in the statehouse in Providence on the first Monday after the second Wednesday in December and proceed to perform the duties required of such electors by the Constitution and the laws of the United States. Va-cancies are filled by plurality vote of those present (§ 17–4– 11). 

SOUTH CAROLINA 

Presidential Electors: 8 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

Presidential electors are nominated by the respective party State committees, composed of one member from each coun-ty, elected by the party county conventions, plus the State chairman and State vice chairman who are elected by a par-ty’s State convention (Code of Laws of South Carolina, § 7– 9–90). (2) Minor or new parties 

Political parties desiring to nominate candidates for offices to be voted on in a general or special election shall, before doing so, have applied to the State Election Commission (Commission) for certification as such. Parties shall nomi-nate candidates of that party on a regular basis, as provided in this title, in order to remain certified. Any certified polit-ical party that fails to organize on the precinct level as pro-vided by § 7–9–50, hold county conventions as provided by §§ 7–9–70 and 7–9–80, and hold a State convention as pro-vided by § 7–9–100; that fails to nominate candidates for na-tional, State, multicounty district, countywide, or less than countywide office by convention or party primary as provided by §§ 7–11–20, 7–11–30, and 7–13–40; and that fails to cer-tify the candidates as provided by § 7–13–350 in at least one of two consecutive general elections held on the first Tuesday 415 Nomination and Election SC Electors following the first Monday in November of an even-num-bered year, or that fails to nominate and certify candidates in any other election which might be held within the period of time intervening between the two general elections, must be decertified by the State Election Commission. The party must be notified in writing of its decertification at the last address of record. If the notification of decertification is re-turned as undeliverable, it must be placed on file in the of-fice of the State Election Commission and with the Secretary of State. Any decertified party or any noncertified party, organization, or association may obtain certification as a political party at any time by filing with the Commission a petition for the certification signed by 10,000 or more registered electors re-siding in this State, giving the name of the party, which must be substantially different from the name of any other party previously certified (§ 7–9–10). Nomination of candidates for the offices of presidential elec-tors are to be made by the party State committees (§ 7–9– 90). (3) Independent candidates 

A candidate’s nominating petition for any office in this State shall contain the signatures of at least 5 percent of the quali-fied registered electors of the geographical area of the office for which he offers as a candidate; provided, that no petition candidate is required to furnish the signatures of more than ten thousand qualified registered electors for any office. The official number of qualified registered electors of the geo-graphical area of any office must be the number of registered electors of such area registered 120days prior to the date of the election for which the nomination petition is being sub-mitted. The petition must be certified to the State Election Commission in the case of national, State, circuit, and multi-county district offices (§ 7–11–70). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS The names of the candidates for President and Vice Presi-dent are printed on the ballot. A vote for the names of a po-litical party’s candidates for President and Vice President is a vote for the electors of that party, the names of whom are on file with the Secretary of State (§ § 7–13–320(C), 7–19– 70). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS Those persons, to the number required to be chosen, having the highest number of votes shall be declared and deemed duly appointed electors (§ 7–19–70). The presidential electors shall meet at 11 a.m. on the first Monday after the second Wednesday in December in the office of the Secretary of State, effect a permanent organization, fill any vacancies by a plurality, cast their ballots for President and Vice Presi-dent, and make distinct lists for all persons voted for as President, and of all persons voted for as Vice President, and of the number of votes received for each (§ 7–19–90). Each candidate for elector shall declare which candidate for Presi-dent and Vice President he intends to vote for if elected. Any registered elector has the right to institute an action to en-416 Nomination and Election SC/SD Electors force the requirement of the statute that the elector shall vote as declared and there are criminal sanctions. A State party executive committee may release electors pledged to support the candidate of their party when, in the judgment of the committee, it would not be in the best interest of the State for the elector to cast his ballot for such a candidate (§ 7–19–80). 

SOUTH DAKOTA 

Presidential Electors: 3 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

Presidential electors are nominated at State conventions of the respective parties (South Dakota Compiled Laws, § 12–5– 21). The time for holding such conventions shall be deter-mined by the State central committee of each party (§ 12–5– 17). Nominations shall be certified to the Secretary of State by officers of the convention, immediately at the close of the convention (§ 12–5–22). Certificates must be filed or mailed by registered mail by the second Tuesday in August at 5:00 p.m. (§ 12–8–6). (2) Minor and new parties 

A new political party may be organized and participate in the primary election by filing with the Secretary of State not later than the first Tuesday of April at 5 p.m. prior to the date of the primary election, a written declaration signed by at least 2 1 ⁄2 percent of the voters of the state as shown by the total vote cast for Governor at the last preceding guber-natorial election, which declaration shall contain: (1) The name of the proposed party; and (2) A brief statement of the principles thereof; whereupon the party shall, under the party name chosen, have all the rights of a political party whose ticket was on the ballot at the preceding general election (§ 12–5–1). All political parties organized to participate in primary elec-tions under 12–5–1 shall nominate candidates for presi-dential elector at their State convention (§ § 12–5–2; 12–5– 21). Candidates affiliated with a party that does not partici-pate in the primary may qualify for the ballot in the same manner as an independent candidate (§ 12–7–1). (3) Independent candidates 

A person may become an independent candidate by filing a certificate of nomination with the Secretary of State or coun-ty auditor signed by at least 1% of the total combined vote cast for Governor at the last gubernatorial election within the district or political subdivision. The certificate must be filed not prior to January 1 at 8 a.m. and not later than the first Tuesday after the first Monday in June at 5 p.m. prior to the election. (§ 12–7–1). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS The names of the electors are listed below the surnames of the candidates for President and Vice President for whom they are pledged. A box precedes the names of the presi-dential and vice presidential candidates (§ 12–16–6). 417 Nomination and Election SD/TN Electors C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS Electors shall meet at the seat of government on the day pre-ceding the day fixed by Congress to elect a President and Vice President, and then and there discharge the duties en-joined upon them as such by the Constitution and laws of the United States and this State (§ § 12–24–1, 12–24–3). 

TENNESSEE 

Presidential Electors: 11 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

For each congressional district there shall be elected one elector who is a resident of the district and two electors are elected at large (Tennessee Code Annotated, § 2–15–102). Electors are chosen according to the rules of the political parties. Only statewide political parties appear on the ballot in elections for an office to be voted on by voters of more than one county (§ 2–13–101). A ‘‘statewide political party’’ is defined as a party at least one of whose candidates for an of-fice to be elected by the voters of the entire State in the past 4 calendar years received a number of votes equal to 5 per-cent of the vote cast in the last gubernatorial election (§ 2– 1–104(29)(A)). New political parties formed by petition in the manner described below qualify as ‘‘statewide political par-ties’’ for 1 year (§ 2–1–104(29)(B)). (2) New parties 

New parties may qualify by filing a petition signed by reg-istered voters, acknowledging membership, in numbers equal to 2 1 ⁄2 percent of the vote cast in the last gubernatorial elec-tion. The petition is to be filed with the State coordinator of elections, and the signatures must be certified by the county election commissions (§ 2–1–104(29)(B)). The first State executive committee of a new political party shall be elected at a State convention after it becomes a ‘‘statewide political party.’’ Their names must be certified to the coordinator of elections at least 90 days prior to the Au-gust election (§ 2–13–107). (3) Independent candidates 

Independent candidates qualifying for an August primary election shall qualify by filing all nominating petitions no later than 12 p.m. on the first Thursday in the fourth cal-endar month before the August election. Independent can-didates for all other elections shall qualify by filing all nomi-nating petitions no later than 12 p.m. on the third Thursday in the third calendar month before an election. Such petition must be signed by the candidate and 25 electors qualified to vote for the office (§ 2–5–101). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS The names of presidential candidates shall be arranged ac-cording to political parties, and followed by the words, (giv-ing the name) for President and (giving the name) for Vice President. Names of electors need not appear on the ballot (§ 2–5–208(h)). 418 Nomination and Election TN/TX Electors C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The electors are to meet at the seat of government of the State at the time prescribed by the laws of the United States. If any elector fails to appear before 9 a.m. on the ap-pointed day, those electors present fill the vacancy. If the candidates of the party which nominated the electors are alive, they shall cast their ballots for them. If either the presidential candidate or both the presidential and vice pres-idential candidates are dead, they may vote as they see fit. If the presidential candidate is alive and the vice presi-dential candidate is dead, the electors shall vote for the pres-idential candidate of their party but may cast their ballot for Vice President as they see fit (§ § 2–15–101 to 2–15–105). 

TEXAS 

Presidential Electors: 32 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

To become a presidential elector candidate, a person must be nominated as a political party’s elector candidate in accord-ance with party rules or named as an elector candidate by an independent or write-in candidate for President (Vernon’s Texas Codes Annotated (Election Code) § 192.003). A political party is entitled to have the names of its nomi-nees for President and Vice President of the United States placed on the ballot in a presidential general election if: (1) the nominees possess the qualifications for those offices prescribed by Federal law; (2) before 5 p.m. of the 60th day before presidential election day, the party’s State chairman signs and delivers to the Secretary of State a written certification of: (A) the names of the party’s nominee for President and Vice President; and (B) the names and residence addresses of presidential elector candidate nominated by the party, in a number equal to the number of presidential electors that Federal law allocates to this State; and (3) the party is: (A) required or authorized by Subchapter A of Chapter 172 to make its nominations by primary election; or (B) entitled to have the names of its nominees placed on the general election ballot under Chapter 181 (parties nomi-nating by convention) (§ 192.031). (2) Independent candidates 

To be entitled to a place on the general election ballot, an independent candidate for President of the United States must make an application for a place on the ballot. An appli-cation must: (1) comply with Section 141.031, except that: (A) the applica-tion is not required to include a candidate’s occupation or length of residence; and (B) the application must contain the applicable information required by Section 141.031(4) with respect to both the presidential candidate and the running mate; 419 Nomination and Election TX/UT Electors (2) state the names and residence addresses of presidential elector candidate in a number equal to the number of presi-dential electors that Federal law allocates to the State; and (3) be accompanied by: (A) a petition that satisfies the requirements prescribed by Section 141.062; and (B) written statements signed by the vice presidential can-didate and each of the presidential elector candidates indi-cating that each of them consents to be a candidate. The ap-plication must be filed with the Secretary of State not later than the second Monday in May of the presidential election year (§ 192.032, Supp.). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS The Secretary of State shall certify in writing for placement on the general election ballot the names of the candidates for President and Vice President who are entitled to have their names placed on the ballot. Not later than the 55th day be-fore presidential election day, the Secretary of State shall de-liver the certification to the authority responsible for having the official ballot prepared in each county (§ 192.033). The names of a presidential candidate and the candidate’s running mate shall be placed on the ballot as one race. The names of presidential elector candidates may not be placed on the ballot § 192.034). A vote for a presidential candidate and the candidate’s running mate shall be counted as a vote for the corresponding presidential elector candidates (§ 192.035). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The electors shall convene at the State Capitol at 2 p.m. on the first Monday after the second Wednesday in December following their election and shall perform their duties as pre-scribed by Federal law. The Secretary of State shall arrange for the meeting place, notify the electors, and call the meet-ing to order. The Secretary shall act as temporary chairman of the meeting until the electors elect a chairman from among themselves. If an elector is absent at the time for con-vening the meeting, the electors may declare the elector posi-tion vacant by a majority vote of those present at the meet-ing (§ 192.006). 

UTAH 

Presidential Electors: 5 A. NOMINATION (1) Registered political parties 

Each registered political party shall choose persons to act as presidential electors and to fill vacancies in the office of pres-idential electors for their party’s candidates for President and Vice President according to the procedures established in their bylaws. The person designated as liaison with the lieutenant governor’s office shall transmit to the lieutenant governor the names and addresses of the persons selected by the political party as the party’s presidential electors (§ 20A– 13–301). (2) New political parties 420 Nomination and Election UT Electors Any organization of voters whose organization did not par-ticipate in the last regular general election, or whose organi-zation polled a total vote equivalent to less than 2% of the total vote cast for all representatives in Congress for any of its candidates in the last regular general election may be-come a registered political party (§ 20A–8–102). To become a registered party, the voters must circulate a petition seeking registered political party status beginning no earlier than the date of the statewide canvass held after the last regular general election and ending no later than the February 15 of the year in which the next regular general election will be held; and file the petition with the lieutenant governor that is signed by at least 2,000 registered voters on or before Feb-ruary 15 of the year in which a regular general election will be held (§ 20A–8–103). Unless an organization of registered voters is a registered political party, it may not place the names of candidates representing that organization upon the primary and regular general election ballots under the com-mon organization name. Nothing prohibits an organization of voters from qualifying candidates as independent candidates or as write-in candidates (§ 20A–8–102). If the newly reg-istered political party does not hold a national party conven-tion, the governing board of the political party may designate the names of the party’s candidates for the offices of Presi-dent and Vice President of the United States and the names of the party’s presidential electors to the lieutenant governor by August 15 (§ 20A–8–106). (3) Independent candidates 

A candidate who is not affiliated with a party may circulate a nomination petition, collect the signatures of at least 1,000 registered voters, and submit the petition for certification by the country clerk (§ 20A–9–502). The candidate must then file the petition with the Lieutenant Governor between March 7 and March 17 of the election year and pay a $500 filing fee (§ 20A–9–503). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS Candidates’ names are listed by party and in alphabetical order by surname (§ 20A–6–302). The highest number of votes cast for a political party’s president and vice president candidates elects the presidential electors selected by that political party (§ 20A–13–301). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The lieutenant governor shall transmit certificates of election to each of the electors selected by the political party whose candidates for president and vice president received the highest number of votes in Utah (§ 20A–13–302). The electors shall meet at the office of the lieutenant gov-ernor at the state capitol at noon of the first Wednesday of the January after their election, or at noon of any other day designated by the Congress of the United States of America. After convening, the electors shall perform their duties in conformity with the United States Constitution and laws. Any elector who casts an electoral ballot for a person not nominated by the party of which he is an elector, except in the cases of death or felony conviction of a candidate, is con-421 Nomination and Election UT/VT Electors sidered to have resigned from the office of elector, his vote may not be recorded, and the remaining electors shall ap-point another person to fill the vacancy (§ 20A–13–304). 

VERMONT 

Presidential Electors: 3 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

In presidential election years, presidential electors for major political parties shall be nominated at the party platform convention (Vermont Statutes Annotated, title 17, § 2721). Electors for all other presidential candidates shall be nomi-nated in the manner independent candidates are nominated (ibid. ). After adjournment of the platform convention of a major po-litical party, the chairman and secretary of the convention shall promptly execute a sworn statement certifying the names, towns of residence, and correct mailing addresses of the persons nominated by the convention to serve as electors, and shall promptly file the statement of nomination with the Secretary of State, along with the written consent of each person to be a nominee for elector (title 17, § 2722). (2) Minor parties and new parties 

Presidential electors for candidates of minor parties and new political parties shall be nominated in the manner inde-pendent candidates are nominated (title 17, § 2721). (3) Independent candidates 

Candidates for presidential electors may be nominated by fil-ing a consent form and a statement of nomination with the Secretary of State not later than 5 p.m. on the forty-seventh day before the day of the general election (title 17, §§ 2386, 2401). The statement of nomination shall contain: (1) name, (2) residence, and (3) address of each nominee for the office of elector (title 17, § 2402(a)(4)). The statement of nomination shall contain 1,000 signatures of qualified voters (title 17, § 2402(b)(1)). For presidential and vice presidential can-didates, the statement of nomination shall contain the names of more than one candidate who may be nominated by means of the same certificate of nominations (title 17, § 2403). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS The names of the candidates for President and Vice Presi-dent appear on the ballot. The names of the electors do not. A vote for the candidates for President and Vice President are votes for the electors. Should a write-in candidate for President receive the greatest number of votes, that can-didate may name the electors after being notified by the Sec-retary of State. Candidates are arranged on the ballot alpha-betically according to the surnames of the presidential can-didate (title 17, § 2473). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The electors shall meet at the state house on the first Mon-day after the second Wednesday in December next following their election, to vote for President and Vice President of the 422 Nomination and Election VT/VA Electors United States, agreeably to the laws of the United States. If there is a vacancy in the Electoral College on that day, occa-sioned by death, refusal to act, neglect to attend, failure of a person elected to qualify, or for other cause, the other elec-tors present shall at once fill such vacancy viva voce and by a plurality of votes. When all the electors appear or a va-cancy therein is filled, the electors shall perform the duties required of them by the Constitution and laws of the United States. If a vacancy occurs and is filled as aforesaid, the elec-tors shall attach to the certificate of their votes a statement showing how such a vacancy occured and their action there-on. The electors must vote for the candidates for President and Vice President who received the greatest number of votes at the general election (title 17, § 2732). 

VIRGINIA 

Presidential Electors: 13 No provisions. A. NOMINATION 1. Political parties 

In elections for President and Vice President of the United States, the appropriate chairman or secretary of each polit-ical party shall furnish to the State Board by noon of the seventy-fourth day before the presidential election (i) the names of the electors selected by the party at its convention held for that purpose, together with the names of the polit-ical party and of the candidates for President and Vice Presi-dent for whom the electors are required to vote in the Elec-toral College and (ii) a copy of a subscribed and notarized oath by each elector stating that he will, if elected, cast his ballot for the candidates for President and Vice President nominated by the party that selected the elector, or as the party may direct in the event of death, withdrawal or dis-qualification of the party nominee (Virginia Code Annotated, § 24.2–542). 2. Independent candidates 

A group of qualified voters not constituting a political party may select electors for President and Vice President by filing a petition with the State Board by noon of the seventy-fourth day before the presidential election. The petition shall be signed by at least 10,000 qualified voters and include signa-tures of at least 400 qualified voters from each congressional district. The petition shall be signed by petitioners on and after January 1 of the year of the presidential election only and contain the residence address of each petitioner. The sig-nature of each petitioner shall be witnessed by a person who is a qualified voter, or qualified to register to vote, and whose affidavit to that effect appears on each page of the pe-tition. The petition shall state the names of the electors se-lected by the petitioners, the party name under which they desire the named electors to be listed on the ballot, and the names of the candidates for President and Vice President for whom the electors are required to vote in the Electoral Col-lege. The persons filing the petition shall file with it a copy of a subscribed and notarized oath by each elector stating that he will, if elected, cast his ballot for the candidates for 423 Nomination and Election VA/WA Electors President and Vice President named in the petition, or as the party may direct in the event of death, withdrawal or disqualification of the party nominee. In order to utilize a se-lected party name on the ballot, the petitioners shall have had a state central committee composed of registered voters from each congressional district of the Commonwealth, aparty plan and bylaws, and a duly designated chairman and secretary in existence and holding office for at least six months prior to filing the petition. The State Board may re-quire proof that the petitioners meet these requirements be-fore permitting use of a party name on the ballot. The party name shall not be identical with or substantially similar to the name of any political party then in existence (§ 24.2– 543). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS The qualified voters of the Commonwealth shall choose the Commonwealth electors for President and Vice President at the general election in November 1996, and every fourth year thereafter. (Code of Virginia Annotated, § 24.2–202). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The electors selected by the state conventions by any polit-ical party shall be expected to vote in the Electoral College for the nominees of any national convention to which the said convention elects delegates. The electors named in any petition of qualified voters shall be expected to vote in the electoral college for President and for Vice President for such reasons as may be named in the said petition (§ 24.2–203). 

WASHINGTON 

Presidential Electors: 11 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

Such candidates are nominated at the state conventions of the respective parties. In the year in which a presidential election is held, each major political party and each minor political party or independent candidate convention held under chapter 29A.20, Revised Code of Washington, that nominates candidates for President and Vice President of the United States shall nominate presidential electors for this state. Each presidential elector shall file with the secretary of state a certificate signed by the presiding officer of the convention at which the presidential electors were chosen, listing the names and addresses of the presidential electors (29A.56.320). (2) Minor party, new party, and independent candidates 

A minor political party is defined as a political organization, not one of whose candidates for statewide office received at least 5 percent of the total vote cast in the last statewide general election in an even-numbered year (§§ 29A.04.097, 29A.04.086). Candidates of a minor party, new party or inde-pendent may secure a place on the ballot by being nominated at a convention of supporters (§ 29A.20.121). To be valid, a convention must be attended by at least 100 registered vot-424 Nomination and Election WA/WV Electors ers. And, in order to nominate candidates for the offices of President and Vice President of the United States, United States senator, or any statewide office, a nominating conven-tion shall obtain and submit to the filing officer the signa-tures of at least 100 registered voters of the State of Wash-ington. In order to nominate candidates for any other office, a nominating convention shall obtain and submit to the fil-ing officer the signatures of 25 persons who are registered to vote in the jurisdiction of the office for which the nomina-tions are made (§ 29A.20.141). A certificate of nomination must be filed with the Secretary of State not later than the last day for filing declarations of one week after the convention at which the nominations were made. The certificate must be in writing; contain the name, address, and office sought by each nominee; a sworn statement of consent to the nomination; be verified under oath by the presiding officer and secretary; be signed by a number of members of the convention at least equal to the number required to validate a convention and give their ad-dresses; contain proof of the notice of the convention call; and identify the minor political party or independent can-didate on whose behalf the convention was held (§ 29A.20.161). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS Names of the candidates for President and Vice President of the political parties and not the names of the electors are printed on the ballot. The votes cast for candidates for Presi-dent and Vice President of each political party shall be counted for the candidates for presidential electors of such political party (§ 29A.56.320). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS Electors are to meet at noon on the day fixed by Federal statute at the seat of government and fill any vacancy by plurality of voice votes and perform the duties required of them by the Constitution and laws of the United States (§ 29A.56.340). Each political party is to require a pledge from those nominated for presidential elector that they will vote for the nominees of the party. Failure to vote for the nominees of the party subjects an elector to a $1,000 fine (§§ 29A.56.320, 29A.56.340). 

WEST VIRGINIA 

Presidential Electors: 5 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

Candidates for presidential electors are nominated at State conventions of the respective political parties which are to be held during the months of June, July or August next pre-ceding the general election at which presidential electors are to be elected (West Virginia Code, § 3–5–21). Nominations so made shall be certified to the Secretary of State by the chair-man and secretary of the convention within 15 days after the close of the convention (§ 3–5–21). 425 Nomination and Election WV Electors The date and place of such conventions shall be designated by the State executive committee of the respective parties. Such committees shall also prescribe the number of dele-gates thereto, and shall apportion the delegates among the several counties of the State in proportion to the vote cast in the State for the party’s candidate for Governor at the last preceding general election at which a Governor was elected (§ 3–5–21). At least 60 days prior to the date fixed for a party’s State convention, the chairman of the party’s State executive com-mittee shall send to the party’s county executive committee in each county a copy of the resolutions fixing the time and place of holding the State convention and prescribing the number of delegates from each county to the convention (§ 3– 5–21). Within 10 days after receipt of the copy of such resolutions, the party executive committee of each county shall meet and, by resolution, shall apportion the delegates to the State con-vention among the several magisterial districts of the county, on a basis of the vote received in the county by the candidate for Governor at the last preceding general election at which a Governor was elected, but in such apportionment of county delegates, each magisterial district shall be entitled to at least one delegate to such State convention. The party’s county executive committee shall call a meeting of the mem-bers of the political party in mass convention in the several magisterial districts of the county, which district meetings shall be held at least 30 days prior to the date fixed for the State convention, and at which meeting the members of the political party in each magisterial district shall elect the number of delegates to which such district is entitled in the State convention (§ 3–5–21). The delegates chosen and cer-tified by and from the several magisterial districts in the State shall make up the State convention (§ 3–5–21). (2) Minor parties 

Any political party which polled less than ten percent of the total vote cast only for Governor at the general election im-mediately preceding may nominate candidates and select committees by party conventions, provided such nominations are made and the certificates thereof filed within the re-quired time and in the required manner or by certificate in the same manner as groups of citizens may make nomina-tions (§ 3–5–22). No delegate or person participating in the selection of delegates shall vote in any primary election held in that year. (3) Independent candidates 

Groups of citizens having no party organization may nomi-nate candidates for public office otherwise than by conven-tions or primary elections. In such case, the candidate, joint-ly or severally, shall file a declaration with the Secretary of State if the office is to be filled by the voters of more than one county, or with the clerk of the circuit court of the coun-ty if the office is to be filled by the voters of one county or political subdivision thereof; such declaration to be filed at least thirty days prior to the required time of filing the nomi-nation certificate: provided, that the deadline for filing the certificate for persons seeking ballot access as a candidate 426 Nomination and Election WV/WI Electors for the office of President or Vice President shall be filed not later than the first day of August preceding the general elec-tion. At the time of filing of such declaration each candidate shall pay the filing fee required by law, and if such declara-tion is not so filed or the filing fee so paid, the certificate shall not be received by the Secretary of State, or clerk of the circuit court, as the case may be (§ 3–5–23). A certificate of nomination, bearing signatures equal to not less than one percent of the entire vote cast at the last preceding general election in the State for the office sought, but in no event shall the number be less than 25, must be filed with the Sec-retary of State not later than one day before the primary (§ § 3–5–23, 3–5–24). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS The names of candidates for offices of presidential electors are omitted from the ballot. Names of candidates for offices of President and Vice President are printed on the ballots (§ 3–6–2, (d)(1)). A vote for any of such candidates shall be a vote for the elec-tors of the party by which such candidates were named, and whose names have been filed with the Secretary of State (§ 3–6–2). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The electors shall meet in the office of the Governor at the capitol on the day appointed by the Congress of the United States and vote for the President and Vice President in the manner prescribed by the Constitution and laws of the United States (§ 3–1–14). 

WISCONSIN 

Presidential Electors: 11 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties, minor parties 

Candidates for presidential electors are nominated at State conventions of the respective political parties held on the first Tuesday in October. One presidential elector shall be nominated by a party from each congressional district and two electors shall be nominated from the State at large. The names of the nominees shall be certified immediately by the chairman of the State committee of each party to the chair-man of the elections board (Wisconsin Statutes Annotated, § 8.18). (2) Independent and write-in candidates 

Nominations for presidential electors may be made by filing nomination papers with the election board not later than 5 p.m. on the second Tuesday in July (§ 8.20). Such papers shall list one presidential elector from each congressional district and 2 electors from the State at large, and the can-didates for President and Vice President for whom they in-tend to vote if elected. They shall contain signatures of not less than 2,000 nor more than 4,000 qualified voters, plus the party or principle the candidates represent, if any, in 5 words or less. Papers shall not be circulated earlier than Au-427 Nomination and Election WI Electors gust 1 and filed not later than 5 p.m. on the first Tuesday in September (§ 8.20(3)–(8)). Candidates for the offices of President or Vice President of the United States as write-in candidates shall file a list of presidential electors and a declaration of candidacy with the election board no later than 4:30 p.m. on the second Tuesday preceding the day of the general election to choose the Presi-dent and Vice President of the United States. The list shall contain one presidential elector from each congressional dis-trict and two electors from the State at large and the names of the candidates for President and Vice President for whom they intend to vote, if elected. Compliance with this sub-section may be waived by the election board but only if the results of the general election indicate that the write-in can-didate for the office of President is eligible to receive the electoral votes of this State except for noncompliance with this subsection. In such event, the write-in candidate and that person’s named presidential electors shall have until 4:30 p.m. on the Friday following the general election to com-ply with the filing requirements of this subsection (§ 8.185). If more than one list of presidential electors is filed with the Secretary of State by any write-in candidates for the offices of President and Vice President of the United States, the first list filed shall be considered the valid list, provided that this list meets the additional requirements of this section (§ 8.185). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS Names of the candidates for the office of President and Vice President and not the names of the electors are placed on the ballot. The vote counts as a vote for the electors (§§ 5.10, 8.25). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS The electors for President and Vice President shall meet at the state capitol following the presidential election at 12:00 noon the first Monday after the 2nd Wednesday in Decem-ber. If there is a vacancy in the office of an elector due to death, refusal to act, failure to attend or other cause, the electors present shall immediately proceed to fill by ballot, by a plurality of votes, the electoral college vacancy. When all electors are present, or the vacancies filled, they shall perform their required duties under the constitution and laws of the United States. The presidential electors, when convened, shall vote by ballot for that person for President and that person for Vice President who are, respectively, the candidates of the political party which nominated them, the candidates whose names appeared on the nomination papers, or the candidate or candidates who filed their names, except that at least one of the persons for whom the electors vote may not be an inhabitant of this State. A presidential elector is not required to vote for a candidate who is deceased at the time of the meeting (§ 7.75). 428 Nomination and Election WY Electors 

WYOMING 

Presidential Electors: 3 A. NOMINATION (1) Major parties 

Electors are nominated by the State convention of a political party nominating candidates for President and Vice Presi-dent of the United States. Certificates of nomination should be filed within 30 days after the termination of the conven-tion (Wyoming Statutes Annotated, §§ 22–19–102, 22–4–118). Party conventions are to be held on the first Saturday in May in even numbered years (§ 22–4–115). (2) Minor parties 

A ‘‘minor political party’’ is one whose candidate for specified offices received between 2% and 10% of the total votes cast for the office (§ 22–1–102(a) (xviii)). (3) Independent candidates 

Independent candidates for President shall file the can-didate’s nominees for presidential electors not less than 70 days prior to the general election. (§ 22–19–102). B. NAMES ON GENERAL ELECTION BALLOTS The number of votes received by Presidential and Vice Presi-dential candidates is the number of votes credited to their electors (§ 22–19–103). The names of candidates for Presi-dent and Vice President are paired with a single voting block for each pair (§ 22–6–120). C. STATUTORY INSTRUCTIONS Electors are to meet at 12:00 noon on the Monday following the second Wednesday in December of presidential election years, and all electors shall vote for the candidates for the office (of President and Vice President of the United States) receiving the highest number of votes in the Wyoming gen-eral election (§ § 22–19–106; 22–19–108). 429 Nomination and Election 

APPENDIX 1. Act of March 1, 1792, 1 Stat. 239 

CHAP . VIII.— An Act relative to the Election of a President and Vice President of the United States, and declaring the Officer who shall act as President in case of Vacancies in the offices both of President and Vice President. 

SECTION 1. Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Rep-resentatives of the United States of America in Congress as-sembled, That except in case of an election of a President and Vice President of the United States, prior to the ordi-nary period as herein after specified, electors shall be ap-pointed in each state for the election of a President and Vice President of the United States, within thirty-four days pre-ceding the first Wednesday in December, one thousand seven hundred and ninety-two, and within thirty-four days pre-ceding the first Wednesday in December in every fourth year succeeding the last election, which electors shall be equal to the number of Senators and Representatives, to which the several states may by law be entitled at the time, when the President and Vice President, thus to be chosen, should come into office: Provided always, That where no apportionment of Representatives shall have been made after any enumera-tion, at the time of choosing electors, then the number of electors shall be according to the existing apportionment of Senators and Representatives. SEC . 2. And be it further enacted, That the electors shall meet and give their votes on the said first Wednesday in De-cember, at such place in each state as shall be directed, by the legislature thereof; and the electors in each state shall make and sign three certificates of all the votes by them given, and shall seal up the same certifying on each that a list of the votes of such state for President and Vice Presi-dent is contained therein, and shall by writing under their hands, or under the hands of a majority of them, appoint a person to take charge of and deliver to the President of the Senate, at the seat of government, before the first Wednes-day in January then next ensuing, one of the said certifi-cates, and the said electors shall forthwith forward by the post-office to the President of the Senate, at the seat of gov-ernment, one other of the said certificates and shall forth-with cause the other of the said certificates to be delivered to the judge of that district in which the said electors shall assemble. SEC . 3. And be it further enacted, That the executive author-ity of each state shall cause three lists of the names of the electors of such state to be made and certified and to be de-livered to the electors on or before the said first Wednesday in December, and the said electors shall annex one of the said lists to each of the lists of their votes. SEC . 4. And be it further enacted, That if a list of votes, from any state, shall not have been received at the seat of govern-ment on the said first Wednesday in January, that then the Secretary of State shall send a special messenger to the dis-trict judge in whose custody such list shall have been lodged, 430 Nomination and Election who shall forthwith transmit the same to the seat of govern-ment. SEC . 5. And be it further enacted, That Congress shall be in session on the second Wednesday in February, one thousand seven hundred and ninety-three, and on the second Wednes-day in February succeeding every meeting of the electors, and the said certificates, or so many of them as shall have been received, shall then be opened, the votes counted, and the persons who shall fill the offices of President and Vice President ascertained and declared, agreeably to the con-stitution. SEC . 6. And be it further enacted, That in case there shall be no President of the Senate at the seat of government on the arrival of the persons entrusted with the lists of the votes of the electors, then such persons shall deliver the lists of votes in their custody into the office of the Secretary of State, to be safely kept and delivered over as soon as may be, to the President of the Senate. SEC . 7. And be it further enacted, That the persons appointed by the electors to deliver the lists of votes to the President of the Senate, shall be allowed on the delivery of the said lists twenty-five cents for every mile of the estimated dis-tance by the most usual road, from the place of meeting of the electors, to the seat of government of the United States. SEC . 8. And be it further enacted, That if any person ap-pointed to deliver the votes of the electors to the President of the Senate, shall after accepting of his appointment ne-glect to perform the services required of him by this act, he shall forfeit the sum of one thousand dollars. SEC . 9. And be it further enacted, That in case of removal, death, resignation or inability both of the President and Vice President of the United States, the President of the Senate pro tempore, and in case there shall be no President of the Senate, then the Speaker of the House of Representatives, for the time being shall act as President of the United States until the disability be removed or a President shall be elect-ed. SEC . 10. And be it further enacted, That whenever the offices of President and Vice President shall both become vacant, the Secretary of State shall forthwith cause a notification thereof to be made to the executive of every state, and shall also cause the same to be published in at least one of the newspapers printed in each state, specifying that electors of the President of the United States shall be appointed or cho-sen in the several states within thirty-four days preceding the first Wednesday in December then next ensuing: Pro-vided, There shall be the space of two months between the date of such notification and the said first Wednesday in De-cember, but if there shall not be the space of two months be-tween the date of such notification and the first Wednesday in December; and if the term for which the President and Vice President last in office were elected shall not expire on the third day of March next ensuing, then the Secretary of State shall specify in the notification that the electors shall be appointed or chosen within thirty-four days preceding the first Wednesday in December in the year next ensuing, with-in which time the electors shall accordingly be appointed or 431 Nomination and Election chosen, and the electors shall meet and give their votes on the said first Wednesday in December, and the proceedings and duties of the said electors and others shall be pursuant to the directions prescribed in this act. SEC . 11. And be it further enacted, That the only evidence of a refusal to accept or of a resignation of the office of Presi-dent or Vice President, shall be an instrument in writing de-claring the same, and subscribed by the person refusing to accept or resigning, as the case may be, and delivered into the office of the Secretary of State. SEC . 12. And be it further enacted, That the term of four years for which a President and Vice President shall be elected shall in all cases commence on the fourth day of March next succeeding the day on which the votes of the electors shall have been given. APPROVED , March 1, 1792. 

2. Act of Jan. 19, 1886, 24 Stat. 1 

CHAP . 4.— An act to provide for the performance of the duties of the office of President in case of the removal, death, res-ignation, or inability both of the President and Vice-Presi-dent. Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, That in case of removal, death, resignation, or inability of both the President and Vice-President of the United States, the Sec-retary of State, or if there be none, or in case of his removal, death, resignation, or inability, then the Secretary of the Treasury, or if there be none, or in case of his removal, death, resignation, or inability, then the Secretary of War, or if there be none, or in case of his removal, death, resignation, or inability, then the Attorney-General, or if there be none, or in case of his removal, death, resignation, or inability, then the Postmaster-General, or if there be none, or in case of his removal, death, resignation, or inability, then the Sec-retary of the Navy, or if there be none, or in case of his re-moval, death, resignation, or inability, then the Secretary of the Interior, shall act as President until the disability of the President or Vice-President is removed or a President shall be elected: Provided, That whenever the powers and duties of the office of President of the United States shall devolve upon any of the persons named herein, if Congress be not then in session, or if it would not meet in accordance with law within twenty days thereafter, it shall be the duty of the person upon whom said powers and duties shall devolve to issue a proclamation convening Congress in extraordinary session, giving twenty days’ notice of the time of meeting. SEC . 2. That the preceding section shall only be held to de-scribe and apply to such officers as shall have been ap-pointed by the advice and consent of the Senate to the offices therein named, and such as are eligible to the office of Presi-dent under the Constitution, and not under impeachment by the House of Representatives of the United States at the time the powers and duties of the office shall devolve upon them respectively. 432 Nomination and Election SEC . 3. That sections one hundred and forty-six, one hundred and forty-seven, one hundred and forty-eight, one hundred and forty-nine, and one hundred and fifty of the Revised Statutes are hereby repealed. APPROVED , January 19, 1886. 

3. Presidential Succession Act—Act of July 18, 1947, as Amended (3 U.S.C. § 19) 3 U.S.C. § 19. Vacancy in Offices of Both President and Vice President; Officers Eligible To Act. 

(a)(1) If, by reason of death, resignation, removal from office, inability, or failure to qualify, there is neither a President nor Vice President to discharge the powers and duties of the office of President, then the Speaker of the House of Rep-resentatives shall, upon his resignation as Speaker and as Representative in Congress, act as President. (2) The same rule shall apply in the case of the death, res-ignation, removal from office, or inability of an individual acting as President under this subsection. (b) If, at the time when under subsection (a) of this section a Speaker is to begin the discharge of the powers and duties of the office of President, there is no Speaker, or the Speaker fails to qualify as Acting President, then the President pro tempore of the Senate shall, upon his resignation as Presi-dent pro tempore and as Senator, act as President. (c) An individual acting as President under subsection (a) or subsection (b) of this section shall continue to act until the expiration of the then current Presidential term, except that— (1) if his discharge of the powers and duties of the office is founded in whole or in part on the failure of both the Presi-dent-elect and the Vice-President-elect to qualify, then he shall act only until a President or Vice President qualifies; and (2) if his discharge of the powers and duties of the office is founded in whole or in part on the inability of the President or Vice President, then he shall act only until the removal of the disability of one of such individuals. (d)(1) If, by reason of death, resignation, removal from office, inability, or failure to qualify, there is no President pro tem-pore to act as President under subsection (b) of this section, then the officer of the United States who is highest on the following list, and who is not under disability to discharge the powers and duties of the office of President shall act as President: Secretary of State, Secretary of the Treasury, Sec-retary of Defense, Attorney General, Secretary of the Inte-rior, Secretary of Agriculture, Secretary of Commerce, Sec-retary of Labor, Secretary of Health and Human Services, Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, Secretary of Transportation, Secretary of Energy, Secretary of Education, Secretary of Veterans Affairs. (2) An individual acting as President under this subsection shall continue so to do until the expiration of the then cur-rent Presidential term, but not after a qualified and prior-en-titled individual is able to act, except that the removal of the disability of an individual higher on the list contained in 433 Nomination and Election paragraph (1) of this subsection or the ability to qualify on the part of an individual higher on such list shall not termi-nate his service. (3) The taking of the oath of office by an individual specified in the list in paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be held to constitute his resignation from the office by virtue of the holding of which he qualifies to act as President. (e) Subsections (a), (b), and (d) of this section shall apply only to such officers as are eligible to the office of President under the Constitution. Subsection (d) of this section shall apply only to officers appointed, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, prior to the time of the death, resigna-tion, removal from office, inability, or failure to qualify, of the President pro tempore, and only to officers not under im-peachment by the House of Representatives at the time the powers and duties of the office of President devolve upon them. (f) During the period that any individual acts as President under this section, his compensation shall be at the rate then provided by law in the case of the President. (June 25, 1948, ch. 644, § 1, 62 Stat. 677; Sept. 9, 1965, Pub. L. 89–174, § 6(a), 79 Stat. 669; Oct. 15, 1966, Pub. L. 89–670, § 10(a), 80 Stat. 948; Aug. 12, 1970, Pub. L. 91–375, § 6(b), 84 Stat. 775; Aug. 4, 1977, Pub. L. 95–91, Title VII, § 709(g), 91 Stat. 609 and as amended Oct. 17, 1979, Pub. L. 96–88, Title V, § 508(a), 93 Stat. 692; Oct. 25, 1988, Pub. L. 100– 527, § 13(a), 102 Stat. 2643.) 

4. Twentieth Amendment: Commencement of the Terms of the President and Vice President 

SECTION 1. The terms of the President and Vice President shall end at noon on the 20th day of January, and the terms of Senators and Representatives at noon on the 3d day of January, of the years in which such terms would have ended if this article had not been ratified; and the terms of their successors shall then begin. SECTION 2. The Congress shall assemble at least once in every year, and such meeting shall begin at noon on the 3d day of January, unless they shall by law appoint a different day. SECTION 3. If, at the time fixed for the beginning of the term of the President, the President elect shall have died, the Vice President elect shall become President. If a President shall not have been chosen before the time fixed for the beginning of his term, or if the President elect shall have failed to qual-ify, then the Vice President elect shall act as President until a President shall have qualified; and the Congress may by law provide for the case wherein neither a President elect nor a Vice President elect shall have qualified, declaring who shall then act as President, or the manner in which one who is to act shall be selected, and such person shall act accord-ingly until a President or Vice President shall have qualified. SECTION 4. The Congress may by law provide for the case of the death of any of the persons from whom the House of Representatives may choose a President whenever the right of choice shall have devolved upon them, and for the case of the death of any of the persons from whom the Senate may 434 Nomination and Election choose a Vice President whenever the right of choice shall have devolved upon them. SECTION 5. Sections 1 and 2 shall take effect on the 15th day of October following the ratification of this article. SECTION 6. This article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an amendment to the Constitution by the legislatures of three-fourths of the several States within seven years from the date of its submission. 

5. Twenty-Fifth Amendment: Presidential Vacancy and Disability 

SECTION 1. In case of the removal of the President from of-fice or of his death or resignation, the Vice President shall become President. SECTION 2. Whenever there is a vacancy in the office of the Vice President, the President shall nominate a Vice Presi-dent who shall take office upon confirmation by a majority vote of both Houses of Congress. SECTION 3. Whenever the President transmits to the Presi-dent pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives his written declaration that he is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, and until he transmits to them a written declaration to the con-trary, such powers and duties shall be discharged by the Vice President as Acting President. SECTION 4. Whenever the Vice President and a majority of either the principal officers of the executive departments or of such other body as Congress may by law provide, transmit to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives their written declaration that the President is unable to discharge the powers and du-ties of his office, the Vice President shall immediately as-sume the powers and duties of the office as Acting President. Thereafter, when the President transmits to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives his written declaration that no inability ex-ists, he shall resume the powers and duties of his office un-less the Vice President and a majority of either the principal officers of the executive department or of such other body as Congress may by law provide, transmit within four days to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives their written declaration that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office. Thereupon Congress shall decide the issue, as-sembling within forty-eight hours for that purpose if not in session. If the Congress, within twenty-one days after receipt of the latter written declaration, or, if Congress is not in ses-sion, within twenty-one days after Congress is required to assemble, determines by two-thirds vote of both Houses that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, the Vice President shall continue to discharge the same as Acting President; otherwise, the President shall resume the powers and duties of his office. 435 Nomination and Election Presidential Succession 

PART V. TABLES RELATING TO VARIOUS ASPECTS OF THE NOMINATION AND ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT AND VICE PRESIDENT TABLE 1.—Presidents and Vice Presidents of the United States and the Congresses Coincident With Their Terms             

> President and political party Born Died Age at inau-gura-tion Native of— Elected from— Religion Major opponent Electoral vote 1Popular vote Service Vice President Congress Winner Loser Winner Loser

George Washington (F) 1732 1799 57 Va. Va. Episcopalian John Adams 69 34 Apr. 30, 1789–Mar. 3, 1793 John Adams 1, 2 Do 61 John Adams (F) 132 77 Mar. 4, 1793–Mar. 3, 1797 do 3, 4 John Adams (F) 1735 1826 61 Mass. Mass. Unitarian Jefferson (D–R) 71 68 Mar. 4, 1797–Mar. 3, 1801 Thomas Jefferson 5, 6 Thomas Jefferson (D–R) 1743 1826 57 Va. Va. Liberal Burr (D–R) 73 2 73 Mar. 4, 1801–Mar. 3, 1805 Aaron Burr 7, 8 Do 61 Pinckney (F) 162 14 Mar. 4, 1805–Mar. 3, 1809 George Clinton 9. 10 James Madison (D–R) 1751 1836 57 Va. Va. Episcopalian Pinckney (F) 122 47 Mar. 4, 1809–Mar. 3, 1813 do 11, 12 Do 61 Clinton (F) 128 89 Mar. 4, 1813–Mar. 3, 1817 Elbridge Gerry 13, 14 James Monroe (D–R) 1758 1831 58 Va. Va. Episcopalian King (F) 183 34 Mar. 4, 1817–Mar. 3, 1821 Daniel D. Tompkins 15, 16 Do 62 John Q. Adams (N–R) 231 1 Mar. 4, 1821–Mar. 3, 1825 do 17, 18 John Q. Adams (C) 1767 1848 57 Mass. Mass. Unitarian Jackson (D–R) 84 3 99 108,740 153,544 Mar. 4, 1825–Mar. 3, 1829 John C. Calhoun 19, 20 Andrew Jackson (D) 1767 1845 61 N.C. Tenn. Presbyterian John Q. Adams (N–R) 178 83 647,286 508,064 Mar. 4, 1829–Mar. 3, 1833 do 21, 22 Do 65 Clay (N–R) 219 49 687,502 530,189 Mar. 4, 1833–Mar. 3, 1837 Martin Van Buren 23, 24 Martin Van Buren (D) 1782 1862 54 N.Y. N.Y. Ref. Dutch W. H. Harrison (W) 170 73 762,678 735,651 Mar. 4, 1837–Mar. 3, 1841 Richard M. Johnson 25, 26 W. H. Harrison (W) 1773 1841 68 Va. Ohio Episcopalian Van Buren (D) 234 60 1,275,016 1,129,102 Mar. 4, 1841–Apr. 4, 1841 John Tyler 27 John Tyler (W) 1790 1862 51 do Va. do ( 4) Apr. 6, 1841–Mar. 3, 1845 27, 28 James K. Polk (D) 1795 1849 49 Tenn. Tenn. Presbyterian Clay (W) 170 105 1,337,243 1,299,062 Mar. 4, 1845–Mar. 3, 1849 George M. Dallas 29, 30 Zachary Taylor (W) 1784 1850 64 Va. La. Episcopalian Cass (D) 163 127 1,360,099 1,220,544 Mar. 5, 1849–July 9, 1850 Millard Filmore 31 Millard Filmore (W) 1800 1874 50 N.Y. N.Y. do ( 5) July 10, 1850–Mar. 3, 1853 31, 32 Franklin Pierce (D) 1804 1869 48 N.H. N.H. do Scott (W) 254 42 1,601,274 1,386,580 Mar. 4, 1853–Mar. 3, 1857 William R. King 33, 34 James Buchanan (D) 1791 1868 65 Pa. Pa. Presbyterian Fremont (R) 174 114 1,838,169 1,341,264 Mar. 4, 1857–Mar. 3, 1861 John C. Breckenridge 35, 36 Abraham Lincoln (R) 1809 1865 52 Ky. Ill. Liberal Breckenridge (D) 180 72 1,866,452 847,953 Mar. 4, 1861–Mar. 3, 1865 Hannibal Hamlin 37, 38 Do 56 McClellan (D) 212 21 2,213,665 1,805,237 Mar. 4, 1865–Apr. 15, 1865 Andrew Johnson 39 Andrew Johnson (R) 1808 1875 56 N.C. Tenn. Liberal ( 6) Apr. 15, 1865–Mar. 3, 1869 39, 40 Ulysses S. Grant (R) 1822 1885 46 Ohio Ill. Methodist Seymour (D) 214 80 3,012,833 2,703,249 Mar. 4, 1869–Mar. 3, 1873 Schuyler Colfax 41, 42 Do 50 Greeley (D–LR) 286 ( 7) 3,597,132 2,834,125 Mar. 4, 1873–Mar. 3, 1877 Henry Wilson 43, 44 Rutherford B. Hayes (R) 1822 1893 54 Ohio Ohio Methodist Tilden (D) 185 8 184 4,036,298 4,300,590 Mar. 4, 1877–Mar. 3, 1881 William A. Wheeler 45, 46 James A. Garfield (R) 1831 1881 49 do do Disc. of Christ Hancock (D) 214 155 4,454,416 4,444,952 Mar. 4, 1881–Sept. 19, 1881 Chester A. Arthur 47 Chester A. Arthur (R) 1830 1886 50 Vt. N.Y. Episcopalian ( 9) Sept. 20, 1881–Mar. 3, 1885 47, 48 Grover Cleveland (D) 1837 1908 47 N.J. N.Y. Presbyterian Blaine (R) 219 182 4,874,986 4,851,981 Mar. 4, 1885–Mar. 3, 1889 Thomas A. Hendricks 49, 50 Benjamin Harrison (R) 1833 1901 55 Ohio Ind. do Cleveland (D) 233 168 5,439,853 5,540,309 Mar. 4, 1889–Mar. 3, 1893 Levi P. Morton 51, 52 Grover Cleveland (D) 1837 1908 55 N.J. N.Y. do Benjamin Harrison (R) 277 145 5,556,918 5,176,108 Mar. 4, 1893–Mar. 3, 1897 Adlai E. Stevenson 53, 54 William McKinley (R) 1843 1901 54 Ohio Ohio Methodist Bryan (D–P) 271 176 7,104,779 6,502,925 Mar. 4, 1897–Mar. 3, 1901 Garret A. Hobart 55, 56 Do 58 do 292 155 7,207,923 6,358,133 Mar. 4, 1901–Sept. 14, 1901 Theodore Roosevelt 57 Theodore Roosevelt (R) 1858 1919 42 N.Y. N.Y. Ref. Dutch ( 10 ) Sept. 14, 1901–Mar. 3, 1905 57, 58 Do 46 Parker (D) 336 140 7,623,486 5,077,911 Mar. 4, 1905–Mar. 3, 1909 Charles W. Fairbanks 59, 60 William H. Taft (R) 1857 1930 51 Ohio Ohio Unitarian Bryan (D) 321 162 7,678,908 6,409,104 Mar. 4, 1909–Mar. 3, 1913 James S. Sherman 61, 62 Woodrow Wilson (D) 1856 1924 56 Va. N.J. Presbyterian T. Roosevelt (R) 435 88 6,293,454 3,484,980 Mar. 4, 1913–Mar. 3, 1917 Thomas R. Marshall 63, 64 Do 60 Hughes (R) 277 254 9,129,606 8,538,221 Mar. 4, 1917–Mar. 3, 1921 do 65, 66 Warren G. Harding (R) 1865 1923 55 Ohio Ohio Presbyterian Cox (D) 404 127 16,152,200 9,147,353 Mar. 4, 1921–Aug. 2, 1923 Calvin Coolidge 67 Calvin Coolidge (R) 1872 1933 51 Vt. Mass. Congregational ( 11 ) Aug. 3, 1923–Mar. 3, 1925 68 Do 52 Davis (D) 382 136 15,725,016 8,386,503 Mar. 4, 1925–Mar. 3, 1929 Charles G. Dawes 69, 70 Herbert Hoover (R) 1874 1964 54 Iowa Calif. Quaker Smith (D) 444 87 21,391,381 15,016,443 Mar. 4, 1929–Mar. 3, 1933 Charles Curtis 71, 72 Franklin D. Roosevelt (D) 1882 1945 51 N.Y. N.Y. Episcopalian Hoover (R) 472 59 22,821,857 15,761,841 Mar. 4, 1933–Jan. 20, 1937 John N. Garner 73, 74 Do 55 Landon (R) 523 8 27,751,597 16,679,583 Jan. 20, 1937–Jan. 20, 1941 do 75, 76 Do 59 Wilkie (R) 449 82 27,244,160 22,305,198 Jan. 20, 1941–Jan. 20, 1945 Henry A. Wallace 77, 78 Do 63 Dewey (R) 432 99 25,602,504 22,006,285 Jan. 20, 1945–Apr. 12, 1945 Harry S. Truman 79 Harry S. Truman (D) 1884 1972 60 Mo. Mo. Baptist ( 12 ) Apr. 12, 1945–Jan. 20, 1949 79, 80 Do 64 Dewey (R) 303 189 24,105,695 21,969,170 Jan. 20, 1949–Jan. 20, 1953 Alben W. Barkley 81, 82 Dwight D. Eisenhower (R) 1890 1969 62 Texas N.Y. Presbyterian Stevenson (D) 442 89 33,778,963 27,314,992 Jan. 20, 1953–Jan. 20, 1957 Richard M. Nixon 83, 84 Do 66 Pa. do 457 73 35,581,003 25,738,765 Jan. 20, 1957–Jan. 20, 1961 do 85, 86 John F. Kennedy (D) 1917 1963 43 Mass. Mass. Roman Catholic Nixon (R) 303 219 34,227,096 34,107,646 Jan. 20, 1961–Nov. 22, 1963 Lyndon B. Johnson 87, 88 Lyndon B. Johnson (D) 1908 1973 55 Texas Texas Christian ( 13 ) Nov. 22, 1963–Jan. 20, 1965 88 Do 56 Goldwater (R) 486 52 42,825,463 27,146,969 Jan. 20, 1965–Jan. 20, 1969 Hubert H. Humphrey 89, 90 Richard M. Nixon (R) 1913 1994 56 Calif. N.Y. Quaker Humphrey (D) 301 191 31,710,470 30,898,055 Jan. 20, 1969–Jan. 20, 1973 Spiro T. Agnew 91, 92 Do 60 McGovern (D) 520 17 46,740,323 28,901,598 Jan. 20, 1973–Aug. 9, 1974 do 14 93 Do Gerald Ford 15 93 Gerald R. Ford (R) 1913 61 Nebr. Mich. Episcopalian ( 16 ) Aug. 9, 1974–Jan. 20, 1977 Nelson A. Rockefeller 17 96 Jimmy Carter (D) 1924 52 Ga. Ga. Baptist Ford (R) 297 240 40,825,839 39,147,770 Jan. 20, 1977–Jan. 20, 1981 Walter F. Mondale 95, 96 Ronald Reagan (R) 1911 69 Calif. Calif. Christian Jimmy Carter 489 49 43,901,812 35,483,820 Jan. 20, 1981–Jan. 20, 1985 George Bush 97, 98 Do 73 Walter F. Mondale 525 13 54,455,000 37,577,000 Jan. 20, 1985–Jan. 20, 1989 do 99, 100 George Bush (R) 1924 64 Texas Texas Episcopalian Michael Dukakis (D) 426 111 47,946,000 41,016,000 Jan. 20, 1989–Jan. 20, 1993 James Danforth Quayle 101, 102 William J. Clinton (D) 1946 47 Ark. Ark. Baptist George Bush (R) 370 168 44,909,326 39,104,882 Jan. 20, 1993–Jan. 20, 1997 Albert Gore 103, 104 Do 51 Robert Dole (R) 379 159 47,402,357 39,198,755 Jan. 20, 1997 do 105, 106 George W. Bush (R) 1946 54 Conn. Texas Methodist Albert Gore, Jr. (D) 271 266 50,456,002 50,999,897 Jan. 20, 2001–Jan. 20, 2005 Richard B. Cheney 107, 108 Do John Kerry 286 251 62,040,003 59,027,335 Jan. 20, 2005–Jan. 20, 2009 do 109, 110 1 Electoral votes for other candidates disregarded. 2 There being no choice for President by the people, the election devolved upon the House of Representatives, and Feb. 17, 1801. Thomas Jefferson was chosen by the votes of 10 States, to 4 for Aaron Burr, and 2 blank. 3 No choice for President having been made by the people, the election devolved upon the House of Representatives and John Quincy Adams was elected, receiving the votes of 13 States to 7 for Andrew Jackson and 3 for William H. Crawford. 4 Harrison died in 1841; succeeded by Tyler. 5 Taylor died in 1850; succeeded by Filmore. 6 Lincoln was assassinated in 1865; succeeded by Johnson. 7 By resolution of the House, 3 votes cast for Horace Greeley were not counted. 8 The electoral votes of 4 States were disputed. Congress referred the matter to the Electoral Commission which gave the decision to Hayes. 9 Garfield was assassinated in 1881; succeeded by Arthur. 10 McKinley was assassinated in 1901; succeeded by Theodore Roosevelt. 11 Harding died in 1923; succeeded by Coolidge. 12 F.D. Roosevelt died in 1945; succeeded by Truman. 13 Kennedy was assassinated Nov. 22, 1963; succeeded by Lyndon B. Johnson. 14 Resigned, Oct. 10, 1973. 15 Replaced Agnew, Dec. 6, 1973. 16 Replaced Nixon who resigned on Aug. 9, 1974. 17 Rockefeller was sworn in as Vice President in Dec. 1974. Key to abbreviations: (D) Democrat; (D–P) Democrat-Populist; (D–R) Democrat-Republican; (D–LR) Democrat-Liberal Republican; (F) Federalist; (N–R) National-Republican; (R) Republican; (W) Whig; (C) Coalition. 

> r 15 2010  16:58 Sep 01, 2010  Jkt 048500  PO 00000  Frm 00001  Fmt 8844  Sfmt 8844  E:\HR\OC\S500T.XXX  S500T

TABLE 2.—Electoral Vote Cast for President, by Major Political Parties—States: 1956 to 2004 

[D=Democratic, R=Republican] REGION, DIVISION, AND STATE 1956 1 1960 2 1964 1968 3 1972 4 1976 5 1980 1984 1988 6 1992 1996 2000 2004 Democratic ........................................................................................... 73 303 486 191 17 297 49 13 111 370 379 266 251 

Republican ........................................................................................... 457 219 52 301 520 240 489 525 426 168 159 271 286 

Northeast: 

Democratic .............................................................................................. — 121 126 102 14 86 4 — 53 106 106 102 101 Republican .............................................................................................. 133 12 — 24 108 36 118 113 60 — — 4 —

Midwest: 

Democratic .............................................................................................. 13 71 149 31 — 58 10 10 29 100 100 68 57 Republican .............................................................................................. 140 82 — 118 145 87 135 127 108 29 29 61 66 

South: 

Democratic .............................................................................................. 60 101 121 45 3 149 31 3 8 68 80 15 16 Republican .............................................................................................. 105 50 47 77 165 20 138 174 168 116 104 168 173 

West: 

Democratic .............................................................................................. — 10 90 13 — 4 4 — 21 96 93 81 77 Republican .............................................................................................. 79 75 5 82 102 97 98 111 90 23 26 38 47 

New England: 

ME ........................................................................................................... R–5 R–5 D–4 D–4 R–4 R–4 R–4 R–4 R–4 D–4 D–4 D–4 D–4 NH ........................................................................................................... R–4 R–4 D–4 R–4 R–4 R–4 R–4 R–4 R–4 D–4 D–4 R–4 D–4 VT ............................................................................................................ R–3 R–3 D–3 R–3 R–3 R–3 R–3 R–3 R–3 D–3 D–3 D–3 D–3 MA ........................................................................................................... R–16 D–16 D–14 D–14 D–14 D–14 R–14 R–13 D–13 D–12 D–12 D–12 D–12 RI ............................................................................................................ R–4 D–4 D–4 D–4 R–4 D–4 D–4 R–4 D–4 D–4 D–4 D–4 D–4 CT ............................................................................................................ R–8 D–8 D–8 D–8 R–8 R–8 R–8 R–8 R–8 D–8 D–8 D–8 D–7 

Middle Atlantic: 

NY ........................................................................................................... R–45 D–45 D–43 D–43 R–41 D–41 R–41 R–36 D–36 D–33 D–33 D–33 D–31 NJ ............................................................................................................ R–16 D–16 D–17 R–17 R–17 R–17 R–17 R–16 R–16 D–15 D–15 D–15 D–15 PA ............................................................................................................ R–32 R–32 R–29 D–29 R–27 D–27 R–27 R–25 R–25 D–23 D–23 D–23 D–21 

East North Central: 

OH ........................................................................................................... R–25 R–25 D–26 R–26 R–25 D–25 R–25 R–23 R–23 D–21 D–21 R–21 R–20 IN ............................................................................................................ R–13 R–13 D–13 R–13 R–13 R–13 R–13 R–12 R–12 R–12 R–12 R–12 R–11 IL ............................................................................................................. R–27 D–27 D–26 R–26 R–26 R–26 R–26 R–24 R–24 D–22 D–22 D–22 D–21 MI ............................................................................................................ R–20 D–20 D–21 D–21 R–21 R–21 R–21 R–20 R–20 D–18 D–18 D–18 D–17 WI ............................................................................................................ R–12 R–12 D–12 R–12 R–11 D–11 R–11 R–11 D–11 D–11 D–11 D–11 D–10 

West North Central: 

MN .......................................................................................................... R–11 D–11 D–10 D–10 R–10 D–10 D–10 D–10 D–10 D–10 D–10 D–10 D–9 IA ............................................................................................................ R–10 R–10 D–9 R–9 R–8 R–8 R–8 R–8 D–8 D–7 D–7 D–7 R–7 MO .......................................................................................................... D–13 D–13 D–12 R–12 R–12 D–12 R–12 R–11 R–11 D–11 D–11 R–11 R–11 ND ........................................................................................................... R–4 R–4 D–4 R–4 R–3 R–3 R–3 R–3 R–3 R–3 R–3 R–3 R–3 SD ........................................................................................................... R–4 R–4 D–4 R–4 R–4 R–4 R–4 R–3 R–3 R–3 R–3 R–3 R–3 NE ........................................................................................................... R–6 R–6 D–5 R–5 R–5 R–5 R–5 R–5 R–5 R–5 R–5 R–5 R–5 KS ........................................................................................................... R–8 R–8 D–7 R–7 R–7 R–7 R–7 R–7 R–7 R–6 R–6 R–6 R–6 

South Atlantic: 

DE ........................................................................................................... R–3 D–3 D–3 R–3 R–3 D–3 R–3 R–3 R–3 D–3 D–3 D–3 D–3 MD .......................................................................................................... R–9 D–9 D–10 D–10 R–10 D–10 D–10 R–10 R–10 D–10 D–10 D–10 D–10 DC ........................................................................................................... (X) (X) D–3 D–3 D–3 D–3 D–3 D–3 D–3 D–3 D–3 D–2 D–3 VA ........................................................................................................... R–12 R–12 D–12 R–12 4 R–11 R–12 R–12 R–12 R–12 R–13 R–13 R–13 R–13 WV .......................................................................................................... R–8 D–8 D–7 D–7 R–6 D–6 D–6 R–6 6 D–5 D–5 D–5 R–5 R–5 NC ........................................................................................................... D–14 D–14 D–13 3 R–12 R–13 D–13 R–13 R–13 R–13 R–14 R–14 R–14 R–15 SC ............................................................................................................ D–8 D–8 R–8 R–8 R–8 D–8 R–8 R–8 R–8 R–8 R–8 R–8 R–8 GA ........................................................................................................... D–12 D–12 R–12 ( 3) R–12 D–12 D–12 R–12 R–12 D–13 R–13 R–13 R–15 FL ............................................................................................................ R–10 R–10 D–14 R–14 R–17 D–17 R–17 R–21 R–21 R–25 D–25 R–25 R–27 

East South Central: 

KY ........................................................................................................... R–10 R–10 D–9 R–9 R–9 D–9 R–9 R–9 R–9 D–8 D–8 R–8 R–8 TN ........................................................................................................... R–11 R–11 D–11 R–11 R–10 D–10 R–10 R–11 R–11 D–11 D–11 R–11 R–11 AL ............................................................................................................ 1 D–10 2 D–5 R–10 ( 3) R–9 D–9 R–9 R–9 R–9 R–9 R–9 R–9 R–9 MS ........................................................................................................... D–8 ( 2) R–7 ( 3) R–7 D–7 R–7 R–7 R–7 R–7 R–7 R–7 R–6 

West South Central: 

AR ........................................................................................................... D–8 D–8 D–6 ( 3) R–6 D–6 R–6 R–6 R–6 D–6 D–6 R–6 R–6 LA ............................................................................................................ R–10 D–10 R–10 ( 3) R–10 D–10 R–10 R–10 R–10 D–9 D–9 R–9 R–9 OK ........................................................................................................... R–8 2 R–7 D–8 R–8 R–8 R–8 R–8 R–8 R–8 R–8 R–8 R–8 R–7 TX ............................................................................................................ R–24 D–24 D–25 D–25 R–26 D–26 R–26 R–29 R–29 R–32 R–32 R–32 R–34 

Mountain: 

MT ........................................................................................................... R–4 R–4 D–4 R–4 R–4 R–4 R–4 R–4 R–4 D–3 D–3 R–3 R–3 ID ............................................................................................................ R–4 R–4 D–4 R–4 R–4 R–4 R–4 R–4 R–4 R–4 R–4 R–4 R–4 WY .......................................................................................................... R–3 R–3 D–3 R–3 R–3 R–3 R–3 R–3 R–3 R–3 R–3 R–3 R–3 CO ........................................................................................................... R–6 R–6 D–6 R–6 R–7 R–7 R–7 R–8 R–8 D–8 R–8 R–8 R–9 NM .......................................................................................................... R–4 D–4 D–4 R–4 R–4 R–4 R–4 R–5 R–5 D–5 D–5 D–5 R–5 AZ ............................................................................................................ R–4 R–4 R–5 R–5 R–6 R–6 R–6 R–7 R–7 R–8 D–8 R–8 R–10 UT ........................................................................................................... R–4 R–4 D–4 R–4 R–4 R–4 R–4 R–5 R–5 R–5 R–5 R–5 R–5 NV ........................................................................................................... R–3 D–3 D–3 R–3 R–3 R–3 R–3 R–4 R–4 D–4 D–4 R–4 R–5 

Pacific: 

WA .......................................................................................................... R–9 R–9 D–9 D–9 R–9 5 R–8 R–9 R–10 D–10 D–11 D–11 D–11 D–11 OR ........................................................................................................... R–6 R–6 D–6 R–6 R–6 R–6 R–6 R–7 D–7 D–7 D–7 D–7 D–7 CA ........................................................................................................... R–32 R–32 D–40 R–40 R–45 R–45 R–45 R–47 R–47 D–54 D–54 D–54 D–55 AK ........................................................................................................... (X) R–3 D–3 R–3 R–3 R–3 R–3 R–3 R–3 R–3 R–3 R–3 R–3 HI ............................................................................................................ (X) D–3 D–4 D–4 R–4 D–4 D–4 R–4 D–4 D–4 D–4 D–4 D–4 —Represents zero. X=Not applicable. 1 Excludes one electoral vote cast for Walter B. Jones in Alabama. 2 Excludes 15 electoral votes cast for Harry F. Byrd as follows: AL 6, MS 8, and OK 1. 3 Excludes 46 electoral votes cast for American Independent George C. Wallace as follows: AL 10, AR 6, GA 12, LA 10, MS 7, and NC 1. 4 Excludes one electoral vote cast for Libertarian John Hospers in Virginia. 5 Excludes one electoral vote cast for Ronald Reagan in Washington. 6 Excludes one electoral vote cast for Lloyd Bentsen for President in West Virginia. S OURCE : 1952–72, 2000–04 U.S. Congress, Clerk of the House, Statistics of the Presidential and Congressional Election, quadrennial; 1976–96, Congressional Quarterly, Inc., Washington, D.C. America Votes, 

> biennial (copyright).

TABLE 3.—Popular Vote Cast for President, by Political Parties—Regions and States 1976 to 2004 

[In thousands, except percent. D=Democrat, R=Republican. Leading party vote refers to the party vote representing either a majority or a plurality for the victorious party in the area shown.] 

1976 1984 1980 1988 2 1992 1996 2000 2004 

Region Division, and State Total 1

Demo-cratic Party Repub-lican Party Per-cent for leading party Total 1

Demo-cratic Party Repub-lican Party Per-cent for leading party Total 1

Demo-cratic Party Repub-lican Party Per-cent for leading party Total 1

Demo-cratic Party Repub-lican Party Per-cent for leading party Total 1

Demo-cratic Party Repub-lican Party Per-cent for leading party Total 1

Demo-cratic Party Repub-lican Party Per-cent for leading party Total 1

Demo-cratic Party Repub-lican Party Per-cent for leading party Total 1

Demo-cratic Party Repub-lican Party Per-cent for leading party 

U.S. ................................................................ 81,556 40,831 39,148 D–50.1 86,515 35,484 43,904 R–50.7 92,653 37,577 54,455 R–58.8 88,963 41,016 47,946 R–53.9 104,425 44,909 39,104 D–43.0 96,273 47,401 39,197 D–49.2 105,594 50,996 50,465 D–48.4 122,349 58,894 61,872 R–50.6 Region: 

Northeast .......................................................... 9,520 9,929 9,272 D–50.9 19,206 8,019 9,147 R–47.6 20,483 9,046 11,336 R–55.3 19,260 9,485 9,774 R–50.7 21,581 9,940 7,507 D–46.1 19,601 10,862 6,607 D–55.4 21,175 11,660 8,215 D–55.1 23,500 12,868 I32,984 I33–54.7 Midwest ............................................................ 24,155 11,671 11,995 R–49.7 25,178 10,291 12,827 R–50.9 25,441 10,511 14,761 R–58.0 24,347 11,489 12,858 R–52.8 27,735 11,692 10,234 D–42.2 24,953 12,076 10,151 D–48.4 26,995 12,845 13,155 R–48.7 30,935 14,962 15,702 R–50.7 South ................................................................. 23,198 12,520 10,394 D–54.0 25,813 11,554 13,118 R–50.8 28,833 10,998 17,699 R–61.4 28,005 11,892 16,113 R–57.5 33,625 14,118 14,014 D–42.0 31,755 14,850 14,346 D–46.8 35,390 15,694 18,887 R–53.4 42,088 18,173 23,591 R–56.1 West .................................................................. 114,682 6,711 7,488 R–51.0 16,318 5,620 8,813 R–54.0 17,895 7,022 10,659 R–59.6 17,351 8,150 9,201 R–53.0 21,484 9,160 7,349 D–42.6 19,964 9,613 8,093 D–48.2 22,011 10,638 10,181 D–48.3 25,801 12,866 12,567 D–49.7 

N. Eng .................................................................. 5,351 2,766 2,454 D–51.7 5,467 2,206 2,446 R–44.7 5,614 2,437 3,153 R–56.2 5,606 2,798 2,808 R–50.1 6,351 2,820 2,012 D–44.4 5,703 3,237 1,769 D–56.8 6,116 3,280 2,247 D–53.6 6,672 3,839 2,715 D–57.5 

ME ..................................................................... 483 232 236 R–48.9 523 221 239 R–45.6 553 215 337 R–60.8 545 241 304 R–55.8 679 263 207 D–38.8 606 313 186 D–51.6 651 319 286 D–49.1 740 396 330 D–53.6 NH ..................................................................... 340 148 186 R–54.7 384 109 222 R–57.7 389 120 267 R–68.6 442 162 280 R–63.3 538 209 202 D–38.9 499 246 196 D–49.3 569 266 273 R–48.1 678 340 331 D–50.2 VT ...................................................................... 188 81 102 R–54.4 213 82 95 R–44.4 235 96 36 R–57.9 240 116 123 R–51.4 290 134 88 D–46.1 258 138 80 D–53.4 294 14 119 D–50.6 312 184 121 D–58.9 MA ..................................................................... 2,548 1,429 1,030 D–56.1 2,524 1,054 1,058 R–41.9 2,559 1,240 1,311 R–51.2 2,572 1,387 1,184 D–53.9 2,774 1,319 805 D–47.5 2,556 1,572 718 D–61.5 2,734 1,616 878 D–59.8 2,927 1,803 1,071 D–61.6 RI ....................................................................... 411 228 181 D–55.4 416 198 155 D–47.7 410 197 212 R–51.7 386 217 170 D–56.1 453 213 132 D–47.0 390 233 105 D–59.7 409 249 130 D–61.0 437 259 169 D–59.4 CT ...................................................................... 1,382 648 719 R–52.1 1,406 542 677 R–48.2 1,467 570 891 R–60.7 1,422 675 747 R–52.5 1,616 682 578 D–42.2 1,393 736 483 D–52.8 1,459 816 561 D–55.9 1,578 857 693 D–54.3 

Mid. Atl ............................................................... 14,169 7,164 6,817 D–50.6 13,739 5,813 6,703 R–48.8 14,870 6,609 8,183 R–55.0 13,654 6,687 6,966 R–51.0 15,230 7,120 5,495 D–46.7 13,898 7,624 4,838 D–54.9 15,059 8,380 5,968 D–55.6 16,828 9,029 7,269 D–53.6 

NY ..................................................................... 6,534 3,390 3,101 D–51.9 6,202 2,728 2,894 R–46.7 6,807 3,120 3,665 R–53.8 6,204 3,228 2,975 D–52.0 6,927 3,444 2,347 D–49.7 6,316 3,756 1,933 D–59.5 6,960 4,107 2,403 D–60.2 7,448 4,180 2,806 D–56.1 NJ ...................................................................... 3,014 1,445 1,510 R–50.1 2,976 1,147 1,547 R–52.0 3,218 1,261 1,934 R–60.1 2,975 1,275 1,700 R–57.1 3,344 1,436 1,357 D–43.0 3,076 1,652 1,103 D–53.7 3,187 1,788 1,284 D–56.1 3,611 1,911 1,670 D–52.9 PA ...................................................................... 4,621 2,329 2,206 D–50.4 4,562 1,938 2,262 R–49.6 4,845 2,228 2,584 R–53.3 4,475 2,184 2,291 R–51.2 4,960 2,239 1,792 D–45.1 4,506 2,216 1,801 D–49.2 4,912 2,485 2,281 D–50.6 5,769 2,938 2,793 D–50.9 

E. No. Cent ......................................................... 16,809 8,035 8,448 R–50.3 17,458 7,221 8,825 R–50.5 17,613 7,279 10,213 R–58.0 16,766 7,762 9,004 R–53.7 19,102 8,199 7,104 D–42.9 17,026 8,439 6,780 D–49.6 18,472 9,085 8,804 D–49.2 21,205 10,569 10,474 D–49.8 

OH ..................................................................... 4,112 2,012 2,001 D–48.9 4,284 1,752 2,207 R–51.5 4,548 1,825 2,679 R–58.9 4,347 1,935 2,412 R–55.5 4,940 1,985 1,894 D–40.2 4,534 2,148 1,860 D–47.4 4,701 2,183 2,350 R–50.0 5,627 2,741 2,859 R–50.8 IN ...................................................................... 2,220 1,015 1,184 R–53.3 2,242 844 1,256 R–56.0 2,233 841 1,377 R–61.7 2,131 851 1,280 R–60.1 2,306 848 989 R–42.9 2,135 887 1,007 R–47.1 2,199 901 1,245 R–56.6 2,468 969 1,479 R–59.9 IL ....................................................................... 4,719 2,271 2,364 R–50.1 4,750 1,981 2,358 R–49.6 4,819 2,086 2,707 R–56.2 4,479 2,181 2,299 R–51.3 5,050 2,453 1,734 D–48.6 4,311 2,342 1,587 D–54.3 4,742 2,589 2,019 D–54.6 5,274 2,891 2,345 D–54.8 MI ...................................................................... 3,654 1,697 1,894 R–51.8 3,910 1,662 1,915 R–49.0 3,802 1,530 2,252 R–59.2 3,643 1,673 1,969 R–54.1 4,275 1,871 1,555 D–43.8 3,849 1,990 1,481 D–51.7 4,232 2,170 1,953 D–51.3 4,839 2,479 2,313 D–51.2 WI ...................................................................... 2,104 1,040 1,005 D–49.4 2,273 982 1,089 R–47.9 2,212 996 1,199 R–54.2 2,166 1,122 1,044 D–51.8 2,531 1,041 931 D–41.1 2,196 1,072 845 D–48.8 2,598 1,242 1,237 D–47.8 2,997 1,489 1,478 D–49.7 

W. No. Cent ........................................................ 7,346 3,635 3,547 D–49.5 7,719 3,070 4,002 R–51.8 7,828 3,232 4,548 R–58.1 7,581 3,727 3,854 R–50.8 8,633 3,493 3,130 D–40.5 7,927 3,637 3,371 D–45.9 8,523 3,760 4,351 R–51.1 9,730 24,393 5,228 R–53.7 

MN .................................................................... 1,950 1,070 819 D–54.9 2,052 954 873 D–46.5 2,084 1,036 1,033 D–49.7 2,065 1,107 958 D–53.6 2,348 1,021 748 D–43.5 2,193 1,120 766 D–51.1 2,438 1,168 1,109 D–47.9 2,828 1,445 1,346 D–51.1 IA ....................................................................... 1,279 620 633 R–49.5 1,318 509 676 R–51.3 1,320 606 703 R–53.3 1,209 667 542 D–55.2 1,355 586 505 D–43.3 1,234 620 493 D–50.3 1,353 638 634 D–48.5 1,506 741 751 R–49.9 MO .................................................................... 1,954 998 927 D–51.1 2,100 931 1,074 R–51.2 2,123 849 1,274 R–60.0 2,085 1,004 1,081 R–51.8 2,392 1,054 811 D–44.1 2,158 1,026 890 D–47.5 2,359 1,111 1,189 R–50.4 2,731 1,259 1,455 R–53.3 ND ..................................................................... 297 136 153 R–51.6 302 79 194 R–64.2 309 104 200 R–64.8 293 127 166 R–56.6 308 99 136 R–44.2 266 107 125 R–46.9 288 95 174 R–60.7 312 111 196 R–62.9 SD ..................................................................... 301 147 152 R–50.4 328 104 198 R–60.5 318 116 200 R–63.0 311 146 166 R–53.2 336 125 137 R–40.7 324 139 151 R–46.5 316 118 190 R–60.3 388 149 232 R–59.9 NE ..................................................................... 608 234 360 R–59.2 641 167 420 R–65.5 652 188 460 R–70.6 644 254 389 R–60.5 738 217 344 R–46.6 677 237 363 R–53.7 697 231 433 R–62.2 778 254 512 R–65.9 KS ..................................................................... 958 430 503 R–52.5 980 326 567 R–57.9 1,022 333 677 R–66.3 975 422 553 R–56.7 1,157 390 450 R–38.9 1,074 388 583 R–54.3 1,072 399 622 R–58.0 1,187 434 736 R–62.0 

So. Atl .................................................................. 11,392 6,264 5,005 D–55.0 12,589 5,698 6,198 R–49.2 14,124 5,519 8,565 R–60.6 13,896 5,852 8,045 R–57.9 17,195 7,352 7,103 D–42.8 16,558 7,897 7,294 D–47.7 18,783 8,858 9,489 R–50.5 22,964 10,651 12,131 R–52.8 

DE ..................................................................... 236 123 110 D–52.0 236 106 111 R–47.2 255 102 152 R–59.8 230 99 131 R–56.8 290 126 102 D–43.5 271 140 99 D–51.8 327 180 137 D–55.0 375 200 171 D–53.3 MD .................................................................... 1,440 760 673 D–52.8 1,540 726 681 D–47.1 1,676 788 880 R–52.5 1,628 794 834 R–51.2 1,985 989 707 D–49.8 1,781 966 682 D–54.3 2,025 1,144 813 D–56.5 2,384 1,334 1,024 D–56.0 DC ..................................................................... 169 138 28 D–81.6 175 131 24 D–74.8 211 180 29 D–85.4 179 153 26 D–85.6 228 193 21 D–84.6 186 158 17 D–85.2 201 171 18 D–85.2 227 202 21 D–89.2 VA ..................................................................... 1,697 814 837 R–49.3 1,866 752 990 R–53.0 2,147 796 1,337 R–62.3 2,166 861 1,305 R–60.3 2,559 1,039 1,151 R–45.0 2,417 1,091 1,138 R–47.1 2,739 1,217 1,437 R–52.5 3,195 1,454 1,716 R–53.7 WV .................................................................... 751 436 315 D–58.0 738 367 334 D–49.8 736 328 405 R–55.1 647 339 308 D–52.4 684 331 242 D–48.4 636 328 234 D–51.5 648 295 336 R–51.9 755 326 423 R–56.1 NC ..................................................................... 1,679 927 742 D–55.2 1,856 876 915 R–49.3 2,175 824 1,346 R–61.9 2,122 890 1,232 R–58.1 2,612 1,114 1,135 R–43.4 2,516 1,108 1,226 R–48.7 2,914 1,257 1,631 R–56.0 3,501 1,525 1,961 R–56.0 SC ...................................................................... 803 451 346 D–56.2 894 430 442 R–49.4 969 344 616 R–63.6 967 368 600 R–62.0 1,203 480 578 R–48.0 1,151 506 573 R–49.8 1,383 566 786 R–56.8 1,617 661 937 R–58.0 GA ..................................................................... 1,467 979 484 D–66.7 1,597 891 654 D–55.8 1,776 707 1,069 R–60.2 1,786 716 1,070 R–59.9 2,321 1,009 995 D–43.5 2,299 1,054 1,081 R–47.0 2,583 1,116 1,419 R–54.7 3,301 1,366 1,914 R–58.0 FL ...................................................................... 3,151 1,636 1,470 D–51.9 3,687 1,419 2,047 R–55.5 4,180 1,449 2,730 R–65.3 4,171 1,632 2,539 R–60.9 5,314 2,073 2,173 R–4.09 5,301 2,546 2,243 D–48.0 5,963 2,912 2,912 R–48.8 7,609 3,583 3,964 R–52.1 

E. So. Cent .......................................................... 4,596 2,482 2,037 D–54.0 5,147 2,465 2,518 R–48.9 5,464 2,155 3,267 R–59.8 5,197 2,165 3,032 R–58.3 6,145 2,689 2,751 R–44.8 5,711 2,602 2,696 R–47.2 6,280 2715 3,446 R–54.9 7,254 2,898 4,301 R–59.3 

KY ..................................................................... 1,167 616 532 D–52.8 1,295 616 635 R–49.1 1,369 540 822 R–60.0 1,311 579 731 R–55.8 1,493 665 617 D–44.6 1,389 637 623 D–45.8 1,544 638 872 R–56.5 1,795 712 1,069 R–59.5 TN ..................................................................... 1,476 826 634 D–55.9 1,618 783 788 R–48.7 1,712 712 990 R–57.8 1,617 678 939 R–58.1 1,983 934 841 D–47.1 1,894 909 864 D–48.0 2,076 981 1,061 R–51.1 2,437 1,036 1,384 R–56.8 AL ...................................................................... 1,183 659 504 D–55.7 1,342 637 654 R–48.8 1,442 552 873 R–60.5 1,357 547 810 R–59.7 1,688 690 804 R–47.6 1,534 662 769 R–50.1 1,666 692 941 R–56.5 1,883 693 1,176 3R–62.5 MS ..................................................................... 769 381 367 D–49.6 893 429 441 R–49.4 941 352 582 R–61.9 913 361 552 R–60.5 982 400 488 R–49.7 894 394 440 R–49.2 994 404 572 R–57.6 1,139 457 672 R–59.0 

W. So. Cent ......................................................... 7,210 3,774 3,354 D–52.4 58,078 3,389 4,403 R–54.5 9,244 3,325 5,867 R–63.5 8,912 3,875 5,037 R–56.5 10,285 4,077 4,160 R–40.4 9,487 4,351 4,356 R–45.9 10,327 4,121 5,942 R–57.5 11,870 4,624 7,159 R–60.3 

AR ..................................................................... 768 499 268 D–65.0 838 398 403 R–48.1 884 339 535 R–60.5 809 345 464 R–57.3 951 506 337 D–53.2 884 475 325 D–53.7 921 422 472 R–51.3 1,054 469 572 R–54.3 LA ...................................................................... 1,278 661 587 D–51.7 1,549 6708 93 8R–51.2 1,707 652 1,037 R–60.8 1,596 716 881 R–55.2 1,790 816 733 D–45.6 1,784 928 713 D–52.0 1,765 792 927 R–52.6 1,943 820 1,102 R–56.7 OK ......................................................................... 1,092 532 546 R–50.0 1,150 402 696 R–60.5 1,256 385 862 R–68.6 1,162 483 678 R–58.4 1,390 473 593 R–42.6 1,207 488 582 R–48.3 1,234 474 744 R–60.3 1,463 503 959 R–65.6 TX ...................................................................... 4,072 2,082 1,953 D–51.1 4,542 1,881 2,511 R–55.3 5,398 1,949 3,433 R–63.6 5,345 2,331 3,014 R–56.4 6,154 2,282 2,496 R–40.6 5,612 2,460 2,736 R–48.8 6,407 2,433 ,799 R–59.3 7,410 2,832 4,526 R–61.1 

Mt ......................................................................... 3,815 1,569 2,124 R–55.7 4,346 1,251 2,637 R–60.7 4,736 1,546 3,131 R–66.1 4,893 2,027 2,865 R–58.6 5,970 2,167 2,272 R–38.1 5,711 2,435 2,649 R–46.4 6,374 2,526 3,489 R–54.7 7,944 3,326 4,504 R–56.7 

MT ..................................................................... 329 149 174 R–52.8 364 118 207 R–56.8 384 147 232 R–60.5 358 168 190 R–53.0 411 155 144 D–37.6 407 168 180 R–44.1 410 137 240 R–58.4 450 173 266 R–59.1 ID ...................................................................... 344 127 204 R–59.3 437 110 291 R–66.5 411 109 298 R–72.4 401 147 253 R–63.2 482 137 203 R–42.0 492 165 257 R–52.2 501 138 336 R–67.2 598 181 409 R–68.4 WY ..................................................................... 156 62 93 R–59.3 177 49 111 R–62.6 189 53 133 R–70.5 174 67 107 R–61.4 201 68 79 R–39.6 212 78 105 R–49.8 213 60 147 R–67.8 243 70 167 R–68.7 CO ..................................................................... 1,082 460 584 R–54.0 1,184 368 652 R–55.1 1,295 455 822 R–63.4 1,349 621 728 R–53.9 1,569 630 563 D–40.1 1,511 671 692 R–45.8 1,741 738 883 R–50.8 2,129 1,001 1,101 R–51.7 NM .................................................................... 418 201 211 R–50.5 457 168 251 R–54.9 514 202 307 R–59.7 497 237 261 R–52.4 570 262 213 R–45.9 556 273 233 D–49.2 598 286 286 D–47.9 756 370 376 R–49.8 AZ ...................................................................... 743 296 419 R–56.4 874 247 530 R–60.6 1,026 334 681 R–66.4 1,142 447 694 R–60.8 1,487 543 572 R–38.5 1,404 653 622 D–46.5 1,532 685 781 R–51.0 2,012 893 1,104 R–54.9 UT ..................................................................... 541 182 338 R–62.4 604 124 440 R–72.8 630 155 469 R–74.5 634 207 427 R–67.4 744 183 323 R–43.4 666 222 362 R–54.4 770 203 515 R–66.8 927 241 663 R–71.5 NV ..................................................................... 202 92 101 R–50.2 248 67 155 R–62.5 287 92 189 R–65.8 339 133 206 R–60.8 506 189 176 D–37.4 464 204 199 D–43.9 609 279 301 R–49.5 829 397 418 R–50.5 

Pac ....................................................................... 10,867 5,140 5,364 R–49.4 11,973 4,369 6,177 R–51.6 13,159 5,476 7,528 R–57.2 12,458 6,123 6,335 R–50.9 15,514 6,993 5,076 D–45.1 14,253 7,178 5,444 D–50.4 15,637 8,112 6,692 D–51.9 17,857 9,540 8,063 D–53.4 

WA .................................................................... 1,556 717 778 R–50.0 1,742 650 865 R–49.7 1,884 807 1,052 R–55.8 1,645 845 800 D–51.3 2,288 993 731 D–43.4 2,254 1,123 841 D–49.8 2,487 1,247 1,108 D–50.2 2,859 1,510 1,304 D–52.8 OR ..................................................................... 1,030 490 492 R–47.8 1,182 457 571 R–48.3 1,227 536 686 R–55.9 1,093 575 518 D–52.6 1,463 621 476 D–42.5 1,378 650 538 D–47.2 1,533 720 713 D–47.0 1,836 943 866 D–81.3 CA ..................................................................... 7,867 3,742 3,882 R–49.3 58,587 3,084 4,525 R–52.7 9,505 3,923 5,467 R–57.5 9,205 4,448 4,756 R–51.7 11,132 5,121 3,631 D–46.0 10,019 5,120 3,828 D–51.1 10,965 5,861 4,567 D–53.4 12,421 6,745 5,509 D–54.3 AK ..................................................................... 124 44 72 R–57.9 158 42 86 R–54.3 208 62 138 R–66.7 165 62 102 R–62.2 259 78 102 R–39.5 242 80 123 R–50.8 285 79 167 R–58.6 312 111 190 R–62.5 HI ...................................................................... 291 147 140 D–50.6 303 136 130 D–44.8 336 147 185 R–55.1 351 192 159 D–54.8 373 179 137 D–48.1 360 205 114 D–56.9 367 205 137 D–55.8 429 231 194 D–54.0 1 Includes other parties. 2 Based on unofficial returns compiled by the News Election Service. Source: Congressional Quarterly, Inc., Washington, DC, Congressional Quarterly Weekly Report, vol. 46, No. 46, Nov. 12, 1988. (Copyright.) S OURCE: Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1987, U.S. Dept. of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 1972, U.S. Congress, Clerk of the House, Statistics of the Presidential and Congressional Election of Nov. 7, 1972 (in some cases, figures have been revised by Elections Research Center, Washington, D.C.); thereafter, Elections Research Center, Washington, D.C., 

America Votes, biennial (copyright) and Congressional Quarterly, Inc.
