Title: Next Generation Military Application & Underlying Technologies

URL Source: https://strategyinternational.org/2022/04/10/next-generation-military-application-underlying-technologies/

Published Time: 2022-04-10T06:33:53+00:00

Markdown Content:
The Private Wireless Networks market will reach $17B by 2025 (CAGR 24%) based on our 2021 projections. PWN market is expected to follow the adoption increase of Industry 4.0 till 2025, (Machine-2-Machine and Internet of Things). In addition, 5G is a game changer and an underlying technology across all emerging and critical applications. These are some important concluding remarks of our report and analysis “Private Wireless Networks and 5G: the impact on emerging technologies”, where some of its highlights will discussed in the rest of this article.

The Private Wireless Networks market will reach $17B by 2025 (CAGR 24%) enabling the presence of more 5G and mission critical applications.

Our team specializes in:

*   technology management and market sizing,
*   industrial analysis,
*   business case analysis,
*   market forecasting and,
*   with “anything” that needs to be “connected”

Specifically, our focus on Private Wireless Networks and 5G is due to the emerging military and critical future applications that need further investigation.

An Innovative ‘Private Network-as-a-Service’ could be a game-changer in the next generation military applications.

In our study, we concluded that several sectors in the industry will experience different growths based on the use cases adaptation and the fundamental drivers:

1.   Manufacturing to lead followed by the transportation segment is anticipated to be a fastest growing end user of private LTE market. A) Vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V), B) Vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I).
2.   Innovative ‘Private Network-as-a-Service’.
3.   Enterprises need high-capacity connectivity networks that are optimized locally for their use cases.
4.   Spectrum and 5G New Radio (Bastos et al 2021).
5.   The increasing investments in machine-to-machine (M2M) and traditional IoT have enabled a significant increase in the economies of scale that drive the adoption of private LTE across the sector.

Fig.1 Private Wireless Networks projected 5-years growth

Aerospace and Defense sector is expected to grow 15% overall compared to other sectors. That growth could be accelerated in case of synergies among NATO members and European Union research programs. NATO decision makers are in a phase of assessing the potential and limitations of 5G and other similar technologies However, the Department of Defense has committed $600 million to 5G deployments, using a licensed, shared and federal spectrum (700 MHz). The Marines, as one example, are investing more than $100 million in a private 5G network at their global logistics center in Albany, Georgia.

As a full 5G network has standards limitations. The private 5G solutions provide a path towards a full 5G implementation, which will provide the necessary bandwidth for tomorrow’s emergency responder applications. As an example, private 5G networks could meet the need to augment or replace two-way voice radio networks along with trunked land mobile radio (LMR), with 5G voice and data services using a portable 5G network that could be deployed at a moment’s notice.

There are several sectors that could be enhanced when considering military applications and further investigation in the field and benefits should be investigated. Also, the impact of 5G should be further explored in the following use cases:

*   Logistics,
*   Augmented reality (AR),
*   sophisticated wearable technologies in defense automation (Sharma et al 2021),
*   and holograms. 

During Mobile World Congress 2022, another emerging solution was discussed, regarding private networking across both 5G and Wi-Fi. That hybrid solution aims to disrupt almost all industries, as the5G experience adds low-latency, dedicated capacity, extended range and security across any environment, campus or industrial environments, when complementing existing Wi-Fi networks. That private 5G solution except of the innovative enhancements, it supports a flexibility of deployment based on customer need, ideal for sensitive or remote operations, such as military, shipping or oil and gas.

Finally, the emerging technologies fit into the set of Critical and Emerging Technologies (CETs) that the U.S. National Science and Technology Council recently published. This list serves as guidance for defense research, development, and acquisition efforts and prioritization (Mitall 2022). There is ongoing interest and research on the following areas where further investigation and analysis is needed to explore benefits of:

*   advanced manufacturing,
*   advanced and networked sensing and signature management,

*   artificial intelligence,
*   autonomous systems and robotics,
*   biotechnologies,
*   communication and networking technologies,
*   human-machine interfaces,
*   networked sensors and sensing,

**References:**

1.   Bastos L, Capela G, Koprulu A and. Elzinga G, (2021), “Potential of 5G technologies for military application,” _International Conference on Military Communication and Information Systems (ICMCIS)_, 2021, pp. 1-8, doi: 10.1109/ICMCIS52405.2021.9486402.

1.   Sharma P.K, Park J, Park J H and Cho K, (2020), “Wearable Computing for Defence Automation: Opportunities and Challenges in 5G Network,” in _IEEE Access_, vol. 8, pp. 65993-66002, 2020, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2985313.

1.   Mitall V., (2022), U.S. Critical And Emerging Technology List Forecasts Future Military Needs, [Online] (https://www.forbes.com/sites/vikrammittal/2022/02/10/us-critical-and-emerging-technology-list-forecasts-future-military-needs/?sh=5d8cc1829e71) (Accessed 15/3/22)

Author
------

*

All written content of this article on this site is the exclusive copyright and property of Strategy International (SI) Ltd and the author who has written to It.

To note, the opinions stated do not necessarily reflect the official policies of Strategy International.

No prior use in part or in its complete form, written, words, maps, charts or statistical, numerical information can be made, unless there is a written prior request and consent by the author and Strategy International and its legal representative.

All requests should be directed at info@strategyinternational.org
