Title: 

URL Source: https://www.state.gov/wp-content/uploads/2024/10/Report-Proposed-Refugee-Admissions-for-FY25.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 20 Jan 2025 17:38:49 GMT

Markdown Content:
1

PROPOSED REFUGEE ADMISSIONS 

FOR FISCAL YEAR 202 5

REPORT TO THE CONGRESS 

SUBMITTED ON BEHALF OF 

THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES 

TO THE 

COMMITTEES ON THE JUDICIARY 

UNITED STATES SENATE 

AND 

UNITED STATES HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 

IN FULFILLMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS OF 

SECTIONS 207(d)(1) AND (e) 

OF THE 

IMMIGRATION AND NATIONALITY ACT 

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF STATE 

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES 2

Table of Contents 

INTRODUCTION ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............. 4

FOREWORD ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 5

OVERVIEW OF U.S. REFUGEE POLICY ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 13 

PROPOSED CEILINGS FOR FY 2025 ................................ ................................ ................................ .............. 14 

ADMISSIONS PROCEDURES ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................... 15 

DHS/USCIS REFUGEE ADJUDICATIONS ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 27 

PROCESSING ACTIVITIES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE ................................ ................................ .......... 29 

OFFICE OF REFUGEE RESETTLEMENT ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 33 

REGIONAL REFUGEE ADMISSIONS ................................ ................................ ................................ .............. 40 

Africa ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................... 40 

East Asia ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .................. 42 

Europe and Central Asia ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................... 43 

Latin America and the Caribbean ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 45 

Near East and South Asia ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................... 47 

International Religious Freedom Act Reporting ................................ ................................ .................... 48 

North Korean Human Rights Act Reporting ................................ ................................ .......................... 53 

REFUGEE ADMISSIONS TO THE UNITED STATES ................................ ................................ ......................... 53 3

LIST OF TABLES 

Page 

I.  Projected Refugee Admissions for FY 202 4 and 

Proposed Refugee Admissions for FY 202 5 by Region 

14

II.  USRAP Projected Arrivals by Region, FY 202 4 55

III.  USRAP Admissions, FY 202 3 56

IV.  USRAP Admissions by Country of Origin, FY 202 3 57-59

V.  Sex and Median Age of Refugee Arrivals, FY 202 3 60 

VI.  Select Age Categories of Refugee Arrivals, FY 202 3 61 

VII.  Refugee Arrivals by State of Initial Resettlement, FY 

202 3

62-63

VIII.  Funding for Refugee Processing and Resettlement, FY 

202 4 and FY 202 5

64-65

IX.  UNHCR Resettlement Referrals Submitted by 

Resettlement Country – 2023 

66 4

INTRODUCTION 

This Proposed Refugee Admissions for Fiscal Year (FY) 202 5 Report to the 

Congress is submitted in compliance with Sections 207(d)(1) and (e) of the 

Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) , 8 U.S.C. § 1157 (d)(1) and (e ). This 

report provides the information required by those sections, including: 

1)  A description of the nature of the refugee situation; 

2)  A description of the number and allocation of the refugees to be 

admitted, and an analysis of conditions within the countries from 

which they came; 

3)  A description of the proposed plans for their movement and 

resettlement and the estimated cost of their movement and 

resettlement; 

4)  An analysis of the anticipated social, economic, and demographic 

impact of their admission to the United States; 

5)  A description of the extent to which other countries will admit and 

assist in the resettlement of such refugees; 

6)  An analysis of the impact of the participation of the United States in 

the resettlement of such refugees on the foreign policy interests of the 

United States; and 

7)  Such additional information as may be appropriate or requested by 

such members. 

This report contains information as required by Section 602(d) of the 

International Religious Freedom Act of 1998 (P .L. 105 -292) (IRFA), as 

amended , 22 U.S.C. § 6472(d) , about religious persecution of refugee 

populations eligible for consideration for admission to the United States. 

This report meets the reporting requirements of Section 305(b) of the North 

Korean Human Rights Act of 2004 (P .L. 108 -333), as amended , 22 U.S.C. §

7845(b) , by providing information about specific measures taken to facilitate 

access to the United States refugee admissions program for individuals who 

have fled “countries of particular concern” for particular ly severe violations 5

of religious freedom, identified pursuant to Section 402(b) of the IRFA , 22 

U.S.C. § 6442(b). 

FOREWORD 

The U.S. Refugee Admissions Program (USRAP ) is a critical demonstration of 

the United States’ efforts to extend hope and relieve suffering globally 

through refugee resettlement , as record numbers of people around the 

world have been forced to flee war, persecution, and instability. Nearly 118 

million people are now forcibly displaced worldwide, more than at any other 

time in history. According to the United Nations High Commissioner for 

Refugees (UNHCR), nearly three million refugees are now in need of 

protection through third -country resettlement. Through resettlement, the 

United States provides an opportunity for some refugees to pursue a life of 

safety and dignity without fear of persecution. In doing so, the United 

States re affirms its role as a global leader, upholds our nation’s core values, 

and builds on the long, enduring history of American communities providing 

a warm welcome to those fleeing persecution .

Over the past three years, the Biden -Harris Administration has restor ed ,

strengthen ed, and moderniz ed the USRAP. Th is included a whole -of -

government effort to streamline and improve overseas refugee processing ,

enhance the security and integrity of the program, digitize case 

management for efficien cy , work through the backlog of the oldest cases, 

increas e staffing to support operations , and reestablish and expand the 

domestic infrastructure for welcoming refugees. 

These efforts have resulted in steady annual increases in refugee 

admissions, with admissions doubling in FY 202 2 and again in FY 202 3. In FY 

2024, the United States expects to reach a historic milestone by resettling 

100,000 refugees from around the world – the most in three decades. 

USRAP is on its strongest footing in modern history. 

The Administration has launched and continues to implement 

groundbreaking initiatives . The Welcome Corps, a program that allows 6

everyday Americans to private ly sponsor refugees and Afghan SIVs to come 

to the United States , responds to the widespread interest of the American 

people to play a greater role in welcoming refugees . Through the Safe 

Mobility initiative, migrants in Guatemala, Colombia, Costa Rica, and 

Ecuador can access information and apply for lawful pathways (including 

refugee resettlement) to the United States, Canada, and Spain and learn 

more about local integration options in the countries where they are .

Screening individuals for lawful pathways closer to home helps encourage 

them to avoid dangerous irregular journey s to the U.S. border .

The Administration also continues to lead on resettlement and 

complementary protection pathways across the international community ,

working to expand the number of countries where refugees can find safety .

All these efforts advance the United States’ broader foreign policy and 

humanitarian efforts to expand safe, orderly , and lawful pathways to the 

United States and other countries around the world, and to invest in 

improving conditions in countries of origin and asylum so that vulnerable 

individuals can access the support they need and are not compelled to 

undertake dangerous journeys in search of safety. 

Welcoming refugees helps demonstrate the United States’ global human 

rights and humanitarian commitments , show s solidarity , and share s

responsibility with countries that host the majority of the world’s refugees. 

Collaboration with other countries, including through resettlement, helps 

provide stability in regions around the world experiencing conflict, 

advancing vital U.S. interests and national security objectives. 

In FY 2025, the United States will continue the momentum of the last three 

years and re affirm refugee resettlement as a core component of our global 

leadership. For FY 2025, the President again proposes to set an ambitious 

and achievable goal of resettling 125,000 refugees in the United States .

This renewed goal reflects the highest American values. The USRAP is an 

essential part of our proud history as a nation that has welcomed and been 

enriched by refugees since our founding . As refugees build new lives in the 7

communities where they are resettled, the United States benefits from their 

significant economic, social, and cultural contributions. As the Department 

of Health and Human Services (HHS) concluded in a recent landmark study, 

refugees and other newcomer populations contribut ed almost $124 billion 

to the growth of the U.S . economy over a 15 -year period .1

USRAP in FY 2025: Strengthening the Program for the Future 

Effective refugee resettlement through the USRAP requires close 

cooperation among U.S. government agencies, U.S. state and local 

governments , non -profit and private resettlement partners, foreign 

governments, UNHCR , the International Organization for Migration (IOM) ,

and refugees themselves . Crucially, the success and sustainability of the 

USRAP is shaped by the strong partnership and investment of the American 

public and the U.S. Congress in this life -saving program .

Innovations and efficiencies made over the last three years have provided 

new hope and opportunities to refugee applicants in the USRAP , including 

longstanding refugee populations from Ethiopia , the Democratic Republic of 

the Congo, and Syria , as well as Rohingya refugees who are facing increased 

threats and dwindling assistance , among many others. In FY 2025, t he 

United States will remain focused on these populations while continuing to 

expand the resettlement of other key populations of concern, including 

vulnerable people from Latin America and the Caribbean ; Afghan allies ;

lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, and intersex ( LGBTQI+ )

individuals ; and individuals persecuted for their religious beliefs. 

Th is section highlights priority objectives and innovations in FY 202 5 to 

further strengthen the USRAP , building on the progress made over the past 

three years .

Strengthening and Continuing Innovations in Domestic Resettlement   

> 1Refugees in U.S. Have Contributed Nearly $124B to U.S. Government Budget, New HHS Study Reveals | The
> Administration for Children and Families (last accessed Aug. 21, 2024). 8

The Welcome Corps: In FY 2025, the Department of State will continue to 

expand opportunities for private sponsorship. T he Welcome Corps launched 

in January 2023 to empower everyday Americans to welcom e refugees from 

around the world and directly support their resettlement and integration as 

they build new lives in the United States. The Welcome Corps expands our 

country’s ability to provide a warm welcome to refugees and Afghan SIVs by 

tapping into the generosity, capacity, and interest of American communities. 

The Welcome Corps first enable d Americans to sponsor refugees they did 

not know. Beginning in December 2023, Americans also can identify specific 

refugees they wish to support and directly refer them for consideration to 

the USRAP , a first for USRAP . The first “sponsor someone you know” 

refugee arrived in June 202 4. In April 2024, the Department of State 

launched Welcome Corps at Work, a program to match refugees with U.S. 

employers for jobs in critical industries such as healthcare, education, and 

information technology. In August 2024, 17 participating U.S. colleges and 

universities and their on -campus sponsor groups welcomed the first cohort 

of 31 ref ugee students through Welcome Corps on Campus. Like all 

refugees, refugees arriving through the Welcome Corps are fully vetted 

overseas before arrival .

As of August 2024, Americans in all 50 states, Washington, D.C., and Puerto 

Rico have applied to sponsor refugees of more than 45 nationalities through 

the Welcome Corps. Building on this interest, the Department of State 

intends to resettle at least 10,000 refugees through the Welcome Corps in 

FY 2025 .

Domestic Resettlement Capacity: In FY 2025, the Department of State and 

HHS will build on the efforts that restored the traditional domestic 

resettlement system following significant cuts and expand to welcome 

greater numbers of refugees. There are now 355 local refugee resettlement 

sites operated by the ten national resettlement agencies  throughout the 

United States , and resettlement agencies continue to explore opening 

additional local offices in consultation with community stakeholders.  In FY 

2025, the Department of State will further expand partnerships with new 9

resettlement partners and grow its innovative new model of virtual 

reception and placement services for certain eligible refugees .

Recognizing that access to affordable housing remains a challenge , multiple 

U.S. government initiatives aim to strengthen access to housing for newly 

arrived refugees. For example, some landlords and property managers have 

been reluctant to rent to refugees , due to a lack of understanding of this 

immigration status . In response, in April 2024, the Department of State ,

Department of Housing and Urban Development, Department of Homeland 

Security (DHS), and HHS jointly release d a fact sheet tha t provides 

information to landlords and property managers who may have questions 

on renting to refugees and other newcomer populations. The Department 

of State and HHS also fund Refugee Housing Solutions, a project of Church 

World Service, to provide technical assistance to resettlement agencies to 

collectively address affordable housing challenges faced by newly arriving 

refugees. Refugee Housing Solutions currently partners with the private 

sector, universities , and faith groups to increase refugees’ access to 

affordable housing . They also work to identify housing innovations and best 

practices for host and shared housing. 

Building on Progress on Global Resettlement Priorities 

Latin America and the Caribbean : As f orced displacement in the Western 

Hemisphere reach es historic highs, the United States remains committed to 

expanding access to resettlement to refugees from Latin America and the 

Caribbean to discourage dangerous journey s to the United States . The 

Biden -Harris Administration has increased operations in the region from 

four countries to nearly two dozen and UNHCR has referred more than twice 

as many individuals from the Americas into USRAP since early 2021 as in the 

previous three decades combined . FY 202 4 refugee arrivals from Latin 

America and the Caribbean will be a more than fourfold increase over FY 

202 3 arrivals . In FY 2025, the United States will continue to increase refugee 

resettlement from the region, including through the Safe Mobility initiative. 

Th ese historic increase s are part of a broader effort the United States is 

leading , along side regional partners , to provide lawful pathways to the 10 

United States and other countries to those who qualify , a goal set forth in 

the Los Angeles Declaration on Migration and Protection endorsed by 

President Biden and 21 other regional leaders. 

Afghan Resettlement : The United States continues to fulfill its commitment 

to the brave Afghans who supported the U.S. mission in Afghanistan over 

two decades, serving alongside American diplomats, development 

professionals , and military service members . U.S. communities have 

welcomed more than 160,000 Afghan newcomers since August 2021, most 

notably in Texas, California, Virginia, Washington, and Pennsylvania. 

Through our Enduring Welcome effort , Afghan allies arrive to the United 

States using durable immigration pathways , such as refugee referrals ,

Afghan SIVs , and family reunification pathways . Through the Welcome 

Corps , American s may now sponsor and welcome Afghan refugees and SIVs 

to the United States, including those they know .

Resettlement Diplomacy: As the country that resettl es the most refugees in 

the world, the United States is uniquely positioned to galvanize global action 

on resettlement and encourage countries across the world to provide well -

organized and legal pathways to protection for those in danger .

The United States chairs the Resettlement Diplomacy Network (RDN), a

high -level forum launched in partnership with Australia, Canada, Italy, New 

Zealand, Spain, the United Kingdom , and the European Commission to 

strengthen the global resettlement system. Through the RDN, the United 

States works with other resettlement countries to build on the lessons 

learned around global efforts to rapidly standup new protection pathways in 

response to the displacement of Afghans, Russia’s war against Ukraine, and 

other emerging crises. The RDN allows us to make better use of 

resettlement as a foreign policy tool and ensures the United States is just 

one of many safe havens for refugees. The United States also co -chairs the 

Priority Situations Core Group alongside the Government of Canada. In FY 

2024, the United States, along with Canada, led a delegation comprising six 

governments to Rwanda and Ethiopia to demonstrate and expand 

resettlement countries' commitment to receiving referrals from the 11 

Emergency Transit Mechanism in Rwanda, which hosts vulnerable 

individuals relocated by UNHCR from Libya. The United States will continue 

to support and promote the life -saving protection offered by this 

mechanism and others like it. 

In FY 2025, the United States will continue to advance collective diplomacy 

to address shared resettlement challenges across multiple regions, 

collaborate on refugee referral mechanisms, and deepen cooperation on 

emergency resettlement responses. 

Rohingya in Bangladesh: Around one million stateless Rohingya have been 

forced to seek refuge in Bangladesh and the surrounding region after the 

Burma military committed genocide and crimes against humanity against 

them , which further worse ned following the February 2021 military coup 

d’état . In August 2023 , the United States co -led with Canada a delegation of 

resettlement countries to Bangladesh to encourage greater resettlement of 

Rohingya, leading to additional commitments from resettlement countries. 

In FY 202 5, the United States and our partners will continue to resettle 

Rohingya refugees from the region so they can start new lives in the United 

States and elsewhere . The United States continue s to work with other 

countries and international partners to seek increased resettlement 

opportunities for Rohingya globally in the coming months and years. 

LGBTQI+ Persons : In FY 2025, the Department of State will build on 

significant progress in expanding resettlement access for vulnerable 

LGBTQI+ refugees in regions across the world. The U.S. Special Envoy to 

Advance the Human Rights of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer 

and Intersex (LGBTQI+) Persons has continued their partnership with NGOs 

to identify LGBTQI+ individuals in need of resettlement. Through the 

Equitable Resettlement Access Consortium (ERAC) , other NGO partners are 

also now making direct referrals to the USRAP of historically marginalized 

refugee populations, including LGBTQI+ refugees. In FY 2025, these partners 

will further facilitat e access to resettlement. Communities across the United 

States may now also sponsor and welcome LGBTQI+ refugees through the 

Welcome Corps. 12 

Recognition of the Impacts of Climate Change on Refugee Vulnerability: As 

the world tackle s the climate crisis, it is vital to develop smart, humane 

policies to address the impacts of climate change on migration and 

displacement within countries and across borders. The United States will 

use its global leadership role in refugee resettlement to reflect the crucial 

role that migration plays in adaptation to the climate crisis. Many displaced 

populations, stateless persons, and vulnerable migrants are displaced many 

times by climate impacts and require expanded protection . In FY 2025, the 

United States aims to strengthen th is protection, including through 

consideration of the impact of climate change on refugees’ vulnerability in 

the refugee resettlement process .

Ensuring Security and Program Integrity 

Security Vetting: The safety and security of the American people remain at 

the forefront of efforts to strengthen the USRAP. In FY 2024, the 

Department of State and DHS, alongside U.S. intelligence, counterterrorism, 

and law enforcement partners , modernized an older refugee vetting 

process, the Security Advisory Opinion, through the National Vetting Center .

This change enhanc ed the integrity and thoroughness of refugee vetting 

while enabling more efficient processes . Additional improvements to 

further enhance the refugee vetting process are planned for FY 2025 .

Ensuring National Security, Public Safety, and Fraud Prevention : The 

Department of State and D HS , in cooperation with other U.S. federal 

government partners, continue to safeguard the integrity of the USRAP by 

leading efforts to ensure U.S. national security and public safety are 

prioritized while mitigating fraud, waste, and abuse ; identifying potential 

vulnerabilities ; investigating allegations received through public and private 

reporting mechanisms ; and ensuring fraudulent cases do not gain access to 

the USRAP. In FY 2024, strong relationships across the U.S. federal 

government bolstered the program’s ability to proactively address fraud 

risks and learn from best practices. In FY 2025, the se partnerships will 13 

support the implement ation of additional integrity measures and robust 

monitor ing to ensure the effectiveness of existing integrity mechanisms. 

OVERVIEW OF U.S. REFUGEE POLICY 

Who is a Refugee? 

Under Section 101(a)(42) of the INA, 8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(42), a refugee is a 

person who is outside their country of nationality (or, if no nationality, 

country of last habitual residence) and who has experienced past 

persecution or has a well -founded fear of persecution on account of race, 

religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political 

opinion. Individuals who meet the statutory definition may be considered 

for refug ee status under Section 207 of the INA , 8 U.S.C. § 1157, if they are 

outside the United States .

Additionally, under Section 101(a)(42)(B) of the INA , 8 U.S.C. §

1101(a)(42)(B), the President may specify circumstances under which 

individuals who are within their countries of nationality (or , if no nationality, 

within their country of last habitual residence ) may be considered a refugee 

for purposes of admission to the United States. For FY 2025, the President 

proposes to specify that the following individuals may be considered 

refugees for the purpose of admission to the United States within their 

countries of nationality or habitual residence: Persons in Cuba ; Persons in 

Eurasia and the Baltics; Persons in Iraq; Persons in El Salvador, Guatemala, 

and Honduras; and , in certain circumstances, that is, for compelling 

humanitarian reasons, persons identified by a U.S. embassy or by an 

authorized State Department referral partner in any location. 

Individuals outside the United States seeking admission as a refugee under 

Section 207 of the INA , 8 U.S.C. § 1157, are processed through the USRAP, 

which is managed by the Department of State in cooperation with DHS and 

HHS. Those admitted as refugees are eligible for U.S. government -funded 

resettlement assistance, which is discussed below in the Office of Refugee 14 

Resettlement section. 

Since the enactment of the Refugee Act in 1980, which incorporated this 

definition of a refugee into the INA, the United States has welcomed more 

than 3.3 million refugees through the USRAP. 

PROPOSED CEILINGS FOR FY 202 5                                

> TABLE I
> Projected Refugee Admissions for FY 202 4and
> Proposed Refugee Admissions for FY 202 5by Region
> REGION FY 202 4CEILING
> FY 202 4PROJECTED
> ARRIVALS
> PROPOSED FY
> 202 5
> ALLOCATION
> Africa 30,000 -50, 000 32,500 -34,500 30,000 -50,000
> East Asia 10,000 -20, 000 6,500 -8,500 10,000 -20,000
> Europe and Central Asia 2,000 -3,000 *3,000 2,000 -3,000
> Latin America/Caribbean 35,000 -50, 000 23,500 –25,500 35,000 -50,000
> Near East/South Asia 30,000 -45, 000 27,500 –29 ,500 30,000 -45,000
> Total 125,000 100,000 125,000

* In July 2024, the Department of State transfer red unused admissions 

allocated to other regions to the Europe and Central Asia region to increase 

that regional allocation to 2,000 -3,500. 

The proposed FY 202 5 regional allocation range s continue to reflect the 

Administration ’s ambition to expand refugee processing in priority regions ,

while providing flexibility as needs arise and as operational capacity grows .

The total admissions among all the regions would not exceed 125,000. 

Furthermore, the President may, as in the past, authorize the Secretary of 

State, upon notification to the Judiciary Committees of the Congress, to 

transfer unused allocations from a particular region to one or more other 15 

regions that have a need for greater allocations. More detail about each 

region is provided below in the Regional Refugee Admissions section. 

ADMISSIONS PROCEDURES 

Eligibility for Access to the USRAP 

The Department of State’s Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration 

(PRM ) is responsible for coordinating and managing the USRAP. A critical 

part of this responsibility is determining which individuals or groups from 

among the millions of refugees worldwide will have access to the USRAP. 

PRM coordinates within the Department of State, as well as with DHS , U.S. 

Citizenship and Immigration Services ( USCIS ), and other agencies, in carrying 

out this responsibility. 

Section 207(a)(3) of the INA , 8 U.S.C. § 1157(a)(3), provides that 

“[a]dmissions … shall be allocated among refugees of special humanitarian 

concern to the United States in accordance with a determination made by 

the President after appropriate consultation.” Which individuals are “of 

special humanitarian concern” to the United States f or the purpose of 

refugee resettlement consideration is determined through one of four 

categories: 

Priority 1: Individual cases referred by designated entities to the program by 

virtue of their circumstances and apparent need for resettlement. 

Priority 2: Groups of special concern designated by the Department of State 

as having access to the program by virtue of their circumstances and 

apparent need for resettlement. 

Priority 3: Individual cases granted access for purposes of reunification with 

family members already in the United States. 16 

Priority 4: Individual cases from all nationalities who have been referred by 

private sponsors in the United States and who receive post -arrival support 

and services from those sponsors. 

(Note: Refugees resettled in the United States may also seek the admission 

of their spouses and unmarried children younger than the age of 21 who are 

still abroad or are located domestically but who did not accompany the 

principal refugee by filing a Form I -730, Refugee/Asylee Relative Petition ,

known as a “following -to -join” petition, which does not require a separate 

refugee adjudication for these family members overseas. This option is 

described in more detail in the discussion of following -to -join cases below .)

Access to the USRAP under one of the four categories does not necessarily 

mean an applicant meets the statutory definition of a “refugee” or is 

admissible to the United States under the INA. Applicants granted access to 

the USRAP within the established categories present to USCIS officers for 

inquiry and adjudication. The determination as to whether an applicant can 

be admitted as a refugee into the United States is made by DHS in 

accordance with criteria set forth in the INA and various security protocols. 

Although the four access categories to the USRAP are referred to as 

“priorities,” entering the program under a certain priority does not establish 

precedence in the order in which cases will be processed or the likelihood of 

success of being admitted to the United States as a refugee . Once cases are 

established as eligible for access under one of the categories , they all 

undergo the same processing steps. 

Priority 1 (P -1) – Individual Referrals 

Priority 1 (P -1) allows the USRAP to consider refugee claims from persons of 

any or no nationality, usually with compelling protection needs, for whom 

resettlement appears to be the appropriate durable solution. P -1 cases are 

identified and referred to th e program by UNHCR, a U.S. embassy , a senior 

U.S. government official granted referral authority , or a designated NGO. 17 

UNHCR, which has the international mandate to provide protection to 

refugees worldwide, has historically referred the vast majority of cases to 

the United States under this priority. A U.S. ambassador or designated 

embassy representative may also make a P -1 referral for vulnerable 

individuals and are encouraged to do so. 

To facilitate protection and access to the USRAP for our Afghan allies , U.S. 

government federal employee s in the Senior Executive Service or Senior 

Foreign Service may make P-1 referral s for Afghan nationals who are known 

to U.S. government officials, have imminent and compelling protection 

concerns , and do not qualify for a n SIV or P -2 referral based on their past 

employment. 

Two other senior government officials were designated with authority in 

2023 to make P -1 referrals . The U.S. Special Envoy to Advance the Human 

Rights of LGBTQI+ Persons may refer both individuals who face persecution 

because of their work promoting respect for the human rights of LGBTQI+ 

persons and individuals who face persecution on the basis of their real or 

perceived sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, or sex 

characteristics. The Special Envoy’s office has also partnered with NGOs 

with expertise serving LGBTQI+ individuals to submit refugee referrals to the 

USRAP. The Assistant Secretary of State for the Bureau of Democracy, 

Human Rights, and Labor may also make P -1 referrals for vulnerable 

individuals identified by the bureau .

The Department of State has also designated certain NGOs that assist 

refugees to make P-1 referrals through the ERAC led by HIAS , RefugePoint ,

and the International Refugee Assistance Project. This effort seeks to reach 

highly vulnerable refugees in need of resettlement who lack access to the 

USRAP through traditional referral mechanisms and for whom resettlement 

may be the only durable solution. ERAC is designed to grow the network of 

NGOs that refer individuals to the USRAP and to address the coordination 

gap among resettlement stakeholders to ensure a coherent and streamlined 

approach to NGO referrals. This model for refugee referrals expan ds 

equitable access to resettlement while establishing global partnerships with 18 

UNHCR, refugee -led organizations, organizations serving LGBTQI+ refugees, 

and other stakeholders in the field of refugee protection. 

Priority 2 (P -2) – Group Referrals 

P-2 includes specific groups whose members warrant resettlement as 

identified by the Department of State in consultation with USCIS, NGOs, 

UNHCR, and other experts. P -2 designations reflect the determination that 

a group is of special humanitarian concern to the United States and that 

individual members of the group will likely qualify for admission as refugees 

under U.S. law. 

There are two distinct models of P -2 access to the program: predefined 

group access and direct access. Under both models, P -2 designations are 

made based on shared characteristics that define the group. In general, 

these characteristics are the reason that members of the group have been 

persecuted or have a well -founded fear of persecution in the future. 

A predefined group designation is usually based on a UNHCR 

recommendation that lays out eligibility criteria for individuals in a specific 

location. 

Once PRM, in consultation with USCIS, establishes the access eligibility 

criteria for the group, the referring entity provides the biographical data of 

eligible refugee applicants for processing. This type of referral enables 

efficient processing because it identifies large groups of people with very 

similar persecution claims, avoid s labor -intensive individual referrals, and 

prevents delays to applicants. 

In special circumstances, the direct access model for P -2 group referrals 

enables individuals to apply for access to the program based on meeting 

designated criteria. The direct access model has operated largely for in -

country programs, historically inclu ding refugees from Bosnia and 

Herzegovina, Cuba, Eurasia and the Baltics, and Vietnam. To establish a 

direct access P -2 group, PRM, in consultation with USCIS, defines the specific 19 

criteria and procedures for access. Applicants may then apply according to 

that process. Applicants who clearly do not meet the access requirements 

do not proceed to USCIS interviews. 

Once an individual gains access to processing via a P -2 designation, all other 

processing steps are the same as for those referred by P -1, including 

individual pre -screening and USCIS interviews, and all security and medical 

checks. 

Pre -defined Group Access P -2s: 

Ethnic Minorities from Burma in Malaysia : Members of ethnic minorities 

from Burma who were recognized by UNHCR as refugees in Malaysia, 

registered by August 17, 2010, and identified as needing resettlement, are 

eligible for resettlement processing. 

Rohingya Refugees in Bangladesh: Rohingya who are (1) registered with 

UNHCR in Bangladesh , (2) defined by the Government of Bangladesh and 

UNHCR as part of the registered caseload of 1992 refugees , and (3) 

participated in the 2023 re -verification exercise are eligible for resettlement 

consideration .

Registered Refugees Residing in the Nine Temporary Shelters in Thailand :

Refugees from Burma who (1) currently reside in one of the nine temporary 

shelters in Thailand and (2) were verified by UNHCR in its 2015 verification 

exercise or by the Thai land Ministry of the Interior in its 2019 -2020 

verification exercise are eligible for resettlement consideration. 

Congolese in the Great Lakes: Congolese refugees in Rwanda, Tanzania, 

and Burundi who arrived in the countries of asylum within certain 

designated years are eligible for resettlement processing in these countries. 

Refugees “Twice Displaced” in Ethiopia : Eritrean, Sudanese, and South 

Sudanese refugees in Ethiopia who were displaced from refugee camps in 20 

Ethiopia as a result of the violence in Tigray, Afar, and Benishangul -Gumuz 

regions are eligible for resettlement processing .

Certain Afghan Nationals: Certain Afghans who do not meet the minimum 

time -in -service for a n SIV but who work/worked as employees of 

contractors*, locally employed staff, interpreters or translators for the U.S. 

government , including United States Forces Afghanistan, International 

Security Assistance Force, or Resolute Support; certain Afghans who 

work/worked for a U.S. government -funded program or project in 

Afghanistan supported through a U.S. government grant or cooperative 

agreement*; and certain Afghans who are/were employed in Afghanistan by 

a U.S. -based media organization or NGO are eligible for resettlement 

processing . U.S. -based media organizations may also refer Afghan nationals 

who worked for them under stringer, freelance, and comparable 

arrangements. ** Afghan nationals eligible for a P -2 referral must be 

referred by an American citizen who works for a U.S. government agency or 

by the senior -most U.S. citizen employee of a U.S. -based NGO or media 

organization. Afghan nationals may not submit self -referrals. 

*Afghans who work/worked for sub -contractors and sub -grantees do not 

qualify for the P -2 designation, though they may qualify for P -1 referrals. 

**Under exceptional circumstances, PRM may accept P-2 referrals for third -

party contractors, particularly from U.S. -based media organizations, and for 

staff of U.S. NGO wholly - or majority -owned subsidiaries in Afghanistan. 

Direct Access Model P -2s: 

Lautenberg Program for Certain Members of Religious Minority Groups in 

Eurasia, the Baltics, and Iran : Jews, Evan gelical Christians, and Ukrainian 

Catholic and Orthodox religious adherents who are or were nationals and 

residents of the Soviet Union , as identified in the Lautenberg Amendment, 

Section 599D of Title V, of the Foreign Operations, Export Financing, and 

Related Programs Appropriations Act of 1990 ( P.L. 101 -167 ), as amended 

(the Lautenberg Amendment) , with close family in the United States are 21 

considered for refugee resettlement in their countries of origin under a 

reduced standard for establishing a well -founded fear of persecution. 

Members of religious minorities in Iran who are or were nationals and 

residents of Iran with close family in the United States are also eligible for 

processing under the Lautenberg Amendment pursuant to the Specter 

Amendment, Section 213 of Title II, Division E, of the Consolidated 

Appropriations Act of 2004 (P.L. 108 -199 ).

Certain Iraqis Associated with the United States : Set forth in Section 

1243(a) of the Refugee Crisis in Iraq Act of 2007 (Title XII, Div. A, P.L. 110 -

181 ), as amended, employees of the U.S. government, a U.S. government -

funded contractor or grantee, U.S. media, or U.S. NGOs working in Iraq, and 

certain family members of such employees, as well as beneficiaries of 

approved Forms I -13 0, Petition for Alien Relative , are eligible for in -country 

refugee processing in Iraq as well as in several countries in the region, 

including Jordan, Egypt, and Lebanon. 

Syrian Beneficiaries of Approved Form I -130 petitions : Syrian beneficiaries 

of approved Form I -130 petitions for whom immigrant visas have not yet 

been issued are eligible for consideration for refugee processing. 

Certain Persons in El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras : Under the 

Central American Minors (CAM) P-2 designation, certain qualifying parents 

and legal guardians in the United States may request access to the USRAP 

for their unmarried child(ren) yo un ger th an the age of 21. In some 

instances, other in -country relatives may be eligible when accompanying the 

qualifying child. 

Certain Persons in Cuba : Human rights activists, members of persecuted 

religious minorities, former political prisoners, and persons deprived of their 

professional credentials or subjected to other disproportionately harsh or 

discriminatory treatment resulting from their perceived or actual political or 

religious beliefs were eligible for resettlement processing . As of September 

202 4, this program remains suspended. 22 

Priority 3 (P -3) – Family Reunification 

P-3 provides USRAP access to individuals of special humanitarian concern 

who have eligible family members in the United States (i.e., parents, 

spouses, or children younger than th e age of 21 who were admitted in 

certain humanitarian immigrant statuses ). The eligible family members in 

the United States can initiate an application for their relatives even if they 

subsequently gained lawful permanent resident status or naturalized as U.S. 

citizens. 

To qualify for access under the P -3 category , an applicant must generally be 

outside their country of origin, be registered or have legal status in the 

country of asylum, have had an Affidavit of Relationship (AOR) filed on their 

behalf by an eligible family member in the United States, and have bee n

cleared for onward processing by USCIS. 

PRM designates which U.S. -based relatives can initiate P -3 processing based 

on their admission status. For FY 202 5, AOR filers can include those 

admitted as asylees, refugees, or Afghan and Iraqi special immigrants 

(admitted under Section 1059 of the National Defense Authorization Act for 

Fiscal Year 2006 ( Title X , Div. A, P.L. 109 -163), Section 1244 of the Refugee 

Crisis in Iraq Act of 2007 (Title XII, Div. A, P.L. 110 -181 ), as amended , and 

Section 602 of the Afghan Allies Protection Act of 2009 ( Div. F, Title VI, P.L. 

111 -8), as amended ). This includes persons who are lawful permanent 

residents of the United States or U.S. citizens who initially were admitted to 

the United States in the designated status. The U.S. -based filer must be at 

least 18 years of age at the time the AOR is filed. The filer must file the AOR 

within fi ve years of the date they were admitted as an asylee, refugee, or 

special immigrant , and the USRAP may reject any AOR for a relationship that 

is contrary to law or policy of the United States, such as underage or plural 

marriages. 

The USRAP recognizes that many refugee families face legal and practical 

obstacles to legal marriage or marriage registration. The United States will 23 

allow a qualifying individual to file for P -3 access for a partner of any gender 

if the filer considers that person to be their spouse or life partner and can 

provide evidence of an ongoing relationship with the partner for at least one 

year overseas prior to the submission of the AOR and evidence that legal 

marriage could not be obtained due to social and/or legal prohibitions. 

Because of the importance of reuniting immediate refugee families who 

have been separated while fleeing from persecution, the USRAP will 

continue to make P -3 processing available to individuals of all nationalities, 

including stateless individuals. 

In FY 2024, t he United States made progress in str eamlining P -3 processing 

and will continue to do so in FY 2025. 

Priority 4 (P -4) – Privately sponsored refugees 

The Welcome Corps private sponsorship program creates opportunities for 

Americans to directly sponsor refugees from around the world arriving 

through the USRAP. The program is designed to strengthen and expand the 

country’s capacity to resettle refugees by harnessing the energy of private 

sponsors across American society , including members of faith and civic 

groups, veterans, diaspora communities, businesses, colleges and 

universities, and other community organizations. The program 

complement s the recepti on and placement (R&P) program provided 

pursuant to Section 412(b) of the INA, 8 USC 1552(b) , by creating new, 

additional opportunities for Americans and organizations nationwide to 

directly support refugee resettlement. 

Like traditional resettlement agency partners , groups of private sponsors 

help refugees find housing and employment, enroll children in school, 

connect with other essential services, and raise funds to support refugees 

during the initial resettlement period . These services are provided 

according to standards of care within a framework of outcomes and 

indicators developed jointly by the NGO community, state refugee 

coordinators, and U.S. government agencies. 24 

Americans may sponsor refugees through the Welcome Corps i n one of 

three ways: (1) they can be matched with approved refugees or Afghan SIVs 

they do not know yet , (2) they can sponsor someone they know who is 

already in USRAP or Afghan SIV processing , or (3) they can apply to sponsor 

refugees they know and refer them to the USRAP. The United States 

welcomed the first arrival through this “sponsor someone you know” P-4

referral process in June 2024. 

The P-4 category provide s access to the USRAP globally for refugees of any 

nationality who have U.S. -based private sponsors. However, the ability of 

the United States to accept and effectively process P -4 referrals is subject to 

the specific requirements imposed by host governments and the operational 

constraints of conducting refugee processing in certain country contexts. To 

qualify for access to the USRAP through the P -4 category, an applicant must 

generally be outside of their country of origin, be registered as a refugee as 

of an established cut -off date , and have a P -4 referral filed on their behalf by 

an eligible private sponsor group in the United States that is approved 

through the Welcome Corps. Additional eligibility criteria may apply for 

applicants in certain locations to comply with the specific requirements of 

host governments. Refugees must still be found eligible for refugee status ,

undergo security vetting, and be approved by USCIS , consistent with all 

other refugee cases .

Family Members and Other Individuals Accompanying the Refugee 

Applicant 

In accordance with Section 20 7(c)(2 )(A) of the INA, 8 U.S.C. § 1157(c)(2)(A), a 

refugee applicant’s spouse or a child , as defined by Section 101(b)(1) of the 

INA, 8 U .S.C. § 1101(b)(1) , accompanying that applicant is entitled to the 

same admission status as the refug ee applicant. 

On a case -by -case basis, an individual may be added to a qualifying refugee 

applicant’s case if that individual: 25 

• Lived in the same household as the qualifying family member in the 

country of nationality or, if stateless, last habitual residence; 

• Was part of the same economic unit as the qualifying family member 

in the country of nationality or, if stateless, last habitual residence; 

and 

• Demonstrates exceptional and compelling humanitarian 

circumstances that justify inclusion on the qualifying family member’s 

case. 

These individuals are not “spouse[s]” or “child[ren],” under Section 

20 7(c )(2)(A) of the INA, 8 U.S.C. § 1157(c)(2)(A), and thus cannot derive their 

refugee status from the principal applicant. They must, therefore, 

independently establish that they qualify as a refugee. 

Following -to -Join Family Reunification Petitions 

Under Section 207(c)(2) of the INA , 8 U.S.C. § 1157(c)(2), a principal refugee 

admitted to the United States may request following -to -join benefits for 

their spouse and/or unmarried children younger than the age of 21 who 

were not previously granted refugee status. Once in the United States, and 

within two years of admission, the principal refugee may file a Form I -730 

Refugee/Asylee Relative Petition 2 with USCIS for each eligible family 

member .3 Following -to -join refugee petitions are initially processed 

domestically by USCIS’ Refugee, Asylum, and International Operations 

Directorate (RAIO) .

Once USCIS has completed initial processing of the Form I -730 petition, if 

the beneficiary appears eligible, the case is sent to the appropriate office 

depending on the beneficiary’s location to interview the qualifying spouse    

> 2This petition is used to file for the relatives of both refugees and asylees, also known as Visa 93 and Visa 92 cases,
> respectively. The USRAP handles only Visa 93 cases, which are counted within the annual refugee admissions
> ceiling. Visa 92 cases are not considered to be refugee admissions cases and are not counted in the number of
> refugees admitted annually.
> 3USCIS may grant a waiver of the two -year filing deadline for humanitarian reasons. 26

and/ or child (ren) and to complete processing. If the beneficiary is located 

within the United States, the petition is forwarded to the USCIS domestic 

field office with jurisdiction over the beneficiary’s residence. If the 

beneficiary is located outside of the United Stat es, the petition is forwarded 

through the Department of State’s National Visa Center to either the USCIS 

international field office or one of the Department of State ’s consular post s

with jurisdiction over the beneficiary’s location. By regulation, all Fo rm I -

730 petitions must be filed with and adjudicated by USCIS. However, in 

locations where USCIS does not have a presence, USCIS partners with the 

Department of State to have consular officers conduct interviews and 

determine the beneficiary's eligibility to travel to the United States. 

The U.S. government continues to streamlin e and improv e following -to -join 

refugee processing, including by centraliz ing processing within the USCIS 

International and Refugee Affairs Division , increas ing staffing to support that 

workload , and making significant technological improvements. 

USCIS or consular officers interview i ndividuals who gain access to the 

USRAP through the Form I -730 petition to verify the relationship claimed in 

the petition, as well as to examine any applicable bars to asylee or refugee 

status and /or admissibility to the United States. Beneficiaries are not 

required to establish past persecution or a well -founded fear of persecution, 

as they derive their status from the refugee relative in the United States 

who filed the petition. Beneficiaries of F orm I -730 petitions may be 

processed within their countr y of origin or in other locations. 

Certain eligible princip al refugees in the United States may file a Form I -730 

petition and separately seek P -3 access for their qualifying family members 

simultaneously. In some cases, the Form I -730 petition will be the only 

option, as the family members are still in their country of origin. It is also 

important to note that unlike the P -3 process, the Form I -730 following -to -

join process does not allow the relative in the United States to petition for 

parents. 27 

DHS/USCIS REFUGEE ADJUDICATIONS 

Pursuant to Section 207(c) (1) of the INA , 8 U.S.C. § 1157(c) (1) , as amended, 

the Secretary of Homeland Security may admit, at the Secretary’s discretion, 

any refugee who is not firmly resettled in a third country, who is determined 

to be of special humanitarian concern, and who is admissible to the United 

States as an immigrant . USCIS has authority to adjudicate refugee 

applications . (See 6 U.S.C. § 271(b)(3)) . USCIS also devotes substantial 

resources to security vetting, fraud prevention and detection, and training 

related to refugee processing, and it has strong partnerships wi th the law 

enforcement, national security, and intelligence communities to maintain 

and promote the integrity of the USRAP. 

Eligibility for Classification as a Refugee 

To be approved for classification as a refugee, an applicant must meet the 

refugee definition in Section 101(a)(42) of the INA , 8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(42) .

That section provides that a refugee is a person who is outside his or her 

country of nationality or, if stateless, last habitual residence , and is unable 

or unwilling to return to that country because of persecution or a well -

founded fear of persecution on account of race, religion, nationality, 

membership in a particular social group, or political opinion. As mentioned 

above, the President may specify special circumstances unde r which a 

person can meet the refugee definition when still within their country of 

origin or, if stateless, within their country of habitual residence. 

The refugee definition excludes a person who has ordered, incited, assisted, 

or otherwise participated in persecution on account of race, religion, 

nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion. 

Further, an applicant who has been “firmly resettled” in a third country may 

not be admitted as a refugee under Section 2 07 of the INA , 8 U.S.C. § 1157 .

Applicants are also subject to various statutory grounds of inadmissibility, 

including criminal, security, and public health grounds, some of which may 

be waived or from which applicants may be exempted. Finally, an applic ant 

must establish that a positive exercise of discretion is merited. 28 

A USCIS officer conducts an inquiry of each principal refugee applicant 

designed to elicit information about the applicant’s claim for refugee status, 

any grounds of in admissibility , and factors related to the exercise of 

discretion . The officer asks questions about the applicant’s experiences in 

the country of origin, including problems and fears about returning (or 

remaining), as well as questions concerning the applicant’s activities, 

background, and criminal history. The office r also considers evidence about 

conditions in the country of origin and assesses the applicant’s credibility 

and claim. For derivative applicants, the officer also asks questions to 

inform th e decision of eligibility based on family relationships. 

Background Security Checks 

The safety and security of the American people remains the first and 

foremost consideration in refugee admissions processing. Refugees are the 

most thoroughly screened and vetted group to enter the United States. 

Refugee applicants of all nationalities a re required to undergo rigorous 

background security checks. Security checks include biographic checks for 

all refugee applicants and biometric (fingerprint) checks for refugee 

applicants within certain age limits . Biographic and biometric information is 

vetted against a broad array of law enforcement, intelligence community, 

and other relevant databases to help confirm identity, to check for any 

national security, criminal , or other derogatory information (including 

watchlist information), and to identify information that could inform lines of 

questioning during the inquiry . Refugee applicants must have all required 

security checks completed and fully addressed prior to an applicant’s 

admission to the United States as a refugee .

In addition, PRM and USCIS work continually with interagency partners to 

identify opportunities to enhance and refine security screening for refugee 

applicants. This includes increasing the efficacy, efficiency, and fairness of 

security screening to further enhance the rigorous security measures that 

ensure the safety and security of the American people. 29 

PROCESSING ACTIVITIES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE 

Overseas Processing Services 

In most processing locations, PRM funds an NGO or an international 

organization to manage a Resettlement Support Center (RSC) that assists in 

the processing of refugee applicants for admission to the United States. RSC 

staff pre -screen applicants for eligibility for one of the applicable processing 

priorities and prepare cases for USCIS. The RSCs assist applicants in 

completing documentary requirements and schedule USCIS refugee 

eligibility interviews. USCIS then conducts security vetting checks on 

applicants. If an applicant is conditionally approved for resettlement by 

USCIS, RSC staff guide the refugee through post -adjudication steps, includin g

completing medical screening exams and attending cultural orientation 

programs. The RSC obtains domestic sponsorship assurances, and once all 

required steps are completed, the RSC refers the case to IOM for 

transportation to the United States. 

In FY 202 4, four NGOs worked under cooperative agreements with PRM to 

operate RSCs based in Austria covering Austria and Israel (HIAS), Kenya 

covering sub -Saharan Africa (Church World Service), Türkiye covering 

Türkiye and Lebanon (International Catholic Migration Commission), and 

Thailand covering Asia (International Rescue Committee). The Department 

of State also funded IOM to operate RSCs based in El Salvador covering Latin 

America and the Caribbean, Jordan covering the Near East and North Africa, 

and Ukraine (temporarily in Poland) covering Europe and Central Asia. 

Cultural Orientation 

PRM strives to ensure refugees who are approved for admission to the 

United States are prepared for the profound life changes they will 

experience as part of the resettlement process. Pre -departure and post -

arrival cultural orientation aim to provide refugees with the vital knowledge, 

skills, and insights they need to adapt to their new lives and be well -

positioned to achieve self -sufficiency. 30 

PRM supports a robust technical assistance program, the  Cultural 

Orientation Resource Exchange  (CORE) , which works to ensure refugees 

receive consistent messages in pre -departure and post -arrival cultural 

orientation and trains resettlement staff to deliver effective cultural 

orientation. In addition, CORE helps providers respond to unforeseen 

events tha t impact resettlement and require rapid adaptation and critical 

communication to resettling refugees, such as during the COVID -19 

pandemic. CORE also develops and manages refugee -facing resources and 

digital channels to augment instructor -led class es, support refugee self -

learning, and build the digital skills that will help them achieve self -

sufficiency. 

RSCs offer pre -departure cultural orientation, usually one week to three 

months before departure. The orientation is generally one to five days and 

is provided by trained educators using appropriate teaching methodologies. 

Cultural orientation programming is guided by objectives and indicators that 

cover 14 topics. Each RSC over many years has established its own 

curriculum that is customized as needed to the populations receiving it, 

based on these objectives and indicators. RSCs r egularly review and update 

their curriculum and incorporate new materials and activities from CORE as 

needed. The RSCs have specific cultural orientation trainers who deliver the 

sessions. Resettlement agencies have access to a comprehensive cu rriculum 

via the CORE website. “T he Road Ahead” supports local providers in 

delivering effective cultural orientation . The curriculum serves as a 

foundation and can be adapted to align with local needs. 

Staff at local resettlement agencies provide the post -arrival cultural 

orientation, beginning right after arrival in the United States. As part of the 

resettlement cultural orientation continuum, post -arrival cultural 

orientation reviews and builds upon p re -departure cultural orientation by 

grounding lessons in the local context. For example, state health care 

coverage is explained as refugees learn how to access and pay for health 

services; refugees are introduced to the local public school system and le arn 31 

about customary student behavior and expectations of parental 

involvement; and refugees learn about the amenities and services available 

in their new communities. 

Cultural adjustment is also addressed including gender dynamics, child 

rearing, and changing family roles. Laws and responsibilities are also a 

focus. In many locations, local partners, such as representatives from health 

care facilities, banks, and loca l police stations, are invited to attend cultural 

orientation to break down barriers and build trust. Volunteers in many 

communities also help with cultural orientation by, for example, 

accompanying refugees to neighborhood grocery stores or the library o r by 

showing them how public transportation works in their cities. 

Transportation 

The cost of transportation to the United States is provided to refugees in the 

form of an interest -free loan from IOM. Refugees are responsible for 

repaying these loans over time, beginning six months after their arrival, 

although it is possible to reques t a deferral based on inability to begin 

paying at that time. The underlying principle of the IOM travel loan program 

is that refugees ’ financial participation in making repayments against their 

debt will not only defray U.S. resettlement costs but also strengthen the 

refugees’ determination to make a success of their migration and help 

establish their credit rating in the United States . IOM billing and credit 

reporting policies are designed to encourage repayment of these interest -

free loans without placing undue hardship on refugees as they adjust to 

their new lives in the United States. 

Reception and Placement (R&P) 

In FY 202 4, PRM funded cooperative agreements with ten non -profit 

resettlement agencies to provide initial resettlement services to refugees 

and Afghan SIVs arriving in the United States pursuant to the authority in 

Section 412(b) of the INA, 8 U.S.C. § 1522(b) , as amended . The resettlement 

agencies are responsible for providing initial reception and core services to 32 

arriving refugees. These services are provided according to standards of 

care within a framework of outcomes and indicators developed jointly by 

the NGO community, state refugee coordinators, and U.S. government 

agencies. These national resettlement orga nizations maintain a nationwide 

network of approximately 355 affiliated offices in 226 communities to 

provide services. Two of the organizations also maintain a network of 28 

affiliated offices through which they place unaccompanied refugee minors 

into fo ster care, a program administered and funded by HHS .

Using R&P funds from PRM, supplemented by funds and in -kind 

contributions from private and other sources, the participating resettlement 

agencies provide the following services, consistent with the terms of the 

R&P cooperative agreement s:

• Agreement to accept cases for management by local resettlement 

affiliates (a process known as “assurance”); 

• Pre -arrival resettlement planning, including placement; 

• Reception on arrival; 

• Basic needs support (including housing, furnishings, food, and 

clothing) for at least 30 days; 

• Cultural orientation; 

• Assistance with access to health, employment, education, and other 

services, as needed; and 

• Development and implementation of an initial service plan for each 

refugee. 

In FY 2024, PRM approved six of the national resettlement organizations to 

offer virtual R&P services (VR&P) to select beneficiaries, including Afghan 

SIV holder s, Afghan refugees, and refugees from Latin America. VR&P 

services are provided through remote case managers instead of relying on 

local affiliate offices. Modeled after the successful Virtual Afghan Placement 

and Assistance program, VR&P empowers refugees who have opted into this 

R&P model (and after a n assessment ) to make their own decisions on 

housing, material needs, and other items by receiving per capita direct 

assistance once assured to VR&P. 33 

OFFICE OF REFUGEE RESETTLEMENT 

Through the Refugee Act, Congress directed the Office of Refugee 

Resettlement ( ORR ) in HHS to provide refugees with resettlement assistance 

that includes employment training, English language training, cash 

assistance (in a manner that promotes early self -sufficiency), and job 

placement – including providing women with equal opportunities to 

employment as men. ORR’s mission is to promote the health, well -being, 

and stability of refugees and other eligible individuals and families, through 

culturally respo nsive, trauma -informed, and strengths -based services. ORR 

can only provide these benefits t o the extent possible based on the 

availability of Congressional appropriations. 

ORR refugee benefits are also authorized by Congress for asylees, Cuban and 

Haitian entrants, certain Amerasians from Vietnam, victims of a severe form 

of trafficking, Iraqi and Afghan SIV holders , and certain Afghan and Ukrainian 

humanitarian parolees. In addition to refugee arrivals through the USRAP, 

ORR is projecting to serve 531,500 other arrivals in FY 2025, the majority of 

whom are expected to arrive as Cuban and Haitian Entrants through lawful 

pathways. ORR funds and administers several critical programs for eligible 

populations , some of which are highlighted below. 

Refugee Cash and Medical Assistance 

Refugees who are not eligible for Temporary Assistance for Needy Families 

(TANF) or Supplemental Security Income are eligible to receive Refugee Cash 

Assistance (RCA) upon arrival. Refugees who are not eligible for Medicaid 

are eligible to receive Refugee Medical Assistance (RMA) upon arrival. 

While refugees are statutorily authorized to receive RCA and RMA for up to 

36 months from arrival, funding limitations have historically limited RCA and 

RMA availability . In FY 20 22, ORR expanded RCA and RMA from eight 

months to up to 12 months of assistance . RCA and RMA are administered 

by states and replacement designees, wh ich are private entities designated 

by ORR to administer the domestic resett lement program in a state that has 34 

withdrawn from administration of the program. In state -administered 

programs that operate a publicly administered RCA program, RCA benefits 

are based on cash -benefit levels established by state TANF programs. In 

states that operate their RCA program through a public -private program, the 

RCA benefit is based on the higher of the RCA rates developed by ORR or the 

state TANF rates. RMA benefits are generally designed to mirror those 

provided through the state’s Medicaid program. 

Refugee Support Services 

ORR provides states and replacement designees with Refugee Support 

Services program (RSS ) funds. ORR distributes this funding by a formula 

based on the arrived and served ORR -eligible populations for up to the 

previous three years. Funding is time limited, and refugees can only access 

RSS services up to five years after arrival. These services include 

employment services, on -the -job training, English language instruction, 

vocational training, case management, translation/interpreter services, 

socia l adjustment services, health -related services, home management, 

childcare, and transportation. 

Additionally, to assist specific groups of refugees or to target specific needs, 

ORR administers specialized RSS “set -aside” programs, which includes the 

following: Services to Older Refugees (SOR) to support integration and 

wellness for refugees aged 60 and older; Refugee School Impact (RSI), which 

also includes “Early RSI ,” to support effective integration and education for 

children from birth to age 18 and their families; Youth Mentoring to foster 

mentorships in support of positive civic and social enga gement and 

educational and vocational advancement; and Refugee Health Promotion, 

including the Refugee Mental Health Initiative, to support physical and 

emotional wellness and to build capacity within communities to address the 

mental health needs of refug ee populations, including help ing to overco me 

stigmas associated with mental health care and creating opportunities for 

social engagement to reduce isolation. 35 

ORR Matching Grant Program 

The ORR Matching Grant program (MG) is an alternative to traditional cash 

assistance provided through the ten national resettlement agencies. The 

objective of MG is to guide newly arrived refugee households toward 

economic self -sufficiency through employment within eight months of 

program eligibility (which usually begins on the date of arrival in the United 

Stat es). In MG, self -sufficiency is defined as total household income from 

employment that (1) would exceed the established state income threshold 

for TANF eligibility and (2) enables a f amily unit to support itself without 

relying on cash assistance. For each MG participant, ORR awards a per -

capita grant to participating national resettlement agencies, which then 

allocate funds to their networks of local affiliates for direct services and 

administrative expenses. Resettlement a gencies provide a 50 percent 

match to every federal dollar awarded. While enrolled in MG, refugees may 

not access ORR -funded RCA but can still access RMA. 

Through MG, local service providers ensure core support services for a 

minimum of 240 days , which include housing, transportation, food, and a 

cash allowance. Refugees also receive intensive case management and 

employment services throughout the 240 -day service period , with more 

than 78 percent of refugees attaining self -sufficien cy during that time .

Refugees who are unable to attain self -sufficiency by day 240 may access 

RCA for the remainder of the eligibility period, up to 12 months. 

Preferred Communities Program 

ORR’s Preferred Communities program (PC) provides intensive case 

management to particularly vulnerable refugees. PC supports a network of 

sites nationwide specializing in a variety of programs supporting particularly 

vulnerable populations. The program b uilds resettlement agencies’ capacity 

for placement of the most vulnerable refugees and provides long -term 

intensive case management to those with acute vulnerabilities, such as 

health or mental health needs, family strengthening needs, and single -36 

headed households. It also helps meet the unmet needs of unexpected 

arrivals. 

Specialty Programs 

ORR administers several specialty programs that promote economic mobility 

and pathways to self -sufficiency. Funded through grants to community -

based organizations, these programs help refugees advance their careers 

and obtain certifications, open small bu sinesses, build community gardens, 

engage with employers in career development, and save to purchase homes 

or cars or to pay for tuition. ORR also funds ethnic community organizations 

to help build the capacity of local providers to offer ongoing support and 

services in a culturally competent manner. 

ORR Refugee Health and Behavioral Health 

ORR services focus on providing technical assistance on domestic medical 

screening guidelines and refugee medical assistance, assessment, and 

follow -up for contagious or communicable diseases, mental health 

awareness and linkages, suicide prevention, emerg ency preparedness , and 

other health and mental health initiatives. Specifically, ORR funds RMA, 

medical screening, and refugee health promotion to support refugee 

populations. Additionally, in FY 2025, ORR plans to increase behavioral 

health services through a new grant program, Support for Trauma -Affected 

Refugees (STAR). The goals of the STAR program are the integration and 

successful achievement of sustained physical, social, emotional, and 

economic well -being of refugees whose experience of trauma is impeding 

their ab ility to function effectively at home, school, work , or in social 

settings . STAR will provide access to appropriate and effective trauma 

assistance services at both the individual and family level and include a

network of culturally responsive providers who can deliver holistic services 

to address the psychosocial needs of trauma -affected newcomers. 

ORR also funds the Survivors of Torture program to provide culturally 

competent and strengths -based services, as well as individual -centered 37 

treatment plans to restore dignity, enhance resilience, and rebuild the lives 

of all survivors of torture, regardless of immigration status. ORR also 

conducts mental -health first aid trainings to refugee -serving program staff 

and refugee community leaders to help them identify and assist refugees in 

emotional distress. Additionally, ORR provides direct services to those 

identified as survivors of torture, including physical and psychological 

treatment and rehabilitation, social and legal services to enabl e survivors to 

rebuild their lives. 

ORR Unaccompanied Refugee Minor s Program 

ORR provides funding to 15 states and the District of Columbia and 

replacement designees to administer 26 Unaccompanied Refugee Minors 

programs (URM). The URM program is separate and distinct from ORR’s 

Unaccompanied Children program, although children who become eligible 

for the URM program while in the care and custody of ORR may be referred 

for placement into the URM program . States and replacement designees 

contract with local licensed foster care agencies that provide specialized 

placements and services to unaccompanied refugee minors. 

Unaccompanied minors with refugee status identified overseas are eligible 

for the URM program , and over time , Congress has expanded eligibility to 

other unaccompanied minor populations. Unaccompanied refugee minors 

live in various placements including traditional and therapeutic foster 

homes, group homes, semi -independent and independent living, and 

residential treatment centers. The youth receive various services including 

English language training, educational and vocational training, cultural 

preservat ion, social integration, family tracing, permanency planning, 

independent living, medical care, and mental health care. ORR requires 

states to provide services to unaccompanied refugee minors in parity with 

the state’s Title IV -B and Title IV -E foster car e plans. 38 

ORR Refugee Technical Assistance 

ORR’s Refugee Technical Assistance program provides technical assistance 

to resettlement stakeholders to enhance services, strengthen organizational 

capacity, and increase community engagement. Switchboard, a project of 

the International Rescue Committee, is funded by ORR and makes its 

reso urces, trainings, and expertise available to all ORR grantees and sub -

grantees. 

ORR also funds a technical assistance provider to support grantees in its 

Survivors of Torture program. The Center for Victims of Torture’s National 

Capacity Building project supports ORR Survivor of Torture grantees by 

building capacity to provide holistic, sustainable, and integrated services and 

evaluating and strengthening the quality and sustainability of these 

programs and organizations. Refugees are determined to be eligible for the 

Services for Survivors of Torture program based on the definition of torture 

in 18 U.S.C. § 2340(1). 

In FY 202 5, ORR will launch the new National Refugee Children and Youth 

Resilience program , which aims to expand the child welfare and protection 

capacity of refugee -serving agencies through training and technical 

assistance, partnership and outreach, crisis intervention and case 

consultation, and assessment and evaluation activities. 

Lived Experience 

In recognition of the value of lived experience, ORR has prioritized creating 

opportunities to listen and respond to the voices of new arrivals and former 

refugees to adapt policy and program services to best support their unique 

needs. 

The ORR Youth Leadership Council for Refugees and Newcomers, a

component of the Youth Mentoring program , allows refugee s and 

newcomer youth s to build their leadership skills and share their experiences 

directly with ORR. As part of this council, ORR has host ed guided listening 39 

sessions and roundtable discussions on topics such as community support 

and resilience, civic engagement, leadership, professional development, 

mental health, addressing systemic racism, prejudice, and discrimination. 

ORR is working to more proactively engage Ethnic Community Self -Help 

grantees on the topic of integration. These are community -based grantees 

that comprise leadership from refugee and immigrant groups and are closely 

connected to their communities’ challenges and strengths. 

Ethnic community -based organizations play an important role in refugee 

resettlement, including improving linguistic and cultural understanding and 

filling the gaps in service provision. Through expanded engagement and 

regular listening sessions, ORR hopes to build additional capacity to support 

more refugees .

Research Initiatives 

ORR also work s to support enhanced research initiatives to demonstrate the 

positive impact refugees have on communities. The HHS Office of the 

Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation (ASPE), in collaboration with 

ORR , conducted a study , which estimated the net fiscal impact of refugees 

and asylees on government budgets. The net fiscal impact of refugees and 

asylees over a 15 -year period equaled $123.8 billion. The net fiscal benefit 

to the federal government was estimated at $31.5 billion, and the n et fiscal 

benefit to state and local governments was estimated at $92.3 billion. 

ORR ’s Annual Survey of Refugees (ASR) is the only national survey on 

refugee self -sufficiency and integration. ASR findings are included in ORR’s 

Annual Report to Congress, as required by Section 413 of the INA, 8 U.S.C. § 

1523, as amended . The 2022 ASR results provide insight into arrival 

demographics, resettlement trends, and refugee employment and 

integration. As a longer -term gauge of employment and integration. ORR’s 

recent 2022 Annual Survey of Refugees reflected: 40 

• Among refugees in the labor force, more than 85 percent are 

employed, earning an average of $16.5 0 per hour .

• More than 25 percent own home s within 5 years of arrival. 

• 70 percent took English as a second language classes since arriving in 

the U nited States , with more than 50 percent improving their English 

language proficiency. 

REGIONAL REFUGEE AD MISSIONS 

Africa 

The proposed FY 202 5 allocation for African refugees is 30,000 -50 ,000 

individuals. 

There are currently more than 8.1 million refugees on the African continent, 

approximately 25 percent of refugees under UNHCR’s mandate 

globally . New or escalating conflicts across the continent have forced 

unprecedented numbers of people to cross borders in search of safety, 

intensifying the pressure on the humanitarian infrastructure. New refugees 

are increasingly susceptible to food insecurity, conflicts, gender -based 

violence, asylum restrictions, and overcrowded camps – all compounded by 

climate shocks. 

In 2024, UNHCR estimates that more than 735,000 refugees in Africa need 

resettlement. While voluntary repatriation and local integration may be 

possible in small numbers, resettlement remains an important durable 

solution for refugees across the continent. To address these needs, the 

United S tates plans to maintain robust resettlement activities in Africa. The 

United States will continue processing Congolese, Eritrean, Sudanese, South 

Sudanese, and Somali refugees, as well as reaching populations the USRAP 

has historically only processed in s mall numbers in countries such as 

Cameroon, Ivory Coast, South Sudan, Mauritania, and Djibouti. Remote 

interviews are also planned in locations that are difficult to access due to 

security or operational constraints. 41 

According to UNHCR, Uganda hosts the largest number of refugees and 

asylum -seekers on the African continent ( more than 1.6 million) and 

continues to receive new arrivals from eastern Democratic Republic of the 

Congo (DRC), Sudan, and South Sudan, as well as from other countries in the 

region. The East, Horn of Africa , and Great Lakes Region ha ve the highest 

concentration of refugees with populations from Sudan, the DRC, South 

Sudan, and Somalia. In Ethiopia, immense humanitarian needs persist, 

including for refugees who experienced secondary displacement within 

Ethiopia during the 2020 -2022 northern conflict. 

Since the outbreak of the conflict in Sudan in April 2023, nearly 1. 9 million 

individuals have fled to neighboring countries, placing an additional strain 

on already limited resources and assistance. Chad alone has taken more 

than 604 ,000 refugees and asylum -seekers and is struggling to manage the 

humanitarian crisis. An average of 1,000 people leave Sudan for South 

Sudan on a daily basis, with more than 700 ,000 arrivals since 2023 . Among 

the recent influx from Sudan, 86 percent are women and children, many of 

whom report experiencing gender -based violence during the conflict and 

while fleeing to safety. Resettlement will remain an important protection 

and responsibility -sharing tool to support the efforts of refugee -hosting 

nations in the face of the Sudan crisis. 

The complex emergency in the DRC has contributed to the continent’s ever 

expanding refugee population. Longstanding conflict in eastern DRC that 

has recently intensif ied , along with political instability and armed clashes in 

the Sahel region, is expected to drive up the number of forcibly displaced 

and stateless persons. 

Given the protracted conflict in the DRC, a sizable number of Congolese 

refugees remain pending USRAP processing . Congolese refugees will 

continue to constitute one of the largest populations arriving in the United 

States . In addition, t he United States will accept a high volume of referrals 

from Ethiopia through the 2023 P-2 designation for certain refugees “twice 

displaced” by violence in the Tigray, Afar, and Benishangul -Gumuz regions. 42 

In addition, resettlement processing out of Chad will continue to increase in 

response to the influx from the Sudan conflict. 

The  United States is a key partner in the resettlement of unaccompanied 

refugee minors from Africa. As one of the few countries with a specialized 

foster care system for unaccompanied minors, the United States plans to 

increase the number of emergency unaccompanied refugee minor cases 

processed throughout the continent. PRM will continue to focus on 

unaccompanied refugee minors who have been evacuated 

from Libya by UNHCR through the Emergency Transit Mechanisms in 

Rwanda and Niger .

PRM has made steady progres s safely identifying, referring, processing, and 

departing LGBTQI+ individuals from Africa for resettlement in the United 

States. These individuals face specific legal and protection risks in Africa, 

where same -sex relationships are often criminalized and integration 

prospects are limited or non -existent . LGBTQI+ refugees often face 

significant insecurity, discrimination, and difficulty accessing asylum systems 

in the country of asylum. 

The United States has also made a concerted effort to advanc e stalled 

backlog cases that were referred to the USRAP prior to FY 2018. Cases 

processed in Africa represent t he largest number of backlog cases within the 

program that are now resolved, including more than 12,000 backlogged 

individ uals across the African continent that have arrived stateside since FY 

2023. Processing efficiencies, remote interviews, and close partner 

coordination will help resolve more longstanding cases. 

East Asia 

The proposed FY 2025 allocation for refugees from East Asia is 10 ,000 -

20,000 individuals. 

According to UNHCR, there are 14.3 million people of concern across Asia 

and the Pacific, including 7.2 million refugees, 245,000 asylum -seekers, 5.3 43 

million internally displaced persons, and 2.5 million stateless 

persons. Thailand, Bangladesh, and Malaysia continue to host large 

numbers of refugees and asylum -seekers from Burma , as well as Afghan, 

Iraqi, Pakistani, Somali, Sri Lankan, Sudanese, and Syrian refugees. Tens of 

thousands of refugees from more than fifty nationalities are residing in and 

around the capital cities of Bangkok, Kuala Lumpur, and Jakarta. Malaysia 

and Bangladesh currently host 90 percent of all Rohingya refugees in th e

region. 

The United States considers Rohingya a priority refugee population whose 

resettlement is an essential component of an international, comprehensive 

humanitarian response. More than 16,000 Rohingya have resettled to the 

United States since 2009, primarily from Malaysia. The United States will 

continue to focus on Rohingya resettlem ent in USRAP as well as in 

resettlement diplomacy efforts .

The four primary countries for UNHCR referrals from East Asia are 

Bangladesh, Indonesia, Malaysia, and Thailand, with a smaller number of 

referrals from other countries in the region. Three P -2 designations for 

certain ethnic Burmese, including Rohingya, residing in Bangladesh, 

Malaysia, and Thailand support large -scale resettlement of refugees from 

Burma. While refugees from Burma comprise the majority of individuals 

departing from the East Asia region, refugees from other countries including 

from Afghanistan, Cambodia, Iran, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, and Vietnam 

depart from some 14 other countries in the region .

Europe and Central Asia 

The proposed FY 202 5 allocation for refugees from Europe and Central Asia 

is 2,000 -3,000 individuals. By July 2024 , almost 3,500 refugees, of which 75 

percent qualif ied as persecuted religious minorities from the former Soviet 

Union under the Lautenberg program , arrived from this region to the United 

States. 44 

Europe hosts large refugee populations, particularly as a result of Russia’s 

war of aggression against Ukraine, as well as significant numbers of asylum -

seekers, internally displaced persons, and stateless persons. According to 

UNHCR, European countries are hosting approximately six million refugees 

from Ukraine as of June 202 4. Many other refugees have sought refuge in 

Europe by fleeing conflicts outside the region, particularly in Syria, 

Afghanistan, and Iraq. The estimate also includes persons claimin g

persecution within Eurasia, including hundreds of thousands of refugees and 

internally displaced persons in the Balkans and South Caucasus. There are 

also Belarusians and Russians seeking protection who have been fleeing the 

increased crackdown on dissent inside Belarus and Russia since February 

2022 .

Much of the refugee caseload within Eurasia falls under the direct access P -2

Lautenberg program, a family reunification program dating from 1990 

whereby individuals who were nationals and residents of the former Soviet 

Union are eligible for the USRAP if they belong to certain religious minorities 

and can show a qualifying relationship with individuals legally residing in the 

United States. P -2 applicants may include Ukrainians who fl ed Russia’s full -

scale invasion. 

In 2004, Congress expanded the Lautenberg program with the Specter 

Amendment to include persecuted religious minorities from Iran . Refugees 

resettled through the Iranian Lautenberg program have include d Jews, 

Christians, Baha’is, Sabaean -Mandaeans, and Zoroastrians. These refugees 

are counted against the Near East/South Asia regional allocation. The 

demand for this refugee program in Iran continues to grow and the 

Department of State reached arrangements with new partners in Europe 

that aim to increase annual refugee processing of Iranian minorities to more 

than 1,250 in FY 2025. 

The United States’ commitment to helping refugees, including Ukrainians, 

from the former Soviet Union is unwavering. While some Ukrainians have 

been resettled through the USRAP, the majority of Ukrainians that arrived in 

the United States since the start of the war have come on temporary status 45 

because most do not want to resettle permanently. Martial law restricts 

most male Ukrainian applicants from leaving Ukraine , and many Ukrainian 

refugees families choose to remain in Europe . Russian and Belarusian 

applicants often need to travel to the South Cauc asus or Central Asia to be 

processed and interviewed. 

Türkiye continues to host the largest refugee population in the world. 

According to UNHCR, there are more than 3. 3 million refugees in Türkiye 

since the start of 202 4, the vast majority of whom are Syrians (3. 1 million), 

with smaller numbers of Afghans, Iraqis, Iranians, and other nationalities. 

Refugees in Türkiye from a wide array of nationalities are resettled through 

USRAP Türkiye and are counted against the corresponding regional 

allocation of their country of origin .

Latin America and the Caribbean 

The proposed FY 202 5 allocation for refugees from Latin America and the 

Caribbean is 35,000 -50,000 individuals. This allocation reflects the 

unprecedented levels of displacement in the region . It further helps 

advance foreign policy priorities with partners in the region to also provide 

for a safe refuge for those individuals fleeing persecution in their homeland, 

and reaffirms the U.S. commitment to working with regional partners to 

advance the principles of safe, orderly, humane, and regular migration 

under the Los Angeles Declaration on Migration and Protection. 

According to UNHCR, countries in Latin America and the Caribbean host 

more than 21 million asylum -seekers, refugees, stateless persons, and 

internally displaced persons. The crisis in Venezuela has displaced more 

than 7.7 million Venezuelans, with 85 percent of them residing within other 

countries in Latin America and the Caribbean. Government repression in 

Nicaragua and Cuba have also forced hundreds of thousands to flee those 

countries . Protracted violence by organized criminal gangs in Guatemala, 

Honduras, and El Salvador has uprooted more than a million people from 

those three countries since 2015. Additionally, a combination of economic 

insecurity, political instability, and gang violence in Haiti ha s forced the 46 

internal displacement of 578,000 people in 2024 and has prompted 

increased outmigration. 

In FY 202 3, UNHCR submitted an all -time high number of referrals from the 

region to the USRAP and will more than quadruple that number by the end 

of FY 202 4. Refugee resettlement from Latin America between 2016 and 

2021 focused primarily on Colombians in Ecuador and Salvadorans, 

Guatemalans, and Hon durans within northern Central America ; since then, 

efforts have expand ed to more than 20 countries . Venezuelans , wh ich 

accounted for relatively few cases two years ago, have become the most -

referred nationality to USRAP operations in the region , surpassing 

Guatemalans, Salvadorans, and Hondurans. 

The United States has surpassed its commitment made in connection with 

the Los Angeles Declaration on Migration and Protection to resettle 20,000 

refugees from the Americas during FY 2023 to FY 2024. This reflects the 

Biden -Harris Administration’s strong commitment to welcoming refugees 

through established l awful pathways . Haitian and Nicaraguan refugee 

arriv als to the United States have steadily trended upward in FY 2024 , as 

referrals to the USRAP from these nationalities increased , enabling the 

United States to interview and screen people with legitimate protection 

concerns in the regions where they are .

The Safe Mobility initiative (known by the Spanish name Movilidad Segura) 

facilitate s access to protection and other lawful pathways to the United 

States and other countries via the MovilidadSegura.org website and Safe 

Mobility Offices ( SMOs ). The Safe Mobility initiative is one of the ways the 

United States is facilitating access to integration and lawful migration 

pathways. SMOs in Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, and Guatemala provide 

information about the wide range of existing services and support available 

for refugees and migrants to integrate in host countries and , when needed, 

facilitate expedited refugee processing via the USRAP as well as provide 

information and referrals to other humanitarian and labor pathways. SMOs 

also provide information and referrals to lawful pathways to third countries, 

including Canada and Spain. 47 

Since the launch of the SMO initiative in June 2023 , m ore than 230,000 

individuals have registered via MovilidadSegura.org. More than 50 ,000 

individuals have been referred to the USRAP across the four SMO countries ,

and more than 24,000 individuals have been referred for other lawful 

pathways .

Near East and South Asia 

The proposed FY 202 5 allocation for refugees from the Near East and South 

Asia is 3 0,000 -45,000 individuals. 

The Near East and South Asia region continues to host more than 8 million 

refugees, primarily Afghans, Iranians, Iraqis, Palestinians, Sri Lankans, 

Syrians, and Tibetans.  The humanitarian situation in Syria remains 

dire . Over the past 1 3 years , nearly 14 million Syrians have been displaced 

from their homes , including more than 6.7 million who are now refugees 

hosted in Türkiye , Lebanon, Jordan, and Egypt. Within Syria, human rights 

violations and abuses and armed conflict – as well as economic decline, food 

and  water scarcity, and the degradation of social services – are expected to 

continue contributing to vulnerabilities in 202 5. Humanitarian needs in the 

country, as measured by the UN, are at their highest level since the conflict 

began. Across the region, Syrian refugees remain highly vulnerable. UNHCR 

reports that Syrian nationals have the highest resettlement needs globally 

and estimates that more than 753 ,000 Syrians will need resettlement as part 

of an ongoing multi -year targeted program. In Iraq, the political and security 

environment is likely to remain challenging, while the Sudan crisis and the 

resulting displacement of millions of Sudanese across North Africa will 

continue to have a wider impact , particularly on Libya and Egypt. More than 

four million people have been displaced by the civil conflict in Yemen , and 

the humanitarian situation continue s to deteriorate as the conflict 

endures.  In Iran, people continue to seek to escape repression as the 

Govern ment of Iran continues its long history of human rights violations 

against its citizens, including using transnational repression to intimidate, 48 

silence, and exact reprisal against dissidents, journalists, and former 

insiders .

More than 774,400 Afghan nationals have been displace d since 2021 . Inside 

Afghanistan, more than 3 million Afghans are internally displaced by conflict, 

and 1 million internally displaced persons have returne d to their places of 

origin . Following the announcement of the Government of Pakistan’ s Illegal 

Foreigners Repatriation Plan in October 2023 , more than 595,000 Afghans 

have returned to Afghanistan from Pakistan – including deportations, 

assisted voluntary repatriation s, and other returns of Afghans of varying 

statuses (including UNHCR proof of registration cardholders, Afghan citizen 

cardholders, and undocumented Afghans) . As of March 2024, there are 

more than seven million Afghans in neighboring countries, including 5.5 

million Afghan refugees and Afghans in refugee -like situations in Iran and 

Pakistan alone. 

Since August 2021, the U.S. government and its partners have resettled 

more than 160,000 Afghan newcomers . As of early July 2024 , PRM has 

accepted 28, 000 P-1 and P -2 referrals for Afghan principal applicants and 

continues to process refugee cases for Afghan nationals in third countries 

around the globe.  The United States remains committed to providing 

refuge, through a range of legal pathways, for those Afghans who supported 

the U.S. mission in Afghanistan. In July 2023, PRM and USCIS began 

processing applications of Afghan refugees in Pakistan, and since January 

2024 have significantly increased processing capacity. 

International Religious Freedom Act Reporting 

The USRAP continues to be available through P -1 referrals to persons of any 

or no nationality who have been persecuted or fear persecution on account 

of religion. The Lautenberg P -2 program provides direct access for members 

of religious minority groups in Eurasia , the Baltics, and Iran. In addition, P -3

provides USRAP access to individuals of special humanitarian concern ,

including those persecuted on account of religion, who have immediate 

family members in the United States who were admitted in certain 49 

humanitarian immigrant statuses. Lastly, P -4 allows groups of American s to 

refer and sponsor refugees , including those persecuted on account of 

religion, in the United States. 

Countries of Particular Concern 

As of December 29 , 202 3, the Secretary of State designated the following 

countries as Countries of Particular Concern pursuant to Section 402(b) of 

the IRFA, 22 U.S.C. § 6442 (b), as amended. 

Africa: Eritrea 

In Eritrea, the government is engaging in or tolerating systematic and 

ongoing violations of religious freedom. The Eritrean government only 

recognize s four officially registered religious groups: the Eritrean Orthodox 

Tewahedo Church, Sunni Islam, the Catholic Church, and the Evangelical 

Lutheran Church of Eritrea. The Eritrean government continues to imprison 

individuals on the basis of their religion. NGOs estimate between 130 to 

1,000 people are detained for their faith. At least 2 0 Jehovah’s Witnesses 

continue to be imprisoned for their refusal to participate in military service 

or renounce their faith. The Government of Eritrea also continues to deny 

citizenship to Jehovah’s Witnesses after stripping them of citizenship in 1994 

for refusing to participate in the referendum that created the independent 

state of Eritrea. 

East Asia: Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (D PRK ), People’s 

Republic of China ( PRC ), and Burma 

The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK) severely restricts 

religious freedom, including all government -organized religious activity, and 

reportedly continues to execute, torture, arrest, and physically abuse 

individuals for religious activities . While the constitutions of the DPRK, the 

People’s Republic of China ( PRC ), and Burma provide for freedom of religion 

or religious belief , in practice and in law , these governments heavily restrict 

or repress religious activities and freedom. Furthermore, a military coup in 

Burma in February 2021 has further undermined those human rights 50 

enshrined in Burma’s constitution and laws and resulted in further 

repression of religious freedom and related human rights. In March 2022, 

the Secretary of State determined the military of Burma committed 

genocide and crimes against humanity against Muslim Rohingya. In January 

2021, the Secretary of State determined that, s ince at least March 2017, the 

PRC has committed genocide and crimes against humanity against 

predominantly Muslim Uyghurs and members of other ethnic and religious 

minority groups in X injiang. 

Europe and Central Asia: Russia, Tajikistan , and Turkmenistan 

The Russian government misuses the law on extremism to restrict the 

peaceful activities of members of religious minority groups, including 

Muslim and Christian groups. In both Russia and Russia -occupied areas of 

Ukraine, the Russian government has harassed, tortured, or impriso ned 

hundreds for their faith. 

Tajikistan law prohibits persons younger than the age of 18 from 

participating in public religious activities, and the government -supported 

highest Islamic religious body bans Hanafi Sunni women from attending 

mosques. The Government of Turkmenistan has imprisoned an unknown 

number of Muslims for their religious beliefs. Turkmenistan law prohibits all 

activity by unregistered religious groups , and the grounds for approval of 

registration remains arbitrary. 

Near East and South Asia: Iran, Pakistan, and Saudi Arabia 

In Iran and Pakistan, the governments use blasphemy and defamation of 

religion laws to restrict religious freedom, constrain the rights of religious 

minorities , limit freedom of expression, and imprison those accused. The 

Government of Iran convicts and executes dissidents, political reformers, 

and peaceful protesters on charges of “enmity against God” and spreading 

anti -Islamic propaganda. In Saudi Arabia, freedom of religion is not provided 

for under the law. The Saudi government constrains the rights of religious 51 

minorities, and incarcerates individuals accused of apostasy and blasphemy 

against Islam. 

Western Hemisphere: Cuba and Nicaragua 

In Cuba and Nicaragua, the governments used forced exile, unjust arrests, 

violence and intimidation, and prolonged detention without charges of 

religious actors, who were expressing their religious beliefs, to stamp out 

any perceived dissent. The Government of Nicaragua also denationalized 

hundreds of individuals in conjunction with forced exile and other forms of 

persecution , including Catholic clergy and affiliates of the Catholic Church .

Special Watch List 

As of December 29, 2023, the Secretary of State also designated the 

following countries to the Special Watch List pursuant to Section 402(b) of 

the IRFA, 22 U.S.C. § 6442(b), as amended. 

Africa: Central African Republic and Comoros 

In Central African Republic, security actors, including the Forces Armées 

Centrafricaines (FACA), police, and gendarmes, used violence, 

discrimination, and threats to target individuals and communities based on 

their actual or perceived religious affiliation. 

In Comoros, the constitution defines national identity based on one official 

state religion, Sunni Islam, but proclaims equality of rights and obligations 

for all, regardless of religious belief. However, this is understood to be 

freedom of belief for foreigners. The constitution also specifies that Shafi’i 

Sunni Islam regulates worship and social life. Proselytizing any religion other 

than Sunni Islam is illegal , and the law prohibits performance of non -Sunni 

rituals based on the principle of “affronting society’s cohesion and 

endangering national unity.” Individuals who convert from Sunni Islam to 

Christianity or Shia Islam are often shunned. 52 

Europe: Azerbaijan 

In Azerbaijan, the government maintains control over religious practices and 

arrests, imprisons, and harasses religious actors. The Azerbaijani 

government granted the State Committee for Work with Religious 

Associations (SCRWA) sole responsibility for the hiring and firing of all imams 

and the authority to approve the appointment of religious leaders in non -

Islamic religious communities . The SCRWA required religious groups to 

cease religious activity in the absence of an appointed cleric, approves the 

content of religious literature read during meetings and sermons at 

mosques, establishes registration requirements for all religious gro ups, and 

bans activities by unregistered religious groups. Any offense committed 

against the SCRWA regulations is punishable by fines or imprisonment. The 

government arrests religious activists and Shia Muslims whom they consider 

“nonconforming ,” specifically, the unregistered Shia group Muslim Unity 

Movement (MUM), which the government considers an illegal organization. 

MUM members report authorities physically abused them and sexually 

assaulted them while in custody. 

Near East: Algeria 

The Algerian government has increasingly restricted religious freedom, often 

punitively or violently, for religious minority communities through numerous 

government agencies. The government most often uses the 2006 and 2012 

laws governing practices of religion and association to target the Protestant 

Church of Algeria, other Protestant churches, and the Ahmadi Muslim 

community. Because these churches and religious communities are not 

allowed to register as religious groups, their gatherings, worship services, 

and other religious and administrative activities are deemed illegal by the 

government. 

East Asia: Vietnam 

In Vietnam, the government maintains significant control over religious 

practices in the stated interest of national security, including mandating 53 

registration of groups under government -sponsored religious 

organizations. Authorities in certain provinces frequently force individuals 

not registered under state -sponsored organizations to renounce their faith, 

and the authorities harass, intimidate, threaten, arrest, and detain those 

who peacefully advocate for freedom of religion or belief. 

North Korean Human Rights Act Reporting 

As reflected in the North Korean Human Rights Act, 22 U.S.C. § 7845(b), as 

amended, the United States remains deeply concerned about the human 

rights situation of North Koreans , both inside the DPRK and in other 

countries around the world . The United States began resettling interested, 

eligible North Korean refugees and their family members in 2006 and 

remains committed to continuing this program. 

REFUGEE ADMISSIONS TO THE UNITED STATES 

In FY 202 3, the USRAP admitted 60,014 refugees from 75 countries. The 

Democratic Republic of the Congo , Syria, Afghanistan , and Burma 

collectively comprised more than two -thirds of total admissions . (See Table 

IV.) 

The demographic characteristics of refugee arrivals from the 20 largest 

source countries (representing 96 percent of total arrivals) in FY 202 3

illustrate the variation among refugee groups. The median age of all FY 

202 3 arrivals was 20 years, ranging from a median age of 16 years for 

arrivals from Syria to 37 years of age for arrivals from Iran. In FY 202 3, 49.95 

percent of all arriving refugees were female, and 50. 38 percent of all arriving 

refugees were male. (See Table V.) 

Of the total arrivals in FY 202 3, roughly 11.2 4 percent were younger than 

the age of five, 34 .08 percent were of school age (5 -17 years old) , 52.9 0

percent were of working age (18 -64 years old) , and 1. 78 percent were of 

retirement age (65 years and older) . (See Table VI.) Considerable variation 

among refugee groups can be seen among specific age categories. 54 

During FY 202 3, 50.7 7 percent of all arriving refugees resettled in 10 states :

Texas (8. 42 percent), New York (6.4 2 percent), California (6.11 percent), 

Pennsylvania (4. 59 percent), North Carolina (4. 37 percent) , Arizona (4. 34 

percent), Ohio (4. 21 percent), Kentucky (4. 19 percent), Michigan (4. 08

percent), and Washington (4 .0 4 percent). (See Table VII.) 55 

ADMISSIONS TABLES AND STATISTICS 

TABLE II 

USRAP Projected Arrivals by Region, FY 202 4

REGION 

FY 202 4

CEILING 

FY 202 4 PROJECTED 

ARRIVALS 

Africa  30,000 - 50,000  32,5000 -34,500 

East Asia  10,000 - 20,000  6,500 -8, 500 

Europe and Central Asia  2,000 - 3,000 * 3,000 

Latin America/Caribbean  35,000 - 50,000  23,500 -25,500 

Near East/South Asia  30,000 - 45,000  27 ,500 -29,5 00 

Total  125,000  100,000 

* In July 2024, the Department of State transfer red unused admissions 

allocated to other regions to the Europe and Central Asia region to increase 

that regional allocation to 2,000 -3,500 .56 

TABLE III 

USRAP Admissions, FY 202 3

REGION 

FY 202 3

CEILING 

FY 202 3

ACTUAL 

ARRIVALS 

Africa  40,000  24,481 

East Asia  15,000  6,262 

Europe and Central Asia  15,000  2,765 

Latin America/Caribbean  15,000  6,312 

Near East/South Asia  35,000  20,194 

Regional Subtotal  120,000  60,014 

Unallocated Reserve  5,000 

Total  125,000  60,014 57 

TABLE IV

USRAP Admissions by Country of Origin, FY 202 3

Country of Origin 

Individual 

Arrivals 

Percentage of Total Arrivals 

Grand Total  60,014  100% 

Dem. Rep. Congo  18,145  30.2 4%

Syria  10,781  17.96% 

Afghanistan  6,594  10.9 9%

Burma  6,185  10.3 1%

Guatemala  1,748  2.91% 

Sudan  1,635  2.72% 

Venezuela  1,442  2.40% 

Somalia  1, 385  2. 31%

Ukraine  1,337  2.2 3%

Iraq  1,235  2.0 6%

Colombia  1,165  1.94% 

El Salvador  1,056  1.7 6%

Eritrea  973  1. 62 %

Iran  743  1.2 4%

Central African 

Republic  634  1.0 6%

Honduras  598  1.00 %

Republic of South 

Sudan  592  0.9 9%

Pakistan  492  0.8 2%

Moldova  489  0.8 2%

Ethiopia  441  0.7 4%

Burundi  335  0.5 6%

Russia  297  0. 50 %

Nicaragua  217  0.36% 

Yemen  204  0.3 4%

Armenia  190  0.3 2%

Kyrgyzstan  146  0.24% 

Belarus  126  0.2 1%

Uzbekistan  90  0.1 5%

Senegal  86  0.14% 

Rwanda  85  0.14% 

Kazakhstan  70  0.1 2%

Palestin ian Territories  56  0.09% 

Cuba  45 0.0 8%58 

Vietnam  45  0.0 8%

Uganda  39  0.0 7%

Haiti  34  0.0 6%

Cameroon  29  0.04 8%

Mali  26  0.04 3%

Guinea  25  0.04 2%

Sri Lanka  22 0. 037%

Ivory Coast  22  0.03 7%

Nepal  18  0.0 30%

Bhutan  17  0.028 %

China  15  0.02 5%

Tajikistan  11  0.018% 

Cambodia  10  0.01 7%

Liberia  9 0.01 5%

Türkiye  8 0.013% 

Indonesia  7 0.01 2%

Libya  6 0.0 10% 

Kenya  6 0.0 10% 

Turkmenistan  5 0.008% 

Egypt  5 0.008% 

Lithuania  4 0.00 7%

Jordan  4 0.00 7%

Namibia  3 0.00 5%

Jamaica  3 0.00 5%

Algeria  3 0.00 5%

Zimbabwe  2 0.003% 

Tunisia  2 0.003% 

Peru  2 0.003% 

Chad  2 0.003% 

Zambia  1 0.00 2%

Togo  1 0.00 2%

Tanzania  1 0.00 2%

Nigeria  1 0.00 2%

Niger  1 0.00 2%

Morocco  1 0.00 2%

Lebanon  1 0.00 2%

India  1 0.00 2%

Guyana  1 0.00 2%

Costa Rica  1 0.00 2%

Burkina Faso  1 0.00 2%59 

Benin  1 0.00 2%

Bangladesh  1 0.00 2%

Source: Department of State, Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration, Refugee Processing Center 60 

TABLE V 

Sex and Median Age of Refugee Arrivals, FY 202 3

Rank  Country of 

Origin 

Refugees 

Admitted 

Median Age  % Female  % Male 

1 Dem. Rep. 

Congo 

18,145  18  49.95%  50.05% 

2 Syria  10,781  16  47.92%  52.08% 

3 Afghanistan  6,594  22  50.77%  49.23% 

4 Burma  6,185  21  48.78%  51.22% 

5 Guatemala  1,748  21  54.69%  45.31% 

6 Sudan  1,635  21  45.87%  54.13% 

7 Venezuela  1,442  27  51.11%  48.89% 

8 Somalia  1,385  23  50.40%  49.60% 

9 Ukraine  1,337  23  50.49%  49.51% 

10  Iraq  1,235  28  47.45%  52.55% 

11  Colombia  1,165  22  51.16%  48.84% 

12  El Salvador  1,056  23  58.43%  41.57% 

13  Eritrea  973  21  47.79%  52.21% 

14  Iran  743  37  44.68%  55.32% 

15  Central 

African 

Republic 

634  18  49.53%  50.47% 

16  Honduras  598  23  52.84%  47.16% 

17  Republic of 

South Sudan 

592  18  50.00%  50.00% 

18  Pakistan  492  23  47.76%  52.24% 

18  Moldova  489  26  54.19%  45.81% 

20  Ethiopia  441  22  50.79%  49.21% 

21  All other 

countries 

2,344  27  47.74%  52.26% 

TOTAL  60,014  20  49.62%  50.38%   

> Source :Department of State, Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration, Refugee Processing Center

61 

TABLE VI 

SELECT AGE CATEGORIES OF REFUGEE ARRIVALS , FY 2023 

RANK  COUNTRY OF 

> ORIGIN

YOUNGER  

> THAN

5 YEARS 

SCHOOL AGE 

(5 -17) 

WORKING AGE 

(18 -64) 

RETIREMENT  

> AGE

(65 AND 

> OVER

)

1 Dem. Rep. 

Congo 

14.89%  34.24%  49.05%  1.82% 

2 Syria  9.38%  44.49%  45.37%  0.77% 

3 Afghanistan  9.63%  30.83%  57.39%  2.15% 

4 Burma  13.40%  32.64%  52.77%  1.18% 

5 Guatemala  9.38%  31.98%  57.21%  1.43% 

6 Sudan  11.80%  31.07%  55.90%  1.22% 

7 Venezuela  6.45%  28.92%  63.04%  1.60% 

8 Somalia  5.92%  28.88%  63.03%  2.17% 

9 Ukraine  13.09%  31.41%  49.21%  6.28% 

10  Iraq  4.94%  24.70%  66.15%  4.21% 

11  Colombia  10.64%  31.59%  57.17%  0.60% 

12  El Salvador  8.14%  31.16%  58.81%  1.89% 

13  Eritrea  7.71%  32.89%  59.10%  0.31% 

14  Iran  2.42%  9.96%  81.70%  5.92% 

15  Central 

African 

Republic 

8.83%  40.85%  49.37%  0.95% 

16  Honduras  9.87%  28.93%  59.87%  1.34% 

17  Republic of 

South Sudan 

7.77%  39.53%  52.03%  0.68% 

18  Pakistan  5.28%  32.93%  60.57%  1.22% 

19  Moldova  12.47%  25.15%  55.21%  7.16% 

20  Ethiopia  12.24%  32.43%  53.97%  1.36% 

21  All other 

countries 

8.32%  25.51%  63.27%  2.90% 

Total  11.24%  34.08%  52.90%  1.78%  

> Source: Department of State, Bureau of Population Refugee and Migration, Refugee Processing Center

62 

TABLE VII 

REFUGEE ARRIVALS BY STATE OF INITIAL RESETTLEMENT FY 2023 

STATE  TOTAL REFUGEE ARRIVALS  PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL ARRIVALS 

Texas  5,053  8.4 2%

New York  3,851  6.4 2%

California  3,667  6.11% 

Pennsylvania  2,756  4. 59 %

North Carolina  2,621  4.3 7%

Arizona  2,605  4.34% 

Ohio  2,52 4 4. 21%

Kentucky  2,51 4 4. 19%

Michigan  2,447  4.0 8%

Washington  2,423  4. 04%

Illinois  2,331  3.88% 

Georgia  2,228  3.71% 

Florida  1,899 3.16% 

Minnes ota  1,53 1 2.55% 

Iowa  1,515  2.52% 

Indiana  1,444  2.4 1%

Colorado  1,42 4 2.37% 

Wisconsin  1,408  2.3 5%

Missouri  1,402  2.3 4%

Virginia  1,381  2.30% 

Maryland  1,331  2.2 2%

Massachusetts  1,247  2.0 8%

Tennesse e 1,132  1.8 9%

Utah  893  1.4 9%

Nebraska  849  1.41% 

Oregon  844  1.4 1%

Idaho  796  1.3 3%

Kansas  784  1.3 1%

South Carolina  683  1.1 4%

Connecticut  672  1.1 2%

New Jersey  550  0.9 2%

Nevada  415  0.69% 

Maine  402  0.6 7%

Oklahoma  330  0.5 5%

Vermont  318  0.5 3%

New Mexico  286  0.4 8%63 

South Dakota  202  0.3 4%

Rhode Island  191  0.3 2%

North Dakota  184  0.3 1%

New Hampshire  171  0.28% 

Arkansas  148  0.2 5%

Delaware  130  0.2 2%

Montana  130  0.2 2%

Alabama  106  0.1 8%

Louisiana  105  0.17% 

Alaska  79  0.13 %

Mississippi  9 0.1 5%

District of Columbia  3 0.00 5%

TOTAL  60,014  100% 64 

TABLE VIII 

Funding for Refugee Processing and Resettlement 

FY 202 4 and FY 202 5

AGENCY  FY 202 4

AVAILABILITY 

(IN MILLIONS )

ESTIMATED 

FY 202 5

AVAILABILITY 

(IN MILLIONS )

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 

U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services 

Refugee Processing 1 $126.5  $139.6 

DEPARTMENT OF STATE 

Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration 

Refugee Admissions 2 3 4 $1,3 21. 8 $1,215.2 

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES 

Administration for Children and Families, 

Office of Refugee Resettlement 

Refugee Resettlement 5 $1,352.2  $3,7 85 .5

TOTALS  $2, 800.5  $5 ,140 .3 

> 1

FY 2024 projected costs are based on payroll and general expenses that support USCIS 

refugee processing activities, reimbursement for following -to -join refugee processing 

conducted by Department of State on behalf of USCIS, and certain International Coope rative 

Administrative Support Services (ICASS) and Capital Security Cost Sharing (CSCS) costs and other 

international operations costs related to USCIS international offices that support refugee 

processing. FY 2025 projections assume that funding levels match the President’s FY 2025 

budget request submitted to Congress, which is subject to Congressional budget action. All 

figures are estimates.  

> 2

FY 202 4: Equals the sum of FY 202 4 Migration and Refugee Assistance (MRA) allocation of 

$1,243.3 million, $ 68.5 million in MRA carryover from FY 202 3, and an estimate of $ 10 million 

in prior year MRA recoveries. Some FY 202 4 funds will be carried forward into FY 202 5. 

> 3

FY 202 5: Equals the FY 2025 MRA budget request of $1,215.2 million.  

> 4

Funding in FY 202 4 and FY 202 54 does not include funding from the ERMA or Enduring 

Welcome Administrative Expenses accounts , which covers costs associated with Enduring 

Welcome.  

> 5

FY 2024 and FY 2025: In addition to refugees, ORR refugee program benefits and services are 

also provided to asylees, Cuban and Haitian entrants, certain Amerasians from Vietnam, victims 

of a severe form of trafficking who have received certification or eligibility letters from ORR, 65 

Iraqi and Afghan SIV holders , and certain Afghan and Ukrainian parolees. However, only 

refugees are included in the refugee admissions ceiling; there is no admissions ceiling or target 

for the other ORR -eligible populations. The estimated funding to provide cash and medical 

assistance, domestic medical screenings, and refugee social services for all ORR eligible 

populations, are included here. ORR received $871 million in regular FY 2024 appropriations, as 

well as $481 million in emergency appropriations. These amounts are reflecte d in the above 

funding chart. ORR estimates do not include any prior year carryover funding or 

reprogramming . Funding estimates to support all ORR -eligible populations in mainstream 

services such as TANF, Medicaid, and Supplemental Security Income are also not included, as 

they are not appropriated to ORR. In addition to base funding requested to support the 

Transitional and Medical Services and Refugee Support Services line items, the President’s FY 

2025 Budget request includes a $2.9 billion emergency supplemental appropriation. 66 

TABLE IX 

UNHCR Resettlement Referrals Submitted by Resettlement Country – 2023 1

(January -December 2023) 

RESETTLEMENT COUNTRY  NUMBER OF UNHCR 

REFUGEES REFERRED TO 

EACH COUNTRY 

PERCENT OF TOTAL 

NUMBER OF UNHCR 

REFUGEES REFERRED 

GLOBALLY 

United States  105,490  67.86% 

Australia  14,377  9.2 5%

Canada  13,194  8.4 9%

Germany  6,931  4.4 6%

France  3,804  2.4 5%

New Zealand  2,386  1.53% 

Norway  2,358  1.5 2%

Finland  1,263  0.81% 

Spain  1,198  0.77% 

Sweden  803  0.5 2%

Italy  770  0. 50 %

The Netherlands  635  0.4 1%

The United Kingdom  559  0.3 6%

Switzerland  427  0.27% 

Portugal  424  0.27% 

Romania  246  0.1 6%

Denmark  201  0.1 3%

Belgium  184  0.1 2%

Slovenia  131  0.08% 

Japan  64  0.04% 

TOTAL  155,4 45    

> Source: UNHCR, actual data current as of June 2024
> 1

The figures provided are primarily limited to UNHCR country operations with allocated quotas and 

specific commitments to meet; additional submissions may have been made by other operations. The 

table reflects only the number of refugee referrals UNHCR submitted to resettlement countries and 

does not reflect actual number of refugees resettled in each country.
