Title: Jindal bars Syrian refugees from Louisiana

URL Source: https://www.thenewsstar.com/story/news/2015/11/16/jindal-bars-syrian-refugees-louisiana/75878350/

Published Time: 2015-11-16T18:53:57Z

Markdown Content:
BATON ROUGE —Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal issued an executive order Monday barring more Syrian refugees from settling in the state and instructing State Police to monitor those already here in what has become a late-cycle campaign issue among the candidates hoping to replace Jindal.

Jindal, who was campaigning for president in Wyoming Monday, directed all state agencies to use "all lawful means to prevent the resettlement of Syrian refugees in the state of Louisiana while this order is in effect."

The order follows the Islamic State terrorist attacks in France Friday that killed more than 120 people. At least one of the terrorists in France was identified as a Syrian refugee.

U.S. State Department officials have said 14 Syrian refugees already settled in Louisiana— seven in Kenner, six in New Orleans and one in Baton Rouge.

State Police Col. Mike Edmonson, who discussed the troopers' role described within the executive order during a news conference in the Capitol Monday, tried to reassure Louisianians while criticizing the U.S. State Department for not being forthcoming with information.

"We know of no threat to any person, business or organization in Louisiana," Edmonson said. "We began looking for any connective threats to Louisiana 15 minutes after the France attacks and have continued to do so."

Edmonson said his agency doesn't know the identities or specific addresses of any Syrian refugees already in Louisiana nor is he necessarily seeking them.

But he said the State Department hasn't answered questions about the process of vetting those already here.

"We have more questions than answers," he said. "The federal government has done an extremely poor job in that area. At least tell us you've done that."

Democrat state Rep. John Bel Edwards and Republican U.S. Sen. David Vitter, the finalists in Saturday's gubernatorial runoff election, both supported Jindal's order, which many other governors — among them those in Alabama, Arkansas, Texas —also issued.

“Louisiana should halt completely the entry of refugees from Syria,” Edwards in a statement. "I’ve been in touch with State Police and the sheriffs to ensure that we maintain public safety in Bobby’s absence. But Bobby is MIA. We need a governor who will lead on this issue from the front, on the ground.”

Vitter told Gannett Louisiana he also "strongly agrees" with Jindal's order and pointed to a Sept. 28 letter he sent to President Obama opposing offering sanctuary to Syrians.

"I've been very concerned about this issue even before France," said Vitter, who accused Edwards of planning to cooperate with Obama.

Opponents criticized Vitter for missing two U.S. Armed Services Committee hearings on Syria from 2012-14, but Vitter insisted he is "very well informed. I attended several top-level briefings," he said.

U.S. Reps. Ralph Abraham, R-Alto, and Garret Graves, R-Baton Rouge, are co-sponsors of a bill introduced earlier this year that would prohibit the admission of refugees into the country until Congress passes a joint resolution giving the U.S. Department of Homeland Security authority to resume admitting them.

“I saw this problem coming months ago and called on the President to act then," Abraham said. "He did not, and now we have a situation where we aren’t sure who is coming into Louisiana and the United States.

"We simply cannot allow people from Syria into this country without knowing their backgrounds. After the attacks on Paris, people are right to be concerned that terrorists could infiltrate this country as they did in France. Allowing Syrian refugees into this country must stop, and it must stop immediately.”

U.S. Sen. Bill Cassidy, R-La., also agrees with Jindal’s executive order and questioned whether the administration can properly vet Syrian refugees.

“The president has zero credibility when he claims Syrian refugees will be screened,’’ Cassidy said in a statement.

State Department officials said they’re aware of the governors’ concerns and take them seriously, but disagree that many refugees from the region“represent any kind of real threat.’’

All refugees undergo a stringent security process before entering the United States, said Mark Toner, a spokesman for the State Department.

“It’s not something we take lightly,’’ said Toner. “We stand by our process.’’

Toner said the administration is committed to its goal of accepting 10,000 Syrian refugees in fiscal year 2016.

Still, Toner said the administration will weigh the concerns of governors.

“Our approach to this is, ‘You have concerns; let’s have a dialogue. Let’s consult. Let’s talk this through. Let’s try to address your concerns and alleviate those concerns,’’ Toner said.“We feel very strongly that we have a process in place that allows for the safe resettlement of refuges. We stand by the process. It’s rigorous. It’s effective.’’

One refugee advocacy organization said the governors are setting themselves up for a discrimination lawsuit.

“You can’t restrict certain nationalities coming to your state,” said Jen Smyers, director of policy and advocacy with the Immigration and Refugee Program at Church World Service.

_Gannett's Deborah Berry and USA Today contributed to this report._

_Follow Greg Hilburn on Twitter @GregHilburn1_
