Title: 'Thoughts and prayers are not enough': Why the US has so many mass shootings

URL Source: https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/03/thoughts-and-prayers-are-not-enough-why-the-us-has-so-many-mass-shootings

Published Time: 2015-10-03T10:00:04.000Z

Markdown Content:
T here was a palpable weariness in President Obama’s official response on Thursday to the gun carnage at Umpqua community college in Oregon. He leaned repeatedly on the word “another” – another mass shooting, another community stunned with grief, more American families “whose lives have been changed forever”.

But underneath the tired exterior of a president who has had to deliver essentially the same speech nine times over the past six years, there was also an evident seething anger. “Our thoughts and prayers are not enough,” he said. “It does not capture the heartache and grief we should feel, and it does nothing to prevent this carnage being repeated somewhere else in America.”

That Obama had rediscovered his anger over gun violence was news in itself, because for most of the past three years it has been lacking. He demonstrated the same passion after the 2012 slaying in Connecticut of 20 five-year-old children and six of their adult carers in Newtown. He said bullishly then: “We can’t tolerate this any more. These tragedies must end. And to end them, we must change.”

At that time, Obama was not the only person in the US who was convinced that the mowing down of 20 young children in their classrooms with a Bushmaster semi-automatic rifle would force the country to finally get serious about addressing the epidemic of gun violence.

But since Newtown there have been 994 mass shootings in the US and, according to the website shootingtracker.com, almost 300 this year alone.

Yet when Obama invested considerable amounts of his second-term political capital trying to fix the problem in the wake of Newtown, he quickly foundered on the rock of National Rifle Association intransigence combined with the political expediency – some would say cowardice – of Congress. A proposal to begin closing some of the most glaring loopholes in the country’s exceptionally lax gun laws collapsed after moderate Republicans and four Democratic senators caved to pressure from the gun lobby.

Despairing of any action from Congress, Obama issued 23 executive orders under his own presidential powers that fine-tuned some regulatory areas without ever truly tackling the problem.

But the ongoing stream of mass shootings has been testimony to the inefficacy of those measures. With sickening regularity, Obama has been forced to stand in front of the White House podium and give yet another rendition of his post-tragedy address, like a gun rampage edition of Groundhog Day. Each time he has made the speech, his words have come across as a little more limp, a little more pro forma – “routine” was how he himself put it on Thursday.

If the president has felt defeated over guns, that is perhaps understandable. In the wake of Newtown, and the failure to secure meaningful legislative change in its aftermath, America’s gun disease has looked insurmountable.

It starts with the sheer numbers. There are about 300 million guns in the country – roughly equivalent to one per every man, woman and child. Expressed as a per capita figure, the US has more firearms swilling around its people than any other country in the world – more than Yemen and Saudi Arabia, 13 times the rate in the UK and 148 times that of Japan.

Mass shootings do occur in other countries – you only have to think of Dunblane in Scotland where 16 children and a teacher were killed in 1996, or the 2011 shooting spree in Norway in which 80 people were hunted down and murdered. But such incidents don’t occur with anything like the frequency of those in the US.

Researchers in New York and Texas have calculated, that between 2000 and 2014 there were 133 events in the US, about six times the number over a similar period in 10 other advanced nations combined.

When you widen the lens to consider all gun homicides – not just those committed in mass shootings – the true scale of the catastrophe is unveiled. According to the UNODC and Small arms survey, the US has 2.97 gun homicides per 100,000 people – vastly more than any other advanced nation, 20 times the rate in Australia for instance.

But perhaps the most powerful way to express the disaster is the most simple. Every day in America, 297 people are shot with firearms and 89 people die. That’s an annual death toll at the end of a gun of 32,000 people.

In his address on Thursday, Obama invited the US media to compare the annual level of gun fatalities to the number of victims of terrorism on domestic soil, and then compare the trillions of dollars invested in counter-terrorism with the almost total legislative inaction over firearms. As Vox duly showed, that does indeed make for an impressive chart.

But a comparison with the response to last year’s Ebola virus crisis might be even more instructive. The US experienced 11 cases of Ebola, including two deaths. In West Africa, which bore the brunt of the outbreak, official figures suggest about 11,000 people died.

In response to the epidemic, the US pulled out all the stops. It mobilized thousands of soldiers to West Africa, set up emergency centers in hospitals across the US, produced revised safety guidelines from the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, formed rapid response teams to deal with new cases of possible infection, introduced a massive screening program at airports, closed some schools and enforced quarantining of individuals.

Nobody would question the efforts made to contain the threat of such a contagious and deadly disease. Yet when comparatively mild reforms have been suggested to combat the epidemic of gun deaths that claims three times the West African Ebola death toll every year in the US, barricades are immediately erected.

If gun violence were treated with the same efforts as Ebola, the mission to eradicate it would begin with nationwide research into the nature and scale of the crisis. Yet even that proves to be impossible, because the NRA has campaigned over many years to prevent federal agencies from compiling records on firearms and their movements – painting such an effort in apocalyptic terms as an attempt by the federal government to strip Americans of their Second Amendment rights.

Over the past 35 years, Congress, under NRA lobbying, has consistently prevented the creation of a centralized national database of gun owners and their weapons. That’s like forbidding the CDC from identifying and logging incidents of Ebola infection.

As Obama put it on Thursday: “We have a Congress that explicitly blocks us from even collecting data on how we could potentially reduce gun deaths. How could that be?”

When something as basic as a federal database of firearms is ruled out of bounds, then the chances of effecting more ambitious reforms such as imposing universal background checks on all gun sales or restricting purchases by people with mental health problems appear remote. The anger that Obama vented this week starts to seem natural as an expression of frustration bordering on hopelessness.

Yet it is not all hopeless, if you look at the conundrum through the eyes of ordinary Americans. Latest figures from the Pew Research Center turn the paranoid world painted by the NRA on its head.

Almost nine out of every 10 Americans – Republican supporters nearly as much as Democrats – agree in the Pew opinion polls with the idea of expanding federal background checks to all gun sales. Almost eight out of 10 want to see tighter laws over mentally-ill people acquiring firearms.

The disparity between such overwhelming public approval for modest gun control reforms and the almost total stasis gripping Congress on the issue lies at the core of America’s modern gun malaise. It raises the possibility, however faint, of change; and it tells Obama that there might be a purpose after all for that anger bubbling beneath the surface.
