Title: Investigating accidents and incidents: A workbook for employers, unions, safety representatives and safety professionals HSG245

URL Source: https://www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/hsg245.pdf

Published Time: Fri, 06 Dec 2024 18:12:37 GMT

Markdown Content:
Page 1 of 88 

Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Investigating accidents and 

# incidents 

# A workbook for employers, unions, safety representatives 

# and safety professionals 

> A workbook for employers, unions, safety representatives and safety professionals

Investigating accidents and incidents 

Every year people are killed or injured at work. Over 40 million working days are 

lost annually through work-related accidents and illnesses. 

This workbook gives organisations an opportunity to find out what went wrong. 

Learning the lessons and taking action may reduce, or even prevent, accidents 

in the future. 

As a step-by-step guide, it will help all organisations, particularly smaller 

businesses, to carry out their own health and safety investigations.  Investigating 

accidents and incidents  explains why you need to carry out investigations and 

takes you through each step of the process: 

Step one:  Gathering the information 

Step two:  Analysing the information 

Step three:  Identifying risk control measures 

Step four:  The action plan and its implementation 

HSE Books 

HSG245, published 2004 Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 2 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Contents 

Reducing risks and protecting people  3

Understanding the language of investigation  4

The causes of adverse events  6

Why investigate?  7

A step by step guide to health and safety investigations  12 

Gathering the information  13 

Analysing the information  19 

Identifying risk control measures  23 

The action plan and its implementation  24 

References and further reading  26 

Adverse event report and investigation form: Worked examples  28 

Adverse event report and investigation form: Blank form  56 

Adverse event analysis: Rooting out risk  66 

Adverse event analysis: Worked examples  73 

Adverse event analysis: Blank form  83 Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 3 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Reducing risk and protecting 

# people 

Recent figures show that an average of 250 employees and self-employed people 

are killed each year as a result of accidents in the workplace. 1 A further 150 000 

sustain major injuries or injuries that mean they are absent from work for more than 

three days. Over 2.3 million cases of ill health are caused or made worse by work. 2

According to the Labour Force Survey, 3 over 40 million working days are lost 

through work-related injuries and ill health, at a cost to business of £2.5 billion. 4

“If you think safety is expensive, try an accident”  Chairman of Easy Group 

Clearly, there are good financial reasons for reducing accidents and ill health. 

Costings show that for every £1 a business spends on insurance, it can be losing 

between £8 and £36 in uninsured costs. 4

The same accidents happen again and again, causing suffering and distress to an 

ever-widening circle of workers and their families. The investigation and analysis of 

work-related accidents and incidents forms an essential part of managing health 

and safety. However,  learning  the lessons from what you uncover is at the heart of 

preventing accidents and incidents. Identify what is wrong and take positive steps 

to put it right. This guide will show you how. 

Carrying out your own health and safety investigations will provide you with a 

deeper understanding of the risks associated with your work activities. Blaming 

individuals is ultimately fruitless and sustains the myth that accidents and cases 

of ill health are unavoidable when the opposite is true. Well thought-out risk 

control measures, combined with adequate supervision, monitoring and effective 

management (ie your risk management system) will ensure that your work activities 

are safe. Health and safety investigations are an important tool in developing and 

refining your risk management system. 

An effective investigation requires a methodical, structured approach to information 

gathering, collation and analysis. The findings of the investigation will form the basis 

of an action plan to prevent the accident or incident from happening again and for 

improving your overall management of risk. Your findings will also point to areas of 

your risk assessments that need to be reviewed. This link with risk assessment(s) is 

a legal duty. 5

This guide will help you to adopt a systematic approach to determining why an 

accident or incident has occurred and the steps you need to take to make sure it 

does not happen again. Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 4 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Understanding the language of 

# investigation 

Certain key words and phrases will be used regularly throughout this guide. 

‘Adverse event’  includes: 

n accident:  an event that results in injury or ill health; 

n incident: 

– near miss:  an event that, while not causing harm, has the potential to cause 

injury or ill health. (In this guidance, the term near miss will be taken to 

include dangerous occurrences); 

– undesired circumstance:  a set of conditions or circumstances that 

have the potential to cause injury or ill health, eg untrained nurses 

handling heavy patients. 

Dangerous occurrence:  one of a number of specific, reportable adverse events, 

as defined in the Reporting of Injuries, Diseases and Dangerous Occurrences 

Regulations 1995 (RIDDOR). 

Hazard:  the potential to cause harm, including ill health and injury; damage to 

property, plant, products or the environment, production losses or increased 

liabilities. 

Immediate cause:  the most obvious reason why an adverse event happens, eg 

the guard is missing; the employee slips etc. There may be several immediate 

causes identified in any one adverse event. 

Consequence: 

fatal:  work-related death; 

major injury/ill health:  (as defined in RIDDOR, Schedule 1), including fractures 

(other than fingers or toes), amputations, loss of sight, a burn or penetrating 

injury to the eye, any injury or acute illness resulting in unconsciousness, requiring 

resuscitation or requiring admittance to hospital for more than 24 hours; 

serious injury/ill health:  where the person affected is unfit to carry out his or her 

normal work for more than three consecutive days; 

minor injury:  all other injuries, where the injured person is unfit for his or her normal 

work for less than three days; 

damage only:  damage to property, equipment, the environment or production 

losses. (This guidance only deals with events that have the potential to cause harm 

to people.) 

Likelihood that an adverse event will happen again: 

certain:  it will happen again and soon; 

likely:  it will reoccur, but not as an everyday event; 

possible:  it may occur from time to time; 

unlikely:  it is not expected to happen again in the foreseeable future; 

rare:  so unlikely that it is not expected to happen again. 

Figure 1  Accident 

Figure 2  Near miss 

Figure 3  Undesired 

circumstance Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 5 of 88 Health and Safety 

> Executive

Risk:  The level of risk is determined from a combination of the likelihood of a 

specific undesirable event occurring and the severity of the consequences 

(ie how often is it likely to happen, how many people could be affected and how 

bad would the likely injuries or ill health effects be?) 

Risk control measures:  are the workplace precautions put in place to reduce the 

risk to a tolerable level? 

Root cause:  an initiating event or failing from which all other causes or failings 

spring. Root causes are generally management, planning or organisational failings. 

Underlying cause:  the less obvious ‘system’ or ’organisational’ reason for an 

adverse event happening, eg pre-start-up machinery checks are not carried out 

by supervisors; the hazard has not been adequately considered via a suitable and 

sufficient risk assessment; production pressures are too great etc. Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 6 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# The causes of adverse events 

Adverse events have many causes. What may appear to be bad luck (being in the 

wrong place at the wrong time) can, on analysis, be seen as a chain of failures and 

errors that lead almost inevitably to the adverse event. (This is often known as the 

Domino effect.) 

These causes can be classified as: 

n immediate causes: the agent of injury or ill health (the blade, the substance, the 

dust etc); 

n underlying causes: unsafe acts and unsafe conditions (the guard removed, the 

ventilation switched off etc); 

n root causes: the failure from which all other failings grow, often remote in time 

and space from the adverse event (eg failure to identify training needs and 

assess competence, low priority given to risk assessment etc). 

To prevent adverse events, you need to provide effective risk control measures 

which address the immediate, underlying and root causes. 

Note:  Each domino represents a failing or error which can combine with other failings and 

errors to cause an adverse event. Dealing with the immediate cause (B) will only prevent his 

sequence. Dealing with all causes, especially root causes (A) can prevent a whole series of 

adverse events. 

Figure 4  Sequence of dominoes 

# B

# AInvestigating accidents and incidents  Page 7 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Why investigate? 

There are hazards in all workplaces; risk control measures are put in place to 

reduce the risks to an acceptable level to prevent accidents and cases of ill health. 

The fact that an adverse event has occurred suggests that the existing risk control 

measures were inadequate. 

Learning lessons from near misses can prevent costly accidents. (The Clapham 

Junction rail crash and the  Herald of Free Enterprise  ferry capsize were both 

examples of situations where management had failed to recognise, and act on, 

previous failings in the system.) You need to investigate adverse events for a 

number of reasons. 

Legal reasons for investigating 

n To ensure you are operating your organisation within the law. 

n The Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations 1999, regulation 5, 

requires employers to plan, organise, control, monitor and review their health 

and safety arrangements. Health and safety investigations form an essential 

part of this process. 

n Following the Woolf Report 6 on civil action, you are expected to make 

full disclosure of the circumstances of an accident to the injured parties 

considering legal action. The fear of litigation may make you think it is better not 

to investigate, but you can’t make things better if you don’t know what went 

wrong! The fact that you thoroughly investigated an accident and took remedial 

action to prevent further accidents would demonstrate to a court that your 

company has a positive attitude to health and safety. Your investigation findings 

will also provide essential information for your insurers in the event of a claim. 

Information and insights gained from an investigation 

n An understanding of how and why things went wrong. 

n An understanding of the ways people can be exposed to substances or 

conditions that may affect their health. 

n A true snapshot of what really happens and how work is really done. (Workers 

may find short cuts to make their work easier or quicker and may ignore rules. 

You need to be aware of this.) 

n Identifying deficiencies in your risk control management, which will enable you 

to improve your management of risk in the future and to learn lessons which 

will be applicable to other parts of your organisation. 

Benefits arising from an investigation 

n The prevention of further similar adverse events. If there is a serious accident, 

the regulatory authorities will take a firm line if you have ignored previous 

warnings. 

n The prevention of business losses due to disruption, stoppage, lost orders and 

the costs of criminal and civil legal actions. 

n An improvement in employee morale and attitude towards health and safety. 

Employees will be more cooperative in implementing new safety precautions 

if they were involved in the decision and they can see that problems are dealt 

with. Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 8 of 88 Health and Safety  

> Executive
> n

The development of managerial skills which can be readily applied to other 

areas of the organisation. 

While the argument for investigating accidents is fairly clear, the need to investigate 

near misses and undesired circumstances may not be so obvious. However, 

investigating near misses and undesired circumstances is as useful, and very much 

easier than investigating accidents. 

Adverse events where no one has been harmed can be investigated without 

having to deal with injured people, their families and a demoralised workforce, and 

without the threat of criminal and civil action hanging over the whole proceedings. 

Witnesses will be more likely to be helpful and tell the truth. (Consider the following: 

‘I mistakenly turned the wrong valve which released the boiling water because the 

valves all look the same’ or ‘I don’t know how John was scalded.’ Which is the 

likely response to a near miss and which to an accident? More importantly, which is 

the most useful?) 

It is often pure luck that determines whether an undesired circumstance translates 

into a near miss or accident. The value of investigating each adverse event is the 

same. 

An investigation is not an end in itself, but the first step in preventing future adverse 

events. A good investigation will enable you to learn general lessons, which can be 

applied across your organisation. 

The investigation should identify why the existing risk control measures failed and 

what improvements or additional measures are needed. More general lessons on 

why the risk control measures were inadequate must also be learned. 

Which events should be investigated? 

Having been notified of an adverse event and been given basic information on what 

happened, you must decide whether it should be investigated and if so, in what 

depth. 

It is the  potential consequences  and the likelihood of the adverse event recurring 

that should determine the level of investigation, not simply the injury or ill health 

suffered on this occasion. For example: Is the harm likely to be serious? Is this likely 

to happen often? Similarly, the causes of a near miss can have great potential for 

causing injury and ill health. When making your decision, you must also consider 

the potential for learning lessons. For example if you have had a number of similar 

adverse events, it may be worth investigating, even if each single event is not worth 

investigating in isolation. It is best practice to investigate all adverse events which 

may affect the public. 

Who should carry out the investigation? 

For an investigation to be worthwhile, it is essential that the management and the 

workforce are fully involved. Depending on the level of the investigation (and the 

size of the business), supervisors, line managers, health and safety professionals, 

union safety representatives, employee representatives and senior management/ 

directors may all be involved. 

As well as being a legal duty, it has been found that where there is full cooperation 

and consultation with union representatives and employees, the number of 

accidents is half that of workplaces where there is no such employee involvement. 7Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 9 of 88 Health and Safety 

> Executive

This joint approach will ensure that a wide range of practical knowledge and 

experience will be brought to bear and employees and their representatives will feel 

empowered and supportive of any remedial measures that are necessary. A joint 

approach also reinforces the message that the investigation is for the benefit of 

everyone. 

In addition to detailed knowledge of the work activities involved, members of the 

team should be familiar with health and safety good practice, standards and legal 

requirements. The investigation team must include people who have the necessary 

investigative skills (eg information gathering, interviewing, evaluating and analysing). 

Provide the team with sufficient time and resources to enable them to carry out the 

investigation efficiently. 

It is essential that the investigation team is either led by, or reports directly to 

someone with the authority to make decisions and act on their recommendations. 

When should it start? 

The urgency of an investigation will depend on the magnitude and immediacy of 

the risk involved (eg a major accident involving an everyday job will need to be 

investigated quickly). 

In general, adverse events should be investigated and analysed as soon as 

possible. This is not simply good practice; it is common sense – memory is best 

and motivation greatest immediately after an adverse event. 

What does it involve? 

An investigation will involve an analysis of all the information available, physical 

(the scene of the incident), verbal (the accounts of witnesses) and written (risk 

assessments, procedures, instructions, job guides etc), to identify what went 

wrong and determine what steps must be taken to prevent the adverse event from 

happening again. 

It is important to be open, honest and objective throughout the investigation 

process. Pre-conceived ideas about the process, the equipment or the people 

involved in an adverse event may blind you to the real causes. Question everything. 

Be wary of blaming individuals. 

What makes a good investigation? 

To get rid of weeds you must dig up the root. If you only cut off the foliage, the 

weed will grow again. 

Similarly it is only by carrying out investigations which identify root causes that 

organisations can learn from their past failures and prevent future failures. 

Simply dealing with the immediate causes of an adverse event may provide a short-

term fix. But, in time, the underlying/root causes that were not addressed will allow 

conditions to develop where further adverse events are likely, possibly with more 

serious consequences. It is essential that the immediate, underlying causes and 

root causes are all identified and remedied. 

Investigations should be conducted with accident prevention in mind, not placing 

blame. Attempting to apportion blame before the investigation has started is Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 10 of 88 Health and Safety 

> Executive

counterproductive, because people become defensive and uncooperative. Only 

after the investigation has been completed is it appropriate to consider whether any 

individuals acted inappropriately. 

Investigations that conclude that operator error was the sole cause are rarely 

acceptable. Underpinning the ‘human error’ there will be a number of underlying 

causes that created the environment in which human errors were inevitable. For 

example inadequate training and supervision, poor equipment design, lack of 

management commitment, poor attitude to health and safety. 

The objective is to establish not only how the adverse event happened, but more 

importantly, what allowed it to happen. 

The root causes of adverse events are almost inevitably management, 

organisational or planning failures. 

Look carefully at your health and safety policy and how it is reflected in the 

workplace. Do staff understand the health and safety message in general and 

in particular those parts that relate to their work? Is something missing from the 

policy? Is it implemented, or is management failing to ensure that health and safety 

measures remain in place and are effective at all times? If not, your health and 

safety policy needs to be changed. 

The investigation should be thorough and structured to avoid bias and leaping to 

conclusions. Don’t assume you know the answer and start finding solutions before 

you complete the investigation. A good investigation involves a systematic and 

structured approach. 

Information gathering:  

> n

explores all reasonable lines of enquiry;  

> n

is timely;  

> n

is structured, setting out clearly what is known, what is not known and records 

the investigative process. 

Analysis:  

> n

is objective and unbiased;  

> n

identifies the sequence of events and conditions that led up to the adverse 

event;  

> n

identifies the immediate causes;  

> n

identifies underlying causes, ie actions in the past that have allowed or caused 

undetected unsafe conditions/practices;  

> n

identifies root causes, (ie organisational and management health and safety 

arrangements – supervision, monitoring, training, resources allocated to health 

and safety etc).  

> Man slipping
> on a patch
> of oil
> Inadequate
> maintenance
> Inadequate
> housekeeping
> Lack of
> supervision
> and monitoring
> Management
> not being
> committed
> to health
> and safety
> Inadequate
> health
> and safety
> management Investigating accidents and incidents Page 11 of 88 Health and Safety
> Executive

Risk control measures:  

> n

identify the risk control measures which were missing, inadequate or unused;  

> n

compare conditions/practices as they were with that required by current legal 

requirements, codes of practice and guidance;  

> n

identify additional measures needed to address the immediate, underlying and 

root causes;  

> n

provide meaningful recommendations which can be implemented. But woolly 

recommendations such as ‘operators must take care not to touch the cutters 

during run-down’ show that the investigation has not delved deep enough in 

search of the root causes. 

Action plan and implementation:  

> n

provide an action plan with SMART objectives (Specific, Measurable, Agreed, 

Realistic and Timescaled);  

> n

ensure that the action plan deals effectively not only with the immediate and 

underlying causes but also the root causes;  

> n

include lessons that may be applied to prevent other adverse events, eg 

assessments of skill and training in competencies may be needed for other 

areas of the organisation;  

> n

provide feedback to all parties involved to ensure the findings and 

recommendations are correct, address the issues and are realistic;  

> n

should be fed back into a review of the risk assessment. The Approved 

Code of Practice 5 attached to the Management of Health and Safety at Work 

Regulations 1999 regulation 3 (paragraph 26), states that adverse events 

should be a trigger for reviewing risk assessments);  

> n

communicate the results of the investigation and the action plan to everyone 

who needs to know;  

> n

include arrangements to ensure the action plan is implemented and progress 

monitored. 

The last three steps, though essential, are often overlooked. But, without them, the 

full benefits of the investigation will not be realised and in the long term nothing will 

change. 

Techniques for analysing adverse events 

There are many tools and techniques for structuring the investigation, analysing 

adverse events, and identifying root causes. 8 HSE does not endorse any one 

method – it is for you to choose which techniques suit your company. These 

techniques are simply tools, not an end in themselves. 

For large, complex or technically demanding investigations, these techniques may 

be essential in determining not only how the adverse event happened, but also 

what were the root causes. 

However, provided a methodical approach with full employee participation is 

adopted, a less complicated approach, such as that set out in this publication, will 

be appropriate. Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 12 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# A step by step guide to health 

# and safety investigations 

Steps to take following an adverse event 

Emergency response: 

n take prompt emergency action (eg first aid); 

n make the area safe (in some cases this may need to be done first). 

Initial report: 

n preserve the scene; 

n note the names of the people, equipment involved and the names of the 

witnesses; 

n report the adverse event to the person responsible for health and safety who 

will decide what further action (if any) is needed. 

Initial assessment and investigation response: 

n report the adverse event to the regulatory authority if appropriate. 

RIDDOR 

For those accidents and dangerous occurrences that are reportable under 

the provisions of RIDDOR (the Reporting of Injuries, Diseases and Dangerous 

Occurrences Regulations 1995), this information must be notified to the enforcing 

authority. 

Whether you are HSE or LA-enforced, to make a report, go to 

www.hse.gov.uk/riddor . A telephone service can be used to report fatal and major 

injuries  only  – call the Incident Contact Centre on 0845 300 9923 (opening hours 

Monday to Friday 8.30 am to 5 pm). 

You must also keep a record of the reports you make that are required under 

RIDDOR. You can do this by: 

n keeping a copy of the form; 

n recording the incident in the accident book; 

n recording the incident electronically. 

You also need to enter details of the accident in an accident book. And, you need 

to decide on the scale of the investigation. Where appropriate, decide who will 

carry out the investigation, the resources required and brief the investigation team. 

Note:  The prompt notification of RIDDOR reportable events is a legal requirement. Do 

not wait until you have carried out a thorough investigation before you report it. Fatalities 

and major injuries (as defined in RIDDOR) must be reported immediately. Those accidents 

where employees have been absent from work (or moved to other duties as a result of 

the accident) for greater than three days must be reported within ten days of the accident 

date. Where a death has occurred the police may take charge and they should be notified 

immediately. Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 13 of 88 Health and Safety 

> Executive

The decision to investigate 

The table below will assist you in determining the level of investigation which 

is appropriate for the adverse event. Remember you must consider the worst 

potential consequences of the adverse event (eg a scaffold collapse may not have 

caused any injuries, but had the potential to cause major or fatal injuries). 

Likelihood of 

recurrence 

Potential worst consequence of adverse event 

Minor  Serious  Major  Fatal 

Certain 

Likely 

Possible 

Unlikely 

Rare 

> (The definitions of ‘consequence’ and ‘likelihood’ are set out in the section on
> ‘Understanding the language of investigation’)

Risk  Minimal  Low  Medium  High 

Investigation level  Minimal 

level 

Low 

level 

Medium 

level 

High 

level  

> n

In a minimal level investigation, the relevant supervisor will look into the 

circumstances of the event and try to learn any lessons which will prevent 

future occurrences.  

> n

A low level investigation will involve a short investigation by the relevant 

supervisor or line manager into the circumstances and immediate, underlying 

and root causes of the adverse event, to try to prevent a recurrence and to 

learn any general lessons.  

> n

A medium level investigation will involve a more detailed investigation by the 

relevant supervisor or line manager, the health and safety adviser and employee 

representatives and will look for the immediate, underlying and root causes.  

> n

A high level investigation will involve a team-based investigation, involving 

supervisors or line managers, health and safety advisers and employee 

representatives. It will be carried out under the supervision of senior 

management or directors and will look for the immediate, underlying, and root 

causes. 

The investigation 

The four steps include a series of numbered questions. These set out in detail the 

information that should be entered onto the adverse event investigation form. The 

question numbers correspond to those on the form. 

Step one  Gathering the information 

Find out what happened and what conditions and actions influenced the adverse 

event. Begin straight away, or as soon as practicable. 

It is important to capture information as soon as possible. This stops it being Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 14 of 88 Health and Safety 

> Executive

corrupted, eg items moved, guards replaced etc. If necessary, work must stop and 

unauthorised access be prevented. 

Talk to everyone who was close by when the adverse event happened, 

especially those who saw what happened or know anything about the conditions 

that led to it. 

The amount of time and effort spent on information gathering should be 

proportionate to the level of investigation. Collect all available and relevant 

information. That includes opinions, experiences, observations, sketches, 

measurements, photographs, check sheets, permits-to-work and details of the 

environmental conditions at the time etc. This information can be recorded initially 

in note form, with a formal report being completed later. These notes should be 

kept at least until the investigation is complete. 

Where, when and who? 

1 Where and when did the adverse event happen? 

2 Who was injured/suffered ill health or was otherwise involved with the 

adverse event? 

Gathering detailed information: How and what? 

Discovering what happened can involve quite a bit of detective work. Be precise 

and establish the facts as best you can. There may be a lack of information and 

many uncertainties, but you must keep an open mind and consider everything that 

might have contributed to the adverse event. Hard work now will pay off later in the 

investigation. 

Many important things may emerge at this stage of the process, but not all of them 

will be directly related to the adverse event. Some of the information gathered may 

appear to have no direct bearing on the event under investigation. However, this 

information may provide you with a greater insight into the hazards and risks in your 

workplace. This may enable you to make your workplace safer in ways you may 

not have previously considered. 

3 How did the adverse event happen? Note any equipment involved. 

Describe the chain of events leading up to, and immediately after, the adverse 

event. Very often, a number of chance occurrences and coincidences combine to 

create the circumstances in which an adverse event can happen. All these factors 

should be recorded here in chronological order, if possible. Work out the chain of 

events by talking to the injured person, eye witnesses, line managers, health and 

safety representatives and fellow workers to find out what happened and who did 

what. In particular, note the position of those injured, both immediately before and 

after the adverse event. Be objective and, as far as possible, avoid apportioning 

guilt, assigning responsibility or making snap judgements on the probable causes. 

Plant and equipment that had a direct bearing on the adverse event must be 

identified clearly. This information can usually be obtained from a nameplate 

attached to the equipment. Note all the details available, the manufacturer, 

model type, model number, machine number and year of manufacture and any 

modifications made to the equipment. Note the position of the machinery controls 

immediately after the adverse event. This information may help you to spot trends 

and identify risk control measures. You should consider approaching the supplier 

if the same machine has been implicated in a number of adverse events. Be Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 15 of 88 Health and Safety 

> Executive

precise. Shop floor process and layout changes are a regular occurrence. Unless 

you precisely identify plant and equipment, you will not detect, eg that a machine 

or particular piece of equipment has been moved around and caused injuries on 

separate occasions, in different locations. 

4 What activities were being carried out at the time? 

The work that was being done just before the adverse event happened can often 

cast light on the conditions and circumstances that caused something to go wrong. 

Provide a good description, including all the relevant details, eg the surroundings, 

the equipment/materials being used, the number of employees engaged in the 

various activities, the way they were positioned and any details about the way they 

were behaving etc. 

5 Was there anything unusual or different about the working conditions? 

Adverse events often happen when something is different. When faced with a 

new situation, employees may find it difficult to adapt, particularly if the sources of 

danger are unknown to them, or if they have not been adequately prepared to deal 

with the new situation. If working conditions or processes were significantly different 

to normal, why was this? 

Describe what was new or different in the situation. Was there a safe working 

method in place for this situation, were operatives aware of it, and was it being 

followed? If not, why not? Learning how people deal with unfamiliar situations will 

enable similar situations to be better handled in the future. 

Was the way the changes, temporary or otherwise, were introduced a factor? 

Were the workers and supervisors aware that things were different? Were workers 

and supervisors sufficiently trained/experienced to recognise and adapt to changing 

circumstances? 

6 Were there adequate safe working procedures and were they followed? 

Adverse events often happen when there are no safe working procedures or where 

procedures are inadequate or are not followed. Comments such as ‘…we’ve been 

doing it that way for years and nothing has ever gone wrong before…’ or ‘…he has 

been working on that machine for years and knows what to do…’ often lead to 

the injured person getting the blame, irrespective of what part procedures, training 

and supervision – or the lack of them  – had to play in the adverse event. What was 

it about normal practice that proved inadequate? Was a safe working method in 

place and being followed? If not, why not? Was there adequate supervision and 

were the supervisors themselves sufficiently trained and experienced? Again, it is 

important to pose these questions without attempting to apportion blame, assign 

responsibility or stipulate cause. 

7 What injuries or ill health effects, if any, were caused? 

It is important to note which parts of the body have been injured and the nature of 

the injury - ie bruising, crushing, a burn, a cut, a broken bone etc. Be as precise 

as you are able. If the site of the injury is the right upper arm, midway between the 

elbow and the shoulder joint, say so. Precise descriptions will enable you to spot 

trends and take prompt remedial action. For example it could be that what appears 

to be a safe piece of equipment, due to the standard of its guarding, is actually 

causing a number of inadvertent cut injuries due to the sharp edges on the guards 

themselves. 

Facts such as whether the injured person was given first aid or taken to hospital (by Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 16 of 88 Health and Safety 

> Executive

ambulance, a colleague etc) should also be recorded here. 

8 If there was an injury, how did it occur and what caused it? 

Where an accident is relatively straightforward, it may seem artificial to differentiate 

between the accident itself (question 3) and the mode of injury, but when the 

accident is more complicated the differences between the two aspects become 

clearer and therefore precise descriptions are vital. 

The mode of injury concerns two different aspects:  

> n

the harmful object (known as the ‘agent’) that inflicted the injury; and  

> n

the way in which the injury was actually sustained. 

The object that inflicted the injury may be a hand-held tool like a knife, or a 

chemical, a machine, or a vehicle etc. The way in which it happened might, eg, be 

that the employee cut themselves or spilt chemicals on their skin. 

9 Was the risk known? If so, why wasn’t it controlled? If not, why not? 

You need to find out whether the source of the danger and its potential 

consequences were known, and whether this information was communicated 

to those who needed to know. You should note what is said and who said it, so 

that potential gaps in the communication flow may be identified and remedied. 

The aim is to find out why the sources of danger may have been ignored, not fully 

appreciated or not understood. Remember you are investigating the processes and 

systems, not the person. 

The existence of a written risk assessment for the process or task that led to 

the adverse event will help to reveal what was known of the associated risks. A 

judgement can be made as to whether the risk assessment was ’suitable and 

sufficient’, as required by law 5 and whether the risk control measures identified as 

being necessary were ever adequately put in place. 

10 Did the organisation and arrangement of the work influence the adverse 

event? 

The organisational arrangement sets the framework within which the work is done. 

Here are some examples; there are many more:  

> n

standards of supervision and on-site monitoring of working practices may be 

less than adequate;  

> n

lack of skills or knowledge may mean that nobody intervenes in the event of 

procedural errors;  

> n

inappropriate working procedures may mean certain steps in the procedures 

are omitted, because they are too difficult and time-consuming;  

> n

lack of planning may mean that some tasks are not done, are done too late or 

are done in the wrong order;  

> n

employees’ actions and priorities may be a consequence of the way in which 

they are paid or otherwise rewarded;  

> n

high production targets and piecework may result in safety measures being 

degraded and employees working at too fast a pace. 

11 Was maintenance and cleaning sufficient? If not, explain why not. 

Lack of maintenance and poor housekeeping are common causes of adverse 

events. Was the state of repair and condition of the workplace, plant and 

equipment such that they contributed to or caused the adverse event? Were Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 17 of 88 Health and Safety 

> Executive

the brakes on the forklift truck in good working order? Were spills dealt with 

immediately? Was the site so cluttered and untidy that it created a slipping or 

tripping hazard? Was there a programme of preventative maintenance? What are 

the instructions concerning good housekeeping in the workplace? You should 

observe the location of the adverse event as soon as possible and judge whether 

the general condition or state of repair of the premises, plant or equipment was 

adequate. Those working in the area, together with witnesses, and any injured 

parties, should also be asked for their opinion. Working in the area, they will have 

a good idea of what is acceptable and whether conditions had deteriorated over 

time. Consider the role the following factors may play:  

> n

a badly maintained machine or tool may mean an employee is exposed to 

excessive vibration or noise and has to use increased force, or tamper with the 

machine to get the work done;  

> n

a noisy environment may prevent employees hearing instructions correctly as 

well as being a possible cause of noise-induced hearing loss;  

> n

uneven floors may make movement around the workplace, especially vehicle 

movements, hazardous;  

> n

badly maintained lighting may make carrying out the task more difficult;  

> n

poorly stored materials on the floor in and around the work area will increase 

the risk of tripping;  

> n

ice, dirt and other contaminants on stairs or walkways make it easier to slip 

and fall;  

> n

tools not in immediate use should be stored appropriately and not left lying 

around the work area. 

12 Were the people involved competent and suitable? 

Training should provide workers with the necessary knowledge, skills and hands-on 

work experience to carry out their work efficiently and safely. The fact that someone 

has been doing the same job for a long time does not necessarily mean that they 

have the necessary skills or experience to do it safely. This is particularly the case 

when the normal routine is changed, when any lack of understanding can become 

apparent.There is no substitute for adequate health and safety training. Some of 

the problems that might arise follow:  

> n

a lack of instruction and training may mean that tasks are not done properly;  

> n

misunderstandings, which arise more easily when employees lack 

understanding of the usual routines and procedures in the organisation;  

> n

a lack of respect for the risks involved, due to ignorance of the potential 

consequences;  

> n

problems due to the immaturity, inexperience and lack of awareness of existing 

or potential risks among young people (under18).You must assess the risks to 

young people before they start work;  

> n

poor handling of dangerous materials or tools, due to employees not being 

properly informed about how things should be done correctly. 

People should also be matched to their work in terms of health, strength, mental 

ability and physical stature. 

13 Did the workplace layout influence the adverse event? 

The physical layout and surroundings of the workplace can affect health and safety. 

Injuries may be caused by sharp table edges. Hazardous or highly inflammable 

fumes may be produced in areas where operatives work or where there are naked 

lights. Or, the workplace may be organised in such a way that there is not enough 

circulation space. Or, it may be impossible to see or hear warning signals, eg 

during fork lift truck movements. Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 18 of 88 Health and Safety 

> Executive

Employees should be able to see the whole of their work area and see what their 

immediate colleagues are doing. The workplace should be organised in such a 

way that safe practices are encouraged. In other words, workplace arrangements 

should discourage employees from running risks, eg providing a clear walkway 

around machinery will discourage people from crawling under or climbing over it. 

14 Did the nature or shape of the materials influence the adverse event? 

As well as being intrinsically hazardous, materials can pose a hazard simply by their 

design, weight, quality or packaging, eg heavy and awkward materials, materials 

with sharp edges, splinters, poisonous chemicals etc. 

The choice of materials also influences work processes, eg a particularly hazardous 

material may be required. Poor quality may also result in materials or equipment 

failing during normal processing, causing malfunctions and accidents. 

15 Did difficulties using the plant and equipment influence the adverse 

event? 

Plant and equipment includes all the machinery, plant and tools used to organise 

and carry out the work. All of these items should be designed to suit the people 

using them. This is referred to as ergonomic design, where the focus is on the 

individual as well as the work task the item is specifically designed to carry out. If 

the equipment meets the needs of the individual user, it is more likely to be used as 

it is intended - ie safely. Consider user instructions here. A machine that requires its 

operator to follow a complicated user manual is a source of risk in itself. 

16 Was the safety equipment sufficient? 

You should satisfy yourself that any safety equipment and safety procedures are 

both sufficient and current for all conditions in which work takes place, including 

the provision and use of any extra equipment needed for employees’ safety. For 

example:  

> n

extra technical safety equipment at machines;  

> n

power supply isolation equipment and procedures;  

> n

personal protective equipment (PPE);  

> n

building safety systems, eg an extract ventilation system. 

Make a note of whether the safety equipment was used, whether it was used 

correctly, whether or not it was in good condition and was working properly etc. 

17 Did other conditions influence the adverse event? 

‘Other conditions’ is intended to cover everything else that has not been reported 

yet, but which might have influenced the adverse event. For example:  

> n

disagreements or misunderstandings between people;  

> n

the weather;  

> n

unauthorised interference in a process or job task;  

> n

defective supplies or equipment;  

> n

deliberate acts, such as trespass or sabotage. Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 19 of 88 Health and Safety 

> Executive

Step two  Analysing the information 

An analysis involves examining all the facts, determining what happened and why. 

All the detailed information gathered should be assembled and examined to identify 

what information is relevant and what information is missing. The information 

gathering and analysis are actually carried out side by side. As the analysis 

progresses, further lines of enquiry requiring additional information will develop. 

To be thorough and free from bias, the analysis must be carried out in a systematic 

way, so all the possible causes and consequences of the adverse event are 

fully considered. A number of formal methods have been developed to aid this 

approach. 8

One useful method for organising your information, identifying gaps and beginning 

the analysis is Events and Causal Factor Analysis (ECFA), 9 which is beyond the 

scope of this guidance. 

The analysis should be conducted with employee or trade union health and 

safety representatives and other experts or specialists, as appropriate. This team 

approach can often be highly productive in enabling all the relevant causal factors 

to emerge. 

18 What were the immediate, underlying and root causes? 

It is only by identifying all causes, and the root causes in particular, that you can 

learn from past failures and prevent future repetitions. 

The causes of adverse events often relate to one another in a complex way, 

sometimes only influencing events and at other times having an overwhelming 

impact, due to their timing or the way they interact. The analysis must consider 

all possible causes. Keep an open mind. Do not reject a possible cause until you 

have given it serious consideration.The emphasis is on a thorough, systematic and 

objective look at the evidence. 

Analysis 

There are many methods of analysing the information gathered in an investigation 

to find the immediate, underlying and root causes and it is for you to choose 

whichever method suits you best. Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 20 of 88 Health and Safety 

> Executive

What happened and why? 

The first step in understanding what happened and why is to organise the 

information you have gathered. This guidance uses the simple technique of asking 

‘Why’ over and over, until the answer is no longer meaningful (see Figure 5). The 

starting point is the ‘event’, eg John has broken his leg. On the line below, set out 

the reasons why this happened. This first line should identify:  

> n

the vulnerable person, eg John on a ladder;  

> n

the hazard, eg falling due to gravity;  

> n

the circumstances that brought them together, eg John fell off the ladder. 

For each of the reasons identified ask ‘Why?’ and set down the answers. Continue 

down the page asking ‘Why’ until the answers are no longer meaningful. 

Do not be concerned at the number of times you ask the question, ‘Why?’ 

because by doing so you will arrive at the real causes of the adverse event. 

Some lines of enquiry will quickly end, eg ‘Why was the hazard of falling present?’ 

Answer: ‘Gravity’. 

Having collected the relevant information and determined what happened and why, 

you can now determine the causes of the adverse event systematically. 

Checklist/question analysis of the causes 

Using the adverse event analysis work sheets and checklist (in the Adverse Event 

and Investigation Form), work through the questions about the possible immediate 

causes of the adverse event (the place, the plant, the people and the process) and 

identify which are relevant. 

Record all the immediate causes identified and the necessary risk control 

measures. 

For each immediate cause, the analysis suggests underlying causes which may 

have allowed the immediate causes to exist. 

Consider the underlying/root cause questions suggested by the immediate causes. 

Record those that are relevant and note the measures needed to remedy them. 

The final step of your analysis is to consider the environment in which the 

John breaks his leg 

Falling due to gravity  John falls off 

The ladder slips 

The ladder is not tied 

John is on ladder 

Access to the roof  

> Figure 5 Investigating accidents and incidents Page 21 of 88 Health and Safety
> Executive

organisation and planning of health and safety was carried out. 

This ‘Management’ section of the analysis must be carried out by people within 

the organisation who have both the overall responsibility for health and safety, and 

the authority to make changes to the management system. Record the underlying 

failings in the overall management system (ie the root causes of the adverse event) 

and the remedial action required at management level. The root causes of almost 

all adverse events are failings at managerial level. 

Worked examples of the Adverse Event Report and Investigation Form are on 

page 29. 

What if ‘human failings (errors and violations)’ 10  are identified as a 

contributory factor? 

If your investigation concludes that errors or violations contributed to the adverse 

event, consider carefully how to handle this information. 

Not addressing the ‘human’ factors greatly reduces the value of the investigation. 

The objective of an investigation is to learn the lessons and to act to prevent 

recurrences, through suitable risk control measures. You will not be able to do that 

unless your workforce trusts you enough to co-operate with you. 

Laying all the blame on one or more individuals is counter-productive and runs 

the risk of alienating the workforce and undermining the safety culture, crucial to 

creating and maintaining a safer working environment. 

Speak to those involved and explain how you believe their action(s) contributed 

to the adverse event. Invite them to explain why they did what they did. This may 

not only help you better understand the reasons behind the immediate causes of 

the adverse event, but may offer more pointers to the underlying causes: perhaps 

the production deadline was short, and removing the guards saved valuable time; 

maybe the workload is too great for one person etc. 

Unless you discover a deliberate and malicious violation or sabotage of workplace 

safety precautions, it may be counter-productive to take disciplinary action against 

those involved. Will anyone be open and honest with you the next time an adverse 

event occurs? What you should aim for is a fair and just system where people are 

held to account for their behaviour, without being unduly blamed. In any event, your 

regime of supervision and monitoring of performance should have detected and 

corrected these unsafe behaviours. 

Human failings can be divided into three broad types and the action needed to 

prevent further failings will depend on which type of human failing is involved. See 

Figure 6. Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 22 of 88 Health and Safety 

> Executive

Skill-based errors: a slip or lapse of memory:  

> n

slips  happen when a person is carrying out familiar tasks automatically, without 

thinking, and that person’s action is not as planned, eg operating the wrong 

switch on a control panel;  

> n

lapses  happen when an action is performed out of sequence or a step in a 

sequence is missed, eg a road tanker driver had completed filling his tanker 

and was about to disconnect the hose when he was called away to answer 

the phone. On his return he forgot that he hadn’t disconnected the hose and 

drove off. These types of error can be foreseen and measures can be taken 

to prevent or reduce their likelihood, eg colour coding, a checklist, an interlock 

etc. 

Mistakes: errors of judgement (rule-based or knowledge-based):  

> n

rule-based mistakes  happen when a person has a set of rules about what to 

do in certain situations and applies the wrong rule;  

> n

knowledge-based mistakes  happen when a person is faced with an 

unfamiliar situation for which he or she has no rules, uses his or her knowledge 

and works from first principles, but comes to a wrong conclusion. For example 

when the warning light comes on indicating that the cooling system pump is 

overheating, is there a rule for what to do? If not, do you leave the pump on, 

turn it off, or shut down the whole unit? 

Training, comprehensive safe working procedures and equipment design are most 

important in preventing mistakes. 

Violation (rule breaking):  

> n

deliberate failure to follow the rules, cutting corners to save time or effort, 

based on the belief that the rules are too restrictive and are not enforced 

anyway, eg operating a circular saw bench with the guard removed. 

This type of behaviour can be foreseen. The provision of training, simple practical 

rules, and routine supervision and monitoring of performance will reduce this type 

of behaviour. 

When considering how to avoid human failings, bear in mind the fact they do not 

happen in isolation. If human failings are identified as a cause of an adverse event, 

consider the following factors that can influence human behaviour. 

Slip 

Lapse 

Mistake 

Violation 

Rule-based 

Knowledge-based 

Human 

failings 

Skill-based 

errors  

> Figure 6 Investigating accidents and incidents Page 23 of 88 Health and Safety
> Executive

Job factors:  

> n

how much attention is needed for the task (both too little and too much can 

lead to higher error rates)?  

> n

divided attention or distractions are present;  

> n

inadequate procedures;  

> n

time available. 

Human factors:  

> n

physical ability (size and strength);  

> n

competence (knowledge, skill and experience);  

> n

fatigue, stress, morale, alcohol or drugs. 

Organisational factors:  

> n

work pressure, long hours;  

> n

availability of sufficient resources;  

> n

quality of supervision;  

> n

management beliefs in health and safety (the safety culture). 

Plant and equipment factors:  

> n

how clear and simple to read and understand are the controls?  

> n

is the equipment designed to detect or prevent errors? (For example different-

sized connectors are used for oxygen and acetylene bottles to prevent errors in 

connecting the hoses);  

> n

is the workplace layout user-friendly? 

Step three  Identifying suitable risk control measures 

The methodical approach adopted in the analysis stage will enable failings and 

possible solutions to be identified. These solutions need to be systematically 

evaluated and only the optimum solution(s) should be considered for 

implementation. If several risk control measures are identified, they should be 

carefully prioritised as a risk control action plan, which sets out what needs to be 

done, when and by whom. Assign responsibility for this to ensure the timetable for 

implementation is monitored. 

19 What risk control measures are needed/recommended? 

Your analysis of the adverse event will have identified a number of risk control 

measures that either failed or that could have interrupted the chain of events 

leading to the adverse event, if they had been in place. You should now draw up a 

list of all the alternative measures to prevent this, or similar, adverse events. 

Some of these measures will be more difficult to implement than others, but this 

must not influence their listing as possible risk control measures. The time to 

consider these limitations is later when choosing and prioritising which measures to 

implement. 

Evaluate each of the possible risk control measures on the basis of their ability to 

prevent recurrences and whether or not they can be successfully implemented. 

In deciding which risk control measures to recommend and their priority, you 

should choose measures in the following order, where possible: Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 24 of 88 Health and Safety  

> Executive
> n

measures which eliminate the risk, eg use ‘inherently safe’ products, such as a 

water-based product rather than a hydrocarbon-based solvent;  

> n

measures which combat the risk at source, eg provision of guarding;  

> n

measures which minimise the risk by relying on human behaviour, eg safe 

working procedures, the use of personal protective equipment. 

In general terms, measures that rely on engineering risk control measures are more 

reliable than those that rely on people. 

20 Do similar risks exist elsewhere? If so, what and where? 

Having concluded your investigation of the adverse event, consider the wider 

implications: could the same thing happen elsewhere in the organisation, on this 

site or at another location? What steps can be taken to avoid this? 

Adverse events might not have occurred at other locations yet, but make an 

evaluation as to whether the risks are the same and the same or similar risk control 

measures are appropriate. 

21 Have similar adverse events happened before? Give details. 

If there have been similar adverse events in the past why have they been allowed 

to happen again? The fact that such adverse events are still occurring should be a 

spur to ensure that action is taken quickly. You will be particularly open to criticism 

if you as an organisation ignore a series of similar accidents. 

Remember that there is value in investigating near-misses and undesired 

circumstances: it is often only a matter of luck that such incidents do not result in 

serious injuries or loss of life. 

Step four  The action plan and its implementation 

22 Which risk control measures should be implemented in the short and long 

term? 

The risk control action plan 

At this stage in the investigation, senior management, who have the authority to 

make decisions and act on the recommendations of the investigation team, should 

be involved. 

An action plan for the implementation of additional risk control measures is the 

desired outcome of a thorough investigation. The action plan should have SMART 

objectives, ie Specific, Measurable, Agreed, and Realistic, with Timescales. 

Deciding where to intervene requires a good knowledge of the organisation and the 

way it carries out its work. For the risk control measures proposed to be SMART, 

management, safety professionals, employees and their representatives should all 

contribute to a constructive discussion on what should be in the action plan. 

Not every risk control measure will be implemented, but the ones accorded the 

highest priority should be implemented immediately. In deciding your priorities you 

should be guided by the magnitude of the risk (‘risk’ is the likelihood and severity 

of harm). Ask yourself ‘What is essential to securing the health and safety of the 

workforce today?’ What cannot be left until another day? How high is the risk to 

employees if this risk control measure is not implemented immediately? If the risk is Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 25 of 88 Health and Safety 

> Executive

high, you should act immediately. 

You will, no doubt, be subject to financial constraints, but failing to put in place 

measures to control serious and imminent risks is totally unacceptable. You must 

either reduce the risks to an acceptable level, or stop the work. 

For those risks that are not high and immediate, the risk control measures should 

be put into your action plan in order of priority. Each risk control measure should be 

assigned a timescale and a person made responsible for its implementation. 

It is crucial that a specific person, preferably a director, partner or senior manager, 

is made responsible for ensuring that the action plan as a whole is put into effect. 

This person doesn’t necessarily have to do the work him or herself but he or she 

should monitor the progress of the risk control action plan. 

Progress on the action plan should be regularly reviewed. Any significant departures 

from the plan should be explained and risk control measure rescheduled, if 

appropriate. Employees and their representatives should be kept fully informed of 

the contents of the risk control action plan and progress with its implementation. 

23 Which risk assessments and safe working procedures need to be 

reviewed and updated? 

All relevant risk assessments and safe working procedures should be reviewed after 

an adverse event. The findings of your investigation should indicate areas of your 

risk assessments that need improving. It is important that you take a step back and 

ask what the findings of the investigation tell you about your risk assessments in 

general. Are they really suitable and sufficient? 

Failing to review relevant risk assessments after an adverse event could mean that 

you are contravening the Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations 

1999 regulation 3(3). 5

24 Have the details of adverse event and the investigation findings been 

recorded and analysed? Are there any trends or common causes which 

suggest the need for further investigation? What did the adverse event cost? 

In addition to the prompt notification of RIDDOR reportable events to the regulatory 

authorities you should ensure that you keep your own records of adverse events, 

their causes and the remedial measures taken. This will enable you to monitor your 

health and safety performance and detect trends, the common causes of adverse 

events and so improve your overall understanding and management of risk. 

It is also useful to estimate the cost of adverse events to fully appreciate the true 

cost of accidents and ill health to your business. 

The step by step approach that is set out in this guide is only one of a number of 

possible approaches. It is for you to decide which approach suits your business 

best. Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 26 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# References and further reading 

References 

1 Health and safety statistics 2000/01  Report HSE Books 2001 

ISBN 978 0 7176 2110 1 

2 Health and Safety Statistics Highlights 2002/03  Report MISC623 HSE Books 

2003 

3 European Social Statistics: Labour Force Survey Results  2001 

ISBN 9289436050 

4 The cost to Britain of workplace accidents and work-related ill health in 

1995/96  HSG101 (Second edition) HSE Books 1999 ISBN 978 0 7176 1709 8 

For the latest workplace health and safety statistics see 

www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/index.htm. 

5 Management of health and safety at work. Management of Health and Safety 

at Work Regulations 1999. Approved Code of Practice and guidance  L21 (Second 

edition) HSE Books 2000 ISBN 978 0 7176 2488 1 (Regulations 3(3) and 5 refer) 

www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/books/L21.htm 

6 Access to Justice: Final report  by the Right Honourable Lord Woolf, Master of 

the Rolls July 1996 available on the Lord Chancellor’s Department website 

www.lcd.gov.uk/civil/finalfr.htm 

7 Safety representatives and safety committees  L87 (Third edition) HSE Books 

1996 ISBN 0 7176 1220 1 (Out of print. Replaced by  Consulting workers on health 

and safety: Safety Representatives and Safety Committees Regulations 1977 (as 

amended) and Health and Safety (Consultation with Employees) Regulations 1996 

(as amended)  L146 HSE Books 2008 ISBN 978 0 7176 6311 8 

www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/books/l146.htm) 

8 Root causes analysis: Literature review  CRR325 

HSE Books 2001 ISBN 978 0 7176 1966 5 

9 Events and Casual Factors Analysis  is a technique developed for the United 

States Department of Energy. A full description of the technique is available via their 

Environmental Health and Safety internet information portal at http://tis.eh.doe.gov/ 

analysis/trac/14/trac14.htm 

10  Reducing error and influencing behaviour  HSG48 (Second edition) HSE Books 

1999 ISBN 978 0 7176 2452 2 www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/books/hsg48.htm 

Further reading 

Five steps to risk assessment  Leaflet INDG163(rev3) HSE Books 2011 (priced 

packs of 10 ISBN 978 0 7176 6440 5) www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/books/indg163.pdf 

Leading health and safety at work: Leadership actions for directors and board 

members  Leaflet INDG417 HSE Books 2007 (priced packs of 5 ISBN 978 0 7176 

6267 8) www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/indg417.pdf Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 27 of 88 Health and Safety 

> Executive

Management of health and safety at work. Management of Health and Safety at 

Work Regulations 1999 . Approved Code of Practice and guidance L21 (Second 

edition) HSE Books 2000 ISBN 978 0 7176 2488 1 

www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/books/L21.htm 

A guide to the Reporting of Injuries, Diseases and Dangerous Occurrences 

Regulations  1995 L73 (Third edition) HSE Books 2008 ISBN 978 0 7176 6290 6 

www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/books/L73.htm 

Successful health and safety management  HSG65 (Second edition) HSE Books 

1997 ISBN 978 0 7176 1276 5 www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/books/hsg65.htm 

Reducing error and influencing behaviour  HSG48 (Second edition) HSE Books 

1999 ISBN 978 0 7176 2452 2 www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/books/hsg48.htm 

Improving maintenance: A guide to reducing human error  Guidance HSE Books 

2000 ISBN 978 0 7176 1818 7 www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/books/improve-maint.htm Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 28 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Adverse event report and investigation form 

Part 1 Overview 

The purpose of this form is to record all adverse events. The term  accident  is used where injury or ill 

health occurs. The term  incident  includes  near-misses  and  undesired circumstances , where there is 

the potential for injury. Part 1 should be filled out immediately by the manager or supervisor for the work 

activity involved. Part 2 should be completed by the person responsible for health and safety. Part 3 

should be completed, where appropriate, by the investigation team. Part 4 should be completed by the 

investigating team, together with managers who have the authority to take decisions. When completing 

Parts 2, 3 and 4 refer to the guidance under ‘A step by step guide to health and safety investigations’. 

Part 1 Overview 

Reported by: 

Brief details (What, where, when, who and emergency measures taken) 

Forwarded to:  Date 

Time 

Incident  Ill health  Minor injury  Serious injury  Major injury 

Date/time of adverse event 

Ref no 

R Osmund  23.06.03 10.00am 

Norman Brown was trying to fix a problem on the edge gluer when the machine operated. Norman cut 

his right hand quite badly. He was given first aid and taken to hospital. 

The fuses have been taken out of the edge gluer and a sign hung on it. 

X

Richard Wills 

23.06.03 

11.00am Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 29 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Part 2 Initial assessment (to be carried out 

# by the person responsible for health and 

# safety) 

Y/N 

Type of event  Actual/potential for harm 

Accident 

Near-miss 

Undesired circumstance 

Ill health 

Investigation level 

High level  Low level 

Basic Medium level 

Initial assessment carried out by:  Date 

Priority 

For investigation by: 

Further investigation required? 

Fatal or major 

Minor 

Damage only 

Serious 

RIDDOR reportable? 

Entry in accident book 

Date/time reported Y/N 

Y/N  Date entered/reference 

X

X

Y

Y

X

Immediate Yes 

Richard Wills 

Peter Peterson (fitter), John Evans (foreman) and Richard Wills 

23.06.03 

15.03.03 

15.03.03 123/03 Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 30 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Part 3 Investigation information gathering 

1 Where and when did the adverse event happen? 

6 Were there adequate safe working procedures and were they followed? 

5 Was there anything unusual or different about the working conditions? 

2 Who was injured/suffered ill health or was otherwise involved with the adverse event? 

4 What activities were being carried out at the time? 

3 How did the adverse event happen? (Note any equipment involved). 

Woodmachine shop 

Monday 23rd July 2003 at 11.00 am 

Yes. This machine normally is used with mdf skirtings, not aluminium. 

No. Machines should be isolated before carrying out repairs. 

Norman Brown – Injured person woodmachinist 

No witnesses 

Norman was working on the edge gluing machine on a batch of 

aluminium skirtings. 

Norman discovered a defect in the edge gluing machine. He opened the 

interlocked lid where the skirting boards are sawn off and planed down. 

Norman put his pencil into the interlock switch, so he could operate 

the machine with the guard open, so he could see what was wrong. 

The cross cut saw operated and cut Norman’s hand. 

Wilmatron 440 edge gluing machine series No 1234/23 1998. 

Sharpcut Mk1 200mm diameter circular saw blade. Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 31 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Part 3 Investigation information gathering 

7 What injuries or ill health effects, if any, were caused? 

11 Was maintenance and cleaning sufficient? If not, explain why not. 

8 If there was an injury, how did it occur and what caused it? 

10 Did the organisation and arrangement of the work influence the adverse event? 

9 Was the risk known? If so, why wasn’t it controlled? If not, why not? 

Severe laceration to the top of the right hand at the knuckles resulting in severing of tendons. 

The rotating blade of the cross cut saw. 

Yes, but Norman thought he would be OK having a look inside the guard. 

No, but Norman had been having trouble with the machine all morning. After the coffee break, he 

decided to get it fixed. 

Yes Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 32 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Part 3 Investigation information gathering 

12 Were the people involved competent and suitable? 

17 Did other conditions influence the adverse event? 

16 Was the safety equipment sufficient? 

13 Did the workplace layout influence the adverse event? 

15 Did difficulties using the plant and equipment influence the adverse event? 

14 Did the nature or shape of the materials influence the adverse event? 

Norman was a qualified wood machinist with 9 years’ experience. He had 

worked on the edge gluing machine for 3 years. 

Yes – access to the edger is difficult. Access to the viewing window in the guard is difficult. 

Yes – the machine was being used with aluminium rather than the normal 

mdf skirtings. 

Yes, in that the edge gluer was malfunctioning. 

No – the interlock switch was of a type easily defeated. 

No Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 33 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Analysis and further action 

18 What were the immediate, underlying and root causes? 

Analysis (see ‘Analysis’ under ‘ Step two ’) 

Norman’s hand was in the 

danger area 

Norman Brown lacerates 

his hand on the edge 

gluing machine 

Because 

Why? 

Why? 

Why? 

Because 

Norman was working on 

the machine 

The machine was ‘live’, 

under power 

Norman was investigating 

a fault  The guard was open 

A B C

The saw blade made a 

stroke 

A B C

Because Because Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 34 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Analysis and further action 

18 What were the immediate, underlying and root causes? 

Analysis (see ‘Analysis’ under ‘ Step two ’) 

Norman was investigating 

a fault 

There were no procedures 

for reporting/repairing 

faults 

Because 

Why? 

Why? 

Why? 

Because Because 

There was a fault on the 

machine 

There were no 

arrangements for carrying 

out maintenance 

The machine was being 

used for aluminium 

Duties/responsibilities  not 

clearly set out 

AInvestigating accidents and incidents  Page 35 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Analysis and further action 

18 What were the immediate, underlying and root causes? 

Analysis (see ‘Analysis’ under ‘ Step two ’) 

Why? 

Why? 

Why?  The machine was live 

The interlock had been 

defeated 

The machine was not 

isolated 

Norman not 

aware of need to 

isolate 

No isolation 

procedures 

Risk assessment 

did not deal with 

this risk 

Risk assessment 

did not anticipate 

violations 

Norman not 

competent for 

maintenance 

work 

Poor attitude to 

health and safety 

Supervision was 

poor 

Norman decided 

to defeat safety 

system 

Interlock of a type 

easily defeated 

Because 

Because Because 

Because 

Because 

Because 

Because 

BInvestigating accidents and incidents  Page 36 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Analysis and further action 

18 What were the immediate, underlying and root causes? 

Analysis (see ‘Analysis’ under ‘ Step two ’) 

Norman wanted to see 

the machine operate 

under power 

The guard was open 

Access to the viewing 

port was obstructed 

Because 

Why? 

Because 

Norman was investigating 

a fault 

Workplace layout was 

inadequate 

CCInvestigating accidents and incidents  Page 37 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Analysis and further action 

18 What were the immediate, underlying and root causes? 

Analysis (see ‘Analysis’ under ‘ Step two ’) 

How/Why 

1 Edge gluer was used for aluminium without adjusting to suit 

2 The saw blade was tearing the end of the sections 

3 The operator decided to investigate the cause 

4 The operator decides that to find the cause he has to run the machine 

5 The operator is unable to see through the viewing port 

6 The operator opens the guards and defeats the interlock 

7 The machine makes a cutting stroke 

8 The operator’s hand is cut by the saw blade 

Immediate causes 

1 Not enough room around the machine to do the job 

2 The saw set up was not suitable for use on aluminium 

3 The interlocks fitted were of a type easily defeated 

4 There were no safe working procedures for the job 

5 Operative not fully competent 

Underlying causes 

6 Poor workplace layout 

7 No risk assessments for use/maintenance of machine 

8 Risk assessments didn’t address use of other materials 

9 Risk assessments didn’t address violations 

10  SWPs were not prepared following risk assessments 

11  Operators not trained on machine maintenance and safety devices 

12  Level of supervision not adequate – should have detected violations 

13  All staff to be reminded of their duties and essential health and safety 

measures 

Root causes 

Management commitment to H&S not communicated to employees 

Health and safety assistants not fully competent and resourced 

Unclear lines of communication and responsibilities Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 38 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Part 3 Investigation information gathering 

19 What risk control measures are needed/recommended? 

20 Do similar risks exist elsewhere? If so, what and where? 

21 Have similar adverse events happened before? Give details. 

1

2

3

4

5

6

Replace interlock switch with tongue type switch 

Rearrange machine to allow access to window 

Procedures for isolation of machine 

Procedures for reporting/repairing defects 

Clear allocation of duties 

Review risk assessment 

Yes – there are similar interlock switches on the multi-headed 

moulder/planer 

No Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 39 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Part 4 The risk control action plan 

22 Which risk control measures should be implemented in the long and short term? 

23 Which risk assessments and safe working procedures need to be reviewed and updated? 

Control measure  Completion 

Date 

Person 

responsible 

2

3

4

5

1

Name of risk assessment 

safe working procedure 

2

3

4

1

Completion 

Date 

Person 

responsible 

Replace interlocks  Before use 

1st week in 

July 

1st week in 

July 

Richard (H&S) 

Richard (H&S) 

Before use 

Peter (fitter) 

1.12.03 

1.03.03 

1.12.03 

1.3.04 

John (foreman) 

Richard (H&S) 

John (foreman) 

Richard (H&S) 

John (foreman) 

Richard (H&S) 

Richard (H&S) Prepare/review risk assessments 

Risk Assess. For workplace 

Risk Assess. For machinery 

Rearrange workshop 

Prepare SWPs for isolation and 

reporting and repair/maintenance 

Assess competence and training needs & 

deliver training Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 40 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Part 4 The risk control action plan 

24 Have the details of the adverse event and the investigation findings been recorded and 

analysed? Are there any trends or common causes which suggest the need for further 

investigation? What did the adverse event cost? 

25 Signed on behalf of the investigation team 

26 Members of the investigation team 

Name  Position 

Name  Signature 

Details have been recorded – no trends or common causes – need to check quality of risk 

assessments. 

Estimated cost of accident £3,700 

Richard Wills  H&S Officer 

John Evans  Foreman 

Peter Peterson  Fitter Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 41 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

27 The findings of this investigation need to be communicated to the following managers, 

union and employee safety representatives 

Person  Signature  Date 

A. Director 

W.K.S Manager 

A. Rep 

# Part 4 The risk control action plan Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 42 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Adverse event report and investigation form 

# Part 1 Overview 

The purpose of this form is to record all adverse events. The term  accident  is used where injury or ill 

health occurs. The term  incident  includes  near-misses  and  undesired circumstances , where there is 

the potential for injury. Part 1 should be filled out immediately by the manager or supervisor for the work 

activity involved. Part 2 should be completed by the person responsible for health and safety. Part 3 

should be completed, where appropriate, by the investigation team. Part 4 should be completed by the 

investigating team, together with managers who have the authority to take decisions. When completing 

Parts 2, 3 and 4 refer to the guidance under ‘A step by step guide to health and safety investigations’. 

Part 1 Overview 

Reported by: 

Brief details (What, where, when, who and emergency measures taken) 

Forwarded to:  Date 

Time 

Incident  Ill health  Minor injury  Serious injury  Major injury 

Date/time of adverse event 

Ref no 

Adam Jones (Wages Dept) 

Paul Melish 

09.11.03 

10.30am 

Unknown 

Sick paper received from John Smith together with a note from his GP which states that he is suffering 

from occupational asthma 

XInvestigating accidents and incidents  Page 43 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Part 2 Initial assessment (to be carried out 

# by the person responsibile for health and 

# safety) 

Y/N 

Type of event  Actual/potential for harm 

Injury 

Near-miss 

Undesired circumstance 

Ill health 

Investigation level 

High level  Low level 

Basic Medium level 

Initial assessment carried out by:  Date 

Priority 

For investigation by: 

Further investigation required? 

Fatal or major 

Minor 

Damage only 

Serious 

RIDDOR reportable? 

Entry in accident book 

Date/time reported Y/N 

Y/N  Date entered/reference 

X X

Y

Y

X

Immediate Yes 

Paul Melish 

P Melish, workshop manager and foreman 

09.11.03 

11.30 am 

09.11.03 Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 44 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

1 Where and when did the adverse event happen? 

6 Were there adequate safe working procedures and were they followed? 

5 Was there anything unusual or different about the working conditions? 

2 Who was injured/suffered ill health or was otherwise involved with the adverse event? 

4 What activities were being carried out at the time? 

3 How did the adverse event happen? (Note any equipment involved). 

Spray shop – sometime over last 6 months? John Smith was taken on 

6 months ago as a paint sprayer 

Nothing different 

As normal 

John Smith – paint sprayer 

Also other sprayers Peter John and Roger Wilson 

Duties carried out would have been limited to the mixing and spraying 

of isocyanate-based spray paint in the spray booth 

John works in the paint spray booth. 

Booth – Windflow Mark 3 serial no 12345/97 

Spray guns – Paintspraymaster model 2 

Gun wash – Cleanomax mark 4 serial no 247/99 

Half mask – Wearmask model 12 with AXP3 filters 

# Part 3 Investigation information gathering Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 45 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Part 3 Investigation information gathering 

7 What injuries or ill health effects, if any, were caused? 

11 Was maintenance and cleaning sufficient? If not, explain why not. 

8 If there was an injury, how did it occur and what caused it? 

10 Did the organisation and arrangement of the work influence the adverse event? 

9 Was the risk known? If so, why wasn’t it controlled? If not, why not? 

Reported Occupational Asthma 

Exposure to isocyanate-based paint suspected 

Also possible poor quality of air fed to mask 

Risks of paint known – existing controls assumed to be sufficient 

Poor air quality not known 

No supervision or monitoring of paint spray shop – air-fed mask not 

always used – for small jobs half-masks were sometimes used (suitable 

for working with isocyanates but NOT suitable for spray painting) 

Spray booth not examined for 2 years – compressed air quality to air-fed 

masks not tested. Both subsequently found to be inadequate Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 46 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Part 3 Investigation information gathering 

12 Were the people involved competent and suitable? 

17 Did other conditions influence the adverse event? 

16 Was the safety equipment sufficient? 

13 Did the workplace layout influence the adverse event? 

15 Did difficulties using the plant and equipment influence the adverse event? 

14 Did the nature or shape of the materials influence the adverse event? 

John Smith was an experienced paint sprayer with 2 1/2 years’ experience 

with his previous employer 

No 

Yes solvent-based isocyanate paints are respiratory sensitisers 

No 

Spray booth air flow was found to be inadequate 

Air quality to air-fed masks was poor – contaminated 

Correct Respiratory Protective Equipment not always used. 

No Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 47 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Analysis and further action 

18 What were the immediate, underlying and root causes? 

Analysis (see ‘Analysis’ under ‘ Step two ’) 

John Smith develops 

occupational asthma 

He is exposed to 

isocyanate paint 

His deteriorating health is 

not detected 

Because 

He is exposed to 

contaminated air 

A B CInvestigating accidents and incidents  Page 48 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Analysis and further action 

18 What were the immediate, underlying and root causes? 

Analysis (see ‘Analysis’ under ‘ Step two ’) 

Because 

Why? 

Why? 

Why? 

He is exposed to 

contaminated air 

The compressed air 

supply to his air-fed mask 

is contaminated 

The air supply was not 

tested for quality 

The risk 

assessment did 

not identify the 

risk 

No-one had 

responsibility for 

maintenance 

management 

Contamination was being 

fed into the air supply 

(faulty pump) 

Because 

Because 

AInvestigating accidents and incidents  Page 49 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Analysis and further action 

Analysis (see ‘Analysis’ under ‘ Step two ’) 

Because 

Why? 

Why? 

Why? 

Because Because 

Because  Because 

John Smith exposed to 

isocyanate paint 

Sprayers sometimes used 

inadequate RPE 

Spray booth extraction 

inadequate 

Supervision inadequate 

No information 

instructions or procedures 

for use of RPE 

Booth was not tested 

No one had overall 

responsibility for 

maintenance 

Risk assessment and 

procedures inadequate 

BInvestigating accidents and incidents  Page 50 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Analysis and further action 

18 What were the immediate, underlying and root causes? 

Analysis (see ‘Analysis’ under ‘ Step two ’) 

Why? 

Deteriorating health not 

detected 

No health surveillance 

including lung function 

test 

Because 

Because 

Why? 

No health screening on 

recruitment 

Because 

Risk assessment not 

adequate 

CCInvestigating accidents and incidents  Page 51 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Analysis and further action 

18 What were the immediate, underlying and root causes? 

Analysis (see ‘Analysis’ under ‘ Step two ’) 

How/why might he have been exposed to substances which caused 

occupational asthma 

1 The compressed air supply to the breathing equipment was contaminated 

2 The spray booth extraction was not adequate 

3 Sprayers sometimes used RPE which was not adequate 

Immediate Causes 

1 Spray booth performance had deteriorated – not tested/maintained 

2 Air quality to air-fed masks had deteriorated – not tested/maintained 

3 Incorrect RPE sometimes used 

4 No safe working procedures for RPE and booth 

Underlying Causes 

1 Risk assessments inadequate for spraying operations 

2 No one in overall charge of testing/maintenance 

3 Supervision and monitoring of work practices inadequate 

4 Sprayers not fully competent – training/instruction on use/choice of RPE 

5 Risk assessment didn’t recognise risk from previous employment exposure 

6 No arrangements for health screening 

Root Causes 

No senior partner in overall charge of H&S 

H&S performance to be monitored 

Responsibilities unclear Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 52 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Part 3 Investigation information gathering 

19 What risk control measures are needed/recommended? 

20 Do similar risks exist elsewhere? If so, what and where? 

21 Have similar adverse events happened before? Give details. 

1

2

3

4

5

6

Spray booth & air to be tested 

Health surveillance & screening for sprayers 

Responsibilities for maintenance to be allocated 

Refresher training on hazards and PPE 

Increased supervision and monitoring 

Partner appointed to manage H&S 

No 

No Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 53 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Part 4 The risk control action plan 

22 Which risk control measures should be implemented in the long and short term? 

23 Which risk assessments and safe working procedures need to be reviewed and updated? 

2

1

Name of risk assessment 

safe working procedure 

3

Completion 

Date 

Person 

responsible 

Jan 2003  Peter Riley Spray painting 

6

5

4

3

2

1

Control Measure  Completion 

Date 

Person 

responsible 

Booth and air to be tested  Immediate 

Jan 2003 

Maintenance fitter 

Jan 2003 

Jan 2003 

Jan 2003 

Jan 2003 

Peter Riley 

Maintenance fitter 

Peter Riley 

All foreman/Peter Riley 

P Melish 

Supervision/monitoring 

Partner appointed to review 

Health surveillance and screening 

Maintenance schedule 

Training PPE Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 54 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

24 Have the details of the adverse event and the investigation findings been recorded and 

analysed? Are there any trends or common causes which suggest the need for further 

investigation? What did the adverse event cost? 

25 Signed on behalf of the investigation team 

26 Members of the investigation team 

Name  Position 

Name  Signature 

No trends 

Estimated total cost £2,700 

Paul Melish  Partner 

A Coome  Work Manager 

P Berry 

T Roberts 

Foreman 

Employee rep 

Paul Melish 

# Part 4 The risk control action plan Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 55 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Part 4 The risk control action plan 

27 The findings of this investigation need to be communicated to the following managers, 

union and employee safety representatives 

Person  Signature  Date 

A. Manager 

A. Supervisor 

A. Representative Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 56 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Adverse event report and investigation form 

# Part 1 Overview 

The purpose of this form is to record all adverse events. The term  accident  is used where injury or ill 

health occurs. The term  incident  includes  near-misses  and  undesired circumstances , where there is 

the potential for injury. Part 1 should be filled out immediately by the manager or supervisor for the work 

activity involved. Part 2 should be completed by the person responsible for health and safety. Part 3 

should be completed, where appropriate, by the investigation team. Part 4 should be completed by the 

investigating team, together with managers who have the authority to take decisions. When completing 

Parts 2, 3 and 4 refer to the guidance under ‘A step by step guide to health and safety investigations’. 

Part 1 Overview 

Reported by: 

Brief details (What, where, when, who and emergency measures taken) 

Forwarded to:  Date 

Time 

Incident  Ill health  Minor injury  Serious injury  Major injury 

Date/time of adverse event 

Ref no Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 57 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Part 2 Initial assessment (to be carried out 

# by the person responsible for health and 

# safety) 

Y/N 

Type of event  Actual/potential for harm 

Accident 

Near-miss 

Undesired circumstance 

Ill health 

Investigation level 

High level  Low level 

Basic Medium level 

Initial assessment carried out by:  Date 

Priority 

For investigation by: 

Further investigation required? 

Fatal or major 

Minor 

Damage only 

Serious 

RIDDOR reportable? 

Entry in accident book 

Date/time reported Y/N 

Y/N  Date entered/reference 

X

Y/N Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 58 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Part 3 Investigation information gathering 

1 Where and when did the adverse event happen? 

6 Were there adequate safe working procedures and were they followed? 

5 Was there anything unusual or different about the working conditions? 

2 Who was injured/suffered ill health or was otherwise involved with the adverse event? 

4 What activities were being carried out at the time? 

3 How did the adverse event happen? (Note any equipment involved.) Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 59 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Part 3 Investigation information gathering 

7 What injuries or ill health effects, if any, were caused? 

11 Was maintenance and cleaning sufficient? If not, explain why not. 

8 If there was an injury, how did it occur and what caused it? 

10 Did the organisation and arrangement of the work influence the adverse event? 

9 Was the risk known? If so, why wasn’t it controlled? If not, why not? Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 60 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Part 3 Investigation information gathering 

12 Were the people involved competent and suitable? 

17 Did other conditions influence the adverse event? 

16 Was the safety equipment sufficient? 

13 Did the workplace layout influence the adverse event? 

15 Did difficulties using the plant and equipment influence the adverse event? 

14 Did the nature or shape of the materials influence the adverse event? Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 61 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Analysis and further action 

18 What were the immediate, underlying and root causes? 

Analysis (see ‘Analysis’ under ‘ Step two ’) Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 62 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Part 3 Investigation information gathering 

19 What risk control measures are needed/recommended? 

20 Do similar risks exist elsewhere? If so, what and where? 

21 Have similar adverse events happened before? Give details. 

1

2

3

4

5

6Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 63 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Part 4 The risk control action plan 

22 Which risk control measures should be implemented in the long and short term? 

23 Which risk assessments and safe working procedures need to be reviewed and updated? 

5

4

3

2

1

Control measure  Completion 

date 

Person 

responsible 

Name of risk assessment 

safe working procedure 

1

Completion 

date 

Person 

responsible 

2

3

4Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 64 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

24 Have the details of the adverse event and the investigation findings been recorded and 

analysed? Are there any trends or common causes which suggest the need for further 

investigation? What did the adverse event cost? 

25 Signed on behalf of the investigation team 

26 Members of the investigation team 

Name  Position 

Name  Signature 

# Part 4 The risk control action plan Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 65 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Part 4 The risk control action plan 

27 The findings of this investigation need to be communicated to the following managers, 

union and employee safety representatives 

Person  Signature  Date Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 66 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

# Adverse event analysis: Rooting out risk 

Using the information gathered during your investigation, go through each of the four sections on the immediate 

causes (the Place, the Plant, the Process and the People). If the answer to any of the questions is ‘no’, then 

this is an immediate cause of the adverse event under investigation. After identifying the immediate causes, 

direct your attention to the potential underlying causes (which are set out to the right of the immediate causes 

identified) and consider the questions under the relevant headings. For example if the answer to the first 

question below ‘Were the access and egress adequate?’ is ‘no’, you should consider whether the design of the 

workplace and the risk assessment for workplace access/egress were adequate. 

Immediate causes 

1 The place or premises where the incident happened 

The place or premises where the incident happened. 

If there was anything about the condition of the workplace that contributed to the 

adverse event, answer the following question, which will suggest other areas to 

consider. If not, go to ‘Plant, equipment and substances’. 

1 Were the access and egress adequate? 

2 Were the access and egress points being used? 

3 Was the workplace suitable for the task in hand? 

4 Was  there  sufficient  space  for  the  task  in  hand? 

5 Was the workplace being used as intended? 

6 Were people segregated from hazardous areas/processes/machinery? 

7 Was the work environment (lighting, temperature and ventilation) suitable? 

8 Did the ergonomics of the workstation suit the person using it? 

9 Was the work area clean and tidy? (Routine cleaning programme and dealing 

with spills.) 

10  Were weather conditions a factor? 

11  Were the noise levels within acceptable levels? 

12  Were the appropriate warning signs in place? 

13  Were contractors provided with adequate information on access/egress and 

the hazards within the premises?  

> Control
> Co-operation
> Communication
> Competence
> Design
> Implementation
> Risk assessment Investigating accidents and incidents Page 67 of 88 Health and Safety
> Executive

Immediate causes 

2 The plant, equipment and substances (used or generated) 

The plant, equipment and substances (used or generated). 

If the equipment being used, or the substances/materials used or generated, 

contributed to the adverse event, answer the following questions, which will 

suggest other areas to consider. If not, go to ‘Process/procedures’. 

1 Were the most suitable plant and equipment available for the job? 

2 Were the plant and equipment used suitable for the person using them? 

3 Were the plant and equipment used suitable for the job? 

4 Had  the  plant  and  equipment  been  chosen,  or  modified,  so  that  its  health 

and  safety  efficiency  could  not  be  improved? 

5 Were plant and equipment in working order and adequately maintained? Was 

there a routine maintenance programme? Was there a procedure for repair 

when a defect was discovered? 

6 Were the plant and equipment being properly used? 

7 Were there adequate controls or guards for the safe use of the equipment? 

8 Were  the  controls  or  guards  fitted,  maintained  and  properly  used? 

9 Were the controls well laid out and easy to understand? 

10  Were the most suitable materials or substances available for the job? 

11  Were the correct materials being used? 

12 Were  the  materials  as  specified? 

13  Were the materials or substances used suitable for the job and person? 

14  Were the materials or substances being properly used? 

15  Was exposure to hazardous materials and by-products adequately 

controlled? 

16  If  the  need  for  personal  protective  equipment  (PPE)  had  not  been  identified, 

was it safe to do the job without PPE? 

17  If necessary, was suitable PPE available? 

18  If necessary, was the correct PPE used? 

19  If the correct PPE was used, was it used correctly?  

> Control
> Co-operation
> Communication
> Competence
> Implementation
> Risk assessment Investigating accidents and incidents Page 68 of 88 Health and Safety
> Executive

Immediate causes 

3 The process/procedures 

The process/procedures. 

If the procedures, instructions or information (or the lack of them), contributed to 

the adverse event, answer the following questions, which will suggest other areas 

to consider. If not, go to ‘People’. 

1 Were there safe working procedures and instructions for the tasks under 

consideration? 

2 If there were safe working procedures and instructions, were they up 

to date? 

3 If there were safe working procedures and instructions, were they realistic, 

accurate and adequate? 

4 If there were safe working procedures and instructions, did they deal with 

the circumstances of the adverse event? 

5 If there were safe working procedures and instructions, were the correct 

ones followed? 

6 If there were safe working procedures and instructions, were they provided 

or readily available to those carrying out the work? 

Include contractors. 

7 If there were safe working procedures, were they policed? 

8 Was the level of supervision adequate? Include contractors. 

9 Were  the  training  needs  for  this  activity  identified? 

10  If there were safe working procedures and instructions, were they used as 

part of training? 

11  Were contractors working in accordance with agreed method statements 

and safe systems of work? 

12  Were contractors informed of the safe working procedures they should 

adopt?  

> Control
> Communication
> Competence
> Design
> Implementation
> Risk assessment Investigating accidents and incidents Page 69 of 88 Health and Safety
> Executive

Immediate causes 

3 The people involved 

The people involved. 

If there was anything about the people involved that contributed to the adverse 

event, answer the following questions which will suggest other areas to consider. 

1 Were the people involved suited for their job?  

> n

physically and emotionally (young people need special consideration)?  

> n

competence (skilled, knowledgeable and experienced)? 

> n

2 Was the health of people who could be affected monitored? 

3 Were the people performing their work as expected? 

4 Were workers employed by contractors suitable and competent? 

5 Was the event free of human failings? 

Was it a mistake? If it was a mistake consider: 

Was it a slip or lapse caused by:  

> n

fatigue – not enough rest breaks, working excessive hours, 

already tired?  

> n

lack of motivation or boredom?  

> n

being distracted?  

> n

being preoccupied, eg angry, or excited?  

> n

being under too much pressure, ie too much or too many things to do?  

> n

too little time?  

> n

taking substances, such as alcohol, medicines or drugs? 

If it was a violation, ie breaking the rules or taking short cuts, consider:  

> Control
> Co-operation
> Communication
> Competence
> Design
> Implementation
> Risk assessment Investigating accidents and incidents Page 70 of 88 Health and Safety
> Executive

Underlying and Root Causes 

If your answers to the Place, Plant, Procedures and People sections identified any 

immediate cause, consider the relevant ‘Underlying and Root Causes’ section. 

ORGANISATION – how we do things and how we make sure they are done 

correctly 

Control 

1 Were the workplace and work activities adequately supervised and monitored 

in order to ensure that risk control measures were effective and implemented 

as intended? 

2 Did the supervisors have adequate resources to carry out their duties? 

3 Were people held accountable for their performance in carrying out their 

duties with regard to Health and Safety? 

4 Were there adequate arrangements for overseeing and controlling contractors? 

Co-operation 

1 Were trade unions, employees and their representatives involved in 

determining workplace arrangements, preparing risk assessments and safe 

working procedures? 

2 Did the individuals involved in the incident share information? 

3 Were there arrangements for cooperation with, and co-ordination of, 

contractors? 

Communication 

1 Were responsibilities and duties clearly set out? 

2 Were they clearly understood by those involved? 

3 Did everyone involved know who they report to and who reports to them? 

4 Was there sufficient, up-to-date information to enable good decisions to be 

made? 

5 Were there adequate arrangements for passing on information at shift 

changes? 

6 Were written instructions, safe working 

procedures and product information sheets practical and clear? 

7 Were the instructions and procedures available to all who needed them? 

8 Was communication between workers and supervisors effective? 

9 Was the communication between different departments effective? 

10  Were there effective communications with contractors? 

Competence: Training and suitability 

1 Were the people involved assessed as suitable for the work in terms of health 

and physical ability? 

2 Were the health and safety training needs of people identified?  

> n

on recruitment;  

> n

on changing jobs;  

> n

when changes in the work are proposed;  

> n

periodically as part of refresher training? 

3 Were the training requirements for particular jobs identified? Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 71 of 88 Health and Safety 

> Executive

4 Was the training effectively delivered?  

> n

with adequate resources?  

> n

effectively?  

> n

and assessed?  

> n

were training records kept? 

5 Was the competence of contractors, employees and agency workers 

checked? 

Planning and Implementation: How we prepare to do things 

effectively and efficiently 

Design 

1 Were the workplace and equipment layouts designed considering health and 

safety? 

2 Were the controls, displays etc of plant and equipment designed to reduce the 

risk of, or prevent, human error? For example mis-reading dials or operating 

the wrong switch 

Implementation 

1 Were there arrangements for ensuring that sufficient, and suitable, plant, 

equipment and materials were available? 

2 Were there arrangements for ensuring that sufficient and suitable labour was 

available? 

3 Was there adequate cover for leave or sickness absence? 

4 Were suitable contractors appointed? 

5 Were there adequate arrangements for cleaning? 

6 Were there adequate arrangements for reporting defects in plant and 

equipment? 

7 Were there adequate arrangements for carrying out maintenance work? 

8 Were there adequate arrangements for reporting health and safety concerns? 

9 Were there adequate arrangements for reporting near-misses and undesired 

circumstances? 

10  Were there adequate arrangements for carrying out health surveillance? 

11  Were there adequate arrangements for carrying out air monitoring/sampling? 

(If required) 

12  Did production targets take account of health and safety? 

13  Were there adequate arrangements for appointing and controlling contractors? 

Risk assessment 

Risk assessments involve identifying the hazards, identifying who may be affected 

and putting in place suitable arrangements to eliminate or reduce the risks to an 

acceptable level. 

1 Were there risk assessments for the work in question? 

2 Were they adequate?  

> n

did they correctly identify the risks?  

> n

were they up-to-date and reviewed as necessary?  

> n

were correct technical standards used?  

> n

were adequate risk control measures identified?  

> n

were safe working procedures developed?  

> n

were there clear conclusions and recommendations?  

> n

were employees involved in preparing them? Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 72 of 88 Health and Safety 

> Executive

3 Did the risk assessments result in a risk control action plan with SMART 

(Specific, Measurable, Agreed, Realistic and Timescaled) objectives? 

4 Were responsibilities for implementing the risk control action plan set out? 

5 Had the risk control action plan been implemented? 

6 If there had been similar adverse events in the past, had they been 

investigated? 

7 Were adverse events recorded, investigated and the findings fed back into the 

risk assessments? 

8 Did the risk assessments include the risks from work carried out by 

contractors? 

A ‘no’ answer to any of the questions in the underlying or root cause section 

identifies an underlying or root cause. 

These underlying or root causes in turn point to failings in the health and safety 

management system. 

Senior management should consider all the questions in the following 

‘Management’ section to identify weaknesses in the overall risk control 

management of the organisation. 

Management: How we create the environment and set the standards 

under which all other health and safety activities take place  

> n

Was there a written health and safety policy statement?  

> n

Did all employees know and understand the health and safety policy 

statement?  

> n

Were named partners, directors and senior managers made responsible for 

health and safety arrangements?  

> n

Was there an adequate commitment to health and safety at a senior level?  

> n

Was this commitment reflected in the actions of directors, partners and 

managers?  

> n

Were sufficient people appointed to assist with health and safety measures?  

> n

Were the people appointed to assist with health and safety measures 

adequately trained and competent?  

> n

Did the health and safety assistants have sufficient authority to carry out their 

duties?  

> n

Were the tasks of carrying out risk assessments and preparing safe working 

practices given to competent persons?  

> n

Was the carrying out of risk assessments a high priority?  

> n

Were adequate resources allocated to health and safety?  

> n

Was it your policy to learn from adverse event investigations and improve your 

health and safety performance?  

> n

Were the recommendations and findings of the health and safety team acted 

on?  

> n

Was the work of the health and safety team (including managers, safety 

officers, safety assistants, supervisors and safety representatives) monitored?  

> n

Were the health and safety team held to account for their performance?  

> n

Were there clear and integrated lines of communication and control?  

> n

Was there a conflict between production and health and safety?  

> n

Was health and safety performance measured and monitored?  

> n

Did you seek to improve your health and safety performance as a result 

of your dealings with the regulatory authorities and other health and safety 

professionals? Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 73 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive  

> 1 Place or premises
> Immediate cause: Point  Risk control measure required  Underlying/root causes  Measures to remedy underlying/ root cause
> Adverse event analysis
> Using the ‘Adverse event analysis: Rooting out risk’ checklist, consider the questions in the immediate cause sections. Enter each of the immediate causes
> identified in the table and enter the risk control measures required. For each immediate cause the checklist suggests possible underlying/root causes. Consider
> each of these potential underlying/root causes and enter those that are relevant.
> Finally enter the remedial measures required to remedy the underlying/root cause.
> Adverse event
> Ref no Investigating accidents and incidents Page 74 of 88

Health and Safety 

Executive 

> 2 Plant equipment and substances
> Immediate cause: Point  Risk control measure required  Underlying/root causes  Measures to remedy underlying/root cause
> Point 5
> Equipment not being routinely
> maintained
> Spray booth to be examined
> immediately and air quality to
> sprayers masks to be checked
> Risk assessment inadequate -
> did not recognise risks where
> booth extraction and air quality
> had deteriorated
> Review risk assessments where
> deterioration in safety equipment will lead
> to increased risks
> Point 15
> Exposure to hazardous materials
> not controlled
> Spray booth and air quality to be
> tested immediately to ensure safe
> Control - No clear responsibilities
> for ensuring equipment working
> effectively
> Maintenance fitter to be made
> responsible for testing of spray booth and
> air quality
> Point 18
> Correct PPE not used  Ensure only air-fed masks are used
> for  all  spray painting
> Supervision and monitoring
> inadequate
> Ensure supervisors check that correct
> PPE is used - introduce monitoring of
> actual use
> Competence - sprayers not fully
> aware of risks and limitations of
> RPE
> Instructions and training of sprayers on
> risks and limitations of RPE
> Adverse event analysis
> Using the ‘Adverse event analysis: Rooting out risk’ checklist, consider the questions in the immediate cause sections. Enter each of the immediate causes
> identified in the table and enter the risk control measures required. For each immediate cause the checklist suggests possible underlying/root causes. Consider
> each of these potential underlying/root causes and enter those that are relevant.
> Finally enter the remedial measures required to remedy the underlying/root cause.
> Adverse event
> Ref no

Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 75 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

> 3 Processes and procedures
> Immediate cause: Point  Risk control measure required  Underlying/root causes  Measures to remedy underlying/root cause
> Point 1
> No safe working procedures
> (SWPs) or instructions
> Prepare SWPs and instructions for
> the safe use of the spray booth
> and the RPE required
> Risk Assessments and  SWPs
> inadequate
> Review risk assessment and prepare
> SWPs for the maintenance and use of the
> spray booth and air-fed masks
> Adverse event analysis
> Using the ‘Adverse event analysis: Rooting out risk’ checklist, consider the questions in the immediate cause sections. Enter each of the immediate causes
> identified in the table and enter the risk control measures required. For each immediate cause the checklist suggests possible underlying/root causes. Consider
> each of these potential underlying/root causes and enter those that are relevant.
> Finally enter the remedial measures required to remedy the underlying/root cause.
> Adverse event
> Ref no

Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 76 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

> 4 People
> Immediate cause: Point  Risk control measure required  Underlying/root causes  Measures to remedy underlying/ root cause
> Point 1
> People not suited for the job
> Ensure that recruitment of sprayers
> includes health checks
> Risk assessment inadequate and
> no health screening on
> recruitment
> Ensure risk assessments recognise need
> to screen people for ill health which may
> be made worse by their work
> Point 2
> No health monitoring
> Spray painters to have annual lung
> function tests as a part of their
> health monitoring
> Risk Assessments inadequate  Ensure that risk assessments recognise
> where health monitoring can detect the
> onset of ill health and set up the
> necessary arrangements
> Adverse event analysis
> Using the ‘Adverse event analysis: Rooting out risk’ checklist, consider the questions in the immediate cause sections. Enter each of the immediate causes
> identified in the table and enter the risk control measures required. For each immediate cause the checklist suggests possible underlying/root causes. Consider
> each of these potential underlying/root causes and enter those that are relevant.
> Finally enter the remedial measures required to remedy the underlying/root cause.
> Adverse event
> Ref no

Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 77 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

> What weaknesses in the overall management of health and safety
> allowed the underlying/root causes of the adverse event to exist?
> Remedial action
> No one in overall charge of health and safety at senior level  Appoint partner to take overall charge of managing Health
> and Safety
> The work of the people responsible for day-to-day health and safety
> arrangements was not monitored
> Partner to monitor health and safety performance
> No clear lines of communication and control  Responsibilities and lines of communication on health and safety matter to be
> established
> Adverse event analysis
> Health and safety management issues
> This section should be completed by managers/directors/partners with the authority to make decisions on the management of health and safety. It should be
> completed using the management section of the ‘rooting out risk’ checklist and with reference to the immediate, underlying/root causes identified earlier in the
> analysis.
> Adverse event
> Ref no

Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 78 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

> 1 Place or premises
> Immediate cause: Point  Risk control measure required  Underlying/root causes  Measures to remedy underlying/root cause
> Point 4
> Not enough room for the job
> Re-arrange machinery to allow
> access to viewing port
> Planning - design of layouts
> Risk assessments - not
> adequate
> Review risk assessments - look at safe
> working access to all areas of machinery
> for operation and maintenance
> Adverse event analysis
> Using the ‘Adverse event analysis: Rooting out risk’ checklist, consider the questions in the immediate cause sections. Enter each of the immediate causes
> identified in the table and enter the risk control measures required. For each immediate cause the checklist suggests possible underlying/root causes. Consider
> each of these potential underlying/root causes and enter those that are relevant.
> Finally enter the remedial measures required to remedy the underlying/root cause.
> Adverse event
> Ref no

Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 79 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

> 2 Plant equipment and substances
> Immediate cause: Point  Risk control measure required  Underlying/root causes  Measures to remedy underlying/root cause
> Point 3
> Equipment not suitable for the job
> Machine not to be used on
> aluminium until manufacturer’s
> literature checked and adjustments
> made
> Risk assessment didn’t deal with
> use for other materials
> Risk assess machine for use with
> aluminium
> Procedures for use with aluminium to be
> produced and instructions/training given
> Point 4
> Equipment not most effective -
> interlocks of a type easily defeated
> Arrange for interlocks to be
> changed for better design
> All employees to be reminded of
> need for interlocks
> Risk assessments not adequate
> - didn’t anticipate violations
> Review how tamperproof safety
> equipment is
> Remind workforce of the importance of
> safety measures and procedures and the
> importance the business places on H&S
> Adverse event analysis
> Using the ‘Adverse event analysis: Rooting out risk’ checklist, consider the questions in the immediate cause sections. Enter each of the immediate causes
> identified in the table and enter the risk control measures required. For each immediate cause the checklist suggests possible underlying/root causes. Consider
> each of these potential underlying/root causes and enter those that are relevant.
> Finally enter the remedial measures required to remedy the underlying/root cause.
> Adverse event
> Ref no

Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 80 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

> 3 Processes and procedures
> Immediate cause: Point  Risk control measure required  Underlying/root causes  Measures to remedy underlying/root cause
> Point 1
> No safe working procedures (SWP)
> for job
> Prepare SWP for working for
> repairs, locking off and isolation
> procedures
> Training
> Risk assessments and
> procedures
> Update risk assessments and prepare
> and communicate procedures for
> reporting of defects, repairs, locking off
> and isolation - training
> Monitor
> Adverse event analysis
> Using the ‘Adverse event analysis: Rooting out risk’ checklist, consider the questions in the immediate cause sections. Enter each of the immediate causes
> identified in the table and enter the risk control measures required. For each immediate cause the checklist suggests possible underlying/root causes. Consider
> each of these potential underlying/root causes and enter those that are relevant.
> Finally enter the remedial measures required to remedy the underlying/root cause.
> Adverse event
> Ref no

Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 81 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

> 4 People
> Immediate cause: Point  Risk control measure required  Underlying/root causes  Measures to remedy underlying/ root cause
> Point 1
> Competence - use of equipment
> and hazards of job during
> maintenance
> Training in need for interlocks and
> isolation/locking off. Training on
> hazards and accepted use of
> machine
> Competence - training
> requirements not assessed or
> delivered
> Ensure all necessary information on
> machinery is available and training needs
> are identified and suitable training given
> Point 4
> Violation - defeating of interlock
> guards
> Fit less easily defeated switches
> Instruction to all operatives
> Control and communication  Staff to be reminded of need for and
> consequences of interfering with safety
> equipment
> Levels of supervision and monitoring to
> be increased
> Adverse event analysis
> Using the ‘Adverse event analysis: Rooting out risk’ checklist, consider the questions in the immediate cause sections. Enter each of the immediate causes
> identified in the table and enter the risk control measures required. For each immediate cause the checklist suggests possible underlying/root causes. Consider
> each of these potential underlying/root causes and enter those that are relevant.
> Finally enter the remedial measures required to remedy the underlying/root cause.
> Adverse event
> Ref no

Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 82 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

> What weaknesses in the overall management of health and safety
> allowed the underlying/root causes of the adverse event to exist?
> Remedial action
> Employees not fully aware of management commitment to health and
> safety
> Ensure all employees are aware of management commitment to health and
> safety - as set out in our policy statement
> Health and safety assistants not fully competent and resourced  Ensure those responsible for preparing risk assessments/SWPs and in charge
> of maintenance are adequately trained and have time to carry out their duties
> No clear lines of communication and control and unclear responsibilities  Ensure all staff aware of their own duties and how they fit into the organisation
> Adverse event analysis
> Health and safety management issues
> This section should be completed by managers/directors/partners with the authority to make decisions on the management of health and safety. It should be
> completed using the management section of the ‘rooting out risk’ checklist and with reference to the immediate, underlying/root causes identified earlier in the
> analysis.
> Adverse event
> Ref no

Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 83 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

> 1 Place or premises
> Immediate cause: Point  Risk control measure required  Underlying/root causes  Measures to remedy underlying/root cause
> Adverse event analysis
> Using the ‘Adverse event analysis: Rooting out risk’ checklist, consider the questions in the immediate cause sections. Enter each of the immediate causes
> identified in the table and enter the risk control measures required. For each immediate cause the checklist suggests possible underlying/root causes. Consider
> each of these potential underlying/root causes and enter those that are relevant.
> Finally enter the remedial measures required to remedy the underlying/root cause.
> Adverse event
> Ref no

Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 84 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

> 2 Plant equipment and substances
> Immediate cause: Point  Risk control measure required  Underlying/root causes  Measures to remedy underlying/root cause
> Adverse event analysis
> Using the ‘Adverse event analysis: Rooting out risk’ checklist, consider the questions in the immediate cause sections. Enter each of the immediate causes
> identified in the table and enter the risk control measures required. For each immediate cause the checklist suggests possible underlying/root causes. Consider
> each of these potential underlying/root causes and enter those that are relevant.
> Finally enter the remedial measures required to remedy the underlying/root cause.
> Adverse event
> Ref no

Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 85 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

> 3 Processes and procedures
> Immediate cause: Point  Risk control measure required  Underlying/root causes  Measures to remedy underlying/root cause
> Adverse event analysis
> Using the ‘Adverse event analysis: Rooting out risk’ checklist, consider the questions in the immediate cause sections. Enter each of the immediate causes
> identified in the table and enter the risk control measures required. For each immediate cause the checklist suggests possible underlying/root causes. Consider
> each of these potential underlying/root causes and enter those that are relevant.
> Finally enter the remedial measures required to remedy the underlying/root cause.
> Adverse event
> Ref no

Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 86 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

> 4 People
> Immediate cause: Point  Risk control measure required  Underlying/root causes  Measures to remedy underlying/root cause
> Adverse event analysis
> Using the ‘Adverse event analysis: Rooting out risk’ checklist, consider the questions in the immediate cause sections. Enter each of the immediate causes
> identified in the table and enter the risk control measures required. For each immediate cause the checklist suggests possible underlying/root causes. Consider
> each of these potential underlying/root causes and enter those that are relevant.
> Finally enter the remedial measures required to remedy the underlying/root cause.
> Adverse event
> Ref no

Investigating accidents and incidents  Page 87 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive 

> What weaknesses in the overall management of health and safety
> allowed the underlying/root causes of the adverse event to exist?
> Remedial action
> Adverse event analysis
> Health and safety management issues
> This section should be completed by managers/directors/partners with the authority to make decisions on the management of health and safety. It should be
> completed using the management section of the ‘rooting out risk’ checklist and with reference to the immediate, underlying/root causes identified earlier in the
> analysis.
> Adverse event
> Ref no

# Further information 

For further information about health and safety, or to report inconsistencies or 

inaccuracies in this guidance, visit  www.hse.gov.uk/ . You can view HSE guidance 

online and order priced publications from the website. HSE priced publications are 

also available from bookshops. 

This guidance is issued by the Health and Safety Executive. Following the guidance 

is not compulsory, unless specifically stated, and you are free to take other action. 

But if you do follow the guidance you will normally be doing enough to comply with 

the law. Health and safety inspectors seek to secure compliance with the law and 

may refer to this guidance. 

This guidance is available at:  www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/books/hsg245.htm .

© Crown copyright  If you wish to reuse this information visit 

www.hse.gov.uk/copyright .htm for details. First published 07/04. 

Published by the Health and Safety Executive HSG245 02/14  Page 88 of 88 Health and Safety 

Executive
