Title: GIUL_BM_Product Summary_TLB1485BME0325_Eng_V9

URL Source: https://www.transamericalifebermuda.com/sites/default/files/2025-04/Genesis+_IUL2_BM_Product%20Summary_English_May2025_2.pdf

Published Time: Wed, 30 Apr 2025 10:48:55 GMT

Markdown Content:
# Product Summary Bermuda 

# Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 Transamerica Life Bermuda at a glance Safeguarding your legacy, amplify your wealth How can Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 help you achieve your wealth management strategy? Key benefits How does Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 work? Which account options should you choose to match your objectives? How is the return determined in the Index Account? When will you earn the return from the Index Account? Putting it all together Product features Key product risks Index licence disclaimers Disclaimers Page Page Page Page Page Page Page Page Page Page Page Page Page 3456789 - 10 11 12 13 - 21 22 23 - 26 26 

# Contents       

> 2|Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 |Product Summary |Bermuda *** *** **** As of May 2024 report. As of 31 December 2023 and based on International Financial Reporting Standards. As of 31 December 2023. As of 31 August 2024.
> Notes:

# S&P 

Nearly 180 years 

of heritage Trusted by customers across 

60+ nations **** Over USD7.38 billion 

in total assets** Over USD373 million in claims to customers across 20+ nations in the past 5 years*** S&P Rating A+ *Over 40 years of experience in managing universal life insurance portfolios Transamerica Life (Bermuda) Ltd. (Transamerica Life Bermuda) is a leading high-net-worth (HNW) life insurer with extensive experience in underwriting large sums assured and managing complex customer scenarios to support legacy and business planning for HNW individuals and families. We aspire to help customers achieve financial security and safeguard their wealth for future generations. With a heritage spanning almost 180 years through Aegon and Transamerica, we have accumulated significant experience and knowledge in global life insurance. Transamerica Life Bermuda is incorporated in Bermuda with branches in Hong Kong and Singapore. We are part of Aegon, an international financial services holding company. Aegon’s ambition is to build leading businesses that offer customers investment, protection, and retirement solutions, united by one single purpose: Helping people live their best lives. Proud of our past, we think for tomorrow. We are constantly pioneering new and innovative ways to help customers grow and protect their wealth, and pass on legacies that last well into the future. 

# Safeguarding generations of wealth Transamerica Life Bermuda at a glance       

> Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 |Product Summary |Bermuda |3

Just like the vibrant hues of diamonds, Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 represents a brilliant fusion of wealth growth and timeless legacy. It is designed to enhance your wealth while safeguarding your personal worth and preserving a lasting legacy for generations to come. Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2, the valuable addition to HNW customers’ overall wealth management strategy, offers attractive growth potential alongside protection from market volatility. This flexible indexed universal life product combines lifetime protection with the opportunity for policy growth based on its distinctive Index Account, insuring what matters most to you —— 

whether that means security for your family, protection for your business, or support for your succession planning goals. 

# Safeguarding your legacy, amplify your wealth 

Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 is an indexed universal life insurance plan designed to be held for a long-term period. This is not equivalent or similar to any kind of deposit. You should consider your liquidity needs for any unexpected events when you purchase this plan. This Product Summary should be read in conjunction with the Company Factsheet and Policy Illustration. To learn more about the terms and conditions of the policy contract to which this Product Summary relates, please contact your financial representative for a copy of the Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 policy provisions. 4 | Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 | Product Summary | Bermuda How can Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 help you achieve your wealth management strategy? 

Diversification 

Enjoy lifetime cover while safeguarding the policy value from market downturns with dynamic index accounts linked to various market sectors, giving the potential for market-linked returns. 

Business Continuity Planning 

Ensure a smooth transition to protect your business from financial challenges resulting from the loss of the business owner or key personnel, and have access to cash if needed. 

Legacy and Estate Planning 

Experience seamless, multi-generational wealth transfer through flexible options, enabling you to tailor long-term financial protection for your loved ones. Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 | Product Summary | Bermuda | 5Key benefits 

> Crediting interest rate will be declared at our discretion from time to time, subject to the Guaranteed Minimum Crediting Interest Rate of 1.50% p.a. Policy Loan and Withdrawal will not be permitted if the adjusted Sum Assured would be less than our published minimum Sum Assured for this product at the time of your request.

Maximise wealth through a wider choice of Index Account options 

• Diversified options: you can choose a sub-account of the Index Account that covers top companies across global markets and economic sectors and/or a sub-account of the Index Account that covers a full spectrum of small to large companies in the US market. 

• Focus options: you can choose a sub-account of the Index Account that focuses on the large-capitalised companies in the US equity market and/or a sub-account of the Index Account with access to Shariah-compliant equities. 

Experience stability amidst uncertainty 

• Provide stable returns with Fixed Account through the declared crediting interest rate #.

• Protect your returns from market downturns with Index Account through 0.00% p.a. Guaranteed Floor Rate and 2.00% p.a. Cumulative Guarantee Crediting Interest Rate. 

• Stabilise your returns and reduce exposure to market volatility with Dollar Cost Averaging. 

Flexibly manage your finances in an evolving market environment 

• Pay your premiums based on your preference. 

• Optimise the growth potential over time by allocating or reallocating across various Index Account options. 

• Strengthen cash flow if needed by withdrawing Cash Value ## from the policy or borrowing from us. 

Protect yourself, your family and business for a lifetime 

• Preserve your wealth to achieve estate liquidity goals and equalisation of inheritance for your loved ones. 

• Secure a standby life protection coverage limit for the next three years with a single application. 

• Facilitate the distribution of assets as desired through death benefit payment option. ### 6 | Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 | Product Summary | Bermuda How does Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 work? 

Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 provides you with Fixed Account and 4 Index Account options. Based on your instructions, your Net Premium will be allocated to the specified accounts to grow your wealth. Our persistency bonus and cumulative guarantee are additional features to support your long-term performance. 

• 1st Policy Year Lock-in Crediting Interest Rate: 4.10% p.a. 

• Guaranteed Minimum Crediting Interest Rate: 1.50% p.a. 

Fixed Account 

• Account options: Global Index Account, US Market Index Account, S&P 500 Index Account, and S&P 500 Shariah Index Account 

• Index Interest Rate is based on the change of market value of underlying indices (”Index Change Rate”) 

• Subject to their respective aggregate cap rates and 0.00% p.a. Guaranteed Floor Rate 

Index Account 

Up to 1.00% starting from the later of 11th Policy Year or Insured’s Age 65. 

Persistency bonus 

Upon full surrender, cumulative guarantee at 2.00% p.a. will be applied. 

Cumulative guarantee       

> Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 |Product Summary |Bermuda |7

50% 50% 25% 40% 35% 100% 100% A guaranteed return to preserve your wealth. A growth potential that is linked to top companies broadly diversified across global markets and economic sectors. A growth potential that is benchmarked against a diverse US equity portfolio encompassing large, mid, and small-cap market segments. A growth potential that is benchmarked against the large-cap segment of the US equity market. A growth potential that is linked to Shariah-compliant equities in the US large-cap segment. 9.27% 10.20% 11.20% 9.30% We will declare the crediting interest rate from time to time at our discretion, subject to the Guaranteed Minimum Crediting Interest Rate. You will be fully informed about the return you earn in the upcoming Policy Year. N/A N/A Based on the performance of the three indices at a fixed allocation percentage. Based on the performance of the three indices: S&P 500 (large-cap) and the best performer between S&P 400 (mid-cap) and Russell 2000® (small-cap). Based on the performance of a single index. 

What are you looking for? Approach Underlying indices and their allocation % Aggregate Cap Rates Fixed Account Global Index Account US Market Index Account S&P 500 Index Account S&P 500 Shariah Index Account 

# Which account options should you choose to match your objectives? 

When choosing among the account options, you may consider the overall market performance, your preference, your risk propensity and your current wealth portfolio. We offer a wide selection of account options, helping you to pursue your financial goals at different times. Each option offers distinct advantages as follows: S&P 500 Hang Seng Index EURO STOXX 50® S&P 500 The best performer between S&P 400 and Russell 2000® S&P 500 S&P 500 Shariah 8 | Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 | Product Summary | Bermuda 6.00% 

Example for Global Index Account Index Index Change Rate 

8.20% 

Index Cap Rate (p.a.) 

0.00% 

Index Floor Rate (p.a.) 

6.00% 

Index Growth Rate 

40.00% 

Index Weighting 

2.40% 6.00% 10.40% 0.00% 6.00% 35.00% 2.10% 4.50% -8.00% 9.40% 0.00% 0.00% 25.00% 0.00% 

Weighted Interest Contribution  

> ~EURO STOXX 50® is a registered trademark of STOXX Ltd.

# How is the return determined in the Index Account? 

The return is determined by the Index Interest earned through the Index Account over a one-year period, which is based on the following factors: 

• A Guaranteed Participation Rate of 100.00% of the underlying Indices. 

• A Cap Rate which is set at our discretion from time to time but guaranteed to be no less than 3.50% p.a. throughout the life of the policy. 

• A Guaranteed Floor Rate of 0.00% p.a., which provides protection against market losses. 

S&P 500 Index Hang Sang Index Index Interest Rate EURO STOXX 50® Index ~12.00% Index Change Rate -8.00% Index Change Rate 0.00% 4.00% -4.00% -8.00% 8.20% 12.00% Cap Rate of 8.20% 

If the Index Change Rate of an Index is 12.00%, with the Cap Rate of 8.20% applied, the Index Growth Rate will be 8.20%. 

Guaranteed Floor Rate of 0.00% 

If the Index Change Rate of an Index is -8.00%, with the Guaranteed Floor Rate of 0.00% applied, the Index Growth Rate will be 0.00%.       

> Index Change Rate
> 9|Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 |Product Summary |Bermuda

6.00% 

Example for US Market Index Account Index Index Change Rate 

11.20% 

Index Cap Rate (p.a.) 

0.00% 

Index Floor Rate (p.a.) 

6.00% 

Index Growth Rate 

50.00% 

Index Weighting 

3.00% 8.00% 9.20% 0.00% N/A, the Index Change Rate of S&P 400 Index is lower than that of Russell 2000 ® Index. 7.60% 11.00% 9.20% 0.00% 9.20% 50.00% 4.60% 

Weighted Interest Contribution S&P 500 Index S&P 400 Index Index Interest Rate Russell 2000® Index 

12.00% 

Example for S&P 500 Index Account Important notes: Index Index Change Rate 

11.20% 

Index Cap Rate (p.a.) 

0.00% 

Index Floor Rate (p.a.) 

11.20% 

Index Growth Rate 

100.00% 

Index Weighting 

11.20% 

Weighted Interest Contribution S&P 500 Index 

11.20% Index Interest Rate 

7.00% 

Example for S&P 500 Shariah Index Account Index Index Change Rate 

9.30% 

Index Cap Rate (p.a.) 

0.00% 

Index Floor Rate (p.a.) 

7.00% 

Index Growth Rate 

100.00% 

Index Weighting 

7.00% 

Weighted Interest Contribution 

7.00% Index Interest Rate S&P 500 Shariah Index 

1. We may use fixed and non-fixed income assets including but not limited to bonds, equities and derivatives as our investment strategy, but the Index Interest Rate is determined by the Index Change Rate subject to the Guaranteed Participation Rate, the Cap Rate and the Guaranteed Floor Rate as illustrated above. 2. The Index Interest will only be credited to a Segment on the Segment Maturity Date, which is 12 calendar months from the Segment Start Date. For the avoidance of doubt, there will not be any pro-rata interest to be credited to a Segment before the Segment Maturity Date. Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 | Product Summary | Bermuda | 10 14 June 2023 15 June 2023 14 June 2024 15 June 2024 Index Interest is credited to the Index Account. 

# When will you earn the return from the Index Account? 

The respective Index Interest will be credited to the Index Account only after the Segment has reached maturity, which spans across a duration of one year. Segment is used to identify and segregate each fund allocation to each sub-account of the Index Account at different times. It is created on the 15th of each calendar month (i.e. Segment Start Date) and matures on the 15th of the same calendar month next year (i.e. Segment Maturity Date). 

Example: You paid premium on 1 June 2023 and plan to allocate it to the S&P 500 Index Account 

Premium will be allocated to the Index Account. 

• The Index Day is the trading day immediately before a Segment Start/Maturity Date. It does not fall onto any specific calendar day. 

• The index closing price on 14 June 2023 is the Index Value for the new Segment starting on 15 June 2023. 

Index day 

(Index Value = 4,372.59) 

Segment start date 

The Segment is matured on 15 June 2024. 

Index day 

(Index Value = 5,431.60) The index closing price on 14 June 2024 is the Index Value for the Segment maturing on 15 June 2024. 

Segment Maturity date 

(Index Interest Rate = 11.20%) 11 | Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 | Product Summary | Bermuda Index Account ^

> ^+++

Net Premium to be allocated to Index Account in a lump sum will first be allocated to Holding Account before the next Segment Start Date, where it will earn the same crediting interest rate and Persistency Bonus as the Fixed Account. On the next Segment Start Date, the Net Premium will be transferred to the sub-account(s) specified by you. Index Interest is calculated and credited at Segment Maturity Date only. For details of the Loan Account, please refer to policy contract. 

# Putting it all together 

• Earns interest on a daily basis based on declared crediting interest rate. 

• Persistency bonus from Policy Year 11 onwards or Insured’s Age 65, whichever is later. 

Death Benefit or Terminal Illness Benefit Net Premium Allocation Choices Account Value Net Cash Value in the event of Full Surrender Global Index Account US Market Index Account S&P 500 Index Account S&P 500 Shariah Index Account 

• Earns interest at Segment Maturity Date based on performance of underlying indices + .

• Persistency bonus from Policy Year 11 onwards or Insured’s Age 65, whichever is later. 1. Monthly Deductions 2. Policy Loan ++ & Withdrawal Less Surrender Charge (decreasing) Less 

Gross Premium 

Less: Premium Charge 

Fixed Account 

Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 | Product Summary | Bermuda | 12 Product features 

This is a generic product overview. For detailed terms and conditions, please refer to the policy contract. 

General Insurer Transamerica Life (Bermuda) Ltd. 

Administration office 

Bermuda Office 

Product type Indexed Universal Life 

Governing law Bermuda 

Policy currency USD 

Issue Ages 

Lifetime - no maturity Maturity date Insured person: 

• 15 days - 80 (Region 1S & Region 1) 

• 15 days - 75 (Region 2) 

Policy Owner (personal and business insurance needs, where applicable): 

• Individuals: age 18 or above; and 

• Trustees of trust structures and corporates of trust structures Other forms of ownership will only be accepted where the insurance need is for business insurance where the company is incorporated or partnership business is registered in Hong Kong, Singapore, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Taiwan, the British Virgin Islands (BVI) and the Cayman Islands. (Please check with your financial adviser representative for the applicable region classification of where you live.) Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 offers two premium payment options: 1. Single Premium payment (split premium is allowed; to be paid within the first Policy Year) 2. Planned premiums, with or without a lump sum payment in the first Policy Year (flexible, to be paid until age 121). Unscheduled Premiums may be contributed at any time, subject to the terms of the policy. We reserve the right to refuse or refund part or all of any Unscheduled Premium that results in the total Unscheduled Premiums paid in any 12-month period exceeding USD25,000. 

Premium payment options 

Net Premiums will be allocated to the Fixed Account, Global Index Account, US Market Index Account, S&P 500 Index Account and S&P 500 Shariah Index Account in whole percentages according to your instructions. 

Premium allocation Payment       

> 13 |Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 |Product Summary |Bermuda

Death Benefit 

USD1,000,000 Minimum Sum Assured 

You may decrease your Sum Assured by a minimum of USD100,000 and the new Sum Assured must not be less than the minimum Sum Assured for the policy. There will be a Surrender Charge for any Sum Assured reduction within the first 15 years of the policy. However, you may not increase the Sum Assured of an existing policy. If you want to increase the coverage, you will have to buy a separate Transamerica Life Bermuda policy. 

Change of Sum Assured 1

If the Insured is diagnosed with a TI while the policy is in force, we may pay the TI Benefit in a lump sum upon your request as an accelerated payment of Death Benefit, provided the maximum amount payable under the TI Benefit provision and other provisions in all policies issued by us for the same Insured shall not exceed USD2,000,000. We will reduce the amount of the TI Benefit by the amount of any outstanding Policy Loan and by any amount necessary to provide insurance to the date of the diagnosis of the TI if it occurs during the Grace Period. The policy will terminate if the payment of the full amount of the Death Benefit is accelerated and paid as a TI Benefit. Otherwise, we will pay the TI Benefit up to the TI limit and the policy will stay in force with the Sum Assured reduced by the TI Benefit amount paid to you. Once any TI Benefit is paid, Withdrawal, decrease in Sum Assured, Future Insurability Option and Insured Exchange Option will not be available. 

Terminal illness (TI) Benefit Protection 

# Product features 

We will pay benefits upon the death of the Insured. The Death Benefit is the higher of (less any Policy Loan): 

• The Sum Assured of the policy; and 

• The Account Value on the date of the Insured’s death. Please refer to the policy contract for full details. 1 Once any TI Benefit is paid, Withdrawal, decrease in Sum Assured, Future Insurability Option and Insured Exchange Option will not be available. Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 | Product Summary | Bermuda | 14 Who is eligible? 

• Insured’s Age: Age 16 - 60 at the Policy Issue Date 

• Country/Region of Residence: Only for Region 1S and Region 1 

How to apply? 

• Select this option at application 

• Complete full medical underwriting The approval is based on prevailing requirements as determined by us from time to time. Upon approval, you will be given a Pre-approved Sum Assured Limit. It is 100% of the Sum Assured, subject to a cap of USD20,000,000 in aggregate per life basis for indexed universal life insurance. At any time after the Free-look Period, you may exercise the Future Insurability Option to take out one or more new policy(ies) within thirty-six (36) months from the Policy Issue Date (validity period) by sending us a Written Request, subject to health declaration, financial and other non-medical requirements as prescribed by us from time to time at our discretion. The total sum assured of the new policy(ies) may not exceed the Pre-approved Sum Assured Limit. The sum assured of each new policy must be at least USD1,000,000, or an amount specified by us from time to time. This option will terminate at the earliest of: (a) The date on which the Pre-approved Sum Assured Limit is fully utilised; (b) The date on which any Terminal Illness Benefit is paid; (c) The date on which the abovementioned validity period expires; and (d) The date whereupon a new policy is issued pursuant to Insured Exchange Option endorsement, if applicable. 

Future Insurability Option 1Protection 

# Product features        

> 1Once any TI Benefit is paid, Withdrawal, decrease in Sum Assured, Future Insurability Option and Insured Exchange Option will not be available. 15 |Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 |Product Summary |Bermuda

Allows the Insured to be changed to new Insured with new policy issued, subject to insurable interest and other conditions. The new policy will be issued with the same effective date as the original policy, but with an exchange date for the re-counting of suicide clause and incontestability period. 

Insured Exchange option 1Administration services for legacy or estate planning 2

# Product features 

You may appoint an individual to become the new Owner of the policy if you predecease the Insured while the policy is in force and the Insured is living, subject to any requirements as we may prescribe from time to time at our discretion. 

Appointment of Contingent Owner 

You may choose to have the Death Benefit paid in the following manner: (1) In a lump sum; (2) In equal instalments up to 20 years 3 ; or (3) Mix of lump sum 4 and equal instalments up to 20 years, subject to any requirements as we may prescribe from time to time at our discretion. 

Death Benefit payment option 

> 1234

Once any TI Benefit is paid, Withdrawal, decrease in Sum Assured, Future Insurability Option and Insured Exchange Option will not be available. The administration services are provided by us at our discretion, subject to any requirements as we may prescribe from time to time. Please refer to the policy provision for the respective Terms and conditions and the servicing forms for the details of the options and disclaimers/acknowledgement. Instalment period: 2-20 years; minimum instalment amount: USD100,000; maximum number of beneficiaries: 5. Lump sum payment for (3) will be either 25% or 50% of the Death Benefit. Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 | Product Summary | Bermuda | 16 Product features 

During the first Policy Year, the Fixed Account earns a Lock-in Crediting Interest Rate which is fixed at the rate we declare when the policy is issued. After the first Policy Year, the Fixed Account earns a crediting interest rate which we declare from time to time at our discretion and will not be less than the Guaranteed Minimum Crediting Interest Rate of 1.50% p.a. 

Fixed Account Index Account 

Before the Segment Start Date, Net Premiums and any other amounts allocated to the Index Account in a lump sum will be held in the Holding Account and earn the same declared crediting interest rate as the Fixed Account. 

Holding Account Interest crediting 

It consists of four sub-accounts, the Global Index Account, the US Market Index Account, the S&P 500 Index Account and the S&P 500 Shariah Index Account. The Global Index Account has three underlying capped Indices. Net Premiums and any other amounts allocated to it is sub-allocated to three indices in the following proportion: 

• S&P 500 Index (40%) 

• Hang Seng Index (35%) 

• EURO STOXX 50® Index (25%) The US Market Index Account has three underlying capped Indices. Net Premiums and any other amounts allocated to it is sub-allocated in the following proportion: 

• S&P 500 Index (50%) 

• the better performing index between the S&P 400 Index and the Russell 2000® Index (50%) The S&P 500 Index Account is tied to S&P 500 Index only. Net Premiums and any other amounts allocated to it is 100% sub-allocated to S&P 500 Index. The S&P 500 Shariah Index Account is tied to S&P 500 Shariah Index only. Net Premiums and any other amounts allocated to it is 100% sub-allocated to S&P 500 Shariah Index. The Index Account has a Guaranteed Participation Rate of 100%, a Guaranteed Floor Rate of 0.00% p.a., and Cap Rates that are declared by Transamerica Life Bermuda from time to time, but guaranteed to be no less than 3.50% p.a. during the life of the policy. 17 | Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 | Product Summary | Bermuda Segments Interest crediting 

# Product features 

When Net Premiums and/or any other amounts are allocated to each sub-account of the Index Account, a new Segment is formed under each sub-account on the Segment Start Date on the 15th of each calendar month. On the Segment Maturity Date, Index Interest (if any) will be applied. You may indicate how you want Segment Proceeds to be handled: 1. automatically reinvesting into a new Segment associated with each sub-account of the Index Account; or 2. reallocating portions of the Segment Proceeds to the Global Index Account, the US Market Index Account, the S&P 500 Index Account and the S&P 500 Shariah Index Account. 

Persistency Bonus Fund Transfers 

Starting from the later of Policy Year 11 or the Insured’s Age 65 until Age 121, up to an additional 1.00% p.a. will be applied proportionately to the Fixed Account, Index Account and Holding Account. The persistency bonus amount will be adjusted if the Account Value exceeds the Sum Assured 5.

Cumulative Guarantee 

The cumulative guarantee is a look-back feature that assures that the policy accumulates interest with a minimum crediting interest rate of 2.00% p.a. over the life of the policy, upon full surrender. You may submit a Written Request to transfer all or a portion of your account value across accounts. Any Written Request to transfer account value which is approved by us on or before the Lock-in Date, will take effect on the days below: 

• On the next Segment Start Date: For fund transfers from the Fixed Account to any sub-account of the Index Account; 

• Upon the Segment Maturity Date: For fund transfers from any sub-account of the Index Account to Fixed Account; or 

• Between the sub-accounts of the Index Account. Fund transfers from the Fixed Account to any sub-account of the Index Account are allowed up to four times per Policy Year. Fund transfers are subject to any other requirements we may prescribe from time to time, including but not limited to maximum number of fund transfers per Policy Year and minimum fund transfer amounts. 5 Where the Account Value exceeds the Sum Assured, the persistency bonus amount for the relevant Policy Year will be adjusted as follows: The average monthly Account Value (net of the account value in the Loan Account) of the preceding Policy Year x 1.00% x (Sum Assured / Account Value). The persistency bonus amount does not apply to Policy Loan and is not used in the calculation of the Net Cash Value under the cumulative guarantee provision. Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 | Product Summary | Bermuda | 18 A Premium Charge 6 of 6.00% will be deducted from each Gross Premium before allocating to the Fixed Account or Index Account as Account Value. 

Premium Charge Monthly Expense Charge 

Monthly expense charge rates will be charged in the first 15 Policy Years and vary by underwriting class, issue age, Policy Year, smoking status, and gender. The Guaranteed Maximum Monthly Expense Charge Rates are shown as such in the Policy Schedule. We may charge a rate that is lower than the relevant Guaranteed Maximum Monthly Expense Charge Rate. 

Cost of Insurance 

Cost of Insurance rates will be charged until the Insured reaches the Age of 121. 

Cap Appreciation Charge (apply to the US Market Index Account, the S&P 500 Index Account and the S&P 500 Shariah Index Account) 

Cap Appreciation Charge will be deducted from the account value of the US Market Index Account, the S&P 500 Index Account and the S&P 500 Shariah Index Account on each Monthly Policy Date and the charge rate is guaranteed at 1% p.a. It is equal to: The total account value of the US Market Index Account, the S&P 500 Index Account and the S&P 500 Shariah Index Account x 1%/12 On each Monthly Policy Date, the Monthly Deduction will be deducted proportionately from the Fixed Account, Holding Account, and each of the sub-accounts of the Index Account, except the Cap Appreciation Charge will only be deducted from the US Market Index Account, the S&P 500 Index Account and the S&P 500 Shariah Index Account. The deduction from each of the sub-accounts of the Index Account will be processed on a pro-rata basis across Segments. 

Monthly Deductions Summary of charges 

# Product features 

You may choose to spread the Net Premium and/or any other amounts allocated or transferred to the Index Account monthly over a number of instalments. Each instalment will form a separate Segment in the Global Index Account, US Market Index Account, S&P 500 Index Account and S&P 500 Shariah Index Account on the Segment Start Date (15th of each calendar month). 

Dollar Cost Averaging        

> 6A Cash Value Enhancement Endorsement option is available which waives a percentage of the policy’s Surrender Charge at full surrender during the first 6 Policy Years. This Endorsement must be elected at policy issue and requires an additional 0.2% Premium Charge in Policy Years 1 - 6. 19 |Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 |Product Summary |Bermuda

Starting from Policy Year 6, you may make a Withdrawal, up to 10% of the Account Value per Policy Year without incurring a Surrender Charge. The amount of Surrender Charge-free Withdrawal will not reduce the Sum Assured. 

Surrender Charge-free Withdrawal 1

Policy Loan is available any time after the Free-look Period, subject to the terms of the policy contract. You must pay interest on the total balance of each Policy Loan in advance, on the date on which the Policy Loan is taken out and thereafter on each Policy Anniversary. The Policy Loan Interest Rate is 8.00% p.a. (7.40% p.a. in advance). The Policy Loan Crediting Interest Rate will be 5.50% p.a. Any outstanding Policy Loans will be secured by a Loan Account which is an account for a specified sum of account value set aside as security for any Policy Loan taken, on which the Policy Loan Interest Rate will be applied. 

Policy Loan Summary of charges Access to the cash value 

# Product features 

Withdrawal is available any time after the Free-look Period, subject to the terms of the policy contract. Amount of Withdrawal and applicable Surrender Charges will reduce the Sum Assured. The reduced Sum Assured cannot be lower than the minimum Sum Assured. 

Withdrawal 1

Surrender Charges are applicable in the first 15 Policy Years and apply in case of policy termination, full surrender, Withdrawal (except Surrender Charge-free Withdrawal), and Lapse. The surrender value will be the Net Cash Value at the time of surrender. 

Surrender Charges        

> 1Once any TI Benefit is paid, Withdrawal, decrease in Sum Assured, Future Insurability Option and Insured Exchange Option will not be available. Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 |Product Summary |Bermuda |20

# Product features 

The policy will terminate at the earliest of: 

• The date we receive your Written Request to surrender or terminate the policy; 

• The date the policy Lapses; 

• The date Death Benefit is fully accelerated on the TI of the Insured; and 

• The date of the Insured’s death. The policy will enter the Grace Period if there is insufficient Account Value (less any amount outstanding on all Policy Loan) or the policy’s Net Cash Value is less than the total Monthly Deduction due (plus any Policy Loan interest due but not paid) on any Monthly Policy Date. You will have a 61-day Grace Period during which you may make any necessary payments to keep your policy in force. If you do not pay the required amount within that Grace Period, your policy will Lapse and it will result in the loss of your life insurance protection. Please note that fees and charges will continue to be deducted as long as the policy is in force. You should give careful consideration to any decision to terminate your policy. 

Termination of Insurance 

You have the right to cancel the policy within the Free-look Period after purchase. You may return the policy to us or the authorised representative through whom you bought it within 14 days after you receive the policy. We will cancel the policy and void it from the beginning. We will refund any premiums paid. No refund shall be made if a claim has been paid on the policy or if the cancellation request and the policy are not returned to us within the specified 14 days. 

Right to cancel the policy Important notes       

> 21 |Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 |Product Summary |Bermuda

Credit risk 

Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 is an indexed universal life insurance policy underwritten and issued by Transamerica Life Bermuda. All premiums paid towards your policy will become and remain part of Transamerica Life Bermuda’s assets. You do not have any rights or ownership over any of these assets. Your recourse is against Transamerica Life Bermuda only. You take the risk of loss should Transamerica Life Bermuda fail to meet any of the benefits the policy offers. As a result, you may lose all the premiums you have paid and the insurance coverage. You may refer to Transamerica Life Bermuda’s Corporate Brochure to learn more about our Company. 

Currency risk 

The currency of Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 is the US dollar. That means the payments you make and the benefits paid out from the policy are both in US dollars. As the value of the US dollar fluctuates against other currencies, if your home currency is not the US dollar, the payments you make or receive may be worth more or less over time when expressed in your home currency. 

Risk of crediting interest rate adjustment in Fixed Account and Holding Account 

Transamerica Life Bermuda determines the declared crediting interest rate (CIR) in the Fixed Account and Holding Account by considering various factors based on the Company’s CIR philosophy. The CIR affects the account value within the Fixed Account and Holding Account of your policy. The CIR of Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 is fixed for the Lock-in Crediting Interest Rate Period. After that, we may increase or decrease the CIR. However, we guarantee that the CIR will not be lower than the Guaranteed Minimum Crediting Interest Rate of 1.50% p.a. Beginning on the Policy Anniversary at the Insured’s age 121, the account value in the Fixed Account and Holding Account will accrue interest at the Guaranteed Minimum Crediting Interest Rate. The account value in the Fixed Account and Holding Account will be affected if the CIR drops, as a lower amount of interest will be added to it. 

Inflation risk 

As a result of inflation, the benefits you receive in the future may not be worth as much in relative terms as they are today. 

Policy exclusion for suicide 

If the Insured person commits suicide within two years from the later of the Policy Issue Date and the Reinstatement Effective Date (if applicable), we will not pay the Death Benefit. We will only return the premiums you paid for the policy up to that time, less any Withdrawal amount you have made against the policy, any TI Benefit paid and any fees and charges associated with those Withdrawal. 

Exclusions and limitations 

These contents provide an overview of the product features and key product risks. Please refer to the policy Application form and policy provisions for the exact terms and conditions and take particular note of those terms where we will not pay the policy benefits. 

# Key product risks       

> Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 |Product Summary |Bermuda |22

# Index licence disclaimers 

Disclaimer of the S&P 500 Index, S&P 400 Index and S&P 500 Shariah Index 

The S&P 500 Index, the S&P 400 Index and the S&P 500 Shariah Index are the products of S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC (“SPDJI”), and have been licensed for use by the Company. S&P®, S&P 500®, US500, The 500, iBoxx®, iTraxx® and CDX® are trademarks of S&P Global, Inc. or its affiliates (“S&P”); Dow Jones® is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC (“Dow Jones”); and these trademarks have been licensed for use by SPDJI and sublicensed for certain purposes by the Company. It is not possible to invest directly in an index. Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 (the “Product”) is not sponsored, endorsed, sold or promoted by SPDJI, Dow Jones, S&P, or any of their respective affiliates (collectively, “S&P Dow Jones Indices”). S&P Dow Jones Indices do not make any representation or warranty, express or implied, to the owners of the Product or any member of the public regarding the advisability of investing in securities generally or in the Product particularly or the ability of the S&P 500 Index, the S&P 400 Index and the S&P 500 Shariah Index to track general market performance. Past performance of an index is not an indication or guarantee of future results. S&P Dow Jones Indices’ only relationship to the Company with respect to the S&P 500 Index, the S&P 400 Index and the S&P 500 Shariah Index is the licensing of the Index and certain trademarks, service marks and/or trade names of S&P Dow Jones Indices and/or its licensors. The S&P 500 Index, the S&P 400 Index and the S&P 500 Shariah Index are determined, composed and calculated by S&P Dow Jones Indices without regard to the Company or the Product. S&P Dow Jones Indices have no obligation to take the needs of the Company or the owners of the Product into consideration in determining, composing or calculating the S&P 500 Index, the S&P 400 Index and the S&P 500 Shariah Index. S&P Dow Jones Indices have no obligation or liability in connection with the administration, marketing or trading of the Product. There is no assurance that investment product based on the S&P 500 Index, the S&P 400 Index and the S&P 500 Shariah Index will accurately track index performance or provide positive investment returns. S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC is not an investment adviser, commodity trading advisory, commodity pool operator, broker dealer, fiduciary, “promoter” (as defined in the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended), “expert” as enumerated within 15 U.S.C. § 77k(a) or tax advisor. Inclusion of a security, commodity, crypto currency or other asset within an index is not a recommendation by S&P Dow Jones Indices to buy, sell, or hold such security, commodity, crypto currency or other asset, nor is it considered to be investment advice or commodity trading advice. S&P DOW JONES INDICES DO NOT GUARANTEE THE ADEQUACY, ACCURACY, TIMELINESS AND/OR THE COMPLETENESS OF THE S&P 500 INDEX, THE S&P 400 INDEX AND THE S&P 500 SHARIAH INDEX OR ANY DATA RELATED THERETO OR ANY COMMUNICATION, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO, ORAL OR WRITTEN COMMUNICATION (INCLUDING ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS) WITH RESPECT THERETO. S&P DOW JONES INDICES SHALL NOT BE SUBJECT TO ANY DAMAGES OR LIABILITY FOR ANY ERRORS, OMISSIONS, OR DELAYS THEREIN. S&P DOW JONES INDICES MAKE NO EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE OR USE OR AS TO RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED BY THE COMPANY, OWNERS OF THE PRODUCT, OR ANY OTHER PERSON OR ENTITY FROM THE USE OF THE S&P 500 INDEX, THE S&P 400 INDEX AND THE S&P 500 SHARIAH INDEX OR WITH RESPECT TO ANY DATA RELATED THERETO. WITHOUT LIMITING ANY OF THE FOREGOING, IN NO EVENT WHATSOEVER SHALL S&P DOW JONES INDICES BE LIABLE FOR ANY INDIRECT, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, PUNITIVE, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO, LOSS OF PROFITS, TRADING LOSSES, LOST TIME OR GOODWILL, EVEN IF THEY HAVE BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, TORT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR OTHERWISE. S&P DOW JONES INDICES HAS NOT REVIEWED, PREPARED AND/OR CERTIFIED ANY PORTION OF, NOR DOES S&P DOW JONES INDICES HAVE ANY CONTROL OVER, THE LICENSEE PRODUCT REGISTRATION STATEMENT, PROSPECTUS OR OTHER OFFERING MATERIALS. THERE ARE NO THIRD-PARTY BENEFICIARIES OF ANY AGREEMENTS OR ARRANGEMENTS BETWEEN S&P DOW JONES INDICES AND THE COMPANY, OTHER THAN THE LICENSORS OF S&P DOW JONES INDICES. 23 | Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 | Product Summary | Bermuda Disclaimer of the Hang Seng Index 

The Hang Seng Index (the “Index”) is published and compiled by Hang Seng Indexes Company Limited pursuant to a licence from Hang Seng Data Services Limited. The mark and name of the Index are proprietary to Hang Seng Data Services Limited. Hang Seng Indexes Company Limited and Hang Seng Data Services Limited have agreed to the use of, and reference to, the Index by the Company in connection with Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 (the “Product”), BUT NEITHER HANG SENG INDEXES COMPANY LIMITED NOR HANG SENG DATA SERVICES LIMITED WARRANTS OR REPRESENTS OR GUARANTEES TO ANY BROKER OR HOLDER OF THE PRODUCT OR ANY OTHER PERSON (i) THE ACCURACY OR COMPLETENESS OF THE INDEX AND ITS COMPUTATION OR ANY INFORMATION RELATED THERETO; OR (ii) THE FITNESS OR SUITABILITY FOR ANY PURPOSE OF THE INDEX OR ANY COMPONENT OR DATA COMPRISED IN IT; OR (iii) THE RESULTS WHICH MAY BE OBTAINED BY ANY PERSON FROM THE USE OF THE INDEX OR ANY COMPONENT OR DATA COMPRISED IN IT FOR ANY PURPOSE, AND NO WARRANTY OR REPRESENTATION OR GUARANTEE OF ANY KIND WHATSOEVER RELATING TO THE INDEX IS GIVEN OR MAY BE IMPLIED. The process and basis of computation and compilation of the Index and any of the related formula or formulae, constituent stocks and factors may at any time be changed or altered by Hang Seng Indexes Company Limited without notice. TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW, NO RESPONSIBILITY OR LIABILITY IS ACCEPTED BY HANG SENG INDEXES COMPANY LIMITED OR HANG SENG DATA SERVICES LIMITED (i) IN RESPECT OF THE USE OF AND/OR REFERENCE TO THE INDEX BY THE COMPANY IN CONNECTION WITH THE PRODUCT; OR (ii) FOR ANY INACCURACIES, OMISSIONS, MISTAKES OR ERRORS OF HANG SENG INDEXES COMPANY LIMITED IN THE COMPUTATION OF THE INDEX; OR (iii) FOR ANY INACCURACIES, OMISSIONS, MISTAKES, ERRORS OR INCOMPLETENESS OF ANY INFORMATION USED IN CONNECTION WITH THE COMPUTATION OF THE INDEX WHICH IS SUPPLIED BY ANY OTHER PERSON; OR (iv) FOR ANY ECONOMIC OR OTHER LOSS WHICH MAY BE DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY SUSTAINED BY ANY BROKER OR HOLDER OF THE PRODUCT OR ANY OTHER PERSON DEALING WITH THE PRODUCT AS A RESULT OF ANY OF THE AFORESAID, AND NO CLAIMS, ACTIONS OR LEGAL PROCEEDINGS MAY BE BROUGHT AGAINST HANG SENG INDEXES COMPANY LIMITED AND/OR HANG SENG DATA SERVICES LIMITED in connection with the Product in any manner whatsoever by any broker, holder or other person dealing with the Product. Any broker, holder or other person dealing with the Product does so therefore in full knowledge of this disclaimer and can place no reliance whatsoever on Hang Seng Indexes Company Limited and Hang Seng Data Services Limited. For the avoidance of doubt, this disclaimer does not create any contractual or quasi-contractual relationship between any broker, holder or other person and Hang Seng Indexes Company Limited and/or Hang Seng Data Services Limited and must not be construed to have created such relationship. By purchasing the Product, you will be regarded as having acknowledged, understood and accepted the disclaimer above and will be bound by it. The level of the Index at any time for the purposes of the Product will be the level as calculated by Hang Seng Indexes Company Limited in its sole discretion. Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 | Product Summary | Bermuda | 24 Disclaimer of the EURO STOXX 50® Index 

STOXX Ltd., Deutsche Börse Group and their licensors, research partners or data providers have no relationship to the Company, other than the licensing of the EURO STOXX 50® and the related trademarks for use in connection with Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 (the “Product”). STOXX Ltd., Deutsche Börse Group and their licensors, research partners or data providers do not: 

• sponsor, endorse, sell or promote the Product. 

• recommend that any person invest in the Product or any other securities. 

• have any responsibility or liability for or make any decisions about the timing, amount or pricing of the Product. 

• have any responsibility or liability for the administration, management or marketing of the Product. • consider the needs of the Product or the owners of the Product in determining, composing or calculating the EURO STOXX 50® Index or have any obligation to do so. STOXX Ltd., Deutsche Börse Group and their licensors, research partners or data providers give no warranty, and exclude any liability (whether in negligence or otherwise), in connection with the Product or its performance. STOXX Ltd. does not assume any contractual relationship with the purchasers of the Product or any other third parties. Specifically, 

• STOXX Ltd., Deutsche Börse Group and their licensors, research partners or data providers do not give any warranty, express or implied, and exclude any liability about: 

• The results to be obtained by the Product, the owner of the Product or any other person in connection with the use of the EURO STOXX 50® Index and the data included in the EURO STOXX 50® Index; 

• The accuracy, timeliness, and completeness of the EURO STOXX 50® Index and its data; 

• The merchantability and the fitness for a particular purpose or use of the EURO STOXX 50® Index and its data; 

• The performance of the Product generally. 

• STOXX Ltd., Deutsche Börse Group and their licensors, research partners or data providers give no warranty and exclude any liability, for any errors, omissions or interruptions in the EURO STOXX 50® Index or its data; 

• Under no circumstances will STOXX Ltd., Deutsche Börse Group or their licensors, research partners or data providers be liable (whether in negligence or otherwise) for any lost profits or indirect, punitive, special or consequential damages or losses, arising as a result of such errors, omissions or interruptions in the EURO STOXX 50® Index or its data or generally in relation to the Product, even in circumstances where STOXX Ltd., Deutsche Börse Group or their licensors, research partners or data providers are aware that such loss or damage may occur. The licensing agreement between the Company and STOXX Ltd. is solely for their benefit and not for the benefit of the owners of the Product or any other third parties. 25 | Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 | Product Summary | Bermuda Disclaimer of the Russell 2000® Index 

Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 (the “Product”) has been developed solely by the Company. The Product is not in any way connected to or sponsored, endorsed, sold or promoted by the London Stock Exchange Group plc and its group undertakings (collectively, the “LSE Group”). FTSE Russell is a trading name of certain of the LSE Group companies. All rights in the Russell 2000® Index (the “Index”) vest in the relevant LSE Group company which owns the Index. “Russell®” is trademark of the relevant LSE Group company and are used by any other LSE Group company under license. The Index is calculated by or on behalf of Frank Russell Company or its affiliate, agent or partner. The LSE Group does not accept any liability whatsoever to any person arising out of (a) the use of, reliance on or any error in the Index or (b) investment in or operation of the Product. The LSE Group makes no claim, prediction, warranty or representation either as to the results to be obtained from the Product or the suitability of the Index for the purpose to which it is being put by the Company. 

# Disclaimer 

Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 (Policy Form No. IUL05 BM / IUL05 FL) is an indexed universal life insurance policy underwritten and issued by Transamerica Life (Bermuda) Ltd., a company incorporated in Bermuda. Policies to which these materials relate are only available in Bermuda. Insurance eligibility and premiums are subject to underwriting. In the event of suicide during the first two policy years, death benefit is limited to the return of premiums paid (less any withdrawals, outstanding policy loans and policy loan interest due). This publication serves only as an overview and is not an offer to sell or a solicitation to buy any of Transamerica Life Bermuda’s products. It is provided for informational purposes only and should not be construed as financial, tax or legal advice. Customers and other interested parties should seek independent financial, tax and legal advice. All cases studies and other illustrations or examples given in this publication are for informational and illustrative purposes and do not predict future performance. The actual premiums, charges and benefits are dependent on factors, including the insured’s age, gender, risk class, smoking status, and country of residence. All monetary values reflected in these materials are in US dollars. This information is current as of May 2025. Customers and other interested parties should refer to the policy contract for detailed terms and conditions. Although care is taken in preparing this material, Transamerica Life Bermuda disclaims any express or implied warranty as to the accuracy of the content and any liability with respect to it. For further information, please contact Transamerica Life Bermuda’s distributors. The policy contract for the product described in this Product Summary is prepared in English. In the event of any conflict or inconsistency between the contents of this Product Summary and the policy contract, the policy contract shall prevail. In the event of any conflict or inconsistency between the contents of the English and Chinese versions of this Product Summary, the English version of this Product Summary shall prevail. Genesis+ Indexed Universal Life 2 | Product Summary | Bermuda | 26 www.transamericalifebermuda.com Incorporated in Bermuda with limited liability 

transamericalifebermuda 

Mintflower Place, 5th floor West 8, Par-la-Ville Road Hamilton, HM 08 Bermuda T : +1 441 705 8282 

Bermuda Office
