Title: Biostatistics and Epidemiology: Midterm Exam Study Guide

URL Source: https://www.studocu.com/ph/document/liceo-de-cagayan-university/medical-laboratory-science/biostatistics-and-epidemiology/66987071

Published Time: 2023-08-16T14:42:26+02:00

Markdown Content:
*   Home
*   My Library

*   Ask AI

BIOSTATI STICS & E PIDEMIOLO GY BIOSTATISTICS & EPIDEMIOLOGY BIOSTATISTI CS & EPIDEMIOLOGY

PRELIM

1.True/False, positive/negat ive,

yummy/yucky, these ca tegories

are

-Dichotomous

2.How many samples are needed

to confirm the diagnosis of

cholera during outbreak?

-10

3.Ana lytic epidemiology answers

which of the ff?

-How was the pop ulation

affected

4.Match the term to the a ctivity that

best describes it: R ecommend

that close contacts of a child

recently reported with

meningococcal me ningitis

receive Rifampin

-Application

5.John Snow u sed the

chemical_____ to clean water

-Chlorine

6.Any factor that brings about a

change in a health condition or

other defined characteristics

-Determinant

7.Tim has a severe heart attack at

age 58. The near-death

experience so scare s Tim that he

quits smoking. Tim’s wife is also

scared and decided to quit

smoking eve n th ough she feels

fine. Tim’s son r esolves never to

start smoking, seeing what

cigarettes hav e done to his dad.

Before quitti ng smoking, Tim, his

cigarettes and his tobacco smoke

represent:

-Host, vehic le and agent,

respectively

8.Identify the type of var iable of

date of diagnosis.

-Interval

9.In the d efinition of epidemiology,

“determinants” generally inc ludes

all of the following, EXCEPT:

-Control Measure

10.Match the te rm to the activity that

best describes it. Compare

frequency of brain cancer

among anatomists with

frequency in general population

-Determinants

11.A nu mber of p assengers on a

cruise ship from Puerto Rico to t he

Panama Canal have recently

developed a gastrointestinal

illness compatible with norovirus

(formerly called Norwalk-like

virus). Testing for norovirus is not

read ily available in any n earby

island, a nd the test takes several

days eve n w here avail able. For

the cruise ship scenario described

above, if y ou suspec ted that the

norovirus may have be en

transmitted by ice made or

served aboard ship, all of the

following a re possible "place" for

norovirus, EXCEPT

-Shaded map by whether

passenger consum ed ship’s ice or

not

1 out of 25

End of document
Was this document helpful?

Preview text
------------

### PRELIM

1.   True/False, positive/negative, yummy/yucky, these categories are -Dichotomous

2.   How many samples are needed to confirm the diagnosis of cholera during outbreak?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.   Analytic epidemiology answers which of the ff? -How was the population affected

4.   Match the term to the activity that best describes it: Recommend that close contacts of a child recently reported with meningococcal meningitis receive Rifampin -Application

5.   John Snow used the chemical_____ to clean water -Chlorine

6.   Any factor that brings about a change in a health condition or other defined characteristics -Determinant

7.   Tim has a severe heart attack at age 58. The near-death experience so scares Tim that he quits smoking. Tim’s wife is also scared and decided to quit smoking even though she feels fine. Tim’s son resolves never to start smoking, seeing what cigarettes have done to his dad. Before quitting smoking, Tim, his cigarettes and his tobacco smoke represent: -Host, vehicle and agent, respectively

8.   Identify the type of variable of date of diagnosis.

-Interval 9. In the definition of epidemiology, “determinants” generally includes all of the following, EXCEPT: -Control Measure 10. Match the term to the activity that best describes it. Compare frequency of brain cancer among anatomists with frequency in general population -Determinants 11. A number of passengers on a cruise ship from Puerto Rico to the Panama Canal have recently developed a gastrointestinal illness compatible with norovirus (formerly called Norwalk-like virus). Testing for norovirus is not readily available in any nearby island, and the test takes several days even where available. For the cruise ship scenario described above, if you suspected that the norovirus may have been transmitted by ice made or served aboard ship, all of the following are possible "place" for norovirus, EXCEPT -Shaded map by whether passenger consumed ship’s ice or not

1.   Identify the type of variable of age.

-Ratio 13. The transition from high birth and death rates to lower birth and death rates as a country or region is called -Demographic transition 14. Newborn screening is a type of -genetic screening 15. The epidemiologic triad of disease causation refers to: -Agent, host, environment 16. Disease control measures are generally directed at all of the following, EXCEPT? -Eliminating the host 17. Herd immunity refers to: -The prevention of disease transmission to susceptible individuals through acquired immunity in others

1.   Which of the following disease is said to have direct transmission? -gonorrhea, whooping cough, Infectious mononucleosis (kissing disease), hookworm

2.   When you reach conclusions from the data gathered, you are practicing -inferential statistics

3.   Which variables might you include in characterizing the event described in the case scenario by person? -Age of passenger and status as passenger or crew

4.   Who said the following “As our world continues to generate unimaginable amounts of data, more data lead to more correlations, and more correlations can lead to more discoveries?” -. Hans Rosling

5.   Match the term to the activity that best describes it -distribution

6.   John Snow’s investigation of cholera is considered a model for epidemiologic eld investigations because it included all of the following, EXCEPT: -Multivariate statistical model

7.   Being overweight is one of the behavioral factors. -true

8.   Which of the following are examples of a health-related source of data collection? -Electronic health records and Measurement of toxins in a river.

9.   Epidemiology includes all of the following activities, EXCEPT -Prescribing an antibiotic to treat a patient with community- acquired methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus infection

10.   An interval variable with a true zero point, such as height in centimeters or duration of illness is

-Applied statistics 47. The branch of applied statistics directed toward applications in health sciences is -biostatistics 48. The most difficult to control among the risks factors of disease is -genetic factors 49. For an infectious disease to occur, there must be interaction between: -the host and the agent 50. A person who is concerned mainly on the health status of a larger population or community is -epidemiologist 51. The easiest to control among the risks factors is -immunologic factors 52. Identify the pattern of occurrence for the disease described below: 25 cases of legionellosis occurred within 3 weeks among residents of a particular neighborhood (usually 0 or 1 per year) -epidemic 53. All of the following are ways to present data, EXCEPT: -none of the choices 54. The researchers that collect secondary data are called -desk researchers 55. Appendicitis is rare in indigenous tribe of tropical Africa -true 56. Any factor, whether event, characteristic, or other definable entity, that brings about a change in a health condition or other defined characteristic is -Determinant 57. Which term best describes the pattern of occurrence of the

disease noted below in a single area? Disease 1: usually 40 – 50 cases per week; last week, 48 cases -Endemic 58. There is an outbreak of meningococcemia. What is the best source of data? -hospital 59. When a patient is asked to evaluate his chest pain on a scale of 0 (no pain) to 10 (the worst pain), he reports to the evaluating clinician that his pain is an 8. After the administration of sublingual nitroglycerin and high-ow oxygen, the patient reports that the pain is now a 4 on the same scale. After the administration of morphine sulphate, given as an intravenous push, the pain is 0. This pain scale is a: -ratio scale 60. Disease 3: usually no more than 2– 4 cases per week; last week, 13 cases -outbreak 61. Another term for count is ____________. It is the number of times a data value occurs -frequency 62. Identify the type of variable for 'highest ALT'

-ratio

1.   The health officer would like to know the prevalence rate of malnutrition in the community. which of the following is the correct formula? -number of people with malnutrition divided by the number of people in the community
2.   In the definition of epidemiology, “distribution” refers to all of the following, EXCEPT: -Why
3.   Drawing conclusions based on data collected from a sample is a -inferential statistics
4.   A subset of a population that represents the population is -sample
5.   It reflects the presence of disease in a population -endemic
6.   Identify the type of variable of the town of residence.

-nominal 69. In a survey of HIV, the answers to alive or dead question is a Yes or No. What type of scale are the data gathered? -nominal 70. Tim has a severe heart attack at age 58. The near-death experience so scares Tim that he

quits smoking. Tim’s wife is also scared and decided to quit smoking even though she feels ne. Tim’s son resolves never to start smoking, seeing what cigarettes have done to his dad. The act of not smoking for Tim, Tim’s wife, and Tim’s son represents: -tertiary prevention, secondary prevention and primary prevention, respectively 71. Statistics that summarize data from a sample is -descriptive statistics 72. A number of passengers on a cruise ship from Puerto Rico to the Panama Canal have recently developed a gastrointestinal illness compatible with norovirus (formerly called Norwalk-like virus). Testing for norovirus is not readily available in any nearby island, and the test takes several days even where available. For the cruise ship scenario described above, how would you display the time course of the outbreak? -Epidemic curve 73. An epidemiologist is doing a study on the sleep patterns of college students but does not provide any intervention. What type of study is this? -Observational 74. A __________can be any characteristic that differs from person to person, such as height, sex, smallpox vaccination status, or physical activity pattern. -variable 75. Evaluation of which of the following potentially preventable causes of disease is most likely to raise ethical concerns?

1.   The first to examine the relationships between occurrence of disease and environment is -Hippocrates
2.   A reservoir of an infectious agent can be: -The environment, asymptomatic human, symptomatic human, animal
3.   A group of cases in a specific time and place that might be more than expected is -cluster
4.   What is the single most effective way of breaking the chain of infection? -handwashing
5.   On Day 1 of a technology conference in San Diego, 15 presenters who were setting up for their sessions in Annex X became ill with u-like symptoms. During the course of the conference, 20 participants who attended sessions in Annex X also became ill with the same symptoms. To begin calculating the rate of this outbreak, investigators should first determine -the size of the conference population.
6.   When the government wants to know the rate of unemployment, data will be collected from every member of the population, it is called -complete enumeration and census
7.   In March 1981, an outbreak of measles occurred among employees at Factory X in Fort Worth, Texas. This group of cases in this specific time and place can

be described as a ________________. -determinant 96. A study of heart disease comparing a group who eats healthy foods and exercises regularly with one who does not in an effort to test association. This is said to be a/an -analytic 97. The ultimate goal in statistics is -understand the complex relationships of data 98. The laws of nature are the same everywhere. -true 99. While the pork industry lobbied aggressively against dubbing the novel H1N1 influenza virus “swine u,” substantial evidence supported that this wholly new genetic variant of influenza developed from conned animal feed operations associated with commercial pig farming. The novel H1N1 virus resulted from: -antigenic shift 100. About 60 cases of gonorrhea are usually reported in this region per week, slightly less than the national average. This is -endemic MIDTERM

1.   Two groups of participants are assembled on the basis of whether they can identify a newt in a pondlife sample. The groups are then asked to rate the probability that industrial emissions cause global warming, using a scale with choices, ranging from “improbable” to “highly probable.” The industrial emissions data in this study are:

-Ordinal

1.   If the p value is 0, you should

-reject the null hypothesis and accept the alternative hypothesis.

1.   Approximately, 95% of the area of normal distribution is within _____ standard deviations of the mean.

1.   The best measure for skewed data with interval/ratio is

-Median

1.   What test should you use if you have more than 30 samples in parametric tests of significance?

-Z test

1.   What is the purpose of an inferential statistical test?

-To check the probability of your results applying to the wider population

1.   If critical value is < calculated value, you should

-reject null hypothesis

1.   Inferential statistical tests only need to be carried out if the trend of your results goes the same way as your hypothesis.

-True

1.   The test employed to compare the mean score on some continuous variable for two groups.

-t test

1.   How do descriptive and inferential statistics differ?

-Descriptive statistics only attempt to describe data, while inferential statistics

attempt to make predictions based on data. 11. The test that should be used for "Heart rate tends to be lower in persons who exercise frequently."

*   Pearson’s r

1.   Hypothesis is an educated guess about something in the world around you. It should be testable by -experiment and thru observation

2.   The null hypothesis can only be rejected when the probability of type I error is -less than the alpha level

3.   Which of the following is a null hypothesis? -There will be no difference between the length of time taken to complete tests online and tests completed on paper, and if there is it is due to chance.

4.   Assume you are comparing two harvests of corn, one where the mean sugar content is 75 ± 3 mg/g and the other with a mean sugar content of 80 ± 4 mg/g. How would you determine if difference in the sugar content of these two subsamples is statistically “significant”?

-Conduct a t-test and if the result is 0. or less, then it is statistically significant.

1.   When 100 students were asked to read a chapter of a book with 25-pages, the mean amount of time it took for each student to vaguely comprehend the text was 3 hours, with a 95% confidence

*   To check the probability of your results applying to the wider population

1.   Normal distributions can dier in their means and in their standard deviations.

*   True

1.   Hypothesis is an uneducated guess.

*   False

1.   The hypothesis that expresses that there is no relationship between variables, or no differences between groups is

*   null hypothesis

1.   Six volunteers have gone on a high- oat bran cholesterol-lowering diet for 3 months. Pretrial and posttrial values are as follows:

Cholesterol Level (mg/dL)

Subject Pretrial Posttrial

1 180 182

2 225 220

3 243 241

4 150 140

5 212 222

6 218 216

In the trial described above, the difference between pretrial and posttrial cholesterol values ultimately is not statistically significant. Before concluding that oat bran does not reduce cholesterol levels, you would want to consider:

*   type II error

1.   When one wants to analyze continuous data, which of the following should be used?

*   Chi square

1.   What type of statistic (descriptive or inferential) would you employ to answer the research questions? "We would like to know how many university students experience high stress levels."

*   Descriptive

1.   The way in which the scientific tradition accounts for variation due to error is

*   degrees of freedom

1.   What is meant by a Type 1 error?

*   Rejecting a null hypothesis that is true

1.   The interquartile range covers what proportion of a distribution?

*   50%

1.   Paired-samples t-test is used when

*   comparing the same group of people on two different Occasions

1.   In epidemiology, the measure of central location generally preferred for summarizing skewed data such as incubation periods is the:

*   Median

1.   Which of the following is NOT considered measures of spread?

*   Percentile

1.   Alpha, in statistical terms, represents:

-type 1 error

1.   To know in a survey which value is the most popular answer, one should measure

*   Mode

1.   A psychologist decides to test who is more likely to help a stranger in need; males or females. A confederate asks both male and female passers-by for 50pesos for a parking meter, as he has accidentally dropped his change down the street drain. The researcher is observing to see who will help and records a tick for every male who helps, and a tick for every female who helps. At the end of the research, the total number of ticks in each category are added up for comparison. What kind of DATA has been collected?

*   Nominal data

1.   Six volunteers have gone on a high- oat bran cholesterol-lowering diet for 3 months. Pretrial and posttrial values are as follows:

Cholesterol Level (mg/dL)

Subject Pretrial Posttrial

1 180 182

2 225 220

3 243 241

4 150 140

5 212 222

6 218 216

In the trial described above, by mere inspection of the data, what can you conclude about the difference in pretrial and posttrial cholesterol values?

*   Even if statistically significant, the difference is probably not clinically significant

1.   A very valuable measure that species how accurate an estimate a sample provides.

-standard error 48. Which of the following terms accurately describe the distribution shown below?

*   skewed to the right

1.   The observation which lies in the middle of the ordered observation is

-Median 50. What is meant by p≤0?

-The probability of results occurring by chance is equal to or less than 0.

1.   Permutation focuses on the selection of objects without regard to the order in which they are selected.

-False 52. Two groups of participants are assembled on the basis of whether they can identify a newt in a pondlife sample. The groups are then asked to rate the probability that industrial emissions cause global warming, using a scale with choices, ranging from “improbable” to “highly probable.” In regards to this

*   Same mean, median, mode; different standard deviation

1.   The geometric mean is the value that:

*   Is statistically closest to all of the values in the distribution on a log scale

1.   What type of statistic (descriptive or inferential) would you employ to answer the research questions? "We would like to know whether female students experience higher stress levels than male students."

*   Inferential

1.   Probability is the study of the patterns of random processes.

*   True

1.   Correlation of 0 indicates

*   No linear relationship

1.   If the null hypothesis is true, the value of t is

*   ≤ 1

1.   The measure of spread most affected by one extreme value is the:

*   Range

1.   This analysis explores the association between variables.

*   Correlation

1.   The mode is the value that:

*   Occurs most often

1.   Two variables might show a correlation if they

-are directly related to each other, are both related to a third unknown variable, appear correlated simply by chance.

1.   Which statement most accurately explains inferential statistics?

*   Inferential statistics are techniques used by scientists to interpret and make judgments about a dataset.

1.   What is statistical significance?

-The likelihood that a statistic did not occur by chance.

1.   The test that should be used for "Is diet X effective in lowering serum cholesterol level in a sample of 12 people?"

*   Paired t-test

1.   Which type of inferential statistical

*   Spearman’s Rho

1.   Which of the following is/are parametric tests for association?

*   Pearson’s r

1.   What type of statistic (descriptive or inferential) would you employ to answer the research questions? "We would like to know what study strategies are used by first year university students."

*   Descriptive

1.   A MedTech student has conducted a Mann Whitney U test on his data. The results show that the observed value is less than the critical value. What should this student do?

-Reject the null hypothesis and accept the experimental hypothesis

1.   All of the following are true for inferential statistics, EXCEPT

*   Summarize

1.   The median is the value that:

*   Has half the observations below it and half above it

1.   It refers to a large number of experiences, events or outcomes that will happen in a population in the long run.

*   Probability theory

1.   A psychologist decides to test who is more likely to help a stranger in need; males or females. A confederate asks both male and female passers-by for 50pesos for a parking meter, as he has accidentally dropped his change down the street drain. The researcher is observing to see who will help and records a tick for every male who helps, and a tick for every female who helps. At the end of the research, the total number of ticks in each category are added up for comparison. Based on the information you have here, which is the most appropriate inferential statistical test to use?

*   Chi-Square

1.   The test that should be used for "Is Vegan diet effective in lowering serum cholesterol levels in a sample of 12 people?"

-Paired t-test

1.   A Medical Technology student is running an inferential statistical test on

her data. What level of statistical significance should she accept? -5%

1.   A psychologist decides to test who is more likely to help a stranger in need; males or females. A confederate asks both male and female passers-by for 50 pesos for a parking meter, as he has accidentally dropped his change down the street drain. The researcher is observing to see who will help and records a tick for every male who helps, and a tick for every female who helps. At the end of the research, the total number of ticks in each category are added up for comparison. What kind of research DESIGN has been used?

*   Independent groups

1.   The normal distribution is the most important distribution used in statistics.

*   True

1.   Two groups of participants are assembled on the basis of whether they can identify a newt in a pondlife sample. The groups are then asked to rate the probability that industrial emissions cause global warming, using a scale with choices, ranging from “improbable” to “highly probable.” In regards to this scenario, to analyze the responses of the two groups statistically, researchers might compare the data on the basis of:

*   Ranking

1.   Six volunteers have gone on a high- oat bran cholesterol-lowering diet for 3 months. Pretrial and posttrial values are as follows:

Cholesterol Level (mg/dL)

1.   Synonyms for incidence proportion is

-attack rate, risk, probability of getting the disease

1.   For chronic diseases such as diabetes, which of the following is a best rate to

*   prevalence

1.   What is the following fraction? Number of deaths due to septicemia among men aged 65–74 years in 2004 divided by Estimated number of men aged 65–74 years alive on July 1, 2004. 1

*   Age-specific mortality rate; 2 - Age- adjusted mortality rate; 3 - Cause- specific mortality rate; 4 - Sex-specific mortality rate

-1, 3 and 4

1.   This is useful for studying trends in the causes of death over time.

*   Cause-specific death rate

1.   The post hoc test that is used when you want to compare experimental groups with a control.

*   Dunnett

1.   It is affected by duration of illness.

*   prevalence

1.   Maternal mortality rate is usually expressed per

*   100,000 live births

1.   During a given year, 12 cases of disease X are detected in a population of 70,000 college students when those 12 students present for medical attention. Many more students have mild symptoms of the disease and do not seek care. Of the 12 detected cases, 7 results in death. To report the incidence

rate of disease X, it would be necessary to know:

*   The midyear population at risk

1.   It is used in the calculation of risk ratio

*   incidence

1.   Assume that the horizontal lines in the diagram represent duration of illness in 11 different people, out of a community of
2.   What is the prevalence of disease during April?

*   11/

1.   During a given year, 12 cases of disease X are detected in a population of 70,000 college students when those 12 students present for medical attention. Many more students have mild symptoms of the disease and do not seek care. Of the 12 detected cases, 7 results in death. The ratio of 7/ represents:

*   The case fatality ratio

1.   Within 10 days after attending a June wedding, an outbreak of cyclosporiasis occurred among attendees. Of the 85 guests and wedding party members, 79 were interviewed; 54 of the 79 met the case definition. The following two-by-two table shows consumption of wedding cake (that had raspberry ling) and illness status. The fraction 50 / 53 is a/an: 1- Attack rate; 2- Food-specific attack rate; 3- Incidence proportion; 4- Proportion. -1,2,3 and 4

2.   Prevalence is related to incidence by the duration of disease.

*   True

1.   The death rate from all causes of death in a population is

-crude death rate

1.   The most commonly used measure for comparing health status among nations is

-infant mortality rate

1.   Assume that the horizontal lines in the diagram represent duration of illness in 11 different people, out of a community of
2.   What is the incidence of disease during April?

*   6/

1.   Age-adjusted mortality rate statistically modified to eliminate the effect of different age distributions in the different populations.

2.   This is the non-parametric version of one-way ANOVA.

*   Kruskal-Wallis

1.   Within 10 days after attending a June wedding, an outbreak of cyclosporiasis occurred among attendees. Of the 85 guests and wedding party members, 79 were interviewed; 54 of the 79 met the case definition. The following two-by-two table shows consumption of wedding cake (that had raspberry ling) and illness status. The fraction 54 / 79 is a/an: 1- Food-specific attack rate; 2- Attack rate; 3- Incidence proportion; 4- Proportion

*   2, 3 and 4

1.   The mortality rate from all causes of death in a population is the crude death rate wherein the denominator is

*   mid-interval population

1.   Which of the following mortality rates use the estimated total mid-year population as its denominator? 1 - Age- specific mortality rate; 2 - Sex-specific mortality rate; 3 -Crude mortality rate; 4 - Cause-specific mortality rate

*   3 and 4

1.   It is a measure of the impact of premature mortality on a population.

*   Years of potential life lost

1.   In a state that did not require varicella (chickenpox) vaccination, a boarding school experienced a prolonged outbreak of varicella among its students that began in September and continued through December. To calculate the probability or risk of illness among the students, which denominator would you use?

*   Number of susceptible students at the

1.   When new cases occurred during a given time period it is said to be

2.   “For life and death are one, even as the river and sea are one.” says

*   K. Gibran

1.   Which of the following is an adaptation of the Chi-square that is used with repeated measures at the nominal level?

*   McNemar Test

1.   “With any recovery from morbidity there must go a certain healthy humiliation.” says

*   G. Chesterton

1.   Post neonatal mortality rate is usually expressed per

*   1,000 live births

-false 8. Disease or condition present among a population at all times is epidemic -false 9. Scientific method starts with observation -true 10. HIV/AIDS is pandemic -true 11. One of the purposes of epidemiology is to treat patients in a clinical setting -false 12. Malaria in Palawan is epidemic -false 13. Distribution refers to the occurrence of health-related events by time, place, and person. -false

1.   An official from the state department of public health visits outpatient clinics and emergency departments to determine the number of cases of post exposure prophylaxis for rabies. The official’s action is an example of

-active surveillance

1.   Arizona, Colorado, and New Mexico report cases of an unexplained respiratory tract illness with a high case fatality ratio. Which of the ff is most reliably true regarding this event?

-It is appropriate for the CDC to investigate the case

1.   An article highlighting the long-term consequences of inadequately treated Lyme disease is published in a medical journal. After a summary of the article appears in popular newspapers and magazines, patients with vague joint

pains begin insisting that their physicians test them for Lyme disease. Cases in which the test results are positive are reported as cases of Lyme borreliosis. This represents:

*   A change in surveillance that would overestimate the prevalence i. Whenever public attention is focused on a particular health problem, an increase in the number of reported cases of the problem is likely.

1.   Which of the ff measures the chance of having a risk factor? -Relative risk

2.   Studies may be conducted to generate or test hypotheses. The best design for testing a hypothesis is a:

*   Retrospective cohort study

1.   The basic goal of epidemiologic research with observational data is -describe associations between exposures and outcomes

2.   Compare food histories between persons with Staphylococcus food poisoning and those without -determinants

3.   Representative sample of residents were telephoned and asked how much they exercise each week and whether they currently have (have ever been diagnosed with) heart disease.

*   Observational cross-sectional

1.   Occurrence of cancer was identified between April 1991 and July 2002 for 50,000 troops who served in the first Gulf War (ended April 1991) and 50,000 troops

who served elsewhere during the same period.

*   Observational cohort

CDC

1.   In the definition of epidemiology, “distribution” refers to:

A. Who B. When

C. Where D. all

1.   In the definition of epidemiology, “determinants” generally includes: A. Agents

B. Causes

C. A,B,D,E D. Risk factors

E. Sources 3. Epidemiology, as defined in this lesson, would include which of the following activities?

A. Describing the demographic characteristics of persons with acute aflatoxin poisoning in District A

B. Prescribing an antibiotic to treat a patient with community-acquired methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus infection C. Comparing the family history, amount of exercise, and eating

habits of those with and without newly diagnosed diabetes

D. Recommending that a restaurant be closed after implicating it as the source of a hepatitis A outbreak E. A,C,D

1.   John Snow’s investigation of cholera is considered a model for epidemiologic field investigations because it included a:

A. Biologically plausible hypothesis

B. Comparison of a health outcome among exposed and unexposed groups

C. Multivariate statistical model

D. Spot map E. Recommendation for public health action

F. A, B,D,E 5. Public health surveillance includes which of the following activities: A. Diagnosing whether a case of encephalitis is actually due to West Nile virus infection B. Soliciting case reports of persons with symptoms compatible with SARs from local hospitals

C. Creating graphs of the number of dog bites by week and neighborhood
