Title: James Comey’s October Surprise

URL Source: https://www.newyorker.com/news/john-cassidy/james-comeys-october-surprise

Published Time: 2016-10-28T17:49:00.000-04:00

Markdown Content:
James Comey’s October Surprise | The New Yorker

===============

Manage your consent preferences

If you are a resident of Colorado, Connecticut, Virginia, Utah, Oregon, Texas, Montana, Delaware, Iowa, Nebraska, New Hampshire, and New Jersey, Tennessee, Minnesota, or Maryland you have the right to opt-out of Targeted Advertising, including our “sale” and/or “sharing” of your Personal Information (“Opt-Out”). We and our third-party business partners use Personal Information in accordance with our Privacy Policy to serve advertising believed to be of interest to you (“Targeted Advertising”). If you are a California resident, you also have the right to limit the use and disclosure of your Sensitive Personal information in particular circumstances. Please note that you may need to Opt-Out on each website, mobile app, browser, and device you use, and if you clear your browser cookies, you may need to repeat this process. However, if you have created an account to log in across several of our websites and/or mobile apps, we will make reasonable efforts to apply your Opt-Out request to each of those websites and apps. ◦ To Opt-Out of Targeted Advertising on this site: Move the “Allow Targeted Advertising" toggle below to the left and press “Confirm My Choices”

Performance

- [x] On

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

* * *

Functional

- [x] On

This website uses functional cookies and services to remember your preferences and choices, such as language preferences, font sizes, region selections, and customized layouts. They enable this website to offer enhanced and personalized functionalities.

* * *

Audience Measurement

- [x] On

We use audience measurement cookies in order to carry out aggregated traffic measurement and generate performance statistics essential for the proper functioning of the site and the provision of its content (for example to measure performance, to detect navigation problems, to optimization technical performance or ergonomics, to estimate server power needed and to analyse content performance). The use of these cookies is strictly limited to measuring the site's audience. These cookies do not allow the tracking of navigation on other websites and the data collected is not combined or shared with third parties. You can refuse the use of this cookie by switching off the slider to the right.

* * *

Essential

- [x] On

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

* * *

Social Media

- [x] On

These cookies are set by a range of social media services that we have added to the site to enable you to share our content with your friends and networks. They are capable of tracking your browser across other sites and building up a profile of your interests. This may impact the content and messages you see on other websites you visit. If you do not allow these cookies you may not be able to use or see these sharing tools.

* * *

Allow Sale/Targeted Advertising?

- [x] On

We may transfer or share your personal information to third parties for the purposes of targeted advertising. You can learn more about what information is used for this purpose in our privacy notice.

Confirm My Choices Reject All Accept All

Privacy Policy

Powered by

Skip to main content

~~$2.50~~ $1 a week for one year.

*   Newsletter

Sign In

Subscribe

Search

*   The Latest
*   News
*   Books & Culture
*   Fiction & Poetry
*   Humor & Cartoons
*   Magazine
*   Puzzles & Games
*   Video
*   Podcasts
*   Goings On
*   Shop
*   100th Anniversary

Open Navigation Menu

Subscribe

Get 1 year for ~~$2.50~~ $1 a week, plus a free tote. Cancel or pause anytime.Subscribe »

John Cassidy

James Comey’s October Surprise
==============================

By John Cassidy

October 28, 2016

Hillary Clinton on the campaign trail with her aide Huma Abedin. The F.B.I. found new e-mails related to Clinton while investigating Abedin’s husband, Anthony Weiner.Photograph by Justin Sullivan / Getty Images

Save this story

Save this story

On Friday morning, James Comey, the director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, sent a letter to the heads of several committees on Capitol Hill, in which he said he wished to "supplement" the testimony he gave in July about the Bureau's investigation into Hillary Clinton's private e-mail server. During that testimony, Comey had defended his decision not to bring any charges in the case, even though his agents had found evidence that Clinton and her aides were, in his words, "extremely careless in their handling of very sensitive, highly classified information."

In his letter on Friday, Comey wrote, "In connection with an unrelated case, the FBI has learned of the existence of emails that appear to be pertinent to the investigation. I am writing to inform you that the investigative team briefed me on this yesterday, and I agreed that the FBI should take appropriate investigative steps designed to allow investigators to review these emails to determine whether they contain classified information, as well as to assess their importance to our investigation."Comey added that the agency couldn't yet determine "whether or not this material may be significant or not," or "how long it will take us to complete this additional work."

Comey's letter was brief and, evidently, carefully stated. Remarkably, though, its release wasn't accompanied by any contextual information or background briefing to either lawmakers or the press. It made its way to much of the media in the form of a tweet posted shortly before 1 _P.M._ by Jason Chaffetz, the Republican Congressman from Utah who chairs the House Committee on Oversight, and who is a longtime Clinton tormentor. "FBI Dir just informed me, ‘The FBI has learned of the existence of emails that appear to be pertinent to the investigation,’” Chaffetz's tweet said. "Case reopened."

The Daily Cartoon, Shouts, and other funny stuff from our Dept. of Hoopla

SIGN UP

By signing up, you agree to our user agreement (including class action waiver and arbitration provisions), and acknowledge our privacy policy.

Get insight and analysis from Washington and beyond when you sign up for our News & Politics newsletter.

SIGN UP

By signing up, you agree to our user agreement (including class action waiver and arbitration provisions), and acknowledge our privacy policy.

Within minutes, the cable networks had picked up on Chaffetz's message. At 1:09 _P.M._, Fox News tweeted:"BREAKING NEWS: @jasoninthehouse; @HillaryClinton email--'Case reopened.’” On social media, several reporters quickly pointed out that Comey himself hadn't used the word "reopened." By then, though, it was too late.Just eleven days before the election, the F.B.I. director had dropped on the world the news that his agency had found new e-mails connected with the Clinton investigation, and was delving into them. This, and the lack of any clarifying information, was enough to create a media frenzy, send the stock market into a (short-lived) dive, and infuriate many Clinton supporters.

In a statement,John Podesta, the chairman of the Clinton campaign, called on Comey to “immediately provide the American public more information than is contained in the letter he sent to eight Republican committee chairmen." The statement continued, "Director Comey’s letter refers to emails that have come to light in an unrelated case, but we have no idea what those emails are and the Director himself notes they may not even be significant.It is extraordinary that we would see something like this just eleven days out from a presidential election."

The Trump campaign, of course, reacted with delight. "A great day in our campaign just got even better,” Kellyanne Conway, Donald Trump's campaign manager,tweeted.Trump himself, after spending months portraying Comey as a Clinton patsy who inexplicably failed to prosecute his opponent, told a rally in New Hampshire, "I have great respect for the fact that the F.B.I. and the D.O.J. are now willing to have the courage to right the horrible mistake that they made.”

Comey, meanwhile, kept quiet. But, as the afternoon progressed, more information dribbled out in the form of news reports based on conversations with unnamed officials. Shortly after two o’clock, Pete Williams, NBC News's justice correspondent,reported that although Comey told Congress in July that the Clinton investigation had been completed, it hadn't technically ever ended. There were still some staffers working on the case, so it wasn't accurate to say, as Chaffetz had done, that it had been reopened.

More important, Williams provided some actual details about the newly discovered e-mails. According to Williams, the e-mails in question were unrelated to the WikiLeaks dump of messages and documents hacked from Podesta’s account; they hadn't been sent by Hillary Clinton; and they hadn't been withheld from the F.B.I. by the Clintons, the Clinton campaign, or the State Department. What happened, Williams said, was that, in the course of a separate investigation, the F.B.I. had come across a "device" that had led them to the e-mails of interest.

This was crucial contextual information that, surely, Comey could have made public in his letter, or in a press briefing. While his letter said the agency was focussing on whether the newly found e-mails contained classified information, it didn't address the key question of whether Clinton, or someone in her camp, had deliberately hidden them from the F.B.I. That allowed Trump and others to raise the spectre of blatant wrongdoing and obstruction of justice. ("It's worse than Watergate," Trump claimed.) But, according to Williams, there wasn't any basis for these claims.

Indeed, Williams, a veteran correspondent who served as a Pentagon spokesman in the first Bush Administration, played down the significance of Comey’s letter. "It looks at this point like being very thorough and very careful, not that this is going . . . to be a game changer," Williams told viewers. "One official said, 'I don't sense alarm bells going on at the F.B.I. and the Justice Department over this.’” Finally, Williams said there was no chance that the F.B.I. would finish up its investigation into the newfound e-mails before the election, on November 8th. The agency's work would go on for quite a while, he said.

Williams's reporting appeared to have cleared up quite a bit, and it made the news seem a lot less earth-shattering and damaging for Clinton than it had initially appeared. Evidently, the F.B.I. was trying to tie up some loose ends, not revisiting the central conclusion of its original inquiry: that there wasn't a criminal case to bring against Clinton, or anybody associated with her. Later in the afternoon, a senior law-enforcement source told NBC News that Comey had sent the letter to Congress"out of an abundance of caution."

But that left open questions about where the newly discovered e-mails had come from, about what they might contain, and about the nature of the other investigation that Comey had referred to.On social media, inevitably, there was speculation. At about one-thirty, Greg Pollowitz, an editor at Twitchy.com,tweeted out,"Hmmm. Maybe Weiner's phone and emails from Huma?" Evidently, Pollowitz was referring to reports that the F.B.I. was investigating allegations that Anthony Weiner, the disgraced former Democratic congressman, who is married to (but separated from) Huma Abedin, a close aide to Hillary Clinton, had sent sexually explicit text messages to a minor.

Lo and behold, Pollowitz turned out to be right. About an hour after he posted his tweet, the _Times_ put up a story under this headline: "New Emails in Clinton Case Came from Devices Once Used by Anthony Weiner." The article attributed the information to "federal law enforcement officials." Shortly after this happened, the hysteria on social media and the cable networks turned into pandemonium, and many heads, mine included, almost exploded.

Other news organizations were also on the case. By Friday night, the _Wall Street Journal_ had reported that "the emails were discovered on a laptop used by both Ms. Abedin and Mr. Weiner, according to people familiar with the matter.”CNN said that the material the F.B.I. was reviewing ran to thousands of pages.At a brief press conference in Des Moines, Iowa, Clinton called on the F.B.I. to "explain this issue in question, whatever it is, without any delay.”She said,"Voting is under way, so the American people deserve to get the full and complete facts immediately.”

John Cassidy has been a staff writer at The New Yorker since 1995. He writes The Financial Page, a column about economics and politics.

More:2016 Election Anthony Weiner E-Mails F.B.I.Hillary Clinton Huma Abedin James Comey Presidential Candidates

### The News & Politics Newsletter

Read the latest from Washington and beyond, covering current events, the economy, and more, from our columnists and correspondents.

SIGN UP

By signing up, you agree to our user agreement (including class action waiver and arbitration provisions), and acknowledge our privacy policy.

Read More

Benjamin Wallace-Wells

The F.B.I. Reinvigorates Trump

By Benjamin Wallace-Wells

Life and Letters

2016: The Novel

The campaigns of Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump offer plenty of dramatic material for a writer of historical fiction.

By Thomas Mallon

The Lede

Why Democrats Shut Down the Government

Having the fight is the point. Winning it is a different matter.

By Jon Allsop

The Lede

What the Video of Charlie Kirk’s Murder Might Do

Parents have less and less control over what their children see. Our children will likely understand history, and the world, very differently as a result.

By Jay Caspian Kang

The Lede

Eric Adams Slips Out the Side Door

The Mayor makes official what has been obvious for some time, and ends his reëlection campaign.

By Eric Lach

The Lede

The End of Israel’s Hostage Ordeal

After two years, Hamas has released the last twenty living hostages, beginning the difficult process of bringing a brutal war to an end.

By Ruth Margalit

The Lede

J.D. Vance, Charlie Kirk, and the Politics-as-Talk-Show Singularity

Broadcasting from the White House, the Vice-President seemed to complete the merger of politics and red-meat live streams—and to threaten more ominous crackdowns ahead.

By Andrew Marantz

The Lede

Donald Trump’s Firing of a Federal Prosecutor Crosses the Reddest of Lines

The dismissal of Erik Siebert sends yet another ominous message about the risks of refusing to do the President’s bidding, and the lengths to which he will go to punish perceived enemies.

By Ruth Marcus

The Lede

Is Donald Trump’s Sweeping Gaza Peace Plan Really Viable?

Many doubts prevail, but the deal is “political gold” for Benjamin Netanyahu either way.

By Robin Wright

The Lede

Can Progressive Mayors Redeem the Democratic Party?

Zohran Mamdani isn’t the only candidate challenging the status quo—and having fun doing it.

By Bill McKibben

A Reporter at Large

Have Cubans Fled One Authoritarian State for Another?

In the past few years, as many as two million people have escaped the island’s repressive regime and collapsing economy. Those who’ve made it to the U.S. face a new reckoning.

By Jon Lee Anderson

Fault Lines

The Illusion of Joe Manchin’s “Common Sense”

How an old cliché has been warped and weaponized in contemporary American politics.

By Jon Allsop

Sections

*   News
*   Books & Culture
*   Fiction & Poetry
*   Humor & Cartoons
*   Magazine
*   Crossword
*   Video
*   Podcasts
*   100th Anniversary
*   Goings On

More

*   Manage Account
*   Shop The New Yorker
*   Buy Covers and Cartoons
*   Condé Nast Store
*   Digital Access
*   Newsletters
*   Jigsaw Puzzle
*   RSS

*   About
*   Careers
*   Contact
*   F.A.Q.
*   Media Kit
*   Press
*   Accessibility Help
*   User Agreement
*   Privacy Policy
*   Your California Privacy Rights

© 2025 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. _The New Yorker_ may earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast.Ad Choices

Your Privacy Choices
