Title: 

URL Source: https://www.congress.gov/118/meeting/house/116936/witnesses/HHRG-118-HM09-Wstate-BensmanT-20240516.pdf

Published Time: Sat, 18 May 2024 01:27:05 GMT

Markdown Content:
1

Testimony of Todd Bensman 

Senior Fellow, Center for Immigration Studies; Former Manager, Counterterrorism 

Intelligence Texas Department of Public Safety Intelligence and Counterterrorism 

Division 

To the Subcommittee on Oversight , Investigations and Accountability 

United S tates House of Representatives 

House H omeland Security Committee 

For a Hearing Regarding 

“Chinese Immigration Over the U.S. Southwest Bo rder ”

May 16, 2024 

2:00 p.m. 

Rayburn House Office Building 

Washington, DC 20515  

> U.S. -bound Chinese national in Reynosa, Mexico .2023 photo by Todd Bensm an 2

Chairman Bishop , Ranking Member Ivey, and members of the subcommittee, 

thank you for the opportunity to testify and for holding this hearing about 

unprecedented torrent of illegal immigration over the U.S. Southwes t Land Border 

from nations adversarial to the United States , particularly the Communist Party -

led People ’s Republic of China. 

Before President Joe Biden ’s January 2021 inauguration, illicit travel from China 

usually amounted to single digits per month, in 20 19 and 2020 , b y five , seven or a 

couple of dozen apprehended in a ny given month . A bout 991 were encountered 

in 2018, 2,060 in 2019 before Covid , and 323 for all of 2020. 1

But in the three years sinc e the president ’s inauguration ending in March 2024, 

DHS ’s alluring quick -release policies resulted in more than 50,000 Border Patrol 

encounters with Chinese nationals , at escalating monthly rates surp assing 4,500 

and reaching nearly 6,000 during calendar year 2024 .2 More Chinese nationals are 

now crossing the Southwest border near San Diego than Mexican nationals. 3

Of those 50,000 Chinese immigrants who crossed illegally , more than 4 3,000 were 

classified as single adults. Most prefer red entering from Mexico ’s Baja State into 

California, about 3 5,000, with Texas crossings a distant second .

The initial catalyst for all of this was a Biden DHS policy that exempt ed them (and 

many other nationalities) from a Trump -era Covid -19 measure that requir ed 

Border Patrol to quickly expel them back into Mexico and , instead, quickly 

releas ed them into the American interior with “notices to report ” or “notices to 

appear .”4

This quick -release policy almost immediately stimulated historic volumes of all 

nationalities to invest in journeys to the Americ an land border , the most by far in 

U.S. history .

Th e ad hoc , honor -system release arrangement asked Chinese immigrants , a nd all 

other immigrants who received it , to voluntarily report later to Immigration and 

Customs Enforcement (ICE) offices in the city of their resettlement choice after 

they are served with a “Notice to Appear (NTA), the charging document in 

removal proceedings that often lead to defensive asylum petitions .

The appointments with ICE, however, became so severely backlogged in the 

months after the inauguration that appointment wait lists stretched for as long as 3

10 years, a highly desirable additional beacon for distant aspiring immigrants who 

knew the American government would grant them permission to work during 

the ir long wait s.5

To date, little credible evidence support s some theories that the People ’s

Li beration Army (PLA) has engineer ed or “weaponized ” all this flow to cloak a

command and controlled insertion of “military -aged ” plain -clothed army over the 

U.S. border among the economic immigrants to await future sabotage and attack 

order s from Beijing .6

Instead, m ost Chinese border crossers are economic opportunists lured to com e

now because Biden DHS policies guaranteed an upgrade to the internationally 

storied American lifestyle, an ability to send money home to family, and to escape 

Chinese Communi st Party (CCP) govern ance. 

These lifestyle -upgrade immigrants are not , however, entirely benig n. Throughout 

the borderlands can be found ample evidence of their fraud , deceit, and 

disrespect for U.S. law in the form of discarded and destroyed personal identity 

documents . These attest to intentions to defraud the U.S. asylum system so they 

can gain permission to stay permanently in America on false pretenses that they 

could find no other safe place a ft er departing China , as will be described in more 

detail below .

While this sort of mendacity falls short of a national -security threat , one is almost 

certainly afoot in the flow. 

An established pattern of Chinese espionage prosecutions in the United States in 

recent years – and current unclassified public intelligence community threat 

assessments predicting more such espionage – points to a high probability that 

the CCP sees the Southwe st border as a new , wide -open avenue of approach 

through which t o infiltrate its spies and intelligence operatives with far low er risk s

of detection than the traditional use of legal visas .

And has done so. None ha ve yet been discovered as of this date , but the CCP has 

al most certainly sent agents of espionage over the border and has co -opted 

others who crossed and will continue to do so for as long as the U.S. government 

reward s the effort with quick releases into the interior for years -long stays that 

are, essentially, permanent .4

U.S. polic ies that ena ble the threat 

> Discarded Chinese passports found at the Mexico -California border in San Diego County by local
> resident Cory Gautereaux

In addition to quick releases into the U.S. interior with work authorization , t he 

Biden DHS also i mplemented other highly desirable policies that , collectively, 

acted as security gua rantees for expensive investments in intercontinental 

journeys that asp iring immigrants likely would not previously have gambled. 

The administration reversed a prior administration return -to -Mexico policy that 

had deterred Chinese immigrants from making large travel investments . It sharply 

pared back, to historically low levels, the use of statutorily required detention and 

inter ior deportation s.7

If the broader world of aspiring immigrants learned of these policies and 

responded with investments for illicit journeys , responsible Chinese intelligence 

officials also viewed them as advantageous .

Perhaps non e of the policies would have pleased Chinese intelligence officials 

more than a Biden specific policy almost ta ilor -made for sending in agents at low 

detection risk .

In April 2023, the Biden DHS drastically reduced the robustness of vetting 

process es for Chinese illegal immigrants after they crossed the border, The Daily 

Caller reported based on a leaked Border Patrol “headquarters guidance .”85

Prior to the new guidance, Border Patrol agents might spend hours running a 

single Chinese illegal immigrant through 40 prepared questions designed to 

discern indicators of ties to the CCP or PLA . Positive findings would produc e

referrals for more in -depth interview s with the Border Patrol ’s Tactical Terrorism 

Response Team and possibly then to the FBI .

But th e 40 questions were slowing release s for overwhelming numbers of 

immigrants who were then pouring in from all over the world to take advantage of 

the quick -release policies . Th e new headquarters guidance , accordingly, instructed 

Border Patrol agents to reduce the questions to just five. Did the immigrant serve 

in the Chinese military, attend CCP -operated universities, and belong to a political 

party? 

But wh ile t he question culling may have fast -tracked the release s, newly arriving 

Chinese illegal immigrants , spies no doubt among them, learned to easily defeat 

the questions and mak e detection of problematic individuals just about 

impossible , acc ording to J.J. Carrell, a retired CBP deputy patrol agent in charge, in 

the Daily Caller report. 

With all these policies in place, Chinese leadership could not help but divine the 

ripest possible opportuniti es to bulk up its expanding espionage programs with a

labor force of well -trained paid government operatives , and also of economic 

immigrants who would be subject later to coerced government cooperation . A ny 

agents of espionage could now cross over the Southwest border at far less risk of 

detection than if they were to us e the legal visa routes .

Immigrants of many other nationalities also are irresistibly drawn by these same 

policies and pose various distinct threats to U.S. national interest s and security ,

such as 340 apprehended suspected Islamic terroris ts who were on the FBI ’s

terrorism watch list from 2021 to March 2024 . The policies render the border 

vulnerable to crossings by human rights abuser s might seek anonymous haven 

from prosecution, and organized crime operatives seeking new opportunities in 

America .9

But the question of adversarial spies entering via illegal border crossings is rarely 

part of much serious bipartisan public debate about the potential causal 

relationship between these policies and the espionage threat from adversarial 

nations .6

The China spy threat 

Many border -crossing illegal aliens hail from adversarial nation -states like Iran ,

Russia , Venezuela , Cuba and N icaragua , who se governments naturally would want 

to exploit this historically unprecedented period of border op enness to insert 

terrorist or intelligence operatives .

It is into this category of adversaries that China falls because of its long public 

record, as revealed in court prosecution s, of inserti ng bright, young military 

intelligence operatives – who attended China ’s military -controlled universities or 

had served China ’s military – into elite American universities and research 

institut es to steal cutting edge technology and to conduct other damaging 

economic espionage operations .10  The CCP inserted these operatives by having 

them expl oit lax vetting processes for legal U.S. visas . Once those visas were in 

hand, the operatives flew with permission into American airports with orders to 

exfiltrate stolen corporate trade secrets and sensitive military -use te chnology and 

research .11 

We know much about these operations because, in recent years, the FBI has 

prosecuted do zens of China ’s People ’s Liberation Army (PLA) spies who found this 

unguarded path through America ’s largely self -babysitting cultural exchange and 

student visa programs. 12 

One of many emblematic examples was 27 -year -old Chinese national Ji Chaoqun ,

now convicted in 2022 and sentenced in 2023 for acting in an espionage capacity 

as an un registered foreign agent. Chaoqun came to Chicago on an F -1 student visa 

in 2013 to study electrical engineering at the Illinois Institute of Technology. 13  He 

eventually enlisted in the U.S. Army Reserve under the Military Accessions Vital to 

the National Interest (MAVNI), a program that allows certain nonimmigrants to 

enlist and gain immigrant status and eventual citizenship. 

Chaoqun used his access to the Illinois school and U.S. military to clandestinely 

feed sensitive U.S. defense information , along with information identifying other 

Chinese nationals ripe for potential recruitment, to China ’s Ministry of State 

Security Chinese intelligence services, prosecutors alleged in a 2018 indictment. 

The FBI investigation showed he worked undercover from at least August 28, 

2013, to about Septe mber 2018 providing to Chinese intelligence background 7

check information on eight Chinese -American citizens for potential recruitment as 

spies , among them U.S. defense contractors. 14 

Separately from stealing defense -related intelligence , Chinese political repression 

operations have target ed perceived CCP opponents inside the United States in 

criminal ways .

Recent p ublished U.S. intelligence community threat assessments predict that 

China will not only continue these operations but also expand them in coming 

years . If they are correct , the operational expansions will require a bigger labor 

force of operatives .

Regardless of how Chinese operatives gain their entry into the United States – the 

intelligence community assessments do not address entry methods – the United 

States regards China as a clear strategic rival and adversary that plans to deploy 

agents of esp ionage , political influence , and dissident suppression operations 

inside the homeland in the coming years , one way or another . And find others 

already here that Chin ese intelligence agencies can recruit by carrot or stick .

The Biden adm inistration ’s own DHS Homeland Threat Assessment for 2024 , for 

instance, calls China “the most aggressive actor ” in U.S. -based espionage 

operations. It says China “will likely continue ” to “employ economic espionage ” to 

exfiltrate protected competitive technologies from American co rporations and 

steal useful intellectual property from U.S. research institutes and universities. 

But the DHS assessment also describes other disturbing Chinese agendas for 

which that country will need higher numbers of trusted or coerced operati ves 

inside the United States .15 

The Chinese government , for instance, will fi nd and “repress ” anti -regime 

opponents living and speaking out in America. To accomplish this mission, Chinese 

operatives will use “physical assault, threats, harassment a nd defamation, 

rend ition ” – kidnapping out of the country – “to suppress oppositional voices, ” the 

threat assessment continues. 16 

“Beijing has used a small number of secret, unsanctioned ‘police stations ’ inside 

the United States to identify, monitor, and harass dissidents ,” according to the 

2024 assessment .17  “Its global ‘Operation Fox Hunt ’ has sought the extradition of 8

Chinese di ssidents under false legal pretenses ” so they can be kidnapped and 

dealt with. 

Likewise, t he Office of the Director of National Intelligence (O DNI) predict ed in its 

2023 assessment that China would pressure perceived political opponents in the 

United States to come on board with its programs .18  The ODNI ’s most recent 

March 2024 assessment also sees a concerted Chinese expansion of its growing 

agenda of nefarious activity that includes monitoring political security targets 

abroad .19 

“China will continue to expand its global intelligence posture to advance the CCP ’s

ambitions, challenge U.S. national security and global influence, que ll perceived 

regime threats worldwide, and steal trade secrets, ” the report concluded. 

“Officials of the PRC intelligence services will …expand their use of monitoring, 

data collection, and advanced analytic capabilities against political security targets 

beyond China ’s borders. ”20 

China does not shy away from using coercive measures to recruit otherwise 

disloyal or dis inclined Chinese nationals as informants and operatives. In coercing 

“volunteers ” into its inf ormant ’s stable , China ’s intelligence operatives would find 

plenty of prospects among the 50,000 young economic immigrants who have 

already entered the United States illegally from Mexico. 

“As part of efforts to stifle anti -Beijing criticism, the PRC monitors overseas 

Chi nese students for dissident views, mobilizes Chinese student associations to 

conduct activities on behalf of Beijing and influences research by U.S. academics 

and think tank experts, ” th e 2023 assessment stated, in part. 

The CCP can mus cle cooperation f rom Chinese nationals who are in the United 

States on approved visas by threatening to deny or cancel those visas, blocking 

access to China ’s archives and resources, and disrupting or withdrawing funding 

for exchange programs , the ODNI report states .

But one method is mentioned that could be handily used to recruit the recent 

Chinese border crossers as informants and state thieves .

The ODNI report noted that it could recruit in the United States by “pressuring 

family members in China .”9

Th e report offers no de tails as to what forms of coercion such “pressuring ” would 

take. But good guessing requires little imagination .

No objecti ve observer of the current laxity in U.S. border enforcement could 

reasonably discount the all -but -confirmed certainty that China ’s intelligence 

services have discerned , perhaps even gleefully, that the border is a n ideal 

gateway , given th at 50,000 of its citizens easily gained unfettered entry at the U.S. 

border .

For one thing, the Chinese government must provide exit stamp s to all citizens 

who travel abroad, whether for tourism , business, or educatio n, and can track 

required ree ntry stamps upon their return .

Yet the Chinese government continues to provide passport exit stamps despite 

obvious U.S. and international report s about escalating numbers of Chinese 

crossing the U.S. -Mexico border , which Beijing could not possibly have miss ed .

Would Chin a keep stamping passports as cloaking for placing espiona ge and 

political suppression operatives ? The answer is, of course , yes . 

> AChinese exit stamp found in a discarded China passport in San Diego County, Cal ifornia.
> Source: 10

Unusual d ispositions of Chinese immigrants feed both probable and less 

probable threat scenarios 

It is easy to understand how unsupported and improbable theories could arise 

that the CCP is infiltrating a clandestine , plain -clothed army into the United States 

over its Southwest border . While the army -infiltration scenario see ms unlikely, it is 

more likely that a relative few espionage agents would blend in among the regular 

Chinese economic migrants and to a void detecti on for years . In this they would 

find as useful broader characteristics about Chinese immigrants that – eventually -

would ease their eventual gravitation into positions of intelligence value at 

American universities , research institutes, corporations, and government .

In my own encounters with them in Mexico, U.S. -bound Chinese travelers present 

behaviors and attributes that are highly unique compared to almost all other 

nationalities of people other researchers and I have encountered moving with 

them on the migration trails in Central America and Mexico .

For example, w hile most national s show little reluctance to discuss their routes, 

costs, reasons for emigrating, and personal circumstances , Chinese immigrants 

almost never will . Universally, t hey seem coached to not share information or to 

be photographed and also in what to tell American officials much later after illegal 

crossings .

While other groups of nationals often include individuals of all age s and “family 

units, ” Chinese immigrants tend to be young, fit single , educated men and women 

in their 20s and 30s. Many may be ideally suited to eventually work their way into 

research institutes, military contracting industries, and the military itself as did Ji 

Chaoqun with his initial student visa .

Reporters and citizen journalists who have encountered hundreds of these young 

Chinese adult immigrants on the Latin American routes over the past several years 

and tr ied to interview them using cell phone interpretation apps , as I have, 

describe the m as almost universally well -educated , well -resourced , and well -

dressed .

They are generally able to afford excellent equipment for occasionally necessary 

camping and resources to stay at higher -end hotels along the way . Many can 

afford air passage to countries that accept their passports, such as Mexico , to 11 

avoid difficult stretches of trail and to reach cities in closer proximity to the U.S. 

border .21 

Ben Bergquam, a political ly conservative activist -journalist has traveled 

extensively among Chinese immigrants crossing through the roadless Darien Gap 

jungle passage between Colombia and Panama. He said he has spoken to 

hundreds and seen thousands of them. 

“The Chinese all have money. There are no poor refugees coming from China, ”

Bergquam told me. “They are all wealthy. ”

And a s in my own experience s with them , Chinese travelers also usually refuse to 

answer Be rgquam ’s questions. 

“Most won ’t dialogue. They ’ll say they ’re from China but not much more, ”

Bergquam told me. 

Many will turn sharply away from Bergquam ’s photography , or even sprint away to 

avoid being photographed. This is highly unusual behavior compared to most 

immigrants on the trail. One rare English -speaking Chinese immig rant I met in 

Matamoros in May 2023 turned his back on me when I tried to take his photo and 

walked quickly away, ignoring my requests to talk to him. 

Th e resources and shyness with strangers are not, of course, evidence of Chinese -

government support for the travel. But the se behaviors could just as well indicat e

CCP financial backing and detection -evasion training for at least some of th ose 

who would be sent for espionage pur poses , who would find use in adopting the se 

same prevailing behaviors .

Some anecdotal indicators also suggest support. Bergquam recounted that some 

Chinese he encountered who did speak to him told him they knew with high 

certaint y that Chinese government agents were in the flow , although this was, of 

course, impossible to indepen dently verify .

Lies along circuitous international trail s

During my own experience as a n intelligence analyst for the Texas Department of 

Public Safety between 2009 and 2018 , I learned that Chinese organized crime 

syndicates known as “snakeheads ” brought most illegal immigrants in over the 

border. They also coached their immigrants to never speak to strangers and to 12 

hew closely to provided and almost perfectly identi cal , cookie -cutter asylum claim 

narratives after they came into the custody of U.S. federal agents. 

Because the pathways are so heavily w orn in this mass migration event over the 

past three -plus years , most Chinese immigrants can self -propel their routes based 

on mobile phone app messag ing rooms brimming with credible journey 

information left by th e thousands who have gone before .22 

They also can rely on trail information and coaching from non -governmental 

organizations set up and funded by t he United Nations and U.S. State Department 

in almost every transit country from South America to Mexico to facilitate the 

mass migration .23 

Th ese circumstances , of course, combine with Biden government border policies, 

to create an ease of entry and travel for spies just as useful ly to the more common 

economic -lifestyle upgraders en route to the U.S. border. 

Before Chinese immigrants can tap into th ese routing instructions, they must first 

acquire a Chinese -government exit visa featuring their first lies ; they will claim to 

Chinese customs officials that they are traveling for tourism . In 2022 and 2023, 

Chinese e conomic -lifestyle immigrants could easily pass this tourism -travel lie off 

because the Chinese government has allowed ma ny millions of Chinese citizens to 

travel abroad for tourism annually for many year s.24 

South America has proven a popular destination for Chinese tourism , especially 

the coastal nation of Ecuador, which offers the dual benefit of not requiring tourist 

visa s for China ’s citizens and proximity to the Darien Gap trail between next -door 

Colombia and Panama.  25 

The government of Ecuador its elf offers the perfect Chinese exit visa cover story .

For the past decade, the country ’s Ministry of Tourism ha s mounted advertising 

campaigns encouraging Chinese tourists to visit the Galapagos Islands. 26  They can 

also claim business travel to Ecuador following the 2023 conclusion of a free trade 

agreement with China. 27 

Before and after arriving in Ecuador, Chinese nationals might spend between 

$15,000 and $30,000 to book their own flights, taxis, and buses for various legs of 

the trips , Bergquam and others who have interviewed Chinese immigrants tell me .

They will hire short -distance local smugglers (also known as “coytotes ”) for certain 13 

limited legs of the journey when necessary , such as in Mexico, rather than to 

purchase departure -to -destination smuggling packages from Chinese crime 

syndicates .

Bergquam has found and posted to social media video advertisements from local 

smuggling groups aimed at Chinese travelers , w hich portray those who went 

before as enjoying a kind of adventure vacation. But he said the Chinese 

government h as grown more skeptical recently about claims of planned tourism in 

Ecuador. 

Passports found abandoned on the 

American side of the border detail 

the contours of winding international 

journeys the Chinese more recently 

claim as their new tourism 

destinations, from which they still 

end up tak ing flights to South 

America and, increasingly, straight 

into Mexico .

These stamps show the Chinese who 

ended up at the U.S. border first 

visited Japan, Sri Lanka, the Kin gdom 

of Bahrain and other Gulf States .

Some show that Chinese nationals 

are flying directly into Mexico , which 

requires a comparatively elaborate 

but not unattainable tourist visa 

application for Chinese citizens . Other 

discarded trash on the California side 

of the Mexican border show that they 

can take flights directly to Tijuana just 

across from San Diego.  

> Kin gdom of Bahrain passport stamp found in a discarded Chinese
> passport recovered at the California -Mexic o border . Courtesy of
> San Diego resident Cory Gautereaux

14     

> Japa n visa found in Chinese passport discarded at the California -Mexico border
> Mexico tourist visa stamp found in Chinese passport abandoned at the California -Mexico border and provided courtesy of San
> Diego resident Cory Gautereaux

Other evidence s uggests that some Chinese border crossers travel first – but 

briefly – to other popular tourist destinations for Chinese , in Southeast Asia but 

that the “tourists ” end up in Ecuador within a few days to begin their journey to 

the United States .15 

An abandoned cell phone found discarded among documents in San Diego County 

contained details of one such journey by a Chinese immigrant who kept 

meticulous track of his December 7- January 3, 2023 travels , often using “selfi e”

photos of himself in easy -to -iden tify coun tries along the way . Within a month of 

leaving China, the man was in San Diego County . Based on data within the phone, 

an estimated total trip cost to the Chinese immigrant ranged from $6,000 to 

$9,000, though reportedly Chinese do the entire trip for approximately $3,500. 

The phone shows the immigrant in Bangkok , Thailand on December 7 ; and three 

days later in Cas ablanca, Morocco .28 

While In Morocco, the Chinese traveler took a photo of someone else ’s screen 

listing detailed instructions in Chinese from Ecuador through Colombia and the 

Darien Gap into Central America , then Mexic o using guides, buses and taxis for 

which prices are listed. These instructions directed travelers to fly from Huatulco, 

Mexico in Oaxaca State just northwest of the Guatemala border by roughly nine 

hour s, directly to Tijuana across from San Diego, where most Chinese immigrants 

have been crossing illegally. 16 

Compiled from recovered cell phone of Chinese illegal alien by private researcher Heather K aiser Kent , a former U.S. Army 

in telligence officer of 11 years 17      

> Figure 1Compiled by independent researcher Heather Kaiser Kent, a former U.S. Army intelligence officer of 11 years

He seemed to t ake these instructions to heart. From Morocco on December 14, 

the man departed for Ecuador on an air route that took him on transit through 

Paris and Panama City, landing in Guay aquil , Ecuador . Then, he seemed to 

generally follow the plan on the screen sho t of travel instructions he saved while 

in Morocco .

He flew to Bog ota, Colombia and then traveled to a spot where he could then s et 

out on foot through the D arien Gap on December 18. By December 23, he was 

through the gap and in a UN camp at San Vicente , P an ama known as “China 

Camp. 

Panamanian government buses likely transported him to the Costa Rica border . He 

found his way to the Nicaraguan border, where he would have had to hire 18 

smugglers to get through Honduras and Guatemala. By January 3, he was flying 

from the Huatulco International Airport in southern Mexico to Tijuana and crossed 

illegally into an area of San Diego County called Jacumba Hot Springs , where large 

numbers of Chinese immigrants are known to cross . His trip across South America 

from Guayaquil, Ecuador to Tijuana, Mexico took roughly three weeks. 

Suggestions of widespread U.S. asylum fraud by Chinese immigrants 

Aside from questions about Chinese spies among them, lifestyle upgrade 

immigrants from China appear to routi nely engage in asylum fraud, as evidenced 

by thousands of discarded identity documents and passports they carried over the 

border with them but did not want to fall into the hands of Border Patrol agents, 

who would log them into each immigrant ’s permanent record, called an “alien file 

(A-file ).”

Chinese immigrants are hardly the only foreign nationals who destroy or abandon 

passports and third -country residency cards. Haitians , Venezuelans and Africans 

frequently attempt to destroy and abandon their cards before they meet up with 

Border Patrol agents , as I have frequently reported finding them on the banks of 

the Rio Grande .29 19  

> Haitian identity cards collected in 2021 from the Rio Grande bank in Acuna, Mexico in September 2021. Photo by Todd Bensman

The main reason foreign nationals crossing illegally discard these documents is 

that they contain information that could and likely would compromise a future 

U.S. asylum claim. 

Once they have crossed, the Chinese nationals present themselves to Border 

Patrol agents for quick processing into the United States that include stated 

intentions to claim “credible fear of return ” to China for eventual asylum petitions 

based on government persecution. But U.S. adjudicators and judges often d ecline 

claims if they learn the petitioner had been living safely and securely in third 20 

countries, or passed through them without claiming asylum there , so called 

“asylum shopping. ” The immigrants , accordingly, try to destroy the ir identity 

documents by pulling out passport pages and burning them. 

Many of the identity cards and passport stamps discarded by Chinese immigrants 

at the border show that they had traveled through multiple safe , asylum -granting 

countries where they could easily have sought protection, and both did so and 

also did not do so .

In fact, some of these discarded documents are Mexican temporary residency 

cards, which amounts to a Mexic an asylum grant . Mexico has endeavored in 

recent years to require illegal immigrants entering it from Guatemala to apply for      

> Destroyed identity documents recovered in San Diego near the Mexico border depicting
> Chinese national swho entered illegally and did not want Border Patrol to recover them.
> Photos provided courtesy of San Diego resident Cory Gautereaux

21 

Mexican asylum cards as a precondition to freely departi ng and traveling and 

travel ing north from the southern Mexico states that border Guatemala .    

> Adiscarded but intact Mexican temporary residency card obtained in southern Mexico as a condition of northward travel, found
> on the California side of the Me xican border would make this Chinese citizen ineligible for US asylum if Border Patrol found and
> logged it .

Chinese immigrants discard the se documents in preparation for lying to American 

authorities and destroying evidence as to where they have been so that they can 

eventually seek asylum in the United States , especially proof that they already had 

asylum in Mexico, which would have to accept their deportations .

Conclusion 

Just as with the millions of other illegal immigrants , Biden administration quick -

release policies have narcotically drawn unprecedented numbers of Chinese 

nationals to illegally cross the U.S. Southwest land border. Many will commit 

asylum fraud here .

But the se policies also have created ideal conditions for the CCP to send spies and 

political agents into the United States , where they will eventually position 

themselves or recruit other recent crossers to carry out a clear -cut Chinese 22 

st rategic agenda to steal military -use and industrial technology or to conduct 

political suppression operations against Chinese -American citizens and legal 

residents.  

> 1

U.S. Bo rder Patrol Nati onwide Apprehensions by Citizenship and Sector  FY 2007 -20 19  

> 2

U.S. Customs and B order Protection “Nationwide Encounters ” website  filtered in Region for “Southwest Land Border, ” in “U.S. 

Border Patrol ” Component, and “People ’s Republic of China ” Citizenship, accessed May 8, 2024.  

> 3

Melissa Koenig, “More Chinese migrants now crossing San Diego border than Mexican nation als : report, ” 23 

February 2024.  

> 4

Elliot Spagat, “Border Patrol paroles migrants to avoid massive overcrowding ,” Associated Press, 23 June 2022.  

> 5

Elliot Spagat, “Immigrants waiting 10 years in US just to get a court date ,” Associated Press, 26 April 2023; Eric 

Feldman, “Migrants get appointments nearly a decade away to meet with federal officials, ” Spectrum News NY1, 31 

May 2023,  https://ny1.com/nyc/all -boroughs/news/2023/05/30/migrants -get -appointments -nearly -a-decade -

away -to -meet -with -federal -officials  

> 6

“Is China Sneaking Military Personnel into the U.S. Via Border? What We know ,” Newsweek Magazine, 16 June 2023 ; Philip 

Bump, “The new border fearmongering: China is ‘building an army ’ in the U.S. ’, The Washington Post, 4 April 2024 . 

> 7

Jessica Vaughan, “ICE Records Confirm Steep Decline in Deportation s,” Center for Immigration Studies, 17 May 

2022 ; Jessica Vaughan, “Deportations Plummet Under Biden Enforcement Policies ,” 6 December 2021.  

> 88

Philip Lenczy cki, “Biden Admin Watered Down V etting Process for Chinese Illegal Immigrants, Email Shows ,” 2

January 2024.  

> 9

Todd Bensma n, “Terrorists Welcome , chronic counterterrorism lapses at the border demand investigation and 

congressional intervention ,” The American Mind , 22 April 2024; Todd Bensman , “Are African War Criminals in the 

Mass Migration Throngs Crossing Biden ’s Open Border? ” Townhall, 25 October, 2022; Todd Bensman, “Ge neral 

Dragon Master, Jungle Jabbah, and Moses, ” Center for Immigration Studies, 14 September 2022; Todd Bensman, 

“Notes on Ukrainian War Refugees Reaching the U.S. Southern Border ,” Center for Immigration Studies, 16 March 

2022 . 

> 10

Bruce Golding, “Not just balloons: Here ’s how China spies on the US ,” The New York Post, 5 February 2023.  

> 11

Alex Jos ke and Charlie Lyons Jones, “How China Uses It s Universities to Spy on America ,” The National Interest, 

29 November 2019 ; “Visiting Stanford University Researcher Charged with Visa Fraud ,” U.S. Department of Justice 

press release, 20 July 2020; Todd Bensman, “Joe Biden Just Condemned America to More Chinese Espionage – and 

Worse, ” The American Interest, 18 July 2021.  

> 12

Todd Bensman , “Joe Biden Just Condemned America to More Chinese Espionage – and Worse ,” The National 

Interest, 18 July 2021.  

> 13

“Chinese National Sentenced to Eight Years for Acting within the United States as an Unregistered Agent of the 

People ’s Republic of China ,” U.S. Department of Justice press release, 25 January 2023.  

> 14

“Chinese National Convicted of Acting W ithing the United States as an Unregistered Agent of the People ’s 

Republic of China ,” U. S. Department of Justice press release, 26 September 2022.  

> 15

Homeland Threat Assessment 2024 , Department of Homeland Security Office of Intelligence and Analysis , September 2023.  

> 16

Ibid ; p . 7 

> 17

Ibid ; p . 7 

> 18

Annual Threat Assessment of the U.S. Intelligence Community , Office of the Director of National Intelligence, p. 11, February 

2023.  

> 19

Annual Threat Assessment of the U.S. Intelligence Community , Office of the Director of National Intelligence, p. 7, March 

2024.  

> 20

Ibid; p 12.  

> 21

Author interviews with independent content producers who have worked extensively in Colombia , Panama and 

Mexico and have met with thousands of Chinese immigrants. These include Michael Yon, Ben Be rgquam, Chuck 

Holton, and Oscar “El Blue ” Ramirez among others.  

> 22

Xio Yu, Shih -Wei Chou, Zhang Zhen, et. al; “Trek North: Coming to America on Foot ,” Voice of America series Part 

2, no date provided. 23  

> 23

Author interviews with independent content producers who have worked extensively in Colombia , Panama and 

Mexico and have met with thousands of Chinese immigrants. These include Michael Yon, Ben Be rgquam, Chuck 

Holton, and Oscar “El Blue ” Ramirez among others.  

> 24

K Oanh Ha, “An Influx of Chinese Tourists Is Coming to a Country Near You ,” Bloomb erg New s, 1 May 2024.  

> 25

“Ecuadorian visa for Chinese citizens ,” Embassies.net, accessed May 10, 2024 ; Xiao Yu, “Some Chinese,  Alarmed 

by Xi ’s Policies, Seek New Lives in Ecuador ,” Voice of America News, date unknown . 

> 26

“Ecuador wants to attract more Chinese tourists ,” Cuenca highlife , 2 January 2014; “Ecuador Welcomes Chinese 

Tourists ,” TeleSUR , 29 F ebruary 2016.  

> 27

Francisco Vazquez, “Ecuador and China Conclude Free Trade Agreement Negotiations ,” 5 January 2023 .          

> 28 Phone recovered by Cory Gautereaux and analyzed by private researcher Heather K aiser Kent , a former U.S. Army intelligence
> officer of 11 years, for Todd Bensman . Contact: heatherkaiser@protonmail.com ; substack
> https://substack.com/@heatherusa?r=20nu7u&utm_medium=ios&utm_source=profile .
> 29

Todd Bensman  posting on Twitter (X ), 22 September 2021.
