Title: Attachment_01.pdf

URL Source: https://cnpa.com/cja2021/Print/2021_California_Journalism_Awards___Print_Division/General/01_General_Excellence_(WB)/First_Place_San_Francisco_Business_Times_1/Attachment_01.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 16 May 2022 22:16:33 GMT

Number of Pages: 54

Markdown Content:
INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO 

# UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER 

# 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 

# BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY 

# AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA 

# BAY AREA 

## The San Francisco Business Times The San Francisco Business Times and Silicon Valley Business Journal and Silicon Valley Business Journal present the region’s most innovative present the region’s most innovative young entrepreneurs in our new young entrepreneurs in our new Bay Area Inno. Bay Area Inno. PAGE 21 

SAN FRANCISCO BUSINESS TIMES 

September 1723, 2021 Vol. 36, No. 10, $10.00 275 Battery St. Suite 600 San Francisco, CA 94111 

BREAKING NEWS ONLINE 

SanFranciscoBusinessTimes.com 

ON FACEBOOK, TWITTER AND INSTAGRAM 

@SFBusinessTimes 

DAILY EMAIL UPDATES 

SanFranciscoBusinessTimes.com/newsletters 

# r

EAST BAY BIOTECH FIRMS, EMPLOYERS AND CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS PAGES 28, 30, 33 

The Koi Nation has proposed a resort and casino on tribal land it has claimed in Wine Country. 

BAY AREA BRIEF, 4 

BIG BET IN SONOMA 

Can San Franciso reinvent itself yet again? This central SoMa office developer thinks it can. 

STRUCTURES, 8 

VOTE OF CONFIDENCE 

The very high-end Rosewood will operate the hotel in the district’s newest tower. 

HOSPITALITY, 14 

TRANSBAY BLOOM INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO 

# UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER 

# 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 

# BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY 

# AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA 

# BAY AREA 

## The San Francisco Business Times The San Francisco Business Times and Silicon Valley Business Journal and Silicon Valley Business Journal present the region’s most innovative present the region’s most innovative young entrepreneurs in our new young entrepreneurs in our new Bay Area Inno. Bay Area Inno. PAGE 21 

SAN FRANCISCO BUSINESS TIMES 

September 1723, 2021 Vol. 36, No. 10, $10.00 275 Battery St. Suite 600 San Francisco, CA 94111 

BREAKING NEWS ONLINE 

SanFranciscoBusinessTimes.com 

ON FACEBOOK, TWITTER AND INSTAGRAM 

@SFBusinessTimes 

DAILY EMAIL UPDATES 

SanFranciscoBusinessTimes.com/newsletters 

# r

EAST BAY BIOTECH FIRMS, EMPLOYERS AND CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS PAGES 28, 30, 33 

The Koi Nation has proposed a resort and casino on tribal land it has claimed in Wine Country. 

BAY AREA BRIEF, 4 

BIG BET IN SONOMA 

Can San Franciso reinvent itself yet again? This central SoMa office developer thinks it can. 

STRUCTURES, 8 

VOTE OF CONFIDENCE 

The very high-end Rosewood will operate the hotel in the district’s newest tower. 

HOSPITALITY, 14 

TRANSBAY BLOOM 2 SAN FRANCISCO BUSINESS TIMES 

CONTACT US 

For a complete list of our staff and their contact information, please turn to 

Page 50. 

NEWS TIPS 

Contact reporters or send news tips to Managing Editor Jim Gardner at jgardner@ bizjournals.com. 

CORRECTIONS 

Fair and accurate coverage is at the heart of our mission. We will promptly print corrections of substantive errors. If you believe incorrect or unfair information has ap-peared in the SFBT, contact Managing Editor Jim Gardner. 

SUBSCRIBE 

To make changes, get help or start a new subscription please go to bizjour-nals.com/sanfrancis-co/subscribe or call 8668533661. 

EVENTS 

SFBT hosts net-working, award and education events throughout the year. View the schedule and register at bizjournals.com/ sanfrancisco/event. 

ADVERTISE 

For information, rates, editorial calendar and specs contact Michael Fernald at (415) 288-4942 or mfernald@ bizjournals.com. 

The entire contents of this newspaper are copyrighted 2021 by the San Francisco Business Times, a publication of Business Journal Publica-tions Inc., with all rights reserved. Reproduction or use, without permission, of editorial or graphic content in any manner is prohibited. Single Copy: $10, Bay Area Book of Lists: $81. Back issues are available for $10. Pe-riodicals Postage Paid at San Francisco, California, and at additional mailing ofices. The San Francisco Business Times (ISSN 08900337) is published weekly by Business Jour-nal Publications Inc. 275 Battery St., Suite 600, San Francisco CA 94111. Subscriptions are 1-year print and digital, $150, 1-year digital, $115. 

Postmaster: Please send address changes to: SanFrancisco Business Times, 275 Battery St., Suite 600, San Francisco CA 94111 

San Francisco Business Times is a publication of: 

American City Business Journals ,120 W. Morehead St., Charlotte, N.C. 28202 Whitney Shaw, CEO Ray Shaw, Chairman (19892009) 

INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO 

UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER 

25 25 25 25 25 25 25 

BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY 

AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA 

BAY AREA  

> The San Francisco Business Times The San Francisco Business Times and Silicon Valley Business Journal and Silicon Valley Business Journal present the region’s most innovative present the region’s most innovative young entrepreneurs in our new young entrepreneurs in our new Bay Area Inno. Bay Area Inno. PAGE 21
> SAN FRANCISCO BUSINESS TIMES
> September 1723, 2021 Vol. 36, No. 10, $10.00 275 Battery St. Suite 600 San Francisco, CA 94111
> BREAKING NEWS ONLINE
> SanFranciscoBusinessTimes.com
> ON FACEBOOK, TWITTER AND INSTAGRAM
> @SFBusinessTimes
> DAILY EMAIL UPDATES
> SanFranciscoBusinessTimes.com/newsletters

r

> EAST BAY BIOTECH FIRMS, EMPLOYERS AND CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS PAGES 28, 30, 33
> The Koi Nation has proposed a resort and casino on tribal land it has claimed in Wine Country.
> BAY AREA BRIEF, 4
> BIG BET IN SONOMA
> Can San Franciso reinvent itself yet again? This central SoMa off ice developer thinks it can.
> STRUCTURES, 8
> VOTE OF CONFIDENCE
> The very high-end Rosewood will operate the hotel in the district’s newest tower.
> HOSPITALITY, 14
> TRANSBAY BLOOM

GOOD WEEK, BAD WEEK WHERE THE PROPTECHS ARE 

A new report from real estate irm JLL shows San Francisco and Silicon Valley are among the top locations for proptech startups. When combined, we’d actually top this list. Proptechs are deined as technology companies that cater to all aspects of the real estate industry. 

ABOUT THE COVER 

Inno Under 25: You know all those talented youngserts who will be your boss one day? We are featuring 12 as part of our new Bay Area Inno. Read more about the platform on Page 22, and the proiles start on 23. 

# BAY AREA BAY AREA BRIEF BRIEF 

Your primer for the week in Bay Area business news Your primer for the week in Bay Area business news 

TAHOE SKI RESORT PLAYS RENAME GAME 

Iconic ski resort Squaw Valley, which hosted the 1960 Winter Olympics, has o icially changed its name to Palisades Tahoe. The new name was adopted because of the history of the word “squaw” as a derogatory term for Native American women. The initial decision to rename the resort came after the George Floyd protests last year. 

MILLS COLLEGE TO LIVE ON VIA MERGER 

The Board of Trustees of Oakland’s Mills College approved a merger with Northeastern University in Boston. The partnership, expected to take effect next July, will make the historic women’s college a co-ed a iliate of Northeastern. A group of alumnae iled an ultimately unsuccessful suit to stop the deal. 

RECOLOGY ADMITS FRAUD AND BRIBERY 

Under an agreement with the DOJ, subsidiaries of trash disposal company Recology admitted to conspiring to bribe disgraced Public Works Director Mohammed Nuru and pay $36M to the U.S. Treasury and San Francisco. The company also agreed to revamp its structure to ensure compliance. 

CALIFORNIA PASSES U.S. COVID TEST 

Alone among the 50 states, California no longer has o icially “high” rates of Covid transmission. That’s according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. With Puerto Rico, California advanced to the second-lowest of the CDC’s four tiers; all 49 other states remain stuck in the bottom category. 

500 HEALTH WORKERS SET TO STRIKE 

Citing understa ing, poor working conditions and labor practices, more than 500 health care workers in the East Bay voted to strike in October. Employees at Sutter Delta Medical Center in Antioch and John Muir Behavioral Health Center in Concord say conditions are worsening and management has ignored concerns. 

FIVE THINGS YOU NEED TO KNOW TEXAS TWOSTEP 

Never shy about wearing his convictions on his corporate sleeve, Marc Benioff has waded into the furor over Texas’ new abortion law, saying Salesforce will relocate any employee and family who wants to leave Texas as a result of the new restrictions. 

THEY MIGHT BE GIANT 

Expected to struggle for mediocrity this year, the S.F. Giants have excelled, clinching a playoff spot on the earliest date in their history and adopting a new slogan that makes it clear where they want this ride to end: “Built for October.” 

OFFTARGET AGAIN 

Robinhood Markets is kicking off a nationwide marketing campaign designed to turn more college students into Robinhood traders. College kids and day trading — what could possibly go wrong? 

London Silicon Valley Chicago San Francisco Berlin Delhi New York Barcelona Madrid Paris Helsinki Singapore Los Angeles Bengaluru Amsterdam SOURCE: JLL, Crunchbase, 2021 

458 412 363 234 188 178 109 104 92 91 90 90 89 84 83 

RETAIL 

San Francisco is launching a pro-gram offering small retailers grants of up to $2,000 to repair damage to their windows or storefronts. The program comes amid a wave anecdotal evidence of an increase in vandalism and highly publicized thefts across the city, from neighbor-hood Walgreens to Louis Vuitton in Union Square, fueling demands from businesses and residents for more accountability for thieves. Mayor London Breed and Super-visor Gordon Mar announced the news Sept. 15 in front of Parkside shoe retailer Footprint, whose owner Michael Hsu described his store falling victim to a middle-of-the-night burglary in February that opened the door for opportunistic looters. “During the pandemic we’ve seen a surge of vandalism and burglaries in particular targeting neighborhood businesses,” Mar said at the press conference in Footprint. “In the Sun-set most of the businesses impacted were Asian- and immigrant-owned.” Businesses with annual gross rev-enue under $8 million will be eligible for grants of either $1,000 or $2,000 depending on the cost of repair to “deliberate” physical damages done to stores. Any incidents since July 1, 2020, are eligible. Recipients can use the funds to enhance security and crime prevention measures such as replacement locks, security gates, alarm system repair, replacing windows or ixing etching or damage, and other uses. 

— Alex Barreira 

# NEW S.F. GRANTS WILL FIX STORES HIT BY VANDALS Wells defends progress 

it has made in response 

to call for splitting it up 

# BREAKING UP IS HARD TO DO 

BANKING 

BY MARK CALVEY 

mcalvey@bizjournals.com 

Wells Fargo defended its progress in 

rebuilding its risk and control mea -

sures after a call by Sen. Elizabeth 

Warren, D-Mass., for the Federal 

Reserve to break up the bank. 

“Meeting our own expectations 

for risk management and controls — 

as well as our regulators’ — remains 

Wells Fargo’s top priority,” the bank 

said in a press release Sept. 14, hours 

after reports of Warren’s letter to Fed 

Chairman Jerome Powell emerged. 

“We are a different bank today than 

we were five years ago because 

we’ve made significant progress.” 

The senator’s letter follows reg -

ulatory actions by the Office of the 

Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) 

fining Wells Fargo an additional 

$250 million this month over the 

bank’s lending practices. It follows a 

$500 million fine the OCC issued in 

the wake of Wells Fargo’s 2016 fake 

accounts scandal, in which employ -

ees opened 2 million accounts with -

out customer authorization. 

Wells Fargo highlighted changes 

it has made, including: 

R Splitting three business groups 

into five. 

R Creating four new enterprise 

functions designed to provide 

greater oversight and transparency. 

R Overhauling its top leadership, 

GETTY IMAGES 

Federal banking regulators 

are seeking millions 

of dollars in financial 

penalties against three 

former executives of Wells 

Fargo’s main banking 

subsidiary in connection 

with the fake accounts 

scandal. 

A civil trial began 

Sept. 13 before an 

administrative law judge 

in Sioux Falls, South 

Dakota, with the Office 

of the Comptroller of 

the Currency pursuing 

claims against Claudia 

Russ Anderson, former 

community bank group 

risk officer; David Julian, 

former chief auditor; and 

Paul McLinko, former 

executive audit director 

of Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. 

The subsidiary holds the 

bank’s retail network and 

other assets 

“The failures of 

these three individuals 

allowed sales practices 

misconduct to continue 

for years, affecting millions 

of bank customers, 

and thousands of bank 

employees,” the OCC said 

in a press release. 

The OCC seeks 

$10 million from Russ 

Anderson, and a ban from 

the banking industry; 

$7 million from Julian; 

and $1.5 million from 

McLinko. 

— Jim Gardner 

AIRLINES 

PENALTIES 

United Airlines is preparing for a 

possible recovery in European travel, 

with new and expanded service from 

SFO in the months ahead. 

San Francisco International Air -

port’s dominant carrier has resumed 

selling tickets for daily nonstop flights 

from SFO to Paris to begin flying on 

Dec. 1. The resumption of United’s 

SFO to Paris flight signals good news 

for Bay Area travelers since this non -

stop flight has been suspended since 

the height of the pandemic in March 

2020. And it’s just one of several 

European flights United expects to 

initiate or resume in coming months. 

United is also selling tickets for 

a nonstop flight to Dublin — a new 

# ANTICIPATING RECOVERY, UNITED MOVES 

# TO RESUME KEY EUROPEAN ROUTES 

# REGULATORS 

# SEEK MORE 

# FINES FROM 

# WELLS EXECS 

route for the carrier that was origi -

nally scheduled to launch in summer 

2020 but never got off the ground 

due to the pandemic. The SFO-to-

Dublin daily flight is now available for 

sale in United’s schedule, with service 

starting March 26, 2022. 

Meanwhile, it is also increasing 

capacity on two additional European 

routes, going from one daily nonstop 

currently from SFO to London Heath -

row to two daily nonstops, starting 

March 4, 2022. The carrier is going 

from one daily nonstop from SFO to 

Frankfurt to two daily nonstops on 

that route, starting Feb. 11, 2022. 

with 10 of the 17 operating commit -

tee members new to Wells Fargo. 

R Establishing an office of con -

sumer practices and a team fo -

cused on sales practices oversight. 

Wells also pointed to regulato -

ry actions over the last two years 

that it also sees as signs of its prog -

ress, including the termination this 

month of the CFPB consent order 

issued in September 2016 regard -

ing improper sales practices. 

“The expiration of the CFPB’s 

2016 consent order is representa -

tive of the progress we are making,” 

CEO Charlie Scharf said in a state -

ment Sept. 9. “We have done sub -

stantial work designed to ensure 

that the conduct at the core of the 

consent order — which was repre -

hensible and wholly inconsistent 

with the values which this compa -

ny was built — will not recur.” 

In January of this year, the OCC 

terminated a 2015 consent order 

regarding the bank’s compliance 

with the Bank Secrecy Act and 

anti-money laundering regulations. 

The bank also pointed to the OCC 

upgrading Wells Fargo’s Communi -

ty Reinvestment Act rating to “out -

standing.” 

# $750 M

Total amount 

of fines levied 

against Wells 

Fargo by the 

Office of the 

Comptroller of 

the Currency. 

Sen. Elizabeth Warren, D-Mass., has been a persistent critic of the 

business practices at Wells Fargo and its big-bank rivals. 

# 2.5% 

Despite making up 39.4% of California’s population, 

Latinos comprise just 2.5% of company directorships, 

according to a new study by the Latino Corporate Direc -

tors Association. By comparison, white directors take up 

81.2% of board seats, while 12% of board seats are held by 

Asian directors and 4.3% by Black directors. The figures 

cover the period from July 1, 2020 through June 30. Under 

a new state law, public companies based in California are 

required to increase the representation on their boards of 

members of “underrepresented communities” by the end 

of 2021. 

THE BIG NUMBER 

SEPTEMBER 17–23, 2021  3

# BAY AREA BAY AREA  BRIEF BRIEF under the 1988 federal Indian Gam-ing Regulatory Act. This process will lead to an environmental review and public comment period, which is slated to begin in 60 to 90 days. The Koi Nation’s original home was on an island in Clear Lake, but its land was seized in the 1870s and it was displaced to communities along the Russian River Valley and later to Sebastopol and Santa Rosa. A 2019 federal court ruling restored the tribe’s recognition and rights, including the right to estab-lish a sovereign land base. “With this land and the Shi-loh Resort and Casino, we are tak-ing long overdue steps to preserve our cultural and historic integri-ty and secure a brighter future for coming generations,” Beltran said. “At the same time, our success will also benefit the communities in the region where our people have lived for thousands of years.” 

Koi Nation claims land in Sonoma as site for ‘economic engine’ 

The tribe describes the hotel and casino as an “economic engine” for the tribe and the county’s residents, creating “hundreds of jobs for work-ers in construction and other skilled laborers.” “The Koi Nation has had to strug-gle harder than almost any other tribe in California to re-establish our sovereignty,” said Tribal Chairman Darin Beltran. “Despite this treat-ment, however, we have endured. It is time to exercise our rights as a fed-erally recognized Tribe to have our own land and to control our own destiny.” The Koi Nation will be the devel-oper of the project, but is in talks with a number of potential part-ners and investors, according to a spokesperson. Dale Partners archi-tects is behind the project’s design. The spokesperson said the tribe has filed to place the land in a federal trust, making it eligible for gaming 

A rendering of the Shiloh Casino and Resort planned on unincorporated land in Sonoma County. 

KOI NATION SONOMA 

# TRIBE PLANS $600M RESORT COMPLEX 

DEVELOPMENT 

BY LAURA WAXMANN lwaxmann@bizjournals.com 

A Northern California tribe is claim-ing 68 acres in Sonoma County where it plans to develop a $600 million hotel and casino with 200 rooms. The Koi Nation, a federally recog-nized tribe of the southeastern Pomo people located in Sonoma County, announced Sept. 15 that it is exer-cising its sovereign rights under fed-eral law and has bought a site north of Santa Rosa, in an unincorporated area of the county, to re-establish its tribal land base. The proposal for the Shiloh Casi-no and Resort calls for a hotel, a gaming facility, six restaurants and food service areas, a meeting center and a spa. The tribe paid $12.3 million for the property, a former winery located 10 miles from its historic lands within California’s Pomo territory. Randall and Cynthia Clifton were the sellers. “When in full operation, the Shi-loh Casino and Resort will employ more than 1,100 full-time workers and provide benefits for the entire Sonoma community,” the tribe said in a statement. “The Koi Nation anticipates that a portion of the resort’s revenues will be shared with the broader community through the support of local organizations as well as collaborating with local gov-ernments and community members to address their needs.” 

San Francisco-based Landed, which offers a shared-equity program to help teachers, irst responders and health care workers buy their own homes, said Sept. 15 that it raised $31 million as it expands its service to essential workers across the country. The company, co-found-ed by Jonathan Asmis and Alex Lofton, wants to go national with its down-pay-ment assistance program that allows qualiied pro-fessionals to put down just 5% of a home’s purchase price. Landed covers up to 15% of the purchase price, putting in up to $120,000 in a property purchase. “Our program is de-signed to help a teacher or a nurse or a ireighter achieve a standard 20% down payment, so they can access a traditional mortgage and purchase a home,” Lofton said. Many of these homebuyers have the inancial ability to make mortgage payments but have diiculty saving for a down payment while paying rent and other expenses, he said. Achieving a 20% down payment waives the need for costly mortgage insurance and results in a lower monthly mortgage payment. Since its founding in 2015, Landed has helped clients purchase more than $500 million worth of homes in more than 300 cities. The company began by working with ive Bay Area school districts and now works with more than 3,600 employers’ job sites. Landed’s shared-equity arrangement lasts between two and 30 years, with Landed eventually getting its investment back plus 25% of the rise — or fall — in the home’s value. Shared-equity is one of the hottest sectors of prop-tech, with Palo Alto-based Point raising more than $1 billion in capital commit-ments last month to buy stakes in Americans’ home equity. — Mark Calvey 

PROPTECH 

# PRICING ESSENTIAL WORKERS INTO HOMES 

DONE DEAL 

A nine-story office building across the street from Oracle Park has a new owner. 

Building: 

Built in 2002, 153 Townsend totals 179,000 square feet of Class A space. The main tenant, Utah-based genealogy and DNA testing company Ancestry.com, listed its entire off ice there — 128,570 square feet across four floors that it began leasing in 2018 — on the sublease market earlier this year as the company switched to a hybrid work model. 

Buyer: 

San Francisco-based Ellis Partners. The purchase represents the first investment in Ellis Partners’ EPNY investment vehicle, which was formed to acquire and manage core office, industrial and retail properties in the Bay Area. 

Alex Lofton, Co-founder, Landed 

Seller: 

Los Angeles-based American Realty Advisors. The firm purchased the building in 2012 for $93.7 million, public records show. 

Price: 

Undisclosed 

Brokers: 

Mike Taquino, Kyle Kovac and Giancarlo Sangiacomo of CBRE’s San Francisco investment sales team advised the buyer; the firm’s Mike Walker and Brad Zampa arranged the financing. 

4 SAN FRANCISCO BUSINESS TIMES 

# BAY AREA BAY AREA BRIEF BRIEF SEPTEMBER 1723, 2021 5

# BAY AREA BAY AREA BRIEF BRIEF $50 

It will cover up to 80M workers, but details have to be finalized 

# 5 QUESTIONS AROUND THE WORK VACCINE MANDATE 

When will the mandate come into effect? Biden’s mandate for employ-ers will come in the form of a rule from the Occupational Safety and Health Administration. No timeta-ble has been confirmed yet. 

Are there exceptions or accommo-dations? Employment attorneys say 

BY TY WEST  twest@bizjournals.com 

The White House unveiled its plans to mandate Covid-19 vaccines or weekly testing of unvacci-nated workers for employers of 100 or more, and businesses are anxiously awaiting the details. It will cover an estimated 80 million private-sector workers. Fines for failure to comply would be up to $14,000 per violation. A lot of questions remain unanswered about how the plan will work. Here are some of the key points that businesses will need to know: 

THE PANDEMIC 

# We like the Book of Lists because it has 

# a year long shelf life. 

JENNIFER CANTERO 

Director of Marketing & Sustainability, 

Sensiba San Filippo LLP 

We like to advertise in the Book of Lists because it gets us in front We like to advertise in the Book of Lists because it gets us in front 

of a very targeted group of individuals within our market and lasts all 

year long. year long. 

## THE BAY AREA’S BUSINESS SCORECARD Advertise: Michael S Fernald | mfernald@bizjournals.com | 415.288.4942 

a sincerely held religious belief or is just trying to resist the vaccine. “Employers are increasing-ly finding themselves in standoffs with employees and frustration is at an all-time high,” said Aimee Delaney of Hinshaw & Culbertson. “Regardless of the outcome, it can be a lose/lose proposition for both sides in terms of damage to work-place culture and relationships.” 

Who will pay for all the tests? At $50 per test, the weekly expense would equate to $1,250 for a business with 25 unvaccinated employees. Andrew M. Lieb, managing attor-ney of Lieb at Law PC, said if test-ing is deemed a reasonable accom-modation for those objecting to the vaccine under the Civil Rights Act, employers would be required to pay. 

What exactly is a large employer? 

The mandate applies to employers with 100 or more employees. It’s not yet clear if that’s 100 or more employees as of a certain date, or the average number over a year. There are also questions how subsidiaries, contract workers, temps and others will be counted. 

What will the mandate mean for litigation? Even prior to the man-date, legal professionals were not-ing an increase in Covid-19-related employer litigation. A recent sur-vey from Fisher Phillips LLP found a 59% increase in Covid-19-related lawsuits filed per month for the first eight months of 2021, compared to the final eight months of 2020. “I think we’re going to see a lot of people losing their job before they go get a vaccine, or a lot more peo-ple saying, ‘I’ll go the testing route,’ and then the cost of testing gets pushed down to them,” said James Glunt, a partner at Fisher Phillips. “We’ll see lawsuits over that.” one of the most important aspects of the final rule will be how employ-ers handle those who claim medical or religious objections. Some of the same workers are expected to claim exemptions to testing. This could lead to uncomfortable scenarios where employers have to try to determine if an employee has 

Estimated cost of a Covid test for each employee who won’t get vaccinted. 6 SAN FRANCISCO BUSINESS TIMES 

# BAY AREA BAY AREA BRIEF BRIEF 

Disrupted by the pandemic, S.F.’s high selling season returns 

# HOME MARKET LISTINGS GROW 

165 listed as coming soon. Vanguard Properties co-own-er Frank Nolan said that it shows a healthy pipeline of business on its way. “Most stagers and profession-als related to preparing a home for the market are booked out for the next few weeks and into Octo-ber and this means more invento-ry,” he said. “My guess is that what we will see are very typical big ris-es in inventory for the next four to six weeks, then as it starts to fade, demand will increase and the bot-tleneck race towards the holiday will happen quickly.” San Francisco-based Green Couch Staging co-founder Jeff Schlarb agreed, telling me the home 

BY TED ANDERSEN reporter@bizjournals.com 

More homes are starting to hit the market in San Francisco as the real estate industry heads into its annual ascent into high season. As of Sept. 10, there were 920 active units listed on the MLS for San Francisco, with 201 listed in the “coming soon” feature. By Sept. 13, that number had grown to 1,113 active San Francisco listings with 

One of the new homes to hit the market: 3498 Jackson St., now listed for $12.9 million 

ADAM POTTS 

SEPTEMBER SURGE 

> OFFICIAL NON-PROFIT PARTNER
> WORLD NO.  1 MOHAMED ELSHORBAGY (EGY)
> WORLD NO.  5 AMANDA SOBHY (USA)

This is your moment. Our job is to make it last. Interested? Questions? Please contact 

Lacey Patterson | 415.288.4961 | lpatterson@bizjournals.com 

## When was the last time you stopped to celebrate a win? 

The award. The spot on the list. The great mention in the press. These are the moments that matter — to your clients, your colleagues and the competition. So celebrate them, with custom commemorative solutions from the 

San Francisco Business Times Recognition Shop. 

$1,900,000 in 2021. Keller Williams agent Jennifer Rosdail told me she’s seen 434 new residential listings over a recent sev-en days in San Francisco compared to 70 the week prior to that and 71 the week before that. While some buyers are returning to the city now to hunt real estate, she predicted that smaller down-town condos — previously useful for someone working full time from an office — are going to take more time to fully recover. staging company was “very busy” at the moment. It’s a sign of the San Francis-co real estate market returning to its normal seasonality after being disrupted by the pandemic. At this time in 2019, there were 1,150 list-ings on the market, San Francisco Association of Realtors President Marc Dickow told me. Home prices have also contin-ued their upward trajectory in San Francisco, rising from a median sales price of $1,710,000 in 2020 to SEPTEMBER 17–23, 2021  78 SAN FRANCISCO BUSINESS TIMES 

da “four years of runway.” He also said that, while the proj-ect comes with large floor plates generally preferred by tech giants, there currently is an appetite in the market for smaller spaces — between 25,000 square feet and 50,000 square feet — for startups and oth-er companies, and that 490 Bran-nan’s floor plates can be divided up to meet that demand. Blout acknowledged that hybrid work is likely to bring about a struc-tural change, but added that accord-ing to conversations he’s had with business and real estate leaders, “people are dying to get back into their spaces and start working.” 

— Laura Waxmann 

Central SoMa project approved despite concerns over market 

increasingly advertised with remote workt, there is reason for concern. “Given how much we are reading about the large amounts of available office space in the downtown area and very large amounts of available sublease space, and a return-to-work that may involve fewer than five days — there may be a significant possibility of increased remote work by tech workers — I’m interested in your views on the timing of your project, what needs its serving, and how it fits into the context of what’s happening downtown,” said Plan-ning Commissioner Sue Diamond. Blout countered that 490 Bran-nan would not be delivered to the market until mid-2025, giving Stra-

This mixed-use building in Central SoMa site at 490 Brannan St. would be delivered in mid-2025, if all goes as planned. 

ABOUT 490 BRANNAN ST. 

Developer: 

Strada Investment Group 

Architect: 

Perkins & Will 

Stories: 

12 

Off ice space: 

270,000 square feet 

PRD space: 

12,000 square feet largely earmarked for local arts organizations at discounted rents. 

Other uses: 

120-seat performing arts center, child care center 

Delivery: 

Mid-2025 

PERKINS & WILL 

# STRADA WINS OVER PLANNING PANEL 

DEVELOPMENT 

A 12-story mixed-use project pitched for a key Central SoMa site at Fourth and Brannan streets won approval Sept. 9 by the San Francisco Plan-ning Commission — despite con-cerns about future demand for office space in San Francisco expressed by several commissioners. Strada Investment Group plans a 12-story, 185-foot building at 490 Brannan St. that would provide 270,000 square feet of office space and 12,000 square feet of produc-tion, distribution and repair uses largely earmarked for local arts orga-nizations at discounted rents. The project, which would replace a parking lot and shuttered Wells Fargo building adjacent to a light rail stop, won unanimous approval after Strada Founding Principal Jesse Blout expressed strong confidence in the office market’s recovery. “As we have seen in past mar-ket correction in San Francisco — whether during the dot-com bust or other times in the market — the city has a remarkable ability to reinvent itself on the fly and recover quickly from downturns,” he said. But with San Francisco at the forefront of a historic wave of office subleases space hitting the market across the nation and local tech jobs 

After more than a century at its Telegraph Avenue lo-cation in Oakland, Samuel Merritt University has plans for a new campus in the city’s downtown. Strada Investment Group submitted a pre-ap-plication for up to 250,000 square feet of academic uses on a vacant parcel at 520 11th St. on Sept. 3, city documents show. The land is owned by the city. The proposed project would replace Samuel Merritt’s existing campus at 3100 Telegraph Ave., where it has been located since its founding as a school of nursing in 1909. The univer-sity leases that space from Sutter Health. “We look forward to working with our partners in the Oakland commu-nity to gain all necessary approvals to make this project a reality,” Jim Muyo, the university’s director of communications, said in a statement. “Truly, we are committed to Oakland.” Muyo declined to re-lease further details, citing the preliminary nature of the application. Samuel Merritt will seek to inance the project through a mix of equity, debt and fundraising, according to documents. It is seeking to raise $100 million for the Oakland campus’s development. The university, which currently has a total enroll-ment of 2,800 students, also has satellite campuses in San Mateo, Sacramento and Fresno. It is seeking to grow its cumulative enroll-ment to 10,000 by 2050 and expects the planned Oakland campus to help facilitate that growth. It is the second phase of a two-part project being developed by Strada Invest-ment Group, which togeth-er with CIM Group inished the irst phase, a 288-unit residential tower at 1150 Clay St., a neighboring address, in November. CIM and Strada purchased the site at 1150 Clay St. from Oakland for $3.35 million. Strada is in discussion with the city regarding con-veyance of the site at 520 11th St., sources say. 

— Sarah Klearman 

PROPOSAL 

# UNIVERSITY PLANS NEW CAMPUS IN OAKLAND 

FILE PHOTO 

350 Mission St., also known as Salesforce East 

DONE DEAL 

Tenant: 

Yelp 

Location: 

Salesforce East, 350 Mission St., San Francisco 

Square feet: 

53,596 

LEASE 

Subandlord: 

Salesforce, which listed the space as part of 250,000 square feet it put on the sublease market in March 

Landlord: 

Kilroy Realty Corp. 

Background: 

The online review company gave up 161,876 square feet on 14 stories at historic 140 Montgomery St. earlier this year by way of staggered leases that were due to expire on Oct. 1, 2021 and May 1, 2022. 

# STRUCTURES 

LAURA WAXMANN & SARAH KLEARMAN cover real estate, construction and architecture cover real estate, construction and architecture 

# STRUCTURES STRUCTURES STRUCTURES STRUCTURES STRUCTURES 

LAURA WAXMANN & SARAH KLEARMAN LAURA WAXMANN & SARAH KLEARMAN LAURA WAXMANN & SARAH KLEARMAN 

Strada co-founder Jesse Blout 

Quotable: 

“We’ve been evaluating our real estate footprint as we look to best accommodate our now remote-first workforce, and while we plan to continue to have off ices in the cities where we’re currently located, we no longer need the same amount of space that we had in the past,” a Yelp spokesperson said in a statement to the Business Times. Located in San Ramon, California, Bishop Ranch is home to a connected downtown that includes a thriving business destination and world-class shopping. See how Bishop Ranch is redefining office space in The New Work Dictionary. 

# Welcome to San Ra most. visit.bishopranch.com Bishop Ranch is where modern office space meets gardens, trails, lakes and award-winning restaurants. Redefine what to expect from work. 

SEPTEMBER 17–23, 2021  910  SAN FRANCISCO BUSINESS TIMES 

San Mateo was wrong to reject a 10-unit development, court says 

would have a negative, unavoidable impact on public health or safety. The case heard by San Mateo County Superior Court concerned a four-sto-ry, 10-unit residential development first proposed in San Mateo in 2015. The development was rejected by San Mateo’s Planning Commission and City Council on the basis of concerns over its design. Project proponents, including the California Renters Legal Advocacy and Education Fund, sued the city of San Mateo to overturn the rejection. The appellate court found the city’s rejection was not based upon objec-tive standards and therefore constitut-ed a violation of the HAA. It also refut-ed San Mateo County Superior Court’s ruling that the HAA violates the city of San Mateo’s right to govern itself. The HAA does not dictate the reg-ulations jurisdictions can impose upon development, the appellate court wrote in its Sept. 10 opinion, but rather forbids regulations that enable subjective rejections of hous-ing developments. Historically, Justice Alison M. Tuch-er noted, the HAA has failed in its quest to curb rejection of residential developments by local governments. San Mateo City Attorney Prasanna Rasiah said the city had not yet decid-ed whether to appeal the appellate court’s ruling. 

— Sarah Klearman 

A California appellate court on Sept. 10 upheld the constitutionality of the Housing Accountability Act across the state’s local jurisdictions. Appellate court justices voted 3-0 to overturn a decision by San Mateo County Superior Court, which ruled in early 2020 that it was unconstitutional to apply the HAA to charter cities, or those governed by their own charters as opposed to general state law. Cali-fornia has 121 charter cities, including San Mateo. The HAA was originally adopted by the California Legislature in 1982 with the goal of “meaningfully and effec-tively curbing” the ability of local gov-ernments to reject or downzone new residential projects. In 2017, the Cal-ifornia legislature reformed the HAA, effectively raising the threshold of evidence a jurisdiction is required to present to justify the rejection of a proposed housing project. Per the terms of the HAA, a juris-diction in California cannot reject a proposed residential project that is in compliance with “objective” planning and zoning standards unless the juris-diction can prove the development 

PROJECT UPDATE 

# STEELWAVE PROPOSES MASSIVE CAMPUS IN SOUTH SAN FRANCISCO 

What happened: 

Foster City developer SteelWave filed a preliminary application for a 750,000-square-foot R&D and office campus in South San Francisco. 

The plan: 

The company wants to demolish the vacant shopping center at 180 El Camino Real and replace it with with three buildings of R&D and office space; 30,000 square feet of amenities; and 19,500 square feet of retail (or, as an alternative, multifamily); and a parking structure. Skidmore, Owings & Merrill LLP is the architect. 

The site: 

The 14.5-acre site, currently owned by Shaiman Inc., sits between El Camino Real, South Spruce Avenue and Huntington Avenue near the San Bruno BART Station. 

Related: 

SteelWave wants to split the property into two development sites. It has already submitted separate plans for a 64,000-square-foot Safeway store, 7,000 square feet of neighborhood-serving retail and 200 covered and surface parking spaces on 3.3 acres of it. 

What’s next: 

The application for the Safeway development will head to the city’s Design Review Board on Sept. 21 and then to the Planning Commission for review sometime this fall. A formal application for the R&D campus is expected to be filed with the Planning Commission before the end of the year. 

CLOSING 

# WEWORK CLOSING EMERYVILLE LOCATION 

Coworking giant WeWork will close its Towers at Emeryville location at the end of this month. Occupants of WeWork’s three floors at 1900 Powell St. were offered “white-glove moving services” to one of WeWork’s three nearby locations at 2201 Broadway and 1111 Broadway in Oakland and 2120 University Ave. in Berkeley, according to a spokesperson. WeWork declined to comment on the details of its lease at the Towers at Emeryville and whether it planned to sublease any of the nearly 57,000 square feet it has there. The Towers of Emeryville is a three-building office park owned by real estate investor KBS. The company currently has 24 locations throughout the Bay Area including the Towers at Emeryville. The exit from Emeryville is part of a larger internal review of WeWork’s portfolio the company has been conducting since 2019, the spokesperson said. 

PEOPLE ON THE MOVE CHRIS MARLIN 

What happened: 

Chris Marlin, president of Lennar International LLC, announced Sept. 14 he has resigned. 

Background: 

Marlin, who is based in Miami, has been president of Lennar International LLC, the global sales and marketing arm of Lennar Corp., since December 2012. He had executive responsibilities for Lennar’s Treasure Island project, a massive redevelopment effort slated to bring more than 8,000 new homes to the man-made island in the San Francisco Bay. 

Replacement: 

No replacement has been announced, and Lennar declined to comment. 

Quotable: 

“I left to pursue a number of entrepreneurial opportunities in ClimateTech and global real estate as well as extend my work on U.S.-China cross-border businesses,” Marlin said. 

What’s next: 

Marlin was named a strategic adviser and member of the board of Singapore-based ClimateAlpha.ai, an AI-driven software firm for the real estate industry. He will also serve as an adviser to Vesta Ventures, a residential sector early-stage investment fund. 

# CHARTER CITIES ARE SUBJECT TO HAA, APPEALS COURT RULES 

IN THE COURTS 

Developer SteelWave is planning two separate projects on a 14.5-acre site in South San Francisco — a mixed-use development shown in this rendering, as well as a separate Safeway store. 

SOM 

# STRUCTURES STRUCTURES SEPTEMBER 17–23, 2021  11 12 SAN FRANCISCO BUSINESS TIMES 

# BIO && HEALTH HEALTH 

RON LEUTY covers biotech, life sciences and medicine covers biotech, life sciences and medicine 

12 

4152884939 4152884939 @rleuty_biotech @rleuty_biotech rleuty@bizjournals.com rleuty@bizjournals.com I

that is expected to start its first clin-ical trial yet this year. The other two drugs are a topi-cal treatment for psoriasis and an oral drug that Peña calls a potential “Tylenol for itch” that could provide chronic itch sufferers — known as pruritus — with relief in a matter of hours, not weeks. “People with chronic itch bring this up as the highest quality-of-life issue,” Peña said. All three of those Dermira drugs were licensed from Lilly after the Big Pharma acquired the Menlo Park company. A fourth drug, an atopic derma-titis drug from Axcelead of Japan, is still in late-stage discovery and won’t be ready for the clinic for another two to three years. That drug lineup was pretty much set when Evommune started reaching out to investors earlier this year with the hope of securing $50 million. What they ultimately came back with was $83 million that included Paris-based Andera Part-ners, Amsterdam-based LSP, exist-ing investor Pivotal bioVenture Part-ners of San Francisco and others. All of those skin conditions are related to inflammation, which Peña said is a more appropriate description of Evommune than a “skin drug” company. For instance, Evommune eventually wants to develop treatments for inflamma-tion in cardiovascular disease, he said. “We have a very broad agenda in immunology, and we’re excited,” Peña said. 

Among Evommune’s drug candidates? A ‘tylenol for itch’ 

about 10,000 square feet near Stanford Research Park, as it hires around 35 people over the next six to nine months to help shepherd its four drugs into clinical trials. Whoever becomes part of that team will have lots to work on. Three of Evommune’s drugs come from Dermira, a potential topical treatment for atopic dermatitis, which turns the skin red and itchy, 

Luis Pena is the CEO of Evommune 

SARAH SLAYTON 

# BIOTECH TEAM THAT’S ‘DONE IT ALL’ NABS $83M 

STARTUP SPOTLIGHT 

The investors who plunked down $83 million in Evommune Inc. knew the startup was hoping to push its first drug into the clinic this year and another three drugs into trials over the next two-plus years. But Evommune President and CEO Luis Peña believes what impressed those who ponied up for the Series A was the 10-per-son company’s team, which has a track record of taking about 20 drugs through approvals and – more recently – turned around of a once-sputtering Genentech asthma drug into a potential treatment for atopic dermatitis. That drug, an injectable mono-clonal antibody treatment which Dermira bought from Genentech and was worked on by Evommune’s founding team, was the centerpiece of Eli Lilly & Co.’s $1.1 billion acqui-sition of Dermira. “It’s a great team that has done it all,” Peña said. But even great teams — Evom-mune cofounders Peña, Dr. Eugene Bauer and Hans Hofland led skin drug company Dermira Inc. to its 2019 blockbuster buyout by Lil-ly — must deliver. And, Peña said, the capital gives Evommune that opportunity to do just that. The company is currently based in Los Altos but aims to move into 

TWIST BIOSCIENCES What happened: 

The South San Francisco company signed a research collaboration with Germa-ny’s Boehringer Ingelheim International that will turn the synthetic DNA maker’s library of antibodies toward disease targets chosen by the Big Pharma company. 

Deal details: 

Twist will use what it terms its “Library of Libraries,” a collection of synthetic DNA variant libraries used for rapid antibody discovery to ind potential drug targets. Twist and Boehringer will collaborate to validate and optimize any new drug candidates. 

Terms: 

Twist will receive an up-front payment for each new program with the potential to earn up to $710 million depending on meeting milestones. Under the terms of the agreement, Boehringer Ingelheim retains exclusive worldwide rights to develop and com-mercialize any therapeutic antibodies discovered. 

DEAL FLOW PEOPLE ON THE MOVE 

IRHYTHM TECHNOLOGIES Who’s in? 

Quentin Blackford was named as the cardiovascular device company’s new president and CEO, the San Francisco company’s second CEO appointment in less than a year after the retirement of long-time leader Kevin King in December. 

Quentin Blackford 

What’s his background? 

Blackford was most recently at diabetes management company Dexcom, Inc. where he was chief operating o icer. He also served in executive roles at medical device companies NuVasive, Inc. and Zimmer Biomet. 

Who’s out? 

Former CEO Mike Coyle left the company in June after a roughly four-month stint that was mainly characterized by a rapid slide in stock price due to pricing disputes between iRhythm and Novitas Solutions, which was responsible for setting Medicare rates for the company’s long-term cardiac monitoring product. 

When does he start? 

Blackford will take over from interim CEO Douglas Devine on Oct. 4. 

Background: 

The company uses its synthetic DNA manu-facturing capabilities to construct genetic material on silicon chips, which can be stitched together to create collection of antibody sequences that match those that occur in the human body. The com-pany’s collaboration with Boehringer comes after a deal that it signed with Japanese pharmaceutical giant Takeda last July to tap Twist’s antibody librar-ies to build up its pipeline of biologics. 

Quoted: 

“We have the ability to generate precise antibod-ies to a diverse range of targets, which together with Boehringer Ingel-heim’s strength in drug development capabilities, could mean multiple new more personalized treatments in the future for patients,” Twist CEO Emily Leproust said in a statement. 

Twist Bioscience CEO Emily Leproust SEPTEMBER 17–23, 2021  13 14 SAN FRANCISCO BUSINESS TIMES 

# HOSPITALITY && RETAIL RETAIL 

ALEX BARREIRA covers tourism, restaurants, retail and the arts covers tourism, restaurants, retail and the arts 

14 

ABOUT ROSEWOOD SAN FRANCISCO 

Address: 

550 Howard St. 

Floors: 

15 

Rooms and suites: 

180 

Architect: 

Pelli Clarke Pelli 

Interior designer: 

Joyce Wang Studio 

Targeted completion: 

2026 

Amenities: 

Indoor-outdoor restaurant, patisserie, event spaces, a fitness studio and indoor lap pool, Rosewood’s Asaya wellness programming and the operator’s private lounge, the Manor Club 

The skyscraper is also planned to feature 170 condo units, 250,000 square feet of office space, and 79,000 square feet of shared amenity space as well as retail opportunities. Arora told me discussions between Rosewood and the F4 part-ners kicked off about five years ago when he met with Goldman Sachs in their New York offices and felt “a great opportunity and meeting of the minds” in subsequent meetings. Another possibility that intrigued the developers, Arora said, was part-nering with Rosewood to sell some of the residential units in the build-ing outside of the hotel. “There was this feeling that, Rosewood, given its stature, would bring more than incremental val-ue that other brands would offer to the residential owner,” Arora said, before cautioning that no plans have been finalized and the number of residences involved, if any, was “still in evolution.” “Rosewood Residences is really quite unique,” Arora said. “It was felt very strongly and discussed among us that it’s a bit of a risk, but if you take the success of Rosewood Sand Hill and take that as your feed-er market ... building around this asset, you see that it’s less of a risk and actually a bit of a surety.” 

Th e downtown ultra-luxury hotel is targeted to open in 2026 

exceptionally well in the Pacific Rim location of San Francisco,” said Phil-ip “Flip” Maritz, former Rosewood chairman and developer of its Menlo Park hotel, the Rosewood Sand Hill. Arora described the hotel’s target guest as corporate travelers at “the C-suite level,” domestic leisure trav-elers, as well as international tour-ists: “There’s a huge lineage with Asia and Hong Kong and San Fran-cisco and we see that in Sand Hill.” Th e hotel will feature 180 rooms and suites designed by Joyce Wang Studio. Other amenities include an indoor-outdoor restaurant, a patis-serie, event spaces, a fitness stu-dio and indoor lap pool, as well as Rosewood’s Asaya wellness pro-gramming and its exclusive private lounge concept, the Manor Club. The Transbay project, expected to be San Francisco’s last skyscrap-er to go under development for the foreseeable future, will rise 61 sto-ries and include 1.1 million square feet of real estate. At a height of 800 feet it will be the city’s fourth tallest building, and one of three projects with a direct connection to the 5.4-acre elevated Salesforce Park via a pedestrian skybridge. Architect Pel-li Clarke Pelli, which designed the Transbay Transit Center and Sales-force Tower, is handling the build-ing’s design. 

The planned 800-foot-tall, 61-story skyscraper in the Transbay District would become the city’s fourth-tallest building. 

PELLI CLARKE PELLI 

# NEW S.F. HOTEL WILL ELEVATE LUXE TRAVEL 

DEVELOPMENT 

On Sept. 9, developer F4 Transbay Partners announced its selection of ultra-luxury brand Rosewood Hotels & Resorts as operator of the 15-floor hotel planned for the skyscraper at 550 Howard St. in San Francisco. The international hotel brand, founded in Texas but headquar-tered in Hong Kong, has 26 proper-ties worldwide and plans to double its portfolio by 2030. F4, a joint-ven-ture between Hines, Urban Pacif-ic Development LLC and Goldman Sachs Asset Management, aims to break ground in the first quarter of 2022 and is targeting a 2026 debut. “Goldman Sachs and Hines want-ed a brand that could really make a difference when you think about the people that live in San Francis-co or migrate to Silicon Valley and come back to San Francisco — where do they want to be after they’ve amassed their wealth, after they’ve been successful,” Radha Arora, pres-ident of Rosewood Hotels & Resorts, told me. “Whichever market we’re in we’d like to be the leader in that market, so that should tell you something,” Arora offered when asked about future room rates. The brand’s near-est hotel is the 121-room Rosewood Sand Hill in Menlo Park, which typ-ically charges between $1,000 and $1,300 per night. Greg Miller, hospitality analyst at Truist Securities, said Rosewood’s selection is a vote of confidence about the long-term viability of the luxury market despite sluggish local forecasts. He said there is growth potential in an international brand that doesn’t have an extensive U.S. presence and the recovery of San Francisco’s tourist numbers, partic-ularly from Asia, where Rosewood has a third of its upcoming hotels. “Rosewood brings a combina-tion of global sophistication and a local look and feel that should play 

VILLA FLORENCE SAN FRANCISCO 

Buyer: 

AWH, Roxborough Group 

Seller: 

Pebblebrook Hotel Trust 

Price: 

$87.5M ($463K per key) 

Address: 

225 Powell St. 

Rooms: 

189 

About the buyers: 

AWH owns hotels across the U.S. Roxborough is an S.F. private equity firm. 

Of note: 

A full renovation is planned by year-end 2022. 

HOTEL ADAGIO 

Buyer: 

Magna Hospitality Group 

Seller: 

Park Hotels & Resorts 

Price: 

$82M ($480K per key) 

Address: 

550 Geary St. 

Rooms: 

171 

About the buyer: 

Rhode Island-based hotel investment firm co-founded by Robert A. Indeglia Jr. in July 1998 

LE MÉRIDIEN 

Buyer: 

KHP Capital Partners 

Seller: 

Park Hotels & Resorts 

Price: 

$221.5M ($615K per key) 

Address: 

333 Battery St. 

Rooms: 

360 

About the buyer: 

San Francisco private equity firm specializing in boutique hotels founded in 2015 by former Kimpton CEO Mike Depatie and Joe Long and Ben Rowe. The buyers of three previously annouced hotel deals in San Francisco have finally been identified. Here’s a quick look at the deals. 

DONE DEALS 

Radha Arora is president of Rosewood Hotels & Resorts 14 SAN FRANCISCO BUSINESS TIMES 

# HOSPITALITY && RETAIL RETAIL 

ALEX BARREIRA covers tourism, restaurants, retail and the arts covers tourism, restaurants, retail and the arts 

14 

ABOUT ROSEWOOD SAN FRANCISCO 

Address: 

550 Howard St. 

Floors: 

15 

Rooms and suites: 

180 

Architect: 

Pelli Clarke Pelli 

Interior designer: 

Joyce Wang Studio 

Targeted completion: 

2026 

Amenities: 

Indoor-outdoor restaurant, patisserie, event spaces, a fitness studio and indoor lap pool, Rosewood’s Asaya wellness programming and the operator’s private lounge, the Manor Club 

The skyscraper is also planned to feature 170 condo units, 250,000 square feet of office space, and 79,000 square feet of shared amenity space as well as retail opportunities. Arora told me discussions between Rosewood and the F4 part-ners kicked off about five years ago when he met with Goldman Sachs in their New York offices and felt “a great opportunity and meeting of the minds” in subsequent meetings. Another possibility that intrigued the developers, Arora said, was part-nering with Rosewood to sell some of the residential units in the build-ing outside of the hotel. “There was this feeling that, Rosewood, given its stature, would bring more than incremental val-ue that other brands would offer to the residential owner,” Arora said, before cautioning that no plans have been finalized and the number of residences involved, if any, was “still in evolution.” “Rosewood Residences is really quite unique,” Arora said. “It was felt very strongly and discussed among us that it’s a bit of a risk, but if you take the success of Rosewood Sand Hill and take that as your feed-er market ... building around this asset, you see that it’s less of a risk and actually a bit of a surety.” 

Th e downtown ultra-luxury hotel is targeted to open in 2026 

exceptionally well in the Pacific Rim location of San Francisco,” said Phil-ip “Flip” Maritz, former Rosewood chairman and developer of its Menlo Park hotel, the Rosewood Sand Hill. Arora described the hotel’s target guest as corporate travelers at “the C-suite level,” domestic leisure trav-elers, as well as international tour-ists: “There’s a huge lineage with Asia and Hong Kong and San Fran-cisco and we see that in Sand Hill.” Th e hotel will feature 180 rooms and suites designed by Joyce Wang Studio. Other amenities include an indoor-outdoor restaurant, a patis-serie, event spaces, a fitness stu-dio and indoor lap pool, as well as Rosewood’s Asaya wellness pro-gramming and its exclusive private lounge concept, the Manor Club. The Transbay project, expected to be San Francisco’s last skyscrap-er to go under development for the foreseeable future, will rise 61 sto-ries and include 1.1 million square feet of real estate. At a height of 800 feet it will be the city’s fourth tallest building, and one of three projects with a direct connection to the 5.4-acre elevated Salesforce Park via a pedestrian skybridge. Architect Pel-li Clarke Pelli, which designed the Transbay Transit Center and Sales-force Tower, is handling the build-ing’s design. 

The planned 800-foot-tall, 61-story skyscraper in the Transbay District would become the city’s fourth-tallest building. 

PELLI CLARKE PELLI 

# NEW S.F. HOTEL WILL ELEVATE LUXE TRAVEL 

DEVELOPMENT 

On Sept. 9, developer F4 Transbay Partners announced its selection of ultra-luxury brand Rosewood Hotels & Resorts as operator of the 15-floor hotel planned for the skyscraper at 550 Howard St. in San Francisco. The international hotel brand, founded in Texas but headquar-tered in Hong Kong, has 26 proper-ties worldwide and plans to double its portfolio by 2030. F4, a joint-ven-ture between Hines, Urban Pacif-ic Development LLC and Goldman Sachs Asset Management, aims to break ground in the first quarter of 2022 and is targeting a 2026 debut. “Goldman Sachs and Hines want-ed a brand that could really make a difference when you think about the people that live in San Francis-co or migrate to Silicon Valley and come back to San Francisco — where do they want to be after they’ve amassed their wealth, after they’ve been successful,” Radha Arora, pres-ident of Rosewood Hotels & Resorts, told me. “Whichever market we’re in we’d like to be the leader in that market, so that should tell you something,” Arora offered when asked about future room rates. The brand’s near-est hotel is the 121-room Rosewood Sand Hill in Menlo Park, which typ-ically charges between $1,000 and $1,300 per night. Greg Miller, hospitality analyst at Truist Securities, said Rosewood’s selection is a vote of confidence about the long-term viability of the luxury market despite sluggish local forecasts. He said there is growth potential in an international brand that doesn’t have an extensive U.S. presence and the recovery of San Francisco’s tourist numbers, partic-ularly from Asia, where Rosewood has a third of its upcoming hotels. “Rosewood brings a combina-tion of global sophistication and a local look and feel that should play 

VILLA FLORENCE SAN FRANCISCO 

Buyer: 

AWH, Roxborough Group 

Seller: 

Pebblebrook Hotel Trust 

Price: 

$87.5M ($463K per key) 

Address: 

225 Powell St. 

Rooms: 

189 

About the buyers: 

AWH owns hotels across the U.S. Roxborough is an S.F. private equity firm. 

Of note: 

A full renovation is planned by year-end 2022. 

HOTEL ADAGIO 

Buyer: 

Magna Hospitality Group 

Seller: 

Park Hotels & Resorts 

Price: 

$82M ($480K per key) 

Address: 

550 Geary St. 

Rooms: 

171 

About the buyer: 

Rhode Island-based hotel investment firm co-founded by Robert A. Indeglia Jr. in July 1998 

LE MÉRIDIEN 

Buyer: 

KHP Capital Partners 

Seller: 

Park Hotels & Resorts 

Price: 

$221.5M ($615K per key) 

Address: 

333 Battery St. 

Rooms: 

360 

About the buyer: 

San Francisco private equity firm specializing in boutique hotels founded in 2015 by former Kimpton CEO Mike Depatie and Joe Long and Ben Rowe. The buyers of three previously annouced hotel deals in San Francisco have finally been identified. Here’s a quick look at the deals. 

DONE DEALS 

Radha Arora is president of Rosewood Hotels & Resorts SEPTEMBER 17–23, 2021  15 

650-815-5860 650-815-5860 @SFBTHospitality @SFBTHospitality abarreira@bizjournals.com abarreira@bizjournals.com I

Alt-protein dog food startup inks $23 million 

Wild Earth co-founder and CEO Ryan Bethencourt survived the “Shark Tank” and a new round of investors. 

> WILD EARTH

# Animal-free protein for animals? 

CELL-GROWN MEAT 

Wild Earth, a Berkeley startup that makes plant-based dog food, announced Sept. 10 that it’s raised a new $23 million funding round it will use in part to develop products with cell-cultivated meat. “Shark Tank” star and Dallas Mav-ericks owner Mark Cuban contribut-ed to the latest tranche of capital along with At One Ventures, Veginvest, Big Idea Ventures, Bitburger Ventures, Gaingels and actor Paul Wesley, star of “Vampire Diaries.” With the new funding, 4-year-old Wild Earth brings its total raised to just shy of $40 million, per Crunchbase. Wild Earth is working on new product lines involving cell-culti-vated beef, chicken and seafood for dogs (and, just in: cats!) with the goal of being market-ready as early as next year. The company manu-factures its plant-based food at scale in facilities in the Midwest and will create the first iterations of the cell-grown meat in its Berkeley Cell Val-ley Labs co-working facility, but is also looking into other sites to fully scale up production. To date, the startup has sold its plant-based dog food, made from the soy sauce-starring superfood koji and vegetable proteins and grains, through its website and some retailers. Early explorers beware: A single four-pound bag sells for $29, but bulk subscriptions include a discount. CEO Ryan Bethencourt co-found-ed the company in Berkeley in 2017. In a press release announcing the new funding, Wild Earth indicat-ed it is headquartered in Berkeley as well as Durham, North Caroli-na, but it will maintain real estate in Berkeley. Alternative protein startups, well-represented in the Bay Area, are forging ahead with ambitious production goals and awareness campaigns coming off a record year of venture funding and anticipation of the first U.S. regulatory approv-als for those products, potentially by the end of the year. While animal proteins are still subject to some Food and Drug Administration regulations, for the sustainability-minded consumer there’s an easier path to the pantry via the doggy bowl than the dinner table. 

© Copyright 2021. CBIZ, Inc. NYSE Listed: CBZ. All rights reserved. 

# NEW NAME SAME PEOPLE 

# AND SERVICE YOU’VE KNOWN FOR YEARS We are pleased to announce that Shea Labagh Dobberstein has joined CBIZ & MHM – together, one of the nation’s Top Ten accounting providers. 

## cbiz.com | mhmcpa.com 

# CBIZ SLD 

MHM (Mayer Hoffman McCann P.C.) is an independent CPA firm that provides audit, review and attest services, and works closely with CBIZ, a business consulting, tax and financial services provider. CBIZ and MHM are members of Kreston International Limited, a global network of independent accounting firms. Effective September 2021 16 SAN FRANCISCO BUSINESS TIMES 

# MONEY 

MARK CALVEY covers banking, inance and the economy covers banking, inance and the economy 

16 

# MONEY MONEY MONEY MONEY 

MARK CALVEY 

SVB has carved out a unique niche. Is it ready to take on the big boys? 

SVB Leerink, led by CEO Jeffrey Leerink, plans to add expertise in equity capital markets, fintech and other areas. SVB Financial is on a roll, with its stock price up 55% this year to close Sept. 13 above $600 for the first time. Banking analyst Dick Bove recently called Silicon Valley Bank the “best bank in the United States.” In a subsequent report on the bank’s success in banking the volatile inno-vation economy, Bove wrote: “It makes the bank’s results erratic in the short run but unusually profit-able in the long run.” 

Greg Becker, CEO of Silicon Valley Bank: Next up is investment banking. 

J. JENNINGS MOSS  SVBJ 

# DIVING EVEN DEEPER INTO TECH WORLD 

INVESTMENT BANKING 

The parent of Silicon Valley Bank, SVB Financial Group, is expand-ing its nascent investment banking operations to serve the technology sector. Some may wonder what took it so long, given the bank’s deep roots providing financial services to the tech industry. But SVB only cre-ated an investment banking arm through its acquisition of Leerink Partners in 2019. SVB Leerink had initially focused on healthcare and life sciences. Expanding into tech investment banking positions SVB to compete more often with Wall Street titans for lucrative work like mergers and securities, as well as continuing to provide banking services. SVB has hired Jason Auerbach as Leerink’s new co-head of invest-ment banking. He comes over from UBS, where he was global co-head of technology, media and telecom investment banking and a mem-ber of the Swiss bank’s global man-agement committee. Earlier in his career, he was the global co-head of TMT mergers and acquisitions at Jefferies LLC. “The success and momentum of our investment banking business with SVB Leerink has exceeded our expectations, allowing us to attract highly sought-after experts who will complement our current team and 

“It’s been quite the ride. And I know it’s cliché to say it, but I feel like we’re just getting started.” 

ZACH HYMAN, 

co-CEO of SpotOn, after the San Francisco fintech pulled down $300 million in fresh funding — and almost simultaneously pulled off the $415 million acquisition of Appetize, a Los Angeles business-payments platform that adds larger enterprise customers to SpotOn’s small-business base. The financing valued SpotOn at $3.15 billion, up more than a billion from the last time it raised money, which was just four months ago. The purchase of Appetize is expected to close by the end of this month. 

capabilities,” SVB Financial CEO Greg Becker said in a statement. SVB’s new tech investment bank-ing team also includes senior man-aging directors overseeing vari-ous sectors, with Bob Casey, Robert Jackman and Chris Montgomery in enterprise software; J.T. Stephens and Xiaoying Zhong in consum-er internet, commerce enablement and marketing software; Nathan Laverriere in education technology and services; William Goodman in digital infrastructure and tech-en-abled services; Zheniya Sidarchuk in industrial technology; and Michael Rosso in equity private placements. 

Two stalwarts of Bay Area inance have teamed up to create an investment irm expected to put billions of dollars to work tackling climate change. 

Who’s behind it: 

Tom Steyer and Katie Hall. Steyer spent about three decades building his investment irm, San Francisco-based Farallon Capital Management. The former presidential candidate also founded – with his wife Kat Taylor – Beneicial State Bank, an Oakland-based community development inancial institution with $1 billion in assets. Hall will remain co-chair of Hall Capital Partners, an investment advisory irm she founded that manages more than $40 billion in assets. 

What they’re doing: 

Galvanize Climate Solutions will seek to use what its co-founders call “movement capitalism” to accelerate adoption of clean energy and increase the rate of decarbonization. “Movement Capitalism is an economic philosophy that employs the foundations of capitalism — innovation, entrepreneurship, competition — and merges those with the power of global activism,” Steyer said in a statement. 

Who’s on board: 

Strategic investors including Marc Benioff’s Time Ventures and Laurene Powell Jobs’ Emerson Collective. “Galvanize will show us what’s possible when you bring inance, business and the public and private sectors together to fuel ‘ecopreneurs,’ accelerate the transition to clean energy and decarbonize the planet,” Benioff said in a statement. 

# NEW FIRM TARGETS CLIMATE CHANGE 

CLEAN GREEN 

Tom Steyer founds new investment firm 

QUOTABLE SEPTEMBER 17–23, 2021  17 

415-288-4950 415-288-4950 @SFBTmoney @SFBTmoney mcalvey@bizjournals.com mcalvey@bizjournals.com I

# Bank resumes shopping spree 

M&A WATCH 

> Progressive Casualty Ins. Co. & affiliates. Coverages and discounts not
> available in all states or situations, for all vehicles or coverage selections.

Protect your small business from reality with over 30+ customizable coverage options and personalized discounts. Get a quote in as little as 6 minutes at ProgressiveCommercial.com 

George Guarini has long kept a shopping list of strong, small banks he’d like to buy one day as he builds BayCom Corp. in Walnut Creek. BayCom, parent of United Busi-ness Bank, was acquisitive leading up to the pandemic. But Guarini has been on the deal-making sidelines for more than a year, owing to a tricky core systems conversion and a stock price that got pounded by the pandemic. With both those things behind him, Guarini’s bank reached an agreement to buy the parent of Pacific Enterprise Bank in Irvine, taking United Business Bank into Southern California’s Orange Coun-ty for the first time. 

Acquisitive Baycom is back to dealmaking after year on sidelines 

BayCom will pay about $53.1 mil-lion in the stock-swap transaction. The combined bank will have about $2.9 billion in assets, with 17 loca-tions in California, two in Washing-ton state, five in New Mexico and 11 in Colorado. “This is our 10th acquisition. We feel like this will start the chain of acquisitions again,” Guarini said. “One of the strengths of our bank, since we opened in 2004, has been our asset quality.” Guarini may have have a high-er-priced currency for more deals in the form of BayCom’s recovering share price. The stock swooned from the low $20s to barely $10 last sum-mer. Now those shares have recov-ered to close Sept. 15 at $18.26. 

George Guarini is the CEO of United Business Bank 

The fake accounts scandal is not Wells Fargo’s only festering problem. The San Francisco-based bank got hit Sept. 9 with a $250 million fine by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency over what the regulator described as “the bank’s unsafe or unsound practices.” In addition to the fine, the OCC issued a cease-and-desist order for the bank’s failure to create an effective home lending loss-mitigation program, and placed restrictions on Wells Fargo’s mortgage servicing operations until problems are addressed. “Wells Fargo has not met the requirements of the OCC’s 2018 action against the bank,” said Michael Hsu, acting comptroller of the currency, in a statement. “This is unacceptable.” 

# $250M 

BIG NUMBER 18 SAN FRANCISCO BUSINESS TIMES 

TOMAS OVALLE  SVBJ 

INTERESTED IN PARTNERSHIP OPPORTUNITIES? Contact Steven Broas at sbroas@bizjournals.com CHECK OUT THE FULL STORIES ON BAYAREAINNO.COM 

# CAN ‘AIRBNB OF PARKING’ FIND A SPOT IN SAN JOSE? 

# BAY AREA INNO 

BY SONYA HERRERA sherrera@bizjournals.com hen Sameer Saran irst started attending San Jose State University in 2016, one of his biggest issues was inding parking near the campus. It regularly took him 30 minutes of circling the block to ind a spot. Talking to other students, he found many were having similar trouble, and some had taken extreme measures to ensure themselves a parking space. “They literally came at six in the morning, slept in their cars, and then went to their classes,” Saran said. He and his classmates’ experience inspired Saran to think of a better solution. The idea eventually became an app called ParkStash that helps students reserve spaces in garages, parking lots and even driveways. But Saran, who enrolled at SJSU to pursue a master’s degree in computer engineering, took a circuitous route to inding the right solution. His original business plan involved placing sensors in individual parking spaces to detect whether spaces were available, said Hooman Bolandi, who co-founded ParkStash with Saran and serves as its president. However, when he pitched that idea at SJSU’s Silicon Valley Business Plan Competition in 2017, it wasn’t well received because of questions about his business plan. “It wasn’t a business that was going to be proitable or investor-friendly,” Bolandi said. 

An early pivot 

On the lip side, Saran met Bolandi. A former vice president of new business and product development at Valin Corp. and, before that, a senior project engineer at Applied Materials, Bolandi was a sponsor and judge at the competition. He gave Saran what turned out to be crucial advice, encouraging Saran to switch to a software-based solution, rather than a hardware-based one. Instead of using sensors to inform students of open spots, Saran created a mobile app that offered a kind of parking marketplace. Landowners who had extra parking places could list them on the app. Students and others in need of parking could reserve and pay for the spots through the same app. While there are lots of other parking apps around, most of them are used to pay for metered street parking or for spots in institutionally owned parking lots or garages. ParkStash is different. In shorthand, Saran says he created the Airbnb of parking. He returned to SJSU’s business plan competition a year later with his new app and won second place. That gave him the boost needed to launch the company, which he leads as CEO. 

500 STARTUPS What happened: 

The 11-year-old startup accelerator and investor said it has closed on its fifth fund, with $140 million in new capital to invest. It’s the largest fund yet and brings 500’s total assets under management to $1.8 billion. It has also adopted a new name. 

Wait, what: 

It’s been a long time since the name 500 Startups was seen as an ambitious target for how many new businesses the accelerator hoped to back, so CEO Christine Tsai announced her group is now going to named 500 Global. 

HQ move: 

The organization also said it is looking for a new home after abandoning the Folsom Street offices it had moved to from Mountain View a few years ago. All of the partners and staff have been working virtually during the pandemic. It’s not clear yet where the new home will be but a spokesperson said it will remain in the Bay Area and 500 hopes to move in early next year. 

What they’re saying: 

“As venture capital continues to globalize and the percentage of unicorns from outside the U.S. increases further, 500 Global is uniquely positioned with deep expertise and a strong track record of investing in markets around the world,” Tsai said in the announcement. 

ACCELERATOR WATCH 

# $12 BILLION The price that Mountain View-based inancial services giant Intuit is paying to acquire Atlanta marketing technology company MailChimp. Intuit, which owns TurboTax, QuickBooks and Credit Karma, plans to create an end-to-end customer growth platform for small and mid-sized businesses, which is Mailchimp’s main customer base. Mailchimp was founded in 2001 and is led by CEO Ben Chestnut, Unlike most high-growth tech companies, the 1,200-person company did not raise any outside venture capital funding and the sale is considered the largest for a bootstrapped technology company. 

NUMBER TO KNOW 

# W

Sonya Herrera is an Inno reporter who covers entrepreneurs and startups in Silicon Valley. Follow along on twitter @SVBiztech 

R MEET SONYA 

ParkStash is easing the familiar frustration of searching for a spot SEPTEMBER 1723, 2021 19 

ParkStash began offering its service commercially in July 2018. Since graduating from the school later that year, Saran’s worked on the app full time. ParkStash now has six employees, most of whom work remotely. Although he and Bolandi have mostly boostrapped the startup, they have raised a small amount of seed funding from Sand Hill Angels. After building up ParkStash’s development team, Saran has handed off his coding responsibilities, but he still works closely on product design. ParkStash’s business model draws from multiple revenue sources. It takes a small cut of the rent property owners charge for their parking spaces and also charges a small commission when customers pay parking citations through its app or make reservations for events. Additionally, entities like SJSU pay it a monthly subscription fee to help direct their students or customers to parking spots. More speciically, SJSU’s multi-year contract with ParkStash includes not just a monthly subscription payment but also commissions on transactions. 

University town 

About 1,400 SJSU students use the app daily to check the availability of Woodward Dream Cruise signed a ive-year deal with ParkStash that also includes commission and booking charges. At the Dream Cruise event last month, property owners in the area listed 1,000 private parking spaces on the app. Saran is hoping to offer ParkStash’s service elsewhere soon. The company has identiied numerous areas that have parking problems, including universities, cities, event centers, hospitals and apartment complexes and plan to use the success that SJSU has seen as a test case to build new business. “We are now engaging with these targeted entities and locations to expand,” Saran said. 

A ‘win-win’ for customers 

The company has expanded in other ways too. In addition to offering parking for passenger vehicles, ParkStash now allows customers to reserve spots for commercial trucks, boats and RVs. Richard Ajluni, who lives near SJSU, lists the driveway of his home on the app. ParkStash is simple and easy to use, he said. He also likes that the company identiies its customers and that he’s able to easily toggle back and forth to see when his driveway is unavailable. parking places in the school’s garages or to reserve private parking spots, Saran said. Since ParkStash began its partnership with SJSU in January 2019, customers have used it nearly 300,000 times to ind parking, he said. Its service has made a big difference for SJSU students, Saran said. Students wake up in the morning, open the app and reserve a spot. That both saves them time and reduces carbon emissions, Saran said. More than 300 property owners — including churches, hotels, restaurants, local businesses and individual homeowners — offer spaces through the app. And those in need of parking can choose from among more than 15,000 parking spaces. For now, ParkStash is still largely focused on San Jose. About 48% of the spots available through its app are located in and around the city’s downtown. But the company has already expanded to serve 10 other cities, including Surrey in Canada and nine cities in Michigan as part of the annual Woodward Dream Cruise car show there. Surrey uses ParkStash as its o icial truck parking app, and the startup collects commissions and booking fees for the service it offers there The organization behind the “The university doesn’t have enough parking spaces for the students. Even if students buy a parking permit for the semester, there’s no guarantee they’ll have a space,” Ajluni said. ParkStash’s app, by contrast, is “a win-win,” he said. ParkStash is taking off in San Jose as the city is considering eliminating minimum parking requirements for new developments. Should the city go ahead with that plan, builders of new commercial oice buildings would be required to provide far fewer parking spots than they do today, making parking an even scarcer commodity. Saran’s app could help address that shortage by freeing up already existing spaces like private driveways for public parking uses. Indeed, ParkStash’s service could make new parking garages unnecessary, he said. “We don’t need the garages if we already have the spaces,” Saran said. “All of these spaces can be utilized for much better things than having more garages or more street parking spots.” ParkStash is poised to be a game-changer for generations, Bolandi said. “It’s not your typical Silicon Valley ‘I’m gonna make a gadget and call it a day,’” he said. He continued: “At the end of the day, our mission is to improve quality of life and the environment.” 

# MOST PEOPLE DON’T WRITE BIG CHECKS TO STRANGERS so, introduce your nonprofit organization to the business leaders in our audience. 

the San Francisco Business Time’s 

Giving Guide | Coming Nov. 5, 2021 For more infomation contact 

KIERSTYN MOORE | kmoore@bizjournals.com  

> SPECIAL SUPPLEMENT
> OCTOBER 30, 2020
> INSIDE
> Special advertising section featuring local nonproits Biggest nonproits and largest capital campaigns 10, 12

## His tipping point 

> Covid-19 is opening eyes to what Sam Cobbs has been trying to do for his entire career

G I V I N G 

G U I D E G U I D E 

SPONSORED BY 

Powered by Silicon Valley Business Journal and San Francisco Business Times Learn about The Leadership Trust and find out if you qualify at: trust.bizjournals.com/learn-more 

# Connect with a vetted network of leaders you can trust in the Business Journals Leadership Trust. 

# The Business Journals Leadership Trust is an invitation-only community that brings together the brightest minds in business across the nation.    

> 20 SAN FRANCISCO BUSINESS TIMES SEPTEMBER 1723, 2021 21

# INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO INNO 

# UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER UNDER 

# 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 

# BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY BAY 

# AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA AREA 

# BAY AREA 

> GETTY IMAGES  ACBJ ILLUSTRATION

# FROM THE EDITORS: WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW ABOUT BAY AREA INNO 

# Every ground-breaking business has to start somewhere. Often, it’s born when someone stumbles across a problem and thinks that they not only can find a solution, but start a business from it. And with that, a new entrepreneur is born. Plenty of these companies, of course, have gotten their start in Silicon Valley and San Francisco Bay area. The region’s track record is legendary. There’s the story of the Steves (Jobs and Wozniak) creating the irst Apple computer in Job’s garage. Or the one when Evan Williams started to experiment with short message services to come up with something that was irst called Twttr before becoming the Twitter we know today. Those companies — and plenty more that today we call unicorns or giants or even titans — have grown into some of the most valuable and powerful in the world. As such, they’ve got countless reporters following their every move, eager to report what’s up with famous founders like Facebook’s Mark Zuckerberg or Salesforce’s Marc Benioff. But this region has far more sto-ries to tell, of young entrepreneurs coming up with the next great con-sumer product or an indispensable tool to help businesses run better. The San Francisco Business Times and the Silicon Valley Business Journal have always been on the lookout for these next-generation business leaders, sharing their sto-ries in these publications, honoring them in programs like 40 Under 40 and covering them when they raise big funding rounds or when they confront failure. Now, we’re going deeper with our coverage of the region’s startup ecosystem with the launch of Bay Area Inno, a joint effort by the Business Times and Business Journal. On a daily basis, we’ll be bringing you stories not just of new entrepreneurs, but also of venture capitalists who focus on early-stage companies and of the numerous incubator and accelerator programs that help grow companies. Bay Area Inno is part of a nationwide rollout of locally focused sites that all have the same mission: to identify a diverse group of ambitious entrepreneurs and their backers and to bring their stories to you. Almost every publication that is part of our parent company, American City Business Journals, either has already launched Inno or is doing so now. Business Times and Business Journal subscribers will get access to Bay Area Inno as part of their subscriptions, and they’ll ind an Inno page in each paper’s weekly editions. If someone wants to just get Inno news, there will be a digital subscription for them too after a period when stories are open to all readers. In time, Inno will also be putting on events with the aim of bringing like-minded founders and funders together. To get things started, this week we’re presenting the irst in what will be a regular feature, Inno Under 25, that will introduce you to young entrepreneurs and the businesses they’re creating. Soon you’ll see other features, like Startups to Watch and Inno on Fire. Our goal with this new product is two-fold. First, to bring readers stories of innovative new companies and non-proits, as well as proiles of the people aiming to break into the billionaire’s club with their next-generation idea. And second, to help connect people in this amazing ecosystem together. Welcome to Bay Area Inno. 

— Douglas Fruehling is editor-in-chief of the San Francisco Business Times. J. Jennings Moss is editor-in-chief and general manager of the Silicon Valley Business Journal 

Alexandr Wang ............................................. 23 

Co-founder and CEO, Scale AI 

Sujude Dalieh ............................................... 23 

Founder and CEO, Gajo 

Adam Guild ....................................................24 

Co-founder and CEO, Owner.com 

Christine Hong ..............................................24 

Founder and CEO, Apothecary 

Pranavi Cheemakurti ....................................25 

Venture Investor, Forum Ventures 

Nick Hershey .................................................25 

Co-founder and CEO, Rundoo 

Rajat Bhageria ...............................................25 

Founder, Chef Robotics and Prototype Capital 

Jasmine Sanchez and Jalen Brown ............. 26 

Co-founders, Vessel Athletics 

Zain Zaidi ...................................................... 26 

Founder and CEO, Transcrypts 

Eric Zhou and Usman Hanif ......................... 26 

Co-founders, Portals 

INNO UNDER 25 PROFILES 

# Choose the best ways to grow your business 

# OFF 

## TOOLS + RESOURCES 

# SUMMER 

# SALE 

Through Labor Day Promo Code: SUMMER25 

or visit: promo.bizjournals.com/2021/summersale LACEY PATTERSON | LPATTERSON@BIZJOURNALS.COM 

# To Learn More Contact Find the Right Clients Highlight Employees Share Company News 

with Book of Lists with People on the Move with BizSpotlight 

Local company data and contact information at your fingertips. Share hiring announcements and employee achievements. 

Promote Your Events Celebrate Success 

with our Calendar with The Recognition Shop 

Place your events in front of thousands of influential leaders in the community. Commemorate your positive press with plaques, reprints, digital ePrints and more. Utilize our multi-channel press release to reach a targeted audience of local executives. 

22 SAN FRANCISCO BUSINESS TIMES INNO UNDER 25 

# Every ground-breaking business 

has to start somewhere. Often, 

it’s born when someone stumbles 

across a problem and thinks that Of course, that humility is backed by hard work and the ability to see and pur-sue opportunities when they arise. Her own startup story began as an under-graduate student focusing on the hard sciences before a car accident led her to change her focus and explore new interests in design. That ultimately led to roles in product development and con-sulting, working on edtech and health care products and eventually getting an entryway into venture capital, including roles at Lux Capital and K50 Ventures. 

— Kevin Truong 

# SUJUDE DALIEH 

Age: 25 

Title/company: Founder and CEO, Gajo 

Location: Menlo Park 

Education: B.S. in physical chemistry from UC Berkeley; M.E. in design from Stanford University 

Resume: Dalieh found her way in the startup and innovation world through a nontraditional path that included spells at startup incubator Socos Labs and as a consultant at Alchemist Accelerator. 

Social media habits: Dalieh mainly uses Instagram to keep her friends and family updated on her personal life. Twitter, on the other hand, is mainly for business. Her key follow? Turner Novak (@TurnerNovak), an investor at early-stage Banana Capital known for both his startup advice as well as his startup memes. 

# Education has always been a big part of Sujude Dalieh’s life. She grew up tutoring in her hometown in Ohio, taught classes while attending UC Berkeley, and worked a side gig as a sub-stitute teacher early in her career. What she found through those expe-riences was a pervading sense of anxiety among her students as they tentatively tried to answer the perennial question: What are you going to do with your life? Dalieh said many of the students she spoke to turned to influencers or social media figures as “pseudo-mentors” to model themselves after. Seeing an opportunity to provide a more validated information source, she co-founded Gajo, a career exploration app that combines the social networking aspects of TikTok or Reddit with the job searching aspects of a Glassdoor. The idea was to create a platform that combined information about work-life balance, pay and benefits, with vetted professionals who could give real insight into the actual career path they took. “I think there’s a shift in how young people think about jobs as more lifestyle based, but there’s not a defined path. They’re piecing together that understanding through social media or blogs,” Dalieh said. The sense of directionlessness is a feeling that Dalieh relates to. Although ironically, she would probably be the person many people would look to as a model for a professional career. “I always tell people not to use me as an example because I honestly think a lot of my story is luck,” she said. 

# ALEXANDR WANG 

like Flexport, GM, Luminar and Oshkosh; as well as agencies like the Department of Defense and the U.S. Air Force. Wang said the AI industry is at a crit-ical tipping point — where companies are needed to help unlock the potential of AI and enable mass adoption. Inves-tors seem to agree, pouring in more than $600 million in funding, including a recent $325 million in Series E at a $7.3 billion valuation. “In Silicon Valley specifically, big tech companies have reaped massive gains from AI while other enterprises who don’t have the time or resources to invest in AI development have been left behind,” he said. 

— Ted Andersen 

Age: 24 

Title/company: Co-founder and CEO, Scale AI 

Location: San Francisco 

Education: MIT (did not finish) 

Resume: He worked as a software engi-neer in Silicon Valley before becoming Tech Lead at Quora from 2014-2016. 

Funny but true: While at MIT, he worked on side projects such as a smart camera that would tell him if he needed to restock the fridge and what he needed to buy. 

Musical instrument: Violin 

# Hailing from Los Alamos, New Mexico (better known as the birthplace of the atomic bomb), Alexandr Wang has always had an interest in scientific inno-vation and problem solving. The inspiration for his company Scale AI came when he was a student study-ing mathematics and computer science at MIT, and realized that data was a key bottleneck for people looking to build meaningful AI tools. So, in the vein of tech magnates with names like Gates and Zuckerberg, he dropped out at 19 and co-founded his startup with Lucy Guo in 2016. The company specializes in acceler-ating the development of AI applications by helping machine-learning teams generate data using advanced LiDAR, image, video and NLP annotation APIs. Essentially, Scale Ai delivers the high quality training data needed to fuel next generation industries like self-driving cars, virtual reality and robotics. “The phrase ‘you are what you eat’ can apply to AI algorithms and data: consuming low quality data leads to garbage results and even dangerous outcomes,” he said. “To provide AI with a ‘balanced diet,’ Scale is like a chef pre-paring data to ensure it meets rigorous quality standards before feeding it to algorithms.” Today, Scale partners with the largest technology companies in the world on their most ambitious AI projects, across industries like fintech with companies like Brex and Square; e-commerce busi-nesses like Etsy, Instacart and Pinterest; transportation and logistics companies SEPTEMBER 1723, 2021 23 INNO UNDER 25 

> LIPO CHING  SFBT GETTY IMAGES

# ADAM GUILD 

other because we were always having to compete for players,” Guild said. “At the end of our conversation, he said, ’I want to give you $100,000 of my own money to help you figure this out, and help you raise the rest.’” Within 72 hours, Guild informally secured $3.6 million in commitments from Redpoint Ventures and other backers, ultimately leading to a $10.7 million seed round led by the SaaStr Fund and contributions from The Chainsmokers, the host of MSNBC’s “The Profit,” and some of Guild’s own clients who believe in a big future for the freemium platform. 

— Alex Barreira 

way that younger people identify and shop for products through social media. The startup focuses on partnerships to uplift smaller indie brands that have the opportunity to break out as the next Glossier or Drunk Elephant. “All this information has historically been behind these closed doors and takes literally several years to under-stand,” Hong said. “With Gen Z, there’s more of a culture around skin positivity and that acne is normal and even beauti-ful. People are starting to become more comfortable around talking about imper-fection and progress, not perfection.” 

— Kevin Truong 

# CHRISTINE HONG 

Age: 21 

Title/company: Co-founder and CEO, Owner.com 

Location: Palo Alto 

Education: Dropped out of high school in tenth grade, later completed inde-pendent courses online through Harvard Business School and MIT. 

Resume: Forbes 30 under 30 (Class of 2020), Thiel Fellow Class of 2020, first LLC established at age 13. 

Fun fact: Adam’s younger brother, Top-per Guild (19), has more than 25.3 million followers on TikTok. 

Age: 24 

Title/company: Founder and CEO, Apothecary 

Location: San Francisco 

Education: B.A. in neurobiology from Harvard University 

Resume: Prior to starting Apothecary, Hong worked as an intern at startups including Mighty AI. In college, while working at Massachusetts General Hospital, she helped co-author a study looking at the use of anabolic steroids on lower-extremity ulcers. 

Outside of work: Hong grew up playing classical violin and still counts music as a big part of her life. Other hobbies include hiking and making pickles. 

# For Owner.com co-founder and CEO Adam Guild, a pet project he started at 12 years old — building an online com-munity in the PC game Minecraft — ulti-mately became a crash course in growth marketing, coding, entrepreneurship and the betting-on-yourself confidence to launch multiple businesses by his 21st birthday. It didn’t appear that way at first, when he dropped out of school in 10th grade to put more time into growing the server that would eventually reach some 7 million players (his parents were “super f—ing pissed about it, to be fair,” according to Guild). But it’s hard to argue with results. After growing a lucrative side hustle via players’ purchases of in-game currency, the then-17-year-old channeled his experience in community building into online marketing for his mom’s new dog care grooming business in West Hollywood. Through a number of iterations, Guild eventually developed — with the help of friend and eventual co-founder Dean Bloembergen — a suite of tools for small businesses to turn website visits into conversions and manage food delivery orders, but at a lower cost and allowing clients better autonomy over their own data than services like UberEats, Door-Dash and GrubHub. In a remarkable twist last year, an interviewer for the $100,000 Thiel Fel-lowship recognized Guild’s old Minecraft username. “We knew each other by our server and in-game names. We hated each 

# Christine Hong’s inspiration for her startup Apothecary is a familiar one for those who have faced issues with their skin. After struggling with acne through-out high school and college, Hong’s mother — who happens to be a derma-tologist — helped her access prescrip-tion skin treatments that included the acne treatment Accutane. While the medication worked, they often came with severe side effects, leaving Hong trying to find a better solution. Her search took her to skincare and makeup counters and put her face-to-face with the dizzying array of products being offered on store shelves. “I realized that there was a tre-mendous learning curve to educate themselves about ingredients and the only way to find what works for you is through trial and error,” Hong said. “I recognized that there was this big gap between beauty and science.” So she turned to social media, scroll-ing Youtube videos and Reddit threads to collect tips and connect with others searching for effective skincare products. She also observed was the rise of “skin-fluencers,” social media figures specializ-ing in beauty and skincare regimens. Hong’s eight-person startup has giv-en these creators the chance to mone-tize their networks through personalized guidance. Users answer a survey to get a baseline skin type and routine, and are recommended experts and products that are shipped directly from the sup-plier to customers. Apothecary’s model speaks to the 

24 SAN FRANCISCO BUSINESS TIMES INNO UNDER 25 

> CHRISTINE HONG  SFBT PHOTO ILLUSTRATION PALO ALTO HEADSHOTS

SEPTEMBER 1723, 2021 25 INNO UNDER 25 

PRANAVI 

CHEEMAKURTI Venture capital continues to be a diversity laggard. Women make up less than 10% of the industry, according to most surveys, and members of most ethnic minorities are fewer still. But the greatest discrepancies are at the deci-sion-making level — this is the dynamic that Pranavi Cheemakurti is working to change, from the inside. “I see venture capital as a tool for advocacy and activism,” she said. Cheemakurti is a venture investor at Forum Ventures, formerly Acceleprise, which specializes in pre-seed and seed-round funding. Since joining the firm in January 2020, she’s worked on roughly a dozen financings, serving as the “final decision maker” on many of them. Her interest in VC was piqued as a college student in Ontario, Canada, by a video she watched of Silicon Valley investment titan Chamath Palihapitiya, arguing that investors’ decisions can turn capital into an agent of change. “That idea is what got me hooked,” she said. “Capital and capital allocation can be used as a systemic vehicle to build the world you want to be in.” Her 200 emails to VC firms to ask about internship opportunities elicited three responses — all no. She came to the Bay Area anyway, and ended working at a “boot camp” for Canadian female founders seeking to better access capital. A conversation with a principal of VU Venture Partners about some of the companies that had presented led to a meeting with VU founder Skyler Fernandes — and the next day, a summer job offer. She had her foot in the door. “I had a chance to read deals and run DD (due diligence) like a real VC,” she said. Cheemakurti took three companies to the VU investment committee, and one of them was funded: “At this point, I was a 22-year-old with a portfolio company.” So when she again went courting for VC jobs after graduation, things were different: “I had a track record.” Cheemakurti said she values the chance to bring a fresh — and young-er — perspective to venture investment decisions. “There are not a lot of people who look like me who do this job,” she said. “I am a first-generation South Asian, specifically Indian immigrant. My cultur-al identification informs my career. My heritage is a huge part of who I am.” 

— Jim Gardner 

RAJAT 

BHAGERIA Rajat Bhageria started and sold his first startup before he even finished college. Soon after graduating, he co-founded Prototype Capital, a venture capital firm with the mission of finding and funding innovative ideas and entrepreneurs out-side of traditional innovation centers like the Bay Area and New York City. So what’s left to accomplish for the wunderkind? Revolutionizing the food industry through his San Francisco start-up Chef Robotics. Bhageri, who was born in India and grew up in Cincinnati, comes from a line of engineers on his father’s side and businesspeople on his mother’s side. Among his list of idols are inventors like Thomas Edison, Steve Jobs and Elon Musk. The philosophy that drives him is turning advances in software and ma-chine learning toward problems in the physical world. Chef is a perfect encapsulation of this idea. The company’s focus is using cutting-edge robotics to address the very physical problems around labor that are endemic in food production. “In 2019, when we were starting Chef, we saw that food service and production companies desperately need some sort of solution to their labor problem because they basically had half of their people coming to work,” Bhageria said. “I mean, literally. If you’re missing half of your labor force, you just don’t have enough supply of people to meet the demand of customers. It really is a desperate problem.” The road to success is littered with the mechanical carcasses of other robotics companies, but Bhageria said he’s learned from their missteps. For one, Chef is focused on serving other food companies as a B2B business rather than starting their own restaurant, simplifying their revenue model. It also takes a page out of large manufacturers like Boeing, surveying and selling to potential customers prior to production, to ensure that their machine comes out right the first time. Bhageria touts millions in pre-bookings and the $7.7 million seed and pre-seed round from Kleiner Perkins, Promus Ventures and Bloomberg Beta, among others, as validation of the company’s strategy. The next mission for the 15-person startup is pretty simple, albeit daunting: Change the way we produce the food we eat every day. 

— Kevin Truong 

NICK 

HERSHEY With Rundoo, Nick Hershey is using technology to kick the archaic process used by suppliers and contrac-tors to exchange building materials into the modern world. “The large majority of materials purchases are still having, in very old-fashioned ways, these back and forths happening between contractors,” Hershey said. “This could be so much more efficient if you brought more modern communication and ordering, and payments that were all online.” Hershey and co-founder Andrew Beckman launched Rundoo earlier this year to build a platform for residential contractors to exchange building supplies like paint, brushes, rollers, wood, fasteners and tools. The name for the company came via a brainstorming session with the two to find a moniker that was easy to pronounce and memorable. “If you heard it, you could write it, and if you read it, you could say it,” Hershey said. “So we just made up a bunch of nonsense words, and we liked this one.” Originally hailing from Cincinnati, Hershey first came to California to study at Stanford. While he was drawn in by the proximity to the Bay Area tech ecosystem, coming from a family of Big Ten fanatics he was also looking for a school with a well defined and historic sports culture. Hershey said he and his co-founder share a lot of duties, though Hershey takes care of more of the sales, product management and fundraising. “We both are doing a little bit of everything, we both try to be on the same page about everything,” he said. “We both are super in sync all the time, rather than neat clean lines (between) what we’re doing.” As the founder of a young startup — Rundoo currently has three employ-ees — Hershey’s job involves wearing different hats on a daily basis. It’s a part of the job, but that’s not to say it isn’t a challenge. “It’s a very hectic roller coaster between having to meet with all these customers, understand their needs, and then rapidly adapt a product based on their feedback,” Hershey said. “It’s simultaneously the hard part, but also the really fun part.” 

— Sonya Herrera 

Age: 24 

Title/company: Venture Investor, Forum Ventures 

Location: San Francisco 

Education: B.S., Western University (Canada); attending Purdue University Global 

Resume: Cheemakurti interned at RBC Capital on the trading floor and then at VU Ventures. She’s since worked in early-stage investing at Republic Venture Partners and in seed investing at Forum Ventures. 

Fun fact: “I disastrously tried to start a company in college and it blew up in my face.” 

Age: 25 

Title/company: Co-founder and CEO, Rundoo 

Location: San Francisco 

Education: B.S. in math and computer science from Stanford University 

Resume: Hershey worked at Google as a product manager intern, then at Bridge-water Associates as an investment analyst before spending time at Citadel Securities and crypto-focused Enigma Securities. 

Hobbies: Loves playing tennis and basketball, along with “outdoorsy stuff” like hiking. He also plays jazz piano. Among his favorite musicians? Oscar Peterson and Bill Evans. 

Age: 25 

Title/company: Founder and CEO, Chef Robotics; founder and managing partner, Prototype Capital 

Location: San Francisco 

Education: B.S. in economics and M.S. in engineering from the University of Pennsylvania 

Resume: Bhageria was one of the co-founders of ThirdEye Technologies, a tool used to help visually impaired people navigate the world through auditory mes-sages. Born out of a college hackathon, he served as CEO of the company until it was acquired by TheBlindGuide in 2017. 

Surprising fact: Bhageria says his first entrepreneurial effort was self-publish-ing a book called “What High School Didn’t Teach Me,” which he wrote at the age of 17, recounting his experiences as a recent graduate. 26 SAN FRANCISCO BUSINESS TIMES INNO UNDER 25 

JASMINE SANCHEZ 

JALEN BROWN Dehydration is a major concern for runners, particularly in the current dry weather conditions aff licting the Bay Area. San Jose entrepreneurs Jasmine Sanchez and Jalen Brown have come up with a novel way to make it easier for those exercising to drink water. The duo are working on creating the HydroShirt, a piece of apparel that seamlessly integrates water into its design, to provide a more comfortable way people to hydrate on the go. Sanchez came up the idea when she enrolled in her first 5K race a few years ago. As her training and competitions grew longer, she struggled to find a suitable way to keep hydrated. “I went through a series of different hydration products,” Sanchez said. “The backpacks and vests were often very heavy, very bulky. I also didn’t want to be holding a bottle in my hand.” Sanchez and Brown were classmates at San Jose State. Brown, who had already had experience starting his own skateboard brand, knew how to locate manufacturers, and the two worked to get the business off the ground. That first professional meeting blossomed into a personal relationship and a romantic one. The two have now been dating for three years, and their company has grown to five employees. The startup is now looking for manufacturers for its first HydroShirt design to hopefully launch a prototype by December, so that she and Brown can wear their product while running in the California International Marathon in Sacramento. “Our main focus right now is to engage with other runners out there and share our product with them and get feedback,” Brown said. “At the end of the day, we’re still learning, we’re taking it each day at a time.” Once a prototype is ready, Sanchez and Brown aim to raise money for production through a Kickstarter fund. “The most effective thing tight now has been really reaching out to the running community early on,” Sanchez said. “We want to show them that we’re not just a brand, we have real faces and are real people.” 

— Sonya Herrera 

ERIC ZHOU 

USMAN HANIF Using Portals, a platform started by Stanford students Usman Hanif and Eric Zhou, celebrities and influencers can reach out and engage with their fan bases. More importantly, though, the startup allows fans to interact and connect with each other. “A lot of these fandoms call them-selves a cult,” Hanif said. “Current social media is really good to display content, but it isn’t built for community.” The service allows influencers to offer their own merchandise, along with a “master clipboard” of behind-the-scenes content, chatrooms and other features offered to fans on a subscription basis. “We’re building less of a social media and building more of an infrastructure company,” Hanif said. “Websites are a little outdated, and also require a lot of upfront work for the influencer or celeb-rity, so we go ahead and make them an entire portal.” The idea came about when Hanif took a sports management class, where he commingled with a lot of athletes who spoke about the strength and voracity of sports communities. That gave Hanif and Zhou the seed of an idea to create a content-based community for fans. Zhou said what they see missing from existing channels is an easy way for fans to interact with each other, while also engaging with their influencer or celebrity of choice. They also wanted to create a pathway for TikTok influencers who have built up viral communities to monetize their content and their engagement. The two founders, who been friends since middle school, are both are the children of immigrants. Hanif’s parents are from Pakistan, while Zhou’s parents are from China. Both credit the lessons and the work ethic their families provided as key to their success, even with the caveat that their parents are unlikely to be the target users of their product. “One of their biggest dreams was to start their own businesses … so I’m kind of living out their dreams and doing it for them by doing this myself,” Zhou said. 

— Sonya Herrera 

ZAIN 

ZAIDI Zain Zaidi is looking to transform how people apply for jobs via blockchain technology. The founder of TransCrypts, which hosts employment documents on the digital ledger system, argues that the current way of verifying employment documents is outdated and dysfunctional. “There’s no good way of storing verified documents digitally,” Zaidi said. “If it gets on the blockchain, you can’t lie about it.” The company aims to get important files such as college transcripts, employment, income verification documents and even Covid-19 vaccination passports uploaded to the blockchain, where they can be securely stored and accessible to whoever needs them. “The potential for this is in a lot of different applications,” Zaidi said. TransCrypts now has 45 beta customers, including Zoom and Urban Outfitters, and is raising money to grow its team and platform to expand beyond employment verification documents. Right now, the company has nine employees, most of whom work in software and cybersecurity. “We don’t want people’s medical records to get leaked on the Internet,” Zaidi said. “This would be a lot more secure and safe.” He said he was motivated to start his own business by his parents. His mother is from Pakistan and his father is from India. His family lost their home during the Great Recession, and that inspired him to pursue a role that could ensure greater financial independence and security. “Both my parents are immigrants, so they didn’t even know the loans they were signing,” Zaidi said. “That kind of put in my mind, ‘Hey, I gotta get my family out of this cycle that we’re in.’” The pandemic provided Zaidi a great opportunity to dedicate his time and energy into the new venture, which he founded last year. “I had nothing else to do, so let me put all my time into this,” he said. “It slowly, but steadily, came alive.” 

— Sonya Herrera 

ABOUT JASMINE 

Age: 23 

Title/company: 

Co-founder and CEO, Vessel Athletics 

Location: 

San Jose 

Education: B.S. from San Jose State University 

Resume: 

Interned at a number of start-up accelerators. Currently a cor-porate partner-ships manager for Plug and Play Tech Center. 

ABOUT ERIC 

Age: 21 

Title/company: 

Co-founder and CTO, Portals 

Location: 

Stanford 

Education: 

Computer science student at Stanford University (class of 2022) 

Hobbies: 

Practicing guitar, hiking and watching Korean dramas on Netflix 

ABOUT JALEN 

Age: 25 

Title/company: 

Co-founder and COO, Vessel Athletics 

Location: 

San Jose 

Education: B.S. from San Jose State University 

Resume: Worked in business de-velopment roles at SV Academy, Talend and Quin-Street. Now he’s an enterprise account execu-tive for Adobe. 

ABOUT USMAN 

Age: 20 

Title/company: 

Co-founder and CEO, Portals 

Location: 

Stanford 

Education: 

Computer science student at Stanford University (class of 2022) 

Favorite social media app: 

TikTok — “It’s sort of a guilty pleasure of mine, spending too much time scroll-ing through.” 

Age: 21 

Title/company: Founder and CEO, TransCrypts 

Location: Fremont 

Education: B.S. in electrical and elec-tronics engineering from San Jose State University 

Resume: Account assistant at a family-run company, intern at JP Morgan investment bank 

Hobbies: Post pandemic: Hiking, mountain climbing, basketball, hanging out with his parents and sister. Pre-pandemic: Traveling to places in Turkey, Europe, Singapore and the Middle East. ELAINE FORBES 

Executive Director Port of San Francisco 

# FUTURE OF SAN FRANCISCO 

# PROJECTS, PREDICTIONS, AND THE GREAT RESET 

This annual signature event has gone virtual. The focus is on the future, and changing real estate dynamics, as people rethink how they work, live, play and shop. San Francisco Mayor London Breed opens the program with a candid conversation on what lies ahead for San Francisco development and the economy. We will look at the future of the Waterfront and Port development, and the myriad of transformative projects underway and in the pipeline. A panel of developers and industry leaders will discuss the future of San Francisco, status of key projects, the future of office and retail, and significant challenges, threats, and opportunities the city and development community are facing. What are the changes yet to come in real estate in San Francisco? For more information, please contact FELICIA BROWN at fbrown@bizjournals.com 

TITLE SPONSOR 

Registration URL BIZJOURNALS.COM/SANFRANCISCO/EVENT/166370/2021/SAN-FRANCISCO-STRUCTURES FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 24 | 9:00 – 10:30 AM | VIRTUAL EVENT Q&A KEYNOTE SPEAKERS 

MAYOR LONDON BREED 

City of San Francisco 

FRAN WELD 

Senior VP, Strategy & Development SF Giants 

JESSE BLOUT 

Founding Partner Strada Investment Group 

SIMON W.R. SNELLGROVE 

Principal Pacific Waterfront Partners, LLC 

JACK SYLVAN 

SVP, Development | Mixed‑use Development Brookfield Properties 

PARTNER SPONSORS PARTNERING ASSOCIATIONS 

SEPTEMBER 17–23, 2021  27 28  SAN FRANCISCO BUSINESS TIMES 

Compiled by Ahalya Srikant 415-288-4962, @AhalyaSrikant asrikant@bizjournals.com 

NOTES: NR - not reported. 

# BIOTECH COMPANIES IN THE EAST BAY 

RANKED BY EAST BAY EMPLOYEES 

OLDEST COMPANIES 

By year founded Bayer 1863 Boehringer Ingelheim 1885 

NEWEST COMPANIES 

By year founded Shiru Inc. 2019 Ansa Biotechnologies 2018 

MOST COMPANYWIDE EMPLOYEES 

Bayer 99,538 Boehringer Ingelheim 52,000 Beigene 7,000 

NEW LIST 

This list is new this year, prior rank is not included on the List. 

ABOUT THE LIST 

This List includes biotech companies in the East Bay, defined as Alameda and Contra Costa counties. 

NEED A COPY OF THE LIST? 

For information on obtaining commemorative plaques, reprints or web permissions, contact Lacey Patterson at 415-288-4961, or at lpatterson@ bizjournals.com. 

WANT TO SEE OUR FULL LISTS ONLINE? 

To see this and other lists online (often including more listings and information not shown in print), visit bizjournals.com/ sanfrancisco/datacenter/ lists. 

R CLOSER LOOK 

Business name Website Address Phone East Bay employees Companywide employees Business description Year founded Top local executive(s) 

11 Bayer 

bayer.com/berkeley 

800 Dwight Way Berkeley, CA 94710 510-705-5000 1,063 99,538 Health care and agriculture life sciences 1863 Jens Vogel, SVP/ Global head of biotech 

22 10x Genomics 

10xgenomics.com 

6230 Stoneridge Mall Rd. Pleasanton, CA 94588 925-401-7300 655 852 Builds instruments, consumables and software for analyzing biological systems 2012 Serge Saxonov, CEO 

33 Boehringer Ingelheim 

boehringer-ingelheim.com 

6701 Kaiser Dr. Fremont, CA 94555 510-608-6500 650 52,000 Human biologics manufacturing 1885 Lars Dreesmann, President, Boehringer Ingelheim Fremont Inc. 

44 Zymergen Inc. 

zymergen.com 

5980 Horton St. #105 Emeryville, CA 94608 415-801-8073 600 NR Designs and creates microbial strains 2013 Jay Flatley, Chairman/Acting CEO 

55 Amyris 

amyris.com 

5885 Hollis St. #100 Emeryville, CA 94608 510-450-0761 430 595 Synthetic biology 2004 John Melo, President/CEO 

66 Exelixis Inc. 

exelixis.com 

1851 Harbor Bay Pkwy., Alameda, CA 94502 650-837-7000 339 908 Genomics-based drugs to treat cancer 1994 Michael Morrissey, President/CEO 

77 Arcus Biosciences Inc. 

arcusbio.com 

3928 Point Eden Way Hayward, CA 94545 510-694-6200 236 236 Cancer therapeutics through the use of immunology 2015 Terry Rosen, CEO 

77 Revance Therapeutics Inc. 

revance.com 

7555 Gateway Blvd. Newark, CA 94560 510-742-3400 236 500 Neuromodulators, peptides, biotechnology, neurology, dermatology/ medical aesthetics 2002 Tobin Schilke, CFO 

99 Sangamo Therapeutics Inc. 

sangamo.com 

7000 Marina Blvd. Brisbane, CA 94005 510-970-6000 167 413 Clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company with a robust genomic medicines pipeline 1995 Sandy Macrae, CEO 

10 10 BeiGene 

beigene.com 

2955 Campus Dr. San Mateo, CA 94403 877-828-5568 160 7,000 Oncology 2010 Jane Huang, CMO, Hematology 

111 1 Adamas Pharmaceuticals Inc. 

adamaspharma.com 

1900 Powell St. #750 Emeryville, CA 94608 510-450-3554 138 138 Develops drugs for dyskinesia in people with Parkinson's disease, multiple sclerosis, epilepsy 2002 Neil McFarlane, CEO 

12 12 Zogenix Inc. 

zogenix.com 

5858 Horton St. #650 Emeryville, CA 94608 510-550-8300 110 1 NR Epilepsy, central nervous system disorders 2006 Stephen Farr, President/CEO 

13 13 Dynavax Technologies Corp. 

dynavax.com 

2100 Powell St. #900 Emeryville, CA 94608 510-848-5100 100 257 Vaccines 2000 Ryan Spencer, CEO 

13 13 Upside Foods Inc. 2

upsidefoods.com 

804 Heinz Ave. Berkeley, CA 94710 hello@upsidefood.com 100 3 NR Cultured meat company 2015 Uma Valeti, CEO 

15 15 Lucira Health 

lucirahealth.com 

1412 62nd St. Emeryville, CA 94608 510-350-8071 95 1 NR Develops infectious disease test kits 2013 Erik Engelson, President/CEO 

16 16 Ardelyx Inc. 

ardelyx.com 

34175 Ardenwood Blvd. #200 Fremont, CA 94555 510-745-7047 90 1 NR Cardio-renal, renal and gastrointestinal 2007 Michael Raab, President/CEO 

17 17 Caribou Biosciences Inc. 

cariboubio.com 

2929 7th St. #105 Berkeley, CA 94710 510-982-6030 75 79 Clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company, developing genome-edited off-the-shelf immune cell therapies for the treatment of cancer 2011 Rachel Haurwitz, President and CEO 

18 18 Nutcracker Therapeutics 

nutcrackerrx.com 

5858 Horton St. Emeryville, CA 94608 510-473-8478 70 1 NR mRNA based drug therapeutic products 2017 Igor Khandros, CEO 

119 9 Zosano Pharma Corp. 

zosanopharma.com 

34790 Ardentech Ct. Fremont, CA 94555 510-745-1200 60 1 NR Develops a transdermal patch system to deliver drugs through the skin 2006 Steven Lo, CEO 

220 0 Octant 

octant.bio 

6701 Hollis St. Emeryville, CA 94608 35 36 Small molecule therapeutics company scaling drug discovery to navigate the complexity of human diseases at unprecedented scales 2017 Sri Kosuri, CEO 

220 0 Scribe Therapeutics 

scribetx.com 

1150 Marina Village Pkwy. Alameda, CA 94501 35 35 Molecular engineering company creating the most advanced technologies for CRISPR-based genetic medicine 2017 Benjamin Oakes, President/CEO 

222 2 Paragon Genomics 

paragongenomics.com 

3521 Investment Blvd. #1 Hayward, CA 94545 510-363-9918 17 25 Amplicon-based target enrichment 2015 Tao Chen, CEO 

23 23 Ansa Biotechnologies 

ansabio.com 

1198 65th St. #250 Emeryville, CA 94609 248-227-5556 15 16 Developing an enzymatic DNA synthesis method to help accelerate innovation for therapeutics, diagnostics & biomanufacturing 2018 Sebastian Palluk, CTO Daniel Arlow, CEO 

224 4 Emery Pharma 

emerypharma.com 

1000 Atlantic Ave. #110 Alameda, CA 94501 info@emerypharma.com 14 NR Contract research laboratory, specializing in microbiology, cell biology, medicinal chemistry, and bioanalytical services 2011 Ron Najafi, CEO 

25 25 Shiru Inc. 

shiru.com 

6460 Hollis St. Suite A Emeryville, CA 94608 510-900-0308 13 15 Sustainable protein ingredients for food CPG companies 2019 Jasmin Hume, CEO Number based on SFBT estimate. 1 Previously Memphis Meats. 2 Over 100. 3Attracting the best and the brightest to our vibrant research campuses — whether it’s the young company sparked by a brilliant idea or a corporation whose fortunes span the globe. 

# Building the East Shore and its critical biotech cluster since 1977.  

> SEPTEMBER 17–23, 2021 29

30  SAN FRANCISCO BUSINESS TIMES 

# 6.6% Unemployment rate in the region of Oakland-Hayward-Berkeley in July 2021, compared to 12% in July 2020 according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics 

ABOUT THE LIST 

This List includes nonprofit, privately held and publicly held companies with offices in the East Bay, defined as Alameda and Contra Costa counties. For this list, the Bay Area is defined as Alameda, Contra Costa, Marin, San Francisco and San Mateo counties. Information was obtained from company representatives and from SFBT research. In case of ties, number of Bay Area employees was used as secondary ranking criteria. 

NEED A COPY OF THE LIST? 

For information on obtaining commemorative plaques, reprints or web permissions, contact Lacey Patterson at 415-288-4961, or at lpatterson@ bizjournals.com. No other companies offering similar services are affiliated in any way with the Business Times. More information can be found online at SanFranciscoBusinessTimes. com by clicking the “Store” tab near the top of the site. 

WANT TO BE ON THE LIST? 

If you wish to be surveyed when The List is next updated, or if you wish to be considered for other Lists, email your contact information to Ahalya Srikant at asrikant@ bizjournals.com. 

WANT TO SEE OUR FULL LISTS ONLINE? 

To see this and other lists online (often including more listings and information not shown in print), visit bizjournals.com/ sanfrancisco/datacenter/ lists. 

R CLOSER LOOK 

NOTES: NR - not reported. * - did not rank. 

# EMPLOYERS IN THE EAST BAY 

RANKED BY NUMBER OF OAKLAND EMPLOYEES IN NONPROFIT, PRIVATE AND PUBLICLY HELD COMPANIES 

Compiled by Ahalya Srikant 415-288-4962, @AhalyaSrikant asrikant@bizjournals.com 

Company/Prior rank 

Website Address Phone East Bay employees Bay Area employees Companywide employees Business description Top local executive 

11 Kaiser Permanente 1

kp.org 

1 Kaiser Plz. Oakland, CA 94612 510-271-5910 34,666 46,352 216,776 Integrated health care system Gregory Adams, Chairman/ CEO 

22 Tesla Inc. 2

tesla.com 

3500 Deer Creek Rd. Palo Alto, CA 94304 650-681-5000 13,000 1 26,000 70,757 Electric vehicle manufacturing Elon Musk, CEO 

33 Safeway 3

safeway.com 

5918 Stoneridge Mall Rd. Pleasanton, CA 94588 925-467-3000 9,731 14,474 300,000 Grocery stores Karl Schroeder, Safeway division president, Northern California 

44 Sutter Health 4

sutterhealth.org 

2000 Powell St. 10th Fl. Emeryville, CA 94608 510-457-7333 9,377 18,710 55,000 Health care system Julie Petrini, CEO, Sutter Bay Hospitals Lizz Vilardo, CEO, Bay Area Foundations Sutter Health 

55 John Muir Health 5

johnmuirhealth.com 

1400 Treat Blvd. Walnut Creek, CA 94597 925-939-3000 6,300 6,300 6,300 Health care system Cal Knight, President/CEO 

66 PG&E 7

pgecorp.com 

77 Beale St. Rm. 2905A San Francisco, CA 94105 415-973-1000 5,100 9,300 23,500 Electric and gas utilities Patricia Poppe, CEO 

77 Workday 9

workday.com 

6110 Stoneridge Mall Rd. #200 Pleasanton, CA 94588 925-951-9000 5,098 2 10,536 13,100 Enterprise cloud application provider Aneel Bhusri, Co-CEO/ Chairman 

88 Chevron Corp. 6

chevron.com 

6001 Bollinger Canyon Rd. San Ramon, CA 94583 925-842-1000 4,700 9,400 47,736 Energy production company Michael Wirth, Chairman/ CEO 

99 Wells Fargo & Co. 8

wellsfargo.com 

420 Montgomery St. San Francisco, CA 94104 415-979-0775 4,354 12,035 268,531 Financial services Jim Foley, EVP/President, Pacific region 

10 10 Allied Universal 12 

aus.com 

545 Sansome St. 6th Fl. San Francisco, CA 94111 415-926-6401 3,454 9,309 250,000 Security services Mike Smidt, President, Northwest region 

111 1 Lam Research Corp. 10 

lamresearch.com 

4650 Cushing Pkwy. Fremont, CA 95438 510-572-0200 3,300 3,300 13,100 Semiconductor manufacturing equipment and services Tim Archer, President/CEO 

12 12 Southwest Airlines 18 

southwest.com 

2702 Love Field Dr. Dallas, TX 75235 214-792-4000 2,619 2,853 60,800 Airline Gary Kelly 3, Chairman/ CEO 4

13 13 The Save Mart Cos. 11 

savemart.com 

6375 Clark Ave. Dublin, CA 94568 925-833-6136 2,500 3,200 NR Grocery store operator Dean Willhite, VP, FoodMaxx store operations 

114 4 Washington Hospital Healthcare System 14 

whhs.com 

2000 Mowry Ave. Fremont, CA 94538 510-797-1111 2,054 2,054 2,054 Health care system Kimberly Hartz, CEO 

15 15 Penumbra Inc. 15 

penumbrainc.com 

1 Penumbra Pl. Alameda, CA 94502 510-995-2486 2,000 1 2,000 3,300 Medical devices Adam Elsesser, Chairman/ President/CEO 

16 16 Bank of America 13 

bankofamerica.com 

555 California St. San Francisco, CA 94104 800-432-1000 1,898 3,847 212,000 Financial services Gioia McCarthy, Market executive, North Bay and San Francisco Elizabeth Minick, Market executive, San Francisco and East Bay 

17 17 Bank of the West 17 

bankofthewest.com 

180 Montgomery St. San Francisco, CA 94104 415-765-4800 1,735 1 4,383 9,683 Bank services Nandita Bakhshi, President/ CEO 

18 18 Manos Home Care 16 

manoshomecare.com 

4173 MacArthur Blvd. Oakland, CA 94619 510-336-2900 1,722 1,722 2,461 Senior and disability care service provider Kevin Rath, Executive director 

119 9 Oracle Corp. 19 

oracle.com 

500 Oracle Pkwy. Redwood Shores, CA 94065 650-506-7000 1,493 2 9,149 135,000 Business software, cloud applications and platform services Larry Ellison, Chairman/ CTO Safra Catz, CEO 

220 0 Robert Half International Inc. 20 

roberthalf.com 

2884 Sand Hill Rd. Menlo Park, CA 94025 650-234-6000 1,474 5 3,116 13,000 Staffing firm Keith Waddell, President/ CEO 

21 21 Blue Shield of California 24 

blueshieldca.com 

601 12th St. Oakland, CA 94607 510-607-2000 1,466 1,466 7,004 Health insurer Paul Markovich, President/ CEO 

222 2 Pixar Animation Studios 22 

pixar.com 

1200 Park Ave. Emeryville, CA 94608 510-922-3000 1,285 1,285 NR Animation, film/video Jim Morris, President 

23 23 Clorox Co. 21 

thecloroxcompany.com 

1221 Broadway Oakland, CA 94612 510-271-7000 1,211 1,211 8,800 Consumer products Linda Rendle, CEO 

224 4 La Clínica De La Raza *laclinica.org 

1450 Fruitvale Ave. 3rd Fl. Oakland, CA 94601 510-535-4000 1,059 1,059 1,200 Health care centers Jane Garcia, CEO 

25 25 Bayer 25 

bayer.com/berkeley 

800 Dwight Way Berkeley, CA 94710 510-705-5000 1,033 1,162 99,538 Health care and agriculture life sciences Jens Vogel, SVP/Global head of biotech Number based on SFBT estimate. 1

Pleasanton employees per city of Pleasanton financial report. 2

Kelly plans to step down from the CEO role and become executive chairman. Robert Jordan, Southwest's executive vice president for corporate services, will become CEO effective Feb. 1, 2022. 

3 Not locally based. 4

San Ramon employees per city of San Ramon financial report. 5Live • Work • Grow 

With its easy connection to the greater Bay Area, its host of modern amenities and living spaces, and access to the Tri-Valley’s world-class talent pool, Hacienda is the ideal place to work, live, and grow an innovative business. Visit hacienda.org Call (925) 734-6500 4305 Hacienda Drive Suite 330 Pleasanton, CA 94588 

SEPTEMBER 17–23, 2021  31 HOW THE EAST BAY’S TOP EMPLOYERS HAVE CHANGED 

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 

A lot can happen in five years. Companies rise, companies fall, companies grow, go bankrupt or get acquired. The employers who are up – or down – tell the story of the economic lifeblood of a region, the continuation or decline of legacy industries and the birth of nascent fields. To give a little more historical context to our list of top East Bay employers (defined as Alameda and Contra Costa counties), we compared the 2021 rankings and numbers to data we collected in 2016. — Kevin Truong 

THE TOP FIVE 

Oakland-based managed care organization Kaiser Permanente holds its crown as the largest private East Bay employer seeing its East Bay headcount rise 21.7% between 2016 and 2021, while its companywide headcount increased 26% to 217,126 in the same period. Outside of Tesla, the industries represented in the top ive have remained relatively static with health care and grocery taking up the majority of spots. 

102,556 

2016 

THEN AND NOW 

The East Bay’s 25 largest employers are 19.6% bigger today. 

HELLO AND GOODBYE 

These are two East Bay companies that have found their way onto the list for the irst time and two who ind themselves no longer on the list. 

BIGGEST MOVERS 

These two East Bay companies stood out in the percentage change of their employees from 2016 to 2021. 

2016 2021 

Kaiser Permanente Kaiser Permanente Safeway Inc. Tesla Inc. Chevron Corp. Safeway Inc. John Muir Health Sutter Health Wells Fargo & Co. John Muir Health 2016 2016 ’21 Five-year percentage change ’21 

28,481 34,666 11,553 13,000 6,244 9,731 6,181 9,377 5,326 6,300 122,629 

2021 

Tesla 

Now ranked as the most valu-able American automaker, Tesla created a 5.3-mil-lion-square-foot factory in Fre-mont to build its leet of electric cars. 

Penumbra Inc. 

The Alameda medical device company has grown to employ 2,000 workers in the East Bay and seen its share price rise more than 40% over the past year. 

GE Digital 

Once positioned as the leading edge of GE’s dig-ital transforma-tion. GE Digital was beset by troubles with a new CEO selling off a portion of the business. 

24 Hour Fitness 

The major itness chain was a victim of the pandemic and iled for Chapter 11 bankruptcy last June, closing more than a quarter of its locations. 

Outgoers Newcomers Workday Wells Fargo & Co. 2,426 5,326 5,098 4,354 110% 110% -19% -19% 

Percentage of total workforce in East Bay 

16 16 418 10 3100 100 17 232 SAN FRANCISCO BUSINESS TIMES SEPTEMBER 17–23, 2021  33 

NOTES: NR - not reported. 

# CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS IN THE EAST BAY 

RANKED BY CONSTRUCTION COST 

Compiled by Ahavah Revis 415-288-4962 arevis@bizjournals.com 

Project 

Address Description Construction cost Start date End date Owner/Developer Architect Contractor 

11 300 Lakeside 1

300 Lakeside Dr. Oakland 94612 Renovation of a 28-story, 792,000-square-foot building with 5-level, 1,405-stall parking garage, rooftop garden, and 128,872 square feet of office/retail $264 million 7/21 7/23 TMG Partners Gensler Plant Construction Co. LP 415-285-0500 plantconstruction.com 

22 1900 Broadway 

1900 Broadway Oakland 94612 39-story tower, 558,000 square foot, mixed-use building with 452 units, retail and office, and below-grade parking $229 million 8/19 3/23 Behring Companies Solomon Cordwell Buenz (SCB) Suffolk 415-848-0500 suffolk.com 

33 Lincoln Landing Apartments 

22301 Foothill Blvd. Hayward 94541 838,152 square feet across three buildings, 474 units with 82,000 square feet of retail and parking, and additional stand-alone retail building $193.99 million 10/19 6/22 Dollinger Properties BDE Architecture Deacon Construction LLC 925-401-1700 deacon.com 

44 Oakland Waterfront Parcel J 

37 8th Ave. Oakland 94606 8-story with 378-units, ground-level retail, swimming pool and spa, lounge with wine room, gym, and pet wash area $162 million 7/21 8/23 Cityview AC Martin Webcor/Roberts-Obayashi JV 415-978-1000 webcor.com 

55 Walnut Creek Transit Village Parcel 2 

101 Pringle Ave. Walnut Creek 94596 Mixed-use development with 358 units, 14,500 square feet of retail $154.2 million 9/19 6/22 Blake Griggs Properties, Mitsui Fudosan America, Transit Village Associates BDE Architecture Deacon Construction LLC 925-401-1700 deacon.com 

66 Marriott Residence Inn 

2121 Center St. Berkeley 94704 16-story hotel with 300 rooms, meeting space, fitness center, pool, dining, retail and parking $145 million 6/18 12/21 Pyramid Hotel Group JRDV Urban International Suffolk 415-848-0500 suffolk.com 

77 Alta Buena Vista 

1501 Buena Vista Ave. Alameda 94501 Adaptive re-use of historic Del Monte Warehouse for 553,200-square-foot, mixed-use development with 372 units, retail, and 460 car and 372 bike parking spaces $133 million 1/20 8/22 Wood Partners BAR Architects Wood Partners 415-888-8075 woodpartners.com 

88 Emery 

1450 Sherwin Ave. Emeryville 94608 500-unit development including 85 units of affordable housing and a new public park $125 million 2/20 6/23 Lennar Multifamily Communities LPAS Architecture + Design Lennar Multifamily Builders 415-975-4980 livelmc.com 

99 1951 Harbor Bay Parkway 

1951 Harbor Bay Pkwy. Alameda 94501 4 story, 220,000-square-foot building for Exelixis, an oncology-focused biotechnology company $120 million TBD 8/22 srmErnst Development Partners Brick-Inc. Pankow Builders 510-893-5170 pankow.com 

10 10 Brooklyn Basin Parcel C 

219 9th Ave. Oakland 94606 241 market-rate apartments over 3 levels of above-grade parking $104.59 million 3/19 10/21 Zarsion Essex LLC Studio T-Square James E. Roberts-Obayashi Corp. 925-820-0600 jerocorp.com 

111 1 Casa Suenos 

3511 East 12th Street Oakland 94601 181 affordable apartments for families, including 46 permanent supportive housing apartments $97.55 million 7/21 10/23 The Unity Council, Bridge Housing SVA Architects J.H Fitzmaurice (JHF) 510-444-7561 jhfitzmaurice.com 

12 12 Foon Lok West 

311 9th Ave. Oakland 94606 130 residential affordable units for families including 26 supportive units for formerly homeless individuals $77.48 million 7/20 4/22 MidPen Housing HKIT Architects Nibbi Brothers General Contractors 415-863-1820 nibbi.com 

13 13 Patterson Pass Water Treatment Plant Improvements 

8750 Patterson Pass Rd. Livermore 94550 Increase plant capacity to 24 million gallons per day and improve cleaning process to remove contaminants $76.14 million 3/19 1/22 Zone 7 Water Agency CDM Smith Overaa Construction 510 234-0926 overaa.com 

114 4 Brooklyn Basin Parcel A1 

285 8th Ave. Oakland 94606 6-story building, 130 units of affordable family apartments, parking, community space, laundry rooms $74.9 million 8/20 5/22 MidPen Housing Corp. HKIT Architects Nibbi Brothers General Contractors 415-863-1820 nibbi.com 

15 15 Newark Civic Center 

37101 Newark Blvd. Newark 94560 Demolition of existing administration building to create a new city hall, library, and police building addition $72.32 million 9/19 10/21 City of Newark Perkins&Will Webcor 415-978-1000 webcor.com 

16 16 2012 Berkeley Way 

2012 Berkeley Way Berkeley 94704 89 affordable units, 53 units of permanent supportive housing, 44 temporary homeless housing beds with space for supportive services, office suite and a community kitchen $71.2 million 7/20 6/22 Bridge Housing, Berkeley Food & Housing Project Leddy Maytum Stacy Architects Nibbi Brothers General Contractors 415-863-1820 nibbi.com 

17 17 

Chabot College Library and Learning Connection Building 

25555 Hesperian Blvd. Hayward 94545 70,000-square-foot mezzanine, four-story space in the Grand Court at the heart of the Chabot campus $71 million 5/21 11/22 Chabot-Las Positas Community College District Group 4 Architecture, Research + Planning Rudolph and Sletten 650-216-3600 rsconstruction.com 

18 18 

Collaborative Opportunities in Research and Engagement (CORE) Building 

25800 Carlos Bee Blvd. Hayward 94542 100,000-square-foot library replacement building with group project space $70 million 11/19 2/22 California State University, East Bay Carrier Johnson + CULTURE Rudolph and Sletten 650-216-3600 rsconstruction.com 

119 9 Centro Callan 

100 Callan St. San Leandro 94577 196-unit mixed-use building with 31,000 square feet of retail near the San Leandro BART station and AC Transit’s BRT system $66 million 9/21 5/23 The Martin Group of Companies LLC BDE Architects Johnstone Moyer Inc. 650-570-6161 johnstonemoyer.com 

220 0 Ice House 

950 W. Grand Ave. Oakland 94607 134 solar, all-electric townhomes $64 million 9/16 12/21 City Ventures Hunt Hale Jones Architects City Ventures Homebuilding 415-964-1097 cityventures.com 

21 21 Industrial Maintenance and Shop Building 

31 Castro St. Richmond 94801 105,488-square-foot building for machine, boiler, instrumentation, electrical maintenance facility $59 million 1/20 12/21 NR NR Overaa Construction 510 234-0926 overaa.com 

222 2

Stanford Health Care ValleyCare IR, Pharmacy and Clinical Lab Renovation 

5555 W. Las Positas Blvd. Pleasanton 94588 Upgrades the Diagnostic Imaging and Interventional Radiology; small renovation of the Clinical Lab and expansion of the third-floor pharmacy $54 million 2/21 6/24 Stanford Health Care Ratcliff (Rx & Lab) / Taylor Design (IR) Hensel Phelps 925-494-9700 henselphelps.com 

23 23 Piedmont High School STEAM and Theater 

800 Magnolia Ave. Piedmont 94611 Alan Harvey Theater building includes a stage, 452 seats, drama classroom, green room, department offices; 42,700-square-foot science technology engineering arts and math building $53 million 4/19 12/21 Piedmont Unified School District HKIT Architects Overaa Construction 510 234-0926 overaa.com 

224 4

City of Hayward, Fire Station 6 and Fire Training Center 

1401 West Winton Ave. Hayward 94545 Nine new structures totaling approximately 64,500 square feet includes a firehouse/classroom building $52.4 million 7/20 8/22 City of Hayward Fire Department RossDrulisCusenbery S.J. Amoroso Construction Co. Inc. 650-654-1900 sjamoroso.com 

25 25 Brentwood WWTP Expansion Phase II 

2251 Elkins Way Brentwood 94513 5 MGD extended aeration/activated sludge facility, expand capacity to 10 MGD and includes process structures, buildings, roads, sitework $45 million 6/20 4/23 City of Brentwood Psomas Overaa Construction 510 234-0926 overaa.com Known as the Kaiser Center 1

rosendin.com/whatwedo DIFFERENCE ROSENDIN the 

> CA - 142881

# There won’t be half as many cars on the bridge this month. 

But BART fares will be half price. 

Get 50% off BART all September when you use Clipper. Learn more at 

bart.gov/September 

WHAT IS THE LIST? 

The data is collected and compiled by full time researchers in our 

newsrooms. The data offers a deep look at our business rankings and other organizations derived from original and often exclusive data one can only find with The Business Journals .

WHERE DOES THE DATA COME FROM? 

Information is generally gathered through direct outreach with businesses and organizations in our markets or by analyzing public 

records and other public data sources. 

SELECT FROM THREE FORMATS 

Bound Hard Copy One-time download Unlimited CSV Downloads 

PRINT EDITION DIGITAL DATA DOWNLOAD UNLIMITED We’ll give you something to talk about 

Get rankings and contact information from the area’s 

most influential companies. 

Find your solution at 

# bookoflists.com or call 1-800-486-3289 

# PROJECTS BOOSTING THE EAST BAY WATER NETWORK 

INFRASTRUCTURE 

BY KEVIN TRUONG ktruong@bizjournals.com 

# As you can see from the listings on our East Bay Construction Projects list, commer-cial and residential developments are rising across the region. But for our closer look, we decid-ed to delve into the decidedly less sexy world of infra-structure projects. Amid a backdrop of a drought that has drained reservoirs, created new tinder for raging wildfires and choked the state’s agricultural breadbas-ket, projects that store, clean and transport water are not just important – but critical – to the environmental and economic health of the East Bay. 

EAST BAY MUNICIPAL UTILITIES DISTRICT EBMUD CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM PATTERSON PASS WATER TREATMENT PLANT PPWTP IMPROVEMENTS 

Address: 

8750 Patterson Pass Road, Livermore 

Construction cost: 

$76.1 million 

Timeline: 

March 2019-January 2022 

Description: 

The plant is currently being upgraded to add ozone treatment. Costs are funded by water rates, new connec-tion fees and bonds. 

Why it matters: 

The upgrades and ozonation project will modernize facilities so water can be supplied to people in the Zone 7 geography of the East Bay. Plant pro-duction capacity will double from 12 million gallons of water a day (mgd) to 24 mgd, the addition of a new ive-mil-lion-gallon tank will increase treated water storage capacity and ozonation facilities will improve water quality. Once the project is complete, the plant will provide much needed redundancy in case of potential outages and resil-iency in the case of natural disasters. 

Number serviced by EBMUD's water system: 

1.4 million people 

Number serviced by EBMUD's wastewater system: 

740,000 people 

Construction costs for three speciied projects: 

$91.4 million 

Timeline: 

20192024 

Description: The $2.5 billion overar-ching program will upgrade EBMUD’s 4,200-mile-long pipeline network, 160 storage reservoirs, 135 pumping plants and more. Here are the three largest projects under construction. 

San Pablo Water Treatment Plant: 

Replacement of the existing 5.4-mil-lion-gallon San Pablo Clearwell (water storage tank) and construction of a new San Pablo Rate Control Station. 

Sobrante Water Treatment Plant: 

Rehab of the Maloney Pumping Plant, La Honda Rate Control Station and Greenridge Pumping Plant facility. 

Castenada Reservoir: Replace the roof on both the Castenada reservoirs and demolish the Glen Reservoir. 

34 SAN FRANCISCO BUSINESS TIMES 

Improvements made to boost water capacity and guard against disasters www.biomedrealty.com/developments/Emeryville The Emeryville Center of Innovation is a best-in-class campus uniquely designed for the life science industry 

and community to thrive. This flagship 12-acre East Bay campus consists of 1.2 million square feet and includes four new life science lab/office buildings that will set the stage for life-changing research. 

The campus is easily accessible to major freeways and public transportation and will include new bicycle and pedestrian connections. With 3.5 acres of publicly accessible parks and plazas, the campus embodies 

an engaging and vibrant place to gather. Phase I will encompass up to 270,000 square feet and is scheduled to break ground in 2022. 

# Welcome To Emeryville Est. Completion Q4 2024 (Phase I) 

# THE EMERY VILLE CENTER OF INNOVATION 

SEPTEMBER 17–23, 2021  35 NEW HIRE Phillip Owens 

Chief Financial Officer 

Veritas Investments, Inc. 

Veritas is pleased to announce that Phillip Owens has joined the 

privately held firm as Chief Financial Officer. This appointment reflects the ongoing growth of one of the West Coast’s premier real estate firms providing high-quality workforce housing to a broad cross-section of residents in the San Francisco Bay Area, greater Los Angeles, and other markets. Phil graduated from USC with a degree in Business Administration with a concentration in Finance. He received his MBA from UC Berkeley and maintains a connection with UC Berkeley as a Policy Advisory Board Member for the Fisher Center for Real Estate and Urban Economics. Most recently, Phil comes to Veritas from Newport Beach based Green Street, where as Managing Director of the Advisory and Consulting Group, he worked with a broad range of private and public real estate companies since 2009. He comes with deep experience and acumen on public debt, equity, private market transactions, 

and public boards. 

P A I D A D V E R T I S I N G 

# PEOPLE ON THE MOVE 

NEW HIRE Sunny Bedi 

Board member for GitLab 

GitLab 

Sunny Bedi joins the GitLab board of directors to provide his CIO perspective and collaborate closely with the management team on the innovative The DevOps Platform. Sunny is currently the CIO & CDO of Snowflake and has 20-plus years of leadership experience from corporate IT and operations roles at notable, high-growth technology companies such as VMware and NVIDIA. He received his MBA from the University of San Francisco. 

NEW HIRE Stephanie Ong 

Vice President of Communications 

Change Consulting 

Stephanie Ong, a communi-cations professional with over 20 years of experience leading strategy for nonprofit organiza-tions, electoral campaigns, and government agencies, will serve as Change Consulting’s Vice President of Communications, Engagement. She will lead 

the agency’s content, digital and earned media teams in her new role. 

NEW HIRE Andy Bromley 

Vice President of Sales, Europe, Middle East, and Africa (EMEA) 

Trifacta Inc. 

Andy Bromley brings more than 20 years of experience to Trifacta, leading growth-stage companies in the Europe, Middle East, and Africa region. Former-ly head of Europe for Informatica Cloud, he also co-founded Data Scout, a pioneering SaaS Master Data Management company. Prior to joining Trifacta, Bromley was the Vice President of Sales at SDL, a desktop publishing software company. He is a graduate of London University with a Bachelor of Laws (LLB). 

NEW HIRE 

Matt Cassie 

Vice President of Sales, 

North America 

Trifacta Inc. 

Matt Cassie joins Trifacta as the Vice President of Sales, North America. He spent the past 11 years at Informatica as VP of North America, Cloud Sales & Field Operations, leading the company through five years of record SaaS growth. Before Informatica, Cassie held positions at Hapag-Lloyd AG, GE Aviation, and Mercator Software. Cassie holds an MBA from the University of Florida and has a Bachelor’s in business administration from the University of Montana. 

NEW HIRE Mark Sarbiewski 

Chief Marketing Officer 

Trifacta Inc. 

Mark Sarbiewski brings more than 25 years of experience as a Chief Marketing Officer in high-tech organizations. Prior to joining Trifacta, he served as CMO at Kentik, Castlight Health, Anaplan, and Clustrix. He also held executive product and product marketing roles at Mercury Interactive and Hewlett Packard. Sarbiewski earned an MBA from the Darden School of Business at the University of Virginia and a B.S. in computer science from the University of California, Davis. 

TO SUBMIT YOUR INFORMATION: Lacey Patterson | lpatterson@bizjournals.com | 415.288.4961 

DESIGN, MANUFACTURING AND RETAIL 

John Michael Kitchens 

2218 Dawson Drive, Chester, SC 

8777993199 | sales@johnmichaelkitchens.com JOHNMICHAELKITCHENS.COM 

John Michael Kitchens’ new home at the San Francisco 

Design Center. 

Moving 

PROFESSIONAL RECOGNITION Cherese Paloni 

West Coast Sales Director 

John Michael Kitchens 

John Michael Kitchens is proud to announce Cherese Paloni as our West Coast Sales Director who will be based in the San Francisco Design Center Galle-ria, 101 Henry Street, No. 424. Cherese brings over 10 years of sales experience with focus on building strong client relation-ships and executing sales strategies in new markets. Cherese will be responsible for growing the west coast business 

as JMK continues rapid market expansion. Learn more at 

www.johnmichaelkitchens.com. 

Sponsored by 

# BIZ SPOTLIGHT 

# SHINE WITH A $50 CREDIT 

BizSpotlight is a unique way to showcase your expansion, IPO, new product launch, acquisition, awards, new location, rebranding and general news. Shine a spotlight on your business today. 

To start your BizSpotlight and claim yourintroductory $50 credit or get help with your press release, please contact Lacey Patterson: lpatterson@bizjournals.com or 415.288.4961 

# SHINE WITH A $50 CREDIT 

BizSpotlight is a unique way to showcase your expan-sion, IPO, new product launch, acquisition, awards, new location, rebranding and general news. Shine a spotlight on your business today. 

To start your BizSpotlight and claim yourintroductory $50 credit or get help with your press release, please contact Lacey Patterson: lpatterson@bizjournals.com or 415.288.4961 

36  SAN FRANCISCO BUSINESS TIMES SEPTEMBER 17–23, 2021  37 

R Abstracts of Judgment ALAMEDA COUNTY 

Wells Fargo Bank vs. Ronald L. D. Lewis/Theta Line Dental Lab , 21680 Gateway Center Dr. #280, Diamond Bar 91765, $90,620, plaintiff, case #20CV361949, 09/30/20. 

Retail Capital vs. Stump & Sons Inc. , 15910 Ventura Blvd. Fl. 12, Encino 91436, $82,739, plaintiff, case #RG1904627, 10/05/20. 

City of Oakland vs. The Fat Lady , 1939 Harrison St. #800, Oakland 94612, $26,185, plaintiff, case #RG17875497, 10/16/20. 

Wells Fargo Bank vs. Power of 3 Consulting Inc. and Stacy A. Roach ,21680 Gateway Center Dr. #280, Diamond Bar 91765, $67,363, plaintiff, case #CIVMSC20-00540, 10/28/20. 

MARIN COUNTY 

Valley Oil Co. vs. SPG Group Inc. dba Diablo Gas and Mart and BPG Pacific LLC et al. , 199 Lincoln Rd. W., Villejo 94590, $2,765,490, plaintiff, case #1-09-CV-144317, 08/10/21. foreign county -Santa Clara 

SAN FRANCISCO COUNTY 

Gary E. Looney dba Collectronics of California vs. Maze Cafe LLC dba Maze Cafe and Bar et al. , 780 28th Ave., San Francisco 94121, $12,295, plaintiff, case #MCV 251923, 07/21/20. foreign county - Sonoma 

Northshore Resources II LP vs. Gary Sun aka YF Sun Photo Co. , 348 Point Lobos Ave., San Francisco 94121, $152,397, plaintiff, case #CGC-98-161672, 07/27/20. 

SAN MATEO COUNTY 

First Home Bank Corp. vs. Sarrtori LLC , 740 Laurel St., San Carlos 94070, $269,681, plaintiff, case #20-CIV-05252, 08/19/21. 

R Bankruptcies NORTHERN DISTRICT OF CALIFORNIA SAN FRANCISCO DIVISION 

Chapter 11 

Thai Stk Inc. , 301 El Camino Real, Millbrae 94030; Assets, $0 to $50,000; Debts, $100,001 to $500,000; Attorney, Matthew D. Metzger; case #21-30613, 08/31/21. 

Roark & Associates LLC ,6192 Mission St., Daly City 94014; Assets, $0 to $50,000; Debts, $0 to $50,000; Attorney, Eric J. Gravel; case #21-30614, 09/01/21. 

Bennett Rosa LLC , 204 2nd Ave. #508, San Mateo 94401; Assets, $0 to $50,000; Debts, $1,000,001 to $10,000,000; Attorney, David A. Boone; case #21-30623, 09/03/21. 

R Civil Suits SAN FRANCISCO COUNTY 

Kember Flooring Inc. vs. Build Group Inc. , breach of contract, case #CGCU21 594326, 08/05/21. 

Andres Gomez vs. RPK Inc./ dba R.K. Krishnan Team ,civil rights, case #CGCU21 594331, 08/05/21. 

Andres Gomez vs. Majdy’s Inc./dba Yuni Rides , civil rights, case #CGCU21 594338, 08/05/21. 

Ema Bell vs. Zoro Tools Inc. ,toxic tort, case #CGCU21 594345, 08/05/21. 

Metro Services Group vs. Kenneth Simoncini/ Simoncini and Associates/ Kerri Johnson , professional negligence, case #CGCU21 594361, 08/05/21. 

Northern California Collection Service Inc. vs. Letterman Holding Co. LLC/ dba Glen Park Hardware/ dba Oliver’s Ace Hardware ,collections, case #CGCL21 594353, 08/06/21. 

Northern California Collection Service Inc. vs. BAPC Inc. , collections, case #CGCL21 594362, 08/06/21. 

Crown Castle USA Inc./ Crown Castle Fiber LLC vs. 6X7 Networks LLC ,collections, case #CGCL21 594366, 08/06/21. 

Keep America Safe and Beautiful vs. SCS Direct Inc. , toxic tort, case #CGCU21 594364, 08/06/21. 

Progressive Direct Insurance Co. vs. Bay Charter Boats , property damage, case #CGCU21 594368, 08/06/21. 

Anastasia Manesis vs. Pineapple Hospitality Co. ,breach of contract, case #CGCL21 594403, 08/09/21. 

Ema Bell vs. Ross Stores Inc. , toxic tort, case #CGCU21 594370, 08/09/21. 

Ashley Nechuta vs. LifeNews.com LLC/ Steven Ertlet , defamation, case #CGCU21 594372, 08/09/21. 

Roven Inc. vs. YBL Restaurant Group LLC/ Michael P. Sopher/Erin E. Brooks , professional negligence, case #CGCU21 594376, 08/09/21. 

Nina Travis vs. A1 Protective Services Inc. ,employment discrimination, case #CGCU21 594383, 08/09/21. 

Robert K. Mills vs. Symbiome Inc./True Venture Management LLC/ Lawrence Weiss , wrongful termination, case #CGCU21 594384, 08/09/21. 

Chris Langer vs. Avital Tours Inc. , civil rights, case #CGCU21 594385, 08/09/21. 

American Express National Bank vs. Lambros Lambracos/The Axion Group , collections, case #CGCL21 594339, 08/10/21. 

Northern California Collection Service Inc. vs. Giustiniani Masonry Marble and Tile , collections, case #CGCL21 594388, 08/10/21. 

Cooks Co. Produce Inc. vs. Fatto Bene LLC/dba The Kings Feet/Elliott Harrison ,collections, case #CGCL21 594394, 08/10/21. 

Cooks Co. Produce Inc. vs. FRJTZ LLC/dba FRJTZ Gourmet Belgian Fries/dba FRJTZ Mission , collections, case #CGCL21 594398, 08/10/21. 

Ivan Novikov vs. Anton Urbanas/Deckrobot Inc. , breach of contract, case #CGCU21 594396, 08/10/21. 

Ema Bell vs. No Rinse Laboratories LLC/CVS Pharmacy Inc. , toxic tort, case #CGCU21 594409, 08/10/21. 

Carl Folk/Martin Jackson/ Michael Santisi vs. Gilead Sciences Inc. , product liability, case #CGCU21 594358, 08/11/21. 

Daniel P. Brown PhD vs. Jock Gordon/Mindonly Pty. Ltd. , fraud, case #CGCU21 594406, 08/11/21. 

John Roe vs. Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc. ,employment discrimination, case #CGCU21 594407, 08/11/21. 

Andres Gomez vs. Getaround Inc. , civil rights, case #CGCU21 594408, 08/11/21. 

Andres Gomez vs. Coldwell Banker Residential Brokerage Co./Realogy Brokerage Group LLC ,civil rights, case #CGCU21 594410, 08/11/21. 

Orion First Financial LLC vs. Custom Landworks Utilities LLC/Klint Davis/ Jason Isenberger , breach of contract, case #CGCU21 594435, 08/11/21. 

Miguel Atencio vs. Stachs LLC , employment, case #CGCU21 594467, 08/11/21. 

Andres Gomez vs. Enterprise Rent-A-Car Co. of San Francisco LLC/Ean Services LLC , civil rights, case #CGCU21 594418, 08/12/21. 

Northern California Collection Service Inc. vs. Kausil Singh/dba Western Contractors , collections, case #CGCU21 594422, 08/12/21. 

Northern California Collection Service Inc. vs. Nicholas M. Klein/dba Absolute Building Co. ,collections, case #CGCU21 594425, 08/12/21. 

On Deck Capital Inc. vs. Zechsan Business Development Inc./John Eric Sanchez , breach of contract, case #CGCU21 594438, 08/12/21. 

Sook Hee Choi vs. Dr. S. Joseph DDS Inc./dba Dentistry of San Francisco ,civil rights, case #CGCU21 594446, 08/12/21. 

Itria Ventures LLC vs. Tioga Lumber and Fencing Inc./ Intelligent Construction Inc./James Manuel Coe , breach of contract, case #CGCU21 594448, 08/12/21. 

Lycee Francais de San Francisco vs. Alcal Specialty Contracting Inc. , breach of contract, case #CGCU21 594470, 08/12/21. 

Creditors Adjustment Bureau Inc. vs. Quality Enterprises USA Inc. , breach of contract, case #CGCL21 594459, 08/13/21. 

Andres Gomez vs. Ruksakul Tanatanyanon/dba Your Home SF , civil rights, case #CGCU21 594440, 08/13/21. 

Andres Gomez vs. Thomas Redmond/dba Redmond Realty , civil rights, case #CGCU21 594444, 08/13/21. 

John Deocampo/Gemma Deocampo/Kathleen Paone vs. Victorian Post Acute/Rachel Ng MD/Kaiser Foundation Hospitals , wrongful death, case #CGCU21 594452, 08/13/21. 

Sabawun Kakar vs. Tony Garnicki/Ocean Avenue Real Estate Fund LLC , breach of contract, case #CGCU21 594458, 08/13/21. 

Renee Kwan/Asset Management LLC/350 WSJ LLC vs. Steven A. Ellenberg/ Ellenberg and Hull LLP/ Thoits Law PC , professional negligence, case #CGCU21 594460, 08/13/21. 

The Hartford Accident and Indemnity Co. vs. M Squared Construction Inc. ,small claims, case #CSM21 864740, 08/27/21. 

John Sotoodeh vs. Wells Fargo and Co. , wrongful termination, case #CGCU21 594449, 08/30/21. 

Ian Brown vs. Getaround Inc. , small claims, case #CSM21 864733, 08/30/21. 

Ellen McCov vs. Liana Tahir/ Empress Real Estate/dba Andersen Jung and Co. ,unfair business practice, case #CSM21 864734, 08/31/21. 

Tanya T. Thomas vs. Yerba Buena Commons , unfair business practice, case #CSM21 864736, 08/31/21. 

Licienne Sanchez vs. Capital One NA , unfair business practice, case #CSM21 864738, 09/02/21. 

Richard Kenny/Sarah Welsch vs. VDG Family LP ,small claims, case #CSM21 864739, 09/02/21. 

S. Dang Dang vs. Patelco Credit Union , small claims, case #CSM21 864741, 09/02/21. 

Qinggin Tan vs. American Express Co. , small claims, case #CSM21 864742, 09/02/21. 

Jacqueline Silva vs. Deysi Gaen/Transportes Pacific International LLC , small claims, case #CSM21 864747, 09/07/21. 

Sean Foy vs. Columbia Debt Recovery LLC/dba Genesis ,unfair business practice, case #CSM21 864748, 09/07/21. 

George Thibodeaux vs. Bridgestone Retail Operations LLC/dba Wheel Works , professional negligence, case #CSM21 864749, 09/07/21. 

Vladimir Smirnov/Kateryna Androshchuk vs. Expedia ,unfair business practice, case #CSM21 864751, 09/07/21. 

Zara Zelenko vs. Quantum Party Productions LLC ,small claims, case #CSM21 864753, 09/08/21. 

SAN MATEO COUNTY 

Farmers Insurance Exchange vs. City and County of San Francisco ,damages, case #21 CLJ 04564, 08/23/21. 

Mard R. Tashijan/Arthur G. Walters vs. San Mateo Credit Union/Boardwalk Chrysler , property damage/ fraud/breach of contract, case #21 CIV 04536, 08/24/21. 

Javier Antonio Montejo De Leon vs. Walter Baltodano/ SF Metro Inc. , negligence, case #21 CIV 04537, 08/24/21. 

Jan Schneider vs. Facebook Inc./Facebook Payments Inc. , breach of contract/ fraud, case #21 CIV 04538, 08/24/21. 

Jessica Moran vs. Francis Polansky MD Inc./Bay in Vitro Fertilization ,employment, case #21 CIV 04544, 08/24/21. 

Adam Guzman vs. FirstAmerica Automotive Inc./Fuad Dayyeh/Joe Cox ,employment, case #21 CIV 04543, 08/25/21. 

Jose G. Luciano vs. Herc Rentals Inc./Michael Peloquin , employment, case #21 CIV 04574, 08/25/21. 

Nazar Awad/Musa Hussan Adam vs. Command International Security Inc./American Heritage Protection Services Inc./ Walgreens Co. , wrongful termination, case #21 CIV 04611, 08/26/21. 

Nahid Bolghand/Andrew Bolghand vs. David Anthony Marino/Real Property Sales Inc. , breach of contract/ fraud, case #21 CIV 04612, 08/26/21. 

Shannon O. Murphy Esquire Sr. dba Sheetmetal & Associates vs. Travis Credit Union , damages, case #21 CIV 04604, 08/27/21. 

Luquan Li vs. Findream LLC , breach of contract/ fraud, case #21 CIV 04625, 08/27/21. 

AM Star Construction Inc. vs. Christian Humanitarian Aid , breach of contract, case #21 CIV 04637, 08/27/21. 

State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co. vs. Auto Pride Car Wash ,damages, case #21 CLJ 04676, 08/27/21. 

R Federal Tax Liens ALAMEDA COUNTY 

Vision Property Management Inc. , 484 Lake Park Ave. #280, Oakland 94610, $10,185, (941), document #2020-332667, 12/02/20. 

West Coast Overhead Door Co. , 5182 Crow Canyon Rd., Castro Valley 94552, $62,050, (941), document #2020-332669, 12/02/20. 

Mag Wellness Inc. , 161 Adeline St., Oakland 94607, $24,838, (941), document #2020-332670, 12/02/20. 

St. Francis Electric LLC ,P.O. Box 2057, San Leandro 94577, $12,154, (940/941), document #2020-332671, 12/02/20. 

Fresh Autobody Inc. ,945 Estabrook St., San Leandro 94577, $14,505, (6721/941), document #2020-332673, 12/02/20. 

Angel Camp , 1470 Orchard Ave., San Leandro 94577, $14,145, (941), document #2020-332674, 12/02/20. 

Prolific Holding Inc. , 2301 Industrial Pkwy. W. #1, Hayward 94545, $97,111, (940/941), document #2020-332675, 12/02/20. 

Wilkersons Carpet Inc. , 401 Fox Hills Ct., Oakland 94605, $26,396, (941), document #2020-332775, 12/02/20. 

Espresso Roma Corp. ,1310 65th St., Emeryville 94608, $889,748, (6721/6722/940/941), document #2020-340662, 12/08/20. 

Marcos Drywall Inc. ,849 O’Donnell Ave., San Leandro 94577, $96,322, (6721/941), document #2020-342973, 12/09/20. 

Buddys Bites and Brews Inc. , 24297 Hesperian Blvd., Hayward 94545, $54,594, (941), document #2020-342974, 12/09/20. 

Advanced Engine Technologies , 1330 E14th St. 2nd Flr, San Leandro 94577, $77,442, (1120/6721/940/941), document #2020-342976, 12/09/20. 

West Coast Overhead Door Co. , 5182 Crow Canyon Rd., Castro Valley 94522, $25,595, (941), document #2020-352313, 12/16/20. 

Kwang OK Landrum Off the Hook Seafood and Super , 2432 Telegraph Ave., Oakland 94612, $10,505, (941), document #2020-352314, 12/16/20. 

American Staffing Service LLC , 1860 Howe Ave. #250A, Sacramento 95825, $140,549, (940/8941), document #2020-352323, 12/16/20. 

Delcon Heating & Ave. , 256 Boeing Ct., Livermore 94551, $43,144, (941), document #2020-366208, 12/28/20. 

MARIN COUNTY 

Caulbridge School Education Foundation , 1 St. Vincents Dr., San Rafael 94903, $53,697, (941/990), document #2021-0051001, 08/11/21. 

Sergio Diaz dba Checos Gardening , 164 Lavender Ln., Mill Valley 94941, $46,371, (941), document #2021-0051002, 08/11/21. 

IK Design Inc. , 21 Duffy Place, San Rafael 94901, $46,186, (940/941), document #2021-0051839, 08/17/21. 

SAN MATEO COUNTY 

St. Mary Family Daycare LLC , 89 John Glenn Cir., Daly City 94015, $10,020, (1120), document #2021-123536, 08/24/21. 

Michael E. Bahlinger DDS ,18821 Delaware St. #104, Huntington Beach 92648, $125,963, (941), document #2021-123537, 08/24/21. 

R Releases of Federal Tax Liens ALAMEDA COUNTY 

Norell Prosthetics Orthotics Inc. , 48531 Warm Springs Blvd. #401, Fremont 94539, $408,292, (940/941), document #2020-221199, 09/03/20. 

Enklu Inc. , 1509 1/2 Webster St. #E, Alameda 94501, $15,973, (941), document #2020-221204, 09/03/20. 

Adept Property Management Inc. , 11875 Dublin Blvd. #D271, Dublin 94568, $39,290, (941), document #2020-221207, 09/03/20. 

Universe Painting Inc. ,1029A 62nd St., Oakland 94608, $13,590, (941/ CIVP), document #2020-234606, 09/16/20. 

Alton Air Conditioning & Heating , 45300 Industrial Place #4, Fremont 94538, $13,720, (941), document #2020-242984, 09/23/20. 

Funks Auto Works , 6785 Dublin Blvd., Dublin 94568, $10,635, (941), document #2020-254516, 09/30/20. 

Cobalt Equipment Inc. , P.O. Box 2231, Dublin 94568, $22,082, (941), document #2020-274414, 10/15/20. 

Cobalt Equipment Inc. , P.O. Box 2231, Dublin 94568, $51,194, (941), document #2020-274416, 10/15/20. 

SAN FRANCISCO COUNTY 

Redacted Inc. , 350 Rhode Island St. #240, San Francisco 94103, $21,614, (CIVP), document #2020-K952784, 07/17/20. 

McMillian Electric , 1950 Cesar Chavez, San Francisco 94124, $22,803, (941), document #2020-K952786, 07/17/20. 

Atendido Home LLC/Nemia Atendido MBR , 383 Byxbee St., San Francisco 94132, $90,316, (941), document #2020-K954478, 07/22/20. 

Atendido Home LLC/Nemia Atendido MBR , 383 Byxbee St., San Francisco 94132, $13,124, (941), document #2020-K954479, 07/22/20. 

Blue Cove Properties Ltd./Aaxtion News and Amusement , 2301 S. El Camino Real, San Francisco 94403, $16,065, (941), document #2020-K954481, 07/22/20. 

R Mechanics’ Liens ALAMEDA COUNTY 

Claimant: McGrath Electric Inc. , Contractor: Turner Construction Co., $419,936, Owner: Pacific Gas & Electric Co., on property at 7205 National Dr., Livermore 94550, document #2020-157903, 07/07/20. 

Claimant: Golden State Lumber Inc. , Contractor: Build Decor, $165,522, Owner: WJS Property, on property at 2551 San Pablo Ave., Oakland 94612, document #2020-158255, 07/08/20. 

Claimant: R Brothers Waterproofing Inc. ,Contractor: Millie and Severson Inc., $349,034, Owner: Jefferson Street Hotel LLC, on property at 1431 Jefferson St., Oakland 94612, document #2020-165154, 07/14/20. 

Claimant: Bay Mountain Air ,Contractor: MCRT Northern California Construction LP, $195,821, Owner: JLS Oakland Apartment LLC, on property at 377 2nd St./378 Embarcadero W., Oakland, document #2020-165370, 07/15/20. 

Claimant: Afco Electric Inc. ,Contractor: Wilshire Pacific Builders LLC, $30,570, Owner: Reliant East Bay LP, on property at 1638 E St., Hayward 94541, document #2020-165414, 07/15/20. 

Claimant: Prime Point Contracting Inc. , Contractor: Prime Point Contracting Inc., $845,770, Owner: Pine Country LLC, on property at 1183 Central Blvd., Hayward 94542, document #2020-174163, 07/22/20. 

Claimant: Pace Supply Corp. , Contractor: Silicon Sage Construction, $134,997, Owner: Osgood LLC, on property at 42111/42183 Osgood Rd., Fremont, document #2020-173522, 07/22/20. 

Claimant: Finishing Touch Moulding Inc. , Contractor: Millie and Severson Inc., $59,723, Owner: Jefferson Street Hotel LLC, on property at 1431 Jefferson St., Oakland 94612, document #2020-176130, 07/23/20. 

Claimant: Sheehan Construction Inc. ,Contractor: Michael Roberts Construction Inc., $186,879, Owner: 1950 Addison Apt. Joint Venture LLC, on property at 1950 Addison St., Berkeley 94704, document #2020-177913, 07/27/20. 

Claimant: Pace Supply Corp. , Contractor: Silicon Sage Construction, $50,930, Owner: B Street Hayward LLC, on property at 108 B St., Hayward 94541, document #2020-178075, 07/27/20. 

Claimant: Prime Point Contracting Inc. , Contractor: Prime Point Contracting Inc., $760,497, Owner: Pine Country LLC, on property at 1256 Tiegen Dr., Hayward 94542, document #2020-179985, 07/28/20. 

Claimant: Fire Detection Unlimited Inc. , Contractor: Madison Park, $19,482, Owner: P&D 23rd Ave. Associates LLC, on property at 1080 23rd Ave., Oakland 94606, document #2020-179735, 07/28/20. 

# BIZ BIZ LEADS LEADS 

Information to build your business Information to build your business 

WHAT’S INSIDE 

Abstract of Judgments  ..................37 Bankruptcies  ..................................37 Civil Suits  .......................................37 Federal Tax Liens ............................37 Federal Tax Liens Released  ............37 Mechanics’ Liens  .......................37, 38 New Fictitious Names Registered  .....................38, 39 State Tax Liens  .............................. 39 State Tax Liens Released  .............. 39 Real Estate Transactions  ......... 39–45 

READER’S GUIDE 

The Business Leads is a collection of information gathered from San Francisco area courthouses, government offices and informational Web sites. We gather these public records so you can build your business. No matter what business you are in, you can gain a competitive edge by reading the Business Leads. Find new and expanding businesses and new customers. Find out the area’s commer-cial and residential hot spots. Find clues about the financial condition of your vendors, customers or competitors. Listings for each category may vary from week to week because of information availabili-ty and space constraints. (Note: xx Indicates listings are not available for this week.) 

EMAIL EDITION 

To buy Leads information for San Francisco and more than 40 other markets, call 877-593-4157, or see bizjournals.com/leads. The information is available on disk or via e-mail and arrives earli-er than the published version. 

ABOUT THIS SECTION 38  SAN FRANCISCO BUSINESS TIMES 

# BIZ BIZ LEADS LEADS 

Claimant: City Lift Parking LLC , Contractor: Silicon Sage Construction, $150,307, Owner: Parkview Financial, on property at 4211 Osgood Rd., Fremont 94539, document #2020-181393, 07/29/20. 

Claimant: Modesto Windustrial Co. , Contractor: Automatic Boiler, $53,480, Owner: Mission Taylor Properties, on property at 2801 Merced St., San Leandro 94577, document #2020-179478, 08/28/20. 

Claimant: Eric Stark Interiors Inc. , Contractor: Iron Construction, $46,661, Owner: SCI LP 1/Prologis LP 1, on property at 3178 Laurelview Ct., Fremont 94538, document #2020-179477, 08/28/20. 

MARIN COUNTY 

Claimant: Accelerated Construction and Metal LLC , Contractor: Knoebel Construction, $21,771, Owner: Scandinavian Designs Inc., on property at 600 Francisco Blvd., San Rafael 94901, document #2021-0051050, 08/11/21. 

SAN FRANCISCO COUNTY 

Claimant: Allied Heating and Air Conditioning Inc. ,Contractor: Michilli Inc., $92,144, Owner: City and County of San Francisco, on property at 44 Ellis St., San Francisco 94102, document #2020-K942649, 06/19/20. 

Claimant: Allied Restoration Co. Inc. ,Contractor: Randy McElfresh, $72,276, Owner: Randy McElfresh/18th & Treat Venture SF LLC, on property at 3150 18th St., San Franciso 94110, document #2020-K942502, 06/19/20. 

Claimant: Goodman Distribution Inc. ,Contractor: Build Group Inc., $21,645, Owner: 2177 Third Street Property Owner LLC, on property at 2177 3rd St., San Francisco 94107, document #2020-K942689, 06/19/20. 

Claimant: Allied Heating and Air Conditioning Inc. ,Contractor: Jorgensen Reeve Builders Inc., $2,145,700, Owner: 1500 Mission Urban Housing LP, on property at 1500 Mission St., San Francisco 94103, document #2020-K942648, 06/19/20. 

Claimant: OLMFC Builders Inc. , Contractor: Matthew Ebrahimoon dba Moon Man Promo Corp., $66,540, Owner: Matthew Ebrahimoon dba Moon Man Promo Corp., on property at 4407 18th St., San Francisco 94114, document #2020-K942787, 06/19/20. 

Claimant: Air Treatment Corp. , Contractor: RMI Mechanical Contractor Inc., $31,872, Owner: Union Square 117 Project LLC, on property at 16 Maiden Ln., San Francisco 94108, document #2020-K943623, 06/23/20. 

Claimant: Ricos General Construction Inc. ,Contractor: 2567 Union Street LLC, $37,151, Owner: 2567 Union Street LLC, on property at 2567 Union St., San Francisco 94123, document #2020-K943511, 06/23/20. 

Claimant: ABC Windows and More LLC , Contractor: Concord Real Estate Services Inc., $86,947, Owner: Concord Real Estate Services Inc., on property at 166 Geary St., San Francisco 94108, document #2020-K943502, 06/23/20. 

Claimant: Acco Engineered Systems Inc. , Contractor: KCC Design and Build, $265,829, Owner: 3060 Fillmore Centercal LLC, on property at 3060 Filmore St., San Francisco 94123, document #2020-K943678, 06/23/20. 

Claimant: Woodford Studio Inc. , Contractor: Build Group Inc., $277,758, Owner: 2177 Third Street Property Owner LLC, on property at 2177 3rd St., San Francisco 94107, document #2020-K943530, 06/23/20. 

Claimant: Pace Supply Corp. , Contractor: Allied Heating and Air, $101,103, Owner: 1500 Mission Urban Housing LLC, on property at 1500 Mission St., San Francisco 94103, document #2020-K943508, 06/23/20. 

Claimant: GK Welding Inc. , Contractor: Related of Mariposa Development Co. LP, $161,207, Owner: Related Development Co. LP, on property at 1601 Mariposa St., San Francisco 94107, document #2020-K944794, 06/26/20. 

SAN MATEO COUNTY 

Claimant: PMK Contractors LLC , Contractor: Thompson Builders Corp., $124,011, Owner: Wheeler Plaza, on property at 657 Walnut St., San Carlos 94070, document #2021-124815, 08/27/21. 

R New Fictitious Names Registered ALAMEDA COUNTY 

Douglas Perry , J.E. Perry Farms, 4604 Mayfield Dr., Fremont 94536. 

Michele Hurlbut , Red Bucket Farms, 735 S. H St., Livermore 94550. 

Michael Ray , Bloom Farms, 1035 22nd Ave. #1A, Oakland 94606. 

Pallab Chatterjee , Roadway Media, 1970 Chalon Clen Ct., Livermore 94550. 

Wiley Roberts , Whatfo Media, 17 Embarcadero Cv., Oakland 94606. 

Pallab Chatterjee , Corporate Certificate School, 1970 Chalon Glen Ct., Livermore 94550. 

Gaurav Kumkar , Majestic Investment Group, 1008 West Ave. #M14/#D180, Palmdale 93551. 

Daniel Santos , Harvey Capital, 28634 Triton St., Hayward 94544. 

Diane Pahler , Next Level Protection LLC, 2023 Murdell Ln., Livermore 94550. 

Jennifer Le , Seabreeze on the Dock, 1885 Buttner Rd., Pleasant Hill 94523. 

Roberto Nunez , Gabyanalia, 20549 Morva Dr., Hayward 94541. 

Catherine Vilar , Sweet Heavens, 3164 Madsen St., Hayward 94541. 

Justin Briggs , Sky Partners, 6819 Paseo Santa Cruz, Pleasanton 94566. 

Jennifer Helms , Lucent Pathways, 2609 Teal Ln., Union City 94587. 

Mark Denham , Private Spaces, 3319 Harpers Ferry Ct., Pleasanton 94588. 

Stacey Harris , Court Vision Access, 3955 Fairlands Dr., Pleasanton 94588. 

Janience Clay , Mara and Mel, 2819 Garden St. #2, Oakland 94601. 

Reuben McElligott Jr. ,Ruby Q, 952 Fruitvale Ave., Oakland 94601. 

Rachael Frank , Kvell, 1023 53rd St., Oakland 94608. 

Christina Thelin , High Vibe Havens, 590 Merritt Ave. #22, Oakland 94610. 

Brad Staba , Things, 1331 Northside Ave., Berkeley 94702. 

Nikesha Vercher , Strategic Independent Consulting Group, 3400 Stevenson Bldg. 827, Fremont 94538. 

Edward Home , ESAH Property Group, 2814 25th Ave. #2, Oakland 94601. 

John Warner , Greenline Realty, 3630 Telegraph Ave., Oakland 94609. 

Maninder Lally , Nav Subway, 4709 Finn Cove Ct., Union City 94587. 

Kodandi Nithyananda ,XOPaddleboards, 30 N. Gould St. #R, Sheridan, Wyo. 82801. 

Maged Al Khateeb , M&M Grocery and Smokeshop, 606 Cozumel Dr., Bakersfield 93307. 

Jazmine Pickens , Debate Boutique, 24438 Santa Clara St. #372, Hayward 94540. 

Melanie Diamond ,Vista Madera Feed and Consignment, 665 Vistamont Ave., Berkeley 94708. 

Kevin King , AllHeart Community Services, 15775 Maubert Ave., San Leandro 94578. 

Alejandro Acevedo , KTA Mobile Tire Shop, 1206 82nd Ave. #D, Oakland 94621. 

Debra Johnson , Compliance Matters Now, 675 Hegenber Rd. #231, Oakland 94621. 

Girmay Yebio , Now Clean, 952 84th Ave., Oakland 94621. 

Kelly Alberts , mySEOdata. com, 4049 1st St. #235, Livermore 94551. 

Pamela Curry , Home Power People Podcast, 2323 Broadway, Oakland 94612. 

Jeyasankar Kottalam ,shaman.cloud, 1762 Spruce St., Berkeley 94709. 

Ibliess Wellness , 555 Mowry Ave. #A, Fremont 94536. 

Pallab Chatterjee , Roadway Intelligence, 1970 Chalon Glen Ct., Livermore 94550. 

Laura Hayes , Early Years Learning Center LLC, 1251 Hopyard Rd., Pleasanton 94566. 

CONTRA COSTA COUNTY 

Cecelia Fortier , Equestrian Games Riding Academy, 17601 Marsh Creek Rd., Brentwood 94513. 

Vida Pejman , Central TV, 2241 Monument Blvd. #W, Concord 94520. 

Chill HVAC & Refrigeration ,23 Beta Ct. #F, San Ramon 94582. 

Armando Estrada , Estrada Painting, 65 Brookside Ct., Pittsburg 94565. 

Elbin Bran , Eby Handyman, 120 Harbour Way S., Richmond 94804. 

Bay Area Construction & Remodeling , 3498 Clayton Rd. #202, Concord 94519. 

Errica Debiasi , EMD Construction, 1821 Alicante Ct., Concord 94521. 

Shawn Kim , Rowland Development & Construction, 460 Center St. #6036, Moraga 94556. 

Imagine Construction ,9721 Davona Dr., San Ramon 94583. 

Rancho Surgery Center , 100 Park Place #110F, San Ramon 94583. 

Rajesh Maheshwari , San Ramon Urgent Care and Clinic, 94140 Alcosta Blvd. #D, San Ramon 94583. 

Massood Dravishzadeh ,Lafayette Dental Implants, 2021 Mt. Diablo Blvd. #100, Walnut Creek 94596. 

Winnresidential-Arbor Ridge , 2400 Shady Willow Ln., Brentwood 94513. 

Roots Tree Co. , 1655 Galindo Ave. #1324, Concord 94520. 

Jorge Hernandez , Garden Stylist, 27 Inlet Dr., Bay Point 94565. 

Jorge Torres , EB Landscaping, 2648 Ridge Rd., San Pablo 94806. 

Cynthia Haren , All About Family Supervised Visitation and Exchange, 1945 Contra Costa Blvd. #2335, Pleasant Hill 94523. 

Kathy Andree-Rissel , Happy Valley Garden Club, 3868 Happy Valley Rd., Lafayette 94549. 

Louder , 617 Texas St., Antioch 94509. 

David De Haas , De Haas, 333 Roundrill Dr., Brentwood 94513. 

R D P S , 1903 Queens Rd., Concord 94519. 

Frank Alioto , Fudd, 1371 Traynor Rd., Concord 94520. 

Lawrence Scott , LGS Enterprises, 18 Shadow Oak Rd., Danville 94526. 

Anthony Archimedes ,Dragonfly Hughes Enterprises, 1806 Key Blvd., El Cerrito 94530. 

Melvin Leslie Jr. , A Town Near You, 4620 Deerfield Dr., Antioch 94531. 

Wilhemina Nkwocha , Jollof Hub, 2420 Mammoth Way, Antioch 94531. 

Earl Dunivan , Earl D. Dunivan and Associates, 615 Escobar St., Martinez 94553. 

Dustie Robeson , Roxbury Hart, 50 San Pablo Ct., Moraga 94556. 

Crystal Allen , The Poison Jewel, 809 Ibis Rd., Oakley 94561. 

Joy Chew ,Joyousjoyfuljoyness, 412 Wovenwood, Orinda 94563. 

Dalia Rodriguez , Dalibless Fancy, 967 Newcastle Way, Pittsburg 94565. 

Quickmints , 1481 Allanmere Dr., San Ramon 94582. 

Duane Buck , Acanthus, 3120 Crow Canyon Rd. #A, San Ramon 94583. 

Michael Pattinson , Modus, 230 Santa Fe Dr., Walnut Creek 94598. 

The Renewal Project Inc. ,2125 Ygnacio Valley Rd. #200, Walnut Creek 94598. 

Camille Atwood , Ikalina, 107 Martina St. #C, Richmond 94801. 

Harmohinder Singh , Mehil Enterprise, 3769 San Pablo Dam Rd., El Sobrante 94803. 

Greencircles , 885 Marina Bay Pkwy. #220, Richmond 94804. 

Cacoco , 1401 Marina Way S. #300, Richmond 94804. 

Vinfast , 3230 Auto Plz., Richmond 94806. 

Craig Edsinger , DGTL Mgmt, 164 Carquinez Scenic Dr., Port Costa 94553. 

Edward Klim , Mountain Mechanical Consulting, 127 Dardanelle Ct., Martinez 94553. 

Myshallee Collins , MyMyMy Diamond Realty, 2420 Sand Creek Rd. #C1-319, Brentwood 94513. 

Raymundo Ayala , Creekside Realty, 1032 Pebble Beach Dr., Clayton 94517. 

Jennifer He , Genuine Home Experts Team, 760 Camino Rd. #200, Danville 94526. 

Grace Abarientos , Realty Providers, 160 Lapis Ct., Hercules 94547. 

Estate Sales Group LLC ,3120 Crow Canyon Rd. #B, San Ramon 94583. 

Crossroads Barbecue , 1599 St. Helena Dr., Danville 94526. 

Silvia Barragan , El Taco Paco, 4961 Parkgreen Cir., Antioch 94531. 

Artisan’s Kitchen , 3709 Mt. Diablo Blvd., Lafayette 94549. 

Eric Smith , Comfort Kitchen, 137 Lake Ave., Rodeo 94572. 

Stephanie Brown , Styles by Stephanie, 1250 Walker Ave. #25, Walnut Creek 94596. 

Lavon Posey , King & Queen 21 Auto Wholesale, 176 Highway Ave., Bay Point 94565. 

Gillian Flores , Bite Me Confections, 9 Rainier Ln., Antioch 94509. 

Brentwood Embroidery and Sewing Inc. , 410 Beatrice Ct. #E, Brentwood 94513. 

Joanna Meinl , Whimsical Creations, 1041 Trailside Dr., El Sobrante 94803. 

Milly’s Multiservices Inc. ,1500 Monument Blvd. #F14, Concord 94520. 

Kevin Cullop , Cullop Agency Registration Services, 4041 Alhambra Ave. #103, Martinez 94553. 

Eddie Washington ,Rainmaker Asset Recovery Co., 4648 Big Bear Rd., Oakley 94561. 

Anthony Lazzareschi , Family Security Locksmith, 681 Azores Cir., Bay Point 94565. 

Milton Vega , M2V Bay Services, 601 S. 52nd St., Richmond 94804. 

Jefferey Hill , Jeffs Mobile Auto Repair, 2711 San Pablo Ave., Pinole 94564. 

Isidra Hernandez , Cervantes & Son Maintenance, 1407 G St., Antioch 94509. 

Progressive Programing ,2302 Lariat Ln., Walnut Creek 94596. 

Delta Music Productions ,508 Alumrock Dr., Antioch 94509. 

Little Kathmandu , 10386 San Pablo Ave., El Cerrito 94530. 

VRWEPlay , 10016 San Pablo Ave., El Cerrito 94530. 

Vibe Dance Studio , 1131 Oak Hill Rd., Lafayette 94549. 

Uniquely Taylor’d , 1556 Fitzgerald Dr., Pinole 94565. 

Bomi Yim , Hosanna 1Hr Cleaners, 1280C Newell Ave., Walnut Creek 94596. 

Zhenbo Zhou , Zhenbo Zhou Massage, 1127 Lovell Ct., Concord 94520. 

Liying Zhou , Liying Zhou Massage, 3309 Carlson Blvd., El Cerrito 94530. 

Guoqing Liu , Guoqing Liu Massage, 3237 Santa Clara Ave. #A, El Cerrito 94530. 

Yong Wang , Yong Wang Massage, 3313 Carlson Blvd., El Cerrito 94530. 

Fidelia Jung , Home and Personal Services, 6910 Gladys Ave., El Cerrito 94530. 

Packing Health , 5616 Howell Mountain Ln., Antioch 94531. 

Nari Life Co. , 3449 Mt. Diablo Blvd. #B, Lafayette 94549. 

Modern Skin Therapy , 1605 Locust St., Walnut Creek 94596. 

The Leadership Connection ,2125 Ygnacio Valley Rd. #200, Walnut Creek 94598. 

Li Wang , Angela Massage, 2716 Humphrey Ave., Richmond 94804. 

Adenizia Indalecio , Bliss Beauty Spa, 2856 Hilltop Mall Rd., San Pablo 94806. 

Willie Burns , Smart Care, 1501 Madera Ct., El Cerrito 94530. 

Nicole Fratangelo , Tole’s Tots, 855 Grayson Rd., Pleasant Hill 94523. 

Scott Rush , Better Storage Solution, 2317 Edith St., El Cerrito 94530. 

MARIN COUNTY 

Alvaro Garcia , YRG Construction Services, 125 Yellowstone Ct., San Rafael 94903. 

Jose Rodriquez , J. Rod Construction, 1610 Hill Rd. #1, Novato 94947. 

The Darkroom Society , 11 Belle Ave., San Rafael 94901. 

Xtra Bold/Xtra Bold Agency , 647 Wakerobin Ln., San Rafael 94903. 

Peter Nicosia , Moving Conscious, 11 Palm Ave., Corte Madera 94925. 

ModFi , 110 Western Ave., Mill Valley 94941. 

Thomas Chiaramonte ,Wrong Rocket, 1416 Sir Francis Drake Blvd., San Anselmo 94960. 

Trusage , 41 Entrata Ave., San Anselmo 94960. 

Katherine Lynch , Katherine Taylor PysD Lily Support, 454 Las Gallinas Ave. #1096, San Rafael 94903. 

West Marin Climate Action/ WMCA , 451 Mesa Rd., Bolinas 94924. 

Novato Registration Services , 6979 Carwash Blvd., Novato 94945. 

Juan Argueta , Hamiltons Smog, 7401 Redwood Blvd. #B, Novato 94945. 

Lindsey Huebner , Ordered Home, 61 Dominga Ave., Farifax 94930. 

Leah Podolin , LTP Productions, 4 Del Casa Dr., Mill Valley 94941. 

Melissa Davis ,MDSafetyTraining, 134 San Carlos Way, Novato 94945. 

QT Ultrasound , 3 Hamilton Landing #160, Novato 94949. 

SAN FRANCISCO COUNTY 

Blake Fulford , Serotonin Sounds, 28 Day St., San Francisco 94110. 

Rafael Huerto , Pride Roofing, 650 S. Van Ness Ave., San Francisco 94110. 

Finance for Gen Z , 1390 Market St. #200, San Francisco 94102. 

Bestime Investment Services Inc. , 224 Silliman St., San Francisco 94134. 

John Garcia , Nulook Construction, 226 Cuardo, Millbrae 94030. 

B.E.A.M. Construction ,2127 25th Ave., San Francisco 94116. 

Hotel 570 , 212 Sutter St. Fl. 3, San Francisco 94108. 

Thomas Ashbourne Craft Spirits , 1150 Illinois St., San Francisco 94107. 

Goodhoom , 580 California St., San Francisco 94104. 

Babak Tehranchi , Perkins Coie, 505 Howard St., San Francisco 94105. 

Alexander Lauri , Lauri Bros. Design, 953 Minnesota St., San Francisco 94107. 

Flori’s , 2360 Van Ness Ave., San Francisco 94109. 

Be Bright , 1045 Bush St., San Francisco 94109. 

Heather Horter , Messy Lens, 3545 24th St., San Francisco 94110. 

La Cava , 2 Embarcadero Center Street Level, San Francisco 94111. 

Griselda Chau , Venya Luxe, 1728 Ocean Ave. PMB 124, San Francisco 94112. 

Orum , 4615 18th St., San Francisco 94114. 

Maison De Etoile , 1770 Post St. #233, San Francisco 94115. 

Jeffrey Litke , Sacramento Locust Associates, 3637-3657 Sacramento St., San Francisco 94118. 

Deron Lawson , Polylith, 3926 Cabrillo St., San Francisco 94121. 

Manely Sharifian , Universe Vibe, 285 Buckingham Way #803, San Francisco 94132. 

Union Yee LLC , 533-537 Union St., San Francisco 94133. 

Jasper Yee LLC , 124-132 Jasper Place, San Francisco 94133. 

Jackson Liles Architecture ,2325 3rd St. #206, San Francisco 94107. 

Butler Armsden Architects ,1420 Sutter St. Fl. 1, San Francisco 94109. 

Pacific Farm Management ,1925 Jerrold Ave., San Francisco 94124. 

Flori’s Mimosas , 2360 Van Ness Ave., San Francisco 94109. 

Carbon Grill , 852 Clement St., San Francisco 94118. 

Umai Savory Hot Dogs #106 , 3251 20th Ave. #2501, San Francisco 94132. 

Massawa Restaurant , 532 Green St., San Francisco 94133. 

Chowders , Pier 39 #121, San Francisco 94133. 

Nelly Reyes , Alpaca Fashion, Pier 39 #J13, San Francisco 94133. 

John Garcia , Nulook Window & Construction, 226 Cuardo, Millbrae 94030. 

Nicholas Lee , Sage Bakehouse, 3 3rd Ave., San Francisco 94118. 

Jie Yang , New Lai Wah Florist, 741 Jackson St., San Francisco 94133. 

Jessy Dang , United Watch Services, 210 Post St. #613, San Francisco 94108. 

Cheryl Meril , Notary Motion Services, 1245 California St. #303, San Francisco 94109. 

Antonio Perez , Lucas Service, 37 Grattan St., San Francisco 94117. 

Nicholas Valenti , NLV Lock & Safe, 2055 Lombard St. #470665, San Francisco 94123. 

Max Cleaning Services ,8 10th St. #1216, San Francisco 94103. 

C&A Janitorial Service ,3225 26th St. #36, San Francisco 94110. 

Denny Ordonez , Denny Ordonez Clean Service, 706 Brazil Ave., San Francisco 94112. 

Skyscraper Maintenance Services , 3908 3rd St., San Francisco 94124. 

Danielle Sexton , The Sandia Circus Aerial Outpost, 801 Minnesota St. #9, San Francisco 94107. 

Cheryl Meril , Parting Sea Videos, 1245 California St. #303, San Francisco 94109. 

Giotto Harrison , Babyfaced Productions, 1044 Revere Ave. #C78, San Francisco 94124. 

Westcoast Therapy and Wellness , 450 Sutter St. #1336, San Francisco 94108. 

Norbert Nunag , Code of Conduct, 650 Florida St. #G, San Francisco 94110. 

Qiqiong Huang , Vaxtra Tax & Accounting Services, 787 Edinburgh St., San Francisco 94112. 

Phanthong Mesomsub ,Kamma Acupuncture, 278 Liberty St., San Francisco 94114. 

Arty Hair Design , 1680 Post St. #G, San Francisco 94115. 

Brandon Davis , Btoopositive, 125 3rd Ave. #4, San Francisco 94118. 

Connie Ly , American Spa & Salon at SF, 1327A 9th Ave., San Francisco 94122. 

Lien Loi , SF House of Nails 2, 3231 Pierce St., San Francisco 94123. 

Nayo Fuentes , One With Peace Martial Arts, 1725 Newcomb Ave., San Francisco 94124. 

Molly Haas , Molly Haas Photography, 449 15th Ave. #202, San Francisco 94118. 

Yingjun Gong , Baby Tree Mandarin Immersion Daycare and Preschool, 682 Madrid St., San Francisco 94112. 

Larry Solomon , Larry’s Limo Service, 685 48th Ave. #6, San Francisco 94121. 

Weiqing Miao , International Moving Co., 86 Farallones St., San Francisco 94112. 

Marcus Miller , Zoom Legal Couriers, 2289 Melvin Rd., Oakland 94602. 

SAN MATEO COUNTY 

Javier Torres , Major League Painting, 360 E. O’Keefe St. #2, East Palo Alto 94303. 

Cal-Pac Roofing , 1122 E. 5th Ave., San Mateo 94402. 

Growth Over Time Learning , 211 Anita Dr., Millbrae 94030. 

Ethel Alandy , California College of Early Childhood Education, 1670 Amphlett Blvd. #214-38, San Mateo 94402. 

Emmanuel Obel , Obel Financial Advisors, 533 Airport Blvd. #400, Burlingame 94010. 

Omar Lopez , PS 127 Construction, 310 Market Place, Menlo Park 94025. 

Bonnie Neylan , Bon Mar Apartments, 115 Dunsmuir Way, Menlo Park 94025. 

Bonnie Regalia , Birder’s Garden, 926 El Camino Real, San Carlos 94070. 

Purple Dragon Fabrics ,262 Dundee Dr., South San Francisco 94080. 

Slate , 1075 Alameda De Las Pulgas, Belmont 94002. 

Mario Ross , CCD, 1767 Louvaine Dr., Daly City 94015. 

OWEA/Owea , 216 Cuesta Real, La Honda 94020. 

Jennifer Rutherford , Jenny Ford, 10 Princeton Rd., Menlo Park 94025. 

Barbara Fischer , Designs by Diana, 10 Valley Oak, Portola Valley 94028. 

Go There Do That , 377 13th St., Montara 94037. 

Ladigan/Ladigan Inc./ Ladigin Inc. , 728 Montezuma Dr., Pacifica 94044. 

The Ark , 1320 Valota Rd., Redwood City 94061. 

Marcelo Dos Santos Luiz ,LM Solution, 52 Hillview Ave., Redwood City 94062. 

Gail Wilkerson , We Are the People, 1755 E. Bayshore, Redwood City 94063. 

Carbonyl , 1017 El Camino Real #448, Redwood City 94063. 

Mohammed Salih , Mo & Sha, 2661 Valleywood Dr., San Bruno 94066. 

Alex Laughman , Acreative, 106 Arden Ave., South San Francisco 94080. 

Monica Alvarado , El Centenario’s Quesebirria, 606 S. Fremont St. #5, San Mateo 94402. 

Mammardou and Associates , 1 Plaza View Ln. #367, Foster City 94404. 

Erika Hathaway , Summerhill Pet-Sitting Service, 1 Watkins Ave., Atherton 94027. 

Dalang Publishing , 2036 Lexington Ave., San Mateo 94402. 

Maria Walter , Home ATBP, 3666 Georgetown Ct., South San Francisco 94080. 

George Sudol , Bay Area Realty Services, No. 5859 Highland Ave. #5, San Mateo 94401. 

Ingrid Rivas , JIka’s Kitchen, 1060 Old CR, Belmont 94002. 

Lorena Lopez , El Buen Sazon Chilango, 435 Dumbarton Ave., Redwood City 94063. 

DMB Redwood City Saltworks/RCS/Redwood City Saltworks/Saltworks ,295 Seaport Blvd., Redwood City 94063. 

Lizzete Gumban , Little Loving Kuties, 108 Grove Ave., South San Francisco 94080. 

Cuong Lam , Cards & Collectibles Bay Area, 1004 S. Grant St., San Mateo 94402. 

Hani Abiyounes , Hani’s Services Helping Hands and First Aid and CPR, 1290 Holly St. #11, San Carlos 94070. 

Hadid’s Retail Services , 541 Eucalyptus Ave., South San Francisco 94080. 

Allan Lai , Al’s AV Service, 104 Escanyo Dr., South San Francisco 94080. 

Jordan Legaspi , J.L. Services, 427 Larkspur Dr., East Palo Alto 94303. 

Cory Weinner , Monster Services, 1311 Birch Ave., San Mateo 94402. 

International Container Services , 2003 La Salle Dr., San Mateo 94403. 

Program Evaluation and Insight , 1038 Oakland Ave., Menlo Park 94025. 

Rhonda Pierce , San Carlos Business Center, 200-250 Industrial Rd. #335/389 Quarry Rd., San Carlos 94070. BIZ BIZ LEADS LEADS 

Richard Beels , Innovative Sales & Leasing, 255 Baldwin Ave., San Mateo 94401. 

Lilian Mendoza , Zia Remodeling & Cleaning Services, 3500 Edison St. #133, San Mateo 94403. 

The Modern Data Co. , 1361 Hull Dr., San Carlos 94070. 

Kate Miller , Elworthy Studio, 578 Kelly Ave. #B, Half Moon Bay 94019. 

Alexander Peck , Xander’s Swim Instruction, 1701 Edgewood Rd., Redwood City 94062. 

Jose Morales , Morales Motorsports, 2819 Middlefield Rd., Redwood City 94063. 

Working Title Recording Studios , 863 Woodside Way, San Mateo 94401. 

Patricia Cruz , Treasure Box Parties, 1428 Edinburgh St., San Mateo 94402. 

10th Planet Jiu Jitsu San Mateo , 910 S. Amphlett Blvd., San Mateo 94402. 

Barre3 , 989 El Camino Real #1/#2, Menlo Park 94025. 

Susan Vellone , Visions Seaside Spa, 1009 Terra Nova Blvd., Pacifica 94044. 

Unapologetically Loved ,1442 Gordon St. #10, Redwood City 94061. 

Christopher Klipp , Holly Gral Tattoo/Holy Grail Tattoo, 171 5th Ave. #202, Redwood City 94063. 

Lauren Raauf , Lively Aromatherapy, 712 Pepper Dr., San Bruno 94066. 

Victorio Li , Victorio Li Photography, 845 N. Humboldt St. #403, San Mateo 94401. 

Ida Galati , Vanessa Care Home II, 1640 Eleanor Dr., San Mateo 94402. 

Nancy Wagner , Nancy’s Playgroups, 228 Morgan Ln., Menlo Park 94025. 

Marta De Silva , Lily’s Bilingual Family Daycare, 82 Nottingham Ave., Redwood City 94063. 

Ultimate Fiji Vacations , 377 13th St., Montara 94037. 

Matt Wiseman , Eagle Moving and Storage, 1149 Montgomery Ave., San Bruno 94066. 

R State Tax Liens ALAMEDA COUNTY 

Reliance Hospice Care Inc. , 2246 Star Ave., Castro Valley 94546, $26,257, (employment development dept), document #2020-262078, 10/06/20. 

Mission Tool & Mfg Co. Inc. , 3440 Arden Rd., Hayward 94545, $17,453, (employment development dept), document #2020-262142, 10/06/20. 

Nubix Inc. , 5540 Doyle St. #M, Emeryville 94608, $12,173, (employment development dept), document #2020-262146, 10/06/20. 

J3M Inc. , 1636 Estudillo Ave., San Leandro 94577, $12,845, (employment development dept), document #2020-262150, 10/06/20. 

Herban Corp. , 132 98th Ave., Oakland 94603, $45,752, (employment development dept), document #2020-262151, 10/06/20. 

Caltek Communication North , 23785 Cabot Blvd. #325, Hayward 94545, $12,788, (employment development dept), document #2020-262486, 10/06/20. 

All Power Labs Inc. , 1010 Murray St., Berkeley 94710, $11,206, (employment development dept), document #2020-262488, 10/06/20. 

Desoto Cab Co. LLC ,2464 Armstrong St., Livermore 94551, $11,526, (employment development dept), document #2020-263107, 10/07/20. 

JR Group Inc. , 5994 W. Las Positas Blvd. #101, Pleasanton 94588, $15,920, (employment development dept), document #2020-263108, 10/07/20. 

St. Francis Extended Care Inc. , 718 Bartlett Ave., Hayward 94541, $65,159, (employment development dept), document #2020-263117, 10/07/20. 

Dynamic Enterprise Services Inc. , 1810 Blackfoot Dr., Fremont 94539, $19,729, (employment development dept), document #2020-263129, 10/07/20. 

Optimization Corp. ,14680 Wicks Blvd., San Leandro 94577, $17,595, (employment development dept), document #2020-263135, 10/07/20. 

Heng Yuan Engineering Group Inc. , 333 Hegenberger Rd. #200, Oakland 94621, $70,880, (employment development dept), document #2020-263143, 10/07/20. 

Mobile Gaming Technologies Inc. , 405 14th St. #800, Oakland 94612, $57,648, (employment development dept), document #2020-263147, 10/07/20. 

Frye Claims Consultation & Administration , P.O. Box 1805, Fremont 94538, $10,450, (employment development dept), document #2020-263149, 10/07/20. 

Calico Biolabs Inc. ,1181 Quarry Ln. #100, Pleasanton 94566, $12,510, (employment development dept), document #2020-263231, 10/07/20. 

Rocke Information Systems Inc. , 7 Maxwelton Rd., Piedmont 94618, $15,507, (franchise tax board), document #2020-266032, 10/08/20. 

HLW International Inc. ,2007 Stoneridge Mall Rd., Pleasanton 94588, $26,784, (franchise tax board), document #2020-266917, 10/09/20. 

Alves Bay Area Construction Inc. , 975 Castro St., San Leandro 94577, $64,079, (franchise tax board), document #2020-266918, 10/09/20. 

Hartley Construction Inc. ,1626 Martin Luther King Jr. Way, Oakland 94612, $14,797, (employment development dept), document #2020-268984, 10/12/20. 

SMP Construction & Maintenance , 1813 Rutan Dr. #A, Livermore 94551, $14,190, (employment development dept), document #2020-268992, 10/12/20. 

CCDC LLC , 2512 Telegraph Ave. #370, Berkeley 94704, $22,047, (employment development dept), document #2020-269417, 10/12/20. 

Zinfi Technologies Inc. ,6200 Stoneridge Mall Rd. #300, Pleasanton 94588, $11,005, (employment development dept), document #2020-275115, 10/16/20. 

Combat Sports Academy LLC , 6207 Sierra Ct., Dublin 94568, $33,696, (franchise tax board), document #2020-275138, 10/16/20. 

Mi Y. Chai/New Custom Jewelry , 10970 International Blvd. #E23, Oakland 94603, $134,465, (franchise tax board), document #2020-275139, 10/16/20. 

L&CS Eastern International Inc. , 10970 International Blvd. #E23, Oakland 94603, $77,843, (franchise tax board), document #2020-275140, 10/16/20. 

Mission Tool & Mfg Co. Inc. , 3440 Arden Rd., Hayward 94545, $27,925, (employment development dept), document #2020-276315, 10/16/20. 

MARIN COUNTY 

Loytr Inc. , 15 Drakes Cv., San Rafael 94903, $40,720, (employment development dept), document #2021-0050844, 08/11/21. 

Green Chili Kitchen and Market LLC , 21 Alcatraz Ave., Belvedere 94920, $50,008, (CA dept of tax & fee admin), document #2021-0050904, 08/11/21. 

Heidi Gross/Sandvoll Landscape , 5575 Hwy. 1, Bolinas 94970, $15,175, (employment development dept), document #2021-0051593, 08/16/21. 

Century Transportations Inc./Rixos Limousine , 14 Galli Dr. #A, Novato 94949, $10,310, (employment development dept), document #2021-0051595, 08/16/21. 

GMP Cars LLC , 74 Hamilton Dr. #H, Novato 94949, $260,971, (employment development dept), document #2021-0051597, 08/16/21. 

SAN FRANCISCO COUNTY 

Edgehill Biosciences Inc. , 260 Juanita Way, San Francisco 94127, $12,994, (employment development dept), document #2020-K013777, 09/08/20. 

Owen Wickersham and Erickson PC , 455 Market St. Fl. 19 #1910, San Francisco 94105, $50,134, (employment development dept), document #2020-K013801, 09/08/20. 

TRC Staffing Group Inc. ,584 Castro St. #159, San Francisco 94114, $31,422, (employment development dept), document #2020-K013805, 09/08/20. 

Aether Innovation ,1337 Mission St., San Francisco 94103, $12,918, (employment development dept), document #2020-K013806, 09/08/20. 

Hearth and Hound ,242 Columbus Ave., San Francisco 94133, $55,156, (employment development dept), document #2020-K013818, 09/08/20. 

Franciscos Mexican Food LLC/Vallartas Taco Bar , 3033 24th St., San Francisco 94110, $12,886, (employment development dept), document #2020-K013819, 09/08/20. 

Berkshire Oil Co. Ltd./ Chemoil Terminals Corp. , 4 Embarcadero Ctr. #1800, San Francisco 94111, $76,655, (employment development dept), document #2020-K013824, 09/08/20. 

Depict Inc./Voir Inc. ,380 Ritch St. #300, San Francisco 94107, $26,247, (employment development dept), document #2020-K013830, 09/08/20. 

Arete Partners Inc. ,55 2nd St. #525, San Francisco 94105, $36,601, (employment development dept), document #2020-K013838, 09/08/20. 

Lod Ballpark Buffet LLC/ Lefty O’douls , 145 Jefferson St., San Francisco 94133, $37,128, (employment development dept), document #2020-K013840, 09/09/20. 

Soundboks Inc. , 995 Market St., San Francisco 94103, $16,190, (employment development dept), document #2020-K014307, 09/09/20. 

TCM Payroll LLC/Encardia Wellness LLC , 442 Post St. Fl. 10, San Francisco 94102, $36,794, (employment development dept), document #2020-K014315, 09/09/20. 

Waterfall Wellness Cooperative Inc. , 1545 Ocean Ave., San Francisco 94112, $11,280, (employment development dept), document #2020-K014319, 09/09/20. 

Ansaro Inc. , 1161 Mission St., San Francisco 94103, $15,618, (employment development dept), document #2020-K014335, 09/09/20. 

Fullfunnell LLC , 535 Mission St. Fl. 15, San Francisco 94105, $10,127, (employment development dept), document #2020-K014336, 09/09/20. 

Arete Partners II LP ,662 20th Ave., San Francisco 94121, $20,801, (employment development dept), document #2020-K014343, 09/09/20. 

Woodside International School Inc. , 1555 Irving St., San Francisco 94122, $12,982, (employment development dept), document #2020-K014377, 09/09/20. 

Always Hungry LLC ,590 Valencia St., San Francisco 94110, $11,353, (employment development dept), document #2020-K014379, 09/09/20. 

The Grand Residences at Millennum Tower Owners Association , 301 Mission St., San Francisco 94105, $12,409, (employment development dept), document #2020-K014391, 09/09/20. 

Glassbreakers Inc. , 2085 Sacramento St. #206, San Francisco 94109, $21,198, (employment development dept), document #2020-K014399, 09/09/20. 

Acceleprise SF Management Services LLC ,1538 Filbert St. #10, San Francisco 94123, $10,109, (employment development dept), document #2020-K014408, 09/09/20. 

Neurovia Inc. , 1700 Owens St. #525, San Francisco 94158, $29,825, (employment development dept), document #2020-K014411, 09/09/20. 

Turbine Labs Inc. , 539 Bryant St. #304, San Francisco 94107, $30,652, (employment development dept), document #2020-K014412, 09/09/20. 

Elegrity Inc. , 180 Montgomery St. #1580, San Francisco 94104, $80,193, (employment development dept), document #2020-K014460, 09/09/20. 

Lanternback Capital Mangement LP , 220 Montgomery St. #460, San Francisco 94104, $12,522, (employment development dept), document #2020-K014464, 09/09/20. 

Bay Area Motivate LLC ,2200 Jerrold Ave. #J, San Francisco 94124, $110,313, (employment development dept), document #2020-K014480, 09/09/20. 

GetTheWorldMoving Inc. ,250 Executive Park Blvd. #4850, San Francisco 94134, $23,472, (employment development dept), document #2020-K014481, 09/09/20. 

GetTheWorldMoving Inc. ,1327 Chestnut St., San Francisco 94123, $13,529, (employment development dept), document #2020-K014481, 09/09/20. 

Orphid Inc. , 2567 Mission St., San Francisco 94110, $289,407, (franchise tax board), document #2020-K015655, 09/10/20. 

Xuma Inc. , 160 Pine St. #200, San Francisco 94111, $10,331, (franchise tax board), document #2020-K015656, 09/10/20. 

Cruisewise Inc. , 270 Dolores St., San Francisco 94103, $60,600, (franchise tax board), document #2020-K015657, 09/10/20. 

La Taqueria Guadalajara/ JT VT Pablo Patino ,4798 Mission St., San Francisco 94112, $12,839, (employment development dept), document #2020-K015812, 09/11/20. 

SAN MATEO COUNTY 

JB Theme Party Productions Ltd. , 165 Jefferson Dr., Menlo Park 94025, $77,045, (franchise tax board), document #2021-123566, 08/24/21. 

Pastorino Farms Inc. dba Half Moon Bay Auto Parts ,12491 San Mateo Dr., Half Moon Bay 94019, $12,560, (franchise tax board), document #2021-123569, 08/24/21. 

Maka-Leonard Construction and Development Inc. , 1806 Alderwood Ct., San Mateo 94402, $16,811, (franchise tax board), document #2021-123570, 08/24/21. 

Rigos Meat Market Inc. dba El Toro Meat Market No. 2, 140 N. B St., San Mateo 94401, $12,822, (franchise tax board), document #2021-123571, 08/24/21. 

Cleos Brazilian Steakhouse Inc. , 446 San Mateo Ave., San Bruno 94066, $10,854, (employment development dept), document #2021-123577, 08/24/21. 

R Releases of State Tax Liens ALAMEDA COUNTY 

Mission Tool & Mfg Co. Inc. , $17,232, (employment development dept), document #2020-296901, 11/04/20. 

Custom Exteriors Inc. ,$19,653, (employment development dept), document #2020-296903, 11/04/20. 

Tonya Thornburgh Enterprises , $10,212, (employment development dept), document #2020-317372, 11/19/20. 

RMT Landscape Contractors Inc. , $18,756, (employment development dept), document #2020-317373, 11/19/20. 

ELCH Partners Inc. ,$72,018, (employment development dept), document #2020-318187, 11/19/20. 

SAN FRANCISCO COUNTY 

Picture Painting and Decorating Inc. , $41,050, (employment development dept), document #2020-K949677, 07/09/20. 

Epsilon Data Management LLC , $87,454, (employment development dept), document #2020-K951908, 07/15/20. 

LDK Solar USA Inc. ,$21,327, (franchise tax board), document #2020-K952816, 07/17/20. 

DMS Drywall and Interior Systems Inc. , $274,148, (employment development dept), document #2020-K954218, 07/22/20. 

Berber Group LLC , 1516 Broadway, San Francisco 94109, $76,535, (CA dept of tax & fee admin), document #2020-K954224, 07/22/20. 

Wards Building Maintenance Inc. ,$151,372, (franchise tax board), document #2020-K954445, 07/22/20. 

SAN MATEO COUNTY 

Amiracle Ice Co. , 1660 S. Amphlett Blvd. #205, San Mateo 94402, $14,369, (CA dept of tax & fee admin), document #2021-123678, 08/24/21. 

Supremeauto LLC , 618 El Camino Real, Redwood City 94063, $16,629, (CA dept of tax & fee admin), document #2021-123681, 08/24/21. 

R Real Estate Transactions ALAMEDA COUNTY 

JCC Shattuck LLC to Shattuck Connections LP ,1442 Walnut St. #A, Berkeley 94709; 1607 Shattuck Ave., Berkeley 94709, Percy Tract ID 58-2178-24-1, $12,500,000. 

Dublin Crossing LLC to Brookfield Bay Area Holdings LLC , 500 La Gonda Way #100, Danville 94526; 4593 Pheasant Ct./Dougherty Rd., Dublin 94568, Tract 8371 Melrose at Boulevard ID 986-6-43/986-64-2, $10,016,500. 

Kevin Patrick Reedy and Lynn Marie Reedy and Reedy Family Trust to Blacklab LLC , 1333 Montrose Place, Pleasanton 94566, Tract 7407 ID 946-4598-1, $6,600,000. 

Green Valley Corp. to 412 Madison LLC , 777 N. 1st St. #5, San Jose 95112; 412 Madison St., Oakland 94607, Parcel 10905 ID 1-163-6, $4,993,500. 

BGE Enterprises LLC to Fortinet Inc. , 899 Kifer Rd., Sunnyvale 94086; Central Ave., Union City 94587, ID 475-70-11, $4,816,000. 

Reuss Road Vineyards LP to Prasad Venkata Nagendra Dasari and Padmaja Prasad Dasari , 3757 Selvante St., Pleasanton 94566; 9846 Reuss Rd., Livermore 94550, ID 99A-2003-19, $4,100,000. 

Taeku Lee and Shirley Lee to Garrett F. Miller and Alice Bond Miller and The Miller Family Trust , 288 Indian Rd., Piedmont 94610, ID 51-4791-4, $3,800,000. 

Lecia Shaffer and James Rogers to Thomas Jicky and Thomas Lindu , 1904 Toyon Ct., Pleasanton 94588, Tract 5945 ID 946-4051-15, $3,320,000. 

Robert W. Matheson and Nancy J. Matheson to John Fillmore and Kimberly Fillmore , 738 Vineyard Terr., Pleasanton 94566, Tract 7240 ID 946-4601-6-1, $3,300,000. 

C.V. Prakash and Prakash Lakshmy to Sony Chacko and Nicy Varghese , 1020 Joshua Place, Fremont 94539, ID 519-1611-36, $3,150,000. 

Brian Peter Quinn and Angelika Voss Quinn and The Quinn Family Trust to Westco Concannon LLC , 5828 S. Naylor Rd., Livermore 94551; 1060 Concannon Blvd., Livermore 94550, Tract 2266 ID 99-312-4, $3,100,000. 

Robert Lester Doig and Kristy Kay Jue and Doig Family Trust to Jing Pang ,5867 Kingsmill Terr., Dublin 94568, Tract 7136 ID 985-35-22, $3,100,000. 

Alejandro Arevalo and Allison Arevalo to Tolga Erbay and Sarah Marie Erbay , 5310 Boyd Ave., Oakland 94618, Claremont Extension ID 14-1252-27, $3,075,000. 

P. Assets Inc. to Mistry and Sons LLC , 485 N. Whisman Rd. #300, Mountain View 94043; 2026 Fruitvale Ave., Oakland 94601, ID 27-837-12-1, $2,930,000. 

The Rea Partners LP to 633 Cleveland LLC , 633 Cleveland St., Oakland 94606, Watson Tract ID 23-410-6, $2,880,000. 

Andrew Fetterer and Lily Fetterer to Louqman Ackandy Parampath and Laila Sherif Mahmood ,2849 E. Castle Pines Terr., Dublin 94568, ID 985-43-8, $2,860,000. 

Suresh Vaidyanathan to Vishwanath Panchapagesan and Priyadarshini D. Vader ,2422 Euclid Place, Fremont 94539, Parcel 5173 ID 513-717-85, $2,850,000. 

Yisyin Chan Eddy and Yunmi Cha and Chan Revocable Trust to Ashish Lakhani and Parita Lakhani and The Lakhani Family Revocable Trust , 33892 Abercrombie Place, Fremont 94555, ID 543-400-48, $2,774,000. 

Douglas Howland and Jennifer Howland and Howland Family 2014 Revocable Trust to Niall James O’Higgins and Tania Libertad Garcia Rosas O’Higgins , 964 Leo Way, Oakland 94611, Glenwood ID 48G-7406-17, $2,750,000. 

Eugene Peter Pius Cadenasso and Cadenasso Family 1994 Revocable Trust to Thomas McGrath and The Susan L. McGrath Trust , 15 Hawthorne Rd., Barrington, Ill. 60010; 12 Crest Rd., Piedmont 94611, Hampton Court ID 51-4807-13-3, $2,655,000. 

David Cutler and One Parcel to Karthi D. Karunanidhi ,6921 Paso Robles Dr., Oakland 94611, Forestland Heights ID 48E-7329-16/48E-7329-35-1, $2,650,000. 

Steven G. Crepeau and Linnea S. Crepeau to Arunkumar Puppala and Ganga Kona Chakra and The Puppala Family Revocable Trust , 3202 Curtis Cir., Pleasanton 94588, Tract 4551 ID 946-4544-55-1, $2,550,000. 

Jon R. Veach Trustee to Palitha Jayaweera and Indira S. Jayaweera , 1665 Quail Ct., Livermore 94550, ID 99-725-32, $2,520,000. 

Eric Strellis and Barbara J. Banks to Sharon Schrank and Joanne Schrank , 1518 Grant St., Berkeley 94703, Northlands Tract ID 59-2275-10-1, $2,500,000. 

Craig J. Esakow and Victoria I. Salinas to Erin Owes and Luke Zulauf , 538 Fairbanks Ave., Oakland 94610, Piedmont Knoll ID 11-856-17, $2,475,000. 

Golden Eagle Investments Inc. to Fangchu Chang and Mabel Qi Lin , 282 Finch, Lake Forest 92630; 33919 Milton St., Fremont 94555, Parcel 2983 ID 543-336-38-1, $2,400,000. 

Kent D. Steele and Charlotte R. Steele to Jeremy Nuger and Janine Rachelle Scott , 335 Brianne Ct., Pleasanton 94566, Tract 4372 ID 949-4-9, $2,400,000. 

Joanne Kagle and The Rusty Trust to Manjeet S. Samra and Rajpreet Chahal ,2632 Cowan Way, Livermore 94550, ID 99A-2939-23, $2,300,000. 

Sanjaykumar Sharanappa Patil and Jyoti Gangadhar Bandak to Wenwen Xu and Li Di , 2016 W. Lagoon Rd., Pleasanton 94566, Tract 7255 ID 946-4593-60, $2,300,000. 

Vishnu Deepak Batthula and Mahati Kunamaneni to Yuebin Yu and Cheuk Lee Wong , 1240 Flickinger Ave., San Jose 95131; 4986 Grayhawk Ct., Dublin 94568, Tract 7141 ID 985-31-28, $2,300,000. 

Edward L. Roy and Carol A. Roy to Srikant Sarda and Amruta Sarda , 2534 Brandini Dr., Dublin 94568, Tract 8037 ID 985-81-22, $2,280,000. 

Dale Holladay and Nancy Holladay to Ankush Agarwal and Prachi Jain ,38292 Ashford Way, Fremont 94536, Tract 2443 ID 501-1504-27, $2,210,000. 

Prashant Varshney and Ruchi Varshney and The Varparivar Trust to Anish Kumar Goyal and Pooja Gupta , 725 Hopi Dr., Fremont 94539, Tract 3628 ID 519-1188-66, $2,210,000. 

Kao Vue and Yam Srey to Shaheen Khan and Saima Awan , 1797 Porcellano Way, Dublin 94568, Tract 8108 ID 985-104-13, $2,200,000. 

Bbys LLC to Philip Andrew Godoy and Wei Ken Ong ,5107 Cerreto St., Dublin 94568, Tract 7854 ID 985-76-80, $2,182,500. 

Kui Wang and Yanhong Wang to Du Yu and Yuanhui Zhang , 2411 Via De Los Milagros, Pleasanton 94566, ID 946-3404-89, $2,120,000. 

Bruce M. Cassidy and Elizabeth S. Cassidy to Fabio Hideaki Matsumoto and Marcia Raruko Koga Matsumoto , 1560 Frederick Michael Way, Livermore 94550, ID 99-401-17, $1,995,000. 

Lee Erickson Riley Harrison and Kasimira Jeanette Riley to Jacob Adams and Erin Chan Adams , 886 Cedar St., Alameda 94501, Bellevue Tract ID 74-1225-13, $1,960,000. 

Patricia S. Chin and The Chin 2008 Revocable Trust to Christopher Hesse and Celia Song , 1018 Ramona Ave., Albany 94706, Fairmount Park ID 65-2644-71, $1,960,000. 

Todd V. Stinn and Alisa D. Stinn to Fern Lodge Inc. , 18457 Madison Ave., Castro Valley 94546; 17961 Madison Ave./ Madison Ave./Trenton Dr., Castro Valley 94546, ID 84C-920-1-10/84C-955-8-14/84C-920-13-4, $1,950,000. 

Stuart L. McVay to Daniel Yun Pak and Ann Ampat Pak and The Pak Family Trust ,18241 Lamson Rd., Castro Valley 94546, ID 84D-1165-5-2, $1,938,000. 

Jay Primus to Julian Garzonrojas and Goldberger Mor , 2911 Newbury St., Berkeley 94703, Adeline Tract ID 53-1590-19, $1,926,000. 

Maria Lev Trustee to Ann Thien Tran and James Thomas , 1620 Ward St., Berkeley 94703, State University Homestead ID 54-1730-24, $1,920,000. 

Lisa Lindsley Kim to Eric Yorton Tsaur and May Luo , 6021 La Salle Ave., Oakland 94611, Montclair Acres ID 48C-7191-26-3, $1,908,000. 

Christine Yee and The Soo Hoo Trust and Christine Shown to Washington Lorenzo LP , 1117 Park Ave., Alameda 94501, Alameda Park Homestead ID 70-181-20, $1,900,000. 

Mark Miller and The Marion Benedict Revocable Trust to Qian Wang and Robert Fletcher , 2805 Hilgard Ave., Berkeley 94709, Ranches of Vicente & Domingo Peralta Co. ID 58-2212-4, $1,900,000. 

Rajnikant A. Shah and Bindu R. Shah to Hongpei Liu and Yini Guo , 6179 Via De Los Cerros, Pleasanton 94566, Country Fair Parc ID 946-4570-125, $1,880,000. 

Robert L. Montgomery and Sherline R. Montgomery to 420 426 West San Fernando LLC , 20980 Redwood Rd. #205, Castro Valley 94546; 4590 Augustine St., Pleasanton 94566, ID 94-152-17, $1,875,000. 

Amarjit Singh and Kulwinder Kaur to Vineet Kumar and Shweta Vidyarthi , 2762 Huff Dr., Pleasanton 94588, ID 946-1145-65, $1,863,000. 

Poki Namkung to Lance Knobel and Tracey Taylor ,1016 Bancroft Way, Berkeley 94710, Berkeley LTI Association ID 56-1934-4, $1,860,000. 

Jennifer Brooks and Kelly Brooks and Jennifer Benson to Joel Baxter and Eileen Lee , 6714 Saroni Dr., Oakland 94611, Forestland ID 48E-7347-29, $1,850,000. 

Robert E. Frangenberg and Ingrid E. Lamirault and The Frangenberg Family Trust to Angela Mackinnon and Susan Klosterhaus ,1969 Drake Dr., Oakland 94611, ID 48E-7339-22-2, $1,850,000. 

SEPTEMBER 17–23, 2021  39 BIZ BIZ LEADS LEADS 

Laura L. Wilcox to Jallel Harrati and Ellary Rose ,769 Alvarado Rd., Berkeley 94705, Claremont Estates ID 48H-7661-11, $1,835,000. 

Laurence L. Tong and Judith Tong to Kumar Sharma Sanjesh and Shoma Priyadarshini , 8301 Rhoda Ave., Dublin 94568, Tract 4668 Pleasanton Township ID 941-2751-81, $1,820,000. 

Toll CA XX LP to Bo Cunpu ,2359 Halogen Common #302, Fremont 94539; Warm Springs Blvd., Fremont 94538, Tract 8265 ID 519-1759-116, $1,806,000. 

Clayeton R. Ray and Colette N. Ray and Ray Family Living Trust to Stephanie Sheldrick and Michael Sheldrick , 2910 Lucca Cir., Livermore 94550, Tract 8091 Vinsanto ID 99-1386-30, $1,800,000. 

Linda M. Nguyen to Ramesh Swaminathan and Swathi Shankar and Swaminathan Family Revocable Trust , 180 Yampa Way, Fremont 94539, Tract 3775 ID 519-1663-5, $1,800,000. 

Redwood Holdings LLC to Marjan Montakhab , 1250 Trestle Glen Rd., Oakland 94610, Lakeshore Hills ID 24-566-35, $1,800,000. 

Shari Lejsek and Bainer Family Trust to Ling Long and Hengyun Zhang , 43517 Gallegos Ave., Fremont 94539, ID 513-601-60, $1,800,000. 

James Alfred Wirowek and Diane Wirowek to Anil Umarji and Roma Deshpande , 529 Misty Ln., Livermore 94550; 2858 San Minete Dr., Livermore 94550, Tract 7412 ID 99-1372-10, $1,790,000. 

Robert O. Divelbiss and Janis A. Butler to Sobhani Kunjan and Jyotika Satish Belani , 6994 Paso Robles Dr., Oakland 94611, Forestland Heights ID 48E-7347-7-6, $1,756,000. 

Eric L. Frank and Becky G. Frank and The Frank Family Revocable Trust to Brian Hayashi and Jinsun Lee ,3928 La Cresta Ave., Oakland 94602, Fourth Avenue Terrace ID 24-521-41, $1,750,000. 

Satheesh Ganapathi Subramanian and Veena Subramanian and The Subramanian Family Revocable Trust to Hitesh Gupta and Mini Goel ,47280 Havasu St., Fremont 94539, ID 519-1189-45, $1,718,000. 

Divakar Gupta and Rupal S. Gupta and Pawan And Meera Gupta Trust to Anandam Ohm and Sanyukta Anandam , 1251 Camero Way, Fremont 94539, ID 525-127-87, $1,712,000. 

James A. Grim Jr. and Lori D. Grim and The Grim Living Trust to Jeff Allen Aguilar and Jarren Joven Aguilar , 5366 Stirling Ct., Newark 94560, ID 92A-725-5, $1,710,000. 

William B. Linse and Diana T. Linse to H. Roger Gavankar and Monica H. Gavankar and The Gavankar Family Trust , 810 Chateli Ct., Pleasanton 94566, ID 946-2554-56, $1,710,000. 

Tomas R. Garcia and Selina M. Goulart Garcia to Dennis Chin Jen and Julie Park ,4249 Torres Ave., Fremont 94536, Warwick Park ID 501-42-44, $1,701,000. 

John M. O’Neill and Mary C. O’Neill and O’Neill 2016 Family Trust to Igor Mysak and Alina Mysak , 17442 Almond Rd., Castro Valley 94546, Parcel 4580 ID 84D-1250-44, $1,700,000. 

Kunal Jain and Sucheta Jain to Avinash Yadav and Sunita Yadav and The Yadav Family Revocable Trust , 38137 Cambridge Ct., Fremont 94536, ID 501-1822-27, $1,700,000. 

Michael Maclean and Mary Helen Maclean to J. Simon Tunnicliffe and Jeremy Simon Tunnicliffe , 1596 Justine Ct., Livermore 94550, Tract 6862 ID 99A-2923-16, $1,700,000. 

Paul Wei Jye Chen to Srinivas Nidamarthi and Sarada Ayyagari , 4368 Healdsburg Way, Dublin 94568, Tract 7714 ID 986-48-46, $1,675,000. 

Diwakar Rao and Deepta Rao and Rao Family Trust to Subbarao Narahari Venkata Raghavendra and Aparna Mulakaluri , 3655 Pruneridge Ave. #40, Santa Clara 95051; 6548 Hansen Dr., Pleasanton 94566, Tract 3147 ID 946-3411-59, $1,665,000. 

David M. Burton and Phyllis Burton and The Burton Family Trust to Huiyu Zheng and Xuanyu Guo ,6022 Slopeview Ct., Castro Valley 94552, ID 85-6313-61, $1,650,000. 

Monika H. Langer and Monika H. Langer Trust and The Langer 1991 Family Trust to Maria Miyuki Speranza Camp and Nicholas Joseph Camp ,40708 Wolcott Dr., Fremont 94538, ID 525-785-47, $1,650,000. 

Linda Subryan to Mark Wilfried Mueller and Elena Stephanie Stumm , 1475 Catherine Dr., Berkeley 94702, Tract 626 ID 59-2286-69, $1,635,000. 

James C. Khazar and Camille Khazar and The Khazar Family Trust to Anthony T. Ng and Monica Ng and Annette Ko Ng et al. , 2471 Valentano Dr., Dublin 94568; 1437 Cottage St., Alameda 94501, Encinal Home Lots ID 72-343-24, $1,630,000. 

Robert T. Ho and Jennifer J. Ho to Gautam Modur and Manjula Modur , 2587 Kellogg Loop, Livermore 94550, Tract 7404 ID 99A-2929-6, $1,630,000. 

Andros Island 1032 LLC to Ruby Clap LLC , P.O. Box 1624, Mountain View 94042; 1733 D St./1737 D St., Hayward 94541, ID 426-80-2/426-80-3, $1,625,000. 

Maryan Beal and Ross Beal to Yazhe Feng and Guankun Su , 39666 Whitecap Way, Fremont 94538, ID 531-22-177, $1,620,000. 

Golden Estate Development LLC to Mohankumar Dhayalan and Gauri Jape ,39019 Bernadine Dutra Common, Fremont 94538; Mowry Ave., Fremont 94538, ID 501-1842-8, $1,613,500. 

Alan A. Hew and Kinjal M. Hew to Nagram P. Addepally and Swetha Dintakurthi , 1525 Gilbert Place, Fremont 94536, Tract 5150 ID 501-1278-91, $1,605,000. 

David Dowd and Margaret Dowd to Vijaikumar Srinivasaraghavan and Anitha Balachandran ,35630 Woodbridge Place, Fremont 94536, Brookvale ID 501-1798-34, $1,600,000. 

Fries Properties Inc. to William J. Sinodinos and Toula Sinodinos , 10204 Atlas Ct., Oakdale 95361; 37372 Niles Blvd., Fremont 94536, ID 507-280-5, $1,600,000. 

Guneet Sethi and Rupeet Maihotra and The Sethi Family Revocable Trust to Ramachandran Subbiah and Sundari Esakkipandian ,34738 Powder River Place, Fremont 94555, Tract 3371 ID 543-254-6, $1,591,000. 

Thomas B. Laffoon and Angela L. Laffoon to William E. Danko and Andria L. Danko , 892 Del Norte Dr., Livermore 94551, ID 98-398-2, $1,580,000. 

Donald J. Stocum and Jackie Yeary and Stocum And Yeary Family Living Trust to Dyutimoy Sarkar and Hiral A. Lakdavala and The Sarkar and Lakdavala Revocable , 4794 Calle De Lucia, San Jose 95124; 41235 Norman Ct., Fremont 94539, Tract 1611 ID 525-202-20, $1,572,000. 

Salim A. French and Markisha K. Greggs to Teja Swaroop Gajula and Sanjana Rajagopala , 4800 Rocklin Dr., Union City 94587, ID 543-423-60, $1,570,000. 

Albert J. Gomez Trustee to Ameer A. Karim , 1642 Lenn Dr., San Jose 95125; 2302 John Ct., Castro Valley 94546, Stanton Tract ID 84A-265-1-8, $1,565,000. 

David E. Wellbeloved and Judith B. Miller to Dhananjay Joshi and Deepali Joshi , 529 Malbec Ct., Pleasanton 94566, Tract 3097 Vintage Hills ID 946-2552-113, $1,560,000. 

Julian Sanzo Davis and Debbi C. Sanzo Davis to Chlu Wu Chen and Shu Hui Wang and Chen Chiu Wu And Shu Huiu Wang , 5862 Shadow Ridge Dr., Castro Valley 94552, Tract 3427 Eden Township ID 85-1612-28, $1,560,000. 

Paul R. Paradis and Rachel B. Paradis to Lauren Lee Taylor and Sarfaty Epstein Alexander , 1722 Woodhaven Way, Oakland 94611, Forestland ID 48F-7379-44, $1,555,000. 

Brett Todoroff to Justin P. Sheek and Jie Yang , 2177 Trafalgar Place, Oakland 94611, ID 48C-7192-34-7, $1,550,000. 

Forrest Wright and Rebecca Burns to Marion Robine and Camille Baelden , 4111 Huntington St., Oakland 94619, High Street Terrace ID 30-1966-5-1, $1,550,000. 

Ira Kravitz and Kravitz Saki to James Bevan Raycraft and Mark Bevan Raycraft ,4625 Park Blvd., Oakland 94602, Fourth Avenue Heights ID 24-554-21, $1,550,000. 

Jeannie Kim to Henry D. Heckart and Christine A. Heckart and Tyler D. Heckart , 602 Austen Way, Livermore 94551, ID 902-12-15, $1,550,000. 

Maureen Quintana Broome and Behrouz Khanvali to Ik Lee Sun and Sun Choi Jee ,2758 Bette St., Alameda 94501, Tract 8131 ID 74-1371-33, $1,550,000. 

Stefanie Dale Connolly and Helen Rose Johnson Rlt to Joshua Douglas Scheid and Ines Bermudez Lejarraga ,4281 Gilbert St., Oakland 94611, Highland Terrace ID 13-1110-14, $1,550,000. 

Golden Estate Development LLC to Shikhar Dua Chandan and Reetika Ganjoo , 39009 Bernadine Dutra Common, Fremont 94538; Mowry Ave., Fremont 94538, ID 501-1842-9, $1,548,000. 

Lennar Homes of California Inc. to Jonathan C. Ma and Lily Ma , 37894 Seafarer Rd., Newark 94560, Tract 8099 ID 537-857-47, $1,531,000. 

Baskaran Hemanath and Gayathri Baskaran to Ashish Patel and Nidhi Agrawal and The Patel Family Revocable Trust , 3473 N. 1st St. #248, San Jose 95134; 2345 Sueno Way, Fremont 94539, ID 525-123-63, $1,528,000. 

Lennar Homes of California Inc. to Jeremy Bomong Zhang and Mengfei Zhang ,37905 Seafarer Rd., Newark 94560, Tract 8099 ID 537-857-37, $1,527,500. 

Harjinder K. Basi and The Basi Family Revocable Trust to Gopi Sundaresan and Rajagopal Shanthi Keerthana , 4908 Caspar St., Union City 94587, Crestwood ID 543-437-37, $1,520,000. 

Golden Estate Development LLC to Haw Tang Ruenn and Shan Yuan Yung ,4668 Mowry Ave., Fremont 94538, ID 501-1842-11, $1,519,000. 

Dalia Patricia Cuevas and Juan Manuel Cazares and Patricia D. Cuevas to Nicholas Constant and Chelsea Constant , 8401 Rhoda Ave., Dublin 94568, Tract 4668 ID 941-2757-37, $1,515,000. 

Debra Steinhauer to Nathaniel Carl Carter and Krista Marie Carter ,242 Buttercup Ct., Napa 94559; 4853 Hillcrest Way, Pleasanton 94588, ID 941-1049-27, $1,515,000. 

James Michael Sullivan and Michele Sullivan to Ashish Bhatia and Vini Harbola ,38798 Hygelund Dr., Fremont 94536, ID 501-956-55, $1,515,000. 

Cynthia L. Trujillo and The Diane A. Green Revocable Trust to Ashutosh Ranjan Gupta and Seema Gangwani , 3172 Weymouth Ct., Pleasanton 94588, ID 946-1105-29, $1,505,000. 

Parag V. Shah and Rupal Shah to Siddharth Vashisth and Ruchi Sharma , 34432 Alberta Terr., Fremont 94555, ID 543-454-16, $1,500,000. 

Juan Li and Weijiang Yu to Vamshi Krishna Merugu and Bhagya Laxmi Gaddam ,4239 Midlands Ct., Dublin 94568, Tract 8250 ID 985-121-173, $1,500,000. 

Narsimha Rao Charagondla and Shobha R. Charagondla to Satyanarayana Vutukury and Ramani Ravirala , 4410 Clovewood Ln., Pleasanton 94588, ID 941-1003-21, $1,500,000. 

Judy Ann Echeandia Trustee to Jun Li Liang and Xiao Mel Liu , 2827 Olive Ave., Fremont 94539, Palmdale Co. ID 525-450-3-5, $1,490,000. 

TH HW Enterprise LLC to Jasper Liu and Hae Jin Kim ,8576 Tailwind Ave., Newark 94560, Tract 8459 ID 92-264-48, $1,485,500. 

Michael N. Tamir and Sara Lillian Tamir to Minh Phuoc Vo and Phuong Ai Le , 159 Bannister Way, Alameda 94502, Tract 6118 ID 74-1345-14, $1,485,000. 

Zou Chen and Sai Zhang to Mark John Yung Lin and Ashley Tuong Vy Vu , 3809 Boulder Canyon Dr., Castro Valley 94552, ID 417-163-4, $1,485,000. 

Scott Paul Mitchell and Joann Mitchell Hepsey to Nicholas Peter Deick and Yunying Liu , 36475 Cypress Point Dr., Newark 94560, Tract 2446 ID 92A-508-33, $1,482,000. 

Chenan Wu and Mei Yin Tueng to Thomas Russo and Lisa N. Russo , 1590 Cheryl Dr., Livermore 94550, ID 99A-2924-20, $1,480,000. 

William Agee and Michelle Agee to Andrew Goodman and Goodman Medinat ,6551 Pinehaven Rd., Oakland 94611, Pinehaven ID 48G-7441-2, $1,475,000. 

Jay Pandey and Saumya Pandey to Yafang Yang and Jun Feng , 5405 Quebec Common, Fremont 94555, Tract 5658 ID 543-454-134, $1,470,000. 

TH HW Enterprise LLC to Ramchandra Deshpande Siddhi and Krishnamurthy Raghavendra Abhilash ,8572 Tailwind Ave., Newark 94560, Tract 8459 ID 92-264-49, $1,456,500. 

David Schwantes and Eileen Hays Schwantes to Erin Joy Mariano Soroushian and Vishtasp Mehr Soroushian ,1353 Carleton St., Berkeley 94702, Mathews Tract ID 54-1791-4, $1,455,000. 

TH HW Enterprise LLC to Sarang Zargar and Pankhuri Soni , 8580 Tailwind Ave., Newark 94560, Tract 8459 ID 92-264-47, $1,454,500. 

Daniel Lee to Sherry Lau and Yoshlyuki Biehler , 5450 Borgia Rd., Fremont 94538; 893 Dwight Cres, Berkeley 94710, ID 56-1940-15-2, $1,450,000. 

George H. Adas Jr. and Maria L. Adas to Karlo Rodrigo Alaura and Holie Anne Cruz , 2617 Spindrift Cir., Hayward 94545, Tract 7360 ID 461-102-5, $1,450,000. 

Lennar Homes of California Inc. to Pok Chek and Stacy Tran , 9143 Cape Breeze Dr., Newark 94560, Tract 8099 ID 537-857-39, $1,448,500. 

Jimmy Tsai and Ching Kang Shih to Sanish N. Mahadik and Sukanya B. Salaskar and The Mahadik And Salaskar Living Trust ,35068 Vincente Ct., Fremont 94536, Tract 2695 Cabrillo Park ID 543-392-15, $1,429,000. 

Bruce E. Shapiro and Linda S. Shapiro to Ayana Corbin ,500 Elysian Fields Dr., Oakland 94605, Tract 2766 ID 48-6432-40, $1,425,000. 

Sushil Rangarajan and Lakshmi Saligram to Ankush Verma and Shatakshi Narayan , 4979 Wingate Place, Newark 94560, Tract 2945 ID 92A-728-9, $1,425,000. 

Golden Estate Development LLC to Logesh Swayamrakasam and Vennila Shanmugavelu ,4688 Mowry Ave., Fremont 94538, Tract 8390 ID 501-1842-10, $1,418,000. 

John Thomas Condon Trustee to Laura Glascott Faustman and Dean Jackson Faustman and Faustmann Family Trust , 3218 Encinal Ave., Alameda 94501, ID 69-71-6, $1,410,000. 

Anne En Yi Wu Trustee to Go Green LLC , 1901 Harrison St., Oakland 94612; 5944 Claremont Ave., Oakland 94618, Batchelder Tract ID 14-1268-25, $1,400,000. 

Antonette West and Estate Of Gilbert Jeuitt to Millennium Living Space LLC , 2171 Hillview Dr., Walnut Creek 94596; 451 62nd St., Oakland 94609, Hansens ID 16-1393-30, $1,400,000. 

Dennis Bruce Cunningham and Marcia Elaine Starcher and Holly Diane Warneck et al. to RKMS Investments LLC , 34501 7th St., Union City 94587; 40501 Fremont Blvd., Fremont 94538, ID 525-960-1-87, $1,400,000. 

Ravi Nalluri and Padmaja Nalluri and Gollapudi Nalluri Trust to Aniket Kharat and Hiral Kotak ,4043 Sutherland Ct., Pleasanton 94588, Tract 5685 ID 946-4573-108, $1,400,000. 

Jay Jurado Gee and Cristeta Jurado Boistad Rlt to Xie Yun , P.O. Box 20201, Castro Valley 94546; 18743 W. Cavendish Dr., Castro Valley 94552, ID 85-6305-45, $1,395,000. 

Dengliang Yang and Chunmei Li to Beiping Qiu ,220 Dutra Vernaci Dr., Union City 94587, Tract 7393 ID 87-103-46, $1,380,000. 

Anjali P. Young and James S. Young to Redfinnow Borrower LLC , 2611 Internet Blvd. #201, Frisco, Texas 75034; 3387 Touriga Dr., Pleasanton 94566, ID 946-2552-105, $1,368,000. 

Siva Rama Narasimham Tadepalli and Sushma Pullela to Venkata Ramesh Chandra Dasika and Naga Tulasi Soujanya Vadrevu ,4343 Healdsburg Way, Dublin 94568, Tract 7714 ID 986-48-75, $1,360,000. 

Brookfield Bay Area Holdings LLC to Kapil Chandra Avasarala and Divya Rajprasad , 5937 Abbott St., Dublin 94568; Dougherty Rd., Dublin 94568, Tract 8365 ID 986-71-9, $1,357,000. 

Marivic B. Carpo and Arnedo Philip C. Carpo to Joseph Kock Hwee and Rita Yee Hwee and Kevin Joseph Hwee , 32741 Fairmead St., Union City 94587, Tract 4689 ID 543-429-62, $1,350,000. 

Patel Shah Nirali and Sachin Hemendra Shah and Shah Family Revocable Living Trust et al. to Huong T. Hoang Lien and Vincent Nguyen , 8539 Mahogany Place, Newark 94560, ID 92A-451-99, $1,350,000. 

Barbara Bonner and William Bonner to Daniel Gordon Ketcham and Pamela Gregory Ketcham , 668 Prospect Place #3, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11216; 183 Elysian Fields Dr., Oakland 94605, Tract 1958 ID 48-6430-14, $1,350,000. 

Lu Li and Yi Zhang to Alpa Shah , 38271 Eggers Common, Fremont 94536, ID 501-1635-72, $1,350,000. 

Man Conchis Serrano to Pawan Teja Reddy Bodireddy and Keerthi Priya Kalakata , 4955 Swindon Place, Newark 94560, ID 92A-716-8, $1,350,000. 

Scott J. Reid and Donna L. Reid to Vipin Kumar Pallepati and Malavika Arishanapelly , 6858 Herrin Ct., Pleasanton 94588, ID 941-1305-63, $1,333,000. 

1625 Prince LLC to Blue Star Property Group LLC ,6104 Hedgecrest Cir., San Ramon 94582; 1625 Prince St., Berkeley 94703, ID 53-1606-12, $1,331,000. 

Kanwarjit Singh and Sumeet Bhatia to Fnu Antony Jesto and Fini Francis Assissi , 3830 Village Terr. #240, Fremont 94536; 32522 Lake Bridgeport St., Fremont 94555, Tract 3648 ID 543-352-142, $1,325,000. 

Sandra E. Brim and Carolyn Mugar to Dana Hansen and Michael Estanislao , 4478 Mountain View Ave., Oakland 94605; 5550 Leona St., Oakland 94605, Parcel 1601 ID 37-2605-96, $1,325,000. 

Sybil A. Mercier Trustee to Jeremy Christopher Norvell , 2275 Chateau Way, Livermore 94550, ID 97-97-25, $1,325,000. 

John G. Williams to Patrick Smith and Rebecca Johnson , 2992 Hedge Ct., Oakland 94602, Tract 1272 ID 29-1162-1-7, $1,310,000. 

Sylvan Investments Inc. to Meng Zhang and Jiasi Tan ,3405 Montgomery Dr. #401, Santa Clara 95054; 6366 Stonecress Ave., Newark 94560, Tract 2544 ID 92A-2355-80, $1,309,000. 

Mark Nolan and Kristi Nolan to Daniel Kurzrock and Jennifer Kurzrock , 4469 Carson St., Oakland 94619, ID 30-1850-56, $1,300,000. 

Parrott Rodes Leannah Trustee and Cal C. Parrott Living Trust et al. to Hui Gen Huang and Min Hong Yu , 19272 Heyer Ln., Castro Valley 94546; 4643 Heyer Ave., Castro Valley 94546, Parcel 879 ID 84C-701-21, $1,300,000. 

Rick Patterson and Aida Patterson to Jesse Dylan Lacewell and Ruoyun Liu ,4742 El Rey Ave., Fremont 94536; 36478 Diego Dr., Fremont 94536, ID 501-40-66, $1,300,000. 

William Kapla Robb and Robyn Danielle Ganeles to Homelight Homes Real Estate LLC , 1375 N. Scottsdale Rd. #140, Scottsdale, Ariz. 85257; 1400 Acton St., Berkeley 94702, Domingo Peralta Homestead Tract ID 60-2423-4, $1,300,000. 

Sarkis Estephan to Andrew E. Tanenbaum and Andrea Tanenbaum , 5240 Golden Gate Ave., Oakland 94618; 200 Monte Vista Ave., Oakland 94611, ID 12-935-4, $1,297,000. 

Jan Berka and Marketa Berkova to Chandrashekhar Tammannagari and Vandana Tammannagari ,3130 Half Dome Dr., Pleasanton 94566, ID 946-4569-211, $1,281,000. 

Scott Andrew Seaton to Prithvi Chandra Reddy Konatham and Anusha Yellu , 3335 Central Pkwy., Dublin 94568, Tract 7655 ID 985-103-53, $1,280,000. 

Wenxiang Zhou and Zhaofei Yang and Zhou and Yang Family Trust to Winnie Zhao Bi Zheng , 877 Washington Ave., Albany 94706, Plat of Cerrito Hill ID 66-2752-14, $1,278,000. 

Homelight Homes Real Estate LLC to Sushant Mishra and Kaumudi Misra ,3180 Cromwell Place, Hayward 94542, ID 425-340-48, $1,273,000. 

David O’Brien Trustee to Rong Zhong and Yi Luo , 354 Escobar St., Fremont 94539; 4503 Piper St., Fremont 94538, ID 525-966-40, $1,265,000. 

Tyler R. Scheel and Melissa Scheel to Ying Kwong Choi and Sui Sum Kwong , 430 Sherman Ave. #314, Palo Alto 94306; 39514 Pardee Ct., Fremont 94538, ID 501-963-121, $1,260,000. 

Amy Joan Weiss Trustee to Jacob Segal and Cecilia D. Segal , 2875 25th St. #4, San Francisco 94110; 1057 Stannage Ave., Albany 94706, Regents Park ID 65-2658-39, $1,257,500. 

Pauline B. Sohn and Sae Hoon Sohn Trust to Susan Prescott Carrithers and George E. Keenen III , 1 Lakeside Dr. #421, Oakland 94612, Parcel 7749 ID 8-696-21, $1,252,000. 

Luis M. Maldonado Trustee to Mayank Garg and Neha Agarwal , 32321 Ruth Ct., Union City 94587, ID 483-100-137, $1,250,000. 

Paul Harada and Michelle Nishina to Sanchayan Chakraborty and Malyamita Bandyopadhyay , 335 Sandstone Dr., Fremont 94536, ID 507-802-27, $1,250,000. 

Reynalda Nunez Rodriguez and Ismael Leon Rodriguez and Rodriguez Family Living Trust to Aaron Scolari and Amy Thomas ,4140 Maybelle Ave., Oakland 94619, Westall Tract ID 30-1934-4-7, $1,250,000. 

Robert F. Strange and Joyce K. Strange to Anton D. Batalla and Stacey Marie Hogan Batalla , 16572 Selby Dr., San Leandro 94578, Tract 3685 ID 84B-326-66, $1,250,000. 

Sudha Krishnan and Krishnan Thiruvengadam to Dorene Gaye Kimoto , 4171 Awela Place, Lihue, Hawaii 96766; 7426 Stonedale Dr., Pleasanton 94588, ID 941-1054-72, $1,250,000. 

William E. Luna Jr. and Alisa Y. Luna to Flyhomes Investments CA LLC , 120 Western Ave. W. #100, Seattle, Wash. 98119; 645 Loyola Way, Livermore 94550, ID 99A-2907-68, $1,250,000. 

Adrian L. Moreira Jr. and Nicole Patricia Moreira to John Farrell and Yevgeniy Shvartsman , 8 Eastwood Ct., Oakland 94611, Forestland Heights ID 48D-7311-70, $1,250,000. 

Eric Chongyul Choe and Kyong Hui Choe to Arati Shimikeri and Ashveej Shivashankar , 2479 Medallion Dr., Union City 94587, ID 475-141-49, $1,250,000. 

John Pickett and Iris Pickett Living Trust to Jonathon Blackburn and Angelina Blackburn , 5415 Brophy Dr., Fremont 94536, Tract 2491 ID 531-4-16, $1,250,000. 

Katsuichi Osako and Chikako I. Osako to Siddharth Verma and Karuna Verma , 21650 Gail Dr., Castro Valley 94546, Tract 2148 Eden Township ID 415-180-13, $1,250,000. 

Tina Montgomery Trustee to Andrew Ryan Coates and Lauren Florence Henry ,71 Rio Vista Ave., Oakland 94611, Kellers Rose Park ID 12-937-36, $1,245,000. 

Toll CA XX LP to Lihao Luo , 3440 Flash Common, Fremont 94538; Warm Springs Blvd., Fremont 94538, Tract 8398 ID 519-1761-23, $1,245,000. 

Sivakumar Makineni and Supriya Gullapalli and The Makineni Family Revocable Trust to Chanaveer Marilingappa Kadapatti and Vijayalaxmi Chanaveer Kadapatti , 528 Kottinger Dr., Pleasanton 94566, Tract 1127 ID 94-66-67, $1,235,000. 

Lennar Homes of California Inc. to Wen Wei Lin and Jingjing Zhu , 37518 Sand Drift Rd., Newark 94560, Tract 8099 ID 537-856-46, $1,233,000. 

Cityserve International to Purus Investment LLC , 5587 N. Dublin Ranch Dr., Dublin 94568; 3143 Independence Dr., Livermore 94551, Parcel 9350 ID 905-17-25, $1,230,000. 

Daren H. Wilkerson Trustee to Molly McCabe Seale and Zachary Lloyd Seale , 1174 Trestle Glen Rd., Oakland 94610; 4624 Newhaven Way, Castro Valley 94546, Tract 1782 ID 84C-1062-47, $1,230,000. 

Kenneth J. Leinweber and The Leinweber Family Trust to Thi Nguyen Nhutrinh and Kevin Tran , 35227 Preston Place, Newark 94560, ID 92A-727-44, $1,220,000. 

Conor A. Dunn to Ryan C. Utter and Kimberley R. Utter , 6940 Balsam Way, Oakland 94611, Pinehaven ID 48G-7433-8, $1,215,000. 

Clifford L. Case and Colette C. Case to Alessandra Abarro Cabrera and Michael Anthony Cota , 534 Kenmore Ave., Oakland 94610, Piedmont Knoll ID 11-859-2, $1,214,000. 

Kumar Das Sambit and Smita Nayak Prak to Kumar Ujjwal and Meenu Baloda ,174 Sierrawood Ave., Hayward 94544, ID 452-86-99, $1,212,500. 

Eric Lam to Madhusudhana Anantharamu and Smitha Ram Mysore Jayaram and Madhusudhana And Smitha Revocable Trust , 48015 Purpleleaf St., Fremont 94539; 37896 Goldenrod Dr., Newark 94560, Tract 2634 ID 92A-2144-49, $1,210,000. 

Kuan Tan and Jennifer Kuan to Darwin Global Limited LLC , 317 E. Foothill Blvd. #201, Arcadia 91006; 2326 Le Conte Ave. #1, Berkeley 94709, Parcel 7541 ID 58-2190-17, $1,210,000. 

Philip P. Chatting to Zhong Yang and Lei Wang , 4680 Rousillon Ave., Fremont 94555, Ardenwood Villages ID 543-441-88, $1,210,000. 

Sara E. Rolita and Ryan P. Rolita to Bhavika Booragadda and Rahul Rao Natarajan , 2464 Lancaster Ct., Hayward 94542, Tract 1714 ID 425-360-15, $1,210,000. 

Diana G. Van Konynenburg and The Van Konynenburg Family By Pass to Fred Li and Carol Lum Li and The Li Family Trust 1997 , 6114 Plymouth Ave., Richmond 94805; 912 Via Del Paz, Livermore 94550, Tract 2793 ID 99-325-28, $1,208,000. 

Curtiss Minnesota Development LLC to Jonathan Quan and Merica Quan , 1631 Wonderland Way, Hayward 94545; Mohr Dr., Hayward 94545, Tract 8151 ID 441-77-105, $1,204,000. 

Douglas A. Unsworth and Estate Of Raquel Kieferdorf to Douglas S. Rubenstein and Kristy Chan , 711 Estudillo Ave. #1, San Leandro 94577; 711 Estudillo Ave., San Leandro 94577, Estudillo Tract ID 77-513-15, $1,200,000. 

Elijah G. Wolfson and Jasdeep K. Johi to Elliot Weiser and Shannon Webster , 1054 56th St., Oakland 94608, Gaskill Tract ID 15-1307-4, $1,200,000. 

Ha Chau Tsui So and The So Ha Chau Tsui Revocable Trust to Yuen Chung Siu and Mandy Shao Ming Jiang and Lufang Xu , 367 9th St. #102, Oakland 94607, Parcel 4349 ID 1-193-33, $1,200,000. 

40  SAN FRANCISCO BUSINESS TIMES BIZ BIZ LEADS LEADS 

John M. Roberts and Lindsey M. Roberts and JM LM Roberts Trust to Everett L. McHenry Jr. and Monique R. East Bratt , 3444 Calandria Ave., Oakland 94605, Oak Knoll ID 43A-4690-10, $1,200,000. 

Pratik H. Shah and Aastha Shah to Nishant Patel and Tanna Krinal , 39882 Parada St., Newark 94560, Tract 5810 ID 901-191-186, $1,190,000. 

Joanne E. Murphy and Mark R. Murphy to Jeffrey Wolman and Phillip Washington Trust , 4208 Overland Ave., Culver City 90230; 6680 Pine Needle Dr., Oakland 94611, Pinehaven ID 48G-7431-41, $1,175,000. 

Brookfield Bay Area Holdings LLC to Yan Liu and Daisy Liu and 2015 Liu Revocable Trust , 5833 Columbus St., Dublin 94568, Tract 8368 Huntington at Boulevard ID 986-57-108, $1,173,500. 

Shaikh Nisar and Syeda Firdoes to Krishna Teja Komma Naga and Sravya Komma , 3546 Sequoia Common, Fremont 94536, ID 501-1826-13, $1,170,000. 

Maureen Munoz and The Louie Solus 2015 Revocable Trust to Cornerstone Capital Investments LLC ,151 Callan Ave. #200, San Leandro 94577; 38785 Hygelund Dr., Fremont 94536, Tract 2173 ID 501-956-59, $1,169,000. 

TH HW Alameda Point LLC to Saket Milind Nigam and Sara Joanna Kritikou Nigam , 2023 Main St., Alameda 94501; 2193 Main St., Alameda 94501, Tract 8336 ID 74-1376-3, $1,163,500. 

Deanna Y. L. Wong to Joel Carrillo and Lucille Carrillo and Benjamin Taylor Braun et al. , 3800 Redding St., Oakland 94619, Key Route Heights ID 30-1980-158, $1,155,000. 

Kory Frost to Jestin P. Escusa and Joseph Ian Puyo Escusa , 1377 Thais Ln., Hayward 94544, ID 454-65-38, $1,155,000. 

Donald Augustus Leitao Trustee to Michael Szeto and Ka Szeto , 3890 Dunbar Place, Fremont 94536, ID 501-1809-130, $1,150,000. 

Jeffrey S. Towne and Malissa L. Towne to Omar David Mora and Esperanza Jimenez , 2887 Hoya Common, Livermore 94551, Tract 7610 ID 903-12-93, $1,150,000. 

Ricardo M. Bustillos and Karen E. Bustillos and The Bustillos Living Trust to Ravinder Singh and Maribel Leon Lopez , 35652 Farnham Dr., Newark 94560, Tract 3036 ID 92A-728-81, $1,150,000. 

Zev Elmer John Haggitt and Estate of Mark Andrew Haggitt to Afshar Jalalian and Mofidi Shahed and Ashkon Jalalian et al. ,1869 Thousand Oaks Blvd., Berkeley 94707; 680 Peralta Ave., Berkeley 94707, Solano Avenue Terrace ID 62-2868-13, $1,150,000. 

James D. Brass and Marsha J. Brass to Neha R. Velhankar and Ameya A. Desai , 31230 San Andreas Dr., Union City 94587, Casa Verde ID 483-43-7, $1,140,000. 

Cynthia Andrews Trustee to Aralya Yee Phinith and Rosa Yee Phinith , 3735 Woodruff Ave., Oakland 94602, Wilmarth Park ID 23-490-7, $1,135,000. 

Ariel Proeprties LLC to Marijoy Angeles , 2212 Aquatic Ct., San Leandro 94579, Tract 6965 ID 80G-1409-118, $1,130,000. 

Redfin Now Borrower LLC to Alberto Campos Rivera and Martha A. Salazar , 4156 Wilson Ave., Castro Valley 94546, ID 84D-1358-5, $1,128,000. 

Glaydys Rouge and Norma A. Rouge Stoliar and Rouge Living Trust to SV Ventures USA LLC , 6490 Potrero Dr., Newark 94560; 35828 Ashton Place, Fremont 94536, Tract 2931 ID 501-1797-96, $1,125,000. 

Deepak S. Nagawade and Rupali Nagawade to Hei Yeung Fong Titus , 40364 Canoga St., Fremont 94538, Davis Meadows ID 525-801-21, $1,120,000. 

Denis Yasukawa and Margit Yasukawa to Christel Adriana Van Der Boom and Kyoung Mi Choi and The Choi Van Der Boom Family Trust , 2760 Park Blvd., Oakland 94606, Arbor Villa ID 22-339-24, $1,111,500. 

Aaron E. Jackson and Egidia Bollini Jackson to Man Pradhan Subhav and Manisha Thapa , 2425 Bonar St., Berkeley 94702, Higgins Tract ID 56-1920-28, $1,110,000. 

Caden J. Blevins and Kristeen Joann Blevins to Maxwell Stapenhorst and Lacey Moffatt ,1390 Winding Stream Dr., Livermore 94551, ID 99B-5403-35, $1,102,000. 

Able International Group Inc. to Christina Luk , 725 Callaway St., San Leandro 94577; 723 Callaway St., San Leandro 94577, ID 75-209-54, $1,100,000. 

Alameda County and Estate Of Charles L. Lawhon to Xin Jin and Michele Jin , 2343 Stuart St., Berkeley 94705; 1341 Parker St., Berkeley 94702, Mathews Tract ID 54-1790-3, $1,100,000. 

Anh Vo and Cathy Yu to Nadia Moshtagh Razi and Michael Razi Hoomer ,3584 Skyline Dr., Hayward 94542, ID 81D-1906-35, $1,100,000. 

Ara D. Acle and Elizabeth Acle to Brian Alberson and Oliver Jourdan , 7940 Earl St., Oakland 94605, Melrose Highland ID 40A-3451-16, $1,100,000. 

Bhavani S. Yella to Dylan Masella and Barbara Annetta Bailey , 974 Arlington Ave., Oakland 94608, Golden Gate Tract ID 15-1296-3-2, $1,100,000. 

Carolynn Jean Breedlove and Wayne Evan Wallace and Robert Gerald Breedlove to Anghel Constantin , 342 Castro St., San Leandro 94577; 388 Castro St., San Leandro 94577, ID 75-9-12-1, $1,100,000. 

John A. Danskin and Jeannette G. Danskin Trust to Ricci Manchong Kuong ,8449 Longford Way, Dublin 94568, ID 941-185-97, $1,100,000. 

Toll CA XX LP to Rubinder Randhawa and Namrata Randhawa , 2359 Halogen Common #103, Fremont 94539; Warm Springs Blvd., Fremont 94538, Tract 8265 ID 519-1759-102, $1,100,000. 

Vanessa Mcleod to Yang Yang and Weilin Tan , 19833 John Dr., Castro Valley 94546, ID 84A-185-46, $1,100,000. 

Jasbir Kaur Sidhu and Rajeshwar Singh and Jasbir Aulakh to Hardeep Singh ,30943 Periwinkle Dr., Union City 94587, Tract 3997 ID 463-91-33, $1,090,000. 

Sunil K. Anikepati and Deepa Anikepati to Yao Chen and Xin Bihui , 33039 Lake Wawasee St., Fremont 94555, ID 543-348-85, $1,080,000. 

Adam Vaughan to Sean Chen and Joanna Mariz Lapuz Asuncion , 24135 Amaranth Loop, Hayward 94541, Tract 8233 ID 445-304-61, $1,065,000. 

Donna D. Yung Trustee to Alisa Trading Corp. , 46560 Fremont Blvd. #104, Fremont 94538; 34160 Via Lucca, Fremont 94555, Tract 7735 ID 543-472-27, $1,065,000. 

Jeffrey Alumbaugh Tyler and Alumbaugh Family Trust to Linda Zboril and Darren Laffond , 3891 California Way, Livermore 94550, Tract 1138 ID 98A-426-11-2, $1,065,000. 

Nathan Steven Louie to Ryan Michael Gardner and Juliana Herrera Correal ,2711 10th Ave., Oakland 94606, ID 22-342-10, $1,060,000. 

Sachin Thigale and Neha Kumari to Deric Walintukan ,38918 Spicebush Place, Newark 94560, Tract 8208 ID 92A-2600-68, $1,060,000. 

Dennis Bravo Jr. to Robert Munoz , 1770 Via Rancho, San Lorenzo 94580; 16200 Hesperian Blvd., San Lorenzo 94580, ID 412-39-49-1, $1,055,000. 

Anthony Fraino and Joan Fraino and Robert Alviar to V4build LLC , 33343 Sandpiper Place, Fremont 94555; 3144 San Gabriel Way, Union City 94587, Tract 2969 ID 483-42-99, $1,055,000. 

Elizabeth August and Dell Corey Stowe to Helen Howe West Lloyd and The Lloyd Revocable Trust and The Muir Family Living Trust et al. , 11 Monticello Ave., Piedmont 94611; 734 45th St., Oakland 94609, Parcel 3446 ID 13-1165-36, $1,050,000. 

Hanxian Guo to Henry Yuen and Mirian Lau ,3821 Branding Iron Place, Dublin 94568, Parcel 9075 Silvera Ranch ID 985-57-38, $1,050,000. 

John Kevin King to Sung Kim and Kim Miga and Kim Maga , 952 Key Route Blvd., Albany 94706, ID 65-2652-67-1, $1,050,000. 

Sanjeev K. Mishra and Sangeeta Mishra and Mishra Family Trust to Pradeep Challa and Aparna Sarampally , 34627 Pueblo Terr., Fremont 94555, ID 543-444-417, $1,045,000. 

Jean Price and Lois Laza and The Ellen S. Johnson 1996 Trust to Joseph Koning , 3876 Yale Way, Livermore 94550, Tract 1253 ID 98A-429-12-2, $1,020,000. 

Homelight Homes Real Estate LLC to Aditya Kappagantula and Veena Nudurupati , 41546 Patton Terr., Fremont 94538, Tract 5476 ID 525-1115-66, $1,015,000. 

Don Jagust Jagust and Yoko Jagust to Julio F. Lastres and Norma E. Lastres , 3930 SW 6th St., Coral Gables, Fla. 33134; 2431 Acton St., Berkeley 94702, Dwight Way Terrace ID 56-1919-26, $1,005,000. 

Omar M. Ebrat and Zarghona Ebrat to Zhaoqiang Mai and Jenny Ying Deng and Alisha Wang et al. , 4024 Sunset Terr., Fremont 94536, ID 543-394-150, $1,005,000. 

Terry Zijian Cheng and Chenyi Yuan to Yulan Chen and Shaoxia Chen , 17346 Via La Jolla, San Lorenzo 94580, Tract 1077 ID 411-87-90, $1,002,000. 

Alissa J. Cohan to Sean Michael O’Shea and Denise Rabuy V. Joyce , 4115 Tompkins Ave., Oakland 94619, Jessie Jones Tract ID 30-1937-3, $1,000,000. 

Mariah May Beltran and Robert Thomas Trini Beltran to Point Green Home Solutions LLC , 164 Robles Way #287, Vallejo 94591; 41173 Ellen St., Fremont 94538, Tract 2063 ID 525-1120-39, $1,000,000. 

Huu Le Phung Trustee to Zhuohao Wu and Qiuqin Huang , 5134 Georgetown Cir., Dublin 94568; 15321 Edgemoor St., San Leandro 94579, ID 80G-1303-7, $990,000. 

Jia Li Wan and Jiapei Zheng to Ravindra Shivraj Bharati and Ashwini Giri , 110 Orchard Cir., Hayward 94544, Regency Square ID 444-80-48, $990,000. 

Summer Dittmer to Rinda Topel and John Wendt ,6067 Aspinwall Rd., Oakland 94611, Thornhill Park ID 48F-7383-11, $990,000. 

Eric Gasmena Maglalang and Trina Mae Ramirez Maglalang to Debasish Mishra and Suchismita Nayak , 1455 Fry Ln., Hayward 94545, Tract 1995 ID 442-55-1, $980,500. 

Jie Li to Brian P. Chan and Daisy Q. Chan , P.O. Box 3337, Oak Park, Ill. 60303; 46164 Warm Springs Blvd. #274, Fremont 94539, Parcel 9629 Fremont Times Square ID 519-1744-67, $980,000. 

733 Apgar Street LLC to Chris Griffiths and Beatriz Garcia , 743 Apgar St., Oakland 94609; 733 Apgar St., Oakland 94609, Tract 8505 ID 12-964-29, $975,000. 

Douglas Brian Miller and Taria Miller to Matthew Starkey , 513 Willow St., Alameda 94501, Tract 3253 ID 74-1240-213, $975,000. 

Robert J. Gallagher to Vishal Jain and Ronak K. Desai and Charulata Bhatt ,3476 Skyline Dr., Hayward 94542; 3705 Gettysburg Ct. N., Pleasanton 94588, Tract 3070 ID 941-903-35, $975,000. 

Walter R. Lopez and Molly Lopez and Leanne Rae Lopez to Vince Luigi Valencia and Brent Scott Nuyda , 2528 Phelan Ave., Hayward 94545, Tract 2605 ID 456-42-28, $968,000. 

Maria Pilar Arce Jauregui Trustee to Rachael Richardson , 2838 School St., Oakland 94602, Champion Tract ID 28-901-22, $957,000. 

Daniel Simon Fluss and Laura Brotherton to Damir Sudar and Francesca Hindrikje Guagliardo , 1258 65th St., Emeryville 94608, Tract 7358 ID 49-1541-82, $951,000. 

Jesus C. Gomez and Abigail S. Gomez to Andrew A. Maldonado , 638 Tamarack Dr., Union City 94587, ID 87-36-129, $950,000. 

Kerry Norman Gott and Estate of Darell Randy Gott to Rachel L. Vanerwegen and Jonathan Vanerwegen ,1664 Rhododendron Dr., Livermore 94551, Tract 3940 ID 99-1310-46, $950,000. 

Raymond E. Williams and Ingrid M. Williams and The Williams Family Trust to Megan Denhardt and Christian Denhardt , 2820 Windsor Dr., Alameda 94501, ID 69-130-64, $950,000. 

Anita R. Angel Trustee to Wang Linnan and Ying Wang , 4326 Fairlands Dr., Pleasanton 94588, Hyde Park ID 946-1109-109, $950,000. 

Avineet Garg to Yvonne Chang , 7880 Sunkist Dr., Oakland 94605, Moss Estate ID 40A-3435-41, $950,000. 

Vladimir Fedotov and Irina Trusova and Irina Trousova to Alen Haoxin Huang and Jin Ye Guan , 20274 Forest Ave. #6, Castro Valley 94546, Tract 4043 ID 84C-713-17, $942,000. 

Daniel E. Phillippi and Christine M. Phillippi to Rajesh Kaja and Shalini Bantupalli , 6307 Almaden Way, Livermore 94551, ID 99B-5355-67, $940,000. 

Darin L. Hepp and Stephanie L. Hepp to Joseph Ming Hong Lai and Megan Datu Dela Vega ,23224 Ernest Ct., Hayward 94541, ID 417-180-66, $940,000. 

Deepak Srivathsan Muralidharan and Bhargavi Ravi to Jacquelyn Anne Crook Trustee , 347 Basswood Common #9, Livermore 94551, Tract 8121 ID 903-15-110, $940,000. 

Patrick R. Joynt to Matthew Seneca and Carolyn Hurst Marley , 2313 Russell St., Berkeley 94705; 1156 Delaware St., Berkeley 94702, Curtis Tract ID 57-2086-1-2, $935,000. 

Thu Nguyen Hong and John Christopher Joyce Jimenez to Justine Ang and Oliver Santos , 2665 Admiral Cir., Hayward 94545; 15272 Laverne Dr., San Leandro 94579, Tract 1876 ID 80G-1323-14, $930,000. 

Ryan Karlson and Marivel Karlson to Chi Lun Tang and Sophie Siu Fun Kee , 3607 Whitworth Dr., Dublin 94568, Tract 7324 ID 985-36-132, $928,000. 

Jennifer C. Damoco to Raymond Prado and Angela Anne Camarillo Prado ,25701 Seaver St., Hayward 94545, Tract 1995 ID 442-51-23, $925,000. 

Lillie Mae to Platinum Homes LLC , 1227 60th Ave., Oakland 94621; 3968 Turnley Ave., Oakland 94605, Fairway Estates in Oak Knoll ID 43A-4720-16, $925,000. 

Mark John Mocettini and Caroline M. Mocettini to Ty C. Lam and Jamie T. Ngo and The Lam and Ngo Family Trust , 1628 Willow Ave., San Leandro 94579; 1463 Hubbard Ave., San Leandro 94579, Tract 1199 ID 80H-1589-19-1, $925,000. 

Raymond V. Macrohon and Nenita P. Macrohon to Rajnikant Patel and Chetankumar A. Patel and Manoj M. Patel , 36012 Magellan Dr., Fremont 94536; 4760 Central Ave., Fremont 94536, ID 501-613-4, $920,000. 

Parmjit Singh Gill Trustee to Amit Kumar and Neha Gupta , 31242 Lily St., Union City 94587, ID 483-113-64, $915,000. 

Vijeth Patil and Savant Avni to Vishnu Vardhan Burugupalli and Sri Krishna Sruthi Mallina , 5848 Crespi Way, Newark 94560, Tract 8166 ID 901-199-79, $915,000. 

Matthew P. Dwyer and Atiya C. Dwyer to Regula R. Jackson , 10043 E. Earll Dr., Scottsdale, Ariz. 85256; 2727 61st Ave., Oakland 94605, Foothill Park ID 38-3193-3, $910,000. 

Serina Montgomery Garst to Grahame Philip Foreman , 1020 Cragmont Ave., Berkeley 94708, North Cragmont ID 63-2974-19-3, $907,500. 

Ella Callow and William Callow to Audrey Lum ,4421 Terrabella Way, Oakland 94619; 1050 Kains Ave. #A1, Albany 94706, Parcel 4812 ID 65-2662-54, $900,000. 

CONTRA COSTA COUNTY 

Michael D. Scribner and Nancy Anne Scribner and 1994 Scribner Family Trust to Daniel L. Delancey ,3252 La Canada, Lafayette 94549, ID 233-180-013, $4,200,000. 

Morgan Tovey to Jeffrey James Simonitsch and Stacey Boggiano , 108 Meadow Crest Ln., Walnut Creek 94595, ID 188-220-025, $3,900,000. 

Suresh Kumar and Suresh Devisree to Amrit Nandan and Nidhi Shah , 2082 Elderberry Dr., San Ramon 94582, Gale Ranch ID 222-790-061, $3,555,000. 

Eric G. Meinberg and Christina B. Meinberg to Peter Safer Shalek and Jessica May Shalek and Shalek Family Trust , 3184 Lucas Dr., Lafayette 94549, Tract 2078 ID 238-143-006, $3,477,000. 

Golden Gate Area Council Inc. and Boy Scouts of America et al. to Purcell Holdings LLC , 2499 N. Main St. #200, Walnut Creek 94597; 800 Ellinwood Way, Pleasant Hill 94523, Pleasant Hill Manor ID 127-180-056, $3,255,000. 

Eunice Shinok Kim to Panipat Plaza LLC , 2175 Castillejo Way, Fremont 94539; 5844 Pacheco Blvd., Pacheco 94553, ID 125-077-018, $3,009,000. 

Jeffrey M. Sauer and Anne E. Sauer to Siddhartho Bhattacharya and Prasunpani Bhattacharjee ,218 Fonthill Ct., Danville 94506, Subd. 9315 Alamo Creek ID 206-800-037, $2,900,000. 

David Gravano and Valerie C. Lewis and The Gravano Lewis Revocable Trust to Bruce Lin and Annie Chen , 9 Estabueno Dr., Orinda 94563, Lincoln Estates ID 271-172-009, $2,800,000. 

Geoffrey Wayong and Ivanatalia Tjokro to Ajay Rawal and Vineeta Rawal ,306 Kami Ct., San Ramon 94582, ID 223-690-060, $2,750,000. 

Anthony Berry Wade and Sharon L. Berry to Rikesh Patel and Sweta Patel ,262 Glorietta Blvd., Orinda 94563, Moraga Gardens ID 268-382-006, $2,700,000. 

Christian Berge and Chris Berge to Jason Langkammerer and Samantha Hero and The Langkammerer Hero Living Trust , 4159 Canyon Rd., Lafayette 94549, ID 249-060-004, $2,700,000. 

Bbys LLC to Lawrence Yuan and Ka Yu Carol Lee Yuan , 1834 Palo Santo Dr., Campbell 95008; 513 Winding Brook Ct., San Ramon 94582, ID 210-011-008, $2,614,500. 

Douglas Maynard Aitken and Douglas G. Aitken and Jeanne N. Aitken to Adam Regelmann and Season N. O’Glesby , 37 Bower Place, Danville 94526, ID 208-390-016, $2,600,000. 

Carol R. Hyland and Edward V. Rogers to Sujoy Kumar Haldar and Sugata Basu ,2275 Tioga Dr., Menlo Park 94025; 4120 Canyon Rd., Lafayette 94549, ID 247-140-003, $2,499,000. 

Currie Gordon and Maxine Currie to Rajnikant A. Shah and Bindu R. Shah , 802 Via Palermo, San Ramon 94583, Preserve ID 208-820-005, $2,400,000. 

Rui Men Trustee to Vivek Devarajan and Anushalakshmi Nageswaran , 231 Lyndhurst Place, San Ramon 94583, ID 211-250-012, $2,400,000. 

Michael A. Kloos and William E. Kloos and The Kloos Family Trust to Currie Gordon and Maxine Currie ,357 Cordell Dr., Danville 94526, ID 201-230-006, $2,300,000. 

2951 Roundhill Road Alamo LLC to Vandad Hamidi and Negar Hamidi ,2951 Roundhill Rd., Alamo 94507, ID 193-580-001, $2,251,000. 

Susanne Laher Trustee to Michael J. Cole and Catherine L. Rogers , 621 Greystone Terr., Orinda 94563, ID 260-240-019, $2,250,000. 

Marsha G. Nielsen Trustee to Ramaiah Ale , 2163 Concord Ave., Brentwood 94513, Brentwood Irrigated Farms ID 010-060-022, $2,250,000. 

TH Danville LLC to Ryan Mckay , 301 Pine Place, Danville 94506, ID 217-490-032, $2,243,500. 

Koustuv Chatterjee and Rajbala Makar to Jaiganesh Vazhkupai Pasupathi and Vidhyalakshmi Kuppusamy Iyer , 6250 Murdock Way, San Ramon 94582, Tract 9142 Windemere ID 223-710-009, $2,175,000. 

Dimitari I. Vangelov to Gabriele Vigevani and Acacia Clark , 421 Summit Rd., Walnut Creek 94598, MS 801 82 ID 179-182-018, $2,150,000. 

Jean Claude B. Mallein Jr. and Astrid Z. Mallein and The Mallein Revocable Trust to Devin S. Waterman and Ariel C. Waterman ,139 Baldwin Dr., Danville 94526, ID 218-211-005, $2,075,000. 

Shapell Industries Inc. to Kai Song , 229 Zinnia Ct., San Ramon 94582, Subd. 9341 Gale Ranch ID 222-770-024, $2,012,000. 

Marie Dear Trustee to Steven M. Ralston and Rachel A. Ralston , 959 Ocho Rios Dr., Danville 94526, Tract 2743 ID 208-302-018, $2,000,000. 

Virginia E. Stuart and Stuart Family Living Trust to Evan Lippow and Jade Whitney Mason , 1055 Via Roble, Lafayette 94549, Tract 2034 ID 244-082-009, $1,995,000. 

Michael S. Cooper and Brittany L. Cooper to Hsing Ann Bau and Ann Monmel ,2744 Corte Vera Cruz, Pleasanton 94566; 34 Pony Ct., San Ramon 94583, ID 209-611-011, $1,925,000. 

Faria Preserve LLC to Ravikumar Ratnaraj Amirthanayagam and Angeline Vanitha Janakaraj ,2521 Veneto Ct., San Ramon 94583, Preserve ID 208-840-017, $1,919,000. 

Richard A. Fregulia and Mario M. Fregulia to Deveshree Gehlot and Sagar Bhosafe , 2804 Morgan Dr., San Ramon 94583, ID 209-671-001, $1,915,000. 

Srinivas Venkat Vura and Pavani Nakirikanti and The Vura Family Revocable Trust to Muralidhar Kattimani and Pushpa Devi Chikkabasavaiah , 5005 Rashelle Way, San Ramon 94582, Subd. 8700 ID 222-450-031, $1,910,000. 

Matt Matheney and James & Barbara Matheney to Frithco LLC , 2242 Westwood Ct., Pittsburg 94565; 135 Gaywood Rd., Alamo 94507, ID 198-020-008, $1,850,000. 

Mahmoud Janbakhsh and Aixa J. Coronado Janbakhsh to Tanmay Shah and Reemaben Maniyar , 5917 Lantana Way, San Ramon 94582, ID 222-110-003, $1,830,000. 

Jeffrey P. Schneider and Debbie I. Schneider and Schneider Family Trust to Daniel T. Quane and Nicolette R. Quane and Daniel And Nicolette Quane 2011 Trust , 816 Tunbridge Rd., Danville 94526, ID 207-560-011, $1,825,000. 

Walter T. Liu and Marianne C. Liu and The Liu Trust to Kilimanjaro T. Robbs and Kara O. King , 3528 Eris Ct., Walnut Creek 94598, ID 138-020-035, $1,825,000. 

US Bank and Truman 2016 Sc6 Title Trust to Honglu Du and Jing Shang , 6025 Joaquin Murieta Ave. #E, Newark 94560; 903 Redwood Dr., Danville 94506, ID 203-692-002, $1,820,000. 

David W. Stephenson and Martine A. Stephenson and The Stephenson Family Trust to Ling Ni and Xin Ma ,425 Glasgow Cir., Danville 94526, Tract 6754 ID 202-323-021, $1,815,000. 

Anthony Schultz and Nancy Rockett to Cindy Chau Rong Chen Trustee , 2108 Davis Dr., Burlingame 94010; 32 Bormio Ct., Danville 94526, ID 202-393-010, $1,810,000. 

Otto A. Stein and Ingrid A. Eliasson to Yasser Sabbagh and Nicole Woodruff , 113 Rheem Blvd., Orinda 94563, Rheem Highlands ID 270-132-004, $1,800,000. 

Donald R. Dingman and Carol M. Dingman and The Dingman Family 2006 Trust to James Bozzini and Tuyen Bozzini , P.O. Box 403, Diablo 94528; 16 Calle Del Casarillo, Diablo 94528, Mt. Diablo Estate Park ID 195-280-036, $1,799,000. 

Ponderosa Homes II Inc. to Chadwick Wyler and Rebecca Leigh Wyler ,36 Molino Ct., Pleasant Hill 94523; 32 Molino Ct., Pleasant Hill 94523, Tract 9447 Reliez Terrace ID 149-051-032, $1,798,000. 

George Riddle and Rachel E. Riddle and The Riddle Family Trust to Adrienne Emily Schell and Jakob Clark Schell , 6 Fieldbrook Place, Moraga 94556, Tract 2710 ID 255-303-014, $1,775,000. 

Bernice Rudley and The Rudley Survivor Trust to Andrew Choi and Ashli Behill , 797 Alcatraz Ave., Oakland 94609; 285 Birchwood Dr., Moraga 94556, ID 256-262-001, $1,705,000. 

William T. Walsh and Laura E. Walsh to Clayton G. Whittaker and Madeline Rosenthal Whittaker , 3654 Walnut St., Lafayette 94549, Bickerstaff Tract ID 243-101-002, $1,700,000. 

Chingwo Ma and Hwa Chen Ma Bie to Guillermo Felipe Martinez and Aleksandra H. Wozniak , 1040 Glasgow Place, Danville 94526, Tract 6754 ID 202-311-008, $1,680,000. 

John Scott Garibaldi and Mayda Johanna Garibaldi to Marie Goldberg and Matthew Goldberg , 1168 Delta Way, Danville 94526, Tract 4411 ID 218-411-012, $1,650,000. 

Janet L. Tozier and Harriet B. Schwarz Testamentary Trust to Duangkamol Tangthongkham and Samuel Dennis King , 1 Fleetwood Ct., Orinda 94563, Tract 2816 ID 270-170-017, $1,620,000. 

Richard Guy Grace and Nancy Ann Grace to Ashish Chandra and Michele K. Ho , 800 Ridge Dr., Concord 94518, ID 130-450-014, $1,600,000. 

Huang Ru and Shih C. Pu to Clyde Grossman and Cynthia K. Grossman and Grossman Family Living Trust , 3026 Grey Eagle Dr., Walnut Creek 94595, ID 190-510-023, $1,575,000. 

Kovacic Boyan and Yasmin Kovacic to Dirk Roth and Christine Spindler , 257 Colgate Ave., Kensington 94708, Berkeley Highlands ID 570-192-023, $1,565,000. 

Sally A. Billingsley and Kurt O. Billingsley to Rahul Bahal and Chenyue Zhang ,450 El Pintado Rd., Danville 94526, ID 196-171-014, $1,550,000. 

Vinaya Rao and Namita Rao and Rao Family Trust to Gaurav Sakhuja and Sheila Roy Choudhury , 5002 Barrenstar Way, San Ramon 94582, ID 222-580-089, $1,520,000. 

Joe Corey to Payam Pardis and Darya Tavakoli , P.O. Box 1119, Cupertino 95015; 136 Cortona Dr., San Ramon 94582, ID 213-760-085, $1,510,000. 

Jorge A. Campos and Olympia Campos to Raymond F. Lum and Marlena Akiko Chu , 6827 Kenilworth Ave., El Cerrito 94530, Richmond Junction Heights ID 501-482-009, $1,510,000. 

Jonathan Poei to Joann Y. Chang and Julie An , 438 W. Grand Ave. #609, Oakland 94612; 6851 Snowdon Ave., El Cerrito 94530, Richmond Junction Heights ID 501-510-012, $1,500,000. 

Sanjeev Angadi and Saritha Achar and The Angadi & Achar Family Trust to Jacob Schapiro and Elanah Entin ,3641 Citrus Ave., Walnut Creek 94598, ID 134-381-003, $1,500,000. 

Maritza D. Faed and Jafar Faed to Ashok Krishnan Gopala Krishnan Anandan and Rekha Mahendran ,3530 Sugarberry Ln., Walnut Creek 94598, ID 134-375-006, $1,472,000. 

SEPTEMBER 17–23, 2021  41 BIZ BIZ LEADS LEADS 

Anthony Morosini and Amy Morosini to Yossi Feinberg and Hana Feinberg Hadar ,111 Arbuelo Way, Los Altos 94022; 137 Derby Ln., Moraga 94556, ID 256-282-003, $1,470,000. 

Breckenridge Property Fund 2016 LLC to Tyler Dunivant and Ursula Lynne Dunivant , 6 Valley View Ct., Danville 94526, Tract 2180 ID 200-132-007, $1,460,000. 

Craig Matthew Fisherkeller and Annette Patricia Fisherkeller to Stephanie G. Oswald and Oswald Family Trust , 31 Iris Ln., Walnut Creek 94595, Floraland Tract ID 185-360-012, $1,450,000. 

James H. Geers Jr. and Vicki L. Geers and The Geers Family Revocable Trust to Regina Zambrano , 265 Gil Blas Rd., Danville 94526, Las Lomitas Subd. ID 202-122-024, $1,405,000. 

James A. Bucher and J. Erik Bucher to Susan Glynn , 47 Linda Vista, Orinda 94563, Haciendas Del Orinda ID 262-022-001, $1,400,000. 

Ahad Anayat and Hannah Ortega Anayat to Kevin Lapp and Janine Caela Watson , 2436 Walnut Blvd., Walnut Creek 94597, RN Burgess Co. ID 173-172-012, $1,400,000. 

Brenda Croft and Otte Family 1988 Marital Trust and Brenda Fernandez to Ryan Cutler and Vanessa Cutler , 2309 Stewart Ave., Walnut Creek 94596, Subd. 4578 ID 182-302-001, $1,400,000. 

Carlos Cordova to Erich D. Moy and Linh H. Luc , 125 Valdivia Cir., San Ramon 94583, ID 209-521-034, $1,390,000. 

Guillermo Lesh and The Lee D. Lesh Trust and William G. Lesh to Seung Taek Kim and Heather M. Kim , 2603 Campeche Ct., San Ramon 94583, ID 209-462-010, $1,380,000. 

Morrill Lord Blair and James Melville Lord and Katharine Jean Lord Wright to Matthew Scott Walton and Kylie Brooke Walton ,370 Fenway Dr., Walnut Creek 94598, Tract 2792 Scottsdale ID 140-022-013, $1,380,000. 

Vivian Cheng Sandy and Joseph Voloshin Sandy and Vivian & Joseph Sandy Family Trust to Joon Park and Yeajin Lee , 9668 Ashby Way, San Ramon 94583, ID 210-485-004, $1,350,000. 

Daniel P. Brown and Darci P. Brown and Brown Family Living Trust to Daniel Anthony Garcia and Sheryn Diane Garcia , 1429 Fieldcrest Cir., Pleasant Hill 94523, ID 154-433-039, $1,325,000. 

Ana Lachoff Vacakis to Bret Terrill and Tiffany Austin , 1080 Jones St. #110, Berkeley 94710; 13 Pinehurst Rd., Canyon 94516, ID 257-160-028, $1,325,000. 

Milz Development & Construction to Kevin Roberts and Megan Roberts and Milz Development & Construction , 696 San Ramon Valley Blvd., Danville 94526; 132 Leona Ct., Alamo 94507, Rancho San Ramon ID 201-010-015, $1,316,000. 

Christopher D. Wright and Cara Renfroe to Ankit Sood and Tanvi Sachdeva , 9947 Broadmoor Dr., San Ramon 94583, ID 212-283-002, $1,302,000. 

Syed Siddiq Farooq and Hina K. Farooq and The Farooq Revocable Trust to Erica Liu Chain and John Joseph Ochoa , 1205 Ustilago Dr., San Ramon 94582, Crest Bridge at Gale Ranch ID 222-190-061, $1,300,000. 

Jerry L. Ross to Peter J. Seith and Joy Seith Odith ,757 Slater Ave., Pleasant Hill 94523, ID 164-060-019, $1,300,000. 

Christopher J. Oleson and Scott J. Oleson to Salvador Trejo and Marcela Trejo ,230 Elworthy Ranch Dr., Danville 94526, Elworthy Ranch ID 208-770-022, $1,255,000. 

Eric B. McConkie and Leah M.S. Hill and The McConkie Hill Family Trust to Rebecca Ann Mortensen and Shawn Gregory Villasenor , 33 Vita Ct., Pleasant Hill 94523, Country Gardens ID 170-222-004, $1,250,000. 

Scott Smith and Estate Of David A. Smith to Jahnavi Potluri and Naren Akkineni ,390 Cordelia Way, Walnut Creek 94597, Hillwood Gardens ID 171-032-020, $1,215,000. 

Daniel J. Miller and Lisa V. Miller to Kevin Kuiper and Ryann Kuiper , 4077 Medford Ct., Martinez 94553, ID 161-550-032, $1,200,000. 

David Lyle Slack and Nancy Jean Slack and Slack Family Trust to Robert F. Adams and Andrea D. Adams , 333 Pikes Ct., Martinez 94553, ID 164-271-036, $1,200,000. 

Joseph Wynn and Karen Denne to Amiram Lusky ,4554 Marsh Meadow Way, Concord 94521, ID 133-432-021, $1,200,000. 

Ron Stevenson and George F. and Evelyn M. Stevenson Living Trust to Sean Brosnan and Ruth Valenzuela , 86 Las Lomas Way, Walnut Creek 94598, Brooktree ID 139-012-008, $1,175,000. 

Cai Bing and Ruxia Zheng to Bhupender Thakur and Dansha Jiang , 6337 Byron Ln., San Ramon 94582, Celamonte at Windemere ID 223-630-021, $1,175,000. 

Diane Berman and Estate Of Kathleen Wells Mcknight to Redfinnow Borrower LLC ,2611 Internet Blvd. #201, Frisco, Texas 75034; 1979 S. Forest Hill Place, Danville 94526, ID 208-551-036, $1,160,000. 

Fred Jarvis and Carolyn Jarvis and The Jarvis Family Trust to Christopher P. Carvajal and Jacqueline L. Carvajal , 1229 Juanita Dr., Lafayette 94595, Sun Valley Estates ID 185-352-043, $1,160,000. 

Li Gang and Lina Wu to Geba Holding LLC , 21870 Granada Ave., Cupertino 95014; 2336 21st St., San Pablo 94806, Andrade Rose ID 412-280-015, $1,150,000. 

Li He and Feng Tian to Brian Thomas Roy and Kelly Lynn Roy , 4 Baltusrol St., Moraga 94556, Moraga Country Club ID 257-521-014, $1,145,000. 

Bbys LLC to Aaron Joseph Mandel and Janet Margaret Manson and The Mandel Manson Family Trust , 173 Sylvia Dr., Pleasant Hill 94523, Gregory Gardens ID 153-202-004, $1,115,500. 

Kenneth P. Boasso and Jamie R. Boasso to Magizharasu Thirunavukkarasu and Lavanya Elangovan , 75 Boulder Creek Ct., Danville 94526, ID 207-530-021, $1,115,000. 

Anthony M. Conner and Christina S. Conner to Kyle Chain Martin and Caitlin Martin , 908 Hampswood Way, San Jose 95120; 364 Pebble Beach Dr., Brentwood 94513, ID 007-370-018, $1,100,000. 

John Crandall and Deborah Crandall to David M. Burton and Phyllis Burton and The Burton Family Trust ,265 Bridgeside Cir., Danville 94506, ID 217-190-134, $1,100,000. 

Bhavin Patel and Kaminiben Patel to Santosh Koti and Patil Vani , 5035 Barrenstar Way, San Ramon 94582, ID 222-570-071, $1,100,000. 

Sandra C. Song and Jessica C. Song and The Song Family Trust to Janine H. Jepson , 1282 Kristin Way, Walnut Creek 94596, ID 182-320-002, $1,100,000. 

Volkan Kaya and Deanna M. Kaya to Omer Bahadir Demir and Shaimaa Wahba ,203 Tanglewood Dr., Richmond 94806, ID 405-600-042, $1,096,000. 

Mark Walde Trustee to Sunia Law and Kei Law Wing and Xin Huang Guo ,140 Spring Rd., Orinda 94563, Oak Springs ID 273-100-022, $1,080,000. 

Faria Preserve LLC to Yevgen Brechko and Iryna Brechko , 38102 Via Vicenza, San Ramon 94583, Preserve ID 208-860-097, $1,078,000. 

Pleasanton Properties Co. to Diane J. Gamba Trustee ,651 Augusta Dr., Moraga 94556; 724 Augusta Dr., Moraga 94556, ID 257-492-023, $1,065,000. 

Erik J. Astrup and The Astrup Family Trust to Rodney C. Haug and Allyson K. Haug , 3725 Waterford Ln., Walnut Creek 94598; 355 Gil Blas Rd., Danville 94526, Las Lomitas Subd. ID 202-122-011, $1,060,000. 

William F. Hughs and Kelli Hughs and Kelly Hughes to Minglin Yang and Weihui Li ,54 Davis Rd., Orinda 94563, Moraga Estates ID 268-151-002, $1,055,000. 

Kathryn McIver to Vincent Nam Tien Nguyen and Bich Ngoc Nguyen , 12 Osborn Way, Danville 94526, ID 207-580-013, $1,050,000. 

Faustina Pedroza and Pedroza Salmeron Elisavet to William Keoprasert , 2865 Gonzaga Ave., Richmond 94806; 1605 16th St., San Pablo 94806, Sunnyside Tract ID 410-253-011, $1,050,000. 

David Preston Burchard to William Quinlan , 69 Fordham Ct., Pleasant Hill 94523, Tract 2051 ID 153-091-006, $1,040,000. 

Vicki W. Malseed and The Malseed Family Trust to Nathan Pearson and Chloe Pearson , 5783 Lewis Way, Concord 94521, Davis Ridge ID 121-201-003, $1,030,000. 

Bernadette Finch Trustee to Kim Romero and Theodore Robinson , 5614 Poinsett Ave., El Cerrito 94530, Richmond Pacific Heights ID 500-370-016, $1,024,000. 

Deborah A. Bruno to Anthony R. Tindall and Charisma T. Tindall , 425 Saddlebrook Ln., Pleasant Hill 94523, ID 154-760-037, $1,020,000. 

Flyhomes Investments CA LLC to Sup Hong Woo and Sunyoung Park , 1154 Cuneo Ct., Concord 94518, Diablo View Terrace ID 130-191-016, $1,020,000. 

Jonathan Spector and Songyi Spector and The Jonathan and Songyi Spector Fmt to Miriam Renzi , 6288 Taft Ave., Richmond 94805, East Richmond Heights Tract ID 521-051-011, $1,010,000. 

Joan Thisius and Jennifer Meeker and Orville and Joan Thisius Rlt to Elizabeth Marie Chamblee and Matthew Justin Morgan , 23 Kirkwood Ct., Concord 94521, ID 116-270-004, $1,000,000. 

Berry J. Behm to Paul Schaffer , 3196 Lucerne Ct., Castro Valley 94546; 254 Tamarisk Dr., Walnut Creek 94598, ID 135-152-001, $1,000,000. 

Glen Knecht and Denise Knecht to Wang Clayton and Michelle Song , 4019 Chestnut Ave., Concord 94519, RN Burgess Co. ID 114-300-029, $999,000. 

Faria Preserve LLC to Piyush Jethwa and Roshni Ramanikial Tank , 38106 Via Vicenza, San Ramon 94583, Preserve ID 208-860-098, $994,000. 

Tenir LLC to Greg Jeffress and Gina Jeffress , 1107 Whispering Pines Rd., Clayton 94517; 3115 Willow Rd., Bethel Island 94511, ID 029-120-014, $991,000. 

Timothy J. Seitz and Seitz Trust to Sheena Weilman-Miner and Joel Miner , 640 Mt. Duncan Dr., Clayton 94517, ID 119-490-050, $990,000. 

Alfred P. Rodrigues and Reba F. Rodrigues and Alfred And Reba Rodrigues Family Trust to Jung Park Woo and Eun Joo Jung and Sung Jun Park , 2841 Goularte Dr., Pinole 94564, ID 360-670-040, $985,000. 

Newell Guest House LLC to Haridayal Jaswal , 2160 Morello Ave., Pleasant Hill 94523, Valhalla Hills ID 154-272-012, $972,500. 

Theoni J. Malone and Wolfgang Weber to Leslie Ann Hall and Justin Robert Meisinger , 90 Mt. Mckinley Ct., Clayton 94517, ID 119-221-017, $960,000. 

Richard B. Benner and The Lisa L. Schra Living Trust to Oleg Makarovskiy and Evgeniia Makarovskaia ,115 Buxton Cir., Pleasant Hill 94523, ID 152-322-006, $960,000. 

Loretta Giordano and The Ritchie Revocable Trust to Brian James Francica and Danielle Sheryce Barnes ,7206 Stockton Ave., El Cerrito 94530, Berkeley Country Club Terrace ID 503-490-004, $960,000. 

Jeffery G. Hymer and Roxanna P. Hymer to Homelight Homes Real Estate LLC , 1375 N. Scottsdale Rd. #140, Scottsdale, Ariz. 85257; 1713 Aurailla Ln., Concord 94521, ID 117-140-078, $950,000. 

Joanna V. Martlew Trustee to Mark Courey and Anamarie Courey , 129 Linda Ln., Pleasant Hill 94523, Tract 2642 ID 164-073-003, $950,000. 

R. Scott Rose and Karen J. Rose to Mohamed Nabeil and Jasmine Althahri ,2316 Redwood Rd., Hercules 94547, ID 406-373-007, $950,000. 

LMC Vineyards LLC to Victor A. Constantin and Gita T. Constantin , 1813 Moscato Place, Brentwood 94513, ID 007-670-066, $950,000. 

Bresland LLC to Faustina Pedroza and Mike Salmeron Elisavet , 673 Mclaughlin St., Richmond 94805, East Richmond Boulevard ID 519-010-008, $948,000. 

Todd Peterson Warner and Cherree Paulline Peterson to Mani Alalasundaram and Hema Thaimanasamy ,4499 Deerberry Ct., Concord 94521, Subd. 3938 ID 133-341-135, $940,000. 

Garrett Taylor and Marybeth C. Taylor to Andrew Charles Williams and Jessica Ann Williams ,1810 Farm Bureau Rd., Concord 94519, Parcel MS 20 71 ID 114-380-044, $940,000. 

Maia R. Mancheno to Dong Yang and Sookyoung Kim ,3974 Selmi Grove, Richmond 94806, ID 405-550-016, $930,000. 

Philip Burkhart and Karen McDonald Burkhart to James Samuel Bolinger Trustee , 5581 Terra Granada Dr. #2B, Walnut Creek 94595, ID 190-340-023, $927,000. 

Richard A. Cruey and Mary Jill Cruey to Philip Aglubat Quitoriano and Jean Reyes Renalyn , 27 Gibson Ln., Clayton 94517, ID 120-043-013, $915,000. 

Carol A. Engle to Ishai Crane and Dorit Hetz Crane ,613 Garden Creek Place, Danville 94526, Garden Creek ID 200-122-069, $915,000. 

Vineyards Land Holdings LLC to Richard T. Isenberg and Elizabeth Isenberg ,1580 Meritage Loop, Brentwood 94513, Subd. 8907 Vineyards at Marsh Creek ID 007-740-016, $909,000. 

Richard Leigh Bradley Jr. to Leo Mallari and Rowena Mallari , 875 Inverness Ln., Brentwood 94513, ID 019-600-027, $907,000. 

Debra Sutter to Emily Webb Trustee , 126 Constanza Dr., Martinez 94553; 422 Trailhead Way, Martinez 94553, Westaire ID 377-290-047, $906,500. 

David Loofbourrow III and Elizabeth Chrisman and Estate Of David Thomas Loofbourrow et al. to Lynn E. Lewis and Darlene D. Lewis , 1812 Stanley Dollar Dr. #2A, Walnut Creek 94595, ID 190-231-072, $900,000. 

Mohamed Elmoustaquim and Asma Elhammoumi to Wei Chen and Xiuzhen Li , 273 Pebble Beach Dr., Brentwood 94513, ID 007-340-049, $900,000. 

Enver Mehmedbaslch and Cheng E. Mehmedbaslch to Janet Evelyn Carter and Robert Arthur Horton ,6128 Jordan Ave., El Cerrito 94530, Richmond Sea View Tract ID 501-150-018, $900,000. 

Steven Fraasch and Monique Fraasch to Daniel Martinez and Sophie Martinez , 581 Orange Ct., Brentwood 94513, Subd. 7798 ID 013-260-034, $900,000. 

MARIN COUNTY 

Hamilton Marketplace LLC to Ipers Hamilton Marketplace Inc. , 101 California St., San Francisco 94111; 5700/5720/5800 Nave Dr., Novato 94949, Hamilton Marketplace ID 157-400-76/157-400-75/157-400-73 (4 parcels), $67,250,000. 

39 Belvedere LLC to Teresa Ann Alexander Mahoney ,Javastraat 50, Aj Den Haag; 41 Belvedere Ave., Belvedere Tiburon 94920, ID 060-161-01, $21,000,000. 

Amalfi 135 Belvedere LLC to LFB 135 LLC , 235 Montgomery St. #16, San Francisco 94104; 135 Belvedere Ave., Belvedere Tiburon 94920, ID 060-181-36, $9,000,000. 

Dennis J. Thompson and Nancy B. Thompson to Ryan James Thomas and Jessica Lynn Matchett and Gary A. Matchett Living Trust et al. ,56 Alder Ave., San Anselmo 94960, Yolanda Court ID 007-041-28, $5,900,000. 

Jeff Gustafson and Cathy Gustafson and The Gustafson Family Trust to Ian Kirwan and May Chu Yun , 4709 Paradise Dr., Tiburon 94920, ID 038-121-05, $5,450,000. 

Timothy C. Gravely and Sarah B. Gravely and The Blue Sky Trust to Alejandro Alex Muller Trustee and Maya Mikhailov Muller Revocable Trust et al. , 227 Evergreen Dr., Kentfield 94904, Kent Woodlands ID 075-102-23, $4,150,000. 

Peter B. Brown and Claudia K. Richards Brown to Vinay Patel and Hansa Patel and The Vinay And Hansa Patel Family Trust , 10 Madrone Ave., Kentfield 94904, ID 071-012-09, $4,100,000. 

Robert L. Graham and Judith E. Sparks to Lawrence James Bartusek and Sandra Schraer Bartusek , 12 St. Jude Rd., Mill Valley 94941, ID 045-151-24, $3,800,000. 

Rachel Andrea Ferrier to Twin Star Enterprise LLC ,2827 Lakeview Ct., Fremont 94538; 240 Trinidad Dr., Tiburon 94920, Paradise Cay North ID 038-460-02, $3,620,000. 

The Baradat Family Partnership to DSAP LLC ,P.O. Box 1707, Los Altos 94023; 25 Buena Vista Ave., San Anselmo 94960, ID 006-121-19, $3,600,000. 

William Selmi and Diane Charlotte Selmi and Selmi 1992 Trust to Andrew Dyche and Holland Dyche ,19 Throckmorton Ln., Mill Valley 94941, ID 027-172-15, $3,327,000. 

Daniel A. Zeff to Peter Schildhause and Deon Schildhause and Schildhause Family Trust ,30 Edgehill Rd., Mill Valley 94941, Land O Peter Pan ID 029-063-04, $3,320,000. 

Peter Luchetti and Emily Luchetti et al. to Edward C. Aitken Revocable Trustee ,507 Sausalito Blvd., Sausalito 94965, ID 065-221-63/065-221-54/065-221-55, $3,250,000. 

David Crisp and Robia Crisp to Gregory M. Stolowitz and Erin Miranda Stolowitz ,22 Butterfly Ln., Kentfield 94904, ID 071-132-41, $2,965,000. 

Peter Reidy and Jessica Safra to Michael Hoisie and Chelsea Anne Young , 11 Claire Way, Tiburon 94920, Bel Aire Estates ID 034-114-06, $2,830,000. 

Ross C. Gondak and Kathryn J. Gondak to Hiromi Nakano , 206 N. Willard St., San Francisco 94118; 160 Corte Anita, Greenbrae 94904, Greenbrae ID 070-092-04, $2,575,000. 

Henry Raymond Scimouni and Sona Boghosian and The Scimouni And Boghosian Family Trust to Baywood Terrace Family Holdings LLC , 54 Baywood Terr., San Rafael 94901; 925 4th St., San Rafael 94901, ID 011-263-07, $2,500,000. 

Todd N. Vaziri and Kearsley F. Higgins and Vaziri Higgins Family Living Trust to Mason McDowell and Aviva Kamler , 333 Bayview St., San Rafael 94901, Shorts Addition ID 012-173-04, $2,400,000. 

Glenn E. Thompson and Suzanne Bohan to Michael Arsenault and Kasey B. Miller , 28 Longfellow Rd., Mill Valley 94941, Enchanted Knolls ID 030-182-20, $2,400,000. 

Adam N. Horowitz and Sarah K. Horowitz and The Horowitz Family Trust to Cheuk Ying Sun , 37 Elizabeth Cir., Greenbrae 94904, Drakes Landing ID 022-721-13, $2,380,000. 

Jonathan Robert Terry and Carrie Diane Pallister to David William Grumm and Anna Jeanne Grumm and The Grumm Living Trust ,68 Ross Ave., San Anselmo 94960, Sunnyside Tract ID 007-281-12, $2,350,000. 

Sequence Grove LLC to Zach Klein , 2495 Harrison St., San Francisco 94110; 105 Kale Rd., Bolinas 94924, Bolinas Beach ID 191-141-16, $2,265,500. 

Joanne Peterson and Thomas Peterson Non Gst Ex Marital to Shurray S. Medina Trustee , 9 Elizabeth Cir., Greenbrae 94904, Drakes Landing ID 022-730-04, $2,150,000. 

Marcy R. Roth to Daniel R. Barrowman and Barbara Barrowman , 203 Flamingo Rd. #133, Mill Valley 94941; 342 Lowell Ave., Mill Valley 94941, Marin Heights ID 050-101-07, $2,100,000. 

Sorin Eremia and Irina Bragin and The Hawksley Trust to Andrey Vinogradsky and Juliya Vinogradsky and The Giverts Tavrosky Family Living et al. , 90 Corte Alejo, Greenbrae 94904, Greenbrae ID 070-321-05, $2,000,500. 

Deborah S. Ablin and Katherine Ann Sultan and Katherine Ann Sultan Gst Exempt Trust et al. to Aliyya Shelley Mattos and Sample Mattos Blake and ASMBSM Family Living Trust , 55 Culloden Park Rd., San Rafael 94901, ID 011-115-07, $2,000,000. 

Jan Hobbel Trustee to Helen C. Dixon and Alastair R. Dixon , 20 Elm Ave., Larkspur 94939, ID 021-223-39, $1,975,000. 

Christopher M. Cain and Sarah M. Cain to William B. Saunders and Betsy I. Saunders , 47 Paul Dr. #5, San Rafael 94903; 35 Poplar Ave. #A, Ross 94957, Cole Tract ID 073-273-22, $1,850,000. 

Morgan Cannon and Joseph Williamson to David Gordon Cupp and Dinesh Cupp Shyama , 430 34th St., Sacramento 95816; 626 Sausalito Blvd., Sausalito 94965, Property of The Sausalito Bay Land ID 065-201-02, $1,840,000. 

Benjamin S. Barnes and Stephanie L. Barnes Castro and Roma Barnes Trust et al. to James Bloom and Camille Bloom , 710 Hilary Dr., Tiburon 94920, Hawthrone Terrace ID 055-222-13, $1,840,000. 

Shurray S. Medina Trustee to Brandon P. McDowell and Bella M. McDowell ,40 Inverness Dr., San Rafael 94901, Loch Lomond ID 016-112-18, $1,765,000. 

Linus LLC to Mark E. Burton Jr. and Robyn Adele Burton ,3421 Nicasio Valley Rd., Nicasio 94946, Lands of Nicasio Ranch Co. ID 121-070-32, $1,750,000. 

Russell Ronald Monroe Jr. and Charles Edwin Chase and Chase Monroe 2018 Revocable Trust to Sean Coffin and Julia Shiplacoff ,224 Oakcrest Rd., San Anselmo 94960, ID 177-133-15, $1,710,000. 

Bahia Heights LLC to Frank M. Kenney III and Patricia G. Kenney , 12 Misty Rd., Novato 94945, Bahia Heights ID 143-272-14, $1,674,000. 

Gary J. Scharlach and April J. Phillips to Gerald Winner Martin and Laura Winner ,30 Mt. Tallac Ct., San Rafael 94903, Lucas Valley ID 164-451-44, $1,650,000. 

Courtney Pecora and Andrew Barrientos to Evan Woock Trustee and Nathalie Helene Graves , 28 Woodside Dr., San Anselmo 94960, Woodland Park D 005-055-20, $1,610,000. 

Kexin Li to Roger Jeanson Arnold and Jean Marie Mileff , 629 Tamalpais Ave., Novato 94947, Tamalpals Hill ID 140-321-04, $1,600,000. 

Nancy S. Wasserman and The Joyce C. Siegel Trust to Mason Hays , 133 Robinhood Dr., San Rafael 94901, Glenwood ID 185-163-01, $1,550,000. 

Kimberly Ann Lloyd and H&J. Kanter 1996 Trust to EFM Holdings LLC , 930 Tahoe Bivde #844, Incline Village, Nev. 89451; 1077 Bel Marin Keys Blvd., Novato 94949, Bel Marin Keys ID 157-301-15, $1,525,000. 

Julia A. Myers to Ryan Lamvik and Monica Mueller ,342 Hickory Ln., San Rafael 94903, Terra Linda ID 178-181-14, $1,510,000. 

Robert Valentino Trustee to 16 Buena Vista LLC , 35 Miller Ave. #185, Mill Valley 94941; 16 Buena Vista Ave., Mill Valley 94941, Lyon and Hoags ID 028-016-17, $1,500,000. 

Marie T. Needels Trustee to Luciana Reznik , 22 Crescent Ave. #24, Sausalito 94965; 22 Crescent Ave., Sausalito 94965, ID 065-253-20, $1,500,000. 

Martin Block Trustee and Sarah Hall et al. to Todd Farr and Colleen Wasilewski , 205 Oak Springs Dr., San Anselmo 94960, Oak Springs ID 005-293-07, $1,475,000. 

Elizabeth L. Thomas and Marital Trust of Alexander C. Thomas to Shary E. Eiser ,1 Roble Ct., San Anselmo 94960, Brookside Meadow ID 005-131-22, $1,472,500. 

Charles H. Numbers and Deborah Ann Johnsen to Alex Valdman and Ivy Valdman , 500 Sequoia Dr., San Anselmo 94960, Sequoia Park ID 006-118-19, $1,400,000. 

Michael S. Hill and Cheryl E. Hill and The Hill Family Revocable Trust to Kyle Stahl and Sablle Scheppmann , 38 Strawberry Cir., Mill Valley 94941, Strawberry Manor ID 043-082-07, $1,400,000. 

Adam Davies and Sophia Davies to Michael Stephen Debellis and Kristen Michele Rice Debellis , 5 San Pablo Ct., Novato 94949, ID 157-990-03, $1,400,000. 

Kim Schwarcz and Esther Lorraine Mamet 2012 Rlt to David K. Goff Trustee , 947 Del Ganado Rd., San Rafael 94903, Terra Linda Valley ID 165-043-01, $1,360,000. 

Gerald Winner Martin and Laura Jane Winner and 2017 Marty And Laura Winner Trust to Elizabeth Marston and Kyle Cassell ,1709 Las Gallinas Ave., San Rafael 94903, San Rafael Park ID 165-171-11, $1,355,000. 

Reza M. Rezaian and Jennifer Erlwein to Simon Bucktrout and Jennifer Bucktrout , 227 Santa Margarita, San Rafael 94901, Westland Terrace ID 010-252-10, $1,315,000. 

Jean Paul Dumouchel and Nicole Dumouchel to Jenee Byrd and Lauren Byrd , 9 Monroe Ct., Novato 94947, Rancho Village ID 151-201-20, $1,310,000. 

Lynn A. Small and Suzanne Small and The Small Family Revocable Trust to Peter Ong , 16 Garner Dr., Novato 94947, Lands of Bettencourt Industries ID 151-183-15, $1,300,000. 

Kenneth Marvin and Oksana Marvin to Steven C. Peterson and Michelle Cheda , 23 Gothic Dr., Novato 94947, Tamalpais Hill ID 140-481-11, $1,295,000. 

Juan Pablo Rodas Mendez and Dalila Isabel De Leon to Tien Lam and Khaekal Assavakhrapong , 1500 Grant Ave. #140, Novato 94945; 626 Olive Ave., Novato 94945, ID 143-033-23, $1,269,000. 

Kimberly S. Sharp and William K. Nata Revocable Living Trust to Zachary Allera and Tori Leigh Correiar Allera , 41 Monroe Ct., Novato 94947, Rancho Village ID 151-201-22, $1,250,000. 

SAN FRANCISCO COUNTY 

Alexandria Jeanette Ashdown to Douglas N. Cogen and Shannon W. Cogen and Cogen Revocable Trust , 2850 Steiner St., San Francisco 94123, Western Addition ID 0558 -021, $7,850,000. 

181 Fremont Street LLC to Jeffrey Brian Arnold ,181 Fremont St. #67A, San Francisco 94105, ID 3719 -511, $7,600,000. 

W. Blake Baird to Tuyen Thuy Mong Huynh , 3878 Jackson St., San Francisco 94118, Western Addition ID 0967 -009, $6,300,000. 

NCK LP and JMK of Winter Park 1 LP to G. David Macewen and Jennifer Seeds Macewen , 3520 Baker St., San Francisco 94123, Western Addition ID 0915 -010B, $5,800,000. 

Robert P. Spano and Marlene M. Spano and Mark D. Crivello and Karen Crivello to MR Redstone LLC and Thunderbird Real Estate LLC , 1690 Filbert St., San Francisco 94123, Western Addition ID 0521 -014, $4,520,000. 

Milton Schlesginer Family LP to Moulds 500 Forbes Associates LLC , 2600 El Camino Real #410, Palo Alto 94306; 1930 Market St., San Francisco 94102, Western Addition ID 0872 -002, $4,500,000. 

42  SAN FRANCISCO BUSINESS TIMES BIZ BIZ LEADS LEADS 

Rishi Garg and Prakash Shaifali and Rishi Garg And Shaifali Prakash Fmt to Travis Bryant and Carina Brockl and Bryant Brockl Family Trust , 4721 17th St., San Francisco 94117, Western Addition ID 1291 -028, $4,300,000. 

Philip T. Sager Trustee to Oliver Liu and Jenner L. Shock and The Liu Shock Revocable Trust , 719 Carolina St., San Francisco 94107, Potrero Nuevo ID 4097 -048, $4,160,000. 

Jonathan Mildenhall and Mirco Gros and JMG Revocable Trust to Jaclyn Carpenter Trust , 722 Duncan St., San Francisco 94131, Horner’s Block 225 ID 6588 -019, $4,150,000. 

Eric X. Li Trustee to Anna Ferrari and Gerard Mccarthy and Adrian Ferrari , 122 Henry St. #124, San Francisco 94114; 122-124 Henry St., San Francisco 94114, ID 3540 -053, $4,050,000. 

Nob Hill 1 LLC to Stephen Kim and Deirdre Sheedy Kim and The Kim 1998 Family Trust , 1150 Sacramento St. #501, San Francisco 94108, 1150 Sacramento Condo ID 0222 -066, $3,875,000. 

Whitney Wells and Whitney Halsted Community Property to Joseph P. Scanlon III and Ellen Lee Scanlon and Scanlon Family 2019 Trust , 1308 Montgomery St., San Francisco 94133, ID 0106 -017A, $3,800,000. 

Douglas B. Randall and Michelle D. Randall to Shashi Upadhyay and Arundhati Krishnamurty ,143 Duncan St., San Francisco 94110, Horner’s Block 36 ID 6599 -028, $3,750,000. 

Kamran PH-2454 LLC to Rafik Bawa and Aparna Bawa and Bawa Family Trust , 21901 Mt. Eden Rd., Saratoga 95070; 2454 Vallejo St., San Francisco 94123, 2450/2452/2454 Vallejo St. ID 0559 -044, $3,625,000. 

Yu Q. Wang and Jim Truong to Udi Ledergor and Guy Ledergor and Ledergor Family Trust , 1365 Portola Dr., San Francisco 94127, ID 2987A-034, $3,475,000. 

Michelle A. Henderer Trustee to Dylan Macniven and Skyline Kid Trust ,1101 Green St. #2001, San Francisco 94109, 1101 Green Street Condo ID 0125 -088, $3,463,000. 

Jack and Ann Fischman Family LP to Xin and Ting Chen LLC , 859 Mosswood Ln., Millbrae 94030; 152 Turk St., San Francisco 94102, ID 0339 -008, $3,395,000. 

Elizabeth Hanley and David Austin and The Hanley Austin Revocable Trust to Annie Chan and David C. Tse and MLP Trust , 109 Forest Side Ave., San Francisco 94127, West Portal Park ID 2929 -029, $3,380,000. 

David Pearson and Sally Pearson to William W.Y. Chu and Teresa Chu , 450 San Antonio Rd. #1528, Mountain View 94040; 1688 Pine St. #W809, San Francisco 94109, Rockwell ID 0647 -097, $3,200,000. 

Scott O. Stielstra and Lilian T. Stielstra and The Stielstra Family Trust to Mustafa F. Nafar and Richa Dhanju and The Mustafa and Richa Revocable Trust , 1382 6th Ave., San Francisco 94122, ID 1760 -030, $3,150,000. 

Richard D. Baum and The Bypass Trust and The Survivors Trust to Harlan L. South and Kadijeh T. South , 1170 Sacramento St. #12B, San Francisco 94108, Nob Hill ID 0222A-042, $2,975,000. 

Alan Tran and Laurie L. Yam to Sunnydavid LLC , 748 Cayuga Ave., San Francisco 94112; 1745 Taraval St. #1757, San Francisco 94116, ID 2398 -041, $2,950,000. 

Felix Litvak to Aaron Melamed , 78 Buchanan St. #101, San Francisco 94102; 1771 11th Ave., San Francisco 94122, ID 2038A-014, $2,850,000. 

Deborah L. Sharkey and Joshua Rowe to Andrey Malevich and Danning Peng , 203 Los Palmos Dr., San Francisco 94127, Miraloma Park ID 3027A-120, $2,828,000. 

Norman Donovan Administrator to Alexander Droulers and Camille Blaudin De , 1181 Dolores St., San Francisco 94110, 1181/1183 Dolores Street ID 6511 -047, $2,810,000. 

SF Realty Partners LLC to Mary L. Holland and Gerald R. Rhodes , 361 Hacienda Way, Los Altos 94022; 310 Montcalm St., San Francisco 94110, Harris of Precita ID 5527 -007, $2,750,000. 

William P. Connors II Trustee and Jeffrey Teator to Steven P. Reilly Jr. and Gregory L. Sabo and Reilly Sabo Living Trust , 3737 16th St., San Francisco 94114, Flint Tract Homestead ID 2622 -036, $2,700,000. 

Hartmut Rogge Erdmann and The Rogge Family Trust to Anne Wilks and Ryan Drebin , 544 Belvedere St., San Francisco 94117, ID 1279 -056, $2,650,000. 

Mark Breimhorst Trustee to Graciela Marie Magnoni ,2 Muswell Hill, Singapore; 455 Eureka St., San Francisco 94114, 453/455 Eureka Street ID 2768 -039, $2,625,000. 

Wei Jun Li and Wen Huang Guan and Nancy Zeng to Colin K. Tam and Karen Dang , 2262 25th Ave., San Francisco 94116, ID 2325 -035, $2,528,000. 

Francesca Covey and James Covey to Matthew Woodard and Susan Woodard , 539 Ortega St., San Francisco 94122, Golden Gate Heights ID 2049A-025, $2,400,000. 

Kevin Martin Primat to Amelia Wong , 201 Folsom St. #38C, San Francisco 94105, 7573 ID 3746 -648, $2,400,000. 

Erin L. Markey and Sarah A. Nerad to Ji Liu Guo and Yi Li Yan and Bernice Zhu ,362 Gellert Blvd., Daly City 94015; 3957 Cesar Chavez St., San Francisco 94131, Horner’s Block 93 ID 6579 -037, $2,368,000. 

Avnish Ajit Patel and Sheila Vinod Patwardhan and The Patel Patwardhan Family Trust to Gabrielle Elise Cho and Mohammed Faisal Jomaa , 172 Connecticut St. #1, San Francisco 94107, 172 Connecticut ID 3983 -042, $2,360,000. 

Dylan R. Meyers to Jeffrey Deming and Renee Deming et al. , 2726 Carolina Ave., Redwood City 94061; 2830 Pierce St., San Francisco 94123, 2828/2832 Pierce Street Condo ID 0538 -028, $2,300,000. 

Joshua Haims and Kendra Kristine Haims to Gregory M. Weiner and Lana Lan and Weiner & Lan Family Trust ,627 39th Ave., San Francisco 94121, ID 1582 -004, $2,300,000. 

Ralph Steven Edler Trustee and Joelle Dee Edler Living Trust et al. to Michael Drake Ranieri , 1444 Shrader St., San Francisco 94117, Western Addition ID 1287 -016B, $2,300,000. 

Roger Markus Kohler and William Phillip Rojas and Kohler and Rojas Family Trust to Andrew Isaac Chang and Danni Xie , 1823 Turk St., San Francisco 94115, ID 1153 -056, $2,300,000. 

Mark Hampton and Gayle Pigatto to Stacie Wu ,451 Kansas St. #459, San Francisco 94107; 780-782 Kansas St., San Francisco 94107, Potrero Nuevo ID 4074 -013A, $2,275,000. 

Iris Orriss and Clifford Walter Orriss to Nathaniel Andrew Cressman , 17 Newburg St., San Francisco 94131, Horner’s Block 178 ID 6589 -001I, $2,250,000. 

Forge Investments DV LLC to Jason Charles Hansen and Margaret Natasha Drew , 615 Teresita Blvd., San Francisco 94127, Miraloma Park ID 3000B-004, $2,196,000. 

The Mina Group LLC to New Deal Holdings LLC and New Deal Holdings 2 LLC , 244 Kearny St., San Francisco 94108; 2120 Greenwich St., San Francisco 94123, ID 0509 -005, $2,175,000. 

Alec P. Bokman and Karin Srisilpanand and Bokman Srisilpanand Family Trust to Amanda Shimshock and Scott Allen and Shimshock Allen Family Trust , 255 Berry St. #114, San Francisco 94158, Channel Park Condo ID 8708 -022, $2,150,000. 

Arthur R. Getz and Carl Wilhelm Folk Living Trust to Martin Carr and Mary Carr and David Carr et al. , P.O. Box 190231, San Francisco 94119; 1434-1436 18th Ave., San Francisco 94122, ID 1836 -016A, $2,150,000. 

David Liu and Xingping Liang to Iqbal Naiyer and Yvonne Feng Yi Liu , 464 31st Ave., San Francisco 94121, ID 1462 -030, $2,100,000. 

Steven Kum and The Lo Kum Irrevocable Trust to John Dowley Prendergast and Marie Antonette Lee Bondoc , 1331 22nd Ave., San Francisco 94122, ID 1777 -005, $2,100,000. 

875 California II LLC to Albert M. Everitt Trustee ,5 Parrott Ct., San Mateo 94402; 770 Powell St./875 California St., San Francisco 94108, Map 9047 ID 0256 -016/0256 -017, $2,030,000. 

Richard C. Woo and The Tuey Ngan Woo Revocable Trust to Asa Sanchez and Pamela Cosce , 1735 8th Ave., San Francisco 94122, ID 2041 -005, $2,025,000. 

Bryan W. Courson to Amar Sumal and Jaspal Sumal ,2235 Jackson St. #1, San Francisco 94115, ID 0604 -053, $1,975,000. 

Chun Kwong Ho Simon and Edith Yi Sun and Ho Sun Family Trust to Raoul Landry Foaleng Tafe and Kimberley Anne Foaleng , 55 Fairfield Way, San Francisco 94127, Mt. Davidson Manor ID 3280 -002, $1,975,000. 

Fillmore Street Condo LLC to Mark Stephen Ragsdale and Leslie Marden Ragsdale and Ragsdale Family Trust , 2931A Fillmore St., San Francisco 94123, 2929/2931/2931A Fillmore Street Condo ID 0539 -044, $1,975,000. 

Scott Alan Macomber and Geraldine Diane Macomber and Macomber Family Trust to Anthony Boetto and Tina Boetto , 200 Brannan St. #435, San Francisco 94107, 200 Brannan Street ID 3774 -411, $1,975,000. 

Stefan D. Pellegrini and Julia Ann Pellegrini to Jacob Mcneill and Stephanie Mcneill , 1308 Mcallister St., San Francisco 94115, Map 9357 ID 0775 -056, $1,900,000. 

Seana Marie Sgambati to Flyhomes Investments CA LLC , 1201 Western Ave. #100, Seattle, Wash. 98101; 1632 12th Ave., San Francisco 94122, ID 1932 -032A, $1,890,000. 

Bernadette S. Wall and 79 Inverness Drive LLC and Manager of 79 Inverness LLC to Agnes Shuk Woon Lau and Hugh Giovinazzo and Marissa Lauren Hom , 79 Inverness Dr., San Francisco 94132, Lakeshore Park ID 7246 -020, $1,865,000. 

Marco Bertoldo and Carol E. Lee to Arvind Krishna Sujeeth and Lauren Kramer Sujeeth , 3215 21st St. #C, San Francisco 94110, ID 3616 -082, $1,855,000. 

Jacob Sharif to Kiran Yigit and Yasemin Avcular , 357 Franconia St., San Francisco 94110, ID 5556 -040, $1,850,000. 

Jeremy A. Warms and Emily R. Warms and Warms Revocable Trust to Haley Read and J. Dean Granoff ,4032 Irving St., San Francisco 94122, ID 1709 -020, $1,835,000. 

Hugh A. Donohoe and Eileen M. Nevin Donohoe to Jordan Ng and Cheryl Tom , 1354 26th Ave., San Francisco 94122, ID 1780 -033, $1,810,000. 

John F. O’Sullivan and Frances D. O’Sullivan to Eamonn Patrick McManus Trustee , 245 Roanoke St., San Francisco 94131, Fairmount Tract ID 6718 -014D, $1,805,000. 

Robustiano Freixas Lopez Lecube and Ines Luchia Puig to Matthew Kallman ,3316 Folsom St., San Francisco 94110, 3314/3316 Folsom Street ID 5544 -030, $1,800,000. 

Samuel J. Radochonski and Elizabeth Weinstein Radochonski to Sergey Goder , 1634 22nd Ave., San Francisco 94122, ID 1922 -039, $1,770,000. 

Gloria Yang and Christopher Rein to Paul Hwang and Annette Hwang Trustees ,3145 Manchester Ct., Palo Alto 94303; 69 Wood St., San Francisco 94118, Western Addition ID 1069 -010A, $1,750,000. 

Chak Wai Lee and Amy L. Lee and Chak Wai Lee to Stanton Mak , 2083 21st Ave., San Francisco 94116, ID 2141 -007, $1,739,000. 

Thomas Pang Au Yeung Trustee to Vivian Ting and Vivian Ting M.D. Trust ,2795 Cherry Ln., Walnut Creek 94597; 2427 32nd Ave., San Francisco 94116, ID 2393 -004, $1,720,000. 

Patrick Marks and Amanda Schapel and Panda Trust to John Eschelbach and Rachel Kiichli , 760 Treat Ave. #1, San Francisco 94110, 760/762 Treat Avenue ID 3612 -111, $1,710,000. 

Deborah Ayerst to Haley M. Choi and Shanna B. Hays , 2546 Sutter St., San Francisco 94115, Western Addition ID 1053 -010A, $1,705,000. 

Stanley H. Chew and Robert H. Chew and Chew Family Revocable Trust to Ali Michael Moazed and Emily Herrick Bridwell , 817 32nd Ave., San Francisco 94121, ID 1675 -001C, $1,705,000. 

Terry Luk and Luisa Devera to Gillian L. Clements and Benjamin Stuart Elgin , 461 41st Ave., San Francisco 94121, ID 1473 -002G, $1,700,000. 

Vladimir Yukhtman and Elizaveta Yukhtman and Yukhtman Family Living Trust to Yuliya Blyakherova ,1891 25th Ave., San Francisco 94122, ID 2062 -001S, $1,700,000. 

Adam Ezra Winer and Beth Nicole Mcgreevy and The Mcgreevy and Winer Family Trust to Meghan Marmor and Andrew Arruda , 536 27th St. #3, San Francisco 94131, 536 27th Street ID 6581 -058, $1,700,000. 

Michael P. Orlando to Emily Puente and Manuel Angel Ureno , 225 Mullen Ave., San Francisco 94110, Gift Map ID 5529 -028, $1,700,000. 

Tanforan Industrial Park Lombard LLC to Dickey Joss Taylor and Mona Safabakhsh , 3131 Pierce St. #303, San Francisco 94123; 2301 Lombard St., San Francisco 94123, 3131 Pierce Street ID 0512 -031, $1,695,000. 

Zachary Pozner and Dera Jill Pozner to Cristina Lourdes Miyar , 1632 Hayes St., San Francisco 94117, ID 1198 -060, $1,665,000. 

Kathleen N. Echiverri to Leslie R. Chaney and Kyle A. Chaney , 379 Hearst Ave., San Francisco 94112, Sunnyside ID 3120 -035, $1,655,000. 

Kevin Law and Jeanna Wallenta to Gibson W. Lee and Marcia Lemmon Lee ,2905 E. 1st St., Long Beach 90803; 724 Masonic Ave., San Francisco 94117, ID 1197 -082, $1,650,000. 

Stephen Jung Lee to Weihua Zhu , 435 China Basin St. #544, San Francisco 94158, Madrone ID 8720 -293, $1,650,000. 

Kevin B. Bailey and Ase P. Bailey to Ali Mohammadi and Gina Frizzi , 1821 Stockton St., San Francisco 94133; 1815 Stockton St. #1827, San Francisco 94133, ID 0076 -006, $1,630,000. 

Philip Belinky Charm and Brittany Hume Charm and The 2018 Charm Family Trust to Nikhil Satish and Archana Ramesh , 1400 S. Van Ness Ave., San Francisco 94110, Lot 51 Mission Block 182 ID 6527 -051, $1,627,000. 

Christopher De Anda and Tong Low Kooi to Evan O’Reilly and Julia Lieberman , 2054 48th Ave., San Francisco 94116, ID 2167 -030, $1,613,000. 

Sandra Soto Ramos and Eddie Ramos to Jia Lin and Jing Shan , 420 Mission Bay Blvd. N. #309, San Francisco 94158, Map 6325 ID 8720 -170, $1,610,000. 

Deborah Tokuhara and Cara Emalani Lane Trust to Yvonne Tse and Theo Bessin , 773 Faxon Ave., San Francisco 94112, ID 3173 -006, $1,600,000. 

Mary E. Egigan Trust to Ellen Leonida and John Michael Bartram , 2063 46th Ave., San Francisco 94116, ID 2166 -016, $1,600,000. 

Vergine Misserlian and Elizabeth L. Manoukian 2013 Trust to Jenny Le Che and Ted Hau , 1558 25th Ave., San Francisco 94122, ID 1870 -005F, $1,600,000. 

Edgardo Gatchalian Montoya and Monica Gallardo Montoya and Montoya Family Trust to Holden J. Karau and Carolyn Anne Desimone , 90 Rotteck St., San Francisco 94112, Spring Valley Homestead ID 6753 -065, $1,590,000. 

Augustin Perichou De Kerversau and Ryan Walker to David C. Brownstein and Grace Shohet and The Brownstein Shohet Family 2006 , 10850 Occidental Rd., Sebastopol 95472; 160-164 19th Ave., San Francisco 94121, ID 1378 -023, $1,565,000. 

Ciaran Rogers and Rachel Adam to Robert Lowrey and Yanwah Cheung , 1739 39th Ave., San Francisco 94122, ID 2010 -010, $1,557,000. 

Michael D. Lamson and Victoria H. Lamson and Lamson Family 2019 Revocable Trust to Gyurme T. Karma and Charlene Wong , 123 Escolta Way, San Francisco 94116, Pinelake Park ID 2466A-015, $1,540,000. 

Janice O’Brien and Robert Becken to Tran Do and Matter Reto , 83 Brady St. #6, San Francisco 94103; 324-326 Coleridge St., San Francisco 94110, Cobb Tract ID 5673 -004, $1,520,000. 

Arash Aghevli Trustee to Samuel Edward Kaminsky and Niketa Kumar , 1406 S. Van Ness Ave., San Francisco 94110, Lot 53 Mission Block 182 ID 6527 -053, $1,505,000. 

Henry Lam Trustee and Yee Lim Cho to Jason Chan and Judy Chan and Nasinaga Lamas Trust , 135 Madrone Ave., San Francisco 94127; 2217 16th Ave., San Francisco 94116, Portal Heights ID 2333A-004, $1,500,000. 

Pat Malinbaum Reid and Lori K. Malinbaum and Malinbaum Family Trust to Vijay M. Bettada and Chiung Hui J. Bettada , 1701 Pierce St. #2, San Francisco 94115, 1701 Pierce Street ID 0680 -022, $1,495,000. 

Donna Rae Wickstrom to Stewart Maco and Michele Lee and Carole W. Lee et al. , 114 Eastwood Dr., San Francisco 94112; 115 Eastwood Dr., San Francisco 94112, Westwood Park ID 3164 -012, $1,476,000. 

Paul G. Salisbury Trustee to Mark Jason Dresser and John Christopher Thomas and Dresser Thomas Living Trust , 461 2nd St. #552T, San Francisco 94107, 100 Vara Block 350 ID 3764 -183, $1,455,000. 

2829 25th Street LLC to Thomas Yeh , 2829 25th St. #2, San Francisco 94110; 2829 25th St., San Francisco 94110, 2829 25th Street Condo ID 4276 -028, $1,452,900. 

Nathaniel E. Koechley and Aimee R. Bell to Benjamin Berres and Nicole Nei Ip Desjardins , 3627 23rd St., San Francisco 94110, Horner’s Block 27 ID 3647 -061, $1,450,000. 

New Boundary Global Ltd. to James Mcstay Ong and Laura Ellyn K. Busche Ong ,99 Summit Way, San Francisco 94132, Tract 4875 ID 7331 -216, $1,450,000. 

Kristin M. Scheel to Sean Melody and Ashley Cookerly , 55 Pomona St., San Francisco 94124; 53-55 Pomona St., San Francisco 94124, Silver Terrace ID 5357 -051, $1,442,000. 

Connie Shiu Trustee to Xihan Li , 9532 Orleans Ln., Riverside 92508; 306 Ashton Ave., San Francisco 94112, Lakeview ID 6933 -018A, $1,440,000. 

John L. Garfinkle Trustee to Matthew Lee and Alexandria Lee and George Lee , 117 S. Lake Merced Hills, San Francisco 94132, Lake Merced Hill ID 7381 -053, $1,420,000. 

Julia M. Lopez to Rong Gang Jiang and Peishan Huang ,35 Wheat St., San Francisco 94124, Garden Tract ID 5465 -041, $1,415,000. 

Thomas Claburn and Andrea Damesyn Claburn to Kevin B. Cranfill and Loralie A. Cranfill , 801 Indiana St. #261, San Francisco 94107, Map 3996 ID 4106 -123, $1,415,000. 

Cristina Tcheyan and Preston Guillory and The Tcheyan Guillory Revocable Trust to Michelle Wei ,25 Sierra St. #201, San Francisco 94107; 25 Sierra St., San Francisco 94107, 25 Sierra Street ID 4101 -073, $1,405,000. 

Jenny Leann Mcvay and Pawlas Trust to Erwin L. Wong and Celeste E. Cang Wong , 1322 39th Ave., San Francisco 94122, ID 1793 -041, $1,400,000. 

Zhao Chen Fang and Kin San Chan to Xianshu Li and Yuyao Liu , 657 Huron Ave., San Francisco 94112, West End ID 7097 -043C, $1,400,000. 

Visit Taveethamcharoen Trustee to Andrew Quoc Trinh and Lee May and The Andrew and May Family Trust , 1712 Wawona St., San Francisco 94116; 4859-4861 Mission St., San Francisco 94112, Excelsior Homestead ID 6272 -016, $1,398,000. 

David Gridley Underhill to Elora Nasir and David Posse ,801 Indiana St. #260, San Francisco 94107, Homes on Esprit Park ID 4106 -122, $1,390,000. 

Christine Pey Ying Chao and Stephanie Pey Shiuan Chao to Maxime Emilien Claudian Nay , 1019 Rhode Island St., San Francisco 94107, Potrero Nuevo ID 4159 -058, $1,385,000. 

Thomas C. Leugers Jr. to Ryan J. Johnson and Pei Ling C. Johnson , 162 Ruby Ave., San Carlos 94070; 300 Beale St. #303, San Francisco 94105, Embarcadero Lofts ID 3747 -032, $1,380,000. 

OMB Investments LLC to Sanjay Jagubhai Patel and Jayshree Sanjay Patel Trustees , 5401 Shirley Ave., Tarzana 91356; 1000 3rd St. #706, San Francisco 94158, Map 8303 ID 8715 -097, $1,350,000. 

1 Stanyan LLC to Sing Cheung Alexander , 1 Stanyan St. #41, San Francisco 94118, ID 1084 -022, $1,349,000. 

Giulietta T. Fochetti and Craig W. Fochetti and Craig and Giulietta Fochetti Trust to John T. Stellini and Alicia Stellini , 1124 Silliman St., San Francisco 94134, University Extension Homestead ID 5913 -022, $1,325,000. 

Diego Andres Ongaro and Jennifer Lee Wolochow to Abbasali Rahim Baig , 1150 Treat Ave., San Francisco 94110, ID 6521 -054, $1,300,000. 

Jeanne M. Spediacci and Separate Survivors Trust to Ian M. Conway and Louise M. Anderson , 206 Maynard St., San Francisco 94112, College Homestead Association ID 5895 -017A, $1,300,000. 

Jeffrey C. Nordin and Pamela C. Nordin to Fong Liang Po and Peter H.T. Uang et al. , 88 King St. #417, San Francisco 94107, ID 3793 -072, $1,300,000. 

Karen Chin Yu Ha to Ka Ho Man , 1736 Brooks St., San Mateo 94403; 312 Mt. Vernon Ave., San Francisco 94112, ID 7027B-032, $1,300,000. 

Patricia M. Mar Trustee to Hing Yip Investments LLC , 68 Converse St., San Francisco 94103; 360 11th St., San Francisco 94103, ID 3521 -009, $1,300,000. 

Stanley Lai and Janet Yan Juan Zhao to Lingling Gao and Liwang Gao , 1 Faxon Ave., San Francisco 94112, Railroad Homestead Association ID 7055 -003, $1,300,000. 

Brendan Peters to Chase Brignac and Mary Herigstad Franz , 219 Lily St., San Francisco 94102; 219-221 Lily St., San Francisco 94102, Western Addition ID 0839 -005C, $1,285,000. 

Lizehte Garcia and Kenneth K. Tateno Trustees to Martin I. Hochberg and Jenny Baligar , 755A Union St., San Francisco 94133; 864 Union St., San Francisco 94133, 2878/864/868 Union Street ID 0100 -048, $1,275,000. 

Sean Andrews and Christine Bolghand to Jonathan Brooks Whiteaker , 1382 Page St. #2, San Francisco 94117, Western Block 605 ID 1221 -041, $1,275,000. 

SAN MATEO COUNTY 

IWF Half Moon Bay LLC to Half Moon Bay Lodge LLC ,2400 Cabrillo Hwy. S., Half Moon Bay 94019, ID 066-092-750, $22,750,000. 

Butler Realty LLC to GS RWC SM Office Owner LLC ,450 Sansome St. #500, San Francisco 94111; 1303 Main St., Redwood City 94063, Eastern ID 053-183-010, $16,000,000. 

Greg S. Druehl and Linda Inson Choy Druell Trustees to SASB Real Estate Investments LLC , 30100 Telegraph Rd. #360, Bingham Farms, Mich. 48025; 1120 Hermosa Way, Menlo Park 94025, ID 071-051-170, $5,415,000. 

Butler Realty LLC to GS RWC SM Residential Owner LLC ,450 Sansome St. #500, San Francisco 94111; 112 Elm St./150 Elm St., Redwood City 94063, Hancocks ID 053-181-090/053-181-100, $5,300,000. 

Rachel Handsman Trustee to Jon S. Nakasako and Debbie Ng Nakasako , 1125 Bernal Ave., Burlingame 94010, Easton ID 026-183-080, $4,550,000. 

Laura L. King and Scott Stephen Wilson and King Wilson Family Trust to Reed Moulds and Aleena Moulds Trustees , 156 Felton Dr., Menlo Park 94025, Felton Gables ID 061-326-050, $4,528,000. 

Whitehall Properties LLC to Igor Geller and Renata Aryanti and Geller Aryanti Family Trust , 1320 Orange Ave., Menlo Park 94025, Tract 548 ID 071-014-640, $4,420,000. 

David A. Kramer and Barbara Lavigna and The Kramer Lavigna Family Trust to Mei Ling and Lee Feng , 147 Crescent Ave., Portola Valley 94028, Brookside Park ID 079-160-270, $4,400,000. 

David A. York and Julia S. York and York Family 2005 Trust to Anthony Gaughan and Jun Fu , 810 Bear Gulch Rd., Woodside 94062, ID 072-250-270, $4,180,000. 

Eric Andrew Evans and Jessica Michelle Evans and Evans Revocable Trust to Caroline C. Lee Trustee , 1316 Capuchino Ave., Burlingame 94010, Burlingame Grove ID 026-085-180, $4,000,000. 

Bruce I. Resnick and Beth R. Resnick to Russell K. Taga and Maria J. Ma and Taga Ma Family Trust , 2205 Hale Dr., Burlingame 94010, ID 027-165-210, $3,865,000. 

John Stuart Looper and Susan Elizabeth Looper Friedman and Joanne G. Wells Revocable Trust to Thomas Durst and Diane S. Durst and Durst Revocable Trust , 1071 Vallejo St., San Francisco 94133; 1101 Cotton St., Menlo Park 94025, Hillview Manor ID 071-043-110, $3,800,000. 

Cary Kietter and Ngan Ha Nguyen Trustees to He Bronte and Annabella Tong Trustees , 643 Santa Barbara Ave., Millbrae 94030; 429 Studio Cir., San Mateo 94401, Studio Park ID 032-135-020, $3,700,000. 

Andy Wu and Annie Tai to Inder Mohan Singh Jaggi and Deepti Sodhi Jaggi , 733 Chateau Dr., Hillsborough 94010, Carolands Park ID 030-032-220, $3,500,000. 

B&G Development to GS RWC SM Affordable Owner LLC , 450 Sansome St. #500, San Francisco 94111; 1304 El Camino Real, Redwood City 94063, Jas A. Robinsons ID 053-063-070, $3,250,000. 

Tage Hampton Howerton and Courtney Christine Chandler to Cody L. Wright and Carlos Gonzales , 2065 Sterling Ave., Menlo Park 94025, University Heights ID 074-063-160, $3,250,000. 

Craig Michael Wesman and Jennifer Renee Maltz Wesman to David Nathan Prince Hopkins and Rebecca Browning Hopkins and Hopkins Family Trust , 117 Bloomfield Rd., Burlingame 94010; 617 Burlingame Ave., Burlingame 94010, ID 029-253-030, $3,100,000. 

Paul Mitchinson Conliffe and Lisabeth Ann Conliffe to Fu Chen Shao and Yvonne Liang , 106 La Loma Ln., Burlingame 94010, Subdivision Block 18 ID 027-052-150, $3,080,000. 

Eileen J. Haughton and Mary E. Moore and The Joseph Mcloughlin Family Trust to Ying Wu , 14630 Horseshoe Dr., Saratoga 95070; 783 Roble Ave., Menlo Park 94025, ID 071-312-130, $3,010,000. 

Peter A. Rothschild and Debra Ann Reinking to Alexander Gray Spight , 901 Governors Bay Dr., Redwood City 94065, Governors Bay ID 095-380-340, $3,003,500. 

SEPTEMBER 17–23, 2021  43 BIZ BIZ LEADS LEADS 

Dennis Stempler and Eunzoo Stempler to Guojun He and Ying Sun ,315 Concord Dr., Menlo Park 94025, Tract 586 The Willows ID 062-333-170, $2,980,000. 

Narasimhan Srivatsan and Seetalaxmi Iyyer to Samuel Johnson and Sandy Yau ,1521 Cedar St., San Carlos 94070, White Oaks Tract ID 051-388-140, $2,950,000. 

Scott Root Trustee to Sivechat Hearst , 417 Hobart Ave., San Mateo 94402, Husing Subd. ID 034-366-010, $2,925,000. 

Kerry Hermann and Kerry B. Britton and Patricia Ann Britton Rev Inter Vivo to Muath Ishan Zghoul and Alaa Zghoul , 3030 Stonegate Dr., Alamo 94507; 1328 El Camino Real, Burlingame 94010, Burlingame Grove ID 026-086-210, $2,750,000. 

Moulder LLC to Beatriz Cristina Mendoza Valladares and Fernando Kovar Romero , 2786 Ohio Ave., Redwood City 94061, Sterling Highlands ID 069-192-010, $2,750,000. 

Troy Shelton and Akiko Shelton to David Macneil and Bi Kim Seul , 35 Laurel Hill Ct., San Mateo 94402, Tract 784 The Highlands ID 041-241-160, $2,750,000. 

John M. Cieslewicz and Alisa Eagleston Cieslewicz and Cieslewicz Family Trust to Nathan Lazarus Gardner and Laura Lazarus Gardner ,1384 Chestnut St., San Carlos 94070, Oak Park ID 051-301-270, $2,600,000. 

Brian Scott Bailard and Erin Willett Bailard to David C. Cheung and Yan Han , 1329 Cabrillo Ave., Burlingame 94010, Easton ID 026-062-020, $2,550,000. 

Harmonious Holdings to Waleed Omar Alzgoul Trustee , 2371 Rollingwood Dr., San Bruno 94066; 434 Railroad Ave., South San Francisco 94080, ID 012-323-570, $2,500,000. 

Gregory J. Vismara and Roxane M. Vismara and Vismara Trust to Kamlesh Patel Hersh and Shivani Shah , 362 Beverly Dr., San Carlos 94070, CD Cunningham Subd. ID 049-222-210, $2,350,000. 

Bbys LLC to John J. Moretti and Mia Moretti , 128 Brook St., San Carlos 94070, Oak Park ID 051-191-130, $2,231,000. 

Simsim Realty LLC to Amy Adaeze Johnson and Nicholas Johnson , 724 Crane Ave., Foster City 94404, Tract 822 Foster City Neighborhood ID 094-154-260, $2,150,000. 

Forrest Dwight Shigley Trustee to Justin Ajay Singh and Shaleen Seema Nand Singh Trustees , 1523 Chula Vista Dr., Belmont 94002, Carlmont 1 ID 045-122-050, $2,100,000. 

Timothy Taylor and Keith Taylor and Jim W. and Ledean Taylor Family Trust to Yizhi Xiong and Tong Zhao , 811 Constitution Dr., Foster City 94404; 315 Esplanade Ave., Pacifica 94044, Surf Side Manor ID 009-411-180, $2,100,000. 

Kevin J. Dolezal and Mary M. Dolezal Trust to Nikolay Tchaouchev and Erika Lou Ocampo and The Tchaouchev Ocampo 2019 Trust , 462 Emerald Ave., San Carlos 94070; 316 Devonshire Blvd., San Carlos 94070, Devonshire Properties ID 049-093-130, $2,050,000. 

Jeff Obertelli and Judy Obertelli to 1464 ECR LLC , 204 2nd Ave. #133, San Mateo 94401; 1464 El Camino Real, Belmont 94002, Bay View Heights ID 045-248-290, $2,000,000. 

Michael Sit and Maria R. Sit to Yunfei Wang and Yuan Zhang , 1370 Ribbon St., Foster City 94404, Tract 830 Foster City Neighborhood ID 094-261-040, $1,970,000. 

Leslie Gray Trustee to Boris Taratutin Chung and Tina Taratutin Chung , 2719 Carolina Ave., Redwood City 94061, Sterling Highlands ID 069-192-080, $1,950,000. 

Karen C. Churig to Yee Cheung Sin and Yat Ming Chu , 49 Edgewood Place, Belmont 94002, Ross Woods ID 044-390-140, $1,940,000. 

Oxford LLC to Liane Fang Trustee , 1554 Oxford St., Redwood City 94061, Woodside Acres ID 059-083-050, $1,900,000. 

Eileen O’Brien Trustee to Michael A. Ruder and Barbara B. Ruder and Ruder Revocable Inter Vivos Trust ,570 El Camino Real #150-50, Redwood City 94063; 2 Hinton Ranch Rd., Pacifica 94044, Tract 11 Southerly Regan Tract ID 023-160-430, $1,900,000. 

Kin Bing Wu Trustee to Ann Cognet and Vincent Delafosse , 2250 Eastridge Ave. #2, Menlo Park 94025, Sharon Court ID 110-660-020, $1,900,000. 

Kaoru Elizabeth Hollingsworth Trustee to Ze En Zheng and Hong Zhou Yan , 206 Hillcrest Blvd., Millbrae 94030, Millbrae Highlands ID 024-113-160, $1,880,000. 

Nicolas L. Owen and Kristina E. Owen and The Owen Family Trust to Neil Watters and Haley Harrier ,299 G St., Redwood City 94063, Heather Gardens ID 052-091-010, $1,870,000. 

Aaron Golden and Rachel Golden to Yong Li and Tong Li , 2225 Trenton Dr., San Bruno 94066, Crestmoor Park ID 019-085-010, $1,868,000. 

Benjamin A. Hernandez and Martha E. Hernandez to Huan Zhang , 217 Westview Dr., South San Francisco 94080, Westview Terrace ID 011-202-470, $1,865,000. 

Gregory Philip Fletcher and Julie Fletcher Trustees to Umer Shaheen and Salim Umer , 1059 Ringwood Ave., Menlo Park 94025; 1029 Oakland Ave., Menlo Park 94025, Blocks 1 To 17 Belle Haven City ID 062-041-140, $1,843,000. 

Jim Roy Greco and Jonathan Kevin Greco to Anton Matosov , 943 Lurline Dr., Foster City 94404; 934 Lurline Dr., Foster City 94404, Tract 813 Foster City Neighborhood ID 094-100-200, $1,800,000. 

Tristan Joseph Lang and Katie Mandel Lang and The Lang 2019 Family Trust to Eric S. Kuhnen and Wendy H. Kuhnen and Kuhnen Family Trust , 2319 Sharon Rd., Menlo Park 94025, Sharon Glen ID 112-540-100, $1,749,000. 

Dominic J. Maraglia and Katharina Maraglia to Shaun Wei Shen Ooi and Chi Low Vye , 1640 Kentfield Ave., Redwood City 94061, Woodside Acres ID 059-071-470, $1,740,000. 

Krystell Finato and Todd Firiato and Daniele P. Bishop to Sharon Shu Lan Liu , 708 S. Norfolk St., San Mateo 94401; 901 Waltermire St., Belmont 94002, ID 045-184-050, $1,725,000. 

Sanjib K. Mohanty and Navanita Mohanty to Alex Hechanova Abelido , 3205 Palos Verdes Dr. N., Palos Verdes Estates 90274; 716 Fathom Dr., San Mateo 94404, Mariners Island ID 035-513-570, $1,720,000. 

Jia Yiding to Haichao Wang and Ma Zhao , 1177 Virginia Ave., Redwood City 94061, West Redwood ID 058-204-240, $1,700,000. 

Lee Nelson and Sherice Lee to Henry Jose Murillo and Sindy Y. Murillo Cruz , 251 San Fernando Way, Daly City 94015; 86 Santa Rita Ave., Daly City 94015, St. Francis Heights ID 008-364-130, $1,680,000. 

Bryan Lee and Jean Higaki to Tinny Ng W. Chu and Ho Chu Wing , 2800 Rivera Dr., Burlingame 94010; 1106 Glenwood Dr., Millbrae 94030, Millbrae Meadows ID 021-043-190, $1,650,000. 

Jenine K. Young to Anik Narain Mathur and Sarika Mathur , 946 Baines St., East Palo Alto 94303, Tract 98 3 Ravenswood Villages ID 063-673-090, $1,635,000. 

Walter Daly and Patricia A. Daly Revocable Living Trust to Anne G. Foor Trustee ,3525 Winway, San Mateo 94403, Westwood ID 042-112-170, $1,633,500. 

Gilbert Zuniga and Ricardo Zuniga and Jaime Zuniga to Raied Azar and Simon Azar , 3754 Farm Hill Blvd., Redwood City 94061, Farm Hill ID 057-413-030, $1,630,000. 

Britta Seuren and Denise Lycka to Kyle Nucera and Ylan Nguyen , 15 Colegrove Ct., San Mateo 94403, Laurel Hills ID 042-154-130, $1,610,000. 

Lana Morin Pierce to Margaret L. Hsu and Lance Alster , 25 Goldenridge Ct., San Mateo 94402, Bayridge ID 041-490-510, $1,610,000. 

Adam H. Rajhboy and Iqbal H. Rajhboy to Karen Hui Mun Chan and Roshelle Karyee Chan , 63 Waverly Ct., South San Francisco 94080, Westborough ID 091-631-140, $1,600,000. 

Michael Mack to Stephen C. Voorhees and Deborah J. Voorhees and The Voorhees Trust , 256 Marks Rd., Alamo 94507; 676 Myrtle St., Half Moon Bay 94019, Arleta Park ID 064-132-610, $1,600,000. 

Wilhelmina Kartman and William Kartman et al. to Qi Zhao and Yunpei Zhang ,508 Mountain View Ave., Belmont 94002, Sterling Downs ID 040-261-170, $1,590,000. 

Lisa E. Ellis and Steven K. Ellis to Peter G. Mack , 412 30th Ave., San Mateo 94403, San Mateo Terrace ID 039-315-110, $1,560,000. 

Gearin Properties LLC to Mark J. Comishock and Lynn A. Comishock and Comishock Living Trust ,49 Lyonridge Ln., San Mateo 94402, Bayridge ID 041-490-260, $1,550,000. 

Jacqueline L. Murphy Trustee to GS RWC SM Residential Owner LLC ,113 Beech St., Redwood City 94063, Hancocks ID 053-181-070, $1,500,000. 

Imo M. Udom and Farralon W. Udom to Homelight Homes Real Estate LLC ,1375 N. Scottsdale Rd. #140, Scottsdale, Ariz. 85257; 20 Barneson Ave. #B1, San Mateo 94402, 20 Barneson Condo Parcel 174 ID 106-310-020, $1,500,000. 

Ryan A. Boudreaux and Ruth C. Boudreaux and Boudreaux Family Trust to Kristopher R. Lee , 3833 Donner St. #3835, San Mateo 94403; 3833 Donner St., San Mateo 94403, Laurel Gardens ID 042-155-150, $1,500,000. 

Stephen J. Legallet and Joe Legallet 1996 Family Trust to Jens Legallet and Christopher Legallet and Neva Legallet Irrevocable Trust , 1401 Griffith St., San Francisco 94124; 555 Laurel Ave. #316, San Mateo 94401, Grosvenor Park ID 109-190-250, $1,500,000. 

Lei Gong and Chen Gao to Farbod Niroomand and Sharzad Kaviani , 820 Lakeshore Dr., Redwood City 94065; 820 Lakeshore Dr. #711, Redwood City 94065, Parcel 87 12 ID 112-650-010, $1,465,000. 

1493 Oak Grove LLC to Mingyi Wen Trimble and Timothy James Trimble ,1493 Oak Grove Ave. #302, Burlingame 94010; 1493 Oak Grove Ave., Burlingame 94010, 1493 Oak Grove Condo ID 029-100-430, $1,460,000. 

15 Crippleridge Investment LLC to Rui Ying Zhang and Qiang Xu , 15 Crippleridge Ct., San Mateo 94402, Batridge ID 041-490-330, $1,453,000. 

Rotundo Cesare and Veronica Ravot Licheri to Vikram Chitnis and Sayali Atul Kotkar , 735 Celestial Ln., Foster City 94404, Tract 4 72 Foster City Neighborhood ID 094-432-070, $1,450,000. 

Mark W. Glanville and Carolyn W. Glanville to Pietro Consavari and Huynh Thach Camnga ,432 Northwood Dr., South San Francisco 94080, Brentwood ID 013-151-060, $1,450,000. 

John Gill and Rebecca Gill Trustees to Latha Rammohan Pisharodi , 140 Pitman St., Providence, R.I. 02906; 400 Mariners Island Blvd. #304, San Mateo 94404, Mariners Island Condominium ID 117-170-560, $1,449,000. 

Lillian Herrera Murillo and Everett L. Herrera to Lynne Pasternack , 3707 Winford Dr., Tarzana 91356; 1445 California Dr., Burlingame 94010, Burlingame Grove ID 026-072-040, $1,430,000. 

Ana Elizabeth Quiros to Luiz Alfonso Coimbra Barbosa Silva and Debora De Seixas Lea Brito Silva , 812 Palm Ave., Redwood City 94061, Palm Estates ID 059-383-050, $1,430,000. 

Moises Lopez Diaz and Concepcion Reyes De Lopez to Michelle Tai and Jordan Hurwitz , 3323 Spring St., Redwood City 94063, Tract 553 Redwood Manor ID 055-097-150, $1,425,000. 

Lennar Homes of California Inc. to Ruby C. Chang and James B. Chang , 1089 Foster Square Ln. #404, Foster City 94404; 1079 Foster Square Ln. #201/1089 Foster Square Ln. #404, Foster City 94404, Foster Square ID 117-820-070/117-820-060, $1,413,000. 

David J. Minetto and Margaret M. Minetto to Theodore Lyndon Obbard and Catherine Waterman Drew , 1174 Alicante Dr., Pacifica 94044, Linda Mar #25 ID 023-493-070, $1,400,000. 

Lennar Homes of California Inc. to James Chan and Angel Au Yeung Trustees ,789 Eppleton Ln. #303, Foster City 94404, Foster Square ID 117-740-100, $1,374,000. 

Martijn Fenaux and Jilean Fenaux to Patricia M. Power and Frederick F. Pieper ,510 S. Grant St., San Mateo 94402, ID 033-293-070, $1,365,000. 

Andry Pribady and Mona Pribadi to Wenqing Shen and Dehui Kong , 2601 Wexford Ave., South San Francisco 94080, Tract 817 Westborough ID 091-082-920, $1,357,000. 

Ronald C. Malouf Trustee to Cher Huang Cheng and Chung Huang Tsuey , 324 Princeton Rd., Menlo Park 94025; 111 St. Matthews Ave. #201, San Mateo 94401, St. Matthews Place ID 123-110-110, $1,350,000. 

Lawrence R. Bradshaw and Christine A. Bradshaw to Miguel Gonzalez and Micaela P. Gonzalez and Christina Y. Gonzalez , 1219 Rosita Rd., Pacifica 94044, Tract 693 Linda Mar ID 023-281-140, $1,335,000. 

John Reener and Janice Reener to Leah Cantero Perez and Robbiejo Nunez Perez , 256 Lauren Ave., Pacifica 94044, Tract 697 Lauren ID 018-041-170, $1,330,000. 

Jose R. Magsaysay and Dolores Dela Rosa Magsaysay to Chanjuan Zhu and Shujuan Zhu , P.O. Box 221, South San Francisco 94083; 245 Gambetta St., Daly City 94014, Gambetta Park ID 003-392-190, $1,325,000. 

Stephen G. Acheff to Flyhomes Investments CA LLC , 1201 Western Ave. #100, Seattle, Wash. 98101; 339 King Dr., South San Francisco 94080, Serra Highlands ID 010-264-070, $1,325,000. 

Nicholas Miyake and Zena Kharsa and Miyake Kharsa Living Trust to Jash Sayani ,1009 Marsh Rd., Redwood City 94063, Tract 509 Friendly Acres ID 055-222-310, $1,320,000. 

Robert E. Freidman and Jerome Meyer Friedman Jr. to Julian Won Jae Bosley ,245 Gardenside Ave., South San Francisco 94080, Sunshine Gardens Subd. ID 011-173-310, $1,315,000. 

Frank J. Frost Trustee to Jose Arenas and Christina Arenas , 961 Rio Vista Dr., Pacifica 94044, Tract 672 Linda Mar ID 023-214-050, $1,303,000. 

Bruce Forshee and Cheryl Forshee to Jacqueline Dory Prescott and Michael Robert Prescott , 321 East St., Redwood City 94063, Cordilleras ID 052-102-560, $1,301,000. 

Nobushige Ichiryu and Mariko Blackburn 2003 Trust to Helen Wenting Zou and Christopher Douglas Atwood , 10 Clearview Dr., Daly City 94015, Westlake ID 008-443-030, $1,300,000. 

Franklin J. Winch Jr. and Linda L. Winch to Barbra A. Hale , 1080 Barcelona Dr., Pacifica 94044, Linda Mar #16 ID 023-141-100, $1,300,000. 

Sherri Rae Shaw Trustee to Richard Ignatius Rivera Jr. and Dana Susan Bachner Rivera and Rivera Family Living Trust , 200 Aderno Way, Pacific Palisades 90272; 1176 18th Ave., Redwood City 94063, Friendly Haven ID 055-150-470, $1,300,000. 

Dale B. Brewer and Danielle M. Brewer to Laura Patricia Alvarez , 249 Linden Ave., San Bruno 94066, San Bruno Park ID 020-405-130, $1,300,000. 

Kathy B. Koliopoulos and Peter J. Belesis and The Angie Belesis Revocable Bypass et al. to Emily S. Chen , 1115 North Rd., Belmont 94002; 819 North Rd., Belmont 94002, Swift Tract ID 044-151-020, $1,300,000. 

Cathy Heins Brown to Richard W. Lee and Feuy F. Lee , 3311 Fasman Dr., San Bruno 94066, Pacific Heights ID 017-282-140, $1,280,000. 

Gordon B. Chamberlain Trustee to Alta Home Buyers LLC and Catch Flip Release LLC , 3822 Palo Alto Dr., Lafayette 94549; 218 Park St., Redwood City 94061, Redwood Villa Park ID 053-324-150, $1,260,000. 

Mond M. Mugiya and Cari Sung He Park and Cari S.H.M. Mugiya to Jean Miao , P.O. Box 34157, San Francisco 94134; 2545 Rollingwood Dr., San Bruno 94066, Rollingwood ID 017-214-100, $1,250,000. 

Stephanie R. Wong and Johnny Ying Lim to Redwood Holdings LLC ,2015 Manhattan Beach Blvd. #100, Redondo Beach 90278; 3992 Martin Dr., San Mateo 94403, San Mateo Village ID 040-224-030, $1,250,000. 

Francis J. Kennedy Trustee to Ajay Jose and Roshen Prasad , 307 N. San Mateo Dr., San Mateo 94401, ID 032-193-050, $1,400,000. 

Spencer Chan and Jasmin Ma to Jason Lin , 254 Crestmoor Cir., Pacifica 94044, Fairmont ID 009-493-510, $1,380,000. 

Gweneth P. Miguel Trustee to Chok Sau Mah and Xiao Lan Ma , 2358 26th Ave., San Francisco 94116; 869 Gellert Blvd., Daly City 94015, Serramonte ID 091-762-500, $1,355,000. 

Amit Goyal and Dolly Bansal to Yuanxing Huang and Huilan Li , 116 Cityhomes Ln., Foster City 94404, Tract 126 86 Town Center Cityhomes West ID 094-052-280, $1,331,000. 

Rosa G. Perez Trustee and Oscar A. Perez Living Trust et al. to Jhorrell Navarro and Zabrina Fong ,3752 Palos Verdes Way, South San Francisco 94080, Westborough West Park ID 091-412-140, $1,300,000. 

Jose J. Rodriguez and Lizeth Rodriguez to Xiao Johnson ,1063 Schwerin St., Daly City 94014, Linda Vista ID 005-361-430, $1,250,000. 

James William Finch and Helen Lingford Hughes to Stephen Michael Love and Alvina Lih Wen Hsu and Hsu Love Revocable Trust ,735 Woodside Dr., Woodside 94062, Tract 579 Woodside Hills ID 069-150-290, $5,500,000. 

Anna Hertel and The 155 Sunrise Trust to Cameron Shafer and Elizabeth C. Stone , 155 Sunrise Dr., Woodside 94062, Tract 764 Skywood Acres ID 075-040-040, $5,450,000. 

Nicolas J. Naclerio and Jacqueline M. Naclerio and The Naclerio Revocable Trust to Erin Stevenson , 521 Grace Dr., Menlo Park 94025, Yale Tract ID 071-180-280, $5,400,000. 

Paul J. Slosar Jr. and Darlynn G. Slosar and The Slosar Family Trust to Hurlingham Oak LLC ,50 California St. #3550, San Francisco 94111; 510 Hurlingham Ave., San Mateo 94402, San Mateo Park ID 032-071-120, $5,400,000. 

Frank Leo Hannig and Denise Carol Hannig and The Frank and Denise Hannig Family to Yann Collet and Clarie Collet , 180 Brookwood Rd., Woodside 94062, Tract 742 Woodside Hills ID 069-032-180, $5,256,500. 

James Jerome Zimmerman to Nikheel Shrinivas Kolatkar and Jennifer Louise Minihan , 40 Martin Ln., Woodside 94062, Tract 689 Woodside Manor ID 072-151-260, $5,000,000. 

Michael Ludovico and Serena Yuki Ludovico and The Ludovico Family Trust to Kent R. Johnson and Christina Norair Johnson and The Johnson Revocable Trust , 55 El Cerrito Ave., San Mateo 94402, El Cerrito Manor ID 032-412-070, $4,265,000. 

Timothy Matthew R. Williamson and Jennifer L. Williamson and Williamson Family Trust to Stephen J. Herrick and Moon Landing Trust , 1390 N. Mcdowell Blvd. #G177, Petaluma 94954; 301 Yale Rd., Menlo Park 94025, Stanford Park ID 071-394-100, $4,150,000. 

George C. Quinn and Terrence Quinn and Quin Family Revocable Trust to Albert J. Bower Trustee ,830 Los Trancos Rd., Portola Valley 94028; 240 Willowbrook Dr., Portola Valley 94028, Tract 792 Willowbrook ID 079-130-270, $4,000,000. 

Philip J. Dowley and James F. Dowley and Geroge F. Dowley Family Trust et al. to Theodore Nicholas Choc and Beth Gaynor Whitney ,1300 N. Lemon Ave., Menlo Park 94025, The Martin Tract ID 071-022-200, $3,950,000. 

Gary K. Conway and Lauren Insco and Conway Family Trust to John Nathan Martin and Sandra Lee Wong Martin , 5 Las Piedras St., Portola Valley 94028, Tract 809 Vista Verde ID 080-140-040, $3,845,000. 

SF19g LLC to Ganesh Ramanarayanan and Nidhi Pankaj Doshi , 621 Middle Ave., Menlo Park 94025; 2001 Eucalyptus Ave., San Carlos 94070, Sunset Highlands ID 050-284-120, $3,695,000. 

Daniel Tealdi to Bradley Earl Johanson and Danielle Lee Aubele , 2123 De Anza Blvd., San Mateo 94402, ID 041-200-500, $3,600,000. 

Mary D. Chessman Trustee to Sebastien Vas and Sarah Toledano , 140 Erica Way, Portola Valley 94028, Tract 670 Ladera ID 077-192-120, $3,225,000. 

Daniel P. Conway and Eileen M. Stanley Conway to Marvin Christopher Loux and Tram Anh Tran Loux , 768 Acacia Ave., San Bruno 94066; 1625 Howard Ave., Burlingame 94010, Burlingame Park ID 028-316-290, $3,200,000. 

John T. Duggins and Laurie A. Duggins and Duggins Family Trust to Rebecca J. Kameny and Alexander Davis Kameny , 2171 Cedar Ave., Menlo Park 94025, Menlo Heights ID 074-036-130, $3,150,000. 

Roxane I. Beeman and Estate of John C. Throckmorton III to Eric Dunn and The Eric and Susan Dunn Living Trust ,509 Coleridge Ave., Palo Alto 94301, ID 082-110-041, $3,079,000. 

Evan Thayer and Carrie Allen and The Allen Thayer Family Trust to Siti Sara Binti Mohamed Nadzri and Mehmet Sanliol , 181 Erica Way, Portola Valley 94028, Tract 670 Ladera ID 077-202-120, $3,010,000. 

Daylin A. Cassidy and Estate of Edward M. Cassidy to Ahmad Hussain Trustee ,129 Lakeview Way, Emerald Hills 94062; 200 Maple Ave., South San Francisco 94080, ID 012-331-020, $3,000,000. 

Bizhan Taymourian and Nahid N. Falaki and The Falaki Taymourian Trust to Betsy Holmes and Adam Miller , 435 Shelford Ave., San Carlos 94070, Garden Terrace ID 045-212-250, $2,935,000. 

Kyrk Jordan and Jennifer Jordan to Alonzo Canada and Grace Jung Hwang , 775 Pico Ave., San Mateo 94403, Glenwood Heights ID 039-091-540, $2,925,000. 

Dewey Wayne Chambers and Martha Cecile Chambers and Chambers Family Revocable Trust to Wesley Lee and Gloria Tse Lee , 1341 Bernal Ave., Burlingame 94010, Eastern Addition ID 026-064-030, $2,823,000. 

Robert William Porter and Janet L. Porter to Justin Wang and Lauren Hathaway Wang , 914 Fallen Leaf Way, Emerald Hills 94062, Tract 933 Marinani Ranchos ID 068-221-500, $2,800,000. 

John A. Schnagl to 1866 Valparaiso LLC , 2063 Gordon Ave., Menlo Park 94025; 1866 Valparaiso Ave., Menlo Park 94025, Linda Vista Tract ID 070-302-290, $2,780,000. 

Lev Tripolsky to Hozefa Jodiawalla and Ummulkiram Jodiawalla , 30 Waterside Cir., Redwood City 94065, Sandpiper Lagoon ID 095-300-770, $2,722,500. 

Teodor A. Ciupitu and Luminita M. Ruva Ciupitu and The Ciupitu Family Trust to Jie Chen and Miaoran Ning , 943 Central Ave., Highland Park, Ill. 60035; 2622 Monserat Ave., Belmont 94002, Belmont Country Club ID 043-311-260, $2,625,000. 

Christopher J. Poehler and Patricia Nola Buzzini and The Poehler Family Trust to Xi Zhou Will and Kyung Kim Won , 1430 Benito Ave., Burlingame 94010, Burlingame Subd. ID 027-181-220, $2,520,000. 

Robabeh Boloorian and Boloorian Family Trust and Ghazaleh J. Boloorian to Amaan Mehrabian and Shirin Badiezadegan , 1262 Middle Ave., Menlo Park 94025, Hermosa Tract ID 071-242-120, $2,500,000. 

Robert Foster and Gus Stratiotis to Flyhomes Investments CA LLC , 1201 Western Ave. #100, Seattle, Wash. 98101; 11 Del Rey Ct., San Carlos 94070, Vista Del Rey ID 050-011-160, $2,500,000. 

Junko Matsubara and Junko Matsubara Tseng Trust to Shihang Lyu and Xueqing Ding , 16 Camino Vista Ct., Belmont 94002, Camino Vista ID 044-192-040, $2,452,000. 

Osamu Kimura and Mirei Yasumatsu to Bharatharajan Balakrishnan Pudugramam and Priya Sriram , 511 Pennant Ct., Redwood City 94065, Dolphin Subd. ID 095-071-130, $2,450,000. 

Jutta H. Hempel and Thomas Peter Hempel and Jutta H. Hempel Survivor Trust et al. to Carl Jeffrey Krueger and Christina Nicholaus Krueger , 15 Quail, Portola Valley 94028; 15 Quail Ct., Portola Valley 94028, Portola Valley Ranch ID 080-421-060, $2,425,000. 

Philip Mchale and Mary Mchale and Mchale Living Trust to Sandeep Gupta and Vidita Karumuri Subbarao ,375 Hedge Rd., Menlo Park 94025, Tract 560 Suburban Park ID 055-303-300, $2,367,500. 

George H. Morello and The George H. Morello Jr. Revocable T. and Joseph P. Morello to Dhanraj Pondicherry and Lisa Pondicherry , 40 Nevada St., Redwood City 94062, Oak Knoll Manor ID 058-071-050, $2,350,000. 

Bryan Jacobs and Jana Jacobs and The Trust of Bryan and Zana Jacobs to Cynthia A. Francisco and Gary A. Francisco and The Francisco Family Trust , 315 Lowell St., Redwood City 94062, Central Park ID 052-303-160, $2,350,000. 

Daniel Lewis Schwartz to Bernard Gallet and Geraldine Gallet and The Gallet Family Trust , 990 La Mesa Dr., Portola Valley 94028; 736 La Mesa Dr., Menlo Park 94028, Tract 838 Ladera ID 077-381-250, $2,315,000. 

Ellen Vigdorchik to Li Chen and Jie Feng , 3411 Beresford Ave., Belmont 94002, Belmont Country Club ID 043-093-070, $2,300,000. 

Simon Wong Shannph and Jennifer Ching Wah Wong and Shannph and Jennifer Wong Revocable to Brandon S. Takemori and Dara Takemori , 622 Crane Ave., Foster City 94404, Tract 882 Foster City Neighborhood ID 094-160-550, $2,300,000. 

James Michael Wysynski and James & Kela Wysynski Family Trust to Dmitriy Kunitskiy and Xiaoyi Liu ,2780 Crestmoor Dr., San Bruno 94066, Crestmoor Park ID 019-111-290, $2,250,000. 

Kenneth R. Pendergast to Jennifer Zee and Andre Mina , 445 23rd Ave., San Mateo 94403, San Mateo Villa Park ID 039-132-120, $2,202,000. 

Jeffrey M. Cory and Joey Ann M. Cory to Stephen Mcclure and Roxanne Mcclure and Orosini Family Revocable Living Trust et al. , 1360 Oakhurst Ave., San Carlos 94070, Oak Park ID 051-214-150, $2,200,000. 

Daniel G. Muriello and Bahia Q. Muriello and The Muriello Living Trust to Xuan Luo and Lin Hao , 1038 Menlo Oaks Dr., Menlo Park 94025, Newbridge Park ID 062-051-260, $2,200,000. 

44  SAN FRANCISCO BUSINESS TIMES BIZ BIZ LEADS LEADS 

Kevin Smyth and Marianne Schovsbo and Kevin Smyth and Marianne Schovsbo to Riley Bateman and Gabriella Bateman , 728 Arroyo Leon Dr., Half Moon Bay 94019, Hacienda Gardens ID 056-200-670, $2,200,000. 

David Waterman and Mary Ann Waterman and David Waterman & Mary Ann Waterman to Robert Ka Chun Kong and Julia Jie Qiu Ma , 383 El Paseo, Millbrae 94030, ID 024-093-030, $2,200,000. 

Thomas P. Mcdonough to Joyce Robison and Rand Robison and 2019 Robison Family Trust , 113 W. Avalon Dr., Pacifica 94044; 2552 Hampton Ave., Redwood City 94061, Woodside Terrace ID 069-123-050, $2,150,000. 

Frank Garcia and Elizabeth Garcia to Wyatt Curphy Hamon and Jody Elizabeth Garcia , 75 Inner Cir., Redwood City 94062, Oak Knoll Manor ID 058-092-010, $2,140,000. 

Mena Fadelli Trustee to Randell C. Cotta and Margot M. Herrman , 4221 Ruthelma Ave., Palo Alto 94306; 2021 Stratford Way, San Mateo 94403, Beresford Manor ID 039-051-370, $2,100,000. 

Bradlee K. Wing and Jennifer Wing Fung to William Zhou , 1639 27th Ave., San Francisco 94122; 1349 Millbrae Ave., Millbrae 94030, Robinwood Subd. ID 024-203-380, $2,100,000. 

Elizabeth Sue Kaske Trustee to Harini Bhandari and Arjit Bhandari , 202 Ravenswood Ave., Menlo Park 94025, Victoria Oaks ID 061-382-450, $2,050,000. 

Fontana Alexander and Laura Fontana to Connie Choi and Alexandre Lett ,340 Topaz St., Redwood City 94062, Jefferson Avenue ID 058-124-040, $2,040,000. 

1493 Oak Grove LLC to Chi Hwa Shao and Margaret Shao , 25 Del Monte Dr., Hillsborough 94010; 1493 Oak Grove Ave., Burlingame 94010, 1493 Oak Grove Condos ID 029-100-430, $2,000,000. 

Alonzo Franklin Canada IV and Grace Jung Hwang to Serena Sanulli and Benjamin Obadia , 417 9th Ave., Menlo Park 94025, Fair Oaks Acres ID 060-182-120, $2,000,000. 

William Stronck and Marya R. Keeth and Stronck Family 1999 Revocable Trust to Van Shaw , 8 Blakewood Way, Woodside 94062, Tract 5 Sky L Onda ID 075-091-120, $2,000,000. 

Adam Regelmann and Season O’Glesby to Vivian Zhu and Simon He , 2455 Whitman Way, San Bruno 94066, Crestwood Park ID 019-122-130, $1,950,000. 

Suzanne Sattui Administrator to Saravana Kumar Rathinam and Anuradha Vellineni , 4 Stowe Ln., Menlo Park 94025, Tract 821 Stanford Green ID 074-311-410, $1,950,000. 

Shivani Singh and Rahul R. Aggarwal to Flyhomes Investments CA LLC , 1201 Western Ave. #100, Seattle, Wash. 98101; 20 Viola St., South San Francisco 94080, Terranbay ID 007-670-310, $1,865,000. 

Southwest Investment Funds LLC to Jacob Becher and Yanfei Ma , 1560 Howard Ave., San Carlos 94070, Oak Park ID 051-305-420, $1,860,000. 

Dong Dong and Mengyuan He to Amir Aref Adib and Marzieh Arad , 838 Andromeda Ln., Foster City 94404, ID 105-940-060, $1,851,000. 

Mark F. Turner and Kathy Stendahl Turner and The Turner Family Trust et al. to Jeffrey Brian Polakow and Jessica Kah Hui Tan , 475 Gymkhana Rd., San Mateo 94403, ID 039-022-070, $1,850,000. 

Patricia A. Azadi Trustee to Lida M. Young and Frank & Lida Young Trust , 1653 Toyon Ct., San Mateo 94403, Sugarloaf ID 041-592-380, $1,850,000. 

Wei Xian Lu and Man Chan to Stella Tsingaris Kunz and Sean Everett Kunz , 362 Meridian Dr., Redwood City 94065; 222 Hartstene Dr., Redwood City 94065, The Preserve ID 114-680-040, $1,850,000. 

Stanley Eng to Marshall Dunn Blair and Meredith Milbank Mell Dunn , 1035 California Dr., Burlingame 94010; 1305 California Dr., Burlingame 94010, Burlingame Grove ID 026-083-040, $1,825,000. 

Boris Kagarlitskiy and Svetlana Volovik to Mayya Brener and Boris Brener ,120 Dover Ct., San Bruno 94066, Crestmoor Park ID 019-083-150, $1,807,000. 

Rigo Maldonado and 2001 Emilio and Amalia Maldonado to Brian Patrick Dunn and Adriana Walter Marcial , 225 Lynton Ave., San Carlos 94070, Devonshire Properties ID 049-093-220, $1,775,000. 

Anthony J. Mariucci and David M. Mariucci and Mariucci Family Living Trust to Kathryn Medina and Pratik Gadamasetti ,2926 Briarfield Ave., Redwood City 94061, Sterling Heights ID 058-356-090, $1,730,000. 

Pedro Brown Jr. and Olivia Sahagun to Ghazal Izadi and Seyedmohammadhadi Shafaatian , 586 Marlin Ct., Redwood City 94065, Marlin Subd. ID 095-090-330, $1,720,000. 

Daniel L. James and Alice W. James to Zeffren E. Zarate and Jenny L. Zarate ,33 Le Havre Place, Half Moon Bay 94019, Frenchmans Creek ID 048-383-090, $1,690,000. 

John F. Scarpace and Joanne A. Scarpace and Arleen Mary Beviacqua Rlt et al. to Jennifer Vella and Christopher Vella , 1751 Parkview Dr., San Bruno 94066, Park View Terrace ID 020-343-040, $1,662,000. 

Michael D. Enfield and Eleanor A. Enfield to Jahangir Ramezanbeigi and Mina Ramezanbeigi and Ramezanbeigi 2005 Trust ,901 Lurline Dr., Foster City 94404; 1520 S. Delaware St., San Mateo 94402, ID 035-073-100, $1,625,000. 

Shan Guo and Trust of Shan Guo to Yucheng Yang ,1518 Keoncrest Dr., Berkeley 94702; 444 Helen Dr., Millbrae 94030, Tract 562 Meadowglen ID 021-341-150, $1,610,000. 

Faiz Merchant and Zainab Merchant and Zainab and Faiz Merchant 2019 to Kai W. Lee and Adeline Tam Lee and Garrick M. Lee , 2882 Saratoga Dr. #B3, San Mateo 94403; 2882 Saratoga Dr., San Mateo 94403, ID 123-890-030, $1,609,000. 

Susan Ann Johnson and Miller Family Living Trust and William George Miller Living Trust et al. to Benjamin Y. Park and Kay Kyung N. Park and The Park Family Trust , 1425 Greenwood Ave., San Carlos 94070; 1200 Belmont Ave., San Carlos 94070, White Oaks ID 051-362-010, $1,600,000. 

Zachary C. Segal and Emily C. Shao and Shao Segal Family Revocable Trust to Salofi Tautuaa and Lovely Tautuaa , 4 Gardenia Ct., East Palo Alto 94303, Tract 589 Palo Alto Gardens ID 063-551-350, $1,599,000. 

Huizhong Duan and Zhen Wu to Yinghao Wang and Dan Dong , 3 Buccaneer Ln., Redwood City 94065, The Cove at California Bayside ID 113-350-060, $1,587,000. 

Cathy Tsou to Sheng Zong Zhao and Yingxia Huang ,172 Windsor Dr., Daly City 94015, Westlake ID 002-128-120, $1,580,000. 

Yunkun Zhou to Guanqing Yan and Yuting Wang ,1310 Huron Ave., San Mateo 94401, Shore View Tract ID 033-192-020, $1,580,000. 

Stanley P. Tan and Lee Bailey and Tan Leo Living Trust to Aydin Mohamad Abdollahian and Elizabeth Abdollahian Kelsey , 739 Grimswood Ct., San Jose 95120; 35 Rockford Ave., Daly City 94015, Westlake ID 008-433-180, $1,560,000. 

Kin Y. Lee and Betty M. Lee to Allie Bennett and The Bennett Family Living Trust and The Cynthia Chaw Revocable Trust et al. , 119 Cypress St., Pacifica 94044, Cypress Walk ID 009-680-830, $1,560,000. 

Kristy Ying Er Mo to Johnson Huang and Thi Ha Nhi Huang , 1488 S. Mayfair Ave., Daly City 94015, West Lake ID 008-041-120, $1,530,000. 

Mark J. Mosely to Glen Scott Giese and Jennifer Ann Giese , 416 Greenbrier Rd., Half Moon Bay 94019, Greenbrier ID 066-470-070, $1,527,000. 

Peter Shugar and Kathleen Shugar 2012 Irrevocable Trust to Trevor James Rainey , 150 Tehama Ct., San Bruno 94066, Portola Highlands ID 017-402-330, $1,500,000. 

Shirley L. Gurnett and The Gurnett 2004 Family Trust to Greg Hentzel and Theresa Hentzel , 441 Kehoe Ave., Half Moon Bay 94019, St. John Subd. ID 048-294-280, $1,475,000. 

Mark J. Boscarino and Becka L. Boscarino to Hai Dang Tran , 3925 Oneill Dr., San Mateo 94403, San Mateo Village ID 040-211-310, $1,475,000. 

Flyhomes Investments CA LLC to Hui Pek Chun and Ziying Tan , 178 Elmira St., San Francisco 94124; 1100 Live Oak Way #1103, Belmont 94002, Cambridge ID 123-470-110, $1,470,000. 

Terry Richard Allen and Gloria E. Allen Trust to SF21G LLC , 26880 Aliso Viejo Pkwy. #100, Aliso Viejo 92656; 624 Myrtle St., Redwood City 94061, Central Park ID 058-194-070, $1,450,000. 

Richard E. Haywood and Susan A. Haywood and The Richard and Susan Haywood Trust to Dominic Y. Lung and Kristine C. Lung , 156 Park Place, Millbrae 94030, Capuchino Golf Corp. ID 021-113-580, $1,450,000. 

Philip Charles Kincer and Sylvia Lee Kincer to Dominic Giovannetti and Danielle Giovannetti , 432 W. 20th Ave., San Mateo 94403, Polo Club Subd. ID 039-024-180, $1,415,000. 

Cesar Arreola and Laura C. Arreola and Arreola Family Trust to Aaron J. Newman and Jessica M. Mccartney ,545 Alvarado St., Brisbane 94005, ID 007-391-070, $1,385,000. 

Ilan Volman and Yanina Volman to Daniel Crawford and Carol Hsu , 1035 Anza Dr., Pacifica 94044, Tract 686 Linda Mar ID 022-162-200, $1,380,000. 

Daniel J. Linehan and Patricia Linehan to Jiajun Lim , 201 Valencia Dr., Millbrae 94030; 708 Sycamore Ave., San Bruno 94066, Mills Park ID 020-053-360, $1,380,000. 

Margaret C. Mcaleer to Justin L. Lo , 225 9th Ave. #327, San Mateo 94401, Nazareth Plaza ID 123-540-450, $1,350,000. 

William Hesselberg and The Anna Marie Nelson Living Trust to Joann Semones and Julia I. Barrow , 2 Bayhill Place, Half Moon Bay 94019, Bayhill Place ID 066-480-010, $1,350,000. 

Samuel Pilli and Sunita Pilli and The Mohanrao Revocable Living Trust to Haidong Wu and Christine Hong Peng , 315 Paramount Dr., Millbrae 94030; 1449 Jenevein Ave., San Bruno 94066, ID 020-264-030, $1,320,000. 

Alejandro Salazar and Karen Chu and Salazar Chu Living Trust to Arun Kishore and Ai Hiyama Kishore , 3300 Kimberly Way, San Mateo 94403, Laguna Vista ID 040-440-480, $1,316,000. 

Linda M. Ballintine to Joseph Mitchell and Robert Mitchell , 161 Fernwood Dr., San Bruno 94066, Rollingwood ID 017-182-260, $1,310,000. 

Michael F. Lawrence and Andrea Stuewe Lawrence to Jeffrey Sean Wilcox , 1140 Banyan Way, Pacifica 94044, Linda Mar ID 023-482-190, $1,300,000. 

Carolyn M. Burgess and Carolyn M. Burgess Living Trust to Aruna Subba and The Jackson and Subba Family Trust , 2935 San Juan Blvd., Belmont 94002; 804 N. Claremont St., San Mateo 94401, Studio Tract ID 032-133-200, $1,300,000. 

Charles Leonetti and Tina Leonetti and Charles and Tina Leonetti Living Trust to Shenu Lo and Elaine Qian and Vivian Lo , 28 Lindbergh St., San Mateo 94401, Shore View Tract ID 033-194-060, $1,300,000. 

Sharon A. Briar Garner and Richard D. Garner to El Dumbo Village LLC , 149 Barkentine St., Foster City 94404; 2757 El Camino Real/768 Bain Place, Redwood City 94061, Dumbarton Oaks ID 054-276-230/054-276-100, $1,275,000. 

Alta Home Buyers LLC to Joseph Bumbaca and Michelle Bumbaca and Adele Bumbaca et al. , 616 Ocean View Ave., San Mateo 94401, Shore View Tract ID 033-273-060, $1,270,000. 

Patrick J. La Grille and Roseanna E. Garcia La Grille to Mozhgan Farshbaf and Allen Forsman Barley , 101 Prague St., San Mateo 94401, Shore View Tract ID 033-181-120, $1,258,000. 

Ronald Wong and Maily Wong to Joceyln Aquino and Rudy Aquino , 36 Moonlight Ct., South San Francisco 94080, Sunrise ID 091-581-190, $1,250,000. 

Hamilton Investors Bayport LLC to 1021 Howard Owner LLC , 801 Hamilton St., Redwood City 94063; 1320/1360/1390 Bayport Ave., San Carlos 94070, ID 046-191-070/046-191-080/046-191-020, $33,000,000. 

Robert I. Feirman Trustee to Meredith Bushnell and The Josselyn Lane Trust ,101 California St. #3800, San Francisco 94111; 215 Josselyn Ln., Woodside 94062, ID 072-052-140, $13,500,000. 

Steven M. Mankoff and Suzanne B. Mankoff and Mankoff Family Trust to Cayman Seacrest and Vannessa Seacrest , 1840 Brookvale Rd., Hillsborough 94010, ID 028-120-200, $10,250,000. 

Anthony P. Adamis and Mary K. Adamis and Adamis Family Trust to Frederic Fenton and Amy Fenton and Fenton Family Revocable Trust , 28 Mountain Wood Ln., Hillsborough 94010, Stonebridge ID 034-311-250, $7,100,000. 

Joseph Lurie Alexander and Kristin Leigh Vogelsong and Lurie Ogelsong Revocable Living Trust to Peter Hebert and Gabriela Hebert and The 2012 Hebert Family Trust , 755 Hermosa Way, Menlo Park 94025, Hermosa Tract ID 071-241-030, $6,600,000. 

Roland J. Schemers and Lindsay R. Schemers and The Schemers Family Trust to Myles Grant and Erin Grant , 236 Park Ave., San Carlos 94070; 135 Woodside Dr., Woodside 94062, Tract 513 Woodside Hills ID 069-044-160, $6,250,000. 

Linda Marie Simi and Matthew Michael Simi and Lsms2016 Living Trust et al. to Eric Colson and Donna Colson , 245 Chapin Ln., Burlingame 94010, Burlingame Park ID 028-313-050, $4,500,000. 

Olives Burlingame LLC to Brian K. Tse and Bethany H. Fong , 472 Edgewood Rd., San Mateo 94402, San Mateo Park ID 031-081-110, $4,125,000. 

Portola Valley Road LLC to Albert F. Scigliano and Marie L. Scigliano and Gina L. Scigliano Living Trust et al. , 850 Portola Rd., Portola Valley 94028, Sausal Creek Associates LLC ID 076-261-180, $4,100,000. 

Albert E. Combatalade and Ruth Larsen Scammon 1995 Revocable to 70 S. Linden LLC , 1939 Newcomb Ave., San Francisco 94124; 70 S. Linden Ave., South San Francisco 94080, ID 014-102-080, $3,800,000. 

Charlees F. Vestner and Mary Grayson Tribaut and Vestner Thibaut Living Trust to Angelina Hendraka and Steven Kim , 1361 Bernal Ave., Burlingame 94010, Easton Addition ID 026-058-060, $3,700,000. 

Dennis Wagner to Paramjit Singh Lalia and Lalia Manprit , 2101 Valparaiso Ave., Menlo Park 94025, ID 074-062-300, $3,535,000. 

Gordon C. Holterman and Khristine L. Holterman to Doris Y.M. Wang and Vivian S.M. Wang et al. , 300 24th Ave., San Mateo 94403, San Mateo Villa Park ID 039-142-310, $3,488,000. 

Herbert R. Neuman and Linda L. Neuman to Mahdi Ben Hamida and Sameh Boujelbene and The Benhamida Family Trust ,858 Corriente Point Dr., Redwood City 94065, Laguna Pointe ID 095-370-680, $3,400,000. 

Mvcj LLC to Michelle Zhehua Xu , 460 Sherwood Way, Menlo Park 94025, Linfield Oaks ID 062-404-070, $3,215,000. 

Vincent S. Keelan and Elizabeth M. Keelan to Jesus Cepero and Karen Ann Cepero , 11 Bennett Rd., Redwood City 94062, Cordilleras Heights ID 058-462-030, $3,150,000. 

Charles L. Griffith III and Jane R. Griffith and Griffith Revocable Trust to Ananth Kadambi and Saroja Ramanujan and Kadambi Ramanujan Family Trust ,716 W. Capistrano Way, San Mateo 94402, Parrott Park ID 034-132-160, $2,900,500. 

Jeffrey Scott King and Michael Lawrence King and King 1992 Revocable Trust to Edward H. Lechner and Linda M. Lechner , 4221 Wooster Ave., San Mateo 94403, Laurel Heights ID 042-172-140, $2,851,000. 

David Crouch to Qixiu Hu and Yuqi Lin , 1049 Almanor Ave., Menlo Park 94025, Newbridge Park ID 062-051-370, $2,850,000. 

Christopher James to Amit Thomas Joseph and Brett Jordan Schilke , 356 Topaz St., Redwood City 94062, Jefferson Avenue Addition ID 058-124-050, $2,800,000. 

Richard K. Falk and Lydia A. Falk and Falk Family Revocable Trust to Eric S. Mellum and Jennifer Dare Smith Mellum ,784 Coronado Ln., Foster City 94404, Tract 23-73 Bayporte ID 094-501-220, $2,771,500. 

Jason Meyer and Julia Ann Graves Meyes to Salvatore A. Santino and Wendy Michelle Froehlich Santino ,120 Rosilie St., San Mateo 94403, Meadowood ID 040-431-290, $2,550,000. 

Richard Souter and Mary Souter and Souter Family Trust to Trevor Wilson and Megan Wilson , 375 Summit Dr., Emerald Hills 94062, Emerald Lake Park ID 057-162-450, $2,500,000. 

LF George Properties Corp. to 101 ElCaminoReal LLC ,840 Hawthorne Way, Millbrae 94030; 101 El Camino Real, Millbrae 94030, ID 104-710-010, $2,500,000. 

Gregory L. Wenzel and Leslie J. Wenzel and The Wenzel Family Trust to Minhao Jiang and Xiyu Liu , 515 Pitcairn Dr., Foster City 94404, Tract 42-75 Pitcairn ID 094-792-200, $2,460,000. 

Christopher Matthew Green and Catherine K. Ho Green to Rosemary Chenhsing Hua and Christopher John Castillo , 1580 La Honda Rd., Woodside 94062, Portola Hills ID 075-103-090, $2,350,000. 

Charles Robert Fish Jr. and Jeanine Fish to Aurangzeb Mahmood and Sahar Aurangzeb , 190 Turnberry Rd., Half Moon Bay 94019, Turnberry ID 066-490-550, $2,300,000. 

Nancy Russell and Russell Revocable Trust to Oren Abrams and Mychal Leah Werner , 121 Somerset St., Redwood City 94062, A Wellesley Park ID 052-052-340, $2,300,000. 

Greenery Holdings SFP LLC to Maxwell Olson and Celeste Holz Schietinger ,2441 Coronet Blvd., Belmont 94002, Belmont Country Club Properties ID 044-271-250, $2,240,000. 

Cameron Mcintosh and Mcintosh Separate Property Trust to Laura Feinstein and James Chandler , 342 E. Bellevue Ave., San Mateo 94401, Leadley Terrace ID 032-184-050, $2,212,500. 

Kurt M. Oppenheimer and Susan Ghosin Oppenheimer to Joshua J. Miller and Carla Camille Pedersen , 632 Palomar Dr., Redwood City 94062, ID 051-022-350, $2,200,000. 

David Dubinski to Susan Sweeney Prohaska , 101 Laurel Ave., Menlo Park 94025, ID 062-351-050, $2,200,000. 

Hugo Christopher Frederic Byron and Kirsty Suzanne Elms Byron to Matthew Doran Fox and Ariana Irene Schiff , 116 Foxwood Rd., Portola Valley 94028, ID 080-092-150, $2,120,000. 

Geoffrey Lynch and Gail Lynch Trust to Mohammad Habib Ranginwala and Farah Suglatwala , 215 Oakdale St., Redwood City 94062, A Wellesley Park ID 052-062-060, $2,100,000. 

Jing Liu and Yu Xiang to Serguei A. Platonov and Irina A. Platonova , 5445 S. Westridge Dr., New Berlin, Wis. 53151; 32 Jenna Ln., Half Moon Bay 94019, ID 056-072-120/056-072-280, $2,050,000. 

Douglas Klein and Scott C. Neely Revocable Trust to Evan D. Rothschild and Allyson Ilene Morris , 851 Whitehall Ln., Redwood City 94061, Kentfield Commons ID 059-401-140, $2,025,000. 

B. Pamela Burleson and Charles E. & Opal W. Burleson Living to Chun Jin Yu , 1175 Fernwood Dr., Millbrae 94030, Millbrae Meadows ID 021-043-020, $2,000,000. 

Beom Im Chang and Wha Seo Yeun to Timothy John Brodeth and Jenece S. Brodeth , 1101 Wayne Way, San Mateo 94403, Bay Meadows ID 040-510-120, $1,989,000. 

Rosemary Scanlan and Rosemary Scanlan Revocable Trust to Vincent Ko , 1588 Columbus Ave., Burlingame 94010, ID 027-141-410, $1,966,000. 

Susanna Toth Licko and Gizella T. Megyesi 2000 Revocable Trust to Srikanth Puranam and Ananthi Puranam and Abhijickrishma V. Puranam , 1626 Connecticut Dr., Redwood City 94061, Woodside Terrace ID 069-122-040, $1,950,000. 

Angela Oudiz Trustee to Yichen Qiu and David Park ,1075 Park Place #312, San Mateo 94403; 1530 Kalmia St., San Mateo 94402, Elmwood ID 034-411-120, $1,940,000. 

Rywick Properties LLC to Eli Peer and Carissa Harper Peer , 324 Emerald Ave., San Carlos 94070, White Oaks Tract ID 051-228-030, $1,940,000. 

Anthony Lee and Patricia Kuang to Mircea Grecu , 663 Birch Ave., San Mateo 94402, Sunnybrae ID 035-013-480, $1,900,000. 

Emily Marent and Marent Marital Trust to Jinfei Zhang , 702 Allerton St., Redwood City 94063, Town Of Mezesville ID 052-283-120, $1,800,000. 

Miguel Carrero Collantes and Bettina Oswald to Sungjoon Cho and Inyoung Lee , 80 Edgewood Place, Belmont 94002, ID 044-390-190, $1,800,000. 

Alan W. Budenz Trustee to Scott Schafebook , 115 Westline Dr., Daly City 94015, Westlake ID 009-582-490, $1,780,000. 

Ryan Holcomb and Chiaki Holcomb to Jiayi Zhang ,1871 Anamor St., Redwood City 94061, Anamor Tract ID 059-223-100, $1,750,000. 

Jadwiga Mosbauer and Mosbauer Family Revocable Trust to Chunhui Gan and Hoang Tran , 79 Cliffside Dr., Daly City 94015, Westlake ID 002-021-060, $1,750,000. 

Margaret Lafon and Francis E. and Margaret Lafon 1992 T to Matthew Wade Allen and Kain Hagey Mackenzie ,1411 Oak St., San Mateo 94402, Elmwood ID 034-402-290, $1,750,000. 

Maia L. Sherrill and Mark K. Weisbarth to Sang Jun Lee and Jina Kim , 223 Hedge Rd., Menlo Park 94025, Tract 560 Suburban Park ID 055-272-190, $1,740,000. 

Steven B. Barnett and Millie M. Barnett to Chase Ruppert and Heather Ruppert West , 1251 Lerida Way, Pacifica 94044, Linda Mar ID 023-581-360, $1,710,000. 

Travis G. Evans to Katherine Mary Suzuki and Kristofer Hanneson Hatch , 319 Hedge Rd., Menlo Park 94025, Tract 560 Suburban Park ID 055-303-160, $1,705,000. 

Yanbin Wang and Baoqing Huang and Wang Huang Family Trust to Thomas Kamtim Lo and Candice Hoi Yung Tang and Lo Tang Family Trust , 3824 King Ln., San Mateo 94403; 3826 King Ln., San Mateo 94403, Laurel Square ID 042-162-100, $1,700,000. 

Christina Bormann Chung and Philip Chung et al. to Wang Ng To and Ying Yan Tai , 10 Tulip Ln., San Carlos 94070, La Ventana ID 049-470-200, $1,685,000. 

A.E. & E.S. Development Corp. and A.E. & ES Inc. to Martha Ying Zhao , 4785 Pine Forest Ln., San Jose 95118; 471 Hansen Dr. #T6, San Mateo 94403, Bay Meadows ID 123-990-060, $1,665,000. 

Javier J. Martinez and Sandra Gomez Martinez to Hee Don Chae and Eun Kyong Chae Suh , 267 Hedge Rd., Menlo Park 94025, Tract 560 Suburban Park ID 055-303-020, $1,665,000. 

Htike Nay Lin and The Lin H. Nay Family Trust to Jun Wen Du and Wanting Wu ,252 Sunshine Dr., Pacifica 94044, Fairmont ID 009-431-130, $1,655,000. 

David M. Chiechi and Dianne A. Chiechi to Jia Sun and Runjie Lei , 2323 Holland St., San Mateo 94403, Westshore ID 035-401-220, $1,650,000. 

Michael Gentsch to Shaun M. Post and Sarah Marie Presotto Post and Post Living Trust , 350 G St., Redwood City 94063, Lot 9 Block 9 Cordilleras ID 052-102-100, $1,573,500. 

Paula N. Belloni to Khanna Andisamy Vijayakumar Kamesh and Nichole Sherebernikoff , 178 San Pedro Rd., El Granada 94019, El Granada Highlands ID 047-181-680, $1,550,000. 

Raymond L. Neal and Nicole M. Neal to Rajesh Shetty and Sona Shetty , 311 Haight St., Menlo Park 94025, Menalto Park ID 062-215-060, $1,521,000. 

Sanjeet Hajarnis and Anuradha Pradhan to An Huy Nguyen and Muoi Ho and Jessica Ngoc Lieu ,323 S. 3rd Ave. #B, Arcadia 91006; 1024 Ocean View Ave., Daly City 94014, Wellington ID 003-490-060, $1,515,000. 

Susan R. Scott to Vladyslav Spichek and Zoryna Verbova , 1213 Chantel Way, Redwood City 94061; 1213 Chantel Way #6, Redwood City 94061, Greenhouse Garden Condominiums ID 111-870-060, $1,500,000. 

Thomas J. Nelson Jr. and Aileen K. Nelson to Tod Ong Hing and Maria Mei Li Yap , 811 S. Eldorado St., San Mateo 94402, ID 033-292-200, $1,500,000. 

Cecilia Sosnowski and Armstrong 1999 Trust to Noah D. Boyens and Brandy M. Kuentzel and Boyens Kuentzel Revocable Trust ,147 Berendos Ave., Pacifica 94044; 312 Keith Ave., Pacifica 94044, Vallemar ID 018-124-030, $1,455,000. 

Emil Sadykhov and Viktoriya Dostal to Tiffany Ching Lam Yuen and William Major , 63 Fairmont Dr., Daly City 94015, Westlake ID 002-084-100, $1,450,000. 

Barbara Niss Trustee to Andrew Brown and Kristina Lee , 1205 Birch Ave., San Mateo 94402, Sunnybrae ID 035-065-340, $1,450,000. 

Ricky G. Paras and Ricky G. Paras Trust to Win Naing and Thandar Lwin , 370 W. Meadow Dr., Palo Alto 94306; 6 Washington St., Daly City 94014, The School House Homestead ID 006-367-080, $1,440,000. 

Robert D. Fitzwilliam and Christine J. Birchwood to Christine Kao and Kumi Kao and Sheen Shiu Kao ,917 Oakes St., East Palo Alto 94303, Tract 98 Ravenswood Villages ID 063-674-190, $1,435,000. 

Charlene Anne Johnson and Thomas & Charlene Johnson Survivors to Casey B. West and Veronica West ,2212 Armada Way, San Mateo 94404, Mariners Island ID 035-522-790, $1,425,000. 

Ricky Chan and Janet H. Chan to Simon Lee and Pei Wang Yu , 20 Eastgate Dr., Daly City 94015, Westlake ID 002-132-220, $1,420,000. 

Marcia L. Zakrajsek Trustee to Vincent Yeh and Jennifer Wong , 601 Mendocino Way, Redwood City 94065, The Manors ID 112-610-060, $1,410,000. 

Ritamarie Downey and The Joseph Lombardi Trust to Kathy Tan and David Tran et al. , 210 Canterbury Ave., Daly City 94015, Serramonte ID 091-171-350, $1,390,000. 

Christopher Douglas Davey and Renae Joan Langlois to Vanessa Lemahieu and Vanessa Lemahieu Revocable Trust , 102 Nueva Ave., Redwood City 94061, The Lee Tract ID 059-102-080, $1,385,000. 

SEPTEMBER 17–23, 2021  45 E M P LOY M E N T LU X U RY L I V I N G 

Twilio, Inc. has the following opportunities in 

San Francisco, CA (Telecommuting Permitted) :· Sr. Product Designer (Req. #20-9916) : Design products that provide a simple, intuitive experience for non-technical audiences to set up, connect sources & destinations. Req’s: MS(or equiv.) Or BS(or equiv.)+5 yrs. exp. · Sales Compensation Reporting & Analytics Mgr. (Req. #20-10825) : Act as an organizational subject matter expert for Tableau, Xactly Analytics, Salesforce & other Enterprise-level reporting systems & tools. Req’s: MS(or equiv.)+1 yr. exp. · Staff, Product Mgr. (Req. #21-1037) : Builds/owns homegrown API migrations w/ 3rd party vendors pro-

cessing highly confidential financial information. Travel to HQ office in San Francisco, CA may be req’d. Req’s: 

MS(or equiv.)+4 yrs. exp Or BS(or equiv.)+6 yrs. exp. · Security Analyst, Information Security Compliance (Req. #19-7952) : Support evidence collection & docu-mentation in support of internal & external audits. Req’s: MS(or equiv.)+2 yrs. exp Or BS(or equiv.)+5 yrs. exp. · Product Designer (L3) (Req. #21-2184) : Design experience of Twilio’s platform used by marketers to engage customers. Req’s: MS(or equiv.)+2 yrs. exp. Education, experience & criminal background checks will be conducted. Mail resume w/ ref. to Req.# at: ATTN: Global Mobility Specialist, Twilio, 101 Spear St., 

San Francisco CA 94105. 

Salesforce.com, Inc. has the following jobs available in San Francisco, CA. Telecom-muting is an option :· Sr. Technical Consultant (Req.# 20-11387) : Formulate & analyze customer sftwr needs & deliver solutions to complex problems in programs & systms w/ both customer 

& third-party partners. Some travel to Salesforce offices & various, unanticipated work -sites throughout U.S. may be required. Req’s: Req’s: MS(or equiv.)+3 yrs. exp. Or BS(or equiv.)+5 yrs. exp. · Sr. Manager, Technical Consulting (Req.# 17-3469) : Advise & mentor diverse teams, 

which include customer & partner resources in technical & functional delivery aspects 

at program level. Some travel to Salesforce offices may be required. Up to 50% travel 

req’d to client sites. Req’s: MS(or equiv.)+4 yrs. exp. Or BS(or equiv.)+6 yrs. exp. · Program Architect (Req.# 20-7768) : Dvlp solutions cross cloud including Salesforce products. Collaborate directly w/ clients to architect technology solutions. Some travel to 

Salesforce offices may be required. Up to 50% travel req’d. Req’s: MS(or equiv.)+4 yrs. 

exp. Or BS(or equiv.)+6 yrs. exp. · Business Architect (Req.# 21-2721) : Co-create personalized plan that aligns cor-

porate goals, possibilities, key biz measures/KPIs & a practical implementation path. Some travel to Salesforce offices & various, unanticipated worksites throughout U.S. 

may be req’d. Req’s: MS(or equiv.)+3 yrs. exp. Or BS(or equiv.)+5 yrs. exp. · Sr. Manager, Technical Consulting (Req.# 18-7008) : Serve as Strategic Advisor & 

Salesforce product & platform expert to company’s largest, most complex enterprise customers. Some travel to client sites & Salesforce offices may be req’d. Req’s: MS(or 

equiv.)+4 yrs. exp. Or BS(or equiv.)+6 yrs. exp. · Sr. Signature Success Engineer – (Tier 2) (Req.# 20-3583) : Solve highly visible, technical, global & strategic, enterprise cases & ensure highest levels of customer satis -

faction w/ exposure to all skill groups/areas of product/platform. Some travel to Sales -

force offices may be req’d. Req’s: MS(or equiv.)+3 yrs. exp. Or BS(or equiv.)+5 yrs. exp. 

· Sr. Threat Detection Engineer (Req.# 20-2495) : Responsible for providing security monitoring services & capabilities to enable both internal security teams as well as cus-

tomer’s security teams to identify Security Incidents. Some travel to Salesforce offices may be req’d. Req’s: PhD(or equiv.) Or MS(or equiv.)+2 yrs. exp. Mail resume w/ ref. to: (include Req. No.) at: Salesforce.com HQ, Rincon Post Office PO Box #192244, San Francisco, CA 94105. Salesforce.com is an Equal Opportunity & Affirmative Action Employer. Education, experience & criminal background checks will 

be conducted. 

target first-class candidates 

> Contact Kathy Biddick | 415-288-4925 | kbiddick@bizjournals.com

Stitch Fix, Inc. has the following opportunities in 

San Francisco, CA (Telecommuting permitted) :· Lead Product Designer, Customer Facing (Req# 20-6963) : Lead & execute on top-notch consumer UX solutions by planning & managing own work. Req’s: MS(or equiv.) +5 yrs. exp. Or BS(or equiv.) +7 yrs. exp. · Compensation Associate (Req# 20-11425) : Lean into a broad scope of work that includes salary & equity programs, rewards & recognition & executive compen-sation. Req’s: BS(or equiv.) +2 yrs. exp. Mail resume w/ ref. (include Req. #.) at: ATTN: Corinna Lee, Mgr., People Ops., Stitch Fix, Inc., 1 Montgomery St., Ste. 1500, San Francisco, CA 94104. 

DoorDash, Inc . has the following job opportunities in 

San Francisco, CA (Telecommuting Permitted) :· Sr. Technical Program Manager (Req.#20-8830) :Drive infrastructure stability initiatives, common ser-vices adoption & integration initiatives. Req’s: MS(or equiv.)+3 yrs. exp. · Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer (Req.#21-2665) :Lead data warehouse reqs gathering, design, analysis & infrastructure maintenance to best support rapidly evolving products & challenges. Req’s: MS(or equiv.)+3 yrs. exp. Or BS(or equiv.)+5 yrs. exp. · Software Engineer (Req.#20-2941) : Dvlp & main-tain company’s cutting-edge software platform. Req’s: MS(or equiv.)+5 yrs. exp. · Manager, DoorDash Drive, Grocery (Req.#20-7812) :

Conduct research projects into financial & operational 

drivers of businesses focusing on Grocery biz vertical. Req’s: BS(or equiv.)+2 yrs. exp. Mail resume w/ ref. to (include Req. # for position ap-plying to) at: ATTN: HR, DoorDash, 303 2nd St., Ste 800, South Tower, San Francisco, CA 94107. 

3+BR • 2BA • $1,995,000 ⊲ OPEN SUN 2-4:00PM ⊳

25 PLAZA DRIVE, BERKELEY 

New Listing! Cozy, convenient Craftsman style abounds with “Old Berkeley” charm, updated kitchen and baths. Sunroom/office overlooking secluded garden with art studio. Family room, bedroom/bath on main level, level-in! Near BART, dining, pool/tennis clubs! A+ Claremont location! 

CalDRE #00988354 O: 510.652.2133/426 | C: 510.220.6373 Fkeogh@grubbco.com | FayeKeogh.com Faye Keogh 

25PlazaDr.com 

Software Engineers (Multiple Positions) Pinterest, Inc. has career opportunities in San Fran-cisco for Engineers includ-ing: Software, QA, Web Development, Software Developers, Database and Data Warehouse. Positions include: junior, senior, and management positions. Positions require BA/ BS, MA/MS, MBA or PhD. Multiple positions/openings. Telecommuting is permitted. Submit resume w/ ref. (in-cluding type of engineering role(s) you are applying for) to: Req: #SWE200PIN at: ATTN: Janet Tang, Global Mobility, Pinterest, Inc., 505 Brannan St., San Fran-cisco, CA 94107. 

ContextLogic Inc. dba Wish . has the following posi-tions in San Francisco, CA: Telecommuting and remote employment permitted. · Product Manager, Buyer Risk Management (Req# 20-8720) : Dsgn, dvlp & evaluate statistical models for fraud detction prdcts usig data-driven mthdolgies. · Senior Product Manager (Req# 20-8400) : Dfine prdct 

strtgy, strtgic roadmap, & projct rquirmnts while ovr-seeng excution & exprimntation analysis for anti-fraud & risk mngment prdct features. Submit resume with references (include Req# for po-sition) to ATTN: Mickey Maher, ContextLogic Inc. dba Wish, One Sansome St., 40th Floor, San Francisco, CA 94104. 

Software Engineers (Multiple Positions) Twilio, Inc. has career opportunities in San Fran-cisco, CA for Engineers including: Software, Software Developers, Machine Learning, Associate, Applica-tions, Technical Support, Security, Quality, Systems, Network, Database & Data. Positions include: Junior, Senior & Management positions. Positions require BA/BS, MA/MS, MBA or PhD. Multiple positions/open-ings. Education, experience & criminal background checks will be conducted. Telecommuting Permitted. Submit resume w/ ref. (including type of engnrng role(s) you are applying for) to: Req#: TWISPEAR 

at: ATTN: Global Mobility Specialist, Twilio, 101 Spear St., San Francisco CA 94105. 

CHIEF TECHNOLOGY 

OFFICER – As creative 

technical leader, build, 

manage, & oversee R&D teams. PhD+5y/M+8y reqd. Travel reqd 30% to dom. & int’l locations. Mail to Job #CTO, attn A. Yamashita, Cyberhaven, Inc., 345 California Ave., Palo Alto, CA 94306. 

Return to Corporation – Soft -ware Engineer – San Francisco, CA - Build & maintain a reliable 

scalable platform for ecosys -

tem-scale program analysis. Architect end-to-end systems. M+0y/B+2y reqd. Participate in on-call rotation approx. 1wk out of every 6wks, including availability to respond during off hours. Email resume to lin -

da@returntocorp.com w/ job ref #SWE-BG in subject line 

## GET RESULTS Showcase your homes in the Luxury Living section. ccrncich@bizjournals.com 

S A N F R A N C I S C O S A N F R A N C I S C O B U S I N E S S T I M E S B U S I N E S S T I M E S B U S I N E S S E XC H A N G E / S E P T E M B E R 17, 2 0 2 1 B U S I N E S S E XC H A N G E / S E P T E M B E R 17, 2 0 2 1 

46  SAN FRANCISCO BUSINESS TIMES Click here to register and see this year’s 2021 Most Influential Women REGISTER ONLINE 

bizjournals.com/sanfrancisco/event/166497/2021/most-influential-women-in-bay-area-business 

Meet the San Francisco Business Times’ Most Influential Women in Bay Area Business at an engaging and inspiring virtual awards celebration on Thursday, October 7. Hear from three special Inspire Award recipients. This year’s Inspire Awards celebrate women leaders who are champions of diversity, equity, and inclusion. Treat your team of aspiring women leaders to a Thursday afternoon, learning from and connecting with the exceptional 2021 class of Most Influential Women, who will share their wisdom, how they lead, what inspires them, and how they pay it forward. 

# THURSDAY, OCTOBER 7, 2021 | 1:00PM – 2:30PM | VIRTUAL EVENT 

TITLE SPONSORS 

PARTNER SPONSORS 

NON-PROFIT SPONSOR 

For more information, please contact Kathy Biddick at kbiddick@bizjournals.com Amy Chang 

> Board Member Marqeta, The Walt Disney Company, Procter & Gamble, SambaNova

Sandra Hernández, MD 

> President & CEO California Health Care Foundation

Quita Highsmith, MBA 

> Vice President and Chief Diversity Officer Genentech
> Sponsored by

## INSPIRE AWARDS RECIPIENTS  

> SEPTEMBER 17–23, 2021 47

48  SAN FRANCISCO BUSINESS TIMES 

# EXECUTIVE EXECUTIVE PROFILE PROFILE 

Interviews with the biggest business executives, thought leaders and changemakers in the Bay Area Interviews with the biggest business executives, thought leaders and changemakers in the Bay Area 

How did you get into the PR indus-try? In 2004, I was working as a loan officer at JPMorgan Chase and then Bank of America kind of coaxed me to work for them in the Cas-tro branch near where I lived. I had these two amazing roommates who were like family, and my life was cen-tered around this vibrant neighbor-hood where I lived and worked. But then both roommates moved away, and I realized I had not reached out beyond my comfort zone. When I had to start all over again with my social life, I determined to go out there and become part of the community of the city — not just the LGBT community. I asked every person I met for their contact info, whether they were a schoolteacher or CEO or hairstylist, and I still do that — which has turned out to be very helpful over the years. When I was working on the Pride Parade, suddenly things changed for me both personally and profes-sionally. I started my PR business by building those relationships which I still maintain today. They are more than just contacts in my phone — I really make a point of trying to know the people I meet on a human level, and to learn what they are about. So when I call them, I hope it matters to both of us. It’s not just a transaction. 

# MARK RHOADES 

# As a teenager growing up in the Central Valley town of Tracy, Mark Rhoades had his sights set on the Bay Area. But what he never imag-ined was that one day he’d be a behind-the-scenes S.F. influencer rubbing elbows with politicos, artists, estate professionals and even big-name actors. Everyone has their own path, and for Rhoades, his was one that led him to the city where he made his name though the eponymous public relations firm that he founded in 2011. Rhoades found early success as the party impresario of SF Pride by organizing its VIP kick-off soirée and continued by working with Al Pacino, whose film “Wilde Salomé” made its U.S. debut at the Castro Theatre. More recently, he managed to place the familiar honey bear icon of his artist client fnnch on no less than six maga-zine covers and help get his work in 200+ Williams-Sonoma stores nation-wide. Working through boom and bust, shutdown or ramp up, Rhoades’ San Francisco PR firm shows no signs of slowing down any time soon. 

## FOUNDER, MARK RHOADES PR SEPTEMBER 17–23, 2021  49 

passing it onto the client. You bring it up only once everything has been solved. When you do an event, you’re always very self-critical — you want it to be the best possible event, but things do happen, it’s inevitable. I learned that nobody knows what goes on behind the scenes, so don’t get stuck on what didn’t work. Just handle things and make sure every-one else is having a great time. That’s why your clients hire you. 

What would say to your 21-year-old self who was here in the city? 

Don’t be so impatient. It’s all going to work out. 

Do you have any big challenges on the horizon? The biggest challenge is once you get your client a lot of attention, which is what PR essen-tially is, then you have to maintain that success for them. That’s real-ly the hard part, preserving that image that everybody has of your client because you set them up and it worked! That’s what I think about when I’m at home in the evening, how to keep the ball rolling. I think my busi-ness is going to really take off more, especially in the fall, because peo-ple are going to realize that business-es need to let everybody know that they’re OK and they need more pro-motion. And businesses need some-body like me that’s on the phone calling the press for you with your story, amplifying the signal of what you are doing well. 

— Ted Andersen 

What’s your favorite part about the industry? I’m very passionate and I think I found my calling. I know everybody always says you have to do what you love, but I really love connecting people, helping the world learn about these amazing things my clients are accomplish-ing. A lot of people can come up with great ideas, but can you execute and manifest them? When I was working on the Pride Parade in the early days, it seemed obvious to me that major corpora-tions should recognize the power in the LGBT community and get to know the players in a friendly way — hence the LGBT VIP Pride Party. I secured sponsors like AT&T, Banana Republic and PG&E. That was a breakthrough for both sides. Those are my dream opportuni-ties, when everybody benefits from working together. 

In 10 years of running your busi-ness, what has been the most sur-prising thing you’ve learned? Ithink that the best thing I’ve learned is really using San Francisco for what it is in a good way. It has a very small-town feel to it. So, if you work hard and you do a good job and you have a good reputation, you’ll go far because it’s a small town. That said, if you do things that are unethical, you’re going to be in trouble because it’s a small town. What I also learned early on is don’t bother your clients with little details or problems. If anything goes wrong, you take care of it instead of LIPO CHING | SFBT 

> ABOUT RHOADES
> Age:
> 53
> Education:
> AA in Business from the University of San Francisco
> Residence:
> San Francisco
> On growing up in Tracy:
> “I couldn’t wait to get out. I’m definitely a city person. I love San Francisco and how it’s raised me over the years.”
> ABOUT MARK RHOADES PR
> Headquarters:
> San Francisco
> Number of employees:
> 6
> Notable clients:
> S.F.-based artist fnnch, Vanguard Properties Co-owner Frank Nolan, Interior Designer Jeff Schlarb, Sotheby’s International Real Estate agent Gregg Lynn, Stefanie Roumeliotes, founder and CEO of San Francisco-based SGR Consulting, Banana Republic, Wells Fargo, AT&T, Bloomingdale’s, Saks Fifth Avenue, Nespresso and EPI Center MedSpa.

Public relations professional Mark Rhoades set his sights on San Francisco while growing up in Tracy. Shortly after arriving, he became a pillar of the community as a natural connector of people. 50  SAN FRANCISCO BUSINESS TIMES 

I remember when and where I was the first time I heard about efforts to recall Gov. Gavin Newsom. I was walking into Costco in San Jose when I saw a couple of guys getting people to sign petitions call-ing for his ouster. It was March 2019 and Newsom had been in office for two months. Since Covid-19 was a year away, complaints about his pandem-ic response or now-infamous trip to French Laundry, where he was caught socializing without a mask, couldn’t be imagined. So why remove a guy who won the 2018 race to succeed former Gov. Jerry Brown with 61.9% of the vote — the largest margin any Democratic gubernatorial candi-date received in state history? What was so egregious about his first two months in office that it necessitated his removal? There wasn’t much news about Newsom at the time. The argu-ments against him then were the same as those made when he ran for governor; he would raise tax-es, increase regulation and gen-erally be a terrible governor. The new twist was that as governor he pulled back National Guard troops from the U.S.-Mexico border in a rebuke to then-President Trump. To recall backers, those were val-id grounds to oust him. They want-ed to see Newsom go through the same trauma as former Gov. Gray Davis, a Democrat who became the second U.S. governor recalled when ousted in 2003 and replaced by Arnold Schwarzenegger about 10 months into his second term. Davis’ recall was at least about something he did in office, primar-ily how he dealt with an energy cri-sis. It was the first to go before Cal-ifornia voters, but it wasn’t the first recall effort ever attempted. Every governor since Edmund G. Brown Sr. in 1960 — Democrat and Repub-lican — has had to deal with recalls, but other than Davis, none got 

EDITOR’S NOTEBOOK 

enough signatures to force a vote. 

There have been dozens of recall attempts 

That long list of recall attempts — 42 between Brown Sr. and Newsom (Republican George Deukmejian holds the record with 11 petition drives against him) — is a sign that the process in California is broken. To make it happen, proponents need to get signatures of only 12% of those who voted in the last elec-tion. Newsom’s case required near-ly 1.5 million signatures; recall pro-ponents ultimately gathered more than 2.1 million. In the two-step recall process, if a majority of California voters say “yes” to a recall, then whoev-er gets the most votes on the sec-ond question on the ballot wins. Schwarzenegger, with his name ID as a Hollywood heavyweight, won with 48%. But in this year’s crowd-ed field, the state’s next governor would win as long as they got one vote more than the next candidate. Then the cycle starts over again. First, claim a “rigged election” took place. Then, launch a recall peti-tion. Repeat until successful, or try again in the general election. This is no way for a state to func-tion. Estimates are that the 2021 recall election cost taxpayers $240 million — ironic since most of his rivals campaign on pledges to run the state more efficiently. There is a time and place for incumbents to stand in judgment by voters, and that’s when their terms are up and they seek reelec-tion. Barring a major issue facing an incumbent, or an act done while in office, the only reason to mount a recall is because you disagree with their politics. In my view, Newsom’s actions as governor don’t rise to the level of recall. Challenge him in the general election. Make the case for change then. But, please, spare us the nev-er-ending campaign. 

# OBSESSION WITH RECALL NEEDS TO STOP 

J. Jennings Moss is editor-in-chief and general manager of the Silicon Valley Business Journal, a sister publication. 

# VIEW VIEW POINT POINT 

The San Francisco Business Times welcomes contributions to this page The San Francisco Business Times welcomes contributions to this page Send letters and columns Send letters and columns to Editor-in-Chief Douglas Fruehling to Editor-in-Chief Douglas Fruehling at dfruehling@bizjournals.com at dfruehling@bizjournals.com 

BAY AREA MARKET PRESIDENT & PUBLISHER 

Mary Huss 

415-288-4934 | mhuss@bizjournals.com 275 Battery St., Suite 600, San Francisco, CA 94111 (415) 989-2522 | sanfrancisco@bizjournals.com 

EDITOR-IN-CHIEF 

Douglas Fruehling 

415-288-4910 dfruehling @bizjournals.com 

MANAGING EDITOR 

Jim Gardner 

415-288-4955 jgardner @bizjournals.com 

ASSISTANT MANAGING EDITOR 

Kevin Truong 

415-288-4916 ktruong @bizjournals.com 

DIGITAL EDITOR 

Ted Andersen 

415-288-4904 tandersen @bizjournals.com 

SPECIAL PROJECTS EDITOR 

Diana K. Murphy 

415-288-4933 dmurphy @bizjournals.com 

SENIOR STAFF REPORTER 

Mark Calvey 

415-288-4950 mcalvey @bizjournals.com 

STAFF REPORTERS 

Alex Barreira 

415-288-4927 abarreira @bizjournals.com 

Sarah Klearman 

415-288-4930 sklearman @bizjournals.com 

Ron Leuty 

415-288-4939 rleuty @bizjournals.com 

Laura Waxmann 

415-288-4960 lwaxmann @bizjournals.com 

RESEARCHER 

Ahalya Srikant 

415-288-4962 asrikant @bizjournals.com 

VISUAL JOURNALIST 

LiPo Ching 

415-288-4970 lching @bizjournals.com 

CREATIVE DIRECTOR 

Ian Lawson 

ilawson @bizjournals.com 

SENIOR DESIGNER 

Jason Baum 

jbaum @bizjournals.com 

DESIGNER 

Chris Almaguer 

calmaguer @bizjournals.com 

ADVERTISING DIRECTOR 

Michael Fernald 

415-288-4942 mfernald @bizjournals.com 

ASSOCIATE SALES DIRECTOR 

Corinne Crncich 

415-288-4931 ccrncich @bizjournals.com 

SENIOR MANAGER, MAJOR ACCOUNTS 

Siggi Reavis 

415-288-4928 sreavis @bizjournals.com 

SENIOR ACCOUNT EXECUTIVE 

Kierstyn Moore 

415-288-4932 kmoore @bizjournals.com 

ADVERTISING ACCOUNT EXECUTIVES 

Donna Bulford 

415-288-4938 dbulford @bizjournals.com 

Josh Tavares 

415-288-4926 jtavares @bizjournals.com 

PRODUCT ACCOUNT EXECUTIVES 

Lacey Patterson 

415-288-4961 lpatterson @bizjournals.com 

LEAD DESIGNER, ADVERTISING/ EVENTS 

Jeff Patingan 

415-288-4959 jpatingan @bizjournals.com 

EVENTS DIRECTOR 

Felicia Brown 

415-288-4936 fbrown @bizjournals.com 

OFFICE MANAGER 

Kathy Biddick 

415-288-4925 kbiddick @bizjournals.com 

ASSISTANT TO THE PUBLISHER/ PROJECT MANAGER 

Tom Thompson 

415-288-4919 tthompson @bizjournals.com Instantly dive into a year’s worth of online list data and gain access into new lists & leads as they become available over the next 12 months. Our database is continuously updated as local information changes, ensuring you have the most accurate and actionable intelligence. Get unlimited insights to the freshest data 

# Take the lead 

# BOOK OF LISTS UNLIMITED WITH 

YOUR LICENSE INCLUDES 

## 12 months of previously published list data Downloadable CSV of lists and lead information as they are published Easily integrates into most CRM systems Thousands of additional contacts not published online or in print Key players in your city and their contact information 

## Find your solution at bookoflists.com  

> SEPTEMBER 17–23, 2021 51

52  SAN FRANCISCO BUSINESS TIMES
