Title: Donald Trump's 2012 Election Tweetstorm Resurfaces as Popular and Electoral Vote Appear Divided

URL Source: https://abcnews.go.com/amp/Politics/donald-trumps-2012-election-tweetstorm-resurfaces-popular-electoral/story?id=43431536

Published Time: 2016-11-09T23:15:00Z

Markdown Content:
In 2012, Trump called the electoral college "a disaster for a democracy."

By

ADAM KELSEY

November 9, 2016, 6:15 PM ET

7 min read

— -- Though Donald Trump eclipsed the 270 electoral vote threshold early Wednesday morning, earning the Republican a concession call from Hillary Clinton and the title of president-elect, the vote count has continued through the day with results showing Clinton taking a lead in the popular vote.

The most recent election with a discrepancy between the electoral college and popular vote winner was just 16 years ago, in 2000, when then-Vice President Al Gore received a higher national vote total than George W. Bush but failed to reach the requisite electoral votes. Since then, the function of the electoral college itself has frequently been called into question and is receiving renewed scrutiny as Clinton’s total mounts.

While Democrats are likely the party perturbed by the process this year, it was Trump, supporting Republican Mitt Romney in 2012, who challenged the viability of the practice by which the president is chosen.

“The electoral college is a disaster for a democracy,” wrote Trump as part of a tweetstorm on election night 2012.

“We can't let this happen. We should march on Washington and stop this travesty. Our nation is totally divided!”

“Lets fight like hell and stop this great and disgusting injustice! The world is laughing at us.”

“This election is a total sham and a travesty. We are not a democracy!”

“Our country is now in serious and unprecedented trouble...like never before.”

“Our nation is a once great nation divided!”

In additional tweets since deleted, Trump asks why Romney should lose if he received a greater number of votes. Upon the final tally, President Barack Obama defeated Romney in both the popular vote and electoral college.

“He lost the popular vote by a lot and won the election. We should have a revolution in this country!” said Trump in one deleted tweet, and “More votes equals a loss … revolution!” in another.

The complaints from 2012 resurfaced earlier in the campaign cycle as Trump began to allege that the election would be rigged. In an interview with ABC News’ George Stephanopoulos on Oct. 26, he was probed about the tweets and said he felt the same about the 2016 election, though ascribed the “rigging” to the media rather than the electoral college.

“I think the system is rigged,” said Trump. “I think it was -- horrible the way [the prior Republican ticket was] treated in the media. The only thing worse is the way I'm being treated. Look, I'm being treated -- hey, it's record-setting bad treatment what I'm getting. It's the greatest pile-on in American history.”

Just a week ago, initial questions about the electoral college began when an elector from Washington stated he would refuse to cast his ballot for Clinton.

Robert Satiacum, who supported Bernie Sanders in the Democratic primary, said there was “no way” he would give his vote -- one of 12 in Washington -- to Clinton.

“Faithless electors” such as Satiacum are rare, but can face fines or have their votes invalidated as a result of deviating from their state’s choice. Whether or not Satiacum follows through on his claim won’t be known until electors cast their ballots on Dec. 19.

_ABC News’ Chris Donovan and Imtiyaz Delawala contributed to this report._
