Title: The Basket of Deplorables, According to Hillary Clinton

URL Source: https://www.nysenate.gov/newsroom/articles/2016/ruben-diaz/basket-deplorables-according-hillary-clinton

Markdown Content:
**What You Should Know

By Senator Rev. Rubén Díaz

32nd Senatorial District

718-991-3161**

**The Basket of Deplorables, According to Hillary Clinton**

You should know that on Friday, September 9, 2016, at a fundraiser in New York City, Former US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton described half of Donald Trump’s supporters as a “Basket of Deplorables.”

Mrs. Clinton said: “You know, to just be grossly generalistic, you could put half of Trump’s supporters into what I call the basket of deplorables. Right? The racist, sexist, homophobic, xenophobic, Islamaphobic — you name it. And unfortunately there are people like that. And he has lifted them up.”

According to her description of who belongs in that basket, I’d have to say that a lot more than half of America belongs in there, so why pick on Donald Trump supporters? Let’s go down her list.

According to Hillary Clinton, if you are a racist, you belong in the Basket of Deplorables.

If we all take a serious look into our hearts, we have to admit that most Americans fall into that category. If we look at our own communities and see how Puerto Ricans are against Dominicans, and Dominicans are against Puerto Ricans, isn’t this racist? In our own elections, if Puerto Ricans and Dominicans line up against each other, and Hispanics only vote for Hispanics, isn’t that racist?

If Black people are fighting to elect people only because they are Black, or if Jewish people are only willing to vote for Jewish candidates, isn’t that racist?

If White people reflexively vote for only White candidates and vote against Black, Hispanic or Asian candidates, isn’t that racist?

If these characterizations describe you, then you would be in Hillary Clinton’s Basket of Deplorable.

According to Hillary Clinton, if you are a sexist, you belong in the Basket of Deplorables.

You should know that if most men were honest with themselves, and thought about any time they complimented a woman because of the way she looked, or spoke with other men about their thoughts about women, they would belong in the Basket of Deplorables.

Or if you are a woman and thought about any time you complimented a man because of the way he looked, or spoke with other women about what they really think about men, they would belong on the Basket of Deplorables.

If you are pro-life, and you don’t support abortion, you are in the Basket of Deplorables.

According to Hillary Clinton, if you are a homophobe, you belong in the Basket of Deplorables.

You should know that if you oppose the legalization of gay marriage in America, you are homophobic and you belong in the Basket of Deplorables.

This would include all Americans who are faithful to the teachings of their religions that oppose marriage between a man and a man, or a woman and a woman. It would also include religious leaders who are Jewish, Christian, Catholic and Muslim and follow the fundamental teachings of their faiths that oppose homosexual marriage. All of these Americans are in the Basket of Deplorables.

According to Hillary Clinton, if you are xenophobic, you belong in the Basket of Deplorables.

Most Americans are against people coming into this country illegally, and all of those people would be labeled xenophobic, and therefore, belong in the Basket of Deplorables.

Many people in this country worry that their jobs will be taken by undocumented immigrants, and taxes will go up to pay for people who are here illegally.

This is also true in the Dominican Republic, Mexico and many other countries. People just don’t want anyone going into their country illegally.

When President Barack Obama was campaigning in 2008, he promised that if he would be elected and there was a Democratic Congress, there would be immigration reform. Even though he won, this was not done, and these problems continue to grow here in America, and more and more people get labeled xenophobic, and belong in the Basket of Deplorables.

According to Hillary Clinton, if you are Islamophobic, you belong in the Basket of Deplorables.

Most Americans don’t want Syrian refugees to come to live here, and because of this, they are automatically labeled Islamaphobic.

You should already know that Democrats and Republicans are overwhelmed with America’s homeless crisis, veteran’s crisis, as well as the housing crisis, and what to do help America’s poor and hungry children and families.

If people are honest with themselves and think about what is in their hearts about Syrian refugees coming to live in our communities, most people would belong in the Basket of Deplorables.

I am afraid that many of those deplorables are, as Hillary Clinton even said, are irredeemable.

So you see, my dear reader, more than 75 percent of American people, whether they are Donald Trump supporters or Hillary Clinton supporters, belong in the Basket of Deplorables.

Welcome to the Basket of Deplorables!

I am Senator Reverend Rubén Díaz, and this is what you should know.
