Title: DHS confirms measles in Oconto County

URL Source: https://www.peshtigotimes.com/stories/dhs-confirms-measles-in-oconto-county,284664

Published Time: 2025-08-08

Markdown Content:
By Gracelyn Giese

Editor

OCONTO COUNTY – The Wisconsin Department of Health Services (DHS) published a release on Saturday, Aug. 2, that confirmed nine cases of measles in Oconto County.

DHS stated that “One case was confirmed through testing at the Wisconsin State Laboratory of Hygiene, with eight additional cases confirmed based on exposure and symptoms.”

While no additional information will be released about these individuals due to privacy laws, DHS did confirm that all of these nine cases were exposed to a common source during out-of-state travel.

Following the communication from DHS, Oconto County Public Health published their own release on Monday, Aug. 4. They added that, “Health officials are actively investigating the outbreak, conducting contact tracing, and working with state officials and local healthcare providers to prevent further spread.”

Both organizations have confirmed that overall there is no known risk to the public.

This small string of measles in Oconto County comes after a total of 1,333 cases of measles were confirmed across the country as of July 29, according to Oconto County Public Health.

Measles spreads quickly between individuals, explained nurse practitioner Jennifer Gibbons from HSHS St. Clare Memorial Hospital Prevea Gillett Health Center.

“Measles is a highly contagious viral illness that spreads through the air when an infected person coughs or sneezes. You can get measles just by being in a room where a person with measles has been. This can happen even up to two hours after that person has left. If one person has it, up to nine out of 10 people nearby will become infected if they are not protected through vaccination,” Gibbons said.

Despite spreading quickly, symptoms typically take up to 10-21 days to appear, DHS stated.

Symptoms of measles include:

*   Runny nose
*   High fever, which may be greater than 104°F
*   Tiredness
*   Cough
*   Red, watery eyes or conjunctivitis (“pink eye”)

A red rash with raised bumps that starts at the hairline and moves to the arms and leg may develop three to five days after other symptoms begin, Gibbons added.

DHS published that, in addition to these symptoms, measles can cause a variety of serious health complications, including pneumonia, brain damage and deafness. They added that one in four people who get measles in the United States will be hospitalized.

Oconto County Public Health shared that “the best way to prevent measles is to get vaccinated with the Measles, Mumps, Rubella (MMR) vaccine. Two doses of MMR vaccine are about 97% effective at preventing measles; one dose is about 93% effective.”

DHS recommends all children receive two doses of the MMR vaccine before age four.

Additional ways that people can prevent contracting measles, according to Gibbons, includes frequent handwashing; covering the face and mouth when sneezing or coughing; and not sharing food, drinks or utensils.

Those who believe they may have contracted measles are advised by the DHS to stay home and call their doctor’s office before coming in so the office can take steps to protect all patients.

Gibbons also encouraged rest, hydration and fever management. 

Oconto County residents may contact the Oconto County Public Health office at (920) 834-7000 for more information about this ongoing investigation.

General information about measles can be found online at www.dhs.wisconsin.gov/immunization/measles.htm#prevention.
