Title: 

URL Source: https://www.nass.org/sites/default/files/surveys/2020-07/research-ballot-access-president-Jan20_0.pdf

Published Time: Sun, 31 Mar 2024 16:24:02 GMT

Markdown Content:
SUMMARY: STATE LAWS REGARDING PRESIDENTIAL BALLOT ACCESS FOR THE GENERAL ELECTION Updated January 20 20 

This document provides a summary of the laws in each state relevant to the placement of a candid ate for president on the general election ballot, and the 

requirements for a presidential candidate to run as a write -in candidate. Generally, a presidential candidate nominated by a political party that meets certain 

criteria is placed on the general elec tion ballot. Th e criteria is often based on a threshold number of votes cast at a recent election for a particular office or offices. 

A number of states provide an alternative mechanism for an organization to qualify in order to nominate cand idates, for ex ample by filing a petition or having a 

certain number of voters affiliated with the organization. Additionally, all states have a procedure for independent candidat es, and in some cases individual 

presidential candidates of a political organization, to obt ain ballot access. Most states also permit a presidential candidate to be a write -in candidate, and many of 

these states require that the candidate file a notice prior to the election. 

The summary for each state include s the timeframe s for certifying the names of the candidates for president and vice -president and the names of the presidential 

electors; the requirements for a political party to be eligible to nominate a presidential candidate; the number of signatures required on a petition in order for a 

presidential candidate to obtain ballot access ; a description of any additional ballot access methods where applicable; and the timeframes required for filing a 

notice in order to be a write -in candidate for president. 

It is important to note that the information in this document is based on a NASS review of relevant state ballot access requirements. This document is intende d to 

provide a general overview of these requirements. It is not intended as a n interpretation of those laws, or as a procedure gui de or manual for political parties or 

prospective candidates with regard to presidential ballot access . States have a variety of filings and other requirements pertaining to political parties, presidential 

candidates , presidential electors, and petitions. Additionally, ballot access laws may change at any time based on new state laws and/or court decisions. Candidates 

and political parties should contact the relevant state election office and/or legal counsel for information on the specific rules and requir ements for each state. 

Additionally, where political parties nominate a candidate, the nomination process varies greatly based on the state, the leg al status of each party, and the rules 

and procedures of each party. Individuals should contact the politica l parties for information on the party nomination process. State 

Alabama  Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a political party may be placed on the general election ballot. A political party must certify to the 

se cretary of state no later than the 82nd day next preceding the day fixed for the election the name s of the candidates for president and 

vice -president and the names of the presidential electors .

A political party is an organization of electors which recei ved more than 20% of the entire vote cast in the state at the last general election. 

An organization may also qualify as a political party by filing with the secretary of state on the date of the first primary election a petition 

containing the number of signatures equal to or exceeding 3% of electors who cast ballots for the office of governor in the last general 

election .

Petition 

An independent candidate for president may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the secretary o f state no later than 

82 days before th e election a petition containing the signatures of at least 5,000 qualified electors . The petition must be accompanied by a 

list of presidential electors. 

Write -In 

In all non -municipal elections a voter may write -in the name of any person not included on the ballot. 

(Alabama Code § § 17 -6-22, 17 -6-27, 17 -6-28 , 17 -6-29, 17 -13 -40, 17 -13 -50 , 17 -14 -31 ).

Alaska  Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a recognized political party may be placed on the genera l election ballot. A recognized pol itical 

party must certify to the division of elections no later than the 48 th day prior to the election the name of the candidates for president and 

vice -president . The political party must certify to the di rector of elec tion no later than September 1 st the names of the party’s nominees 

for presidential electors. 

A recognized political party is an organized group of voters whose candidate for governor in the last general election receiv ed at least 3% 

of the votes cast fo r that office, or whose number of registered voters is equal to at least 3% of the total votes cast for governor at the last 

general election. If the office of governor was not on the ballot at the preceding general election but the office of united states senator was, the 3% threshold applies to that office. If neither the office of governor nor the office of united states senator was o n the ballot, the 

3% threshold applies to the office of united states representative. 

A limited political party may be organized for the purpose of selecting candidates for presidential electors by filing with the director of 

elections at least 90 days before a presidential election a petition signed by a number of qualified voters equal to at least 1% of the 

number of vot es cast for president at the last presidential election. 

Independent Candidate Petition 

An independent candidate for president may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the director of elections no later 

than the 90t h day before a presidential election a petition containing the signature of qualified voters equal to at least 1% of the number 

of votes cast for president at the last general election. The candidate s must certify to the director of election s no later than September 1 st 

the name of the candidates for president and vice -president and the names of the presidential electors. 

Write -In 

A write in candidate for president must file a letter of intent with the director of elections at least 5 days before the gene ral election. 

(Alaska Stat. § § 15 -25 -105 , 15.30.020 , 15.30.025 ; 15.30.026 ; 15.80.010 )

Arizona  Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a recognized political may be placed on the general election ballot. Each recognized po litical party 

must fi le with the secretary of state no less than 90 days before the primary election the names of the party’s nomin ees for presidential 

electors. 

A recognized political party is a political organization that received at least 5% of the total vot es cast for go vernor or presidential electors 

at the last preceding general election, or a political organization entitled to continued representation by having registered voters equal to 

at least 2/3 of 1% of the total number of registered voters in the s tate. 

A polit ical organization may also become eligible for recognition as a political party by filing with the secretary of state no less than 140 

days before the primary election, or no less than 75 days prior to the presidential preference election, a petition conta ining the signatures 

of at least 1 and 1/3% of the total votes cast for governor at the last preceding general election. The petition must include signatures from 

electors in at least 5 different counties, and at least 10% of the signatures m ust be from el ectors in counties with populations less than 

500,000. Petition 

A presidential candidate who is not a member of a recognized political party may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with 

the secretary of state no less t han 60 days be fore the general election nomination papers and a petition containing the number of 

signatures equal to 3% of the registered indep endent voters in the state. The petition must include the names of the presidential electors. 

Each of the electo rs must also file nominati on papers. 

Write -In 

A w rite -in candidate for president must file nomination papers with the secretary of state no later than the 40th day prior to the el ection. 

Each of the presidential electors must also file nomination papers. 

(Ariz. Rev. Stat. §§ 16 -243, 16 -244, 16 -312 , 16 -341, 16 -344 , 16 -801 , 16 -803, 16 -804) 

Arkansas  Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a political party may be placed on the general election ballot. A political party must certify to the 

secretary of state no later than September 15 th the names of the presidential electors .

A political party is a group of voters whose candidate for governor or nominee for presidential electors at the last precedin g general 

election received at le ast 3% of the en tire vote cast for the office. A new political party may be formed by filing with the secretary of state 

no later than 45 days before the preferential primary election a petition containing the signatures registered voters in an amount that 

equals or exceeds 3% of the total votes cast for Governor in the immediately preceding general election for Governor. 

Petition 

A presidential candidate of a political group may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the secretary of state no later 

than the first Monday of August a petition containing the names of 1,000 qualified electors. The group must fil e with the secretary of state 

no later than the 75th day before the election a certificat e stating the nam e of the candidates fo r president and vice -president and must 

certify to the secretary of state no later than September 15 th a list of presidential el ectors. 

An independent presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the secretary o f state no later than 

the first Monday in August a petition containing the names of 1,000 qualified electors and certifying to t he secretary of state no later than 

September 15 th a list of the presidential electors. 

(Ark. Code Ann. §§ 7-1-101, 7-5-525 , 7-7-205, 7-8-302 ). California  Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a qualified political party may be placed on the general election ballot. A qualified political party 

generally must certify to the secretary of state no later than October 1st the names of the presidential electors. 

A qualified political party is a political party that received for an y of its candidates for statewide office at the last preceding gubernatorial 

election at least 2% of the entire vote statewide. 

A group may also qualify as a political party if on or before the 135 th day before any primary election a number of registered voters equal 

to at least 1% of the entire vote of the state at the last gubernatorial election are affiliated with the party; or , if it files with the secretary of 

state no later than 135 days prior to the primary election a petition signed by the number o f voters equal to at least 10% of the entire vote 

of the state at the last gubernatorial election. 

Petition 

An independent pre sidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with county election officials no later 

than 88 days before the election a declaration of candidacy for each of the presidential electors and nomination papers signed by the 

nu mber of voters equal to at least 1% of the entire number of registered voters in the state. The nomination papers must includ e t he 

name of the presidential electors, and may include the name of the candidates for president and vice -president .

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must have each of the presidential electors file a declaration of write -in candidacy with the s ecretary of 

state no later than 14 days before the election. 

(California Elections Code Ann. §§ 338, 5001, 5100, 6901, 7100, 711 0, 7300, 7578, 7843, 8303, 8304 , 8400, 8403(a)(2), 8451 , 8550 , 8650, 

8651, 8652, 8653 )

Colorado  Political Party Nomination 

A pr esidential candidate nominated by a major or minor political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Political parti es must 

file with the secretary of state no later than 60 da ys before the general election a certificate of nomination for presi dential electors. The 

name of the presidential candidate may be added to the certificate. 

A major political party is a politica l party that that was represented on the ballot at the last preceding gubernatorial election by a political 

party candidate or i ndividual nominee who received at least 10% of the total gubernatorial votes cast. 

A minor political party is a political party that had a candidate for statewide office in either of the last two preceding general election 

receive at least 1% of the total votes cast for any statewide office, or has 1,000 or more registered electors affiliated with the party prior to July 1 st in ei ther of the last two preceding general elections. 

A political party may also qualify as a minor political party through any of the following methods: 

- the party had a candidate for statewide office in either of the last two prec eding general elections rec eive at least five percent of 

the t otal votes cast for such office; 

- one thousand or more registered electors are affiliated wit h the minor political party prior to July 1 st of the election year for which 

the minor party seeks to nominate candidates; or 

- th e party files with the secretary of state no later than the second Friday of January a petition containing the signatures of 10, 000 

registered electors 

Petition 

An unaffiliated presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by fi ling with the secretary of state no later than 

the 90 th day before the election a petition contain ing the signatures of at leas t 5,000 eligible electors and a notice of acceptance of the 

nomination from the presidential candidate and each of the electors .

Fee 

An unaffiliated presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the secretary of s tate no later than 90 

days before the election a statement of inten t and a $500 fee. 

Write -In 

A presidential write -in candidate m ust file with the secretary of state an affidavit of intent no later than the 110th day prior to the election. 

(Colo. Rev. Sta t. §§ 1-1-104 , 1-3-100.3 , 1-4-302, 1 -4-303, 1 -4-502; 1 -4-701, 1 -4-802 ; 1-4-1101, 1 -4-1102 , 1-4-1302, 1 -4-1303, 1 -4-1304 )

Connecti cut  Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a major or minor political party may be placed on the gen eral election ballot. Political parties must 

file with the secretary of state no later than the 14th day after the close of the st ate convention the names of the nominees for 

presidential electors . A minor political party must certify the names of nominees to the secretary of state no later than the 62 nd day prior 

to the election. 

A major political party is a political party whose c andidate for governor at the last preceding election for governor received at least 20% of 

the whole number of votes cast for all candidates for governor, or, whose enrolled membership is at least 20% of the total number of 

enrolled members of all politica l parties in the state. A minor political party is a political party whose candidate for the office i n question received at th e last preceding regular election at least 

1% of the whole number of votes cast for all candidates for that office. 

Petition 

A pr esidential candidate who does not receive a nomination from a minor or major political party may obtain ballot access for the general 

election by filing with the secretary of state no later than the 90 th day prior to the election a petition containing the number of signatures 

of qualified electors equal to the lesser of 1% of the votes cast for the office at the last election, or 7,500. The names of the presidential 

electors must be included on the petition. The name s of the candidates for president and vic e-president must be fi led with the secretary of 

state at the time a petition form is requested. 

Write -In 

A presidential write -in candidate must register with the secretary of state and submit the names of the presidential electors no later than 4

o’clock pm of the 14th day preceding the election. 

(Conn. Gen. Stat. § § 9-175 , 9-372, 9-388, 9-452 , 9-453 b, 9 -453d, 9 -453i )

Delaware  Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a qualified political party may be placed on the general electio n ballot. Each eligible political party 

must file with the state election commissioner no later than September 1 st a certifica te of nomination that includes the name of the 

candidates for president and vice -president and the names of the presidential elect ors. If a party holds a national nominating convention, 

the certificate must be filed by the earlier of the Tuesday following the convention, or September 15 th .

A political party is a political organization which nominates candidates for presidential elec tors, or nominates candidates for offices do be 

decided at the general election. A political party is eligible for general ele ction ballot access if 21 days prior to the primary election the 

number of registered voters in the name of the party is equal to at least 1 0/100 of 1% of the total number of voters registered in the state 

as of December 31 st of the year immediately prece ding the general election. 

Petition 

An unaffiliated presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the state election commissioner no 

later than September 1 st a sworn declaration of non -affiliation and a nominatin g petition signed by at least 1% of the total number of 

registered voters as of December 31 st of the year immediately preceding th e general election. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file a write -in candidate declaration with the state el ection commissioner no later than September 30th. 

(Del. Code Ann. tit. 15, §§ 101 , 3001, 3002, 3301 , 3303 , 3402 )

District of Col umbia  Information not available. 

Florida  Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a political party may be placed on the general election ballot. The governor must nominate the 

presidential electors for each political party and c ertify the names of the electors to the department of state no later than September 1 st . A 

minor political party affiliated wi th a national party holding a nominating convention must certify to the department of state no later than 

September 1 st the names of the candidates for president and vice -president and the names of the presidential electors. 

A m inor political party is an y group which on January 1 st preceding a primary election does not have registered as members 5 % of the total 

registered electors of the state. 

Petition 

An unaffiliated presidential candidate, and a presidential candidate of a minor political party that is not affiliated with a national party 

holding a nominating convention, may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the department of state no later than July 

15 th a petition signed by 1% of the registered electors of the state. The par ty or candidate must file with the department of state no later 

than September 1 st the names of the presidential electors. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file an oath with the department of state and must certify the names of the presid ential electors 

no later than the 49th day prior to the primary election in the presidential election year. 

(Fla. Stat. §§ 97.021, 103.021 , 103.022 )

Georgia  Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a political party or a political body may be placed on the general election ballot. Political bodies 

that nominate presidential electors by convention must hold th e convention at least 150 days prior to the general election, or, in years 

following the release of a decennial census, 120 da ys before the election. 

A political party is a political organization that nominated a candidate for governor at the last genera l election and the candidate received 

at least 20% of the votes cast in the state for that office; or nominated a candidate fo r president at the last presidential election and the candidate received at least 20% of the vote cast for that office. 

A politi cal body is any political organization other than a political party. A political body is eligible to nominate candidates for the general 

election by convention if the political body nominated a candidate for statewide office at the preceding general electi on and the candidate 

received the number of votes equal to at least 1% of the total number of registered voters for that elect ion; or, if the political body files 

with the secretary of state no later than the second Tuesday in July a petition signed by the number of voters equal to 1% of the registered 

voters in the preceding general election. The nominating petition and notice of candida cy must be filed by the second T uesday in July. 

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate, or a presidential candi date of a politi cal body, presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for 

the general election by submitting to the secretary of state no late r than no later than the second Tuesday in July a nominating petition 

signed by 7500 registered voters eligibl e to vote in the last presidential election. 

The candidate must file wit h the secretary of state no later than the second Tuesday in J uly a notice of candidacy and a qualifying fee equal 

to 3% of the annual fee of the office . In a general e lection year f ollowing the release of a decennial census, the notice of candidacy and 

qualifying fee must be filed no later than the Friday following the last Monday in July .

An independent candidate for the of fice of President or Vice President must file with the Secr etary of State no later than the Friday before 

the opening of qualifying for the office a slate of candidates for the office of presidential elector which the independent candidate has 

certified as being the presidential electors for th e inde pendent candid ate. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate must file intention of write -in candidacy with the secretary of state no later than the Tuesday after the first Monday in 

September prior to the election and must publish notice of the candidacy in a newspap er of general circulation. 

(Ga. Code Ann. § § 21 -2-2, 21 -2-130, 21 -2-131, 21 -2-132, 21 -2-133 , 21 -2-170, 21 -2-172 , 21 -2-180 , 21 -2-185, 202 -187, 21 -2-285 )

Hawaii  Politic al Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a qualified political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Qualified political parties 

must file with the chief election officer no later than the 60 th day prior to the election a cer tification of the party’s nominees for electors, 

and a sworn application that includes th e name of the party’s candidates for president and vice -president and a statement that the 

candidate is the chosen candidate of both the state and national party. A na tional party is one that is admitted to the ballot in at least one 

state other than Hawai i or one which is determined by the chief election officer to be making a bona fide effort to become a national 

party. If there is no national party or the national an d state parties do not agree on the presidential candidate , the chief election officer 

ma y d etermine wh ich candidate’s name shall be placed on the ballot or may leave the candidate’s name off the ballot. A qualified political party is an association of vot ers which had candidates running for election at the last general election for any of the 

statewide off ices whose terms had expired, and the party received: 

- at least 10% of all votes cast for any statewide office or in at least 50% of the congressional dis tricts, or; 

- at least 4% of the votes cast for all the offices of state senator statewide, or; 

- at least 4% of the votes cast for all the office of state representative statewide, or; 

- at least 2% of the votes cast for all the offices of state senate and all the offices of state representative combined statew ide 

A group of persons may qualify as a political p arty by filing with the chief state election officer no later than the 170 th day before the next 

primary election a petition containing the signatures of at least 1/10 of 1% of the total registered voters in the state as of the last 

preceding election. 

Pe tition 

An individual presidential candidate or the p residential candidate of a party our group that is not a qualified political party may obtain 

ballot access for the general election by filing with the chief e lection officer no later than the 90 th day pr ior to the general election a

petition containing the signatures of at least 1% of the number of votes cast in the state at the last presidential electio n.

(H.R.S. §§ 11 -61b, 11 -62, 11 -113, 14 -21 )

Idaho  Political Party Nomination 

A preside ntial candidat e nominated by a political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Each political party must certify to the 

secretary of state no later than September 1 st the name s of the candidates for president and vice -president and the names of the 

preside ntial electors, unless a 5 day extension is granted by the secretary of state .

A political party is an organization of electors that had 3 or more can didates for state or national office listed under the party name at the 

last general elec tion, or had a candidate for state or national office at the last general election receive at least 3% of the aggregate vote 

cast for go vernor or presidential electors .

An affiliation of new electors may form a new political party by filing with the secr etary of state no later than August 30 th in even 

numbered years a petition containing the signatures of qualified electors equal to at least 2% of the aggregate vote c ast for presidential 

electors in the state at the previous general election at the last p residential el ection .

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the secretary of state no later than August 25 th prior to the election a petition signed by 1,000 qualified electors. The candidate mus t file with the secretary of state no later 

than September 1 st the names of the presidential electors. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file a declaration of intent with the secretary of state no later than 28 days before th e election. 

(I daho Code §§ 34 -501, 34 -702 , 34 -708A , 34 -711 ; 34 -711A) 

Illinois  Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by an established politic al party may be placed on the general election ballot. Each established 

political party m ust certify to the state board of election within 2 days of the state nominating convention the names of the party’s 

nominees for presidential electors. 

An establishe d political party is a political party whose candidate for governor at the last general e lection for st ate and county offices 

received more than 5% of the entire vote cast for governor. A political party that received more than 5% of the entire vote cast i n the state 

at the general election next preceding a primary is also an established polit ical party. 

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate, or a presidential candidate of a new political party , may obtain ballot access for the general 

election by filing with the state board of elections no less than 134 prior to the election a petiti on signed by 1 % of the number of voters 

who voted at the next preceding statewide general election or 25,000 qualif ied voters, whichever is less. The petition must inc lude the 

names of the presidential electors. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for preside nt must file a declaration of intent with the each county clerk and board of commissioners in the state no 

later than 61 days prior to the election. 

(10 Ill. Comp. Sta t. §§ 5/7/2, 5/7 -9, 5/10 -2, 5/10 -3, 5/10 -6, 5/17 -16.1 , 5/18 -9.1 )

Indiana  Political Party Nomination 

A p residential candidate nominated by a major political party or other qualified political party may be placed on the general e lection 

ballot. Political par ties must certify to the elections division no later than the second Tuesday in September the name s of the nominee s for 

president and vice -president and the names of the nominees for presidential electors. 

A major political party refers to either of the t wo political parties whose nominee for secretary of state in the last election received t he highest and second highest number of votes statewide for that office. A political party also qualifies to nominate candidate for presiden tial 

electors if its nomine e for secretary of state at the last election received at least 2% of the total votes cas t for that off ice. 

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate or a presidential candidate of a minor political party not qualified to nominate by con vention may 

obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the elections division no lat er than July 1 5 a written consent form and a petition 

containing the signatures of registered voters equal to 2% of the votes cast at the last election for secretary o f state. The name of the 

candidates for president and vice -president and the names of pre sidential elec tors must be filed with the secretary of state no later than 

the second Tuesday in September. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file a d eclaration of intent with the division of elections no later than July 3rd prior to the e lection. 

(Ind . Code §§ 3-5-2-26.6 , 3-5-2-30 , 3-8-2-2.5, 3 -8-2-4, 3 -8-2-5, 3-8-4-1, 3-8-4-2, 3-8-4-10 , 3-8-6-10, 3 -8-6-12 , 3-10 -4-1, 3 -10 -4-5)

Iowa  Political Party No mination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a political party may be placed on the ge neral election ballot. Political parties must certify to the 

secretary of state no later than the 81 st day before the election the name s of the candidate for president and vice -president and the name s

of the presidential electors. If the national nominatin g convention o f a political party adjourns later than 89 days before the general 

election the name s of the candidates for president and vice -president must be certifie d within 5 days after adjournment. As an alternative 

to certification by the state centra l committee of the political party, the certificate of nomination issued by the political party’s national 

nominating convention may be used to certify the name of the party’s candidates for president and vice -president .

A political party is a party whose candidate for president at the last presidential election, or candidate for governor at the last 

gubernatorial election, received at least 2% of the total vote cast f or all candidate for that office at that election. 

A political organization that is not a political pa rty may hold a convention or caucus to nominate a presidential candidate if a minimum of 

250 eligible electors attend, including at least one from each c ounty. The organization must certify to the secretary of state no later than 

the 81 st day before the el ection the name of the candidates for president and vice -president , the names of the presidential electors, and 

the names of the delegates in attendance at the convention or caucus. 

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate, or a presid ential candida te of a political organization that does not hold a nominating caucus or 

convention, may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the secretary of state no later than the 81 st day before the 

election an affidavit of candid acy and a peti tion signed by at least 1500 eligible electors residing in at least 10 counties of the state. The filing must include the names of the presidential elect ors. 

Write -In 

A voter may write -in the name of a candidate. 

(Iowa Code §§ 44.1, 44.2, 4 3.2, 44.4, 44. 17, 45.1 ,45.4, 49.99 , 54.5 )

Kansas  Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a recognized political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Recognized political 

parties must certify to the secretary of st ate the names of the presidential electors. The certification may also include the name s of the 

candidates for president and vice -president. 

A recognized political pa rty is a political party which nominates a person for at least one statewide office at an y general elec tion, and 

whose nominee for any statewide office receives at least 1% of the votes cast for the office at the election. 

A political party may obtain of ficial recognition by filing with the secretary of state no later than June 1 st prior to the primary el ection a 

petition containing the signatures of at least 2% of the total vote s cast for all candidates for the office of governor in the state in the last 

preceding general election .

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate may obtain ba llot access fo r the general election by filing with the secretary of state no later than 

the Monday preceding the primary election a petition signed by at least 5,000 qualified voters. The petition must include the name of the 

candidates for president and vice -presiden t and the names of the presidential electors. The candidate must file with the secretary of state 

an affidavit of candidacy no later than the 2nd Monday preceding the general election. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file an affidavit of intent with the secretary of state no later than the second Monday preceding 

the election. 

(Kan. Stat. Ann. §§ 25 -202, 25 -301, 25 -302 a, 302b, 25 -303, 25 -304, 25 -305 , 25 -305b , 25 -804 )

Kentucky  Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candida te nominated b y a political party or political organization may be placed on the general election ballot. Each political 

party or political organization must certify t o the secretary of state no later than the Friday following the first Tuesday in Septembe r the name of the presidential candidate and the names of the presidential electors. 

A political party is an organization of electors whose candidate received at leas t 20% of the total vote cast at the last preceding election for 

presidential electors . A political orga nization is a group not constituting a political party whose candidate received 2% or more of the vote 

at the last preceding election for presidential el ectors. 

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate, a political group presidential candidate, and a presidential candidate of a political organization not 

entitled to nominate by convention, may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the secretary of state no later than the 

Friday following the first Tuesday in Sept ember a nomina ting petition signed by at least 5,000 registered voters. The petition must include 

the names of the presidential electors. 

Write -In 

A write -in candida te for president must file a declaration of intent and a list a presidential electors wit h the secretar y of state no later than 

the fourth Friday in October preceding the election. 

(Ky. Rev. Stat. Ann. § § 117.265 , 118.015, 11 8.305, 118.315, 118.325, 118.3 65) 

Louisiana  Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a recogn ized political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Each recognized political 

party must file with the secretary of state the names of the presidential electors. If the nominee s for president and vice -president and the 

names of the president ial electors a re not certified to the secretary of state by the state central committee of the political party no later 

than the first Tuesday in September, the nation al chairman of the party must certify the names of the presidential electors to the secre tary 

of state no later than the first Friday following the first Tuesday in September. 

A political party may qualify as a recognized political party if at least 1,000 registered voters are registered as affiliated with the party 

ninety days prior to the o pening of the qualifying period; or, if any candidate of the party for presidential elector at the last presidential 

election received at least 5% of the votes cast or any candidate of the party for any statewide office in any primary or general election 

received at lea st 5% of the votes cast for the office. 

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with t he secretary of state no later than 

the first Friday following the first Tuesday in Septe mber a notice of candidacy, affidavit of each elector, and a petition containing at least 

5,000 signatures of registered voters, at least 500 of which must be obtained in each of the congressional d istricts. The petition must include the name of the presid ential candida te and the names of the presidential electors. 

Fee 

An i ndependent presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by paying a $ 500 fee and filing notice of the 

presidential electors. 

(Louisiana Rev. Statutes §§ 18 -44 1, 18:464(A) , 18 -465, 18 -1253, 18 -1254, 18 -1255) 

Maine  Political Party Nomination 

A p residential candidates nominated by a qualif ied political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Each qualified political 

party nominates presidential electo rs. 

A qualifi ed political party is a party that was listed on the ballot at either of the 2 preceding general elections and had at least 10,000 

voters enrolled in the party voted in the last general election. 

A political party may also qualify it had a c andidate for g overn or or for p resident in the last preceding general election who was nominated 

by petition receive 5% or more of the total vote cast in the state for governor or for p resident , or; 10 or more voters not enrolled in a 

quali fied political pa rty file with the secretary of state on the 180 th day before the primary election a petition containing the signatures of 

voters equal in number to at least 5% of the total vote cast in the s tate for g overnor at the last preceding gubernatorial election .

Petition 

A pres idential candidate that is not nominated by a political party may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the 

secretary of state no later than August 15 th a petition signed by at least 4,000 and not more than 6,000 vote rs . The petition must include 

the name s of the candidates for president and vice -president and the names of the presidential electors. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate fo r president must file a declaration of write -in candidacy with the secretary of state no later than the 45th day prior 

to the election. 

(21 -A Me. Rev. Stat. Ann. § § 301 , 302, 303 , 321, 351, 354 )

Maryland  Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidat e nominated by a qualified political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Qualified poli tical parties 

must certify to the state board of elections no later than September 6 th the name s of the candidates for president and vice -president and must certify the state board of election no later than 30 da ys before the general election the names of the presidential electors. 

A qualified political party is a political party that has nominated a candidate for the highest office on the ballot in a sta tewide general 

election and the candidate received at least 1% of the total vote for that office, or; i f state voter registration totals as of December 31 st 

show that at least 1% of the state’s registered voters are affiliated with the political party. 

A group of voters may form a new qualified political party by filing with the state board o f election no later than the first Monday in August 

containing the signatures of at least 10,000 registered voters. 

Petition 

A presidential candidate that is not affi liated with a political party may obtain ballot access by submitting a petition with the state board of 

election no later than the first Monday in August a certificate of candidacy and a petition containing the signatures of at least 10,000 

registers vo ters of the state. The candidate must certify to the state board of election no later than 3 0 days before the election the names 

of the presidential electors. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file a certificate of candidacy with the stat e board of elections no later than the Wednesday before 

the election. 

(Md. Ann. Code Art. 33 , § § 1 -101, 4-102, 4-103, 5 -301, 5-303 , 5-701, 7-503, 5-704 , 8-503 )

Massachusetts  Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a political party may be placed on th e general election ballot. Each political party must certify to the 

secretary of state no la ter than the s econd Tuesday of September the name s of the candidates for president and vice -president and the 

names of the presidential electors. 

A political party is any party whose candidate for any statewide office at the last general election received at least 3% o f the vote cast for 

that office, or, a party with a number of enrolled voters equal to or greater than 1% of the entire voters registered in the state .

Petition 

A presidential candidate not running as the candidate of a political party may o btain ballot a ccess by submitting to the secretary of state 

no later than the second Tuesday of September nomination papers containing the signatures of at least 10 ,000 voters. The nomination 

papers must include the name s of the candidates for president an d vice -preside nt and the name s of the presidential electors. Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file the name of the candidate for president and th e names of the candidates for presidential 

electors with the secretary of state no later tha n 60 days prio r to the election. 

(Mass. Gen. Laws § § 50 -1, 53 -1, 53 -6, 53 -8, 53 -10, 54 -78A )

Michigan  Political Party Nomination 

A presidential c andidate nominated by a political party that qualifies for general election ballot access ma y be placed on the general 

election ballot. Each political party must certify to the secretary of state no later than 1 business day after the conclusio n of the sta te 

convention the names of the candidates for presidential electors. Each political party mu st certify to the secretary of state not more than 1 

business day after the state or national convention of the party, whichever is later, the name s of the candidat es for president and vice -

president .

A political party qualifies for ballot access at the g eneral electio n if any of the party’s candidate s at the last preceding general election 

received at least 1% of the total number of votes cast for the successful ca ndidate for the office of secretary of state at the last preceding 

general election in which a secretary o f state was elected. 

A group may form a new political party by filing with the secretary of state no later than the 100 th day before the general elect ion a 

petition containing the signatures of registered and qualified electors equal to not l ess than 1% of the total number of votes cast for all 

candidates for governor at the last election in which a gov ernor was elected. The petition must be signed by a t least 100 registered 

electors in each of at least 1/2 of the congressional districts of th e state. 

Peti tion 

A presidential candidate not affiliated with a political party may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the secretary of 

state no later than the 110 th day before the election a petition signed by a number of quali fied and regis tered electors of the state equal to 

not less than 1% of the total number of votes cast for all candidates for governor at the last election in which a governor was elected .

[note: see Michigan Secretary of State  Ballot Access Information for Presidential Candidates  which states that the number of valid 

signature s required is 30,000]. The petition must be signed by at least 100 registered electors in ea ch of at least 1/2 of the congressional 

districts of the state. The candidate must certify to the secretary of state no later than 66 days before the election the n ames of the 

presidential electors. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file a declaration o f intent with the secretary of state no later than the second Friday immediately 

preceding the election. ( Mich. Comp. Laws § § 168.16, 168.42, 168.532 , 168.544f , 168. 560a , 168.590b , 168.590c, 168.590d, 168.591, 168 .68 5, 168.686, 168.686a ,

168.737a) 

Minnesota  Pol itical Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a major political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Each major politi cal party must 

certify to the secretary of state the names of the presidential electors and the names of t he candidates for president and vice -president at 

least 7 1 days before the general election. 

To qualify as a major political party, a political party must meet one of the following requirements: 

- present at least one candidate for constitutio nal office at the last general election for these offices, or presidential elector or U.S. 

senator at the last presidential election, who receive d votes in each cou nty, and receive d at least 5% of the total votes in that 

election; or 

- present at least 45 ca ndidates for s tate representative, 23 candidates for state senator, 4 candidates for representative in 

Congress, and 1 candidate for each constitutional office , at the last general election for these offices; or 

- file a nominating petition with the secretar y of state pri or to the close of filing for the state primary containing the signatures of 

party members that equal at least 5 % of the total vote s at the last state general election. 

Petition 

A presidential c andidate of a minor political party or other pa rty, and indep endent presidential candidates, may obtain ballot access by 

filing with the secretary of state no later than 77 days before the general election a pet ition containing the signatures of at least 2,000 

eligible voters. The petition must include the names of the presidential electors. 

A minor political party is a party that present ed at least one candidate for constitutional office at the last general ele ction for these offices, 

or presidential elector or U.S. senator at the last presidential el ection, who re ceived votes in each county in the aggregate equal to at least 

1% of the total number of individuals who voted in the election ; or, the party filed wi th the secretary of state no later than the close of 

filing for the state primary a nominati ng petition co ntaining the signatures of party members equal in number to at least 1% of the total 

number of individuals who voted in the preceding general election .

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file a written request to have their w rite -in votes tallied and the names of the presidential electors 

with the secretary of state no later than the 7th day before the election. 

(Minn . Stat. §§ 200.02, 204B.07, 204B.08, 204B.09 , 208.03 )Mississippi  Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nom inated by a n organized political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Each political party must 

certify the names of the candidate for pr esident and vice presiden t and presidential e lectors to the secretary of state no less tha n 60 days 

prio r to the election .

Petition 

An independent p residential candidate may o btain ballot access by filing with the secretary of state no less than 60 days before the 

election a petition containing the signatures of 1,000 qualified electors. The p etition must b e accompanie d by the names of the individual 

who will serve as presidential electors. 

Write -In 

A write -in vote will be counted in the event of the d eath, resignation, withdrawal, or removal of an y candidate whose name was printed 

on the off icial ballot 

(Miss. Code. Ann. §§ 23 -15 -365 , 23 -15 -539 , 23 -15 -781, 23 -15 -785 , 23 -15 -1063 )

Missouri  Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by an established political party may be placed o n the general election ballot. Each establish ed 

political p arty must certify the name s of its nominee s for president and vice -president to the secretary of state no later than the 12 th 

Tuesday prior to the ele ction, or within 7 working days after choosing it s nominee for president, whichever is later . Each establi shed 

political party must certify to the secretary of state no later than the 3rd Tuesday prior to the election, the names of its nominees for 

preside ntial elector. 

To qualify as an established po litical party, a political party’s candidate for statewide office at either of the last two general elections must 

have received more than 2% of the entire vote cast for the office. 

A group may form a new pol itical party and nominate a presidential candid ate to be placed on the general election ball ot if the grou p files 

with the secretary of state no later than the 15th Monday immediately preceding the general election a petition containing the signatures 

of at least 10,000 registered voters. 

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate may obtai n ballot acces s for the general election by filing with the secretary of state no later t han 

the 15th Monday immediately preceding the general election a declaration of candidacy and petition containing the signatures of at least 

10,000 registered voters . The petition m ust include the names of the presidential electors and the names of the can didates for president and vice -president .

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must submit a declaration of intent and the names of the nominees for presiden tial electors with the 

secretary of state no later than the second Friday immediately pre ceding the election. 

(Mo. Rev. Stat. § § 115.013, , 115.315, 115 .317, 115.321, 115.329 , 115.399 , 1 15 -453 )

Montana  Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate no minated by a q ualified political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Each qualified political party 

must certify to the secretary of state file by the date prescribed by the s ecretary of state the names of the nominees for presidential 

elec tors 

A politic al party is qualified if it had a candidate for a statewide office in eithe r of the last two general elections receive 5% or more of the 

total votes cast for the most recent successful candidate for governor. A political party may also quali fy by filing w ith the secretary of state 

no later than 85 days before the date of the pri mary a petition containing the number of signatures of registered voters equal to 5% or 

more of the votes cast for the successful candidate for governor at the last ge neral election , or 5,000 electors, whichev er is less. The 

number must include the registe red voters in more than 1/3 of the legislative districts equal to 5% or more of the total votes cast for the 

successful candidate for governor at the last general elec tion in those districts or 150 electors in those districts, whichever is less. 

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate or a presidential candidate of a political party that does not qualify may obtain ballot access for the 

general election by filin g with the sec retary of state 76 days prio r to the general election a petition containing the signatures of electors 

equal to 5% or more of the total votes cast for the successful candidate for governor at the last general election , or 5,000 electors, 

whic hever is less. The names of the candidates for presidential electors must be certified to the secretary of state no later than 76 days 

before the election 

Write -In 

A presidential write -in candidate for president must submit a declaration of intent with th e secretary of state no later than the 10t h day 

before absentee ballots must be made avai lable 

(Mont. Code. Ann. § § 13 -10 -504, 13 -10 -601, 13 -25 -101 , 13 -10 -211 )

Nebraska  Political Party Nomination A presid ential candidate nominated by a political party tha t meets state requirements for partisan ba llot access may be placed on the 

general electi on ballot. The officers of the various national political party conventions must certify to the secretary of state no later than 

September 8 th the names of the candida tes for presid ent and vice -president . Each political party must hold a state convention n o later 

than September 1 st to select presidential electors and must certify the names of the electors to the secretary of state. 

A political party meets state require ments for part isan ballot access if a cand idate nominated by the political party at one o f the two 

immediately preceding statewide general elections received at least 5% of the vote in a statewide race, or if a combination o f candidates 

nominated by the po litical party for a combination of distric ts that encompass all of the voters of the enti re state polled at least 5% of the 

vote in each of their respective districts. 

Petition 

Presidential candidates of a newly formed political party, and non partisan presidential ca ndidate s, may obtain ballot access for the general 

election by filing with the secretary of state no later than September 1 st a petition containing the signatures of at least 2500 registered 

voters . The petition mu st include the names of the candidates for president and vice -president and the names of the presidential electors. 

A group may form a new political party by filing with the secretary of state no later than A ugust 1 st a petition containing signatures equa l

to at least 1% of the tota l votes cast f or governor at the most recent general election for that office. The petition signatures must be 

distributed to include registered voters totaling at least 1% of the v otes cast in the most recent gubernatorial elec tion in each of the 3 

congre ssional distri cts in the state. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file an affidavit of intent and the required filing fee with the secretary of state no later than 10 

days prior to the election. 

(Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 32 -610, 32 -615 , 32 -617, 32 -620, 32 -621 , 32 -710, 32 -712, 32 -716, 32 -813 )

Nevada  Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a qualified major or minor political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Each major 

and min or party must certify the na mes of the pre sidential electors to the secretary of state. A minor party must certify to the secretary of 

state no later than the first Tuesday in September the names of the candid ates for president and vice -president .

To qual ify as a major political par ty :

- the party must be designated as a political party on the voter registration applications of at least 10% of the registered voters in 

the state on January 1st preceding any prima ry election, or; - the party must file a petition with the secretary of state no later than the last Friday in February before any primary election 

containing the signatures of registered voters equal to or more than 10% of the total number of vote s cast at the last preceding 

general election for the off ice of representative in con gress. 

To qual ify as a minor political party: 

- any of the party’s candidates for partisan office at the last general election must have received at least 1% of the total nu mber of 

th e total votes cast for the offic e of representa tive in congress; 

- on January 1st preceding a primary election, the party must have been designated as the political party on the voter registration 

applications of at least 1% of the total number of registered voters in the state; or 

- the party must file a petition with the secretary of state no la ter than the 3 rd Friday in May preceding the general election 

containing the signatures of registered voters equal to at least 1% of the total number of votes cast at the last preceding general 

election for the off ice of representative in con gress 

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the secretary of state no later than 

the second Friday in Augus t a declaration of candidacy , a filing fee of $ 250 , and a petition containi ng the signatu res of registered voters 

equal to at least 1% of the total number of votes cast at the last preceding general election for the office of representativ e in congress. Th e

candidate must also file with the secretary o f state the names of the ind ividuals who w ill serve as presidential electors. 

(Nev. Rev. Stat. § § 293.128, 293.270 , 293.1715 , 293.1725, 298 .020, 298.109) 

New Hampshire  Political Party Nomination 

A preside ntial candidate nominated by a political party may be placed on the general election ball ot. Each political party must certify to the 

secretary of state no later than the last Tuesday of October the names of the presidential electors. 

A political party is any political organization which received at l east 4% of the total number of votes cast for governor or United States 

senators at the preceding state general election. 

A political organization may also nominate a presidential candidate for the general e lection by filing with the secretary of state no later 

than the Wednesday o ne week before the primary nomination papers containing the signatures of registered voters equal to 3% of the 

votes cast at the previous state general election. The name of the can didate and a declaration of candidacy must be s ubmitted to the 

secretary of state no late r than the day of the primary. Petition 

A presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing a declaration of intent between the firs t Wednesday in 

June and the Friday of the follo wing week, and submitting to the secretary of state no later than the Wednesday one week before the 

primary nomination papers containing the signatures of 3,000 registered voters, 1,500 from each United States congressional district in 

the state. The candi date must also pay a fee of $250. 

Write -In 

A voter may write -in the name of a candidate on the ballot. 

(N.H. Rev. Stat. Ann. §§ 652:11, 65 5:40a , 655:40b, 655:42, 655:43, 655:53, 655:54, 659:17 , 667:21 )

Ne w Jersey  Political Party Nomination 

A presiden tial candidate nominated by a political pa rty may be placed on the general election ballot. Political parties must certify the 

names of the presidential electors to the secretary of state within 1 week after t he electors are nominated at a state convention which 

must be held within 1 week followin g the closing of the party’s national convention. The certificate may include the names of the 

candidates for president and vice -president .

A p olitical party is a par ty which, at the election held for all of the m embers of the general a ssemb ly next preced ing the holding of any 

primary election , polled for members of the general a ssembly at least 10% of the total vote cast in the state .

Petition 

A presidential candidat e who is not nominated by a political party, an d independent presidential c andidate, may obtain ballot access for 

the general election by filing a petition with the secretary of state no later than the 99 th day before the general election a petition 

contai ning the signatures of 800 legally qualified vo ters of the state. The names of the presid ential electors may be included in the 

petition. 

Write -In 

A voter may write -in the name of a candidate. 

(N.J. Stat. Ann. §§ 19:1 -1, 19:5 -1, 19:13 -2, 19:13 -1, 19:13 -3, 19:13 -4, 19:13 -5, 19:13 -9, 19:13 -15 , 19:53A5 )

New Mexico  Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a qualified political party may be placed on the general election ballot. A qualified political party must certify the names of the presidential electors to the secretary of state no less than 56 days prior to the electio n. 

A qualified political party is a political party that has a candidate on the ballot in at least one of the two previous gener al elections, or if the 

party has a ca ndidate for governor or president in a general election, the candidate rece ives at least 1% of the total votes cast for the 

office. 

A political party may qualify as a political party by filing with the secretary of state petition containing the signatures of at least ½ of 1% of 

the total votes cast fo r the office of governor at the preceding general election. 

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the secretary of state on the 21st 

day following the primary election a declaratio n of candidacy and a nominati ng petition co ntain ing the number of voter signatures equal 

to at least 3% of the total vote cast for governor at the last preceding general election for that office. The petition m ust include the names 

of the presidential elec tors. 

Write -In 

Write -in can didates for Pr esident are not allowed. 

(N.M. Stat. Ann. §§ 1-1-10, 1 -7-2, 1-8-1, 1-8-49, 1 -8-51, 1 -8-52, 1 -15 -3; New Mexico Secretary of Sta te FAQs )

New York  Politica l Party Nomina tion 

A presidential candidate nominated by a political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Political parties must certify to the 

state board of electi ons no later than 14 days after the fall prima ry election the names of the nominees for p residential electors. 

A political party is any political organization whose candidate for governor at the last preceding election for that office r eceived at least 

50 ,000 votes. 

Petition 

An independent president ial candidate may obtain ball ot access for th e general election by filing with the state board of elections no later 

than 11 weeks prior to the election a petition containing 15,000 signatures, with at least 10 0 signatures coming from each of ½ of the 

cong ressional districts in the st ate. The petit ion must include the names of the presidential electors. The candidate must f ile an 

acknowledgment of acceptance of the nomination no later than the 3rd day after the last day to file the petition. 

Write -In 

A wr ite -in candidate for presiden t must file a certificate of candidacy and a list of presidential electors with the state board of elections no 

later than the third Tuesday before the general election (N.Y. Electi on Law §§ 1-104, 6 -102, 6 -142, 6 -146, 6-153 , 6-158 )

North Carolina  Politi cal Party Nomi nation 

A presidential candidate nominated by a political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Political parties must certify the 

names of the presidenti al electors with the secretary of state .

A political party is any group whose candidat e for governor or presidential electors at the last preceding general election received at least 

2% of the entire vote cast in the state for governor or presidential e lectors. 

A group may form a new political par ty by filing with the state b oard of electi on no later than the 1 st day of June preceding the general 

election a petition containing the number of signatures of registered voters equal to ¼ of 1 % of the total number of voters who voted in 

the most recent genera l election for governor . The petition must be signed by at least 200 registered voters from each of the 4 

congressional districts in the state. 

Petition 

An unaffiliated presidential candidate may obtain ball ot access for the general election by filing w ith the state board of elections no l ater 

than the last Friday in June preceding the general election a petition containing the number signatures of registered voters equal to 1.5 %

of the total number of voters w ho voted in the most recent general election f or governor. The peti tion must be s igned by at least 200 

registered voters from each of the 4 congressional districts in the state. The candidate must certify to the secretary of state no later t han 

the first F riday in August the name of the candidate for vice -president and th e nam es of the presidential electors .

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file with the state board of election no later than 90 days before the election a declaration of 

in tent and a petition containing the signatures of 500 qualified vote rs. 

(N.C. Gen . Stat. §§ 163 -1, 163 -96, 163 -122, 163 -123 , 163 -209 , 163 -213 )

North Dakota  Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by an established political party may be placed on the general election ballot. The filing deadline for 

candidates is 64 days before the election. 

An established political party is a political organization that had candidates for presidential electors, a candidate for governor, a candidate 

for attorney general, or a candidate for secretary of state on the last general e lection ballot and the candidates received at least 5% of the total vote cast for the office. 

Petition 

A presidential candidate of a party that is not established, or an independent presidential candidate, may obtain ballot acce ss for the 

general electi on by filing with the secretary of state no later than the 6 4th day before the general election an affidavit of candidacy, a 

statement of interests, and a petition containing the signatures of 4,000 qualified electors. The names of the presid ential elector s must be 

filed with t he petition. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate f or president must file a certificate of write -in candidacy and the names of the presidential electors with the secretary 

of state no later than the 21st day before the electi on 

(N.D. Cent. Code §§ 16.1 -03 -14 , 1 6.1 -03 -19, 16.1 -06 -07.1 , 16.1 -12 -02 , 16.1 -12 -02.2 )

Ohio  Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Major political parties must cert ify to 

the sec retary of state on or before the 90th day before the election names of the candidates for president and vice -president . Major 

parties must nominate presidential electors no later than 40 days prior to the general election and must certify the names of the electors 

to the s ecret ary of state within 5 days. Minor parties must certify to the secretary of state on or before the 90th day before the election 

the names of the candidates for president and vice -president and the names of the presidentia l electors .

A political party is any party whose candidate for governor or nominee s for presidential electors at the most recent general election 

received at least 5% of the ent ire vote cast for that office. 

A group may also obtain political party status by petition ( Ohio Secretary of State  Directive 2007 -09 ). 

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by fili ng with the se cretary of state no la ter than 

the 90 th day before the general elect ion a petition containing the signatures of at least 5,000 qualified electors. The candidate must file a 

statement of candidacy and the names of presidential electors with th e petition. 

Write -In 

A write -in ca ndidate for president must file a declaration of intent and a list of presidential electors with the secretary of state no later 

than the 72nd day before the election. (Ohio Rev. Code Ann. §§ 3505.10, 3513. 11, 3513.041 , 3513.257, 3517 .01) 

Oklahoma  Politic al Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate n ominated by a recognized political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Each recognized political 

party must certify to the state board of elections no fewer t han 90 days fr om the date of the gen eral electio n the names of the nomine es 

for pr esidential electors. 

A recognized political party is a political party whose nominee for governor or nominees for presidential electors received a t least 10% of 

the total vot es cast for th e office in any genera l election. 

A group may form a recognized pol itical party by file with the state elections board any time except between March 1 st and November 15 th 

of an even numbered yea r a petition containing the signature of regist ered voters eq ual to at least 5% of the total votes cast in the last 

general elect ion for governor or for presidential electors. 

Petition 

Uncommitted candidates for presidential electors may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing a petit ion with the s tate 

elections board no later than July 15 th of a presidential elect ion year containing the signatures of registered voters equal to at least 3% of 

the total votes cast in the last general election for president. 

An independent presidential candidate, or a presidential candida te nominated by an unrecognized political part y, may obtain ballot access 

for the general election by submitting the required filing fee, or by filing with the state elections board no later than July 15 th of a 

president ial election y ear a petition containing the signatures of registered voters eq ual to at least 3% of the total votes cast in the last 

general election for president. The candidate must certify to the state board of elections no later than September 1 st the name of the 

ca ndidate for vice -president and the names of the presidential ele ctors. 

(Oklahoma Statutes §§ 26 -1-108, 26 -1-109, 26 -10 -101, 26 -10 -101.1, 26 -10 -101.2) 

Oregon  Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a major or minor political part y may be placed on the general election ballot. Political partie s must 

certify to the secretary of state no la ter than the 70th day before the election the names of the candidates for president and vice -president 

and the names of the presiden tial electors. 

A political party qualifies as a major political party if a nu mber of electors equal to at least 5% of the n umber of registered electors in the 

state are registered as members of the party no later than the 275 th day before the date of a pr imary election .A political party qualifies as a minor political party if: 

- an affiliation of electors files with the secre tary of state no later than two years after filing a prospective a petition a petition 

containing the signatures of electors equal t o 1 ½ % of the total votes cast for all candidates for governor at the most re cent 

election at which a candidate governor w as elected to a full term; 

- the candidate of an affiliation of electors receives at least 1% of the total votes cast for presidentia l electors at the last 

presidential election, or receives 1% of the votes cast for any state offices for which nominations b y political parties are permitted 

at the most recent election for those offices 

Petition 

A nonaffiliated presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the secretary of state no later than 

the 70 th day before the ge neral election a petition containing the signatures of individual electors equal to not less than 1% of the total 

votes cast for all candidates fo r presidential electors at the last general election. The names of the presidential electors must be filed wit h

the petition. 

Assembly of Electors 

A nonaffiliated presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election thr ough nominatio n by an assembly of at least 

1,000 electors gathered in one plac e for no longer than 12 hours. The signatures of the assemble members and a certificate of nomination 

must be filed with the secretary of state no later than the 70 th day before the general el ection. The names of the presidential electors must 

be filed wit h the certificate of nomination. 

Write -In 

A voter may write -in the name of a presidential candidate. 

(Or. Rev. Stat. Ann. §§ 248.006, 248.008 , 248.315 , 248.355 , 249.705, 249.72 2, 249.735, 24 9.740 , 254.500, 254.548 )

Pennsylvania  Political Party Nominatio n

A presidential candidate nominated by a pol itical party may be placed on the general election ballot. The nominee of each political party 

must certify to the secretary of the commonwealth within thirty days after the national convention of the party the names of the 

presidential electors .

A politi cal party is any party or political body whose candidates at the general election next preceding the primary received in each of at 

least ten coun ties in the state no less than 2% of the largest entire vote cas t in each of the counties for any elected cand idate, and received 

a total vote in the state equal to at least 2% of the largest entire vote cast in the state for any elected cand idate. Petiti on 

Presidential candidates of minor parties and political bodie s may obtain ballot access for the general ele ction by filing with the secretary of 

the commonwealth no later than the 2nd Friday subsequent to the primary an affidavit of candid acy, a $200 fe e, and n omination papers 

containing the signatures of 5000 qualified electors .

A minor political party is a party whose statewide registration is less than 15% of the combined statewide registration fo r all statewide 

political parties and o therwise meets the criteria of a political party. A political body which is not a political party but has nominated 

candidates by nomination papers is a political body. 

Wr ite -In 

A voter may write -in the name of a pre sidential candidate on the ballot. 

(Pa. Consol. Stat. Ann. §§ 2831, 2878 , 2872.2 , 2873, 2911, 2913, 2914 , 3031.12 )

Rhode Island  Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a political par ty may be placed on the general election. Poli tical parties must nominate presidentia l

electors at a meeting to be held no later than October 14 th .

A political party is any political organization that: 

- nominated a candidate for governor at the next preced ing general election for general officers who received at least 5% of the 

entire vote cast for gove rnor, or; 

- nominated a candidate for president at the next preceding presidential election who received at least 5% of the entire vote c ast in 

the state for president 

A political organization may also ob tain political party status by filing w ith the local boards of canvassers no later than August 1 st petition 

forms containing the signatures of registered qualified voters equal to 5% of the entire vote cast in the state for governor or president in 

the imm ediately preceding general election. 

Petition 

An ind ependent presidential candidate or presidential candidates seeking to establish a political party may obtain ballot access by filing 

nomination papers contai ning the signatures of 1000 voters. The candid ate must file a declaration of candidac y, and, where applicable, a 

notice of intent to establish a political party, no later than the last day for filing with the secretary of state for congre ssional and statew ide 

offices. The nomination papers must be fil ed with local boards of election no lat er than 60 day s before the election. Write -In 

A voter may write -in the name of a presidential candidate on the ballot. 

(R.I. Gen. Laws §§ 17 -1-2, 17 -12 -13, 17 -12 -15 , 17 -14 -7, 17 -14 -11, 17 -14 -12 , 17 -19 -31 )

South Ca rolina  Political Party Nomination 

A pre sidential cand idate nominated by a political party may be placed on the general election . Political parties nominate presidential 

electors, and must certify names of the c andidates for president and vice -president to the state election commission no later than the first 

Tuesday following the first Monday in September .

A political party is a political party, organization, o r association certified by the state election c ommission . An organization may obtain 

certifica tion as a political party by filing with t he s tate elect ion commission no later than 6 months prior to the election a petition 

containing the signatures of 10,000 or more registered electors. 

Petition 

A presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the st ate election c ommission no later than July 

15 th a petition containing the signatures of at least 5% of qualified registered electors, provided that the petition candidate is not requir ed 

to furnish more than 10,000 signatures. The names of the presidential ele ctors must be filed with the secretary of state. 

Write -In 

Write -in votes for president are not allowed. 

(S.C. Code Ann. §§ 7-7-120, 7-9-10, 7-9-90 , 7-11 -10, 7-11 -70, 7-13 -320, 7-13 -350, 7 -13 -351 , 7-13 -360 , 7-19 -70 )

South Dakota  Political Party Nomin atio n

A presid ential candidate nominated by a political party may be placed on the general election ballot. The chairperson of the national 

convention of each political party must certify to the secretary of state immediately following the convention the names of the ca ndidates 

for president and vice -president . If the national certification is not received, the names must be certified by the state chairperson of the 

party at the request of the secretary of state. Ea ch political party must certify to the sec reta ry of stat e the nominees for presidential 

electors within three days of the state convention, and no later than the 2 nd Tuesday in August. 

A political party is a party whose candidate for governor at the last preceding general election for governor re ceiv ed at leas t 1 percent of 

the total votes cast for governor. 

A new political party may be formed by filing with the secretary of state no later than the last Tuesday of March prior to th e date of the primary election a written declaration signed by at le ast 2 ½ perc ent of the voters in the state as shown by the total vote cast for governor 

at the last preceding gubernatorial election. 

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the sec re tary of stat e no later than 

the first Tuesday in August prior to the election a certificate of nomination containing the number of signatures equal to at least 1% of the 

total combined vote cast for governor at the last certified gubernatorial election. Th e candidate must file a declaration of candidacy and 

certify the name of a candidate for vice -president prior to circulation the nominating petition 

(S.D. Codified Laws §§ 12 -1-3, 12 -5-3.16 , 12 -5-1, 12 -5-21 , 12 -5-22, 12 -7-7) 

Tennessee  Political Party No mi nation 

A pr esidential candidate nominated by a statewide political party or a minor political party may be placed on the general election ballot. 

Candidates nominated by political parties must be immediately c ertified to the coordinator of elections. 

A statewide po litical party is a political party that had at least 1 candidate for an office to be elected by voters of the entire state in the 

past 4 years who receive d a number of votes equal to at least 5% of the total number of votes cast or gubernator ia l candidate in the most 

recent election for governor. 

A minor political party may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing a petition no later than 90 days prior to the general 

election with the coordinator of elections containing the sig na ture of regi stered voters equal to at least 2.5% of the total number of votes 

cast for gubernatorial candidates in the most recent election for governor. 

Petition 

An ind ependent presidential candidate may obt ain ballot access by filing wit h the coordin at or of electi ons no later than the 3 rd Thursday in 

August a petition containing the signatures of 25 or more registered voters for each elector allotted to the state , which totals 275 valid 

signatures . The candi date must also file the names of the preside nt ial electors and the Vice Presidential nominee .

Write -In 

Write -in candidates must file a notice with the appropriate election official no later than 50 days before the election , and must also submit 

elector i nformation .

(Tenn. Code. Ann. §§ 2-1-104, 2-5-101, 2-7-133 , 2-13 -201, 2-13 -203 , § 2 -1-104(a)(31)(a), (a)(24), 2 -13 -107(a), 2 -5-101(a)(1), 2 -15 -101, 2 -15 -

102, 2 -7-133(i) ; 2012 Tenn. Pub. Acts ch. 55 )Texas  Political Party Nomination 

A p re sidential ca ndidate nominated by a political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Political parties must certify the 

names of the candidates for president and vice -president and the names of the presidential electors before the later of th e 71s t day bef ore 

the presidential election, or the first business day after the date of final adjournment of a party’s national nominating con vention. 

A political party that is authorized or required to nominat e candidates by primary election is entitled to have its n ominee for president 

placed on the general election ballot . A political party is authorized to nominate by primary if the party’s nominee for governor in the most 

recent gubernatorial general electi on received at least 2% of the total number of votes recei ved by all candidates for governor in the 

election ; a political party is required to nominate by primary if that candidate received more than 20% of the vote. 

A political party that nominates candi dates by convention is entitled to have its no minee for pr esident placed on the general election 

ballot if the party had a nominee for statewide office at the last general election receive a number of votes equal to at least 5% of the total 

number of voter s received by all candidates for that office .

A political party that nominates by convention may also qualify to place a presidential candidate on the general election ballot if the p arty 

files with the secretary of state no later than the 75 th day after precinct conventions a list convention parti ci pants indica ting that the 

number of participants equals at least 1% of the total number of votes received by all candidates for governor in the most re cent 

gubernatorial general election. If the number of conve ntion participants is fewer than the number re quired, the party may qualify for 

ballot access at the general election by filing a petition with secretary of state containing a number of signatures that when added to the 

number of convention participants on the list equals at least 1% of the total nu mb er of voters received by all candidates for governor in 

the most recent gubernatorial election. 

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with t he secretary of state no later than 

the 2 nd Mo nday in May an application and a petition containing the number of signatures equal to at least 1% of the total vote received in 

the state by all candidates for president in the most recent presidential electio n. The application must include the names of the 

president ial electors. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file a declaration of write -in candidacy and the names of the presidential electors with the 

secretary of state no later than the 78t h day before the election. 

(Tex . Elections Cod e Ann. §§ 14 6.023, 146.025 , 172.002, 181.005, 181.006, 192.003, 192.032, 192.033 )Utah  Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a registered political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Each registered political 

pa rty must cer tify the names of the candidates for president and vice -president to the lieutenant governor no later than August 31 st , or 

provide written authorization for the lieutenant governor to accept the cer tification a candidate for president from th e national off ice of 

the registered party. Each registered party must certify to the lieutenant governor no later than August 31st the names of the presidential 

ele ctors. 

To qualify as a registered political part y an organization must have participated in th e last gener al election and in at least one of the last 

two regular general elections received for any of its candidates for any office a total vote equal to 2% or more of the total votes cast for all 

candidate s for the united states house of representat iv e in the sam e election. 

An organization may also become a registered political party by filing with the lieutenant governor on or before February 15 th of the year 

in which a regular general election will be he ld a petition containing the signatures of a t least 2,000 registered voters. If a newly registered 

political party does not hold a national party convention the party may designate the names of its candidate for president an d the names 

of the presidential electors to the lieutenant governor by Augus t 15 th .

Petit ion 

An independent presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the lieutenant governor no later 

than August 15th a certificate of nomination , a nominating petition containing the signatures of 1,000 registered vo ters , and a $500 fee. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file a declaration of write -in candidacy with the lieutenant governor no later than 60 days before 

the election. 

(Utah Code A nn. §§ 20A -8-101 , 20A -8-103 , 20A -8-106 , 20A -9-202, 20A -9-502, 20A -9-503 , 20A -9-601 , 20A -13 -301 )

Vermont  Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a major political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Major political parties must 

certify the names of the presi de ntial electo rs promptly after the electors are nominated at a party convention held no later than the 4 th 

Tuesday in September. The parties must certify to the secretary of state no later than the 47 th day befo re the general election the names 

of the par ty ’s nominee for president and vice -president .

A presidential candidate may be nominated by a minor political party and placed on the general election ballot if the party has town 

committees organized in at lea st 10 towns in the state and files a stateme nt of nominati on with the secretary of state no later than the second Thursday after the first Monday in June preceding the primary election. 

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate may obtain ballot acce ss for the general election by filing with t he secretary o f state no later than 

the second Thursday after the first Monday in June preceding the primary election a statement of nomination containing the signatures of 

1,000 registered voters and a consent f orm from each nominee for presidential elect or .

Write -In 

A voter may write -in the name of a presidential candidate on the ballot. 

(Vt. Stat. Ann. tit. 17, § § 2103 , 2319, 2356, 2381, 2382, 2385, 2386, 2387, 2402, 2587 , 2403, 2716, 2721, 2722 )

Virginia  Po litical Party Nomination 

A presidential can di date nominat ed by a political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Each political party must provide to 

the state board of elections no later than the 74 th day before the election the names of th e presidential electors selected at the part y’ s

convention and the names of the candidates for president and vice -president . A political party whose national convention is scheduled to 

be held after the 74 th day before the election must file with the state board of election no later than the 74 th da y before the e lection the 

certification of the presidential electors and a certification of the persons expected to be nominated for president at its n ational 

convention. The party must certify the names of the c andidates for president and vice -president nom inated at th e national party 

convention no later than the 60 th day before the election. 

A political party is an organization which received at least 10% of the total vote cast for any statewide office at eithe r of the two preceding 

statewide general ele ct ions. 

Petit ion 

A group of qualified voters not constituting a political party may obtain ballot access for a presidential candidate by filin g with the state 

board of elections no later than the 74 th day before the election a petition containing the sign at ures of at l east 5,000 qualified voters 

including signatures of at least 400 qualified voters from each congressional district. The petition must include the names of the candidates 

for president and vice -pres ident and the names of the presidential elect ors. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file a declaration of intent with the state board of elections no later than 10 days before t he 

election. (Va. Code Ann. §§ 24.2 -101 , 24.2 -542 , 24.2 -542.1 , 24.2 -543 , 24.2 -614 , 24.2 -644 )

Washington  Po litical Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a major political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Each major political party must 

certify to the secretary of state at least 75 days before the election the names of the pa rty’s nominees for presidential electors and the 

names of the candidates for president and vice -president .

A major political party is a political party that had at least one nominee for president, vice presiden t, united state senator, or a statewide 

offic e receive at l east 5% of the total vote cast at the last preceding state general election. 

Petition/Assembly 

A presidential candidate that is not nominated by a major political party, including minor party cand idates and independent candidates, 

may be pla ced on the gen eral election ballot by holding an organized assembly attended by at least one hundred registered voters no later 

than the second Saturday in May or during the first Saturday in June through the fo urth Saturday in July . The candidate must fil e with the 

sec retary of state no later than one week after the convention is held a petition containing the signatures of at least 1,000 registered 

voters and certificate of nomination , and must file with the se cretary of state no later than ten da ys after the conventio n is held a list of 

presidential electors .

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file a declaration of write -in candidacy with the secretary of state no later than 18 days before the 

el ection. 

(Wash. Rev. Code §§ 29A.04.097 , 29A.0 4.086 , 29A.20. 111 , 29A.20.121 , 29A.20.131 , 29A.20.141 , 29A.20.151 , 29A.20.161 , 29A.20.181 ,

29A.24.311 , 29A.56.320 , 29A.56.360 , 29A.80.020 )

West Virginia  Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nomi nated by a political party may be placed on t he general ele ction ballot. Political parties nominate the 

candidates for presidential electors at a state convention in June, July, or August and must certify the names of the elector s to the 

secretary of state within fifteen days. 

A political party is a n organization whose candidate for governor at the last preceding general election received at least 1% of the total 

number of votes cast for all candidates in the state for that office. 

Petition A group of cit izens that is not a political party (minor pa rty and indepe ndent candidates) may obtain ballot access for a presidential 

candidate by filing with the secretary of state no later than August 1st preceding the general election a certificate of nomination con taining 

the number of signatures of registere d voters equal to at least 1% of the entire vote cast for president in the last preceding presidential 

election. The candidates for president and vice president must also pay a fee equivalent to 1% of the annual salary of the office, provided 

that the fili ng fee for pre sident or vice president must not exceed $2500. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file a certificate of announcement with the secretary of state no later than the close of business on 

the 49th day before the election. 

(W. Va. Code §§ 3-1-8, 3-5-8, 3-5-21 , 3-5-23 , 3-5-24 , 3-6-4a )

Wisconsin  Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a recognized political party may be placed on the general election ballot. Each recognized political 

party must certify to t he general acc ountability board no later than the first Tuesday in September preceding a presidential election the 

names of the candidates for president and vice -president . Each recognized party must hold a conv ention on the first Tuesday in October 

prior to the preside ntial election for the purpose of nominating presidential electors and the names of the electors must be immediately 

certified to the general accountability board. 

A recognized political party is a political party whose candidate for any sta tewide office at the last gubernatorial election received at least 

1% of the total votes cast for that office, and if the last general election was also a presidential election, the party’s candidate received at 

least 1% of the total vote cast for that off ice. 

A politi cal organization may also become a recognized political party by filing with the general accountability board no later than A pril 1 st in 

the year of the partisan primary a petition containing the s ignatures of at least 10,000 electors, includ ing at least 1 ,000 electors residing in 

each of at least 3 separate congressional districts. 

Petition 

An independent presidential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the g eneral accountability board no 

later than the first Tuesday in August preceding the partisan primary nomination papers containing between 2,000 and 4,000 signatures. 

The nomination papers must include the names of the candidates for president and vice -pres ident and the names of the presidential 

elect ors. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate for president must file a declaration of candidacy and a list of presidential electors with the general accounta bility board no later than the 2nd Tuesday preceding the elect ion. 

(Wis. Stat. §§ 5.02, 5.62, 5.64, 8.16 , 8 .18, 8.185 , 8. 20 )

Wyoming  Political Party Nomination 

A presidential candidate nominated by a major or minor political party may be placed on the general election ballot. The poli tical parties 

must nominate pr esidential electors at a state convention and certify the n ames of the electors to the secretary of state no later than 30 

days following termination of the state convention. 

A major political party is a political organization whose candidate for united s tate representative, governor, or secretary o f state, recei ved 

not less than 10% of the total votes cast for that office in the most recent general election. A minor political party is a p olitical organization 

whose candidate for united states representati ve, governor, or secretary of state received not less than 2% nor more than 10% of the total 

votes cast for that office in the most recent general election. 

A group may form a new political party and obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the secretary of state no later than 

Ju ne 1 st in a ge neral election year a petition containing the signatures of registered electors equal in number to no less than 2% of the tot al 

number of votes cast for the office of united state representative in the last general election. 

Petition 

An ind ependent presi dential candidate may obtain ballot access for the general election by filing with the secretary of state no later than 

70 days before a general election a petition containing the signatures of reg istered electors numbering not less than 2% o f the total 

nu mber of votes cast for united states representative in the last general election. The petition must be accompanied by a $200 fee. 

Write -In 

A write -in candidate must file an application of candida cy and the required fee with the appropriate filing officer no later than 2 days after 

the election. 

(Wyo. Stat. Ann. § § 22 -1-102, 22 -4-118, 22 -4-120, 22 -4-303, 22 -4-306 , 22 -4-402 , 22 -5-101, ,22 -5-208, 22 -5-301 , 22 -5-304 , 22 -5-306, 22 -5-

307, 22 -5-501 , 22 -19 -102 )
