Title: 

URL Source: https://coast.interreg-npa.eu/subsites/coast/DT2.1.1_Applications_of_drone_technology_for_sustainable_development_of_the_coastal_zone.pdf

Published Time: Thu, 27 Aug 2020 12:25:33 GMT

Markdown Content:
Work Package 2: Technological Innovation for Sustainable Development 

Deliverable T2.1.1 : Project report 

# Applications of Drone Technology for 

# Sustainable Development of the Coastal 

# Zone: A Literature Review 

Sarah Kandrot and Paul Holloway 

July 2020 Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

2

# Executive Summary 

Coastal zones are at the frontline of sustainability challenges arising from the exploit ation of natural resources. 

Integrated coastal zone management (ICZM) seeks to address these challenges by balancing multiple, and 

sometimes confl icting, objectives within the limits set by natural dynamics. To do so effectively requires a 

reliable evidence -base upon which decision makers, such as policymakers and planners, can make informed 

management decisions. Data and information obtained from modern drone technology can help. This report 

explores the practical applications of drone technology for ICZM and examines the relevance of the technology 

to the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) at the coast. It has been produced as part of the EU -funded 

Sustainable Resilient Coasts (COAST) project, a collaboration between partners from Iceland, Finland, Ireland 

and Northern Ireland focusing on the future challenges a nd development of coastal areas in Europe’s Northern 

Periphery and Arctic (NPA) region. The project seeks to deliver practical guidance for coastal local authorities to 

support resilience building and coastal sustainability. This document is therefore intended to educate local 

auth orities with limited experience but a desire to unde rstand the capabilities of drone technology for ICZM and 

sustainable development. 

The potential for drones to contribute data and information to support ICZM and sustainable development at 

the coast is appreciable, but has been underexplored and underuti lized. This report describes a number of 

innovative applications of drone technology to support ICZM in nine key areas. It also explores the relevance of 

drone technology to the SDGs. This should be of interest to local authorities given their responsib ilities in 

relation to coastal management and their role in contributing to the SDGs at the local level. In order to 

appreciate these applications, some technical background on the technology is provided, including information 

about different platforms, s ensors, and software, as well as information related to technological limitations and 

logistical challenges. A dictionary of technical terms is provided in an appendix, for reference. 

The range of applications described in this report, which is not exha ustive, demonstrates the potential for drone 

technology to support ICZM and the SDGs at the coast. Examples documented in this report include surveillance 

of illegal fishing and aquaculture activities, seaweed resource assessments, cost -estimation of post -storm 

damages, and documentation of natural and cultural heritage sites under threat from, for example, erosion and 

sea -level rise. An awareness of such activities, as well as the limitations of the technology, can help local 

authorities evaluate their o ptions for management activities. We also highlight the need for policies or strategies 

that deal specifically with the use of drones for those local authorities who wish to employ them as part of their 

activities. Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

3

# Contents 

Executive Summary  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................ 2

Acronyms  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................  4

1. Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 5

2. Overview of drone technology  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................... 8

2.1 Instruments  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........... 8

2.2 Sensors ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................ 10 

2.3 Data collection and analysis software ................................ ................................ ................................ . 12 

2.4 Limitations and logistical challenges ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 14 

3. Applications for sustainable development of coastal systems ................................ ................................ .... 18 

3.1 Habitat mapping, and biological and natural resource assessment and management ...................... 18 

3.2 Ecologi cal monitoring ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................... 21 

3.3 Environmental law enforcement and compliance ................................ ................................ .............. 23 

3.4 Pollution management ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 25 

3.5 Digital heritage documentat ion, preservation, and conservation ................................ ...................... 27 

3.6 Emergency response ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................... 30 

3.7 Disaster assessment and management ................................ ................................ ............................... 32 

3.8 Planning and development ................................ ................................ ................................ ................. 35 

3.9 Tourism ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............... 37 

4. Conclusion ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .................... 39 

Appendix I: Definitions ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 40 

Appendix II: Guidance materials on drone use from national aviation authorities ................................ ............. 44 

References ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................ 45 Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

4

# Acronyms 

CAD Computer aided design 

CBD Convention on Biological Diversity 

COP21 Conference of the Parties (COP21) Paris Agreement 

DSS Decision support system 

FPS Frame s per second 

GIS Geographical Information Systems 

GNSS Global Navigation Satellite System 

GPS Global Positioning System 

GSD Ground Sampling Distance 

HAB Harmful algal bloom 

LiDAR Light detection and ranging 

MCA Multiple criteria analysis 

NDVI Normalised di fference vegetation index 

NIR Near infrared (part of the electromagnetic spectrum) 

RGB Red, green, blue (visible portion of the electromagnetic spectrum) 

RPAS Remotely piloted aircraft system 

RTK Real time kinematic 

SDGs Sustainable Development Goals 

SFM Structure from motion 

SUA Small Unmanned A ircraft 

UAS Unmanned Aerial System 

UAV Unmanned Aerial Vehicle 

UN United Nations 

VTOL Vertical Take Off and Landing 

Acknowledgements : Thank you to Tryggvi Stefánsson and Sydney Gunnarson (Svarmi), Brian Wilson (Ma yo 

County Council) and Dr. Fiona Cawkwell (UCC) for their feedback and input into this report. Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

5

# 1. Introduction 

With the advent of low -cost consumer grade drones, the technology has become ubiquitous amongst many 

organisations and institutions, including ma ny local government agencies in North America, Oceania, and Europe 

(Miller, 2018; council.ie, 2019; Gee, 2019) . Amongst i ts many uses, the technology is well -placed to support 

integrated coastal zone management (ICZM) 1 activities because it can deliver relevant data and information that 

can contribute to evidence -based decision making. Many l ocal authorities struggle with t he implementation of 

ICZM, due in part to limited access to resources and funding (Cummins et al. , 2004) . The low operating cost, 

high level of automation , and high quality of survey data from modern drone technolog y can help support local 

authorities in their efforts to implement ICZM (Scarelli et al. , 2017) .

Sustainability is at the heart of ICZM. The challenge for society is how to balance economic growth with 

environmental , social, cultural and recreational objectives , all while ensuring we can meet “the needs of the 

present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs ” (World Commission 

on Environment and Development, 1987) . This is especially challenging at the coast , where populations and 

industries tend to be concentrated, often resulting in stakeholder conflicts. Drone techn ology can help to 

support sustainable development at the coast and can be used to help achieve the UN Sustainable Development 

Goals (SDGs) (Kitonsa and Kruglikov, 2018) . Part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Devel opment (UN General 

Assembly, 2015) , t he SDGs are comprised of 17 goals that address global challenges, i ncluding those related to 

poverty, inequality, climate change, environmental degradation, peace and justice (Figure 1). For each goal, a 

numb er of targets have been defined , and for each target, there are a number of indicators and metrics for 

measuring progress towards those targets, and, ultimately, the overall goal. Unfortunately, it is difficult to 

quantify many of tho se metrics, but there are many areas where drone technology can help. These are described 

explicitly in this report. 

Figure 1: The 17 United Nations Sustainable Development Goals.  

> 1

See appendix I Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

6

Everyone has a responsibility to contribute to the SDGs, including local authorities. In fact, some indicators 

specifically reference the actions of local government, such as indicator 13.1.3 , defined as the “Proportion of 

local governments that adopt and implement local disaster risk reduction strategies in line with n ational disaster 

risk reduction strategies ” (UN General Assembly, 2020, p. 1) . In light of such responsibilities , and the potential 

for drone technology to help local au thorities work toward the SDGs , we believe this report is timely. 

Complementing the SDGs are other global initiatives, including the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) 

(United Nations, 1992) , the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction (United Nations, 2015b) , and the 

Conference of the P arties (COP21) Paris Agreement (United Natio ns, 2015a) . The data requirements to deliver 

progress towards these conventions are substantial (Politi et al. , 2019) , but drone technology can play a role in 

helping to deliver those requirements. This report, while focused prim arily on the SDGs for the coast, highlights 

a number of applications where there are synergies with these international conventions. 

In 2018, a workshop was held in Maine, USA on the practical uses of drones to address management problems 

in coastal zones. The workshop summary report concluded “[coastal] managers are eager to use drones, but 

how to use them is not always well understood” (Alliance for Coastal Technologies, 2018, p. 3) . This report aims 

to de -mystify the use of drone technology for coastal management by highlighting various practical applications 

of the technology from around the wor ld. It has been written specifically for local authorities, although other 

au diences may find it useful as an introduction to drone technology for sustainable development and 

management of the coastal zone (and potentially other environmentally sensitive areas). The report gives a 

basic introduction to different types of drone platforms, sensors, and software. It then goes on to discuss specific 

applications in nine key areas in which drone technologies can support ICZM and the UN SDGs at the coast 

(Figu re 2). Definitions of technical terms are provided in appendix I, for reference, and highlighted in the text in 

green .

This report was produced as part of the Sustainable Resilient Coasts (COAST) project, a collaboration between 

partners from Iceland, F inland, Ireland and Northern Ireland focusing on the future challenges and development 

of coastal areas. Information from this report will be integrated into our Sustainable Resilient Coasts Toolbox 

for local authorities, an online resource focusing on SM ART Blue Growth 2. For more information see: 

http://coast.interreg -npa.eu/  

> 2

SMART Blue Growth refers to the sustainable growth of the marine and maritime sectors . It is based on the 

principles of Sustainability, Mitigation, Planning, Adaptation, Resilience and Transition (SMART). Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

7

Figure 2: Nine key areas in which drone technologies can support ICZM and the UN SDGs at the coast. Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

8

# 2. Overview of d rone technolo gy 

While there is a plethora of technical literature on different types of drones, ancillary equipment and software ,

it can be difficult for the non -expert to navigate this material. The following section aims to help members of 

local authorities with lim ited experience in this space to understand the basic types and capab ilities of drone 

technologies, as well as their limitations. In this document, ‘d rones’ refer to small, unmanned aircraft, 

sometimes also called unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), small un manned aircraft (SUAs), unmanned aerial 

systems (UASs), or remotely pilo ted aircraft systems (RPASs) 3.

# 2.1 Instruments 

There are many different types of drones on the market with a range of different features. Rotary wing drones 

consist of blades that rotat e around one or more rotors, like a helicopter, to lift the aircraft. Fixed wing drones 

consist of rigid wings that generate lift from forward airspeed , like a traditional airplane. A key difference 

between the two is that rotary wing drones have the abi lity to hover, whereas fixed wing drones do not. It is 

therefore easier to control a camera or sensor mounted to a rotary wing drone. Fixed -wing drones, though, can 

fly faster than rotary wing drones, have longer endurance, and thus can cover larger area s. 

Drones can be further subdivided into four general types of platforms (Figure 3). Multi -rotor drones are very 

common. These include quadcopters, hexacopters, octocopters, and many others 4. Affordable (from c. 

€1,300 5), c onsumer grade multi -rotor dr ones, such as the DJI Phantom 4 Pro, are commonly used for 

professional photography, video recording or visual inspection , but they can also be used for survey -grade 

mapping and photogrammetry , depending on the desired level of data quality (Boon et al. , 2017) . Many of these 

consumer grade multi -rotor systems are designed to be easy to fly. For example, the in -built GPS in the Phantom 

4 Pro helps to assist pilots fly more steadily, and in -built infrared sensors help with obstacle avoidance. More 

expensive systems can carry larger payloads (for example, professio nal video recording equipment or LiDAR 

sensors) and/or might include more advanced GPS capabilities. Flight time (c. 28 minutes for the Phantom 4 

Pro) is a key lim itation of multi -rotor drones, which are often powered by rechargeable lithium batteries. 

Fixed -wing drones tend to be more expensive than multi -rotor drones, but are sometimes preferred for aerial 

mapping applications due to their ability to cover large areas. More inexpensive models can be adapted from 

hobby planes, but their assembly requir es expertise. Since many fixed -wing drones use petrol engines as their 

power source, they can stay in flight longer than battery -operated drones. For example, the Penguin C has a 

flight endurance of over 20 hours. Some small fixed -wing models can be lau nched by hand, but larger models 

require a runway or catapult to launch. Because of their design, fixed -wing drones usually require more 

experience to fly than multi -rotor drones. 

Vertical Takeoff and Landing (VTOL) drones are hybrid platforms with both fixed wings and rotors. The rotors 

allow the drone to take off and land vertically and hover while in the air, while the fixed wings give the added 

benefits of speed and endurance. These tend to be expensive and occupy niche areas, for example in academ ic 

research and professional surveying. Like fixed -wing drones, these can be difficult to operate without expertise. 

Flying submersibles can be used in the air and underwater. These are relatively new, expensive, and used for 

niche applications, although they have obvious applications for coastal zone management ( e.g. for inspection of 

aquaculture farms). Examples include the SeaHawk flying submersible product line and the SubUAS Naviator. 

Drone systems themselves are comprised of a number of component s. These typically include the aircraft itself, 

a battery (if battery powered), propell ers , a gimbal (used to orientate the mounted camera or sensor), a camera 

or sensor, and a remote control. Most of the drones on the market can be operated with a mobil e device, such 

as a tablet or mobile phone, or laptop equipped with data collection software (see section 2.3), connected to 

the remote control.  

> 3

UAS and RPAS refer to the whole drone and payload syste m, including the gimbal and ground control  

> 4

Single rotor helicopters also exist, but are less common.  

> 5

Prices in this report are correct as of July 2020. Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

9

Figure 3 : Four types of aerial drone platforms, including three types of multi -rotor systems . (a) DJI Pha ntom 

4 Pro Quadcopter (from c. €1,300) [Source: DJI ]; (b) DJI Matrice 600 Pro Hexacopter (from c. €5,699) [Source: 

DJI]; (c) DJI Spreading Wings S1000 Octocopter (kit from c. €4,400) [Source: DJI]; (d) senseFly eBee (from c. 

€22,000) [Source: senseFly ]; (e) WingTra One VTOL drone (from c. €19,000) [Source: WingTra] ; (f) SeaHawk D4 

flying submersible [Source: SeaHawk] 

Other equipment and accessories may be required . For example , for mapping and photogrammetry 

applications, georeferencing may be important. Th is is the process of assigning real world coordinates (e.g. 

latitude/longitude) to the imagery. Although many drones come equipped with an in -built GPS, the positional 

accuracy is often limited to within one to several metres. The vertical accuracy is ty pically lower than the 

horizontal accuracy. For beach monitor ing, for example, this is us ually insufficient. A real -time kinematic (RTK) 

GPS can increase positional a ccuracy to within millimetres, although the accuracy of processed photogrammetric 

models will be much lower, especially in the vertical, due to inherent errors in the bundle block adjustments 

made to create the model. RTK also requires generally a dual frequency GPS module on the drone, which can 

increase payload weight. A base station must a lso be set up nearby in order for the drone to receive an RTK 

correction. While some instruments are equipped with an on -board RTK GPS (e.g. the Phantom 4 RTK, from 

€5,70 0), most are not. However, it is possible to georeference the imagery in the post -processing stage using 

referenced survey targets placed on the ground before data capture. In thi s case, the survey targets must be 

captured in the drone imagery and s urveyed on the ground using an RTK GPS system (such as the Trimble R10, 

from €22,000). The surveyed points are known as ‘ ground control points ’. A major advantage of using ground 

control points , or a combination of RTK and GCPs, is that they can be used to estimate the absolute geolocation 

error of the model. This can be done by using some of the GCPs to reference the model and using the remaining 

ones to check how well it is referenced (a form of model validation). Generally , ground control points are the 

easiest and most cost -effective way to achieve higher accuracy because they do not require additional 

equipment on the drone. 

An alternative to RTK is post -processed kinematic (PPK) geolocation . This method involves correcting the 

trajectory afterward s using a precisely located local base station. PPK requires same equipment as in RTK , but 

there is no live transmission between the drone and the base station. This method can achieve similar accuracy 

results as RTK , but the data must be post -processed. The advantage, though, is that a live signal between drone 

and base station is not required, so if the signal between the drone and base station is lost for a brief moment, 

the mission does not have to start again. Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

10 

It is also important prior to purchas ing any equipment to consider local restrictions on maximum flight height 

and distance from the pilot (see also section 2.4), because this can limit the type of drone that can be used for 

a project. It would not be wise, for example, to use a fixed -wing d rone in an area where the flight height 

restrictions are 50 m, because a fixed -wing cannot fly slow enough to map effectively at this height. Additionally, 

some areas have privacy laws prohibiting the collection of high -resolution imagery above private res idences. 

To summarise, some of the key c onsiderations when comparing drone equipment include: 

 Flight time 

 Payload capacity 

 Ease of use 

 Petrol powered versus battery powered 

 Cost 

 Include/exclude accessories, such as g imbal and camera or sensor 

 GPS/GNSS capa bilities 

 Local restrictions and laws on flight height, distance from operator, and drone weight limits 

 Physical environment in which the drone will be flown 

 Maintenance requirements 

# 2.2 Sensors 

The most common type of sensor used in drone data capture is the RGB 6 camera, used to collect still and video 

imagery. Other sensors, though, may be used to capture information invisible to the naked eye, such as 

temperature or vegetation health (Wich and Koh, 2018) . These sensors measure radiation in different parts of 

the electromagnetic spectrum, apart from or in addition to the visible portion. Such sensors are commonly 

found on satellite platforms used for Ear th Observation. The spatial and temporal resolution of satellite data, 

as well as the presence of cloud cover, though , can limit their applicability .

Five types of sensors 7 used in drone surveying include: 

 RGB Cameras 

 Thermal Infrared Sensors 

 Multispect ral Sensors 

 Hyperspectral Sensors 

 LiDAR Sensor s

RGB cameras measure the reflectance of light in the visible portion of the electromagnetic spectrum 

(wavelengths between 0.4 and 0.75 μm ). The resulting image is called a ‘ true colour image ’ and is made up o f a 

grid of pixels, each of which contains information about the reflectance or colour of the element in the image. 

The camera characteristics, along with flight altitude, will dictate the spatial resolution of the resulting images. 

This is often referre d to as the ground sampling distance, or GSD. GSD is a function of the flight altitude and the 

camera’s focal length, sensor resolution, and sensor size (Wich et al. , 2018) . Table 1 compares the GSD for two 

camera models flown at an altitude of 100m above ground level (AGL). Spatial resolution limits the detection of 

smaller obje cts on the ground, so this is an important consideration for d rone survey work. The higher the 

altitude of the drone, the lower the spatial resolution . For video recording, video quality is limited by the image 

resolution and the number of frames that can be recorded per second (FPS). 

Thermal i nfrared sensors rec ord temperature data , or the thermal radiation (or heat) emanating from a surface 

or object. These operate in the long wave infrared portion of the electromagnetic spectrum (8 –14 μm). Since 

our eyes cannot see radiation emitted at these wavelengths, the resulting images are given colours that we can  

> 6

RGB refers to the bands of the electromagnetic spectrum captured by a typical camera (see in appe ndix I)  

> 7

While this is not an exhaustive list, these sensors are commonly used for coastal applications, and so are 

highlighted in this report. Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

11 

see – these are called ‘ false colour images ’. Most thermal cameras capture relative temperature data, but more 

expensive radiometric thermal cameras can capture absolute temperature data , provided the sensor is 

calibrated to do so . Manufactures of thermal cameras for drones include FLIR, Optris, and Xenics . It is important 

to note that images captured by thermal sensors generally have a much lower number of pixels than RGB 

cameras , thus the GSD is also lowe r (Wich et al. , 2018) . Thermal sensors may be useful in coastal settings for 

detection of people (search and rescue), animals (conservation studies), and fires. 

In order to understand the capabilities of multispectral and hyperspectral sensors , a basic understanding of the 

principles of remote sensing is required 8. Different surfaces reflect different amounts of radiation in different 

part s of the electromagnetic spectrum. Our eyes can only see light reflected in the visible portion of the 

spectrum, the portion recorded by RGB cameras. RGB cameras record reflectance in three distinct wavelength 

bands of the spectrum - red ( 0.64 - 0.67 μm), green ( 0.53 - 0.59 μm), and blue ( 0.45 - 0.51 μm). Multispectral 

sensors can record reflectance in these and/or other wavelength bands, such as the near infrared (0.75 – 2.5μm) .

These sensors typically record reflectance in 3 -5 bands of the spectrum, which may include portions of the visible 

spectrum , such as coastal blue band ( 0.433 -0.453 μm ), which is especially useful for coastal inspections (USGS, 

2020) . Sensors with bands in the red and near infrared part of the spectrum are typically used to map vegetation 

health. Reflectance measured in these parts of the spectrum can be used to calculate the Normalized Difference 

Veget ation Index (NDVI) for each pixel, which is an indicator of vegetation health. Other features that may be 

of interest may have different reflectance characteristics in other parts of the electromagnetic spectrum. 

Sometimes, these can only be mapped using hyperspectral sensors , sensors with many more, but narrower, 

bands ( i.e . they have a higher ‘ spectral resolution ’). Since different objects or surfaces of interest have different 

‘spectral signatu res ’, or unique reflectance characteristics, the choice of which sensor is appropria te depends 

on the application and may require specialist skills to identify the right sensor and to correctly process the data. 

A special reflectance target is always required on the ground for calibration of such sensors, as wel l as a 

“sunshine sensor” to precisely measure the radiation from the sun at any given moment. 

There are two ways to map elevation and structural data using drones. One is to use passive measurement 

techniques, such as photogrammetry (see section 2.3). This is an indirect way of mapping elevation, in that 

elevation is derived from the processing of the visible imagery . Light Detection and Ranging ( LiDAR ) sensors are 

only recently beginning to be flown on drone platforms. LiDAR sensors provide direct ele vation measurements. 

They work differently from the sensors discussed previously in that they are ‘ active ’ sensors, meaning that rather 

than measuring radiation that is reflected or emitted by an object, they emit their own radiation. They then 

measure the time it takes for the signal to be reflected back to the sensor, allowing the distance between the 

sensor and the ground to be calculated. There are two types of LiDAR which can be fitted on a drone: green and 

red (near infrared). While red LiDAR is much more common on drones (see, for example, VUX -UAV or MiniVUX -

UAV1 by Riegl), green LiDAR may be more useful for costal applications, because can penetrate water (up to a 

certain depth). It also reflects more strongly off vegetation, and therefore may be more useful for vegetation 

mapping. Green LiDAR systems, however, are much more expensive (see, for example, BathyCopter or VQ -800 -

G by Riegl). LiDAR sensors must be flown on drones equipped with a highly precise GPS and inertial measurement 

unit (IMU) to obtain accurate measurements (on the order of mm) . The ability of drones to be equipped with 

LiDAR is relatively new, and these systems can be prohibitively expensive ( €100,000+). However, where high 

precision and accuracy is important, LiDAR is preferred over photogrammetry for elevation and structural 

modelling. 

Figure 4 illustrates raw and processed imagery from various different types of sensors. 

Canon S110  Sony  A6000 

Focal length (mm)  5.2  20 

Number of pixels (sensor resolution)  4000 x 3000  6000 x 4000 

Sensor size (mm)  7.6 x 5.7  23.5 x 15.6 

Ground sample distance (cm)  3.65  1.95 

Table 1: Characteristics of and ground sample distance for two camera models flown at 100m AGL. [Source: 

Wich et al. , 2018]  

> 8

For a good primer on remote sensing , see, for example, Campbell and Wynne (2011) Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

12 

Figure 4 : Imagery from different types of sensors . (a) true colour RGB image captured by an RGB camera on 

a Phantom 4 Pro drone [Source: Sarah Kandrot]; (b) false colour thermal image showing a flock of arcti c birds 

(circled) in Northern Greenland captured by a thermal infrared sensor [Source: Lee et al. (2019) ]; (c) false 

colour image illustrating kelp (red) captured by a multispectral sensor . The reds represent areas where there 

is a high reflectance in the NIR band , typically vegetation . [Source: Science Learning Hub – Pokapū Akoranga 

Pūtaiao (2020) ; (d) classified LiDAR data in a coastal setting (green=vegetation, brown=land, blue=water) 

[Source: Assenbaum (2018) ]

# 2.3 Data collection and analysis software 

The tools required for drone data collection and analysis include data capture apps and software for viewing and 

processing imagery/data. 

Data capture apps are used to control the sensor aboard the drone and to set up automated flights . Some apps 

are built for specific platforms, such as the DJI Go 4 App for the Phantom 4 Pro , which allows users to control the 

camera settings such as shutter speed, aperture, ISO (brightness), etc . and to take photos and videos . They also 

record flight data, such as time, position, and altitude. Other apps have been designed for specific applications; 

such the DroneDeploy and Pix4D capture app s, which are designed for photogrammetry applications . Others 

give more flexibility in relation to automated flight planning, such as the Mission Planner app. Some key 

considerations for selecting the right data capture app include: 

 Compatibility with the drone platform and mobile device being used for data c apture 

 Features (e.g. what sensor/camera settings does it control; does it offer flight planning) 

 Cost (many are free, but advanced features may be paid -only) 

 What format can the files be saved as (.jpg, RAW, GeoTIFF 9, etc.) 

 Ease of use 

 Availability of sup port  

> 9

A georeferenced image that can be read by GIS software Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

13 

For some applications, such as building inspections, visual interpretation of raw imagery or video footage may 

be sufficient for analysis of the data captured by the drone . For others, such as mapping and 3D modelling ( e.g. 

applications discussed in section 3 of this report), software is essential for data processing. Some categories of 

software for processing drone data include: 

 Geographical Information System (GIS) packages ( e.g. ESRI ArcGIS Desktop or Pro , QGIS , MapInfo )

 Remote sensing packages ( e.g. ENVI , ESRI ArcGIS Pro , GlobalMapper )

 Photgrammetry /SfM packages ( e.g. Pix4D, Agisoft Metashape, previously known as Agisoft PhotoScan ,

DroneDeploy , Meshroom , MicMac 10 )

 CAD packages ( e.g. Autodesk) 

 Professional photo editing software ( e.g. Adobe Phot osho p) 

 Professional video editing software ( e.g. Final Cut Pro, Da Vinci Resolve) 

GIS packages can be used to georeference imagery, create orthophotos (geometrically corrected 2D maps) ,

generate digital elevation models (DEMs) or 3D textured meshes, and produc e other different types of maps 

from the imagery. They can also be used to detect changes between images of the same area taken at different 

times (called change detection). Analysis of drone data using GIS may require some degree of expert knowledge, 

al though many local authorities have GIS officers that may be able to carry out such tasks. There have been 

many recent developments in the field of automatic change detection and image processing with machine 

learning techniques, such as convolutional neur al networks (CNNs) (Quinn et al. , 2018; Gray et al. , 2019) .

Although such analyses currentl y require expert knowledge, there are consulting companies that offer these 

services, especially for satellite imagery but also for drone imagery (e.g. Svarmi). 

There is some overlap between the capabilities of GIS softwa re and remote sensing software. However, for 

advanced image classification, for example analysis of imagery from multispectral or hyperspectral sensors ,

remote sensing software , or GIS software with advanced image analysis capabilities, such as ArcGIS Pro, is 

required . Remote sensing so ftware packages are used for spectral analysis and image classification. Spectral 

analysis refers to the analysis of multispectral (or hyperspectral ) data. For example, maps of the Normalized 

Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) , a proxy for vegetation hea lth, can be created where reflectance information 

is available from the red and NIR parts of the electromagnetic spectrum. The software calculates the NDVI using 

the following equation for each pixel: 

𝑁𝐷𝑉𝐼 = 𝑁𝐼𝑅 − 𝑅𝐸𝐷 

𝑁𝐼𝑅 + 𝑅𝐸𝐷 

Where: 

NDVI = normalised difference vegetation index (unitless) 

NIR = reflectance in the NIR portion of the spectrum 

RED = reflectance in the red portion of the spectrum 

The resulting image contain s pixel values ranging from -1 to +1. A false colour image can be produc ed by 

assigning colours to the pixel values to highlight unhealthy versus healthy vegetation. This type of analysis and 

resulting interpretation requires specialist knowledge. It can, however, be very useful for conservation, habitat 

mapping, and ecologi cal monitoring. Remote sensing software is also useful for image classification, or the 

categorisation of pixels based on their reflectance in different parts of the electromagnetic spectrum into 

different land cover c lasses. The resulting image, when ge oreferenced and orthorectified , is essentially a map 

illustrating the spatial distribution of different features of interest. As highlighted in section 2.2, different objects 

or surfaces reflect different amounts of light in different parts of the electro magnetic spectrum, thus have 

unique ‘ spectral signatur es ’. While the sensor measures this reflectance, the data must be processed in order 

to identify or map the features of interest. There are different types of image classification techniques that can 

be performed using remote sensing software to differentiate between the different classes of features in an 

image. Effective analysis of multispectral or hyperspectral imagery using remote sensing software requires 

specialist knowledge, which can be outs ourced. Many consultancies and research institutions offer such 

services.  

> 10

While Meshroom and MicMac are open source, the other packages mentioned are subscription based. Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

14 

Ano ther class of software package is used to produce orthorectified 2D maps and 3D models from visible 

imagery . These are photogrammetry or structure from motion (SfM) packages. Again, there is some overlap 

between the capabilities of GIS and photogrammetry /SfM packages, but since these packages are designed 

specifically for the purpose of creating 3D maps and models, they tend to be easier to use for this application .

The packa ges are based on the principle of photogrammetry , whereby multiple overlapping photos are used to 

generate an orthorectified 2D map or 3D model 11 . Again, these activities should be carried out by experienced 

professionals, which can be contracted by local authorities to perform such analyses. For example, Pix4D (2019) 

describe an application of their software whereby a local geoinformatics consultancy was contracted by local 

authorities to map clifftop hazards and coastal erosio n on the northwest coast of France. While 

photogrammetry can be useful for many applications, it is limited in some cases. For example, homogenous 

surfaces, such as snow, sand, and tarmac, cannot be accurately mapped using this technique. Wide, sandy 

be aches with few defining features can therefore be difficult to map using photogrammetry . In addition, there 

can be multiple sources of errors or noise in photogrammetry , which means data processing can be onerous. 

Computer aided design (CAD) software pa ckages are used by architects and engineers ( amongst others) to create 

technical drawings of built struc tures. Drone data usually need to be processed using other software, such as 

Pix4D Survey or Virtual Surveyor, before they can be imported into CAD sof tware. The use of different software 

packages allows drone imagery to be overlaid on to technical drawings (or used to create technical drawings) of 

buildings. This can be useful, for example, for planning building maintenance work. 

Finally, profession al photo and video editing software can be used for tourism, education and outreach, and 

cultural heritage applications. Packages such as Adobe Photoshop can help to enhance drone images by allowing 

users t o adjust the brightness, contras t, and other sett ings. Video editing software can be used to create 

professional videos from drone footage. Depending on the application, professional expertise may be required. 

# 2.4 Limitations and logistical challenges 

Operating a drone and analysing the data requires ce rtain skills, knowledge of best practice, and an 

understanding of the limitations of platforms, sensors and data (Alliance for Coastal Technologies, 2018) .

Some important practical considerations for drone use include: 

 Local regulatory framework in relation to the use of drones 

 Privacy and data protection issues 

 Flight traffic in the area (the p ossibility of a plane or helicopter entering the area the drone is being 

operated in) 

 Drone capabilities 

o Flight time 

o Resolution 

o Coverage 

o Accuracy 

 Field survey limitations 

o Weather 

o Minimising environmental impacts (e.g. impacts on wildlife, such as birds) 

o Te rrain 

 Costs (equipment, software, insurance, training, etc.) 

 Frequency of drone usage (e.g. if a project only requires data collection once, or maybe once a year, it 

may be more cost -effective to out -source this work to a company or contractor that already has the 

equipment and knowledge to obtain the data quickly and effectively. There is a huge start -up cost to 

establishing a drone department, with a lot of trial and error involved, which can be costly to companies 

and projects. Outsourcing drone data col lection can be cheaper and more effective in many cases.) 

 Data storage  

> 11

See Aber et al. (2019) for a primer on photogrammetry from UAS imagery. Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

15 

 Alternatives to drone data 

 Failures/setbacks of any sort (e.g. drone crash, sensor failure, fly away or similar) 

Perhaps the most important factor when considering the use of drone tech nology is the regulatory framework 

in relation to the safe use of drones. This can potentially limit some applications. For example, most countries 

require that drones be flown within the operator’s visual line of sight (VLOS). In other words, the drone must 

be visible in the sky at all times. If a very large survey is to be undertaken, this could mean taking off and landing 

at multiple locations, limiting the efficiency of the technology. Some countries do give out special exemptions 

to fly beyond vis ible line of sight (BVLOS), but it can be very difficult to obtain such permission. Some common 

criteria that may covered by legislation includes: 

 Flying Distance Restrictions (e.g. maximum altitude / distance from take -off) 

 Weight Classification (e.g. different rules for different size drones) 

 Over Crowed Areas Restrictions 

 Flight Permissions 

 Areas’ Distance Restrictions (e.g. restrictions in different classes of airspace) 

 Drone Registration 

 Buildings’ Distance Restrictions 

 Safety Insurance 

 Piloting Certificate 

 Purpose of Flights 

 Operators’ Age Limitations 

 Operation Plan 

 Air Flight Zones 

 Weather Conditions 

 Wildlife/birds 

(Tsiamis et al. , 2019) 

There is considerable diversity in drone legislation between countries (Tsiamis et al. , 2019) , although national 

rules in the European Union are to be replaced by a common EU legislation in 2020 to facilitate cross -border 

operations 12 . It is important for drone operators to familiarise themselves with these rules and ensure th ey are 

compliant to avoid fines, injuries or damage to property. A r ecent study involving 350 local authorities in the 

UK indicated that despite the increasing adoption of drone technology by local councils, many do not have 

appropriate policies in place to ensure that they are compliant with drone regulations (Gee, 2019) . Such policies 

can help to limit safety and/or legal issues. More information on European leg islation will be included in a later 

COAST project report. Links to information about drone use from the aviation authorities in the COAST Project 

Partner regions are provided in appendix II. 

Legislation in relation to drones is not limited to safety, b ut also includes regulations in relation to privacy and 

data protection. For example, in the EU, non -recreational drone operations must comply with the Data 

Protection Directive on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal da ta and on the 

free movement of such data . Personal data that can inadvertently be captured by drones include facial images 

or car registration plates. Drone operators have certain ob ligations to ensure such data are handled 

appropriately and in line with national and international laws. Such regulations and compliance measures are 

usually covered in detail by p ilot training programmes. It is strongly recommended that any local authority 

considering utilising drones as part of their activities ensure tha t staff are suitably trained to do so and that they 

have a policy or strategy in place that deals specifically with the use of drones and the data they capture (e.g. 

see Gee, 2019) .

The capabilities of the drone platform and sensor are also limiting factors . For example, battery energy limits 

fligh t time, meaning the drone may need to take off and land multiple times to change the batteries - or, worse,  

> 12

See  Easy Access Rule s for Unmanned Aircraft Systems (Regulation (EU) 2019/947 and Regulation (EU) 

2019/945) Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

16 

the drone could run out of battery in the sky. This may seem unlikely, but it can happen where strong winds 

force a returning drone to use more bat tery power than ant icipated. Professional drone pilots avoid such 

scenarios through careful flight planning. 

The spatial resolution of the captured imagery can also be a limiting factor . For example, if the drone is flown 

at height and the GSD is low, certain objects of interest may not be visible in the resulting imagery. For 

multispectral and hyperspectral cameras, the spectral (number and width of bands in the electromagnetic 

spectrum ) and radiometric resolution (capacity of the instrument to disti nguish differences in light intensity or 

reflectance ) will also limit object detection. Finally, for mapping applications, the quality of the mapped data (in 

terms of accuracy and precision) will be influenced by factors including (but not limited to): 

 th e positional accuracy of the GPS 

 the number of ground control points 

 the location of the ground control points 

 the sensor characteristics 

 the type of terrain 

 visibility 

 brightness 

 overlap of images 

 angle of the camera 

 vegetation 

 presence of manmade objects 

These are all important consideration s for beach survey applications. 

Drone surveys can be limited by the geographical characteristics of the site and the survey conditions on the 

day. For example, field surveys over vertiginous terrain, such as cliffs or mountains, must be planned carefully 

to avoid crashing into the ground , losing visual line of sight or connection with the drone, and /or capturing 

images of variable resolution. Surveys over water must also be planned carefully, especially where accur ate 

georeferencing necessitates the use of ground control points . Surveys in environmentally sensitive areas may 

require consideration of how to minimise or avoid potential negative impacts on wildlife, such as birds, which 

are known to attack drones. Fi nally, it is important to understand the limitations of your drone in certain 

weather conditions, as some models cannot be controlled in strong, or even moderate and gusty, winds or rain. 

Another important consideration for local authorities who wish to u se drone technology is costs. While 

consumer grade drones have come down in price, the cost of other required equipment a nd software can be 

prohibitive. For example, table 2 shows the start -up budget for the United States Geological Survey’s Aerial 

Imagi ng and Mapping (AIM) Gr oup, which totalled $160,000 (Alliance for Coastal Technologies, 2018) . This does 

not include insurance, flight training, software training, or pilot certification fees . There is also a considerable 

amount of time required to invest in a new drone department, as well as additional costs associated with staffing 

and investi gating and managing the purchasing of equipment. Given the costs and expertise required for certain 

applications, local authorities may choose to sub -contract drone work. 

Finally, it is important to determine if a drone is the right tool for the job. Some questions worthy of 

consideration include: 

 Can the required data or information be obtained on the ground or using data collected by an 

alternative aerial or satellite platform? 

 What extra added value is the drone data providing that would be impossi ble to achieve with ground -

based data or satellite data? 

 Can we avoid putting people at risk by using drones instead of employing more dangerous traditional 

survey methods, such as field surveying in hazardous environments or using manned aircrafts? 

 Do you have the necessary equipment and skills (or access to both) to undertake the work , including 

the manpower/resources to extract information from the data that you need? 

 Do you have access to expert knowledge that can interpret the data? Can you provide ne cessary 

training to use the data to its full potential, or would it be better to outsource it to an expert? Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

17 

If these questions are not answered up front, then drone data can add extra work and frustration to a project 

where project members are already over whelmed. Where drone work is deemed the only cost -effective means 

of achieving an objective, it should be noted that this should never replace field work, but complement it, as 

ground verification is essential for accurate interpretation of the data. 

It em  Cost  Quantity  Subtotal 

UAS Platforms 

 3DR Solo (quadcopter)  $1,200  3 $3,600 

 Bird’s Eye View FireFLY6 Pro (fixed wing)  $15,000  1 $15,000 

Cameras 

 Gopro4 (video)  $400  1 $400 

 Ricoh GRII (high resolution, global shutter)  $600  3 $1,800 

 MicaSense RedEdge ( multispectral ) $5,000  1 $5,000 

GPS Systems 

 Spectra Precision SP80 GNSS receivers  $20,000  4 $80,000 

Processing 

 Agisoft Photoscan licenses  $3,500  4 $14,000 

 High -powered processing computers  $10,000  3 $30,000 

 Synology disk station raid storage  $10,000  1 $10,000 

Total  $160,000 

Table 2: Start -up budget for the United States Geological Survey’s Aerial Imaging an Mapping (AIM) Group 

[Source: Alliance for Coastal Technologies (2018) ]Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

18 

# 3. Applications for sustainable development of coastal systems 

In recent years, satellite -based EO products have become more accessible and more widely used to address 

coastal and marine management issues, with opportunities to support the SDGs highlight ed by Politi et al. 

(2019) . However, such opportunities o ffered by drone platforms are yet to be fully explored or exploited. In 

this report, we identify nine areas in which drone technologies can support ICZM and the UN SDGs at the coast. 

We discuss specific applications from around the world, which may be of interest in particular to local 

authorities, for each of these areas. We identified 16 targets across 10 (out of the 17) SDGs to which drones can 

contribute data and information. For each section, we present examples of applications, discuss some of the 

technical and methodological challenges faced by users of the technology, and conclude with a summary table 

outlining the relevance of drone technology to the UN SDGs. 

# 3.1 Habitat mapping , and biological and natural resource assessment and 

# management 

The us e of drones for habitat mapping and biological and  natural resource assessments are  among the most 

common applications of drone technologies in the coastal zone. Information from such surveys is widely being 

used for  sustainable  management and conservatio n purposes. Drones can help to map key habitats and to 

monitor ecological populations, behaviour, and health.  They can also be used to manage human interactions 

with marine species and  to monitor  other anthropogenic activities that can have negative envi ronmental 

impacts. This information is important for  protecting threatened marine life and  for supporting  Blue Growth ,

by  providing policymakers, planners, and managers with an evidence -base for decision -making. 

Mapping and identifying the geographic di stribution of different habitats  is a primary use of drones in the coastal 

environment.  Blue Carbon  ecosystems are a key habitat due to their potential to seq uester large amounts of 

carbon. Q uantification of these carbon stores has bec ome a priority of m any nations  in response to the climate 

crisis , yet  the global coverage of  many sizable carbon stores, such as seagrass, remains  largely unknown  (WEB, 

2014;  Röhr  et al. , 2018) . Drones  have been su ccessfully used to  map seagrass habitats , using  multispectral ,

hyperspectral  and RGB data  (Duffy  et al. , 2018; Jeon  et al. , 2020) . For example, Duffy  et al.  (2018)  used a 3D 

Robotics Solo mult i-rotor d rone with a 3D printed -sensor mount to collect  hyperspectral  imagery of  Zostera 

noltei  in Pembrokeshire, Wales  (Figure  5) . They explored  how such cameras can be used,  the accuracy of 

different image  classification techniques, and  the  effectiveness  of thei r methods  at identifying other species and 

habitats. This team interestingly noted  a high  accuracy  associated with interspecies classification in 

heterogeneous meadows,  which provides opportunities to advance beyond a boundary delineation of such 

habitats  and identify within -patch variation of meadows.  Drones  have also been used to monitor other key  Blue 

Carbon  habitats, including mangrove forests in Malaysia  (Ruwaimana  et al. , 2018) , China  (Wang  et al. , 2020) ,

and Australia  (Warfield and Leon, 2019)  and saltmar shes in Scotland  (Green  et al. , 2020) , USA  (Doughty and 

Cavanaugh, 2019) , and China  (Dai  et al. , 2020) , among many other countries. By identifying the overall 

distribution of these habitats, estimates of the monetary value of CO 2 can be calculated, with  Green  et al.  (2018) 

estimating the value of  Zostera marina  in the UK  of  between £2.6 and 5.3 million. 

Drones  have also been used to identify nursery habitats for many rare and/or commercially important fish 

species. For example, Ventura  et al.  (2016)  attached a GoPro to a quadcopter and used  this imagery to undertake 

supervised classification of the RGB  image bands, resulting in the creation of  a fine -scale map of fish nurseries 

around Giglio Island in Italy. Such approaches to modelling fine -scale habitats of nurseries have been extended 

to i dentify the most suitable sites to undertake underwater censuses , which reduces the amount of time and 

resources  for  more targeted underwater surveys  (Ventura  et al. , 2017) . Drones have also been used to map coral 

reefs. In the Pacific, NASA and the U niversity of Guam used drones to create a centimetre resolution digital 

model of coral reef structure, with the aim to undertake repeat surveys to monitor how the habitat is changing 

over time  (Silver, 2019) . Quantifying change  is a key feature of many of these implementations, with the ease 

and speed of mapping allowing for the potential monitoring of these habitats over time as drones become  more 

ubiquitous. Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

19 

Figure 5 : RGB drone imagery of an intertidal sea grass habitat in the UK, which can be used to help quantify the 

Blue Carbon  store. [Source: Duffy  et al.  (2018) ]

Drones are increasingly being used  to limit interactions between people and anim als in coastal areas. For 

example,  Butcher  et al . (2020)  explored how drones can be used to manage conflict between swimmers and 

sharks. Using a  multirotor drone (DJI Inspire) , they assessed the potential to detect shark analogues  in the water 

across a  range of environmental conditions in Australia. Such a method provides an opportunity for real -time 

detection and alert s for the protection of bathers, although this research found that detectability decreased 

with higher winds and poorer water visibility. 

Drones have also been used for surveillance of illegal fishing activities, which  can support more sustainable 

management of fish stocks. In Belize, quadcopters with live video streams have been deployed to  increase the 

patrolling of the  coastline to dete ct and enable real -time enforcement of illegal fishing  (Howard, 2016) .

Moreover, the collection of video footage also enables successful prosecution.  Toonen and Bush  (2020)  note 

that this has also been adopted in other coastal regions, including Jamaica and Costa Rica. The ability of larger 

drones to traverse up to 500km ov er  a 2 -day period  (Toonen  et al. , 2020)  enables drones to be highly effective 

in the mana gement of this natural resource  and  is strongly tied  to  the enforcement and compliance of 

environmental law , which is further explored  in section  3.3 of  this report .

Finally, drones have been widely used to manage agriculture in terrestrial ecosystems, optimizing agriculture 

operations, monitoring growth, and  identifying  the environmental impact of events such as flooding  (Puri  et al. ,

2017) . In Ghana, UAVs have been used to monitor the impact of flooding within the Volta Delta, quantifying the 

amount of land (including farms) that have been lost to flooding a nd erosion  (Addo  et al. , 2018) . Such 

information is key to the successful management of coastal communities to inform resilient planning 

opportunities, as well as  to inform the provision of  compensation to land managers.  Further applications related 

to disaster assessment and  management are discussed i n section 3.7 of this report.  Table 3 outlines the  SDG 

goals, targets and indicators to which drones can contribute data and information for  habitat mapping and 

biological and natural resource assessment and management  at the coa st .Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

20 

SDG Goal  Target  Indicator  Relevance of drone technology 

GOAL 14 

Conserve and 

sustainably use 

the oceans, seas, 

and marine 

resources for 

sustainable 

development. 

Target 14.2 By 2020, 

sustainably manage and 

protect marine and coastal 

ecosyst ems to avoid 

significant adverse 

impacts, including by 

strengthening their 

resilience, and take action 

for their restoration in 

order to achieve healthy 

and productive oceans 

None  Drone technologies can be used 

to document and map the 

distribution of mar in e and coastal 

resources ( e.g. fisheries, seagrass 

me adows), providing 

policymakers, planners and 

managers with the evidence -base 

required for effective decision -

making and management 

GOAL 15 Protect, 

restore and 

promote 

sustainable use of 

terrestrial 

ecos ystems, 

sustainably 

manage forests, 

combat 

desertification, 

and halt and 

reverse land 

degradation and 

halt biodiversity 

loss 

TARGET 15.5 Take urgent 

and significant action to 

reduce the degradation of 

natural habitats, halt the 

loss of biodiversity and, by 

2020, protect and prevent 

the extinction of 

threatened species 

INDICATOR 15.5.1 Red 

List Index 

Drone technology can be used to 

document and map coastal 

biological resources ( e.g. 

saltmarshes, mangrove forests) 

and to monitor changes in the 

distribution of threatened species 

Table 3 : SDG goals, targets and indicators to which drones can contribute data and information for habitat 

mapping and biological and natural resource assessment and management at the coast. Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

21 

# 3.2 Ecological monitoring 

Ecological monito ring is the system of regular observation of species and habitats in both space and time.  UAVs 

have been regularly used to undertake bird censuses in both natural environments and urban environments to 

identify how populations are changing. In county Dubli n, Ireland,  Roughan &  O’Donovan  (2018)  used aerial 

ima gery obtained from two drones (Yuneec H520 and the DJI Phantom 4 Pro+) to identify buildings on wh ich 

herring gulls were nesting. They identified  451 nests in total and  noted  that birds favoured flat roofs or built 

their nests against chimney stacks. This  work was commissioned in part to address the increasing conflict 

between humans and gulls in the region, but such drone surveys are beginning to replace ground surveys of 

nesting sites for many remote coastal environments  (e.g. Rush  et al. , 2018) . Research has noted higher accuracy 

when using drones to conduct bird censuses compared with ground surveys in natural and often remote 

en vironments ( e.g.  cliff -tops). This is i n part due to the increased ability of  drones  to identify camouflaged chicks. 

However, counts from drone surveys may be skewed where birds flee their nests in response to an approaching 

drone, exposing chicks to ground predators, thereby increasing predation rates  (Brisson -Curadeau  et al. , 2017) .

Measures can be taken to avoid such disturbance, though, such as keeping a safe  distance from nesting birds 

(Brisson -Curadeau  et al. , 2017) .

Drones  have also been successfully used to undertake aerial surveys of marine mammals. In Australia,  Hodgson 

et al.  (2013)  undertook the first Aus tralian UAV survey trial of dugongs. Using a ScanEagle UAV and digital SLR 

camera, they flew a 1.3km 2 area capturing over 6000 images and over 600 recordings of dugongs, with turbidity 

the only factor that negatively impacted detection rate. Similarly, Oce an Research and Conservation Ireland 

(O.R.C. Ireland) initiated the FlukeFollow project in 2018, which uses UAVs to monitor whales and dolphins in 

Irish waters  (Ocean Research & Conservation Ireland, 2020) . Drones  have been widely used to collect count and 

density data on marine mammals  (Hensel  et al. , 2018; Colefax  et al. , 2019; Palomino Gonzalez, 2019) , with many 

Environmental Impact Assessments now requiring aerial surveys as part of their remit, and conservation 

management plans requiring stock assessment to support funding allocations. Such  surveys are highly regarded 

due to their higher accuracy in counts; however, little is known regarding impacts on the behaviour of mammals 

in response to UAVs  (Smith  et al. , 2016) .

Monitoring the behaviour of mar ine taxa is  becoming  a prominent avenue for drone research, particularly due 

to the coupling of this technology with biologging techniques  (Schofield  et al. , 2019) . Drone  footage can be 

monitored to quantify in teractions between individuals. For example, Schofield  et al.  (2017)  investigated 

whether departure of male sea turtles from breeding sites was driven by changes in the receptiveness of females 

or the probability of successful mati ng attempts, quantifying this through the sex ratio of all individuals within 

the footage. Drones have also been used to monitor the health of species. For example, in Australia, drones 

were coupled with specialised equipment to capture the blow samples of  19 Eas tern -Australian humpback 

whales  in order to test for novel viruses  (Geoghegan  et al. , 2018) . They characterised the virome of the blow 

(or exhaled breath) and found six novel virus species. Such approaches  are  increasingly being  used in Australia 

(see also Pirotta  et al. , 2017)  and demonstrate the potential for such equipment to monitor the disease ecology 

of marine mammals  (Fig ure  6) .Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

22 

Figure 6 : (A) Purpose -built UAV designed to sample whale blow. (B) UAV sampling whale blow. (C) Screens hot 

from the UAVs on -board GoPro camera mid whale sample collection. [Source: Pirotta et al. (2017) ]

SDG Goal  Target  Indicator  Relevance of drone 

technology 

GOAL 15 Protect, restore and 

promote sustainable use of 

terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably 

manage forests, combat 

desertification, and halt and reverse 

land degradation and halt 

biodiversity loss 

TARGET 15.5 Take urgent 

and significant actio n to 

reduce the degradation of 

natural habitats, halt the 

loss of biodiversity and, by 

2020, protect and prevent 

the extinction of 

threatened species 

INDICATOR 

15.5.1 Red 

List Index 

Drone technology can be 

used to monitor the 

abundance, behaviou r, and 

heal th of marine species, 

providing an evidence -base 

for more effective 

management activities 

Table 4 : SDG goals, targets and indicators to which drones can contribute data and information for ecological 

monitoring in the coastal zone. Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

23 

# 3.3 Environmental law enforcement and compliance 

There are several examples of the use of drone technology for environmental law enforcement and compliance. 

In Ireland, eighteen councils are using drones to visit known fly -tipping sites (The view from above: drones and 

public services , 2020) . Waterford City and County Council are using footage from a DJI Phantom quadcopter in 

their investigations into fly -tipping and illegal dumping, which h ave led to several notices of fines being executed 

(Parker, 2018) . In the Philippines, Ezequiel et al. (2014) describe how drone footage has been used to identify 

unregistered fishpens in one of the world’s most threatened lakes. This was the result of a collaboration 

between members from industry, local government, and acad emia with the aim of promoting the acquisition, 

post processing, analysis and sharing of drone -based aerial imagery. They used GIS and remote sensing 

techniques to overlay licenced pens on the drone imagery so that unlicensed pens could be easily identifi ed 

(Figure 7). This information is important to help ensure the carrying capacity limit of the lak e is not exceeded. 

Jiménez López and Mulero -Pázmány (2019) and Beaubien (2015) document how a conservation group is using 

fixed -wing drones to detect illegal mining and logging in the Peruvian Amazon. The private Los Amigos 

conservation area covers 145,000 hectares, and there are only a limited number of rangers on the ground. With 

their long range and ability to remain in the sky for long periods, the fixed -wing technology allows the group to 

more quickly identify and investigate illegal activity. Nuwer (2017) describes how another conservati on group 

is using thermal cameras , also mounted on fixed wing drones , to combat poaching in Malawi’s Liwonde National 

Park . This allows them to detect illegal activity on the ground , even at night. In Ireland, the Irish Naval Service 

used a drone to surv ey the extent of an accidental oil spill in Bantry Bay (O’Shea, 2020) . The footage can be used 

as part of an investigation into the incident. In the US, drones are also being used at sea to support the 

enforcement of no -discharge zones, for example where the release of bilge water is restrict ed (Alliance for 

Coastal Technologies, 2018) .

These applications demonstrate how drones can provide data and information that can contribute to more 

effective ICZM practices. While some of the applications described above were not necessarily coastal, they are 

still relevant as they may be applied in coastal settings. For example, drones can b e used to identify unlicensed 

coastal aquaculture sites. This can help to ensure aquaculture practices are sustainable. The potential 

applications of drones for environmental law enforcement and compliance in coastal environs directly address 

the UN SDGs outlined in table 5. 

Figure 7 : Orthomosaic , produced from drone imagery, of Lake Palakpakin, Philippines with annotated 

information on fishpens. Unlicensed pens can be identified by overlaying the known locations of 

licensed pens on the imagery using GIS software. [Source: Ezequiel et al. (2014) ]Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

24 

SDG Goal  Target  Indicator  Relevance of drone 

technology 

GOAL 6 Ensure 

availability and 

sustainable 

management of water 

and sanitation for all 

TARGET 6.6 By 2020, protect and 

restore water -related ecosystems, 

including mountains, forests, 

wetlan ds, rivers, aquifers and lakes 

INDICATOR 

6.6.1 Change in 

the extent of 

water -related 

ecosystems 

over time 

Drones can help to 

identify and reduce 

illegal dumping and 

aquaculture activities, 

improving the quality of 

water -related 

ecosystems 

GOAL 14 Conserve and 

sustainably use the 

oceans, seas and 

marine resources for 

sustainable 

development 

TARGET 14.4 By 2020, effectively 

regulate harvesting and end 

overfishing, illegal, unreported and 

unregulated fishing and destructive 

fishing practices and implement 

sc ience -based management plans, 

in order to restore fish stocks in the 

shortest time feasible, at least to 

levels that can produce maximum 

sustainable yield as determined by 

their biological characteristics 

INDICATOR 

14.4.1 

Proportion of 

fish stocks 

within 

biologically 

sustainable 

levels 

Monitoring illegal 

aquaculture practices 

can help to reduce 

destructive fishing 

practices 

TARGET 14.6 By 2020, prohibit 

certain forms of fisheries subsidies 

which contribute to overcapacity 

and overfishing, eliminate subsid ies 

that contribute to illegal, 

unreported and unregulated fishing 

and refrain from introducing new 

such subsidies, recognizing that 

appropriate and effective special 

and differential treatment for 

developing and least developed 

countries should be an inte gral part 

of the World Trade Organization 

fisheries subsidies negotiation [c] 

INDICATOR 

14.6.1 Degree 

of 

implementation 

of international 

instruments 

aiming to 

combat illegal, 

unreported and 

unregulated 

fishing 

Drones can help to 

improve the degree of 

imple mentation of 

international laws 

regulating unreported 

and unregulated fishing 

activities 

GOAL 15 Protect, 

restore and promote 

sustainable use of 

terrestrial ecosystems, 

sustainably manage 

forests, combat 

desertification, and 

halt and reverse land 

degradat ion and halt 

biodiversity loss 

TARGET 15.7 Take urgent action to 

end poaching and trafficking of 

protected species of flora and 

fauna and address both demand 

and supply of illegal wildlife 

products 

Drones can help identify 

poachers and illegal 

deforestati on activities 

and bring perpetrators 

to justice 

Table 5 : SDG goals, targets and indicators to which drones can contribute data and information in the area of 

environmental law enforcement and compliance at the coast. Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

25 

# 3.4 Pollution management 

The use of dr ones to combat coastal and marine pollution has been documented in a number of instances. In 

Japan, Project Sea Unicorn (IKKAKU) brings together an interdisciplinary team of startups, SMEs, large 

enterprises, and academic institutions to promote the devel opment and commercialisation of innovative 

technologies that will reduce ocean debris (Leave a Nest Co. Ltd., 2020) . One of the three teams working on the 

project will focus on the development of a g lobal marine debris monito ring system that uses data from satellites 

and drones . This data wil l be used to predict the arrival of debris at the coast to make coastal clean -up 

operations more efficient. A preliminary evaluation of such an application is described by Watanabe et al. 

(2019) . They designed an experiment to test the effectiveness of a real -time object detection algorithm at 

identifying marine debris in the Ishikari river estuary in Hokkaido. The deep -network model was able to 

successfully detect plas tic bottles, plastic bags, driftwood , and other debris on the ocean surface and on land 

from visible drone video footage. The authors envisage the technique could be used in combination with 

satellite observation to assist with clean -up operations. For e xample, a drone swarm could be activated and 

sent to a particular area where abnormal trends are detected by satellite imagery to examine the area in more 

detail. Similar experiments have been conducted in Hawaii and Greece using various types of drone pl atforms 

and sensors (Alliance for Coastal Technologies, 2018; Topouzelis et al. , 2019) and work is currently underway in 

Spain to test the technical and commer cial potential of such techniques (LITTERDRONE, 2020) . Several citizen 

science projects have also demonstrated how drones can help to address the marine littler problem (Campbell 

et al. , 2019; Fritz et al. , 2019; Jiménez López et al. , 2019) . Projects such as the Marine Litter DRONET encourage 

citizen scientists to undertake their own marine litter surveys using a standardised methodology (Kohler, 2018) .

The images are being used to help train an object -detection system to automatically detect debris in drone 

imagery. So much research effort is being invested in automatic debris detec tion because manua l detection 

from thousands or hundreds of thousands of drone images is not practical. 

Poor water quality due to nutrient pollution and wastewater discharge is another problem in some coastal and 

marine environments. Nutrient flows from industrial, urban , and agricultural activities can trigger harmful algal 

blooms (HABs), overgrowths of algae that can produce dangerous toxins. Alliance for Coastal Technologies 

(2018) describes how labs in Florida and Virginia, USA are exploring the use of drones for early detection and 

tracking of HABs using hyperspectral sensors, although there are still many challenges to be overcome before 

this can become practical for coastal management act ivities (Kislik et al. , 2018) . Martin et al. (2018) have also 

explored the applications of hyperspectral sensors, this time for monitoring coastal bathing water quality in the 

Canary Islands. A hyperspectral sensor mou nted on a multi -rotor platform was used to obtain indicators of the 

presence of bacterial pathogens. While the results of the study were promising, the technique is still 

experimental. 

The applications described above directly address SDG goals 6 and 14 . The specific targets and indicators to 

which drones can contribute data and information are summarised in table 6. Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

26 

SDG Goal  Target  Indicator  Relevance of drone 

technology 

GOAL 6 Ensure 

availability and 

sustainable 

management of 

water and 

sanitatio n for all 

TARGET 6.3 By 2030, improve 

water quality by reducing 

pollution, eliminating dumping 

and minimizing release of 

hazardous chemicals and 

materials, halving the 

proportion of untreated 

wastewater and substantially 

increasing recycling and safe 

reus e globally 

INDICATOR 6.3.1 

Proportion of 

domestic and 

industrial wastewater 

flows safely treated 

Multispectral , thermal, and 

hyperspectral sensors 

mounted on drone 

platforms can help to 

monitor water quality, 

although there are still 

many challenges to be 

overcome before this can 

become practical for 

coastal management 

activities 

INDICATOR 6.3.2 

Proportion of bodies 

of water with good 

ambient water 

quality 

GOAL 14 

Conserve and 

sustainably use 

the oceans, seas 

and marine 

resources for 

sustainable 

develo pment 

Target 14.1 By 2025, prevent 

and significantly reduce marine 

pollution of all kinds, in 

particular from land -based 

activities, including marine 

debris and nutrient pollution 

None  Drones are an effective 

means of efficiently 

providing data and 

inform ation on debris and 

nutrient pollution, assisting 

with targeted cleanup 

operations 

Table 6 : SDG goals, targets and indicators to which drones can contribute data and information in the area of 

coastal and marine pollution management. Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

27 

# 3.5 Digital herit age documentation, preservation, and conservation 

The use of drone technology for digital heritage documentation, preservation, and conservation is well 

documented, particularly in relation to natural, built, cultural, and archaeological heritage sites. On behalf of 

English Heritage, a charity that manages hundreds of heritage sites in England, Historic England (2017) used a 

combination of drone data, photogrammetry , and 3D printing to produce a 3D display model of Tintagel Isl and 

and Castle ( on the Cornwall coast) for an exhibition at a newly opened visitor's centre (Figure 8). The drone 

survey, which was undertaken by a professional surveying company, was obtained using a visible camera 

mounted on fixed wing and multi rotor p latforms to increase efficiency while ensuring maximum coverage of 

the site. Historic England processed the data using photogrammetry to create a 3D digital co mputer model, and 

then a reconstruction artist produced a physical 3D scaled printed model of th e island and a section of the 

adjoining mainland. In the visitor centre, an overhead projection system overlays the model with video showing 

the development of settlement and use of the island, enhanced by an audio soundscape. The project helps to 

educat e the public and celebrate the natural and built heritage of the local area. Similar work was undertaken 

by Themistocleous et al. (2015) at the Byzantine church of Panagia Phorbiotissa in Asinou, Cyprus, a UNESCO 

World Heritage Site. 

In Italy, Brumana et al. (2012) describe the use of visible oblique drone imagery to suppor t landscape heritage 

analysis and planning . They show how drone images can be used to reconstruct panoramic views and simulate 

the visual impact of planned developments on the landscape , using examples from the Alpin e foothills of 

Lombardy . The resulting imagery can be used to ensure proposed developments are in line with regulatory 

guidelines for provincial and municipal planning, such as those outlined in the European Landscape Convention. 

Also in Italy, Candiglio ta and Immordino (2013) showed how drones can be used to monitor and manage 

structural and architectural dam age to built heritage sites following an earthquake. They used a visible camera 

mounted on helicopter and quadcopter platforms to survey a number of damaged historical buildings, including 

a UNESCO world heritage site, following an earthquake in Emilia -Ro magna. The damage to the buildings meant 

that they were inaccessible, but the damage could be safely assessed from the high -resolution drone imagery. 

This allowed the municipality to more efficiently plan recovery works. Similar work was also undertaken in Italy 

by Achille et al. (2015) and Trizzino et al. (2017) , although they used photogrammetry techniques to create 3D 

visualisations of damaged structures. 

Many built heritage sites around the wor ld are in poor condition, and this could present a public safety hazard. 

One such site is the abandoned Ashnott lead mine in North Lincolnshire. Historic England (2017) surveyed the 

site using a fixed -wing drone to highlight places where the collapse of old, poorly sealed shafts presented a 

danger to livestock and hill -walkers. The surveys were then used to plan the installation of new fences, intended 

to safeguard the remains. 

Many of the world’s coastal heritage sites hav e been submerged or are under imminent threat of submergence 

because of changing sea -levels. This can occur either due to changes in the E arth’s climate or where tectonic or 

even anthropogenic activity 13 causes the earth’s crust to shift or sink below the sea -surface. In Greece, several 

submerged ancient harbours have been discovered along the coast of Lesbos Island, in the Aegean Sea (Harff et 

al. , 2016) . Papakonstantinou et al. (2019) explored how drones can be used to map such sites. They used vis ible 

drone imagery and photogrammetry techniqu es to create detailed 3D models of two sites at Mytilene and 

Eresos. This enabled the discovery of new hidden structures . Such information can be used for coastal heritage 

conservation planning and management. Skarlatos and Savvidou (2015) undertook similar work in Cyprus, but 

highlighted the technical difficulties in creating accurate orthomosaics of submerged sites. 

In Russia, Nicu et al. (2019) used drone imagery and photogrammetry in an analysis of coastal archaeologica l

heritage sites threatened by flooding and coasta l erosion on the shores of the Kuibyshev reservoir. They were 

able to identify and quantify the number of sites impacted by the creation of the reservoir in 1957. This 

information can be used by local authorities in future management plans and conservati on strategies. Similar 

work is being undertaken in Ireland and Wales as part of the EU -funded CHERISH (Climate, Heritage and 

Environments of Reefs, Islands, and Headlands) project (CHERISH, 2020) . The project explores the use of digital 

surveying technologies, including but not limited to drones and photogrammetry , for the protection and  

> 13

Such as groundwater or oil and gas extraction Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

28 

management of heritage sites. It s aim s includ e the generation of best practice guidelines for collecting and 

analysing such data , the identification of “at risk” cultural heritage sites in Ireland and Wales, and the 

development of mitigation and conservation guidance plans for their future management and protection. While 

photogrammetry mapping is becoming more commonly employed for coastal heritage applications, drone -

based LiDAR is also being used (e.g. Skarlatos et al. , 2015; CHERISH, 2020) , but this technique is considerably 

more e xpensive. 

Several others document the use of drone technologies for archaeological heritage investigations and 

conservation in coastal settings. In Australia, Kurpiel et al. (2 018) used visible imagery and photogrammetry to 

record the presence of Aboriginal cultural heritage at a coastal dune site prior to the imminent agricultural 

development of the landscape. The pending development meant that the physical and topographical context in 

which artefacts were found could be lost forever. The digital recording will allow archaeologists to continue to 

investigate the site (to some extent), even after development has occurred. In Canada, researchers at the Hakai 

Institute are usin g drone technology to create detailed maps of ancient clam gardens created by First Nations 

(A lliance for Coastal Technologies, 2018) . Many such sites have been destroyed by storms, tectonic activity, or 

historic logging activities (Holmes, 2016) . By digitally recording the remains of the surviving sites, a record of 

their exist ence remains. 

SDG goal 11 emphasises the protection and safeguarding of the world’s natural and cultural heritage sites. The 

applications outlined above demonstrate how drone technology can help to contribute to this endeavour. Table 

7 summarises the sp ecific targets and indicators to which drones can contribute data and information in relation 

to digital heritage preservation, documentation, and conservation at the coast. 

Figure 8 : Model of Tintagel Island and Castle, 

Cornwall, UK, created using drone imagery, 

photogrammetry , and 3D printing techniques. 

[Source: Historic England (2017) ]Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

29 

SDG Goal  Target  Indicator  Relevance of drone technology 

GOAL 11 

Make cities 

and human 

settlements 

inclusive, safe, 

resili ent and 

sustainable 

TARGET 11.4 Strengthen efforts 

to protect and safeguard the 

world’s cultural and natural 

heritage 

None  Drone technologies can be used 

to document, digitally preserve, 

and manage cultural and natural 

heritage sites 

TARGET 11.5 By 2030, 

significantly reduce the number 

of deaths and the number of 

people affected and 

substantially decrease the 

direct economic losses relative 

to global gross domestic 

product caused by disasters, 

including water -related 

disasters, with a focus on 

protecting the poor and people 

in vulnerable situations 

INDICATOR 11.5.2 

Direct economic 

loss in relation to 

global GDP, 

damage to critical 

infrastructure and 

number of 

disruptions to basic 

services, attributed 

to disasters *

Drone technologies can be used 

to (safely) help quantify the 

economic loss of damaged or 

destroyed cultural heritage sites 

in the event of a disaster ( e.g. 

following an earthquake) 

Table 7 : SDG goals, targets and indicators to which drones can contribute data and information in the area of 

digita l heritage preservation, documentation, and conservation at the coast. *A metric that contributes to this 

indicator is ‘ Direct economic loss to cultural heritage damaged or destroyed attributed to disasters ’Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

30 

# 3.6 Emergency response 

Emergencies at the coas t can arise from accidents or natural disasters, such as storms or earthquakes. The latt er 

are dealt with in section 3.7 (Disaster assessment and management) of this report. This section focuses on 

search and rescue operations. 

Drones can be very effec tive tools in supporting search and rescue activities (Burke et al. , 2019; Jiménez López 

et al. , 2019; Rajabifard, 2019) . Drone platforms equipped with visible o r thermal sensors can be used to search 

large, potentially difficult -to -access or inaccessible areas and detect people in distress on the ground or at sea. 

Thermal sensors are particularly suited to such activit ies because w arm objects, such as people or a nimals, stand 

out against the relatively cooler background in the false colour images . This makes them easier to detect than 

from visible imagery or from the view of rescuers aboard an airplane or helicopter (Figure 9). This is critical in 

time -sensitive situations, where people’s lives may be at risk. Thermal cameras have the added advantage of 

being able to detect objects both in the day or at night 14 . Manual detection of humans from the imagery or 

video footage, though, can be a difficult task, especi ally over a large search area. Artificial intelligence (AI) 

algorithms are now under development to automate the detection of people, both from visible and thermal 

drone imagery , for search and rescue operations . These , however, are still in the very ear ly stages of 

development and not yet practical for real -life operations (Lomonaco et al. , 2018; Burke et al. , 2019) .

Nevertheless, Lomonaco et al. (2018) suggest such AI -equipped platforms could eventu ally be used to power 

‘intelligent drone swarms’ for search and rescue operations at sea, for example in the context of the migrant 

crisis in the Mediterranean Sea. Other examples of potential drone uses in search and rescue operations include 

use of drone imagery to gather information on the ground state , use of drones as communications relay points, 

and use of drones to deliver life -saving equipment, such as life vests, to people in distress (Bäckman et al. , 2018; 

Seguin et al. , 2018; Burke et al. , 2019) . In 2018, the leading drone manufacturer DJI published a report 

documenting real -world examples of drone use in search and rescue operations. Between May 2017 to April 

2018, they counted at least 65 people who were rescued from peril by use of a drone (DJI Technology Inc., 2018) .

The use of drones for search and rescue operations can help to support the SDGs at the coast (Lomonaco et al. ,

2018) . Table 8 outlines the relevance of drone technology in relation to the specific goals, targets, and indicators 

to which it can contribute data and information. 

Figure 9 : Thermal 

imagery used in a SAR 

operation in Iowa, USA .

In this instance, six 

people who went 

missing on a river at 

night were identified 

and rescued by the 

Decorah Iowa Fire 

Department. People 

are clearly vi sible (lower 

right of centre) in the 

image against the dark 

background. [Source: 

DJI Technology Inc. 

(2018) ] 

> 14

This is especially effective in colder areas where the temperature difference (or the emissivity) of the 

background i s much greater compared to warmer regions. Conversely, in warmer environments, detection can 

be more challenging. Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

31 

SDG Goal  Target  Indicator  Relevance of drone 

technology 

GOAL 1 End 

poverty in all 

its forms 

everywhere 

TARGET 1.5 By 2030, build the 

resilience of the poor and those 

in vulnerable situations and 

reduc e their exposure and 

vulnerability to climate -related 

extreme events and other 

economic, social and 

environmental shocks and 

disasters 

INDICATOR 1.5.1 

Number of deaths, 

missing persons and 

directly affected persons 

attributed to disasters 

per 100,000 popul ation 

Drones can help to reduce 

the number of deaths, 

missing persons and 

directly affected persons 

attributed to disasters by 

quickly and cheaply 

providing rescuers with 

the information they 

need to find people in 

distress. 

GOAL 10 

Reduce 

inequality 

wi thin and 

among 

countries 

TARGET 10.7 Facilitate orderly, 

safe, regular and responsible 

migration and mobility of people, 

including through the 

implementation of planned and 

well -managed migration policies 

INDICATOR 10.7.2 

Number of countries 

with migration policies 

that facilitate orderly, 

safe, regular and 

responsible migration 

and mobility of people 

Drones can be used to 

support search and 

rescue of migrants, 

refugees and internally 

displaced persons at sea, 

for example those who 

find themselves in 

diffic ulty crossing the 

Mediterranean Sea. 

GOAL 11 

Make cities 

and human 

settlements 

inclusive, safe, 

resilient and 

sustainable 

TARGET 11.5 By 2030, 

significantly reduce the number 

of deaths and the number of 

people affected and substantially 

decrease the dir ect economic 

losses relative to global gross 

domestic product caused by 

disasters, including water -related 

disasters, with a focus on 

protecting the poor and people in 

vulnerable situations 

INDICATOR 11.5.1 

Number of deaths, 

missing persons and 

directly af fected persons 

attributed to disasters 

per 100,000 population 

Drones can help to reduce 

the number of deaths, 

missing persons and 

directly affected persons 

attributed to disasters by 

quickly and cheaply 

providing rescuers with 

the information they 

need to find people in 

distress. 

GOAL 13 Take 

urgent action 

to combat 

climate 

change and its 

impacts 

TARGET 13.1 Strengthen 

resilience and adaptive capacity 

to climate -related hazards and 

natural disasters in all countries 

INDICATOR 13.1.1 

Number of deaths, 

mi ssing persons and 

directly affected persons 

attributed to disasters 

per 100,000 population 

Table 8 : SDG goals, targets and indicators to which drones can contribute data and information for emergency 

response at the coast. Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

32 

# 3.7 Disaster assessment and man agement 

Disasters at the coast can arise from storms, erosion, earthquakes, and human activities, such as oil spills. 

Assessment of the damages is important for planning recovery activities, assessing insurance claims, and 

increasing the capacity of coast al communities to respond to future events. Drones are commonly used to 

support these activities. For example, the use of drones to asses post storm coastal erosion and damage to built 

infrastructure is well documented (e.g. Scarelli et al. , 2017; Alliance for Coastal Technologies, 2018; Duo et al. ,

2018; Laporte -Fauret et al. , 2019; Starek et al. , 2019) . On the southwest coast of France, Laporte -Fauret et al. 

(2019) demonstrated how a consumer grade quadcopter and photogrammetry techniques could be used to 

monitor post -storm beach and dune erosion . They showed how high -resolution digital surface models, which 

can be used to measure morphological and sediment volume changes after a storm or winter storm season, 

could be created from the visible imagery . The quality of the ir models were found to be sufficient for coastal 

monitoring, and the authors highlight the fact that drone data can be obtaine d cheaper, faster, and more 

efficiently than aerial LiDAR or traditional ground survey techniques. Starek et al. (2019) describe similar work 

for a hurricane impact assessment in Texas USA. They undertook a drone survey using a consumer grade drone 

following Hu rricane Harvey in 2017. Using photogrammetry techniques, they created a digital surface model 

and compared it with pre -Hurricane LiDAR data to assess beach erosion and damage to infrastructure. This 

information was provided to the local authority to assi st with recovery efforts. The United States Geological 

Survey (USGS) regularly undertakes similar work (Alliance for Coastal Technologies, 2018) . In Emilia Romagna, 

Italy, Scarelli et al. (2017) showed how such work can help to evaluate the effectiveness of different coastal 

management interventions. They performed pre - and post -winter storm season dr one surveys and generated 

digital surface models using photogrammetry techniques from the images. Comparison of the resulting models 

showed how different parts of the shoreline responded differently to one another. This could be explained by 

the beaches’ different physical characteristics as well as the different management interventions present, such 

as ‘bulldozer dunes’ (man -made dunes) and breakwaters. The authors highlight the usefulness of the low -cost 

technique for evaluating the effectiveness of these different shoreline protection measures , which can 

ultimately support local authorities in the development an d implementation of ICZM plans. Similar work was 

undertaken in the same region by Duo et al . (2018) . They mapped the extent of flooding and beach erosion 

following an extreme storm in February 2015, also using a consumer -grade drone and photogrammetry 

techniques, as part of a post -storm damage imp act assessment. The authors argue that the techniques used 

and the resulting information can be used by the municipality for the development and implementation of local 

risk management plans. 

Also in Italy, Trizzino et al. (2017) used drone surveys to detect hazards posed by erosion of rocky cliffs, known 

locally as ‘falesie’. Visibl e drone images were used to create 3D models of the cliffs, which were compared with 

LiDAR surveys obtained previously. This allowed them to map the fractured fronts of the cliffs in detail along a 

1km stretch of coast in Lecce, Southern Italy. Feng et a l. (2015) showed how drone data could be used to 

evaluate hazards posed by flooding in urban areas. Using visible drone imagery from a drone survey covering 

an urb an area in China of approximately 10km 2, they developed an image classification technique that could 

detect flooded areas (Figure 10) . Quick access to this information is essential to efficiently plan flood relief 

efforts, especially in urban areas. Pope scu et al . (2017) undertook similar work for a case study in Romania. 

They highlight that this information can be used by local authorities to distribute funds and by insurance 

co mpanies to determine payments. Ezequiel et al. (2014) described how visible imagery from drone surveys 

could be used to estimate damages to crops following a typhoon in the Philippines. They developed an image 

classification technique for identifying damaged coconut plantations after Typhoon Hai yan. This information 

can be used by the government to evaluate the scale of recovery assistance required. Separately they describe 

another application for mapping the extent of new fault systems following an earthquake, also in the Philippines 

(Popescu et al. , 2017) . This information is important for the evaluation of post -earthquake hazards. 

The applications described above exemplify the potential for drones to contribute to more effective ICZM 

practices in response to disasters at the coast . Table 9 summarises the specific SDG targets and indicators to 

which drones can contribute data and information in relation to disaster assessmen t and management at the 

coast. Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

33 

Figure 10 : Urban flood map of Yuyao, China generated from drone imagery. [Source: Feng et al. (2015) ]Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

34 

SDG Goal  Target  Indic ator  Relevance of drone technology 

GOAL 1 End 

poverty in all its 

forms 

everywhere 

TARGET 1.5 By 2030, 

build the resilience of the 

poor and those in 

vulnerable situations and 

reduce their exposure 

and vulnerability to 

climate -related extreme 

events and ot her 

economic, social and 

environmental shocks and 

disasters 

INDICATOR 1.5.1 

Number of deaths, 

missing persons and 

directly affected 

persons attributed to 

disasters per 100,000 

population *

Drones can help to quantify 

damage to dwellings, built 

infrastructur e, agricultural land, 

and other assets following a 

disaster, which can also help 

with estimation of economic 

losses 

INDICATOR 1.5.2 Direct 

economic loss 

attributed to disasters 

in relation to global 

gross domestic product 

(GDP) 

GOAL 11 Make 

cities and human 

settlements 

inclusive, safe, 

resilient and 

sustainable 

TARGET 11.5 By 2030, 

significantly reduce the 

number of deaths and the 

number of people 

affected and substantially 

decrease the direct 

economic losses relative 

to global gross domestic 

product caused by 

disasters, including water -

related disasters, with a 

focus on protecting the 

poor and people in 

vulnerable situations 

INDICATOR 11.5.1 

Number of deaths, 

missing persons and 

directly affected 

persons attributed to 

disasters per 100,000 

population *

INDICATOR 11.5.2 

Direct economic loss in 

relation to global GDP, 

damage to critical 

infrastructure and 

number of disruptions 

to basic services, 

attributed to 

disasters ** 

GOAL 13 Take 

urgent action to 

combat climate 

change and its 

impacts 

TARGET 13.1 Strengthen 

resilience and adaptive 

capacity to climate -

related hazards and 

natural disasters in all 

countries 

INDICATOR 13.1.1 

Number of deaths, 

missing persons and 

directly affected 

persons attributed to 

disasters per 100,000 

population *** 

Drones can hel p to quantify 

damage to dwellings following 

climate -related disasters 

Table 9 : SDG goals, targets and indicators to which drones can contribute data and information in the area of 

disaster assessment and management at the coast. *Relevant i ndicator metric s include n umber of people whose 

damaged dwellings were attributed to disasters , n umber of people whose destroyed dwellings were attributed 

to disasters , and n umber of people whose livelihoods were disrupted or destroyed, attributed to disasters .

**Releva nt indicator metrics include d irect agriculture loss attributed to disasters , d irect economic loss 

attributed to disasters , direct economic loss resulting from damaged or destroyed critical infrastructure 

attributed to disasters, direct economic loss to cu ltural heritage damaged or destroyed attributed to disasters, 

direct economic loss to other damaged or destroyed productive assets attributed to natural disasters, number 

of damaged critical infrastructure attributed to natural disasters. ***Relevant indi cator metrics include n umber 

of people whose damaged dwellings were attributed to disasters , n umber of people whose destroyed dwellings 

were attributed to disasters Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

35 

# 3.8 Planning and development 

Effective planning is a key tenet of integrated coastal zone man agement and is essential to achieving the 

sustainable development goals (Burbridge, 1999; West, 2019) . A number of studies have highlighted how drones 

can support planning authorities in the development and implementation of ICZM plans. For example, Scarelli 

et al. (2016) demonstrated how maps generated from drone surveys could be used to identify anthropogenic 

pressures on a beach/dune system in Brazil. This informati on could be used to secure funding for local ICZM ,

especially where local authorities have limited funds/resources to acquire high -quality mapping and monitoring 

data. Similar work by Scarelli et al. (2017) (described in section 3.7 of this report) demonstrates how drone 

surveys can be used to evaluate the effectiveness of different coastal management interventions , thus 

supporting local authorities in the development and implementation of evidence -based ICZM plans . Sabetien 

et al. (2019) showed how drone imagery could be used to guide seaweed cultivation planning in the Solomon 

Islands. They developed a decision support system (DSS) using a GIS technique called spatial multiple criter ia 

analysis (MCA) , which allowed them to identify suitable locations for seaweed farming based on multiple, 

conflicting criteria. Among those criteria was the distribution of the resource and the extent of existing farms, 

which were mapped from drone imag ery. The imagery is further intended to provide useful site information for 

future farm development, planning and monitoring. The DSS tool, which was developed in collaboration with 

the Solomon Island Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resources, will help support the sustainable development 

of seaweed farming in the Solomon Islands. Work by Brumana et al. (2012) , desc ribed in se ction 3.5 of this 

report, demonstrates how drone imagery can be used to support landscape planning by helping to visualise how 

different development scenarios would impact on waterfront views. Since the images can be easily shared via 

web -based geoportals , Brumana et al . (2012) argue that this can enhance public participation in the planning 

process. Ezequiel et al . (2014) used drone imagery to map land use development trajectories around the Seven 

Lakes of San Pablo in the Philippines. They contend that such maps can be used to support long -term 

infrastructure and zoning plans. Similarly, Gallagher and Lawrence (2016) highlight the potential for drone 

imagery to support sustainable land -use planning in urban e nvironments. For example, high -resolution maps 

can help to identify and plan the potential re -use of abandoned urban areas within cities. They can also help 

with planning and management of green and open spaces – e.g. aiding in inventory studies of the h ealth of urban 

trees to determine stresses, evidence of infestations, disease, the need for addition of new trees, etc. Drones 

can also support marine spatial planning. Themistocleous et al. (2019) used drone imagery in combination with 

other geospatia l data to identify sea and land activities around the ports of Cyprus. This information is essential 

for the implementation of integrated marine plans in compliance with the European Marine Spatial Planning 

Directive (2014/89/EU). The relevance of drone technology to the UN sustainable development goals in relation 

to planning and development at the coast is outlined in table 10 .Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

36 

SDG Goal  Target  Indicator  Relevance of drone technology 

GOAL 14 Conserve and 

sustainably use the 

oceans, seas and marine 

re sources for 

sustainable 

development 

Target 14.2 By 2020, 

sustainably manage and 

protect marine and coastal 

ecosystems to avoid 

significant adverse impacts, 

including by strengthening 

their resilience, and take 

action for their restoration 

in order to achie ve healthy 

and productive oceans 

None  Drone technology can be used to 

support marine spatial planning, 

which will aid in the sustainable 

management and protection of 

marine and coastal ecosystems. For 

example, drones can be used to 

monitor development act ivities, such 

as seaweed farming, which can 

contribute to the implementation of 

ICZM and marine spatial plans. 

GOAL 16 Promote 

peaceful and inclusive 

societies for sustainable 

development, provide 

access to justice for all 

and build effective, 

accountab le and 

inclusive institutions at 

all levels 

TARGET 16.7 Ensure 

responsive, inclusive, 

participatory and 

representative decision -

making at all levels 

None  Drone imagery can be used to 

enhance public participation in the 

planning process 

Table 10 : SDG goals , targets and indicators to which drones can contribute data and information in relation to 

planning and development at the coast. Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

37 

# 3.9 Tourism 

Drone imagery and videos are well placed to promote tourism and to facilitate ‘virtual tourism’ - the experience 

of visiting a place through digital media without physically being present in that place (Kitonsa et al. , 2018) .

Several c ompanies with expertise in drone photography/videography and virtual reality (VR) imaging technol ogy 

are now offering to create customised, sometimes interactive , virtual tour s for businesses in the tourism sector 

(3deep, 2020; e.g. Drone View, 2020; Virtual Reality Tour Guys, 2020) . The tours can be simply made up of 

images or video footage or they can be more complex, for example offering visitors the chance to explore an 

area in 3D with supplementary educational information embedded in the tour (Mirk and Hlavacs, 2014) . The 

tours can be delivered via the web for viewing on a computer or mobile device or even using VR goggles for a 

more immersive experience (Rutkin, 2015) . In Ireland, local authorities are using drone imagery and footage for 

marketing national brands such as the Wild Atlantic Way, Ireland’s Ancient East an d Dublin: A Breath of Fresh 

Air (DHLGH, 2017) . Besides being used for marketing and promotion , drone imagery and footage can help to 

limit visitors to certain areas threatened by excessive huma n activity, thereby contributing to more sustainable 

tourism practices. For example, the high number of visitors to the South Ari atoll Marine Protected Area 

(SAMPA) in the Maldives is posing a threat to resident marine species (Femmami, 2019) . Inter actions with an 

increasing number of boats are causing injury to a high proportion of local whale sharks (Allen, 2018) . In 

addition, overcrowding threatens the safety of swimmers and negatively affect s visitors’ satisfaction . Femmami 

(2019) ar gues that drones can be used to help alleviate these problems. For example, drones can be used by 

rangers to perform aerial surveillance operations, giving them the information they need to disperse tour 

operators among a greater number of sharks , thereby lim iting interactions with boats as well as the potential 

danger to swimmers. 

‘Virtual tourism’ has perhaps never been more relevant than in the time of coronavirus (Katanich, 2020) . In 

Ireland, Virtual Visit Tours uses a combination of ground and drone imagery to create 360 degree immersive 

media tours of popular tourist destinations (Virtual Visit Tours, 2020; Figure 11) . The tours have been featured 

as destinations for vir tual visitors who cannot physically travel to the is land or site as a result of travel restrictions 

or temporary closure due to Covid -19 (Romano, 2020) . Other examples of virtual tourism include a virtual drone 

tour of P ompeii (Osanna, 2020) and tours of (mostly UK -based) tourist destinations created by 3deep (3deep, 

2020) .

Figure 11 : Screenshot of a virtual tour of Antrim Castle Gardens . The functions of this web -based viewer, 

created and hosted by Virtual Visi t Tours, are similar to those in Google Earth and Google Street View, allowing 

visitors to explore the site from the air or the ground. [Source: Virtual Visit Tours (2020)] Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

38 

Traditionally, virtual tourism was seen as a way to promote a location to attract visitors, usually commissioned 

by hotels, tourist sites, and other businesses in the tourism industry, but in the last few months it has emerged 

as an entertaining and educational way of vis iting far -flung places that are t emporarily off -limits. Such tour s can 

be monetised, for example by generating ad revenue from YouTube and other social media sites. The revenues 

can potentially be used by local coastal communities to promote the sustainable development of the tourism 

sector. The relevance of drone tec hnology to the UN sustainable development goals in relation to tourism at 

the coast is outlined in table 11 .

SDG Goal  Target  Indicator  Relevance of drone technology 

GOAL 8 Promote 

sustained, 

inclusive and 

sustainable 

economic 

growth, full and 

productive 

employment and 

decent work for 

all 

TARGET 8.9 By 2030, 

devise and implement 

policies to promote 

sustainable tourism that 

creates jobs and 

promotes local culture 

and products 

INDICATOR 8.9.1 

Tourism direct GDP as 

a proportion of total 

GDP and in growth rate 

Drone imagery/footage can be 

used in ‘virtual tourism’ 

products, which can be 

monetised, providing a source of 

income for local businesses, and 

the revenues can potentially be 

used by local coastal 

communities to promote the 

sustainable development of the 

tourism sector. 

GOAL 11 Make 

cities and human 

settlements 

inclusive, safe, 

resilient and 

sustainable 

TARGET 11.4 Strengthen 

efforts to protect and 

safeguard the world’s 

cultural and natural 

heritage 

None  Drone technology can help to 

limit the impacts of t ourism on 

cultural and natural heritage 

sites at the coast , for example, 

by helping to deliver ‘virtual 

tourism’ as an alternative to 

physical visits to threatened sites 

GOAL 12 Ensure 

sustainable 

consumption 

and production 

patterns 

TARGET 12.b Develop an d

implement tools to 

monitor sustainable 

development impacts for 

sustainable tourism that 

creates jobs and 

promotes local culture 

and products 

INDICATOR 12.b.1 

Number of sustainable 

tourism strategies or 

policies and 

implemented action 

plans with agreed 

mo nitoring and 

evaluation tools 

Drone imagery/footage can be 

used in ‘virtual tourism’ 

products, which can create jobs 

and promote local culture and 

products. 

Table 11 : SDG goals, targets and indicators to which drones can contribute data and information in relation to 

tourism at the coast. Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

39 

# 4. Conclusion 

The potential for drones to contribute data and information to support ICZM and sustainable development at 

the coast is appreciable . The technology can help local authorities, provided they are aware of it s capabilities, 

as well as its limitations. This report demonstrates several innovative applications across nine key areas ,

although it is by no means exhaustive. The relevance of drone technology to the SDGs has also been explored, 

and clearly it offers potential for measuring progress toward the goals as well as supporting their achievement. 

This should be of interest to local authorities given the cost effectiveness (against alternative technologies) and 

their role in contributing to the SDGs at the l ocal level. 

As drone technology develops, new applications will no doubt emerge. It is crucial at this point that local 

authorities who wish to employ drone technology have a policy or strategy in place that deals specifically with 

the use of drones (Gee, 2019) and have suitably trained staff to undertake survey and/or data analysis activities. 

There are three options for local authorities who wish to employ drone technologies for ICZM activit ies: 

(1) Undertake data acqu isition and processing in ternally 

(2) Outsource data acquisition and processing 

(3) A combination of the above 

The implementation of the first option – e. g. the de velopment of a dedicated drone department – is complex, 

costly, and requires signific ant resources. Outsourcing may be preferred to limit co sts and complications. This 

is not to say that some activities cannot be undertaken by local authorities. As we ’ve seen in this report, Irish 

local authorities have been effective in using drones to tackle illegal dumping. However, for more complex tasks, 

time and money can be saved by employing experts. 

At a minimum, local authorities should be aware of the potential applicability of drone technology so that it can 

be evaluated alongside alternatives for the practical implementation of ICZM .Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

40 

# Appendix I: Definitions 

Active sensor  A sensor that emits its own energy and records the response from the 

physical environment. Microwave and LiDAR sensors are examples of 

active sensors. Passive sensors, on the other hand, record energy emitted 

or reflected by the physical environment. Digital cameras are exa mples of 

passive sensors, in that they record the light that is reflected by an object 

or surface. 

Blue carbon  Carbon dioxide that is removed from the atmosphere by coastal 

ecosystems, primarily mangroves, saltmarshes, and seagrass. These 

ecosystems se quester and store a large amount of carbon, and therefore 

play an essential role in regulating the Earth’s climate. 

Blue growth  A loose term that refers to the environmentally sustainable growth of th e

marine and maritime economy (Eikeset et al. , 2018) . In Europe, “Blue 

Growth” is the European Union’s long -term strategy to support 

sustainable growth in the marine and maritime sectors as a whole .

False colour image  An image that depicts an object or surface in colours different to that of a 

traditional photograph (or true colour image). They illustrate the amount 

of reflectance in different parts of the electromagnetic spectrum, thus 

allowing us to visualize wav elengths that the human eye can not see , such 

as near infrared. These are also sometimes called pseudo -colour images. 

Imagery captured by thermal sensors , for example, is displayed as a false 

colour image, whereby warmer objects stand out against cooler ones. 

Georeferencing  The process of assigning real world geographic coordinates to an image so 

that it can be referenced against other geographic data. Drone imagery 

captured for survey purposes must be georeferenced. This can be 

achieved in a number of ways, for example by using target s placed in the 

field during a survey whose coordinates are recorded using a GPS or by 

georeferencing the image to an existing image that already has embedded 

geographic information ( e.g. from referenced satellite imagery). 

Georeferencing is usually done using GIS or other mapping software 

packages, such as ArcGIS Pro or Pix4D. 

GIS  Geographical Information Systems (GIS) is a framework for collecting ,

managing, and analyzing geographical data . GIS software packages, such 

as ArcGIS Pro, are commonly used to manage, analyse, and share drone 

data. These can be used, for example, to georeference and orthorectify 

imagery, create maps, generate digital elevation models, and to detect 

land use changes over time. 

Ground Control Points  Points on the ground us ed to georeference drone imagery. These are 

usually taken as the centre of circular or square targets placed on the 

ground during a survey whose position is recorded on the ground using a 

GPS. The points can then be identified in the imagery and assigned those 

positional coordinates. This is usually performed in GIS or other mapping 

software packages, such as ArcGIS Pro or Pix4D. 

Hyperspectral sensor  Hyperspectral sensors record energy reflected in many narrow bands of 

the electromagnetic spectrum, of ten outside of the visible portion. They 

are useful for identifying objects on the ground with unique reflectance 

characteristics, such as phytoplankton, which can be difficult to distinguish 

using visible or multispectral imagery. Hyperspectral sensors differ from 

multispectral sensors in that they record reflectance in many more and 

much narrower bands of the electromagnetic spectrum. For some 

applications, features on the ground can be more easily identified 

(mapped) based on their reflectance charact eristics in such bands. Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

41 

ICZM  Integrated coastal zone management is a holistic and integrated approach 

to th e management of coastal areas. It seeks to balance environmental, 

economic, social, cultural and recreational objectives, all within th e limits 

set by natural dynamics. It is based on the principles of sustainability, 

active stakeholder engagement and cooperation, evidence -based decision 

making, and the integration of all relevant policy areas, sectors, and levels 

of administration across both time and space (EEA, 2000) . While th ere are 

no statutory requirements in the EU to implement ICZM, there are 

synergies between the approach and the EU directive on Marine Spatial 

Planning ( Directive 2014/89/EU ). 

LiDAR  Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) is an active remote sensing 

technolog y that can be used to create accurate and detailed elevation 

models. Traditionally flown on a piloted aircraft, LiDAR sensors are 

increasingly being flown on drones. Such surveys can produce more 

detailed datasets and are generally cheaper and safer to o btain than those 

obtained from piloted aircraft. 

Multispectral sensor  Multispectral sensors (or cameras) record energy reflected in several 

bands of the electromagnetic spectrum, including those than cannot be 

seen by the naked eye, such as the near inf rared. They are useful for 

identifying objects on the ground with unique reflectance characteristics, 

such as different types of vegetation or land cover, which can be difficult 

to distinguish from visible imagery alone. For some applications, features 

on the ground can be more easily identified (mapped) based on their 

reflectance characteristics in these different bands. 

NDVI  The normalised difference vegetation index (NDVI) is an indicator of 

vegetation health based on reflectance characteristics in t he red and near 

infrared bands of the electromagnetic spectrum. It can be calculated for 

each pixel of an image using the following equation: 

𝑁𝐷𝑉𝐼 = 𝑁𝐼𝑅 − 𝑅𝐸𝐷 

𝑁𝐼𝑅 + 𝑅𝐸𝐷 

Where: 

NDVI = normalised difference vegetation index (unitless) 

NIR = ref lectance in the NIR portion of the spectrum 

RED = reflectance in the red portion of the spectrum 

The resulting image can be displayed as a false colour image that 

highlights healthy versus unhealthy vegetation. Often used for agricultural 

applications, it can also be used for ecological resource assessments and 

habitat mapping. 

Orthorectification  Orthorectification is the process of removing geometric distortions caused 

by terrain and the angle at which an image is acquired. It can be thought 

of as the process of ‘stretching’ an image such that the scale becomes 

uniform. This is an essential processing step for drone imagery that is to 

be used for survey purposes, because uncorrected images will not 

produce accurate measurements. This can be done in GI S or other 

mapping packages, such as ArcGIS Pro and Pix4D. 

Orthomosaic  An orthomosaic is a collection of orthorectified images stitched together 

to create a single, seamless image. 

Passive sensor  Passive sensors record energy emitted or reflected by the physical 

environment. Digital cameras are examples of passive sensors, in that 

they record the light that is reflected by an object or surface. Thermal 

sensors are also passive sensors, in that they record heat emitted by a 

surface. These are differ ent from active sensors, which emit their own 

energy. Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

42 

Photogrammetry  Photogrammetry is the science of extracting 3D information from 

overlapping 2D photographs taken from different vantage points. Aerial 

photogrammetry software packages match pixels from the overlapping 

imagery and use triangulation to calculate 3 dimensional object 

coordinates. Commonly used packages for drone survey data include 

Pix4D and Agisoft Metashape. 

PPK geolocation  A method for geolocating drone imagery that involves correctin g the 

trajectory after the survey using a precisely located local base station. 

Radiometric resolution  The ability of a sensor to distinguish differences in light intensity or 

reflectance .

Remote sensing  The process of collecting information about an o bject or surface without 

physically being in contact with it. Remote sensing platforms include 

satellites, aircraft and drones. 

RTK GPS/GNSS  Real -time kinematic global positioning systems or global navigation 

satellite systems provide highly precise in formation about the location of a 

point on the Earth’s surface. For precise georeferencing of drone imagery, 

coordinates can be obtained using an RTK GPS . These coordinates are 

known as ground control points. 

Spatial multiple criteria 

analysis 

Spatial multiple criteria analysis (MCA) is a GIS technique for assessing 

multiple and often conflicting criteria across a geographical area. It is 

often used for site suitability assessments and risk assessment studies. It 

involves overlaying multiple layers o f geographical information to produce 

a single layer illustrating where desirable (or undesirable) criteria overlap. 

Spatial resolution  Spatial resolution is a measure of the smallest object that can be resolved 

by a sensor. It can be defined as the si ze of a single pixel on the ground 

(sometimes referred to as the ground sampling distance, or GSD). 

Spectral resolution  Spectral resolution refers to t he ability of a sensor to resolve features in 

the electromagnetic spectrum . The higher the spectral r esolution, the 

narrower the wavelength band. Hyperspectral sensors have higher 

spectral resolution than multispectral sensors. 

Spectral signature  The unique variation in reflectance (or emittance ) of a n object with 

respect to wavelengths on the electro magnetic spectrum. Different 

surfaces or objects reflect different amounts of energy at different 

wavelengths. As a result, it is possible to distinguish, for example, 

between different land cover types or vegetation types. This allows for 

the creation of maps that can help identify the geographical coverage of 

features of interest on the ground. 

Structure from Motion  Structure from Motion (SfM) is a photogrammetric technique for creating 

a 3D model from 2D images. SfM does not require ground control p oints 

to create a 3D model. The resulting models are used more for 

visualisation purposes rather than to generate survey grade models. 

Sustainable development  Sustainable development is “development that meets the needs of the 

present without compromis ing the ability of future generations to meet 

their own needs ” (World Commission on Environment and Development, 

1987) .

Temporal resolution  Wh ere multiple images are undertaken at regular intervals, temporal 

resolution refers the period of time between which the images were 

acquired. 

True colour image  An image that depicts an object or surface in colours similar to what we 

might see with our own eyes. True colour images are composites of 

reflectance recorded in the red, green, and blue portions of the 

electromagnetic spectrum, thus are sometimes referred to as RGB images. Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

43 

Traditional photographs , including those obtained from the cameras 

abo ard many consumer -grade drones, are true colour images. 

Visible image  See true colour image Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

44 

# Appendix II: Guidance materials on drone use from national aviation 

# authorities 

Country  National Aviation Authority  Link to guidance material 

Finland  Finnis h Transport Safety Agency  https://www.droneinfo.fi/en 

Iceland  Icelandic Transport Authority  https://www.icetra.is/aviation/drones/ 

Ireland  Irish Aviation A uthority  https://www.iaa.ie/general -aviation/drones 

United 

Kingdom 

UK Civil Aviation Authority  https://www.caa.co.uk/Co nsumers/Unmanned -aircraft -

and -drones/ Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

45 

# References 

3deep (2020) 360° Aerial Virtual Tours . Available at: https://3deepmedia.com/360 -aerial -photography -virtual -

vr -tours/ (Accessed: 17 July 2020). 

Aber, J. S. et al. (2019) Small -format aerial photography and UAS imagery: Principles, techniques and 

geoscience applications . Academic Press. 

Achille, C. et al. (2015) ‘UAV -based photogrammetry and integrated technologies for architectural 

applications —Methodologica l strategies for the after -quake survey of vertical structures in Mantua (Italy)’, 

Sensors . Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute, 15(7), pp. 15520 –15539. 

Addo, K. A. et al. (2018) ‘Drone as a tool for coastal flood monitoring in the Volta Delta, Ghana’, 

Geoenvironmental Disasters . SpringerOpen, 5(1), pp. 1 –13. 

Allen, H. (2018) ‘The impacts of anthropogenic injury on site fidelity in Maldivian whale sharks (rhincodon 

typus)’. University of York. 

Alliance for Coastal Technologies (2018) ‘Practical U ses For Drones to Address Management Problems in 

Coastal Zones’, in Workshop Proceedings Alliance for Coastal Technologies . Wells, Maine, p. 45. Available at: 

http://www.act -us.info/Download/Workshops/2018/Drone.pdf. 

Assenbaum, M. (2018) ‘Monitoring Coasta l Erosion with UAV Lidar’, GIM , March. Available at: 

https://www.gim -international.com/content/article/monitoring -coastal -erosion -with -uav -lidar. 

Bäckman, A. et al. (2018) ‘Drones for Provision of Flotation Support in Simulated Drowning’, Air Medical 

Journ al , 37(3), pp. 170 –173. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amj.2018.01.007. 

Beaubien, J. (2015) ‘Eyes In The Sky: Foam Drones Keep Watch On Rain Forest Trees’, NPR , 19 May. Available 

at: https://www.npr.org/sections/goatsandsoda/2015/05/19/398765759/eyes -in -th e-sky -styrofoam -drones -

keep -watch -on -rainforest -trees?t=1540327094055&t=1593529685195. 

Boon, M., Drijfhout, A. and Tesfamichael, S. (2017) ‘COMPARISON OF A FIXED -WING AND MULTI -ROTOR UAV 

FOR ENVIRONMENTAL MAPPING APPLICATIONS: A CASE STUDY’, ISPRS - Intern ational Archives of the 

Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences , XLII -2/W6, pp. 47 –54. doi: 10.5194/isprs -

archives -XLII -2-W6 -47 -2017. 

Brisson -Curadeau, É. et al. (2017) ‘Seabird species vary in behavioural response to drone census’, Scientific 

Reports . Nature Publishing Group, 7(1), pp. 1 –9. 

Brumana, R. et al. (2012) ‘Panoramic UAV views for landscape heritage analysis integrated with historical maps 

atlases’, Geoinformatics FCE CTU , 9, pp. 39 –50. 

Burbridge, P. R. (1999) ‘The guiding principles for a European ICZM strategy’, Towards a European Strategy for 

Integrated Coastal Zone Management (ICZM), University of Newcastle, UK .

Burke, C. et al. (2019) ‘Requirements and Limitations of Thermal Drones for Effective Search and Rescue in 

Ma rine and Coastal Areas’, Drones . Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute, 3(4), p. 78. 

Butcher, P. A. et al. (2020) ‘Beach safety: can drones provide a platform for sighting sharks?’, Wildlife Research .

CSIRO, 46(8), pp. 701 –712. 

Campbell, J. et al. (2019) ‘Citizen Science and Data Integration for Understanding Marine Litter’, in Data for 

Good Exchange [D4GX] 2019 . New York City. Available at: https://www.wilsoncenter.org/article/citizen -

science -and -data -integration -for -understanding -marine -litter. 

Campbell, J. B. and Wynne, R. H. (2011) Introduction to remote sensing . Guilford Press. 

Candigliota, E. and Immordino, F. (2013) ‘Low Altitude Remote Sensing by UAV for monitoring and emergency 

management on historical heritage’, in ANIDIS Congress, Padova .

CHERISH (2020) ‘Climate, Heritage and Environments of Reefs, Islands, and Headlands’. The Discovery 

Programme, Aberystwyth University: Department of Geography and Earth Sciences, Geological Survey Ireland, 

Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Mo numents of Wales. Available at: Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

46 

http://www.cherishproject.eu/en/ (Accessed: 20 July 2020). 

Colefax, A. P. et al. (2019) ‘Reliability of marine faunal detections in drone -based monitoring’, Ocean & Coastal 

Management . Elsevier, 174, pp. 108 –115. 

council.ie (2019) ‘Utilising Drone Technology In Local Government’, Council Journal , 1 July. Available at: 

https://council.ie/utilising -drone -technology -in -local -government/. 

Cummins, V., O’Mahony, C. and Connolly, N. (2004) ‘Review of Integrated Coastal Zone Managem ent and 

principles of best practice’, Environmental Research Institute University College, Cork, Ireland .

Dai, W. et al. (2020) ‘Saltmarsh Expansion in Response to Morphodynamic Evolution: Field Observations in the 

Jiangsu Coast using UAV’, Journal of Coas tal Research . BioOne, 95(sp1), pp. 433 –437. 

DHLGH (2017) Local Authority Tourism Activty 2016 . Available at: https://www.lgma.ie/en/news/role -of -local -

government -in -tourism.pdf. 

DJI Technology Inc. (2018) More Lives Saved: A Year of Drone Rescues Around th e World . Available at: 

https://www.dropbox.com/s/7f6lhzz5mt1fcz0/More Lives Saved 2018.pdf?dl=0. 

Doughty, C. L. and Cavanaugh, K. C. (2019) ‘Mapping coastal wetland biomass from high resolution unmanned 

aerial vehicle (UAV) imagery’, Remote Sensing . Multid isciplinary Digital Publishing Institute, 11(5), p. 540. 

Drone View (2020) Drone View . Available at: http://www.droneview.media/ (Accessed: 17 July 2020). 

Duffy, J. P. et al. (2018) ‘Spatial assessment of intertidal seagrass meadows using optical imaging s ystems and a 

lightweight drone’, Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science . Elsevier, 200, pp. 169 –180. 

Duo, E. et al. (2018) ‘Local -scale post -event assessments with GPS and UAV -based quick -response surveys: a 

pilot case from the Emilia -Romagna (Italy) coast’, Natural Hazards and Earth System Sciences , 18(11), pp. 

2969 –2989. 

EEA (2000) Integrated Coastal Zone Management , CEC Communication 2000/547 ICZM . Available at: 

https://www.eea.europa.eu/help/glossary/eea -glossary/integrated -coastal -zone -

management#:~:text =Integrated coastal zone management (ICZM,sustainable management of coastal 

zones.&text=ICZM seeks%2C over the long,limits set by natural dynamics. (Accessed: 29 July 2020). 

Eikeset, A. M. et al. (2018) ‘What is blue growth? The semantics of “Sustainable D evelopment” of marine 

environments’, Marine Policy , 87, pp. 177 –179. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2017.10.019. 

Ezequiel, C. A. F. et al. (2014) ‘UAV aerial imaging applications for post -disaster assessment, environmental 

management and infrastruct ure development’, in 2014 International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft 

Systems (ICUAS) . IEEE, pp. 274 –283. 

Femmami, N. (2019) ‘Monitoring and enforcing the South Ari Atoll marine protected area in the Maldives’. 

Department of Environment and Geography, Un iversity of York. 

Feng, Q., Liu, J. and Gong, J. (2015) ‘Urban flood mapping based on unmanned aerial vehicle remote sensing 

and random forest classifier —A case of Yuyao, China’, Water . Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute, 7(4), 

pp. 1437 –1455. 

Fritz, S. et al. (2019) ‘Citizen science and the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals’, Nature 

Sustainability . Nature Publishing Group, 2(10), pp. 922 –930. 

Gallagher, K. and Lawrence, P. (2016) ‘Unmanned systems and managing from above: the practica l

implications of UAVs for research applications addressing urban sustainability’, in Urban sustainability: Policy 

and praxis . Springer, pp. 217 –232. 

Gee, C. (2019) Making drones work in local government . Available at: https://socitm.net/download/inform -

re port -making -drones -work -in -local -government/. 

Geoghegan, J. L. et al. (2018) ‘Virological sampling of inaccessible wildlife with drones’, Viruses .

Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute, 10(6), p. 300. 

Gray, P. C. et al. (2019) ‘A convolutional neu ral network for detecting sea turtles in drone imagery’, Methods in Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

47 

Ecology and Evolution . Wiley Online Library, 10(3), pp. 345 –355. 

Green, A., Chadwick, M. A. and Jones, P. J. S. (2018) ‘Variability of UK seagrass sediment carbon: Implications 

for blue ca rbon estimates and marine conservation management’, PLoS One . Public Library of Science San 

Francisco, CA USA, 13(9), p. e0204431. 

Green, D. R., Mauquoy, D. and Hagon, J. J. (2020) ‘8 Monitoring, Mapping, and Modelling Saltmarsh with 

UAVs’, Unmanned Aerial Remote Sensing: UAS for Environmental Applications . CRC Press, p. 129. 

Harff, J., Bailey, G. N. and Lüth, F. (2016) ‘Geology and archaeology: submerged landscapes of the continental 

shelf: an introduction’, Geological Society, London, Special Publications . Geological Society of London, 411(1), 

pp. 1 –8. 

Hensel, E., Wenclawski, S. and Layman, C. A. (2018) ‘Using a small, consumer -grade drone to identify and count 

marine megafauna in shallow habitats’, Latin american journal of aquatic research . Pontificia Un iversidad 

Católica de Valparaíso. Facultad de Recursos …, 46(5), pp. 1025 –1033. 

Historic England (2017) Photogrammetric Applications for Cultural Heritage: Guidance for Good Practice ,

Historic England . Swindon, UK. 

Hodgson, A., Kelly, N. and Peel, D. (2013 ) ‘Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) for surveying marine fauna: a 

dugong case study’, PloS one . Public Library of Science, 8(11), p. e79556. 

Holmes, K. (2016) The Great Walls of Quadra , Hakkai Institute . Available at: https://www.hakai.org/blog/great -

walls -quadra/ (Accessed: 8 July 2020). 

Howard, B. C. (2016) ‘Watch how drones fight pirate fishing from the sky’, National Geographic .

Jeon, E. -I. et al. (2020) ‘Semantic Segmentation of Drone Imagery Using Deep Learning for Seagrass Habitat 

Monitoring’, Korean Journal of Remote Sensing . The Korean Society of Remote Sensing, 36(2_1), pp. 199 –215. 

Jiménez López, J. and Mulero -Pázmány, M. (2019) ‘Drones for conservation in protected areas: present and 

future’, Drones . Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute, 3(1), p. 10. 

Katanich, D. (2020) ‘CORONAVIRUS LOCKDOWN: COULD THIS BE THE MOMENT FOR VIRTUAL REALITY 

TRAVEL?’, euronews , 23 April. Available at: https://www.euronews.com/living/2020/04/22/coronavirus -

lockdown -could -this -be -the -moment -for -virtual -reality -travel. 

Kislik, C., Dronova, I. and Kelly, M. (2018) ‘UAVs in support of algal bloom research: a review of current 

applications and future opportunities’, Drones . Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute, 2(4), p. 35. 

Kitonsa, H. and Kruglikov, S. V ( 2018) ‘Significance of drone technology for achievement of the United Nations 

sustainable development goals’, R-Economy. 2018. Vol. 4. Iss. 3 . Уральский федеральный университет, 4(3), 

pp. 115 –120. 

Kohler, P. (2018) Launching the Marine Litter DRONET , The P lastic Tide . Available at: 

https://www.theplastictide.com/blog -1/2018/4/22/launching -the -marine -litter -dronet (Accessed: 6 July 2020). 

Kurpiel, R., Ogden, R. and Turnbull, D. (2018) ‘The sky’s the limit: Applying drone technology to improve 

cultural herita ge management outputs and outcomes, incorporating an example from Bunurong Country’. 

Bundoora, Victoria: Archaeology Program, La Trobe University. 

Laporte -Fauret, Q. et al. (2019) ‘Low -Cost UAV for high -resolution and large -scale coastal dune change 

monito ring using photogrammetry’, Journal of Marine Science and Engineering . Multidisciplinary Digital 

Publishing Institute, 7(3), p. 63. 

Leave a Nest Co. Ltd. (2020) Project Ikkaku . Available at: https://ikkaku.lne.st/en/. 

Lee, W. Y., Park, M. and Hyun, C. -U. ( 2019) ‘Detection of two Arctic birds in Greenland and an endangered bird 

in Korea using RGB and thermal cameras with an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV)’, PloS one . Public Library of 

Science San Francisco, CA USA, 14(9), p. e0222088. 

LITTERDRONE (2020) LITTER DRONE Project , LITTERDRONE . Available at: 

http://litterdrone.eu/index.php/proyecto/?lang=en (Accessed: 6 July 2020). Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

48 

Lomonaco, V. et al. (2018) ‘Intelligent drone swarm for search and rescue operations at sea’, arXiv preprint 

arXiv:1811.05291 .

Martin, J. et al. (2018) ‘Drone hyperspectral system for monitoring coastal bathing water quality’, YP Remote S ,

7, p. 32. 

Miller, B. (2018) ‘Drones Take Flight for Local Government’, Government Technology . Available at: 

https://www.govtech.com/products/Drones -Take -Fl ight -for -Local -Government.html. 

Mirk, D. and Hlavacs, H. (2014) ‘Using drones for virtual tourism’, in International Conference on Intelligent 

Technologies for Interactive Entertainment . Springer, pp. 144 –147. 

Nicu, I. et al. (2019) ‘Shoreline dynamics and evaluation of cultural heritage sites on the shores of large 

reservoirs: Kuibyshev reservoir, Russian Federation’, Water , 11(3), p. 591. 

Nuwer, R. (2017) ‘High Above, Drones Keep Watchful Eyes on Wildlife in Africa’, The New York Times , 13 

March. Availabl e at: https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/13/science/drones -africa -poachers -

wildlife.html#:~:text=LIWONDE%2C Malawi — Night has fallen,the luminous gray Shire River. 

O’Shea, J. (2020) ‘Watch: Naval Service drone videos oil spill in Bantry Bay’, Cork Beo , 27 Ap ril. Available at: 

https://www.corkbeo.ie/news/local -news/watch -naval -service -drone -videos -18155476. 

Ocean Research & Conservation Ireland (2020) Fluke Fellow Project . Available at: 

https://www.orcireland.ie/fluke -follow -project (Accessed: 23 July 2020). 

Osanna, M. (2020) The new excavations of Pompeii in Regio V revealed in an exclusive virtual tour by Massimo 

Osanna . Italy: YouTube. Available at: 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?time_continue=420&v=abspZyhQDm0&feature=emb_logo. 

Palomino Gonzalez, A. (2019) ‘ Drones and marine mammals in Svalbard’. UiT Norges arktiske universitet. 

Papakonstantinou, A. et al. (2019) ‘Mapping Cultural Heritage in Coastal Areas with UAS: The Case Study of 

Lesvos Island’, Heritage . Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute, 2( 2), pp. 1404 –1422. 

Parker, C. (2018) ‘Council using drone to tackle fly -tipping and litter’, The Irish Examiner , 15 January. Available 

at: https://www.irishexaminer.com/ireland/council -using -drone -to -tackle -fly -tipping -and -litter -465759.html. 

Pirotta, V. et al. (2017) ‘An economical custom -built drone for assessing whale health’, Frontiers in Marine 

Science . Frontiers, 4, p. 425. 

Pix4D (2019) Mapping clifftop hazards and coastal erosion , Blog . Available at: 

https://www.pix4d.com/blog/coastal -erosion -drone -mapping (Accessed: 29 June 2020). 

Politi, E. et al. (2019) ‘Earth observation applications for coastal sustainability: potential and challenges for 

implementation’, Anthropocene Coasts . NRC Research Press, 2(1), pp. 306 –329. 

Popescu, D., Ichim, L. and Stoic an, F. (2017) ‘Unmanned aerial vehicle systems for remote estimation of 

flooded areas based on complex image processing’, Sensors . Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute, 

17(3), p. 446. 

Puri, V., Nayyar, A. and Raja, L. (2017) ‘Agriculture drones: A modern breakthrough in precision agriculture’, 

Journal of Statistics and Management Systems . Taylor & Francis, 20(4), pp. 507 –518. 

Quinn, J. A. et al. (2018) ‘Humanitarian applications of machine learning with remote -sensing data: review and 

case study i n refugee settlement mapping’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, 

Physical and Engineering Sciences . The Royal Society Publishing, 376(2128), p. 20170363. 

Rajabifard, A. (2019) Sustainable Development Goals Connectivity Dilemm a: Land and Geospatial Information 

for Urban and Rural Resilience . CRC Press. 

Röhr, M. E. et al. (2018) ‘Blue carbon storage capacity of temperate eelgrass (Zostera marina) meadows’, 

Global Biogeochemical Cycles . Wiley Online Library, 32(10), pp. 1457 –1475 .

Romano, A. (2020) ‘Missing Out on St. Patrick’s Day? Grab a Guinness and Take These Virtual Tours of Ireland 

and the Guinness Storehouse (Video)’, Travel + Leisure , 20 July. Available at: Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

49 

https://www.travelandleisure.com/attractions/festivals/st -patricks -day -virtual -tour -ireland. 

Roughan & O’Donovan (2018) Nesting Gulls Populations in Balbriggan, Skerries and Howth, Co. Dublin: Final 

Report .

Rush, G. P. et al. (2018) ‘Can drones count gulls? Minimal disturbance and semiautomated image processing 

with an u nmanned aerial vehicle for colony ‐nesting seabirds’, Ecology and evolution . Wiley Online Library, 

8(24), pp. 12322 –12334. 

Rutkin, A. (2015) ‘See the sights by air with drone tourism’, New scientist . New Science Publications, (3024), p. 

19. 

Ruwaimana, M. et al. (2018) ‘The advantages of us ing drones over space -borne imagery in the mapping of 

mangrove forests’, PloS one . Public Library of Science San Francisco, CA USA, 13(7), p. e0200288. 

Sabetian, A. et al. (2019) SINOPSIS –The Solomon Islands National Ocean Planning Spatial Information Syst em: 

Spatial decision support tools for seaweed aquaculture planning in the Solomon Islands . New Zealand Institute 

for Pacific Research (NZIPR). 

Scarelli, F. M. et al. (2016) ‘Natural and Anthropogenic coastal system comparison using DSM from a low cost 

UAV survey (Capão Novo, RS/Brazil)’, Journal of Coastal Research . BioOne, 75(sp1), pp. 1232 –1236. 

Scarelli, F. M. et al. (2017) ‘Seasonal dune and beach monitoring using photogrammetry from UAV surveys to 

apply in the ICZM on the Ravenna coast (Emilia -Romagna , Italy)’, Remote Sensing Applications: Society and 

Environment . Elsevier, 7, pp. 27 –39. 

Schofield, G. et al. (2017) ‘Detecting elusive aspects of wildlife ecology using drones: new insights on the 

mating dynamics and operational sex ratios of sea turtles’ , Functional Ecology . Wiley Online Library, 31(12), pp. 

2310 –2319. 

Schofield, G. et al. (2019) ‘Drones for research on sea turtles and other marine vertebrates –A review’, 

Biological Conservation . Elsevier, 238, p. 108214. 

Science Learning Hub – Pokapū Akor anga Pūtaiao (2020) ‘Monitoring marine environments with drones’. 

Available at: https://www.sciencelearn.org.nz/resources/2855 -monitoring -marine -environments -with -drones. 

Seguin, C. et al. (2018) ‘Unmanned aerial vehicles (drones) to prevent drowning’, Res uscitation . Elsevier, 127, 

pp. 63 –67. 

Silver, A. (2019) ‘Drone takes to the skies to image offshore reefs’, Nature . Nature Publishing Group, 

570(7762), pp. 545 –546. 

Skarlatos, D. and Savvidou, E. (2015) ‘Coastal Survey of archaeological sites using drones’ , Skyllis , 15, pp. 196 –

204. 

Smith, C. E. et al. (2016) ‘Assessment of known impacts of unmanned aerial systems (UAS) on marine 

mammals: data gaps and recommendations for researchers in the United States’, Journal of Unmanned Vehicle 

Systems . NRC Research P ress, 4(1), pp. 31 –44. 

Starek, M. J., Gingras, M. and Jeffress, G. (2019) ‘Application of Unmanned Aircraft Systems for Coastal 

Mapping and Resiliency’, in Rajabifard, A. (ed.) Sustainable Development Goals Connectivity Dilemma (Open 

Access): Land and Geos patial Information for Urban and Rural Resilience . CRC Press, pp. 109 –125. 

The view from above: drones and public services (2020) Government Business . Available at: 

https://governmentbusiness.co.uk/features/view -above -drones -and -public -services (Accessed: 30 June 2020). 

Themistocleous, K. et al. (2015) ‘The methodology of documenting cultural heritage sites using 

photogrammetry, UAV, and 3D printing techniques: the case study of Asinou Church in Cyprus’, in Third 

International Conference on Remote Sensing a nd Geoinformation of the Environment (RSCy2015) . International 

Society for Optics and Photonics, p. 953510. 

Themistocleous, K. et al. (2019) ‘The use of satellite remote sensing and UAV for the mapping of coastal areas 

for the use of marine spatial plannin g’, in Earth Resources and Environmental Remote Sensing/GIS Applications 

X. International Society for Optics and Photonics, p. 1115610. Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

50 

Toonen, H. M. and Bush, S. R. (2020) ‘The digital frontiers of fisheries governance: fish attraction devices, 

drones and satellites’, Journal of environmental policy & planning . Taylor & Francis, 22(1), pp. 125 –137. 

Topouzelis, K., Papakonstantinou, A. and Garaba, S. P. (2019) ‘Detection of floating plastics from satellite and 

unmanned aerial systems (Plastic Litter Project 2018)’, International Journal of Applied Earth Observation and 

Geoinformation . Elsevier, 79, pp. 175 –183. 

Trizzino, R. et al. (2017) ‘Applications of UAV Photogrammetric Surveys to Natural Hazard Detection and 

Cultural Heritage Documentation’, in EGU Gene ral Assembly Conference Abstracts , p. 18091. 

Tsiamis, N., Efthymiou, L. and Tsagarakis, K. P. (2019) ‘A Comparative Analysis of the Legislation Evolution for 

Drone Use in OECD Countries’, Drones . Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute, 3(4), p. 75. doi: 

10.3390/drones3040075. 

UN General Assembly (2015) Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development ,

A/RES/70/1 . New York. Available at: https://www.refworld.org/docid/57b6e3e44.html. 

UN General Assembly (2020) Global indicator fram ework for the Sustainable Development Goals and targets of 

the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development . Available at: https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/indicators/Global 

Indicator Framework after 2020 review_Eng.pdf. 

United Nations (1992) ‘Convention on Biologic al Diversity (CBD)’. Rio de Janeiro, p. 79. Available at: 

https://www.cbd.int/convention/ (Accessed: 24 July 2020). 

United Nations (2015a) COP21 (United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change) . Paris. Available at: 

https://unfccc.int/sites/default/ files/english_paris_agreement.pdf. 

United Nations (2015b) Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015 -2030 . Available at: 

https://www.undrr.org/publication/sendai -framework -disaster -risk -reduction -2015 -2030. 

USGS (2020) How is the Landsat 8 Coastal/A erosol Band 1 used? , Mapping, Remote Sensing, and Geospatial 

Data . Available at: https://www.usgs.gov/faqs/how -landsat -8-coastalaerosol -band -1-used?qt -

news_science_products=0#qt -news_science_products (Accessed: 26 August 2020). 

Ventura, D. et al. (2016) ‘A low -cost drone based application for identifying and mapping of coastal fish 

nursery grounds’, Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science . Elsevier, 171, pp. 85 –98. 

Ventura, D. et al. (2017) ‘ Unmanned aerial systems (UASs) for environmental monitoring: A review with 

applications in coastal habitats’, Aerial Robots -Aerodynamics, Control and Applications . InTech Rijeka, Croatia, 

pp. 165 –184. 

Virtual Reality Tour Guys (2020) Virtual Tour Guys . Ava ilable at: https://vrtourguys.com/ (Accessed: 17 July 

2020). 

Virtual Visit Tours (2020) Virtual Visit Tours . Available at: www.virtualvisittours.com (Accessed: 20 July 2020). 

Wang, D. et al. (2020) ‘Estimating aboveground biomass of the mangrove forests on northeast Hainan Island in 

China using an upscaling method from field plots, UAV -LiDAR data and Sentinel -2 imagery’, International 

Journal of Applied Earth Observation and Geoinformation . Elsevier, 85, p. 101986. 

Warfield, A. D. and Leon, J. X. (2019) ‘Es timating Mangrove Forest Volume Using Terrestrial Laser Scanning and 

UAV -Derived Structure -from -Motion’, Drones . Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute, 3(2), p. 32. 

Watanabe, J., Shao, Y. and Miura, N. (2019) ‘Underwater and airborne monitoring of marine ecosystems and 

debris’, Journal of Applied Remote Sensing . International Society for Optics and Photonics, 13(4), p. 44509. 

WEB (2014) Ireland’s Biodiversity: Our Natural Ally in the Fight against Climate Change . Available at: 

http://environmentalp illar.ie/wp/wp -content/uploads/2015/07/WEB -booklet3.compressed.pdf. 

West, P. C. (2019) ‘Redesigning Planning, Governance, and Policies to Achieve Multiple Sustainable 

Development Goals’, One Earth , 1(3), pp. 303 –304. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oneear.2 019.11.002. 

Wich, S. A. and Koh, L. P. (2018) Conservation drones: mapping and monitoring biodiversity . Oxford University 

Press. Applications of Drone Technology for Sustainable 

Development of the Coastal Zone: A Literature Review 

51 

World Commission on Environment and Development (1987) Our Common Future . Oxford University Press.
