Title: 

URL Source: https://www.fec.gov/files/legal/aos/1996-35/1076001.pdf

Published Time: 2009-07-29T15:10:44.000Z

Markdown Content:
# ihe Ecological Wisdom 

Social Justice 

Grassroots Democracy 

Nonviolence 

# Green Party USA Decentralization Community-based Economics Feminism Respect for Diversity Persona] and Global Responsibility - Future Focus 

August 2, 1996 /f OR J*W(? ~ 35 Identification Number: COOS 19699 The Greens/Green Party USA is requesting an advisory opinion as to its status as a national committee of a political party as required by the 2 U.S.C. §431(14) so that it may collect and disperse funds as a political party. This year the Green Party is mounting a national presidential campaign with Ralph Nader as our candidate for president. He is on the ballot as a Green Party candidate in Alaska, California, Colorado, Hawaii, Maine, Nevada, New Jersey, New Mexico, Utah, and Washington. The Florida and the North Carolina Green Parties are running a write-in campaign. More than twenty other states are in the process of meeting the petitioning requirements to get him on the ballot. They include: Alabama, Arkansas, Connecticut, Delaware, Illinois, Iowa, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, New York, North Dakota, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Tennessee, Vermont, Virginia, Washington DC, and Wisconsin. The final outcome of this effort won't be known until September. Your prompt review of the enclosed materials in response to our request for an advisory opinion is greatly appreciated. 

Sincerely, 

Betty K. Wood c? Clearinghouse Coordinator, National Office, Greens/Green Party USA °">  

> „.

Enclosures: •Incorporation Papers 

^

Charter and Working Guidelines (Bylaws) °"> Green Politics Bulletin Syn thesis/Regenera tion Newsletter of Independent Progressive Politics Network §3 m

*

Greens Program: An Evolving Vision (2 copies) *& IS 0 so 22 

> - - 0

mi:- m

The Greens/Green Party USA, PO Box 100, Btodgett Mills NY 13738, 607/756-4211 August 2, 1996 Identification Number: COOS 19699 The Greens/Green Party USA is requesting an advisory opinion as to its status as a national committee of a political party as required by the 2 U.S.C. §431(14) so that it may collect and disperse funds as a political party. This year the Green Party is mounting a national presidential campaign with Ralph Nader as our candidate for president. He is on the ballot as a Green Party candidate in. Alaska, California, Colorado, Hawaii, Maine, Nevada, New Jersey, New Mexico, Utah, and Washington. The Florida and the North Carolina Green Panics are running a write-in campaign. More than twenty other states are in the process of meeting the petitioning requirements to get him on the ballot. They include: Alabama, Arkansas, Connecticut, Delaware, Illinois, Iowa, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, New York, North Dakota, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Tennessee, Vermont, Virginia, Washington DC, and Wisconsin. The final outcome of this effort won't be known until September. A number of people will be running for federal and state offices: Vice President Krista Paradise, Colorado Madeline Hoffman, New Jersey Others are petitioning: Anne Goeke, Minnesota, Pennsylvania and others Muriel Tillinghast, New York Richard Walton, Rhode Island Bill Boteler, Washington DC U.S. Senate Jed Whittaker, Alaska Abraham Guttman, New Mexico John Rensenbrink, Maine Others are petitioning: Bob Rudner, Illinois Richard Grossman, Massachusetts Bill Martin, Rhode Island U.S. House of Representatives John Grames, Alaska District 1 Walt Sheasby, California District 27 Will Yeager, California District 38 Mike Chamness, Colorado District 3 Jack Uhrich, New Mexico District 1 Others are petitioning: Charles Laws, Massachusetts District 10 The Greens/Green Party USA, PO Box 100, Blodgett Mills NY 13738, 607/756-4211 Page 1 Howie Hawkins, New York District 25 Rob McRoberts, New York District 19 Tom Leighton, New York District 14 Graham Schwass, Rhode Island District 1 State Legislative Bodies Mike Brunner, Alaska State House, District 15 Hank Chapot, California State Assembly, District 14 Craig Coffin, California State Senate, Monterrey Gary Swing, Colorado State Assembly, District 8 Tico Embury, Colorado State Assembly, District 1 Karen Archibald, Hawaii State House, Honolulu District Bob Anderson, New Mexico State House, Albuquerque, Mary Lou Jones, New Mexico State House, Grants David Hampton, New Mexico State House, Valencia Roberto Mop dragon, New Mexico State House, District 46 Peggy Halgeson, New Mexico Corporation Commission Others are petitioning: Cam Gordon, Minnesota State Assembly, Distrit 62A Tom Sullivan, New York State Senate, District 48 Bob Polhemus, New York State Senate, District 26 Craig Seeman, New York State Assembly, Brooklyn Tony Gronowicz, New York State Assembly, District 73 Jeffrey Johnson, Rhode Island Assembly, District 48 Other Partisan Candidates Larry Grantham, Mayor, Foley AL Keiko Bonk, Mayor, Hawaii HI Jason Schwartz, County Council, Maui HI 

> *

DonnaLynn Napua Johns, County Council, District 3, Hawaii HI Julie Jacopson, County Council, District 6, Hawaii HI Others are petitioning: Suzanne Gaetani, Broome County Executive, NY The Green Party USA is a decentralizeed grassroots democratic organization in that policy decisions are made at our annual convention (Congress) where representatives of local organizations meet and vote on policy matters. The Greens National Committee/Greens Council meets 3-4 times a year to make decisions on issues that come up between Congresses. The GNC/GC is our legal board of directors and is made up of representatives of nineteen state or multi-state regions. It does not make policy but makes decision to carry out policy set by the Congress. The Clearinghouse is our national office that, with oversight by committees of the GNC/GC, carries out the day to day operations of the organization. The Greens/Green Party USA, PO Box 100, Blodgett Mills NY 13738, 607/756-4211 Page 2 Conventions: Our now annual event is called a Green Gathering that generally has four parts: a conference with educational workshops that cover organizing techniques, issues, and skill building; a local demonstration or action; a convention (Congress); and a meeting of the Greens National Committee/Green Council. Each Gathering has been organized at the local level by a different state organization which takes lead responsible for the logistics, workshop planning, and the local demonstration/action. The national organization, through committees of the Greens National Committee/Greens Council, has responsibility for the convention (Congress) portion of the Gathering. The GNC/GC also is responsible for its own meeting that immediately follows the convention (Congress). We will be having our ninth convention this year at our Gathering in Los Angeles, August 15-20. Previous conventions have been held in Amherst, Massachusett, 1987; Eugene, Oregon, 1989; Estes Park, CO, 1990; Elkins, West Virginia, 1991; Minneapolis, Minnesota, 1992; Syracuse, NY 1993; Boise, Idaho, 1994; and Albuquerque, New Mexico, 1995. Attendees number around 300 people. Green Congress: The Green Congress meets each year to set policy. It is made up of representatives of chapters (locals). Voting is proportional according to the membership of each chapter. The Green Congress is the only body that can change the bylaws or the program. It sets the guidelines by which the Greens National Committee makes decisions. The Congress elects three of its participants to sit on the Greens National Committee for the coming year. Greens National Committee: The Greens National Committee is the body responsible for the day-to-day operations of the party and has ultimate financial responsibly for the organization. It is made up of two representatives of each state or multi-state region. The organization was originally set up with several multi-state regions. As states have become more organized, they have established themselves as a separate region and have two seats on the GNC. We now have 19 regions, including seven single-state regions, with several other states considering to declare themselves a separate region. Voting is proportional. The GNC has met three to four times a year in various locations throughout the country. The GNC has met in Syracuse NY, 8/93; Tampa FL, 11/93; Cleveland OH, 3/94; Boise ID, 8/94; Pullman WV, 10/94; Blodgett Mills NY, 3/95; Albuquerque NM, 8/95; South Bend IN, 11/95; St. Louis MO, 3/96. There are several committees of the GNC: budget and finance, clearinghouse oversight, electoral action, fundraising, gathering (which has subcommittees), Green Politics editorial board, international, long-range planning, media, mediation, presidential candidates and nomination, program, publications, and structure. Caucuses; The national Green Party has identity caucuses to better enable those people who have traditionally been disempowered by society to organize. While any group with common interests may create a caucus, the People of Color Caucus, the Women's Caucus, the Lesbian/Bisexual/Gay/Queer Causus, and the Youth Caucus all have two voting representatives on the Greens National Committee and voting rights in the Green Congress. The caucuses, in addition to providing organizing opportunities for their members, provide consciousness-raising for the Greens as a whole. Incorporation: The Greens/Green Party USA is incorporated in the state of Missouri as a national political party within the meaning of Section 527 of the Internal Revenue Code and is operated primarily for the purpose of directly or indirectly accepting contributions or making expenditures, or both, directed toward the influencing or attempting to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political organization, or the election of Presidential or Vice Presidential electors, whether or not such individual or electors are actually selected, nominated, elected, or appointed. No part of the revenues of the corporation shall inure to the benefit of, or be distributable to its directors, trustees, officers, other private individauls, or organizations established and operated for profit, except as may be permited under the Internal Revenue Code as reasonable compensation for services rendered. The purposes for which the corporation is organized are to promote and conduct political action within the context of the following ten key values: ecological wisdom, grassroots democracy, social justice, nonviolence, decentralization, community-based economics, feminism, respect for diversity, personal The Greens/Green Party USA, PO Box 100, Blodgett Mills NY 13738, 607/756-4211 Page 3 and global responsibility, and future focus/sustainability. These objectives may include educational and administrative functions as well as any such other activities as may be necessary and proper to accomplish the corporation purposes. (Incorporation papers enclosed.) U.S. Postal Service recognition; We have been recognized by the U.S. Postal Service as a political party in its granting of a political party bulk mail authorization. National Office: The Greens have had a national office (clearinghouse) continuously since before 1991. For several years the office was located in Kansas City MO. It moved to present location, Blodgett Mills NY, in 1995. The national Greens/Green Party USA national office serves all Greens, whether they are members or not, with information about the activities of Green locals and Green Parties, whether they are affiliated or not. Staff of the national office includes one fulltime volunteer and many part-time, decentralized volunteers. The national office serves as the administrative focal point for all Greens in the country. It processes memberships and renewals, handles information inquiries for anyone interested in the Greens, serves as a facilitator for communications among Greens by putting Greens in touch with other Greens who may be working on the same issues or who have a needed skill or expertise, publishes and distributes the newspaper, Green Politics, and administrative newsletter, the Bulletin, distributes the quarterly discussion journal, Synthesis/Regeneration, that goes to all members, handles all finances for the national Greens/Green Party USA, serves as the focal point for communications among the members of the Greens National Committee and its three or four annual meetings, and for the work of the Green Congress that meets annually. The national office provides literature on membership, issues education, the Green Platform, and Green Party positions on issues. It sells books, audio tapes, and video tapes by Greens about Greens and the Green philosophy. The national office buys merchandise at volume discounts and then resells to local organizations at discount to help them with their fundraising. The national office makes money on the merchandise, but so do the locals, who are able to get better discounts for lesser amounts by ordering through the national office. In addition to providing merchandise at a discount for the locals, the national office has prepared an organizing kit to help organizers set up new locals in their communities. To aid in the organization of new locals, the national office provides names of others in the general locality of the new local to that local. When there are several inquiries from the same area, the national office attempts to get these people together. Finances: The Greens/Green Party USA has had a bank account for several years. It currently has an account with the Country Club Bank in Kansas City MO and another with the Alternatives Credit Union of Ithaca NY. The annual budget is approximately $30,000. Money is raised through memberships, contributions, special fundraising, and by the sale of merchandise. Merchandise includes Green t-shirts, bumperstickers, buttons, books, and tapes. Sales are both retail and at a discount for volume orders to aid locals in their fundraising. Expenses are primarily in maintaining the national office: for rent, postage, telephone, and photocopies. Thousands of dollars are spent on membership services: the publications, and maintaining the database, in addition to photocopies, postage, and telephone. Bylaws: The Greens/Green Party USA is governed by the Charter and Working Guidelines (copy enclosed). The bylaws are modified through proposals submitted to the annual convention (Congress) and approved by consensus or by a 75% majority. The Bylaws describe the structure, membership requirements, and responsibilities of each body. Publications: The Greens/Green Party USA publishes a quarterly newspaper, Green Politics (samples enclosed), a bimonthly administrative newsletter, the Bulletin (samples enclosed), and Synthesis/Regeneration, a quarterly discussion journal (samples enclosed). Green Politics carries news of the Greens, the Green Parties, and topics of interest to them. The purpose of the newspaper is to let Greens know what is going on among other Green groups and for The Greens/Green Party USA, PO Box 100, Blodgett Mills NY 13738, 607/756-4211 Page 4 outreach to those who don't know of the Greens to help them understand what we stand for and what we do. Political activity of ad state Green Parties is reported, as well as various other activities such as coalition work, actions, and demonstrations. Green perspectives on various issues are also presented. Letters to the Editor are published. There is an editorial board of five or six people, geographically distributed, who solicit articles, select those to be published, edit them as necessary, and provide general layout guidelines. Actual layout, production, and distribution is done in the national office. Green Politics is sent to all members and is available in bundles for locals or individuals to use for outreach. Articles that are inappropriate for outreach are not published here. The newspaper is 12-16 pages; print runs are 10,000 copies (or more) and are sold out. The Bulletin carries administrative news and is available by subscription to individual members and to locals. Proposals to be considered by the Congress or the Greens National Committee are published here prior to their respective meetings. Minutes of meetings are published here, as are general announcements, calls for proposals, and financial reports. Articles that are appropriate for the membership but not for outreach may be published here where they are not published in Green Politics. Various committees and Direct Action Networks publish their reports in the Bulletin. The Bulletin is published at and distributed by the national office within guidelines established by the Greens National Committee. Synthesis/Regeneration is in magazine format and carries news and opinion articles written by members and non-members. Topics include toxics, nuclear energy and waste, electoral politics, and other topics of interest to Greens. Each issue usually has several articles on one or more topics. Synthesis/Regeneration is sent to all members and to independent subscribers. Editing, layout, and distribution are by a Greens local in Saint Louis MO. On-qoino Efforts: The Greens have held a number of conferences in conjunction with its annual convention and Greens National Committee meetings. Conference themes have included economics, social justice, electoral politics, and others. Greens are involved in a number of issues in an on-going basis. Many of these issues are reflected in Direct Action Networks, loose networks of people working on an issue. Examples include: the Toxics Network, the Nuclear Network, the Leonard Peltier Network, Forests and Wildlands Network, Food Grcles, Health Care, Sustainable Energy, Local Currencies. An example of a network in action was this past year when the Greens/Green Party USA joined with GreenPeace and Nuclear Information Referral Service in sponsoring Chernobyl +10 actions across the country. Greens in several states staged protests, wrote letters to the editor and other educational actions, and collected goods to be sent to the victims of Chernobyl. Greens across the country are continuing their efforts in protesting the spread of radiation through the transport of nuclear waste across the country by contacting Congresspeople and the White House, by writing letters to the editor, by influencing their local city and county legislatures to pass legislation outlawing the movement of radioactive waste through their communities. Greens continue to educate and lobby for universal coverage, single-payer health care. Brochures on single payer health care are available from the national office and are a part of the organizing kit. Greens in many communities are setting up local currencies based on the model of Ithaca Hours. Greens in Santa Fe NM, Kansas City MO, and Brooklyn NY are examples of this effort. Voter registration drives are on-going. They are also an accepted part of the petitioning process. The Green Party of California initially received ballot status by registering 80,000 people as Greens. Many Greens are involved in community education through the presentation of topics in line with Green values through the use of cable access. These efforts are happening in, for example, California, New Mexico, New York, and North Carolina. The center page of Green Politics has articles from various locals and state parties that describe many of these activities. The Green Party USA is actively involved in promoting independent politics through its co-sponsorship of the Independent Progressive Politics Network (IPPN) and its predessors, the National Peoples Progressive Network and the National Independent Politics Summit. The IPPN had forty-five organizations in attendance at its April 1996 meeting. Ten of these were Greens groups - the The Greens/Green Party USA, PO Box 100, Blodgett Mills NY 13738, 607/756-4211 Page 5 Greens/Greens Party USA, five state Green Parties, four Green locals. Five members of the Greens/Green Party USA are elected members of the 26 person National Steering Committee. The purpose of the IPPN is to provide a forum for independent progressive organizations to work together for common goats. Four of its committees are: the National Slate of Independent Candidates Task Force, the Independent Presidential Task Force, the National Peoples Pledge Campaign Task Force, and the Caravan/March for Social Justice. Green Party members are active in leadership positions in each of these groups. A newsletter is enclosed. Platform: The Green Party USA has been active in electoral politics since 1989 when we began drafting our platform: Greens Program: An Evolving Vision (copy enclosed). Greens from across the country were involved in the drafting of the document that was initially approved, plank by plank by 75% majority, at our annual convention (called the Green Congress) in 1990 at Estes Park CO and modified at subsequent conventions. The most recent modification was made at our annual convention in 1995 in Albuquerque NM. The platform covers many topics: agriculture and food, arts, biological diversity and animal liberation, community, criminal justice, direct action, economics, educations, energy, foreign and military policy, forests, health and healing, indigenous people, land use, materials and waste management, peace and nonviolence, politics, social justice, spirituality, technology, water,  

> and

air. Green Party members write articles for a number of periodicals, including Z Magazine and The Nation. State Party Affiliation: Many state Green Parties are affiliated with the national Greens/Green Party USA and more are expected to affiliate within the next two months. Some of those (but not necessarily all) that are affiliated include: Green Party of Alaska Green Party of Colorado Florida Green Party Indiana Green Party Green Party of Missouri New Mexico Green Party New Hampshire Green Party Green Party of New York State North Carolina Green Party Green Party of Ohio Green Party of Vermont Green Party of Virginia Green Party of Washington State Green Party of Wisconsin Ballot Access: Green Party of Alaska, 1990, by Jim Sykes receiving more than 3% of the votes for governor; retained in 1994 by Jim Sykes/Roger Lewis receiving more than 3% of the votes for governor/It, governor. Green Party of Arizona, 1992, by petition Green Party of Hawaii, 1992, by petition; lost in 1994; regained in 1996 The Greens/Green Party USA, PO Box 100, Blodgett Mills NY 13738, 607/756-4211 Page 6 Green Party of California, 1992, by petition; retained in 1994 by Margaret Garcia receiving more than 3% of the vote for Secretary of State. Green Party of Colorado, 1994, by Philip Hufford/Krista Paradise receiving 1.5% of the vote for governor/It, governor. Green Party of Maine, 1994, by Jonathan Carter receiving more than 5% of the vote for governor. Candidates: Green Party candidates have been running for office since 1985 when Greens began running candidates for local offices in Wisconsin and Connecticut. In 1989, Greens in Burlington VT ran for local office. In 1990 New Hampshire and Alaska each ran candidates for governor. In 1991, 22 Greens held of flee in 11 states (list enclosed). In 1992, 91 people ran for office in 14 states, collected 570,000 votes, and won 13 seats (list enclosed). In 1994 and 1995, Greens ran for office in fifteen states, collecting over one million votes. A list of candidates, the office for which they ran, and their percentage of the vote, is enclosed. This latter sheet has been liberally distributed for several months from the national office. Federal and state races: U.S. Senate 1992 Mary Jordan, U.S. Senate, Alaska, 8.1% Linda Martin, U.S. Senate, Hawaii, 13% 1994 Barbara Blong, U.S. Senate, California, 1.6% U.S. House of Representatives 1992 Mike Milligan, Alaska District 1, 3.8% Blaise Bonpane, California District 30, Richard Greene, California District 36, 5% Tian Harter, California District 5, 2% Mindy Lorenz, California District 22, 10% Jesse Moorman, California District 27, 4% Richard Roe, California District 51, 2% Walt Sheasby, California District 28, 3% Charlie Wilken, California District 25, 3% Barbara Ann Rodgers-Hendrick, Florida District 1, 4.2% Jonathan Carter, Maine District 2, 10.00% Jeff Barrow, Missouri District 9, 4.5% 1994 Joni Whitmore, Alaska, District 1 10% Craig Coffin, California District 17, 3.3% Robert Marston, California District 23, 2.6% Kip Kruger, California District 50, 1.8% Charles Fitzgerald, Maine, 5% Rex Johnson, New Mexico District 2, 5% Tom Leighton, New York, East Side of Manhatten, 1% State Governor/It. Governor The Greens/Green Party USA, PO Box 100, Blodgett Mills NY 13738, 607/756-4211 Page 7 1990 Guy Chichesler, New Hampshire Jim Sykes, Alaska, >3% 1994 Jim Sykes/Roger Lewis, Alaska, 3.9% /Danny Moses, California, 1.8% Philip Hufford/Krista Paradise, Colorado, 1.5% Kionj Dudley/Jack Morse, Hawaii, 3.5% Jonathan Carter, Maine, 6.5% Roberto Mondragon/Steve Schmidt, New Mexico, 10.4% /Jeff Johnson, Rhode Island, 6% State Legislative Bodies 1990 Lucy Wyman, New Hampshire State House (Lancaster) Roy Morrison, New Hampshire State House (Warner) 1992 Timothy Feller, Alaska State Senate, District 14, Seat H, 23% Michael Kutscheid, Alaska State House, withdrew after primary Benn Levine, Alaska State House, District 7, 8.0% Gary Pearson, Alaska State House, District 27, 6.0% David Stannard, Alaska State Senate, District 24, Seat 0, 7.1% Charles Weaverling, Alaska State Assembly, District 35, 23% Carolyn Campbell, Arizona State House, District 11,11.0% Jesse Chandley, Arizona State House, District 29, 5.0% Cynthia Allaire, California State Assembly, District 61, 5% Glenn Bailey, California State Assembly, District 40, 4% Joseph Desist, Calidornian State Assembly, District 63, 13% Richard Geiselhart, California State Assembly, District 9, 7% Margene McGee. California State Assembly, District 1, 6% Kent Smith, California State Senate, District 1, 10% Dan Tarr, California State Assembly, District 75, 3% Jeff Alexander, Hawaii State House, District 43, 15% Gary Andersen, Hawaii State Senate, District 9, 3.6% Connie Chun, Hawaii State House, District 32, 49.26% Kristine Kubat, Hawaii State House, District 4, 23.22% Jack Morse, Hawaii State House, District 25 Lynn Nakkim, Hawaii State House, District 1 Edwina Wong, Hawaii State Senate, District 20, 5.84% Delmira Quarles, Missouri State Legislature, District 46, 9.53% Chris Hanson, New Hampshire State House (Alstead) The Greens/Green Party USA, PO Box 100, Blodgett Mills NY 13738, 607/756-4211 Page 8 \Stuart Leiderman, New Hampshire State House (Hampton) Abraham Guttman, New Mexico State House, District 8, 42% Andrea Vargas, New Mexico State House, 41% Mark Dunlea, New York State Assembly, 41% 1994 Paul Bratton, Alaska State Legislature, 11% Walt Sheasby, California State Senate, 2.3% Hank Chapot, California State Assembly, 6.1% Tim Fitzgerald, California State Assembly, 8.0% Tom Stafford, California State Assembly, 2.1% Charles Wilken, California State Assembly, 7.1% Ton! Worst, Hawaii State House, 41% Karen Archibald, Hawaii State House, 38% Chris Walker, Hawaii State House, 17% Bruce MacPherson, Hawaii State House, 10% Mary France, New York State Assembly, 3% Craig Seeman, New York State Assembly, 4% Anna Cardillo Martin, Rhode Island State Senate, 5.3% 1995 Virginia Porras, Virginia State House, 3% Eric Sheffield, Virginia State House, 3% Mark Yatrofsky, Virginia State House, 3% Elise Sheffield, Virginia State Senate, 3% Jeff Peterson, Wisconsin State House, 6% Other State Offices 1994 Margaret Garcia, Secretary of State, New Mexico, 3.9% Lorenzo Garcia, Treasurer, New Mexico, 33% Patricia Wolff, Commissioner of Public Lands, New Mexico, 12% Other Partisan Races 1985 Frank Kuehn, Bayfield County Board, Wl (win) Several candidates for Board of Aldermen, New Haven CT 1987 Several candidates for Board of Aldermen, New Haven CT 1988 Paul Fleckenstein, City Council, Burlington VT Gary Cisco, Gty Council, Burlington VT Bea Bookchin, City Council, Burlington VT Sandy Baird, Mayor, Burlington VT 1989 Several candidates for Board of Aldermen, New Haven CT Candidate for Mayor, New Haven CT The Greens/Green Party USA, PO Box 100, Blodgett Mills NY 13738, 607/756-4211 Page 9 JO 1992 Claudia Elquist, County Attorney, AZ (write in) Jack Strasburg, Tucson, AZ, Pima County Board of Supervisors, 6.3% Nikhilananda, East Maui, HI, 8.38% Joe Bertram III, No. Dist. Res., Maui, HI, 5.7% Keiko Bonk-Abramson, Hawaii County Council, HI, District VI, 54.6% (win) Chris Cackiey, Hawaii Council, HI, District IX, 12.99% Jack Davis, County of Hawaii, HI, 26.9% Sally Raisbeck, Central Maui, HI, 8.1% Russell Ruderman, Hawaii Council, HI, District V, 38.99% Jason Schwartz, West Maui, HI, 10.55% Ellen Takazawa, Hawaii Council, HI, District 1, 20.71% Matt Marline, City Council, Columbia MO (win) Kay McKenzie, Douglas County Board, Wl (win) 1994 Keiko Bonk-Abramson, Hawaii County Council, HI, District VI, 60% Nikhilananda, Maui County Council, HI, 22% Mailing Akuna, Maui County Council, HI, 9% Jason Schweartz, Maui County Council, HI, 4% Victor Bailey, Kauai County Council, HI Jeff Barrow, County Commissioner, Boone County MO, 40% Terry Webster, Mayor, Webster Grove MO (win) Matt Harline, City Council, Columbia MO (win) Fran Gallegos, Magistrate Judge, Santa Fe NM, 43% Don Brayfield, County Assessor, Santa Fe NM, 32% Howie Hawkins, City Council, Syracuse NY, 1% Tom Sullivan, School Board, Syracuse NY, 2% Ted Ciskie, Douglas County Board, Wl (win) 1995 Pete Meyers, South Bend IN City Council, 25% Karen Mayon, Selectperson, Bowdoinham ME (win) Mark Dunlea, Rensselaer County Executive, NY, 11.5% Ben Armento, Ulster County Legislature, District 2, NY, 8% Dave Menzies, Ulster County Legislature, District 2, NY, 7% Howie Hawkins, Syracuse NY City Council, 3% Tom Sullivan, School Board, Syracuse NY, 3% Debbie Anderson, Town Council, McDonough NY, 12.5% Betty Wood, Town Council, Cortlandville NY, 10% 1996 Fran Gallegos, Municipal Judge, Santa Fe NM (44%, win) The Greens/Green Party USA, PO Box 100, Blodgett Mills NY 13738, 607/756-4211 Page 10 ^ *Miguel Chavez, City Council, Santa Fe NM (33%) Eric Morgan, Mayor, Williston Park NY, (lost by 23 votes) Bill Anderson, Douglas County Board, Wl (win) Ted Ciskie, Douglas County Board, Wl (lost by 24 votes) Kay McKenzie, Douglas County Board, Wl (lost by 24 votes) Several other candidates have run, many of them winning, in non-partisan races. The Greens/Green Party USA, PO Box 100, Blodgett Mills NY 13738, 607/756-4211 Page 11 1 £. . 1/0 

> 'MS®* Jita&w*

# Judith K. Moriarty 

> SECRETARY OF STATE

## CORPORATION DIVISION CERTIFICATE OF INCORPORATION GENERAL NOT FOR PROFIT   

> WHEREAS, DUPLICATE ORIGINALS OF ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION OF THE GREENS/GREEN PARTY, U-S-A., INC-

# HAVE BEEN RECEIVED AND FILED IN THE OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF STATE, WHICH ARTICLES, IN ALL RESPECTS, COMPLY WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF GENERAL NOT FOR PROFIT CORPORATION LAWj &&& NOW, THEREFORE, 1, JUDITH K. MORIARTY, SECRETARY OF STATE OF STATE OF MISSOURI, BY VIRTUE OF THE AUTHORITY VESTED IN ME BY j^fc LAW, DO HEREBY CERTIFY AND .DECLARE THIS ENTITY A BODY CORPORATE DULY ORGANIZED THIS DATE AND THAT IT IS ENTITLED TO ALL RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES GRANTED CORPORATIONS ORGANIZED UNDER THE GENERAL NOT FOR.PROFIT CORPORATION LAW. 

## IN TESTIMONY HHEREOF, I HAVE SET MY     

> HAND AND IMPRINTED THE GREAT SEAL OF THE STATE OF M.ISSOURI, ON THIS, THE 4TH DAY OF NOVEMBER, 1993-

## AND 

ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION 

FOR NOV O < 1993 

> G>
> (/**+«* /C '

THE GREENS/GREEN PARTY, U.S.A., IN (A general not-for-profit corporation) We, the undersigned,. Diana R. NDca, 708 SW Cambridge Ave., Topeka, Kansas 66606, Susan Whitxnore, 41.13 Baltimore, Kansas City, Missouri 64111, and Eric Odell, 4113 Baltimore! Kansas City, Missouri 64111, being natural persons of the age of eighteen years or more and citizens of the United Stales, for the purpose of forming a corporation under the "General Not For Profit Corporation Law" of the State of Missouri, do hereby adopt the following Articles of Incorporation: Article I The name of the corporation is: The Greens/Green Party, U.S.A., Inc. Article II The period of duration of the corporation is perpetual. Article m The address of its initial Registered Office in the State of Missouri is 210 Westport Road, Kansas City, Missouri 64111 and the name of its initial Registered Agent at said address is Amy Belanger. Article IV The first Board of Directors, hereafter referred to as the "Board of Trustees", shall be thirty-two in number, their names and addresses being as follows: 

## Hams Addisss 

Gregory Gross 2577 Findley Ave., Columbus, OH 45322 Sulaiman Mahi 1405 Beecher St., Atlanta, GA 30318 Johann Moore . 691 Union St., Brooklyn, NY 11215 Farida Sidiq 795 Livennore St., Yellowsprings, OH 45387 Denise Meyer 4540 Squires Cur., Boulder. CO 80303 Brenda Phillips 36 N. McKinley Dr., Athens, GA 49302 Chandler Morse 221 W. 12th St., Columbus, OH 43210 Tom Macchia POBox 221285, Anchorage, AK 99522 Joseph Boland Sue Nelson Ed Shacklett Hugh Osborn Darlene Nixon Bruce Coughlin Nancy Harvey Mike Castro Stanley Bereisky VaJ.erie Ackennan Susan Whitmore Mark Clive Sharon Withey Deborah Lore David Ellison Wes Wager Tom Shaver Denny Wolfe Gail McGlatheiy Cassie Wilson Brian Tokar Carol Perry Gary Zuckett Jana Cuilip The Greens/Green Pany, U.S.A., Inc. Page 2 1325 West 4th, Eugene, OR 97402. 1675 Sargent PL, Los Angeles, CA 90026 242 W. Ramona St., Ventura, CA 93001 PO Box 1232, Kalispell, MT 59903 

## 2237 Emerson, Denver, CO 80205 

## P. 0. Box 30208, Kansas City, MO 64112 4540 Squires Cir., Boulder, CO 80303 2886 Trades West Rd, Sante Fe, NM 87501 127 Toncowanda Dr., Des Moines, IA 50312 3227 Yprktown Dr., Ann Arbor, MI 46105 

> 4113 Baltimore, Kansas City, MO 64111 2351 Ballycastle Dr., Dallas, TX 75228 RR 10 Box 547-A, Denton, TX 76207 12788 New England Rd f, Amesville, OH 45701 2871 Hampton Rd #11, Cleveland, OH 44120. 716 W. Maxwell St., Chicago, IL 60607 536 Wyatt Rd., London, KY 40741

## 17920 Burnside Dr., Lutz, FL 33549 

> 1722 Doncaster Rd., Clearwaier, FL 34624 3144 Main St., Buffalo, NY 14214 PO Box 93, Plainfield, VT 05667

## 609 Bellevue Ave., Syracuse, NY 13204 

> PO Box 144, Pullman, WV 26421 2107 Gihon Rd., Parkersburg, WV 26101 Article V The purposes for which the corporation is organized are to promote and conduct political action within the context of the following ten key values:

## ecological wisdom grassroots democracy social justice nonviolence decentralization community-based economics 

> feminism

## respect for diversity 

> personal and global responsibility

## ftiiure focus/susiainability Articles of Incorporation "Hie Greens/Green Party, U.S.A., Inc. Page 3 These objectives may include educational and administrative functions as well as any such other activities as may be necessary and proper to accomplish the corporation purposes. The corporation is organized as a national political party within the meaning of Section 527 of the Internal Revenue Code and will be operated primarily for the purpose of directly or indirectly accepting contributions or making expenditures, or both, directed toward the influencing or attempting to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a poljticalorganization, or the election of Presidential .or Vice-Presidential electors, whether or not such individual or electors are actually selected, nominated, elected, or appointed. No pan of the revenues of the corporation shall inure to the benefit of, or be distributable to its directors, trustees, officers, other private individuals, or organizations established and operated for profit, except as may be permitted under the Internal Revenue Co~3e as reasonable compensation for services rendered. Article VI These articles shall not be repealed, amended, or altered without the unanimous consent of the Board of Trustees at any annual or properly called special meeting of the corporation, provided that no amendment shall authorize the corporation to conduct affairs in any manner or for any purpose contrary to the provisions of Section 527 of the Internal Revenue Code as now or hereafter in force. Article VII Upon the dissolution of the corporation, the Board of Trustees shaij, after paying or making provisions for the'payment of all of the liabilities of the corporation, dispose of al] of the assets of the corporation to such organization or organizations established and operated exclusively for charitable, educational, religious, scientific or political purposes and which at such time qualify as exempt under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (or the corresponding provisions of any future United States Internal Revenue law) as the Board of Trustees shall determine. Articles of Incorporation The Greens/Green Party, U.S.A., Inc. Page 4 Diana R. Nika Susan Whitmore EricO State of Missouri )

## )ss. 

County of Jackson )

## V .A ^ _ , a notary public, do hereby certify that on the^'/^ day of November, 1993, Diana R. Nika, Susan Whitmore and Eric Odell personally appeared before me and being first duly sworn by me, severally acknowledged that they signed as their free act and deed the foregoing document in the respective capacities therein set forth and declared that the statements therein contained are true, to their best knowledge and belief. In Witness Whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and seaJ the day and year above written. My commission expires: Notary ;Public 

Lafayette County, State of Missouri My Commission Expires: 12-27-94 FILED AND CERTIFICATE OF RS)R?ORAT10N ISSUED NOV04 1993 Charter and Working Guidelines for The Greens/Green Party USA 

> Revised Edition: 11/17/95 After Albuquerque Gathering

Table of Contents l.THE GREENS — PURPOSE AND VALUES 1.1. NAME 1.2. PURPOSE 1.3. THE TEN KEY VALUES 2. POLITICAL PRACTICES 2.1. GRASSROOTS DEMOCRACY 2.2. AFFIRMATIVE ACTION 22.3. ROTATION OF DELEGATES 22.4. DEMOCRATIC DECISION RULES 22.5. FREEDOM OF INFORMATION 22.6. STRATEGIC DIVERSITY 22.7. MEMBERSHIP AND PROCESS STANDARDS 22.8. MEMBERSHIP REVIEW PROCESS 23. NATIONAL STRUCTURE 33.1. ANNUAL GATHERING 33.2. GREEN CONGRESS WORKING GUIDELINES 43.3. GREENS NATIONAL COMMITTEE 53.4. GREENS NATIONAL COMMITTEE WORKING GUIDELINES 73.10. PEOPLE OF COLOR CAUCUS 83.11. WOMEN'S CAUCUS 83.12. LESBIAN/BISEXUAL/GAY/QUEER CAUCUS 84. AMENDMENTS 84.1. PROCEDURES 84.2. LOCAL REFERENDUMS 85. INDIVIDUAL MEMBERSHIP 95.1. COMMITMENT TO GREEN VALUES AND PRINCIPLES 95.2. ADMISSION AND PARTICIPATION 95.3. DUES 95.4. SUPPORTING MEMBERS 95.5. RESIGNATION 96. LOCALS AND CONFEDERATIONS 10 6.1. GENERAL ON LOCALS AND CONFEDERATIONS 10 6.2. LOCAL LEVEL OF ORGANIZATION 10 6.3. CONFEDERATIONS WITHIN THE GREENS 10 6.4. STATE LEVEL OF ORGANIZATION 11 6.5. REGIONAL LEVEL OF ORGANIZATION 11 7. NATIONAL STRUCTURE 11 7.1. NATIONAL OFFICES 11 8. AMENDMENTS 11 APPENDIX I. REGIONAL MAP MCharter and Working Guidelines of The Greens/Green Party USA 1 THE GREENS — PURPOSE AND VALUES J.I. NAME The name of this organization is The Greens/Green Party USA, referred lo herein as The Greens. 1.2. PURPOSE The Greens shall facilitate the organization of local Green groups and confederations for the purpose of creating a sustainable, just society based on the Ten Key Values. 1.3. THE TEN KEY VALUES The following Ten Key Values were adopted by the Green Organizing Planning Meeting held in St. Paul, Minnesota on August 10-12, 1984 which launched The Greens — then the Green Committees of Correspon-dence — as an organizing network. The Ten Key Values shall remain embodied in the internal structure and process and public activities of The Greens at its local, state, regional, and interregional levels: 1.3.1. Ecological Wisdom 1.3.2. Grassroots Democracy 

> 1.3.3. Social Justice

1.3.4. Nonviolence 1.3.5. Decentralization 1.3.6. Community-based Economics 13.7. Feminism 1.3.8. Respect for Diversity 1.3.9. Persona] and Global Responsibility 1.3.10. Future Foois/Sustainability 2. POLITICAL PRACTICES 2.1. GRASSROOTS DEMOCRACY The Greens are. an individual membership organization structured as a confederation based on local Green groups, referred to herein as Locals. Every individual and level of confederation in The Greens shall be respon-sible for establishing an organization structure consistent with the principles of grassroots democracy, includ-

ing: 

2.1.1. Accountability to Membership Base 2.1.1.1. Each level of confederation shall remain structured so that its parts — working groups, committees, and so forth, are accountable to the membership base as manifested through the Locals and the Green Con-gress. 2.1.2. Immediate Recall 2.1.2.1. Representatives at every level shall always be immediately recallable by the bodies that choose them, as provided for in the current Working Guidelines. 2.13. Imperative Mandate 2.13.1. Imperative mandate means that representatives must follow the instructions of the bodies they represent. Representatives are free to express their persona] views but must vote as instructed. 2.13.2. Regions may give their delegates mandates of discretion to act within the framework of regional policy, so that compromises may be negotiated, and positions taken on issues not specifically discussed at the local or regional level. 2.133. The use of non-negotiable mandated positions shall be the right of every local, state, and region, but should be carefully considered. 2.1.4. Freedom to Speak and Caucus Around Political Views 2.1.4.1. Members and confederations in the minority on a decision may publicly dissent from that decision. and organize caucuses to promote their views, provided they dearly distinguish their position from that of the majority. 2.1.4.2. To ensure that their views are represented at larger confederated levels of the organization, minorities may call for a procedure of political division in the allocation of mandated proportional votes, as specified in the current Working Guidelines. Charter and Working Guidelines of the Green/Green Party USA 1

# Zo 2.2. AFFIRMATIVE ACTION 2.2.1. Every level of ihe confederation shall lake affirmative action to reach goals of sexual, racial, and social diversity, and balance in the allocation of responsibilities among members. 2.22. All levels of the confederation shall be responsible for making participation in their organizing process open to all interested Greens and people reflective of the soda! diversity of their localities. 2.23. All levels of the confederation shall communicate and work to develop the broad whole of Green thought and action, and to convey Green ideas to the general public 22.4. All confederated bodies shall work to ensure that the diversity of local Green groups interested in participation are included. 2.3. ROTATION OF DELEGATES All levels of the confederation are encouraged to rotate their delegates in confederal representative bodies and any coalitions they enter into on a staggered basis in order to ensure both broad participation in responsibili-ties and continuity from one meeting to the next. 2.4. DEMOCRATIC DECISION RULES Local: and confederations shall set their own democratic decision-making processes. Groups are encouraged to usj some form of agreement-seeking process in which all points of view are fairly and openly heard. 2.5. FREEDOM OF INFORMATION Meetings and records of finances, membership, minutes, and so on at any level shall be open to inspection by any members in good standing on that level. At every level, every Green meeting shall be open to all mem-bers in good standing. Sometimes it is appropriate to limit participation at a particular meeting to those who are members of that particular body or committee; however these meetings are still open to any Greens who wish to observe. A meeting may be closed to green observers on 74% vote in personnel or criminal matters or if required by law. These procedures shall apply at the national level and are recommended at other levels. 2.6. STRATEGIC DIVERSITY A full range of nonviolent strategies and tactics shall be considered permissible and desirable in pursuing Green social change, such as rallies, demonstrations, boycotts, citizen's initiatives, civil disobedience, direct action, building alternative institutions, and/or electoral politics. 2.7. MEMBERSHIP AND PROCESS STANDARDS Policies against the following shall apply at all levels of The Greens. Violation by any individual Green, or local, confederal, or national body may be cause for sanctions including (as Appropriate) reprimand, suspen-sion or loss of accreditation, recall, or expulsion. 2.7.1. Committing The Greens or any of its affiliated locals or confederations to actions, endorsements, and other policy positions outside that body's decision-making process; 2.7.2. Misrepresenting the decisions and policies of any such Green body; 2.73. Making false statements in an application for membership or affiliation to any such Green body. 2.7.4. Financial irregularities with Greens funds; 2.73. Advocacy or practice of racial, sexual, national, or religious oppression; 2.7.6. Advocacy or practice of violent political action by The Greens or any of its affiliated locals or confederations; 2.7.7. Acting as a strike-breaker, agent provocateur, or government or corporate informer; 2.7.8. Acting to willfully disrupt the freedom of speech, press, or assembly of any individual or body of The Greens; 2.7.9. Violating the principles of grassroots democracy as embodied in Section 2; 2.7.10. Continually failing, after receiving written notice, to participate regularly at the local level; 

or 

2.7.11. Continually failing, after receiving written notice, to pay dues. 2.8. MEMBERSHIP REVIEW PROCESS 2.8.1. Each level of the confederation may sanction or exclude members or affiliates who behave in a manner inconsistent with the membership standards of the Greens as defined in section 2.7. 2.8.2. Charges of violation of membership standards against any member or affiliate of the Greens may be made by any member. 2.83. No charges can be raised and no sanctions can be imposed for actions not explicitly proscribed in Charter and Working Guidelines of the Green/Green Party USA 2

# 21 section 2.7. 

2.8.4. Locals (or the next largest level of the confederation responsible for organizing in their locality) are responsible for reviewing the standing of members who are charged with violating membership standards. 2.8.5. All charges shall be in writing. The accused and the accuser shall have the first option seeking a resolution of the conflict through the Mediation Committee of the Greens National Committee as both parties agree. 2.8.5.1. A copy of the charges will be sent to the geographically closest member available of the Mediation Committee. 2.8.5.2. No charges shall be published or otherwise made public prior to the conclusion of the mediation process, without written consent of all parties involved. 2.8.6. If mediation is not agreeable or not successful the mediators involved shall report this fact in writing to a special committee selected by lot from the membership of the appropriate level of the confederation who shall handle the case expeditiously. 2.8.6.1. A written report will be prepared by the mediator(s) and sent to the special committee. 2.8.6.2. The substance of the conflict referred to a special committee must remain strictly confidential, with the exception of notice of the convening of the special committee and names of the parties involved. 2.8.6.3. The special committee shall hear charges, report findings, make recommendations, and then disband. 2.8.6.4. Findings of the special committee shall be reported to all individuals, groups and appropriate re-gional bodies involved. 2.8.7. All members or affiliates charged with violations of membership standards shall have the right to appear, to bring witnesses, and to testify. 2.8.8. The burden of proof shall be on those making the charges. After hearing the report of the special committee and statements by those making the charges and by those charged, the membership assembly of the appropriate level of the confederation shall have the right to vote any sanction, including exclusion, by a 2/3 vote. 2.8.9. Sanctions may be automatically appealed to the next larger level of the confederation, up to and including the national Greens National Committee and Green Congress. Appeals shall be heard at the next meeting of the appropriate body where the appeal has been duly warned by that body's normal procedures. 3. NATIONAL STRUCTURE 3.1. ANNUAL GATHERING 3.1.1. Authority and Schedule 3.1.1.1. The Annual Gathering is the highest decision-making body for The Greens as a national organiza-tion. It shall convene annually. 3.1.1.2. There shall be two components to the Annual Gathering: a non-decision-making Conference, for community building, networking, education, and debate, and a decision-making Congress. 3.1.2. Composition 3.1.2.1. All interested individuals and sympathetic organizations may be invited to the Conference. 3.13.2. The Congress shall be composed of mandated delegates and proxies from locals in good standing, proportionally represented as specified in the current Working Guidelines. 3.13. Charge 3.13.1. The Green Congress shall review, amend, and ratify platform, principles, and policy statements for The Greens; 3.1.3.2. Review and amend the Green Charter and Working Guidelines; 3.133. Review, initiate and set strategic and policy parameters for national Green actions and campaigns; 3.13.5. Review and (if needed) amend the actions and decisions of the Greens National Committee. 3.1A. Decision-making Guidelines 3.1.4.1. The Congress shall seek unanimous agreement on proposals, endeavoring to hear all views in full. 3.1.4.2. When agreement cannot be reached, the Green Congress shall move to a vote. 3.1.43. Votes shall be passed as specified in the current Working Guidelines. 3.1.5. General 3.1.5.1. Regional and state caucuses may meet for various purposes including selecting representatives to functional bodies as specified in the Working Guidelines. 3.1-5.2. Other caucuses may meet and present reports to the Congress. Caucus meetings during the Annual Gathering will be scheduled in advance of the Gathering and will not conflict with other scheduled caucus Charter and Working Guidelines of the Green/Green Party USA 3

# ?7 meetings or workshops. A caucus shall have the opportunity to present reports to the Green Congress. 3.1.5.3. The Annual Gathering shall start with the Women's Caucus meeting with simultaneous unlearning sexism workshops for men. 3.1.5.4. The Green Congress shall hear reports from and review the work of the various functional and geographic bodies. 3.1.5.5. Community building and recreation shall be an integral part of all Annual Gatherings. 3.1.5.6. An appropriate action in support of local organizing efforts shall be organized in conjunction with the Gathering, if possible. 3.1.5.7. Child care, responsible supervision, and developmenlaJIy-appropriate activities based on Green values and children's activities shall be provided at the Annual Gathering. 3.2. GREEN CONGRESS WORKING GUIDELINES 3.2.1. Composition The Green Congress shall be composed of one voting delegate or proxy from each active local or identity caucus for members in good standing, with a minimum of three members to be awarded the first vote, based on the following numbers: Members in Good Standing Voting Delegates 

3-4 T5-9 2

10-19 3

20-29 430-39 540-49 6

and so on 

> 3.2.2. Voting

Green Congress votes shall be passed according to these criteria: 3.2.2.1. 75%: Changes or additions to the Green Charter; recalling members of national bodies. 3.2.2.2. 66 2/3%: Changes or additions to the Green Program and Platform; chartering permanent commit-tees or working groups of The Greens; approving endorsements or substantive proposals; changes to the Working Guidelines; motions to dose or extend debate, table or send to committee and internal administra-tive decisions not already specified. 3.2.2.3. 50% + 1: Meeting-specific process motions not already specified. 3.2.2.4. Minority reports are accepted as official Green documents on 33% vote of the Congress. 3.2.2.5. Abstentions are not counted in the relative percentages of those voting for and against. 3.2.2.6. Proxy votes can only be carried by another member of the same local. 3.2.3. Agenda 3.2.3.1. A call for agenda proposals shall be publicized in the national Green publications at least 12 weeks before the Congress meets. 3.2.3.2. The agenda shall be developed by the Greens National Committee's Annual Gathering Committee working in close consultation with Locals. Confederations, and the Greens National Committee. 3.2.33. All agenda proposals shall be circulated to all dues-paying Green locals no less than 6 weeks prior to the Gathering. 3.2.3.4. Prior to the Congress, the Greens National Committee or appropriate committee thereof shall have final approval over the proposed agenda, and shall meet, if necessary, immediately before the Congress to do 

so. 

3.23.5. The first order of business for the Congress shall be to discuss, amend, and approve the proposed agenda. 3.23.6. Agenda amendments, including new substantive proposals (i.e., from the floor) shall require at least a 66 2/3% vote in favor to be placed on the agenda. 3.2.3.7. The agenda as a whole shall require at least a 66 2/3% vote in favor to pass. 3.2.4. Decision Review 3.2.4.1. At least 12 weeks before the Gathering, all functional bodies of The Greens shall circulate detailed reports of all substantive decisions, endorsements, representations, and so forth undertaken in the preceding year. 3.2.4.2. Any of these decisions may be rescinded by the Congress. Charter and Working Guidelines of the Green/Green Party USA 43.2.5 The Congress shall elect 3 delegates to the Greens National Committee. 3.2.5.1 Each delegate to the Green Congress may vote for a maJe delegate, a female delegate, and a Green Justice delegate. The number of voles to be cast by each delegate of the Congress for each delegate for the Greens National Committee will be according to the proportion defined in 3.2.1. Preferential voting will be used. This means that each voting delegate will identify his/her first, second, third, etc choice candidate for each position. Ballots will be counted according to ihe first choice for a position. If no candidate has at least 50% of the vote, the votes for ihe candidate with the fewest votes will be redistributed according to the second choices on those ballots. If no candidate has at least 50% of the vote, the votes for the candidate with the fewest voles will be redistributed according lo the second or third choices, as appropriate. This procedure is followed until one candidate has at least 50% of the vote. This procedure is followed for each delegate position so that the male, female, and member of Green Justice each receiving at least 50% of the votes win the election. 3.2.5.2 Any representative of ihe Green Congress who serves as the Congress* delegate on the Greens Na-tional Committee must have been present at the Congress which they are charged with representing. 3.2.5.3 The number of Congress delegates voting for the Greens National Committee representatives shall be used to determine the Congress* representatives' voting rights on ihe Greens National Committee when figuring proportional voting. 3.3. GREENS NATIONAL COMMITTEE 3.3.1. Authority and Schedule 3.3.1.1. The Greens National Committee shall serve as a leadership body for The Greens, within the param-eters set by ihe Annual Gathering. 3.3.1.2. It shall meet at least twice yearly, once immediately subsequent to the Annual Gathering, to make decisions and develop action strategies within the framework of overall policy set by the Annual Gathering. 3.3.2. Composition 3.3.2.1. The Greens National Committee is composed of two delegates (two women or one woman and one man) elected from each slate or multi-state region, the People of Color Caucus, the Green Youth Network. the Women's Caucus and the Lesbian/Bisexual/Gay/Queer Caucus and three delegates elected from the Green Congress. These elections shall lake place prior lo ihe Annual Galhering if ihe constituencies are functional. If the election has not taken place before ihe Annual Gathering, then it shall be done by caucus vote of delegates from each constituency at the Annual Gathering. 3.3.2.3. A process shall be specified in ihe Working Guidelines lo achieve gender balance on ihe Greens National Committee. 3.3.2.4. Representatives of Greens National Committee Committees, the Greens Clearinghouse, national publications, other staff, and activists from issue and constituency networks, shall participate in Greens National Committee meetings as needed. 3.3.2.5. Only active members in good standing of The Greens may serve on the Greens National Committee. as long as they are not serving as staff for the Greens during the elected term. 3.3.3. Charge 33.3.1. The Greens National Committee as a whole shall bear ultimate financial and legal responsibility for The Greens; 3.3.3.2. Make policy between Annual Gatherings providing that it is consistent with the Green Program and the decisions of the Green Congress; 333.3. Amend the Working Guidelines as needed; 3.3.3.4 Coordinate ongoing Green activities at the national level; [3.5.3.1] 1

333.5. Stralegize and initiate national Green action programs (including electoral action, direct action, issue campaigns, public education, internal education, alternative institutions, and so forth) in order to advance the program and policies adopted by the Green Congress; 333.6. Accredit Slate Parties and Confederalions. and Regions; 333.7. Bear ultimate responsibility for hiring and firing staff; 333.fi. Work to keep the relationship between movement and party balanced; 33.3.9. Oversee liaison activities with other national groups; 333.10. Coordinate and bear responsibility for and oversight of regional and local development and mainte-nance; [3.53.6] 33.3.11. Develop long-range strategic plans for ratification by Green Congress;    

> 1Items included in brackets tic the number of Out hem in the previous version of the Ouuut Charter and Working Guidelines of the Green/Green Party USA

3.3.3.12 Respond to problems and opportunities which require immediate action between Green Congresses and Greens National Committee meetings; [3.5.3.2] 3.3.3.13 Bear responsibility for administrative planning and implementation of action programs and cam-paigns decided by the Green Congress and Greens National Committee; [3.5.3.3] 3.3.3.14 Serve as the primary liaison and alliance-building body. [3.5.3.5] 33.3.15 Oversee all record keeping; [3.5.3.7] 3.3 J.I 6. Serve as The Greens' national press/media spokespeople; [3.5.3.8] 3.33.17 Develop statements and editorials in the name of The Greens, for official publications of The Greens and elsewhere; [3.53.9] 3.33.18 Propose agendas for the Green Congress, and assist with meeting logistics and facilitation; [3.53.10] 3.33.19 Oversee Budget and Finance; 333.20.1 Prepare a yearly national budget reflecting the needs of the various national Green bodies; [3.8.1.1] 3.33.21 Prepare yearly plans for approval by the Greens National Committee, determine the need for new committees, strengthen present committees, and the disbanding of committees; [3.8.2.1] .333.22 Keep the Charter and Working Guidelines continuously updated and available, make recommenda-tions on proposed changes to these documents, and facilitate any needed decision-making process for changes to these documents; [3.8.3.1] 3.3.3.23 Plan and coordinate the annual gatherings; [3.8.7.1] 33.3.24 Facilitate the development of position papers to be approved at the Green Congress, and update the Green Program as needed; [3.8.6.1] 333.25 Work to develop Green contacts on a global basis, form a global Green to Green information network, and support international Green meetings; [3.8.5.1] 33.3.26. Aid in the development of Green electoral endeavors, apply State Green Party accreditation guide-lines, and facilitate communication and cooperation among Green electoral activists and kindred groups; [3.8.6.1] 3.3.3.27. Create and maintain Green Platform statements which must be adopted by the Green Congress; [3.8.6.4] 33.3.28. Oversee each national direct action campaign mandated by the Green Congress or Greens National Committee; 33.3.29. Formulate proposals on structural issues, such as Greens National Committee and Congress repre-sentation and voting weights; 33.3.30 Encourage mediated resolutions of conflicts within the Greens and maintain a mechanism to, when called upon by any member or affiliated body of the Greens, work with parties in conflict to establish a mutually acceptable process of mediation; [3.9.1 & 3.9.3] 33330.1 May not impose decisions or binding arbitration; [3.9.5] 33330.2 Mediators are bound to keep confidential, except as necessary for record keeping, any proceeding of mediation; [3.9.6] 3.3330.3 Coordinate the facilitation of Green Congresses and to this end they will ensure the development. training, and maintenance of a facilitation team; [3.9.8] 33330.4 Develop workshops, presentations, or other means to train and prepare delegates in effective participation in the decision-making process of the Green Congress: [3.9.9] 3.3.4. Decision-making Guidelines 3.3.4.1. The Greens National Committee shall seek agreement on proposals. 3.3.4.2. When agreement cannot be reached by the end of the allotted time, the Greens National Committee moves to a vote as specified in the Working Guidelines. 33.43. There shall be appropriate categories of voting majorities to decide issues of varying importance specified in the current Working Guidelines. 33.5. Accountability and Recall 33.5.1. The Greens National Committee shall report in detail to the Annual Congress, which may amend or reverse any Greens National Committee decisions. 33.5.2. Members of the Greens National Committee may be removed upon 7596 vote of the bodies which selected them, following the procedures specified in the Working Guidelines. 33.6. General 3.3.6.1. Childcare and childrerwEs activities shall be provided at all Greens National Committee meetings. Charter and Working Guidelines of the Green/Green forty USA 6

# 25 3.4. GREEN NATIONAL COMMITTEE WORKING GUIDELINES 3.4.1. Composit ion 3.4.1.1. Term of office is one year. Office holders are encouraged to serve two terms and may serve up to four consecutive terms. 3.4.1.2. Each constituency of the Greens National Committee shall select it's delegates by whatever manner it chooses, while striving to maintain gender balance within each delegation. All members and locals of the Greens will be invited to participate in an election within the conslituency(ies) that they belong. Sufficient, notice will be given prior to all elections of delegations to the Greens National Committee. Only national dues-paying members of the Greens who are active in locals may vote in these elections. 3.4.1.3 Greens National Committee members must attend all GNC meetings as well as the National Green Gathering at the beginning and at the end of his/her term or find a designee to go in their place. 3.4.2. Constituencies 3.4.2.1. There shall be delegations from each slate or multi-state region, a People of Color Caucus, the Green Youth Network, a WomeruCs Caucus and a Lesbian/Bisexual/Gay/Queer Caucus on the Greens National Committee. 3.4.2.2. The constituencies shall cast a total of 100 votes. 3.4.2.3. Each representative shall be entitled to a minimum of 1 vote, for a total of 25 votes distributed equally. 3.4.2.4. The remaining 75 votes shall be distributed proportionally, rounded to the nearest whole vote, based upon the number of dues-paying members in each constituency. 3.4.3. Observers 3.4.3.1. Nonvoting observers can attend Greens National Committee meetings, and may speak at the discre-tion of the facilitator. 3.4.3.2. The Greens National Committee may vote to eject a disruptive observer from the meeting. 3.4.3.3. Sessions of the Greens National Committee may be dosed only for discussing personnel matters. 3.4.4. Voting Greens National Committee votes shall be passed according to these criteria: 3.4.4.3. 50% + 1: Meet ing-sped fie process motions not already specified. 3.4.4.4. Minority reports are accepted as official Green documents on 33% vote of the Greens National Committee. 3.4.4.5. Abstentions shall not be counted in the relative percentages of those voting for and against. 3.4.5. Agenda 3.4.5.1. Written reports from all national bodies and a call for agenda proposals shall be publicized in the national Green publications at least 12 weeks before the Greens National Committee meets. 3.4.5.2. The agenda shall be developed by the appropriate body designated by the Greens National Commit-tee working in dose consultation with Locals, Confederations, and the Greens National Committee. 3.4.5.3. All agenda proposals shall be circulated to all dues-paying Green locals no less than 6 weeks prior to the Gathering. 3.4.5.4. Prior to the Greens National Committee meeting, the appropriate body designated by the Greens National Committee shall have final approval over the proposed agenda, and shall meet, if necessary, imme-diately before the opening of the Greens National Committee to do so. 3.43.5. The first order of business for the Greens National Committee shall be to debate and approve the proposed agenda. 3.4.5.6. Agenda amendments, induding the addition of timely submissions not approved for the proposed agenda, shall require 50%+1 to pass. 3.4.5.7. New substantive proposals (i.e., from the floor) can only be added to the agenda upon 66 2/3% agreement. 3.4.5.8. The agenda as a whole requires 66 2/3% approval. 3.4.6. Endorsements 3.4.6.1. Endorsements, if possible, should be debated in the Greens National Committee as a whole. 3.4.6.2. If the proposed endorsement garners the necessary Greens National Committee majority, it goes out in the name of The Greens. 3.4.7. Dedsion Review 3.4.7.2. Any of these decisions may be rescinded by the Greens National Committee. 3.4:8. Accountability and Recall 3.4.8.1. Uncorrected Greens National Committee minutes shall be published in the Green Bulletin, shall be Charter and Working Guidelines of the Green/Green Party USA . 7reviewed and corrected at the succeeding Greens National Committee meeting, and then shall be public documents. 3.4.8.2. Members of the Greens National Gommittee may be recalled by 66 2/3% vole of the bodies which elected them. 3.4.8.3. Members of the Greens National Committee elected by Regional Caucus at the Annual Gathering may also be recalled by 66 2/3% vote of the applicable Regional Assembly, if one exists. 3.4.9. Committees 3.4.9.1 The Greens National Committee shall annually establish such committees as it deems necessary to properly conduct its work. 3.4.9.2 Members in good standing who are not National Committee members may be appointed to assist in the work of committees. 3.4.9.3 Committees may appoint additional ex-officio members as they see fit. 3.4.9.4 The annual report of the Greens National Committee to the Green Congress shall include informa-tion on committee structure and activity. 3.4.9.5. Each Committee, if it will expend organizational funds, will prepare an annual budget to be inte-grated into the yearly national budget prepared by the Budget & Finance Committee and approved by the Greens National Committee. [3.8.3.1.] 3.4.9.6. Each Committee may raise some or all of its own funds. [3.8.3.2] 3.10. PEOPLE OF COLOR CAUCUS 3.10.1. The Greens shall encourage and give organizational support to a People of Color Caucus. 3.10.2. Greens who are people of color shall be enrolled in the People of Color Caucus upon notifying the Greens Clearinghouse. 3.10.3. The People of Color Caucus is entitled to representation on the Greens National Committee on the same basis as the other constituencies. 3.11. WOMEN'S CAUCUS 3.11.1. The Greens shall encourage and give organizational support for a Women's Caucus. 3.11.2. All women who are members of the Greens are invited to participate in the Women's Caucus Network. 3.11.3. The Women's Caucus is entitled to representation on the Greens National Committee on the same basis as the other constituencies. 3.12. LESBIAN/BISEXUAL/GAY/QUEER CAUCUS 3.12.1. The Greens shall encourage and give organizational support for an L/B/G/Q Caucus. 3.12.2. All Lesbian, Bi-SexuaJ, and Gay people who are members of the Greens are invited to participate in the L/B/G/Q Caucus. 3.12.3. The L/B/G/Q Caucus is entitled to representation on the Greens National Committee on the same basis as the other constituencies. 4. AMENDMENTS 

4.1. PROCEDURES 

4.1.1. This Green Charter, and Article 8 of the Working Guidelines, may only be amended by the approval of written draft amendment by 75% support of the delegates to the Green Congress; OR 4.1.2. by 75% support of active locals responding to a mail referendum. Such a mail referendum can be initiated by: 4.13. 75% vote of the Greens National Committee; OR 4.1.4. at least 3 Regional Confederations; OR 4.15. at least 6 State Confederations and/or Parties; OR 4.1.6. at least 12 Locals. 4.2. LOCAL REFERENDUMS 4.2.1. When a referendum is required, the Clearinghouse shall send a ballot to each local in good standing. 4.2.2. The number of votes which each local is allocated shall be using the same proportions as indicated 3.2.1. (Composition) above. 4.2.3. Abstentions are not counted in the relative percentages of those voting for and against. Charter and Working Guidelines of the Green/Green faty USA 84.2.4. Ballots must be returned lo the Greens Clearinghouse no less than 60 days from the date that the ballot is sent. 5. INDIVIDUAL MEMBERSHIP Membership in The Greens shall be open to any individual in North America who agrees with and will observe the following: 5.1. COMMITMENT TO GREEN VALUES AND PRINCIPLES Members shall be in agreement with the Ten Key Values (Article 1) and the Political Practices (Article 2) of The Greens as a framework for organizing and political action. 5.2. ADMISSION AND PARTICIPATION Admission to membership shall be through a Local, or the Clearinghouse if there is no active local in the area. 5.2.1. A member in good standing shall participate regularly in a Local, or be working to organize one. 5.2.2. Regular participation in a local shall be required for assuming any elective, appointive, staff, or com-mit lee positions at a higher level in The Greens. 5.2.3. Under special circumstances, this requirement may be waived by vote of the Greens National Commit-tee on a case-by-case basis. 5.3. DUES 5.3.1. Members in good standing shall have their dues paid up to date as specified by the Working Guide-lines and the policies of any groups or confederations in which they are active. 5.3.2. Members shall pay their dues for every level of the confederation to their Locals, which shall then be responsible for directly disbursing to the appropriate level of confederation. 5.3.3. Members shall be encouraged lo support The Greens at all confederal levels. No member of a local shall be assessed for dues to a confederal level in which he or she does not wish to be an active or supporting member. 5.3.4. National dues shall be $15.00, yearly, exclusive of local, state, and regional assessments, forwarded through the Local to the Clearinghouse. 5.3.5. Representation to the national organization for individuals and Locals shall be based on paying na-tional dues. 5.3.6. Waivers shall be available upon annual request from the individual. 5.3.7. Dues-paying members of The Greens shall receive Groundwork/Green Letter and Synthesis/Regenera-tion 5.3.8. Dues paying members of the Greens may receive a copy of the Charier and Working Guidelines for the G/GPUSA, as of the December 1995 version. 5.3.9. Membership applications, whether submitled ihrough a local or directly to the G/GPUSA, shall inform the newly applying members, who may be people of color, women, youth, or Lesbian/bisexual/gay/queer, that they may enroll in whatever caucus that may apply to them. 53.10. Caucus members, after covering the costs of their membership benefits, have the opportunity to direct all or part of their dues to the caucus or caucuses that they belong to so as to support the activities of the caucus. 5.4. SUPPORTING MEMBERS 5.4.1. Individuals and organizations that wish to support The Greens at any level, but who do not want to take on the responsibilities of membership at that level, may do so as provided for in the current dues structure. 5.4.2. Supporters shall be entitled to review documents and observe meetings, but shall not have the right to participate in the formal decision-making process, or to serve in any positions. 5.4.3. Supporting dues shall be $25.00 yearly for the national organization. 5.5. RESIGNATION Members may resign at any time and are asked to give written notification of their resignation to their local, state, or region, or The Greens, as is appropriate in their case. Charter and Working Guidelines of the Green/Green Party USA 6. LOCALS AND CONFEDERATIONS 6.1. GENERAL ON LOCALS AND CONFEDERATIONS 6.l.J. Commitment to Green Values and Principles Affiliated locals and larger confederations shall be in agreement with the Ten Key Values (Artide ]') and the Political Practices (Article 2) of The Greens as a framework for organizing and political action. 6.1.2. Local and Regional Membership Standards 6.1.2.1. In keeping with decent raJ is t principles, the Green Charter and Working Guidelines shall set only minimum standards for the affiliation of Locals and Confederations with The Greens. There shall, however, be a regularly-updated Appendix (compiled by the Charter Working Group) detailing the suggested stan-dards, practices, procedures, and relationships for ihe affiliation and participation of Locals and Confedera-tions. 6.1.2.2. Local. State, and Regional Confederations may call themselves by any name that is consistent with the values and goals of The Greens, and are encouraged to use the phrase "Members of The Greens/Green Party USA" if not also part of their name. 6.1.2.3. In addition to the individual membership standards listed in Article 2, no Green local or confedera-tion shall knowingly receive funds derived from illegal sources. 6.2. LOCAL LEVEL OF ORGANIZATION 6.2.1. Affiliation Process Locals apply for affiliation to The Greens through the appropriate State Confederation, or the Regional Confederation if there is no State Confederation, or the Clearinghouse if there is no Regional Confederation. 6.2.2. Local Activities In order to be considered an active Local of The Greens a Local shall: 6.2.2.1. Work in basic agreement with the 10 Key Values; 6.2.2.2. Participate at the State and Regional levels as appropriate, and send delegates to the Green Con-gress; 6.2.2.3. Subscribe to the Green Bulletin; and 6.2.2.4. Work actively on State, Regional, and National programs as their resources allow. 6.2.3. Local Membership 6.2.3.1. For the representational and decision-making purposes of The Greens, a local's members in good standing shall be those who pay national dues and participate actively in the Local. 6.2.3.2. A minimum of three members currently in good standing are necessary for a local to have full voting rights in the Green Congress. 6.2.3.3. The Local shall collect national dues of the amount currently specified in the Working Guidelines and forward them to the Clearinghouse with the names and addresses of the dues- paying members. 6.2.3.4. Locals and confederations shall determine their own dues assessments additional to national dues. 6.23.5. Dues for all levels shall be reduced or waived upon request by a member with financial hardship. 6.2.4. Resignation Locals may resign at any time and are asked to give written notification of their resignation to their local, state, or region, or The Greens, as is appropriate in their case. 63. CONFEDERATIONS WITHIN THE GREENS 63.1. Members of Green Locals. Stales, and Regions may confederate at any level to suit their needs. 63.2. These confederations may be organized around existing governmental jurisdictions (municipalities, counties, states, electoral districts, etc.), areas of social and ecological interaction (bioregions), or around constituency or issue-based criteria. 633. These confederations may call themselves by any name consistent with the values and goals of The Greens. 63.4. Representation to the Greens National Committee shall be through the participation of Locals and their State Confederations through Regional Confederations to the Greens National Committee. 63.5. Confederations may request that locals and other confederations apportion a part of their dues to them. 6.3.6. Accredited confederations shall have the right to mandate delegates to the Greens National Committee. Charter and Working Guidelines of the Green/Green Party USA 10 6.4. STATE LEVEL OF ORGANIZATION 6.4.1. State representation criteria In order to send delegates to the Greens National Committee, a state-wide organization must either be a confederation open to all affiliated Green locals in the slate or be a state Green Party accredited by the Electoral Action Working Group in accordance with the accreditation guidelines. Accreditation of state Green Parties shall be reviewed periodically. 6.4.2. Accreditation Guidelines In order to be accredited by the Greens/Green Party USA, a stale Green Party, Green candidate, or Green elected official shall explicitly affirm the Ten Key Values and be willing to engage in Green conflict resolution processes, upon request of any individual member of the Greens/Green Party USA or any affiliated local or confederated body of the Greens/Green Party USA. 6.4.3. Local participation in State Green Parties In order for a state Green Party to achieve and maintain accreditation, a majority of affiliated locals in that state or of active national dues-paying members in thai state must not be opposed to its formation or continued existence. 6.5. REGIONAL LEVEL OF ORGANIZATION 6.5.1. Affiliation Process 6.5.1.1. The Greens National Committee shall approve regional boundaries. 6.5.1.2. Stales may change lo adjacent regions by mutual agreement of regions concerned. 6.5.1.3. Regional Confederations shall be accredited by the Greens National Committee. 6.5.2. Regional Activities Regional Confederations shall: 6.5.2.1. Ensure the participation and enfranchisement of all regional Locals and State Confederations or Parties in all Regional Confederation activities; 6.5.2.2. Actively support the formation of new State Confederations. Parties, and Locals in unorganized areas; 6.5.2.3. Hold an annual convention or assembly, and other general membership meetings as needed; and 6.5.2.4. Represent Green movement activities in the region to the Greens National Committee. 6.5.3. Regional Membership Only active, dues-paying members of locals will be counted for purposes of Regional representation lo the Greens National Committee. 7. NATIONAL STRUCTURE 7.1. NATIONAL OFFICES 7.1.1. The national offices are the Greens National Committee seats. 7.1.2. No .person may hold national office who has held national office or served as a national staff person for more than four out of the six previous years. 8. AMENDMENTS These Working Guidelines may be amended by the express approval of written draft amendment by 2/3 of currently recognized Greens National Committee delegates present at a Greens National Committee meeting. or 2/3 vote of delegates to the Green Congress, except for Article 8, which may only be amended in the same way as the Green Charter. Charter and Working Guidelines of the Green/Green Party USA 11 APPENDIX I. REGIONAL MAP 

# 10 

# HI 

Region 1 WA, OR Region 2 NV GU Region 3 ID, MT, WY, ND, SD Region 4 UT, CO, AZ, NM Region 5 MN, Ml Region 6IA, KS, MO, NE Region7TX.OK.LA.AR Region 8IL, IN. KY. TN Region 9 MS. AL, PL. GA. SC. NC, PR Region 10 ME. CT. Rl. MA Region 11 DE. MD, NJ. PA, WV, DC Region 12 AK Region 13 HQ Region 14 CA Region 15 OH Region 16 Wl Region 17 VA Region 18 NY Region 19 NH.VT 

Charter and Working Guidelines of the Green/Green Party USA 1-1 

# 31 Update 1.1 (note confirmed time) FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE AUGUST 23.1991 Local contact: Charles Betz 234-0041, 232-7853, fax 387-4549 US. GREENS FORM NATIONAL POLITICAL PARTY 

The Greens will announce the official formation of the Green Party—USA on Tuesday, August 27th, 1991, at 10:00 AM A press conference will be held at 1350 Pennsylvania Av, N.W, in the Council Chambers of the District of Columbia Building. The conference will be hosted by Hilda Mason, member of the D.C Council and the D.C Statehood Party. At the recently-concluded meeting of the first Green Congress, the former Green Committees of Correspondence was reorganized into The Greens. The new organization will provide a table at which progressive movements and organizations can convene and build consensus toward a sustainable future. A Green Justice caucus was organized to ensure the continued responsiveness of The Greens to the concerns of historically under-represented constituencies. The Greens have 142 local chapters and 170 affiliated organizations in 46 states. State Green parties are forming in Hawaii, California, Arizona, Pennsylvania, and Missouri. Greens have secured statewide ballot access in Alaska, Vermont and New Hampshire. Greens hold office in at least 15 municipalities from California to New England. Green locals have participated for the past two years in the development of a comprehensive Green Program, which will guide The Greens both locally and nationally toward a sustainable future. Greens Coordinating Committee members Charles Betz, Washington, D.C; Howard Hawkins, Vermont; and Joni Whitmore, Green Party of Alaska chair; will be introduced. Anders Erkeus of the Swedish Greens, Mike Peinstein of the California Green Party, and Phil Hill of the International Green Network will also be available to provide additional information. Translations will be available in German and Swedish. 

# 32 Green Elected Officials 

Jay Gustaferro Toni Harp Roy Morrison Many Kcmple Neil Colder John Schroeder Joyce Brown Andy Height* Joe Szwaja* Bert Zipperer* Mary Kay Baum* Frank Kochn Karen Kubby Matt Marline Will Wood Bob Ornelius Melanie Williams Todd Cooper Louise Humphreys David Tan-Pat Akers Kathryn Hawkins August 1991 Gloucester, Massachusetts New Haven, Connecticut Warner, New Hampshire Plainfield, Vermont Ithaca, New York Ithaca, New York Chapel Hill. North Carolina Madison, Wisconsin Madison, Wisconsin Madison, Wisconsin Madison, Wisconsin Bayfield County, Wisconsin Iowa City, Iowa Columbia, Missouri Missoula, Montana Arcata, California Arcata, California San Jose, California San Diego, California San Diego, California San Diego, California San Diego, California city council city council 

city budget committee planning commission 

city council. city council county board city council city council 

city council 

school board county board city council city council city council city council city water board conservation district board county water board county water board county planning commission county planning commission 

* Labor-Farm Party, an affiliated organization of the Greens 

# 33 Green Party USA elections update 

# 12/4/92 

PO Box 30208, Kansas City, MO 64112 1-800-257-7336 

# 91 Green candidates win 570,000 votes in 1992, 13 victories 

One year after official founding of the Green Party USA, Green Party members across the U.S. won 13 seats in local partisan and nonpartisan elections in Hawaii, Arkansas, Arizona, and California. Ninety-one Green candidates ran for national, state and local offices in 14 states: 15 for U.S. Congress and Senate; 32 for state houses; 22 for county and city offices; and 22 for other elected municipal and community positions. Green candidates polled over 570,000 votes for an average showing of 16% nationwide. Prior to the elections, Greens already held 50 seats in local offices ranging from town councils and mayors to county commissions and boards of education. 58 Greens now hold office. In Hawaii, where the Green Party has mounted a serious challenge to the Democratic Party, a total of eighteen Green Party candidates ran in Hawaii. Keiko Bonk-Abramson's successful Green Party bid for a seat on the Hawaii County Council was the first victory by any third party in Hawaii. In the best Green Party showing for a national office, Linda Martin's U.S. Senate candidacy polled 50,000 votes (over 13%) against powerful U.S. Senator Daniel Inouye. Hawai'i Greens placed second (beating Republican candidates) in four partisan races. By far the largest number of Green candidates ran in California. 15 partisan and 22 nonpartisan candidates polled a total of over 340,000 votes, for a statewide average of 13%. Members of the California Green Party won nine nonpartisan seats. Greens were also elected to nonpartisan seats in Arizona and Arkansas, evidence of the party's growing appeal. Green Party candidates made good showings in other state elections. In a bid for the New Mexico State House, Abraham Guttman won 42% of the vote against an incumbent Democrat Mark Dunlea won 41% in a New York State Assembly race against his Republican opponent's 58%. Kelly Weaverling, the current Green Party mayor of Cordova, Alaska, polled 23% in his bid for the Alaska State Assembly. Green Party candidates also ran in Missouri, Maine, North Carolina, Florida, Pennsylvania, Wisconsin, and Arizona. Women did very well in the 1992 Green elections. Of the 13 candidates elected, 6 were women, including Keiko Bonk-Abramson's historic victory. Linda Martin's Senate showing further strengthened these achievements. Greens polled an average of 16% in all the races they entered across the U.S.. In partisan races (those in which "Green Party" appears on the ballot with the candidate's name), Greens received over 340,000 votes, for an average of nearly 13% per candidate. Greens are represented in the parliaments of many European countries with proportional representation, which require just 5% support to give seats to third parties. With a truly representative system in the U.S., Green parties would have already won seats in state and national legislative bodies. Greens ran against other third party and independent candidates in 18 races, and outpolled or equaled them in 13 races. Where Greens ran against third parties and independent candidates, Green Party candidates averaged over twice as many votes as candidates for the Libertarian Party, and 68% more votes than all other third parties and independent challengers combined. Green parties have permanent ballot status in Hawaii, Arizona, California, New Mexico, and Alaska. Other state Green parties are forming in at least two dozen states. 460 Green locals are organizing in 48 of the 50 states. Greens chose not to run a presidential candidate, nor did they endorse a candidate. The Green Party employs a conscious strategy of building 'from the bottom up," meaning that policies and campaigns initiated in local communities determine the direction of the national organization. This decentralist strategy mirrors the Party's vision for a society based on participatory democracy. However, many Greens supported Ron Daniels' independent candidacy (a campaign focusing on racial and gender justice, worker's rights, ecology and community empowerment). 

"Green politics is not just about getting people elected to office," notes Diana Spalding of the national Greens Coordinating Committee. "We did better in races where candidates had the support of strong local Green groups which have built credibility by working on issues and in coalitions. Now that the elections are over, it's important to keep on track with local activism around issues important to people's lives, like toxic waste, gender equality, racism, and nuclear power. That's how we're going to build a grassroots party that is a true alternative to politics as usual." New Green officeholders: 

Stephen 

Melissa Richard Lois Dona Carol Barbara Nancy David 

> Dan

John Timothy 

Keiko 

Miller Usrey Done Humphreys Spring Skiljan Carr Bernard! Tarr Tarr Beall Moore Bonk-Abramson Fayetteville AR Tombstone AZ Bisbee AZ Leucadia CA Berkeley CA Encinitas CA La Mesa CA 

CA CA 

El Cajon CA 

CA CA 

Volcano HI Fayetteville City Council Tombstone School Board Bisbee School Board Leucadia Water Board 

Berkeley Gty Council 

Encinitas School Board La Mesa/Spring Valley School'Board Evergreen Resource Conservation District Romona Water Board Valledeoro Planning Group Santa Clara County Evergreen Resource Conservation District Ramona Community Planning Group Hawaii County Council 

# 35 GREEN PARTY ELECTORAL RESULTS AROUND THE U.S. 

1 9 9 4 - 1 9 9 5 Arkansas Green Party 

Green incumbent Stephan Miller was re-elected to the Fayetteville City Council. Green Party of Alaska Jim Sykes and Roger Lewis received 3.9% in a five-way race for Governor/Lt. Governor. Joni Whitmore received 10% for the US House of Representatives, a statewide race in Alaska. Both races surpassed the 3% required for the Green Party of Alaska to requalify for statewide ballot status. In the 28th State Legislature district, Paul Bratton received 11%. 

Green Party of California 

California retained ballot status by Margaret Garcia's Greens record of 300,000 votes (3.9%) for Secretary of State. Other statewide races included: U.S. Senate - Barbara Blong 1.6% and Lt.'Governor -Danny Moses 1.8%. U.S. House of Representative races were 17th District - Craig Coffin 3.3%, 23rd District - Robert Marston 2.6%, 50th District - Kip Kruger 1.8%. State Senate, 29th District candidate, Walt Sheasby received 2.3%. State Assembly candidates included: 14th District - Hank Chapot 6.1%, 23rd District - Tim Fitzgerald 8.0%, 35th District - Tom Stafford 2.1%, and 38th District - Charles Wilken 7.1%. In non-partisan local races, several candidates won city council seats: Jason Kirkpatrick, Arcata (29%), Dona Spring, Berkeley (60%), Steve Schmidt, Menlo Park (15.8%), Allan Drusys, Yucaipa. In other city council races, Michael Hitchcock received 1707 votes in Redwood City, Jon Stevens received 1669 in Santa Monica and Gloria PurceN received 34% in Belmont. Other local races include: Malibu/Las Virgenes Resource Conservation District - Glenn Bailey (incumbant, uncontested win), Crest/DehesaHarison Canyon/Granite Hills Planning Group - William Bretz (incumbant, uncontested win), La Mesa/Spring Valley School District Board - Barbara Can (incumbant 24.7% win), Evergreen Resource Conservation District -Todd Cooper (incumbant 28.2% win), Alpine Community Planning Group - Bonnie Gengron (4.2%) and Brian Me Call (3.0%), Grossmont Hospital Board - Celesta Owen (13.5%), Grossmont Union High School District Board - Susan Wolfe-Fleming (10.8%), Helix Water Board - Steve Saint (17.7%), Mountain Empire School District Board - Leo Bennett-Cauchon (33.4%) Ramona Municipal Water District Board -Timothy Moore (43.7%), Evergreen Resource Conservation District - Rick Bemardi (14.3%) 

Green Party of Colorado 

Philip Hufford and Krista Paradise received 1.5% for Governor/Lt. Governor. The Green Party of Colorado needed 10% to qualify for statewide ballot status. 

Hawai'i Green Party 

Kioni Dudley and Jack Morse received 3.5% for Governor/Lt. Governor in a four-way race. The Hawai'i Green Party needed 10% to retain statewide ballot status they first achieved in 1992. Now they will have to gather petition signatures to regain their status. In State House races on Oahu, Ton! Worst and Karen Archibald got 41% and 38% respectively in two-way races. Chris Walker and Bruce MacPherson received 17% and 10% in multi-candidate races. Keiko Bonk-Abramson was re-elected to the County Council (Board of Supervisors) of the Big Island of Hawai'i with 60% of the vote in a partisan race. Bonk-Abramson is the highest elected Green official in the United States. On Maui, three candidates ran for County Council - Nikhilananda 22%, Meiling Akuna 9% and Jason Schwartz 4%. On Kauai, victor Bailey received 3,014 votes. Indiana Green Party Pete Meyers received 25% for South Bend City Council District 1. 

The Greens/Green Party USA, PO Box 100, Blodgett Mills NY 13738, 607/756-4211 GREEN PARTY ELECTORAL RESULTS AROUND THE U.S. 

1994-1995 Maine Green Party 

Jonathan Carter received 6.5% in a four-way race for Governor. By surpassing 5%, the Maine Green Party has qualified as a statewide ballot-status party. Running for the U.S. House of Representatives, Charles Fitzgerald received 5%. Karen Mayo won her race for Selectperson in Bowdoinham. Missouri Green Party Jeff Barrow received 40% in a two-way race for County Commissioner in Boone County. Terry Webster was elected mayor of Webster Grove, and Matt Marline was reelected to the City Council of Columbia. New Mexico Green Party 

Roberto Mondragon/Steve Schmidt received 10.4% and national recognition in a three-way contest for Governor. Lorenzo Garcia received 33% for Treasurer, his percentage being the highest in 60 years for .a statewide office by a candidate from a nationally-organized 3rd party. By receiving over 5% in a statewide office race, the New Mexico Green party now qualifies for major party ballot status. Patricia Wolff received 12% for Commissioner of Public Lands; Rex Johnson received 5% for Congress,. 2nd District. Fran Gallegos received 43% for Santa Fe Magistrate Judge and Don Brayfield received 32% for Santa Fe County Assessor. 

New York State Green Party •

New York State Green candidates were for Congress, East Side Manhattan - Tom Leighton (1 %); State Assembly, Brooklyn Heights - Craig Seeman (4%); State Assembly, Queens - Mary France (3%). Mark Dunlea, Poestenkill Town Councilor, received 11.5% in his race for Rensselaer County Executive. Ulster County Legislature District 2 candidates, Ben Armento and Dave Menzies, received 8% and 7%, respectively. City and town races included Councilor-at-Large, Syracuse - Howie Hawkins 1% and 3%*; School Board, Syracuse - Tom Sullivan 2% and 3%*; McDonough Town Council - Debbie Anderson 12.5%; Cortlandville Town Council - Betty Wood 10%; Binghamton City Council - Rick Sprout; Ithaca Mayor - Paul Sayvetz. * Howie and Tom ran in 1994 and in 1995. North Carolina Green Party Alex Zaffron won his race for the Carrboro Board of Aldermen. Mark Chilton was relected to to the Chapel Hill Town Council. 

Green Party of Rhode Island 

Jeff Johnson received 6% for Lieutenant Governor, qualifying the Green Party of Rhode Island for statewide ballot status. Anna Cardillo Martin received 5.3% for State Senate, 4th district. 

Green Party of Virginia 

Four people ran for the state legislature: Virginia Porras, House District 18 (3%;) Eric Sheffield, House District 24 (3%), Mark Yatrofsky, House District 88 (3%), and Elise Sheffield, Senate District 24 (3%). 

Washington DC Greens Jodean Marks received 670 votes for mayor. Marks ran on the Statehood Party line. Wisconsin Green Party 

Jeff Peterson placed third out of four candidates for State House, receiving 6%. Turns to the East placed third out of four candidates for Gty Council of Lake Geneva, receiving 11.4%. 

# 31 Green Party USA Press Release—11/11/92 

PO Box 30208. Kansas City. MO 64112 1-800*257-7336 

# Greens win 580,000 votes in 1992, seat 13 candidates 

One year after official founding of the Green Party USA, Green Party members across the U.S. won 13 seats in local partisan and nonparcisan elections in Hawaii. Arkansas, Arizona, and California. Eighty-five Green candidates ran for national, state and local offices in 13 states: 15 for U.S. Congress and Senate; 28 for state houses; 22 for county and city offices; and 20 for other elected municipal and community positions. Green candidates polled over 580,000 votes for an average showing of 16% nationwide. Prior to the elections, Greens already held 50 seats in local offices ranging from town councils and mayors to county commissions and boards of education. 58 Greens now hold office. In Hawaii, where the Green Party has mounted a serious challenge to the Democratic Party, a total of eighteen Green Party candidates ran in Hawaii. Keiko Bonk* Abnmsoo's successful Green Party bid for a seat on the Hawaii Council was the first victory by any third party in Hawaii. In the best Green Party showing for a national office. Linda Martin's U.S. Senate candidacy polled 50,000 votes (over 13%) against powerful U.S. Senator Daniel Inouye. Hawai'i Greens placed second (beating Republican candidates) in four partisan races. By far the largest number of Green candidates ran in California. 15 partisan and 22 nonpartisan .candidates polled a total of over 340,000 votes, for a statewide average of 13%. Members of the California Green Party won nine nonparrisan seats. Greens were also elected to nonpartisan seats in Aritona and Arkansas, evidence of the party's growing appeal. Green Party candidates made good showings in other state elections. In a bid for the New Mexico State House, Abraham Guttman won 42% of the vote against an incumbent Democrat. Mark Dunlea won 41% in a New York State Assembly race against his Republican opponent's 58%. Kelly Weaverling, the current Green Party mayor of Cordova, Alaska, polled 23% in his bid for the Alaska Scare Assembly. Green Party candidates also ran in Missouri, Maine, North Carolina, Florida, Pennsylvania, Wisconsin, and Arizona. Women did very well in the 1992 Green elections. Of the 13 candidates elected, 6 were women, including Keiko Bonk-Abramson's historic victory. Linda Martin's strong Senate showing further strengthened these achievements. Greens polled an average of 16% in all the races they entered across the U.S.. In partisan races (those in which 'Green Party' appears on the ballot with the candidate's name), Greens received over 340.000 votes, for an average of nearly 13% per candidate. Greens are represented in the parliaments of many European countries with proportional representation, which require just 5% support to give seats to third parties, with a truly representative system in the U.S.. Green parties would have already won seats in state and national legislative bodies. Greens ran against other third party and independent candidates in 18 races, and oucpolled or equaled them in 13 races. Where Greens ran against third parties and independent candidates, Green Party candidates averaged over twice as many votes as candidates for the Libertarian Party, and 68% more votes than all other third parties and independent challengers combined. Green parties have permanent ballot status in Hawaii. Arizona, California, New Mexico, and Alaska. Other state Green parries are forming in at least two doien states. 460 Green locals are organizing in 48 of the 50 states. Greens chose not to run a presidential candidate, nor did they endorse a candidate. The Green Party employ] conscious strategy of building "from the bottom up," meaning that policies and campaigns initiated in local communities determine the direction of the national organiiation. This decentralise strategy mirrors the Party's vision for a society based on participatory democracy. However, many Greens supported Ron Daniels' independent candidacy (a campaign focusing on racial anJ gender justice, worker's rights, ecology and community empowerment). "Green politics is not just about getting people elected to office," notes Diana Spalding of the national Greens Coordinating Committee. "We did better in races where candidates had the support of stronglocal Green groups which have built credibility by working on issues and in coalitions. Now that the elections are over, it's important to keep on track with local activism around issues important to people's lives, like toxic waste, gender equality, racism, and nuclear power. That's how we're going to build a grassroots party that is a true alternative to politics as usual." 

nor did I

r»a I

## Ilocal I

New Green officeholder*! 

Stephen 

MclisM 

Richard 

> Lob

Don* Carol 

Barbara 

Nancy David 

Dan 

John Timothy Keiko 

Miller Usrey Dbhe Humphreys Spring Skiljan Carr Bernard! Tait Tail Beall Moore Bonk'Abramson Faycrreville Tombstone Bisbee Lcucadia Berkeley Encinitas La Mesa ElCajon Volcano 

AR Fayccccvillc City Council AZ Tombstone School Board AZ Biibee School Boaid CA Lcucadia Water Board CA Berkeley City Council 

CA Encinitas School Board 

CA La Mesa/Spring Valley School Board 

CA Evergreen Resource Conservation Dilutee CA Romona Water Board CA Valledcoro Planning Croup CA Santa Clara County Evergreen Resource Conservation District 

CA Ramona Community Planning Group HI Hawaii Council ,

> ;

# Mil' 

## j;  

> 0 i |

# ii 

# 11! 3? T

# ' ! 

# HI 

i'

s

# Mil' 

> O i

# ii 

3

# Ji\

l\I

# ii

# i1

f f f • I f 

IH 

# 'in 1

# !i I] 

# ill

3

# j j

# ih! 

• >s l

# it 

# Mil' 

# i

# ii i

# ill 

3

## f

# !! |} ii ii

# i5

# }ii 

i

# 'in' 1

# il I. 1

# iii 

3

# i

# ll IJ

!

# Mil' 

# h . 

# li{ 

# ill-

t

,Ii , 

> w

# 1

> •

# Mil' 

# h

# •h 

# i: 

# ill! 

3 ]

# i j 

# ! 1 

> i1
> *
> iI

H

> 1

# 'iii"ii 

# ii i, 

# S i] 

i-> i * \ \ l l \ 

0*0 o* 

3 3

# i ,i 

# rfi.i 

\ \ \ 

# ii"iii' 

# il i •>{ 

# i ill 3 i

# i| 

# fi h 1 

## cV

# 1

# Mil' 

# jl 

# Ii 

# i«. 3

## ,

J j 

## j

# !it • S 

H

f

> 9

i

# Mil' 

## ii ii 

## ill

3

## J

1

# jj

# ii

I|9

# Mil'  

> 0

f

# ii 

# II! 

3

# 1il 

## m

> 1

# Mil' 

# ii 

# ii 

# III

3

# l

# il, 

# f

# I

U((l 

> f

# Mil' 

# ii 

# iii 3

# ill 

## mils 

## »

# Mil' 

# i, 

# ill 111 3

# I

# ill

# ffl n 

> JB •« gi

Is 

# ]i 

## &i '*t 5 6 v 

> 15 J[

# ii jj§i 

# 1

# ii it « i A s

# ! lit 

|I ]

## i i i1

## 1 io*5 o-

> 1

# j jj 

# >! i

> |||

# jnjjj 

# il 1'! if •! 

# ii il! 

i if ™

!i ri 

# Mil' 

# i

iii

# ill 

'

# ]

# ill 

5|5 t s 

# III 1

# il 6 M

# ill 

*

# i

## ?il 

n

# 'in 

# ii • V 

# ill 9

# »,„ 

Si! $ 

> s s •

# Mil' 

> •

2; i|i

# i.ii 

(( 

> s s

# 'III 

# il ii 

# ill 

*

# 1. 

# 1(IS! ( 

> \'-"
> L...
> I -
> 1

# Mil' 

> 01

• 5

# U

~^, i *

# is

# '111 1

# jj 

> 0 $

# ill 

'

J

'

# d_ ' 1

# ll 

# 11 it i!    

> JHr $1s s s --

$M- Mi 

# '111"!!!"!!! 1

# i, t, il til !i| !M 

: s 8i » • i* t * III ll! >{    

> O«o ofo•*'

9 4 «

# ii i i t

[fli ..! !i 

# .,

# $ ?

!

> ~ ~

_

> I

# Mll'MH'l 

# ill 'ii ;*ii ii 1 

# I1, 1 ih 1 0*0 o** *

3 M^i 

# ' ' !i! , .<i!i .Progressive Unity through a National Slate off Lx>oal Independent Candidates 

by HOWIE HAWKINS, Syracuse NY Will Ralph Nader run an all-out campaign for Pmidenl thai unites progressives in this country? Whether he does or not. progressive movements still have • way to unite and touch mil* lions of people in the 1996 Whet if. instead of the 100-200 election. independent progress/ye cendittade* W h a t we had in 1994. wo had 1000-2000 if, instead of n 1996? .... united behind a common ptorfo/m... the 100 

200 indr p e n d e n t progressive candidacies we had in 1994. we had 1000-2000 in 1996? And what if they united behind a common plat-form of national demands, which all of these independent candidates signed on to as part of a national slate of indepen-dent progressive candidates?' We would indeed touch millions with a common message. If we do this in 1996. independent progressives would be a factor in the 1996 election wlu-ther or not Ralph Nader (or another well-known candidate like Jesse Jackson) runs a high profile independent progressive campaign for President. 

National Independent Polltloe Summit In 

Pltteburgh, Auauet 1 e»8 

Organizing a "National Slate of Lo-cal Independent Candidates" is a project that was enthusiasti-cally adopted by the National Independent Politics Summit in Pittsburgh. August 18* 20. I99S. INttt: Tkt Cram Cm*al tabnti At fi&ia" ft Hi Ntftmlrt anting. -EJ-I Hie Summil was far and iway the most broadly representative of conferences this year to build unity on thr independent left. 210 people representing over 100 organizations from 24 slates and I fie conTd on p*ge 9

> Tllk CR1.KNS/ORJJ.N PAKCY USA

rxi new too 

> BlIIIXil.lTMIU&NY 11738-0100 rd fc AddirM CorrrrllcNi Nonprofit Of ganlulton U.S.POSTAGI
> MID
> McGriwNY KAMITNO.Z

cont'd from page 1 Pledge Campaign" that seeks to collect the names and addresses of one million people who support the creation of a progressive independent party or alliance of parties. The data base of names will be accessible to all organi-zations that ire part of the National In-dependent Politics Summit The Summit also endorsed the "CaravarVMarch for Social Justice" that Green activist Inila-Wakan has been spearheading. It will begin on the West Coast on Mothers Day. 1996 and con-clude with a demonstration on Wall Street a week before the election. [N*c "Tit Car*vmx/M*rdifor SecuJ Jiutltf tm n-Finally, a task force to support the development of a "Movement-Gener-ated 1996 Independent Presidential Campaign" was organized at the Sum-mil. Although no one at the Summit argued for supporting Ginton as a lesser evil, many expressed concern that the movement was not prepared to take on a presidential race and that our limited resources should be focused on the na-tional slate, the pledge, and the cara-van in 1996. The Summit did not en* done a project to build a movement* generated presidential campaign, but did ask the presidential task force to report back to the next Summit in At* lanta. April 19*21. 1996. 

National Independent Polttlo* summit In Atlanta, April 1 DOS 

The Atlanta Summit Hill decide on what will be included In the common platform of national demands for the nationals/ate of local independent can-didates. The Summit will also decide on principles of unity and an on-eolnf structure for this network of oiganlza* lions committed to independent pro-gressive politics. And there will be dis* 

> <U

i11

?1 y lhe P^^Ual campaign •nd of a five-year organizing vision and 

> lU

.Vf*y f(M independent progressive politic, leading up to the year 2000 that U* Continuation, Committee is draft* ing for discussion. The AUanta Summit will be a del* «g«ted conference. Every oreaniza* uon-local. state, and national, includ* «ng each local and stale affiliate of na* tional organizations—will be accorded two voting delegates. Organizations are asked to send at least one woman and one person of color as members of their :

voting delegations. IThe Continuations Committee of j the National Independent Politics Sum* | mit concluded that this apportionment 'of delegates would be the most propor- : tional. It would reflect the higher de* ' gree of organization for organizations with local and state affiliates while also giving local, state, and national organi-zations without affiliations a vote as well. And it would reflect the various organizations' level of commitment to building a united independent party or alliance of parties. The Green Party USA. as the larg-est and most developed organization-ally of the independent progressive party initiatives, will have voting strength at the Atlanta Summit that reflects its level of development — but only if Green locals and stales demon-' mate a commitment to building a more ,united progressive party movement by ,sending delegations. \

A United Laft Party, or 

an Alllanoo of PariloaT 

The idea of an alliance of indepen-dent parties was widely discussed at the Pittsburgh Summit as a way to build a united left. The foremost example of this approach is in New Zealand where the New Zealand Alliance was formed by the Green Party, the Maori Party (representing the indigenous Polynesian people who are 12% of the population). and the New Labor Party, a left breakaway from the Labor Party. Alone 

u t l - M f t ut-w.jfMUCft HOK.WfjU*. *A» • UJPW*. alliance. they have agreed to not com-pete in the same election districts, and to work for common demands, like pro-portional representation. As an alliance of independent pro-gressive parties, the New Zealand Alii* , ance succeeded in 1994 in switching that country's electoral system from winner-take-all plurality (like the U.S. has) to • mixed-member proportional system (like Germany has, with half being elected from single-member dis-tricts and the other half from party lists 10 make the leeiilature's overall com* position proportional to lite voles for party lists). In next year's election, the New Zealand Alliance is expected to increase its representation from 2 to 25* 30 in a 120 seat national parliament. The New Zealand Alliance could be a model for building an independent left in the U.S. with real impact Greens in the U.S. are strongest among environmentalists, feminists, and peace activists. But we are generally weak in organizing in communities of color, where the Campaign for a New Tomorrow is more successful, and in organized labor, where Labor Party Advocates is strong. The Greens are strong in some states, but in other states there are other independent parties with similar political values and goals. The New Party has shown an ability to raise some real money, while the Greens haven't. An alliance of all these parties, instead of competition to become HIE independent progressive party, may be the best way forward in this country, a way that synthesizes the strengths and unique programmatic contributions of each party. 

The* National Slate of Ljooal Independent Candidate* 

The "National Slate of Independent Local Candidates" was proposed in the spirit of the New Zealand Alliance. It will allow local candidates to retain their own ballot name (i.e.. Green. New. Socialist. Progressive. labor. Peace and Freedom. New Progressive. New Democracy. Mountaineer. Pacific. Consumer. Liberty Union. Rainbow, etc.) and their . ..own, local platform, while, also aligning ' themselves with other independent candidates around the country who share common national demands. For the slate project, "focal" means the district elections for Congress and state legislatures as well as county and municipal elections. "Independent" means progressive and independent of the Democrats and Republicans. There is nothing in the national slate project to prevent an independent presidential candidate (or candidates) from signing on to the slate. But even without a presidential ticket, the na-tional slate of local independent candi-dates could project the independent progressive party movement and its platform on to the public agenda. The elements of the national slate project include: • a common name/identity for the slate (while local candidates retain their own local identity on the balk*); • a common platform—a succinct state* ment in popular style of key national demands shared by the slate (local can-didates retain their focal platforms); • nationally-coordinated days of focal action to link electoral and extra-eke* toral action, link up the focal indepen-dent campaigns, and magnify the im-pact of our focal actions; • • covenant with the candidates of the alate stating their accountability and other standards expected of candidates and what candidates can expect from • a clearinghouse to coordinate the project's organizing, collect the names of candidates joining the slate, and pub-licize the slate in the media. The Atlanta Summit is wliere these elements of the slate project will be ft* nalized. In the meantime, a task force set up at the Pittsburgh Summit to de-velop this project is contacting indepen-dent progressive parties and candidates about the slate, publicizing the project in the progressive media, and prepar-ing a draft common platform and cov-enant with candidates for circulation and comment. If you want to work on any aspect of the slate project, contact me at P.O. Box S62. Syracuse NY I320S.(3ISH71.70SS. ** informa-tion on the Atlanta Summit: National Independent Politics Summit, P.O. Box 170610, Brooklyn NY 11217, (718) 643-9603. ff9M*M0H<Su was tfeSyacMStGrten Part* canddatt for Spantst Common Cornel ti 1993 ata It a mentor of t/it Conthuattotu Commtttie of tft HoUonat Hdcpendent fet-tles Summit, aid Is coordnothg If* Summit last force on tft national Salt of*&pei-dent locd Canddatn 

# LI* GREEN POLITICS SUMMER V6 

# Ecofemlnl-sm, Democracy f and The Nader Campaign 

> yi Orcta Oaard. Green Party of Mlmeacfei

Ralph Nader Is • weD-known consumer Jvocate and • longtime critic of eoiponlleni. !< leads an Impeccable personal life, b a de* •oud activist, and hai been Inspirational 10 housanda. Bui Is he Green? Actually, he's not. And vilhln the Grrent. some And that problem-tic. For yean. Greens have been proud of uniting Green candidates who stand on a jreen Platform, developed democratically vithln their stales (platforms do vary from 

\s Greens are fond of saying, .hese Ten Key Values aren't a nenu of selections-he., "Ill take ;rassroots democracy, but hold .he social Justice and respect for Jlverslt*'. would vou?" 

xiU to suu, but they all share an adherence •.o the Ten Key Vtlues). As Greens are fend >f saying, these Ten Key N4lue« aren't a menu >f selections--!*., 'Ill take gianroots democ* icy. but hold the social Justice and respect .'or diversity, would you?"--but rather Intent* ..ted parts of a holisUcGrcen Vision. Hence. Greens have chosen candidates who are mem-bers of the Greens In good standing, and whose campaign itQecU a commitment to aO ten of the Key Values. There's always been the dream of candi-date accountability, a quality which dlstin-gubhes Gieens from the demopubllcans right sway. Wkh these expectations. It's no sur-prise that some Greens have feh real rests-unoe to the Nader campaign from uSe sun. Nader's non-membenhlp In the Greens, and his refusal to run on • Green Platform are •uit the first CM several objections Greens ha« 

> raised.

Undemocratic Process of the Nader Campaign In 1995, a survey was conducted among Greens to test attitudes about running a presi-dential candidate, with the results presented al the Albuquerque gathering. Only 20% of those receiving the survey responded, but of these, over 90% were In favor. It would ap-pear that only those who favored such a cam-paign responded to the survey, making It sta-tisticaOy unsound to conclude that there was wide-spread support for a presidential cam-paign. Four months after the gathering, the Nader campaign was bunched anyway. Al-though Greens never agreed on what the goal for such a campaign would be, ostensibly the purpose Is to 'unify progressives* by using the media coverage generated by a hlgh-vblbU-ky candidate to get "our* message across to a wider audience, and by bringing people to-gether to work on a common Issue. Unfortunately. It's not working out that way. Nader Isn't broadcasting "our* message; he's broadcasting his. Many people dont see Nader addressing their Israel, and have re* fused to work on a campaign they didn't Ini-tiate. As a result, some states have had diffi-culty mobilizing consent, and the proposed straugy of sending money and signs tuie-galh-crers to various states to force Nader's name onto the btflol seems to violate the very Idea of democratic process-IntenuDy. Greens who have voiced con* cerni about the campaign process have been dismissed rather than addressed. Worse yet. wcVe been told that our concerns are kss Im-portant than Nader's focus on corporate 

. . . how can democracy be achieved by subordinating the 1s-•ues that people are concerned about? 

power and the national croston of democracy. Not only b this dismissive approach a bad way to handle the Green membership. It's doesn't help us build coalitions. Claiming that your single Issue. If ad-dressed. wiD solve all other Issues Is no way to win friends. And wcVe seen this strategy fall before: In the thirties, the one-lssue'lib-crates-aD topic was class: In the eighties, to was nuclear power. This strategy becomes par* llcularly bonk when the Issue b democracy •how can democracy be achieved by subordi-nating the Issues that people are concerned about? I cal this "trickle-down democracy* and expect It lobe about as effective as trickle* down economics. UndemocnUc PoslUoru Taken by Nader In Interview* Since his candidacy has been declared, Nader has given numerous Interviews In which he addresses corporate power and the erosion of democracy, but fafls to lake demo-cratic positions on mature of sodal Justice. On the Phil Donahue show, for example. Nader refused to address reproductive choice, claiming h was a "private* Issue. Feminists have long critiqued the publkfrrtvate division as a gendered split ^^^^^^^^^^^ which conf.net *^^""**"^""**"****^ women's concerns to 

the realm of the pri-

vate, reserving legiti* macy and *rigTnV to the male-defined realm of the public (Feminism, bidden* tally, b one of the Ten Key Values thai Nader does not seem to be adhering to.) Slmuariy. when WUUam Safin asked ======= If Nader would sup- """"""""""""""""" port same-sex marriage, Nader claimed he was •not Interested In gonadal politics.* This re* sponse b not only uninformed, but overtly homophobic. And finally, on 'Meet the Press * Nader said he would not take a stand on ani-mal rights Issues, a topic which b part of the California Green Fkity Platform.  

> In these Interviews. Nader b uitn* a Ian*

. . . the democratic tradition crafted predomlnanUy by white elite males has elevated reason over emotion, split the political arena Into realms of public and private, and confined anything to do with human bodies and the body of nature to the realm of the private and the apolitical. 

and men, people of aO colon, humans and nature In the fulfillment of genuine democ-racy. From aa ecofcmlnbt perspective, then, democracy which does not Include our bod-ies b not a true democracy. Nader's Inability la see the relevance of sodal Justice Issues to the meaning of democracy b a shortcoming which b alienating not only to women or gay* and lesbians, but also to people of color, E-Raclng the Opposition Early In the campaign, many Greens voiced concerns about choosing a white, male. heterosexual as the first Green presidential candidate.but these concerns were shut down. ^^^^^^^^^^ In April, at a meeting "'"""*'"""*'*'*'"""""*"**! 1 of the muhJ-ndal In-dependent Progret* rfvt Politics Network (IPPN). Greens got the same message. The opposition to Nader from the Afri-ca n-American com* munlty present In At-lanta may be based on the fact that Nader hasn't been there In the past ,^,— __— ___j; when racism has been the key Issue. Certainly, Nader's current refusal lo take po-sitions on Immigration and affirmative action hasn 1! helped. Based oa the chlDy reception of the Nader campaign at the IPPN. some Greens suggested that Nader be paired wish a woman • of color as vke-presidentiaJ candidate. Thb guage which oclegfelmr.tr* V^y ponfe. the assigned domain of women, people of coloc queen, and animals. Ecofemlnbts have pointed out that die democratic tradition crafted predominantly by white elite males has elevated reason over emotion, split the political arena Into realms of public and pri-vate, and confined anything' to do with hu-man bodies and the body of nature to the realm of the private and the apolitical Ecofemlnlsts-and many Greens-who embrace the values of ecological wisdom and feminism understand the necessity of both reason and emotion, mind and body, women lowniiiiu. using a woman of color-or any Green woauuv-to voice con-cerns Nader won't address. There are other problems. For example, what policy-making authority would such a woman have during this campaign? Would campaigns now be made on her behalf? Would her Issues be foregrounded as equally Important as Nader's? How would we resolve, say. her support of re* • productive choice or affirmative action, and his refusal to speak about these bsues? Mod likely, Nader's running mate would be femi-nized Into sflence-which b exactly what haj happened Internally, with the dissenting SM Democracy, Page£ / Demooraoy— 

ecrroln>mPaoe4 Greens. 

In retrospect.Greens look the wion|ap-proach to the IPPN. A campaign to unify progrcsslvei should br offcied to every po> lentlal ally from the fUit • and their Input should • fleet die strategy that If adopted. Wt can't |iut hand a ruOy<rafud campaign to people for their signature and expect to cre-ate auto. Ciecnt have been told thb over and over again. Yet we wonder why women, outer*, people of color, and Crccni who thought the IOKV meant something arc now objecting to the Nader campaign. 

The root problem of the Nader campaign stems from Greens' dif-ficulties with leadership. Thus far, some Greens have mistaken charisma, Initiative, and the abil-ity to "think big' for leadership. 

Undemocratic Leadership 'The root problrmof ih« Nader campaign stems from Greens' difficulties with kader* •Sip. Thui fat lome Cieem hive mistaken charitma. InhUilve. and the ability to "think big" fee kadrnhlp. Study. iheM an the nec-essary chararterlnla. and they arc trans-fermrd Into Green kadrnhip when they ate pUotd In service of the Green community through the pfoecM of participatory, demo-cratic decision-making. The Nader campaign It a criib In kadcnhlp because the self-tun-en In the Greens, once again. Jumped ahead and canceled everyone else to foBow. Now. those who didn't launch the cam-paign and who have various concern* about Si arc In a bind: If we speak out. we risk be-Ing bbmed for airing our dirty Green bun-In public, or potentially sabotaging the haid work of others: If we remain silent, we arc enabling the lack of accountability IB the Nader campaign leaden. Both options, youl notice, fsll to hold the eelf-staitcn responsible for making a statewide decision whh Rational Implications. By using participatory democracy, genu-ine Greco leadership domnt put the Green coriuiwruiylntoihbklndofadoubk-blnd. When charisma. Initiative, and vision ase used lo facilitate decision! that the majority can endorse, the community moves forwasd together because everyone can Mpport and participate In leadership. What NowT A Word About Rhetoric As Green dissenters, we aren't political walls. V* aienll asking br perfection, pu-rity, or the Impossible dream. (We thought the Ten Key Values would do fine Instead.) And we know the Importance of eheioric It's been said that no candidate wiB win In thb political climate standing on a platform of social Justice or an opposition to caphalbnx A successful campaign has lo focus on eco-nomic Issues, the workplace and Jobs, and the 

Paradoxically, Nader may actually support all sorts of freedoms that he hasn't been willing to lake a stand on. But we need to know that. 

antidemocratic Impact of muhinallona! cor-porailons. On these lasues. Nader's snessage b Incredibly Important, and h reaches maoy people. But hb silences on rsckl Justice, kta sealsm and hb homophobia, scach people too. Paradoxically. Nader may actually sup-port all sons of freedoms that he hain't been willing to take a stand on. Bui we need to know that. He doesn't have to make repro-ductive choice or py marriage or ecological wisdom hb main Issue. What he dots have lode b make short remarks like. •You're damn right I support social Justice.* «r 'Real de-mocracy Includes everybody-regardkss of their race, gcndct age. ability, class, religion. or aexual orientation. Now. kft talk about ih« teal opponents to democracy, which ast not society's marginalised groups at all-uWse corporations, and the mttliary-lndua. trial complex.* Come to think of a. Joining the Gnen Party wouldn't be a bad Idea, el-diet At thlaoolni to the campaign. wU a ihe-torical sea change redeem Nader In the eye* of the G sec ns and other progresdvce who an not white, heterosexual, or mak>ldendBed? And If he doesrt acUirai our bauea. who's left* If | were hb advtsot I'd suggest that expanding kb melartc b worth • 

fft* arts* li Aitnad 

faff 1997 Jnm by* V*l~nlt,PnuJ The Challenge of Nader and the Greens 

by MARK ANDERLIK, Gn»n Potties c»«W 

The effort to have Ralph Nader be the Green candidate for President poses many challenges for us In the Greens. Some of these challenges are healthy some are troublesome, and some are Quite unnecessary. The healthy challenges Include Nader's campaign summons to grassroots Greens. He offers his considerable credibility and stature to a Green campaign only If we work hard to make the Greens a broader organized ^politl-cal movement for the future." His campaign also challenges us to speak clearly and force* fuDy against the power of the multinational corporate system and its poisonous effects on democracy and the environment. The process used by some Greens to so* licit Nader's bid for the presidency Is a trouble-some challenge to democracy within the Greens. Troubling, too. is Nader's decision to not address certain Issues In his campaign, such as gay and lesbian rights. In her article In this issue, Greta Gaard explores these and other problematic challenges of the campaign. One unnecessary frustration of the cam-paign Is the Inaccessibility of the candidate himself tc his campaign workers and to the Greens as a whole. Green Politic* editors have tried unsuccessfully for many weeks to arrange an Interview with Nader. We had hoped to ask unique questions ironr a Green perspec-tive and publish them in this issue. Many Greens have expressed their frus-tration with Nader's lack ol communication with the Greens. John Rensenbrink of. the Maine Green Party, for example, wrote In re* sponse to an article by Nader in the July 8. 1996 Nation: "Now we need much more per-ceived energy and direct enpgement from him [Nader], Including better communication with the people who are trying to make it happen. I Implore you. Ralph: Do kl And make sure your people do It." Greens around the country have gained substantial experi-ence and knowledge about political cam-paigns. We are among the most successful progressive third party movements In the U.S. in this century. Nader's candidacy can help campaigns Ukt TUnsenbiinVt VJ.S. Senate campaign. But this can only be done with communJcatlon and cooperation between Nader and the Greens. Speculation has it that to prevent Fed-eral Section Commission (FEC) and the In-ternal Revenue Service (IRS) scrutiny Nader win not spend more than $5000 (all his own money) on his campaign. Nader rightfully does not want to jeopardize the tax-exempt status of the multitude of activist organiza-tions associated with him. Even so, ways can be found to commu-nicate that keeps his expenses to a minimum. Cooperation with Green activists Is Improved simply by letting local Greens know when he's coining to the area to speak so they can effec-tively organize around trie event. If U« savOny horn the FEC : and IRS U •othreauidngihatllhamsiring* Nader. •*«" 

Scoffer o^self a, a P^-f"-E£ dldate? UndlnghliitpuutlonlotheCitenf ^tremendous.."!- Hoover, the de^nd, 

°" of oiganlzlng icqulre more and <^ra^toiiukehU catena 'I™* SfecdvThelp to Ac Greens, Without Oil., SvTSkU that the morale of the oeople mo-SSre? by Made* campaign wlO JecUne .nd thut defeat the purpose of hli campaign, An Initiative of "Unity and Diversity" 

t o R A L P H H A D E R . P n & * W C v * 5 U & J G r * n 1 > v t f . ' . ' ' . . . . . . . . 

(NiU:Tkliit&maittjR*lrhpi*4*rH*ifcu4 various rolei that dtlzens need foaMume for action writ large and writ small... ' ...•'/. 

forty (fCtlifprnl* for Jiou 30,1996uhtHO> vironment and a Just society foir all bcrUs.ThegIob^coipcmUonsareon ;acol->>< 

cffidally iuim«l M At JVafaVnffcf auufUflte ty . Demanding and achieving justice re-9696 fib Jcltggta prat*!.) quires that we demand from aH of us as dtl-zens more dvlc time and energy. ; Hie Greens must show the way here with new definitions and strategies. Leadership 'means producing more kaden. not more fol-lowers. Welcome to the most self-reliant politi-cal movement In California. Welcome to a progressive Initiative that goes to the central contention of public poUtics - the concentra-tion of power and weahh in a few hands and what should be done about what Thomas Jeflenon called "the excesses of the rnonled' Interests." Society rott from the top down and h is reconstructed from the bottom up. The take-over of our political government at the na-(

tional and state levels by the corporate pow-* en Is dismantling our democracy, shutting out dtlzens and dtlzen groups from their own government - executive, legislative and judi-cial. When democracy is downsized, so too will people's standard of living be downsized, along with their rights, remedies, opportuni-ties and ability to make a difference In this world. 'By The People as a Commonwealth..." But the people In this country still have llslon course whh American democracy, with community and with sustainable economies and the well being of worken and consum-

ers. .

Plutocracy and oligarchy are making our government one OF the Exxons. BY the Gen-eral Motors, and FOR the DuPonts. . ' 

A political movement means agreeing on core issue* of funda-mental democracy and not frac-turing on. demands for unanim-ity about remaining priorities. 

•Unity and Drvenlty Holds Thie Today" 

A political movement means agreeing on core Issues of fundamental democracy and not fracturing on demands for unanimity about remaining priorities. The old slogan - unky and diversify •• holds true today. Together they build energy that builds democracy •• the best assets that they own. but unfortunately do_^_mcchanljm yet devised for solving problem* not control. I speak of the public airwaves, the public lands, the huge capital pools that comprise trillions of doDan In pensions, mu-tual Insurance assets and other savings. We the people own these enormous as-sets but corporations control their use and disposition - from the broadcast industry to the mining and Umber Industries. Progressive poUtics means that what is legally owned by the people as a commonwealth must be con trolled by them. That means, first and foremost, that we must pay dose attention to our civic duties In time, knowledge and determination. That is what self reliance and grassroots mean for progressive poUtics - banding together In the with Justice In a society where everybody counts and everybody Is respected and every-body is eager to assume the dutks of dtizen^ 

launch the Green Waves and Breezes..." 

What of the future for the children -nearly 25 percent of whom live In poverty la our country -• and future generations to come? What will THEY think of our generation If we do not launch the green waves and breezes of a resurgent democracy across this land. May your decisions, motivations and ob-jectives rise to the level of expectations held by hardworking California Greens who wish to forge a united endeavor to take on the two party duopoly that Is demeaning and deni-grating to the promise of our country and the pe rformance of Its people. From, this tide of the country, I can as-sure you that the message wffl be communi-cated In many ways through many mediums that the time has come for progressives to re-store and advance the great promise of our society and hi benign contributions to the world. Forward. Greens. Forward, America! _Thank you. By JANA CUTUP, PulbiMn VW Ralph Nadci. perhaps the world's best known consumer advocate ha* permiUrd his name to be placed on the ballot in Green Party primaries In California. Maine and New Mexico. Mr. Nader hat stated thai he hopes to serve as • catalyst to the creation of grassroots organizing efforts to bring de-mocracy back Into the public arena. In a March l°96 1 Magazine* Interview he deckles, 'I want to try to give the Green Parry. . . more energy and hope that they can begin making a difference, signing up more people, becoming more of a visible al-ternative* His entrance Into these stale primaries has resulted In a flurry of activity In Green Partfct and locals around the coun-

> try.

HoDe Bryan of (he Green Party of Min-nesota expressed delight that Nader was al-lowing his name to be entered In the Presi-dent la) race. This Is a bnisrtk tool for Green organUlng. Nadrr has Urn serving as a lightning rod lo gel the Green mriugc out. His appearance on Donahue was In-spiring lo everyone here." The Gircn Party of Colorado Is orga-nil ir^lo put Nader on the baflot. TheGrecn Party of Colorado achieved "qualified polll I-cal organization* suius when they ran Philip Huffoid for Governor and Kriita Paradise foi U. Governor In 1994. It Is Imperative thai people br given an alternative lo the options currently out there. The American people deserve a candidate who brings the Issues affecting them into the debate. We're organizing for Ralph Nader, lo offer the voter's of Colorado a valid choice.* says Philip llufford. The oolnl Is the oartv m»ws * ««v« .... !*».»• M tm |MII) fiwwt. says Nancy ADen. Green Party of Maine. "We've got 3000 registered Greens In Maine. With each campaign we grl more.* Greg )an of the Green Party of Califor-nia has been amongst those spearheading the Nader effort, lie says, this Is the David and Goliath campaign, the avenge people against the corporate parties. It could be the beginning of an enormous revolution in the politic* of this country. In theory, Isn't that what the Greens are here for?" The Phil Donahue Show. February 12. was Mr. Nader's Tint national television ap-pearance since accepting the Green Party of CaJifomia's request to enter his name on the baOot. There he expressed his positions on a variety of topics, eloquently expressing many Green values. The following are ex-cerpts in his own-words from the Donahue piugjam. ON PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY listen, we can't get away from our own com-mitment a* citizens. Mobilizing yourselves. You know, that's what It's afl about, folks. Society rots from the head down, and It re-constructs from the bottom up. That's the 1 history of the United Statea. From the abo-\ litlon of slavery, womens' right to vote, the I right of workers to organise, the environ-f mcnulUts. ervil right* movemenU-thtt's «vfic*r H't ut. -We-eanH g*t-«w«y wfeJi Jut* picking presidential candidates like we pick ice cream flavors, based on thirty-second ads. It's too deadly serious a 'business for us not to spend more time on k.* On the current slate of the country. 'Right now you have super-corporal* prof-its up. corporate caecutrvei making ions of money, slock markets setting al rccoids. at the same lime that homelcssness Is on the increase. 80% of the workers have suffered declining standards of Irving- In terms of wages for the last twenty years-one out of four children lives In poverty, corporations shipping fobs to Mexico and the Far East for serf labor-and shipping U back hcrc-and. lo top if off. we don't have much of prospect for Improving things, for the bottom 80% of the peopk in this country.' "If someone said to you. what country in the world Is it that |% of the wealth al the lop Is equal to 95% at the bottom. You might say. Guatemala. Brazil. The wealth of the top 1% In this country la eoual toihii wealth of the bottom 95% of Americans bi thb country. History shows when you gets big disparity of the rich and the real of America we're In boubk. Every time In our history we recovered democracy-the tarmet reforms around the turn of the century, workers and conservcn and women-we have Improved our country. Why? Because de-mocracy worka. Democracy Is the best way to .oh* out pn*Urm.* 

7

# \

> •And fcfnHrvfnaoB. tf OTOMOMC •**»ja «•» •

you. what do think of when the three words are crime, violence and welfare? We aBthink of street crimes, poor welfare people stand-ing in Unc for uSclr checks-UK biggest crime, welfare and violence, comes from corporate misbehavior. You have 420.000 people dy. Ing from tobacco-they are al hooked, al-most without exception, under the age of seventeen. You got 100.000 peopk dying In work place accidents-toxics, kad. beryl-lium, trauma, etc. You got 50.000 people dying from air poDuf km alone; 4S.OOO on highways. WeVe helped to reduce that (highway deaths). Thai's one of the few problems we've, overcome. Why' Because consumers banded together and spoke out.* ON BALANCING THE BUDGET: i "You're worrying about deficits? Cut out the! corporate welfare budget, bring the Rental gon down to normal size given die situation! In the world, and that'll balance your budj^ get. Instead, they're making us fight over the crumbs. Gverashiinkingple-ohweVegotu take It away from your drinking water reno-vation program: oh we gotta take h away from your auto safety program; oh we gotta lake h away from your child nutrition. Whlk the fat cats are loading up on the backs of you taxpayers." ON TAXES: "Do you know this flat tax only taxes working peopk? And If you sit around getting huge amounts of money from capital gains and interest and dividends, no tax whatsoever. Ifs at 17%, guaranteed to create $300 billion deficit, and It doesn't •have a flat effect on everyone. Not If you have a home mortgage interest payment ev-cry month. Not If you get employer-based health Innirancc." *j believe In a progressive tax. feu'rc making a lot of money? You're making It because you're privileged In a lot of ways by public policy In this country, you should pay a higher rate than persons mak-ing $30.40. SO. 60.000 a year.* ON EDUCATION: "I believe In pub-Ik education. I think It's worked In the past. It has some serious problems, especially In some of our large dllea. The approach is to Improve H-to have die parents more In* vorved, to get more repairs In die schools, lo get a different quality of dvlc education-get these kids out analyzing and working with responsible aduhs trying to improve dielr community. It's a good way to get dtem to read, write and figure.* 1 don't believe In privatization. Once you corporatize our schools, dien the bet-twin IUK ucuum uic tyiaiuiy. And afl kind* of dtlngs start happening. Corporate pro-paganda floods die schools. Certain text books arc used; certain video tapes arc not used. And before we know It. the overall binding logcdicr of peopk and chOdren wiO be gone. They! cream off the lop; the stu> dents who have kamlng probkms and dis-abilities wiD be thrown together with under* utilized resources. I'm not fork* ON DEMOCRACY The great thing about aB dils citizen talon. PhO. k fun. Democracy's die best way to human happj. ness, and as Andrew Jackson-one of our carry presldenu-once said, tf our country's In troubk. the answer Is not kss democracy, it's snore democracy. The more we lose con-trol, die more concentration of power and weahh In fewer and fewer hands, die more troubk we're I n.'Tm running on die Green ballot In California, and perhaps In Maine. And die Idea uncx to )u« do (adept* pothlct. We've got to break up the two party duopoly In this country. So many people are aBenated from k. Look. Perot gelt 19 million votes because he's None of die Above m 1992. So we're going to try to generate mote compe-tition. No focus on die candidate as much •a on broadening die agenda." "How do we rebuSd out democracy; dial's the biggest feme. Giving voice and power to voUn-chluM. taxpayers, work* crs. consumers and shareholders. Those arc the five loki we've |M to play-othc twite we Just pack It in. These |itnl global corpo-niloni will twin our country, pit pooicr countitci abroad against ui under these gi-ant trade agreements, and theie won't be much kftofour nation. I think we're belter than that at a people. And you know one thing about pushing bt monger democracy. It brlngi out the belt In ui. Democracy •eaichei for the aolutloni that we have In thli counlry-to energy, houilng and die economy, etc. We have thcK solutions." "I think we have lo shake up or bust up the two-party duopoly In dib country. Iwant to try to contribute to that. I think... the big thing government can do for ui U give us the tool'-die democratic power-to dupe our own country, and not get our needs bom global corporations that have no alle-giance to thli country or hi people. Sec* ond. people dont like money In poUtlei? Well thlt Often Party candidacy of mine: Tm not ateklng any money, spending any money-no money In politics. It's going to be volunteer work, brain power, footwork-go Green hrty In California.' For more Information caD Gicg Jan at 510/644-2293 or The Greenr/Grcen Party USA Clearinghouse at (607) 736-4211: <gpu»@ljc apc.org>; fax (607) 7S8-S4I7  

> (caO

first). JIM Cutiif a * avjnltr c/lkr Muf-OrW Cnau Ml It Co-eonvtw iftkt Grtau NalfeM/ Com-MittM. p-i p 

Ralph Nader Enters The Green Party off California Presidential Primary: What It Could Mean 

by MIKE FEMSTEIN, Santa Monica CA Why Ralph Nader and the Greens, and why at this time? Nader and the Green* share simi-lai perspectives on many issues of de-mocracy, citizen empowerment, the environment, social justice, trade, and corpo-rate welfare and abuse. Nader's 

•/ intend to stand with others around the county as a catatyst tor the creation of a new model of electoral politic*... The campaign witt be run by the people them-selves and witt be just as sa/ious as cHizens cnoosa to make t* 

alignment. On November 27. at a press confer-ence in San Francisco's Dolores Park, the Green Party of Cali-fornia announced that long-time public inteiest advocate Ralph Nader will ap-pear on its presiden-tial primary ballot in March. 1996. This is the Pint time that a U.S. stale Green Parly has entered a ability to sjwak to presidential primary and it comes dur- coqiorale welfare, campaign finance re-ing a time of major national political re- form and the dominance of money in politics makes him a particularly appro* priate candidate at this historical mo-ment. With the country al a political crossroads, a Nader candidacy could reach lens of millions of people who might not otherwise know a Green'pro-gressive approach even exists, and poten-tially redirect the country's political de-bate in this direction. Beyond policy, there is also tlie re-lated question of the credibility of the campaign itself. Given the difficultirs thai third party (and independent) can-didates have had in the past, under what circumstances does it make sense for Nader and/or the Greens to enter the presidential race? As an individual. Ralph Nader is one of the few potentiate reen/ptogressive/populist conftf on page I 

f»otltl9«>n«th« ttertln Luther 

and kindred activists, including. Third Parlies <96 in Washington. DC. in Janu-ary, the Citizens' Alliance in Si. Louis in February, the National Independent Politics Summit in Atlanta in April; and others. Ultimately, the coalition-build-ing process can go on in most stales till early spring because Nader would have to be qualified in most slates by the sig-nature-gathering method and most sig-nature-gathering periods start in the spring and eitd in August. There are also other variables that may help to determine how far the cam-paign will go. first, because winning California is so crucial for Clinton. Nader's mere appearance there puts enormous pressure on Clinton to veto various pieces of upcoming legislation, and perhaps make solid commitments regarding future judicial appointments. The threat of a Nader candidacy will • focus Clinton's mind and make clear the consequences of his actions. If he chooses to ignore the Green/progressive movement, lie will have made a clear statement about priorities, and in so doing, may invite a Nader/ Green/pro-gressive candidacy in response. Ai to ballot access, within the SO stales there air three main possibilities: I I. stales where ballot -status Grren (or other progressive) parlin rml *ml where Nader fuiilj IK qualified via ihr parly's convriiiiun nomination |»n«ckt in the summer. 2. stairs wU-rr NaJrr could lie qualifirJ uinlrr ihr namr uf the Girrn (or utlirr kiitJird) pany via conTd from pa001 presence means the campaign^ pe-UnUal must be taken seriously. Of course, transformative move-ments are bigger than any individual. This is why Nader said in his press state-ment. "1 intend to stand with others around the country as a catalyst for the creation of a new model of electoral politics... The campaign will be run by the people themselves and will be just as serious as citizens choose to make it." Greens have long advocated bottom-up, grassroois models of politics, rather than candidate-driven ones. Nader's entry in California is an opportunity (and chal-lenge to build just such a grassroots presence into a coherent electoral force. Hia name la a first step that lends credibility But to advance beyond California to other states, and beyond the primary election to the general, there will have to be sufficient grassroots organizing, community-by-community and state-by-state, (f this happens. Nader would have reason to respond to the move-. ment and continue, but the decision would have been borne out of the move-ment. Can this kind of grassroots coali-tion building come about? It has al-readv begun. In California a letter co-social, and labor activists was sent to Nader as evidence of the grassroois sup-port his appearance in the California Primary would generate. Follow-up or-ganizing meetings will be held in Los Angeles and the Bay Area during De-cember. These efforts will build a coa-lition and increase the chance that kin-dred activists will join and work within the Green Pany. Nationally, the Nader/Green an-nouncement has also spurred dialogue and action among Greens and kindred groups. Tlte Green Parties of Rhode Is-land and Pennsylvania have already sent notice to 

What are the options for Greens and kindred movements in the next several months? 

Nader of their interest in supporting his candi-dacy in their slates. Others are discussing this possi-bility within their own states. What are the options for Greens and kindred movements in the next sev-eral months? While Nader has not committed lo appearances beyond the California Green primary, his presence in California can spur organizing around the country that will help to de-termine whether adequate support ex-ist to make a national campaign viable. Groups in other states could contact Nader with letters similar to California's. In conjunction with the slair-l»y-stale process, a srnVs of rrUlni national iture-gathering route, and 3. states where Nader could be quali-fied simply by himself as an indepen-dent via the signature route. There are currently five slates (AK. CA. ME. NM. OR) where the Greens have ballot-status. At least an addi-tional seven (AZ. DE. GA. 111. NV. OH. UT) are possibilities in the next several months. Alongside these twelve are al least another four (CO. MN. NY & Rf) where NaJrr could be qualified as an individual, bul accompanied by llie ballot name of the (ireen (or other) •: party or coalition. In addition to Green ballot access, the New Pany (NP) has ballot status in one stale (Wl). but has no plans to pursue other states at present. This means that the Greens have ihr most ballot access among US progressives. Beyond the state-by-stale process, how would the campaign be known nationally, and how would the platform, cabinet and running-male come about? At this point, how these lurn out is his-tory yet to be writ lea Assuming the campaign actually makes it that far. the name might be some combination of Green. Progressive. IVoplrs. Alliance, or something else not yet determined. (X. thrre may br no national ballot line, but milv HhlivfcluJ »l«lr lialLrf limt til *1 

## Greens Nominated by 1Socialist Party USA for Presidential Ticket 

by HOWIE HAWKINS Whether or not Ralph Nader's entry Into California Green Party primary in March blossoms into a vigorous na-tional campaign, il Is now clear that Greens will have a presidential stale to put on their state ballot if they so choose. The Socialist Party USA has nomi-nated Maiy Cat Ilollis foi President and F.ric Chester for Vice President, both of whom are also members of Green or-ganizations. Mary Cal Ilollis is a member of the Colo-rado Green Parly as well as the Socialist Party. She is amulticultural special education school teacher who has long been active in anti-nuclear. Central America solidar-ity, and economic justice movements.' She has served as an elected member of the Rural Electric Power Board in Western Colorado. Eric Chester Is a member of the Left Green Network as well as the So-cialist PartyT He has been an activist since the early 1960s when he partici-pated in the civil rights and anti-war movements as a member of SDS. Erk considers himself "a revolutionary so-cialist within the tendency represented by Rosa Luxemburg, as well as a so-cialist feminist and Left Green." He is the author of two books: Sodalltt and tht Ballot B0>'(Praeget. 1985) (a his-"We look forward to worfuno; together with Greens end other prooressrves in the coming yeer*   

> it rI.

torical analysis that is a model ol clar-ity and conciseness, the best book on tlie subject of independent politics in the U.S.) and Covtrt Network: Profrntivts. At InUrnational Rttcut Com-mltttt. and tht CIA (M.E. Sharpe. 1995). Mary Cal Holtis Issued a statement when Nader entered the California Green primary welcoming him into the race. 'We look forward to working together with Greens and other progressives in the coming year." Hollis said in her stateme..t. Between the Vermont Liberty Union. Wyoming's Labor Party, the California Peace and Freedom Party, and various Socialist Party chapters across the country, the Hollis-Chester campaign is already pretty sure of be-ing on the ballot in about 20 slates. They would like to run as the Green's candidate in slates where the Greens have, or can get. ballot status in 1996. Chester met with the New York Stale Green Party in early December to dis-cuss strategy in.that slate. The New York Greens decided to ask the N.Y. jSocialist Party and the N.Y Campaign • for a Nrw'lbmoirow to join us in putting . up a Green Pmgrrs- :

sive party line in New York State in 1996 for both our respective local can-didates and a presi-dential ticket, whether it turns out to be Nader or the Hollis-Chesler ticket. Just about everyone agrees— Green. Socialist, or independent pro- • gressive of another stripe—that a j Nader candidacy would do the most ! to advance our cause. In a four-way ! Nader-Clinlon-Dole-Perot race. Nader could conceivably win. A strong Nader campaign would, in any case, project a progressive platform into the national j debate, dramatically change the terms j of that debate, and substantially in-crease the votes that Greens and other independent progressives receive lower down on the ticket. But if a vigorous national Nader campaign doesn't materialize, we can still run with the Greens nominated by • •» . .. »• .. ........ %the Socialist ftrty. Mary Lai iioilis and Eric Chester. They won't grab the media attention that Nader would. But ' they will give our candidates lower down on the ticket better ballot place* ment in many slates. And they will enable us to educate in our communi-ties about the thoroughly regressive and i mean-spirited policies of Clinton and | the Democrats and about the urgent jneed for an independent progressive I political party for working people. :

people of color, and all people commit- • ted to peace, justke. democracy, and ' ecology To contact the Hollis-Chester . Campaign: Socialist Party National Office. 516 W 25th St. *M04. NY NY 10001. 212/6914)776. 

# _J ALASKA 

lite GrecnParty of Alaska has Ralph Nader en the baBol for prcsidcM. Jed Whltuker to ran. nlng for U.S. Senile. John Gremn to running for US. HCHHC of Rr prcsrnutlvci. Mike Bruncr to running CM Suu House District 

IS. 

ARIZONA 

In a nonpaitlsan race. BUbec acUvinVbrganlier. ANa dOrgcU. was elected to • four-year Unn on the Bisbee Qty countd. 

CALIFORNIA 

The San Diego CiteiM are engaged fat a variety of project* on bodt the local and luUonal level LocaDx. on Much 12. Kip Kruger. • long term Ocean Beach activist and Green Pany County Ceuncfl member, w»§ circled lo the O.B. PUnniit| Boaid. whh 7 1% of the you. ousting the Board* i piccideni In the process. Thii was the cul-mination of a grassroots campaign by mtmben of 'the O.B. Ciccni and the O.B. Preservation League. • local cnvbonmenul group. In April, the Cieem panic!-paled In the Balboa Pa* Earth Day Fair. They distributed bun-dredi of pieccf of varioui Greens and Ciecn Pany Ikcraiure. regta-teied voun. and cotkcud many dgniluRf for prihioni Including cause* ivch as Ward Valley. Carrel ML. and iKc Hemp In** line. They al«o bnprc sscd many.of . lite thousands In the Park with a large creative booth display. gel • permit lot one of the eov-cud proud Umet alccaled by the dry. which fa hoping to Have off • repeal of the 1968 Chicago rloU at the OcmocraUc National Con-vcnUoA. Various graup* MCA a* the A.C.LU, iht National Lawyers Gu0d. and ot>. (n wtt be m brat lo monitor the security bices for civil righu vIolatloM. h also to possible thM C-Span. etc. wlB be there at the prated aUc. So for Crecni arriving early for the Green Catherine and wanting for something to talc up their lime or who arc fpcd/kaBy coming carry to parUdpoic In acilvitlei surrounding the R.N.C. the Creeni of San Diego wffl be pro-viding housing, transportation. •Irabrt ot Amlnk. etc. pickup and Info on varioui event*. For more bifocal] (6l9)73S-2733.ea. 6230 email: The Santa Barbara Creeni voted to participate In the Adopt' A-Highway proognm of the DC-

Crtmcnt of Tranporutlon. WE vc been assigned two milci of highway doat to BucBton wheie our volunteers wiB pick up tnsh once • month. We ate alio continuing our sponsorship of Toward A Better World. Time lo Take Aolon". two dayi a week on cabk access. WE continue to be active m publiciilng the voUi£ record* of our reptciciiuuvct. Ine latcd * the voting record of Reprcaeat*. live Andrea Seadrand. 

COLORADO 

T he Colorado Ciecn Party Kaj •uecccdcd In punlng lUlpb Nader on the baDoc wtth Krliu Paradiie ai the vlcc-preaidentkl The San Diego Greens arc currently working to help save Carmel Ml. a coastal mesa, that to a habiut for several endangered and threatened speck*, including the CA. gnatcaicher. from the de-vckpingbuDdoien. Alison RoUc. a Green who also ran for the OB. Planning Board but lost by put a few votes, to Involved In the offi-cial negotiations between the county, the developen. and vari-ous environmental groups trying to save H. candidate. Krina ran for h. gov* cmor In 1994. Other candidatci cndoncd by the party Include Gary Swing for Suu Ancmbly Didrici 8. Mike Chamnen for US. Conmm Didriet 3. TMO Embury for Suu Aitcmbly DlMrtcl I. and Tom Shelly for Colorado University Regent. Ubleda decblon vnd the Pound-Ing Gathering. Them wmi much dlanurion on the barrien to bufld-Ing • multi-racial itatcwldc oigaixallon. ThoaeprcKM agreed to mn one or more Independent candidatet M Grecnt (or another name prcfened by the rounding convcnUon).eupportlheaccandi-dadei with Matewtdc rctouroM, develop a platform and bvdkf an Inchulvc autewtdc party Infra* system of St Joseph County. WE co-sponsored a forum, alunded by about 73 pcpk. PrcscnuiioM west made on how local economic , development decisions arc made, what arc some of the probkim. •and how the process Itself night ;On February 10th a work Kanon wai held m Atlanu to draft a platform and by4awi to be con-aMetcdat a rounding Convention on May 4. 1996. The draft phi* form wai buflt on the totuei re* aeajch conducted ai a part of the Pcopte'i General Ajacmbly held the previous week aj a pan of rVor Peopk'sDiyatiheCapnoL Itwae agreed to adapt the bylaws of the AilanU Green to serve a suu* wide Party organization. The October membenhlp meeting of the Atlanu Green* agreed to the following goals far the 1996 election year, regutering new voun. gaining baBat access. conducting reararch. doing public education, era fting a vision which wiB appeal la people. denning ii* met thai wiB mobiliic vote n. ui-geling races when; we can make a difference, opening an office, hir-ing a italf and doing the nindraUIng necessary to support inn work. Since then, our mccllnp have been concerned wtth craft-Ing a winning draugy to achieve these goals. Starting In April, the Greens wfB bunch a door-to-door campaign to .reach every Green supporter In the 67th House DU-Uict In order to register voun. budd active membenhlp and en-courage participation In a nomi-nating process to •elect a Green candidate to Hand for election In November. We have opened an office in Decaiur. V* hope that a Green candi-dale bi Alia nu.with a Green can-didate in Athens, and an indepen-dent candidate In rural Scrcven County wffl provide the Impetus foe conilnueo organizing In Geor-gia. WtwiOuplorchowwewifh to participate with the Days of Direct Action planned In support of the National Sbu of Indepen-dent Progressive Candidates. HAWAII The Green Party of Hawaii has regained baBot status and baa Ralph Nader on the ballot for president. Katcn Archibald to run-ning for Suu RepresenUUve bom Honolulu. Kelko Bonk to running for Mayor of the Island of Hawaii. •VlOWA The Green Parry of Iowa hai reformed after a period of dor-mancy to run Ralph Nader for 

^LOUISIANA 

The Deha Greens arc con-tinuing to speak out on the condi-tion* In Import due to corporate greed and exploration. 

MAINE 

The Milne Green Pany spearheaded a petition drive to prevent ckucwiing of the ferciu of the state. The referendum seems lo have a great deal of sup-port. Mini u> WIMIIUCU lu i un Nader for president. The Grecnbeh Greens an working working on the Nader campaign. 

•^MASSACHUSETTS 

Charles Laws to running for Congress m Dinriet 6. Our faD gathering la being organUcd by the Merrlmack VU-try Greens for September 27-29. Contact: Jonathan Leavtat at 30V 688-3569. massgrtcni eigc.apc.org. 

jfr MICHIGAN 

The Huron ViUey Greens passed a resolution that, with the assiiuncc and counsel of the ACLU. shaB petition the Suu of Michigan for a deurminatton that any attempt by the Suu to Im-pose Umiu upon access to the bal-iot boa by the People to nuD and void. Wi atk that a fLndlng be made that the lack of rules for bal-tot access In local elections conrU-tutei a dc facto denial of the ftoplc'i right to equal protecUon under the law. We also participated In GrecnDay and Earth Day acihH-

Uei. 

'CONNECTICUT 

ILLINOIS 

The Chicago Greens arc working to get Nader on the bal-lot. Bob Rudncr of the Chicago Greens to running for US. Senatt. 

'"^MARYLAND 

The Green Party of Mary- '

MINNESOTA 

Om Gordon to running for Minnesou rule house from Mb> neapoUa. On die national MCM. San Diego GiveM wiQ be hrlplAg to co-had lh< August **A Cite* Gad>ei4ngMLA..pro»loWhoi*> Ing. transportation, and other lo-gistical need* Of ClMM attending. Ai braid* Republican Na-tional Convention u San Dkgo If concerned, which wfl be hap-pening dw week be fore dwGarco Gadwring, dwre wffl he a turn-her of events whldi wiB keep iXem bury. Motdy dwy wiB be ptaring out Info on die Ralph Nader a A. dldacy and Proportional Rcpre* fcnuUon la die many groups who plan to pioten dw Republican Natior.al Convention, Green* •« cumndy working with • million eppo*^ to Republican palkks.lt wiB be helping 10 co-sponsor • of rfei of alternative media IbnuM accusrii«.durifig die aunt time pe-riod. They plan to mike coaven-lion-related visitors to Sao Diego aware of Green alternative* and Invlu representatives of different progressive organfeaiioni lo die LA. Gathering. Acton die tlreet fiom die Convention Center, during (he R.N£. die Green Par./ hope* to I he Uretn Patty of ConnrcU-cut I* newly formed to run Ralph Nader for president. They wiB he taking on other prefect* after dw election. 

FLORIDA 

On April I dw Florida Greet. Party announced that It was orga. nil Ing a write-in campaign for Rabh Nader hi preridenl. They arc continuing dicir effort* to reg* bier 60.000 voun for baBot a*> 

GEORGIA 

On December 8-10. 1995. community activists from Aiknu. Airgutie. Brunswick. Ma con. Syhmnia. and TUkon pthcrcd In Scrcvcn County for • founding gidicring of die Georgia Greet, Party OrgMliIng Committee. Af UT a brief discussion on a name for die progressive IndependcM political patty we are budding, we INDIANA The St. fee Mkfley Grecnt are publidibig out newrletter irfuUrly and have tel up eight cotMoJiten lo deal wtdi nrioui topics: bike lane*, electoral, nuclear Issuet. iniuportalaM Issues, school b-MCI. tolid watu. CARE, and ho-rns n rights amendment. Vw ha vcUen supporting fo-cal union* u their aiieo.pt* to keep local planu to the comnw-nlty. The RACO worken were tuccctsfid an Hopping the plam'* owners from relocating the profit, able plant lo a more •all-union •talc. Vfc are now supporting dw unfonltcd worken at Unhoyal to keep dial company from leaving. The nuckar bsuct covmtncc did considerable rereaxk on die bnpaci of Chcmobyl. a footnoted ankle b available (caB 2I9AB9-9220). The CARE (CUun* ABkd for Responsible Economk Devel-opmrat) commhicc b working mcoalition with other nouf* on the broader cconomk Development 

MISSOURI 

The Gateway Green ABianot continue* iu anti-nuke work with dw sponsorship of Chcmobyl * 10 ptdrtini of Union Electric t» dose CaBaway Nuke and eoflee-lion of Chernobyl relief contraW tions. V* tponsored a forum on Chernobyl (ire Don fiu prcsro. lationonpagc M) and another on progrenlwr partki. V*K>lnedeUw.ufcbyPub. b CUun Litigation Group. NIRS and 20 other group* for Btigation by the Prairie Island Coalition (Minnesota) which would force Union Dectrk to reveal Ht Infor-mation concerning deterioration of the steam generator tube* hi dw CaUaway Coniy nuclear power V* have leined wUh die CM-*CM AgabiM Dtadn Incineration lo petition die AMUUIM Admlnla-trator of Solid »nd Hatardout die EPA. EDion Lawa. ta dke opentioa of a haurdow wane incinerator In die former cfryofTtmet Beach Ma 

™ NEVADA 

The Green Parry of Nevada haf Mccecded In getting JUlpb Nader onihcbaDotferpRaldenL Gnup* arc moat active in du Lai Megai and Reno aieat. 

</ NEW JERSEY 

The Green Party of New fen' cey b petitioning lo get Ralph Nader on die balta for prcddeM. .Our vice pmidenlUlciuidkbu b Madeline Hofrman, 

PNEW MEXICO 

The Green Party of New Mexico reccndy had a primary where Ralph Naderwai identified at the presidential candid* ic. Other podlioni were contettcd. Abe Gunman won hb contctted raceagabm Sam Hilt forU.S. Sen-ate. Jack Uhrich won hb race again* lohn McCaB for Congiert. Peggy Helgcton It running for State Garpontiont GMiMibonnet S^au LegfilaUvc candidatet arc: Roberto Mondragon in Santa re. Bob Andemn m Abuquen]ue. Mary Lou (onet hi Grantt. end The NYC GRCM GaaUdon contlnwet to meet owndily with Inurett in forming new local*. The Queens Green* b yon-aorirtg an oipnk food co-op, they aic working with Safe Aviation for Everyone (SAFE). The govern-ment want to fawreaac aiipUnet by 1/3 at UGuardU and Kennedy ariporu ever die next 20 year*. The Brooklyn Greent Educa-tion Committee icttlfled at a tchool dbtrict public hearing on refonningthc gifted education program. They distributed a GAM ddfi tf Tatinf mat £r«awj(int. pre-pared a list of suggested Greca choices for *chooi board election* and mailed it to friend* and Greens In die district. The Green-hadu commiiicc I* continuing iu work on letting up a new currency. Grmnroou Queers did a 140 piece mailing of diclr new bro-chure, participated in a march for Mumia. and it co-apontoiing a weekly drumming drde. Long Island Green. Eric Mor* pn ran for mayor and bat by 23 voles out of 1100. Patonk Greens b a new. en-diusiastk gmup widi a number of anti-nuke activists who an work* Ing to capore and prevent nuclear pollution from die Brookhavcn nulceu facility 

## Ideas That Work 

Dulufh Votort» Say PdO to Mall Sprawl by JOEL SPRESS. (Mufti ATM Gtcon Party 

Duhith. Mbinetou voters look a major step toward building • greener Duhidi on April 16. when they rejected a propoaed (trip maB m dM cny* already apnwfing MiDer HO corridor. The ttrip mal prokct. propoaed by Mlmeapolis-han-d Opus Corporation, went down lo defeat by a 54-4o% mugia m a dty«ide special elecUon. An expansion of Duhidi't MOer HiD Mal. aho on dw baBoi. waj na^ ard Himptoa !• Then? are to candidate! far DU-tricl Attorney: in Taot. Andy .Vargat and in Albuqutr^uc. Gcraldined'Arauo, We arc knkmg for nxMone to run for Sute Supreme Court. ^fcur fegbtntioa hat been cHmbing Meadfly at about 200/ month, ahhough mieren w die primariet brought a tingle nondt tacjeatcof around 1000. %* now tund at aroun 5000 rcgincicd 

"^ NORTH CAROLINA 

Orange County Greens ha* completed petitioning for a wine-bi vole for Ralph Nader for preri. dent. Vie are also working on a cable aeon* program and a focal, currency. The defeat of the Oput (trip maB tendt a dear mrssagr to fcvor of*uaubu!4edevelopBieni. friend* of Miller HiO. die gmup leading die eOort to defeat the pmiecta. made die election a referendum on •mal (prawl- Friendi of Miller Hi! fecured on dw cconomk and cnvbonmental cottt of apnwL The group caOed for reinvestment in traditional commetcial dutrkts. die rente of old eommercialAndusUial rite*, and a commitment to dw creation of high-wage Job*. The defeat of dte Opus strip mrJD repie tents a triumph of gnsooou organizing over big money. Friends of Miller HiB ran an aggrewivc granuoots campaign that bwohwdacoret of ordinary Duludibn*. Pro-ponent* of die mal projects, by contrast, ran a dkk advertising canv palgnihaiouupent Friends of Miller HiO by a nMghrjr len-to-onc mai* gin. Pnponenu of the project* had the support efihc mayor, die kcal newspaper, and die dty planning depannent. The Duhidi Are* Green Party played * significant talc In die campaign. Seven) Greeat sat on the steering commfiiee of Friend* of MiDer HiB. The Grecnt also took reiporuibUhy for organlabig a num-ber of key precinct* The appron) of the MiUer HiB MaA expansion on the aimr day. a* die delect of die Opui strip maB can be accounted for by die fkree desire on dw pan of *omt CXJudiiant to tec a Dayton'* deparunrnt •tote come to die dty Pnponenu of the mtB capsntton made die unfounded claim dial approval of die measure was oecrasary to bring Dayton's to Duhith. The Oiyion-Hudaon Corporation Itself took out a fufl page edvcniaemeM to die local newspaper urging a ye* vote. Largely an the beds of dte Dayton's trsue. dw MUfci HiB MaB eapan* •ion was approved by a 53-48% margin. Above afl. the referendum denontuiled that • wcBorganbed grassroou campaign can take on dty hafl (and b|g burine**) and win, ThelXIwuAreaGrecBfWtybahwdybuildliigupMdtisvtcioryby organUing around dwbaue* of svsulnahttitydut were at dw heart of ihe-SttMaUSrtwraflain. %Vc arc distributing a dis-count coupon book and, m Santa fe. we continuing to work on a local currency. InABjuquemue we have Initiated a Green bicycle campaign. V* provide bicycle* around town fee people ta> borrow and dwn Wave fee dM neat per-IDA • much like die while bicycle* MAmtteidasa. la addition to working on die anti-nuke constitutional amend* •tent dM Ohio Greco Pany to working to get Ralph Nader on die 

# 50 NEW YORK 

The Green r\rty of New \brk SUM held hi oonvcnilon June IS-16. Meit than 60 people attended •nd took part In the nomination of Ralph Nader at our candidate for president and Kl up the frame-work far Identifying our vice-pieri-dentUl candidau. finalising our 1996 Section Agenda. Identifying our 33 elector*. and running the petitioning proottf and the cam-paign. With petition coonlinaien identified for eieh congressional din/id we «und a good chance of coOeaing the IVOOO tignatuRi naucrcd within the §U week pe-riod. Our viot presidential candi-dau ta Brooklyn Green. Muriel TUUnghaH. a veteran cMl right* and community activist whose commitment to Independent poll-tlci datci back to SNOCi dlred action campaign* again* *egtrga-Uon and the 1964 Mluliiippl Freedom Dtmocntk Party Today. (he terved on the caecutlve com-mittee of the National Commit-lee for Independent Political Ac-tion and a* naff fundraiser for the Independent Pmgitssive Politic* Network. Seven other Green* will be gathering signatures to gel on the baBot: three for Congicn. Howie Hawkin*. Tom Lclghion. and Rob McRobcru; two for Kale (cnatc. Bob PoOicmui and Tom Sullivan: and two for itate houac. Tony Cronowics and Craig Secmaa. 

PENNSYLVANIA 

The Green Pkny of hnniyi-vanla has been busy coBeaing sig-nature* to fet Ralph Nader on the baBot. The Lchigh \fclley Green* have been InvoKcd in self-educa-tion with a series of ducunioni on Intentional communltlei. We hive darted a Lehigh RlvrrKreper group to *pur Inuni in preserving and enoying the entire watershed. The Lancaitcr Crccni arc continuing our Nippon for the Vfemrn In .Black. The BiMicrOy Canton I* planird and we wiB be adding a buiurOy houir and lun dial The Community Supported Gadknhad • late ftrrt psdnipdue to • cold, wet noting but M ha* no more epacci ivailabk. We arc working with the Alliance to pre-vent ChcmNudear bom creating a rite In Lancaster County. 

RHODE ISLAND 

The Green Party of Rhode Island ha* nominated Ralph Nader for president and Richard VAhon for vice president. Other Green candidate* arc William Martin for U.S Senate. Graham Schwa** for U.S. Congji**. and Jeffrey Johnson for Rl Assemby District 48. 

TEXAS 

Austin Green* are involved promoting coalition* among like, minded group*. They have been active in educating the public on various propositions up for vote. 

f VERMONT 

Nfcrmont Greens arc working to gel Rjjph Nader on the baBot for president. 

Pr»»ld»nt 

Local* end >uic Green PmrUci arc invited la itibnii newiletun and oihci material fot thto page to the OearinghouM. Photo* and graphic* arc abo reeded and will be relumed if requeued. 

July ftts, i 

Rab> Nider li on the balot tot icvcnl tuiei: Alaska Cahfomt* Colondo 

VIRGINIA 

The Green Pany of VA had a meeting in (anuary where they or-ganlicd • central committee and Initiated a cute-wide baBot Nader petition drive. The drive, which end) In August. invoNcs eoBrcting the signature* of thirty ihoucand regiftcred voter*. 

WASHINGTON 

Crecni in Waihington have been trafklng with othcn and no* have Ralph Nader on ihrbtBot. 

WISCONSIN 

Wt congraiulaic Lake Supe-rior Cirrn. Bil Andenon. on hi* reelection to die the Douglai County Board. Ted Ciakle and Kay McKenxie Ion their tcau by 24 vote margini. M* thank them for afl their service during the Ust two yean. Kay hai served for three and a halt Our Public Service An-nouncement* arc now getting lot* of play on local radio nation*. Many of u* were invoked in lestt-fying or in making caJU to the dry Council and Park* and Recreation Department atklng them to ci-plate alternative* to pesticide UK for dty baUield* and garden*. Milwaukee Area Green* co» sponsored three day* of Earth Day •ctMUci at the Milwaukee Lake MUae Nevada NfwMudco 

> OrcgoA

Utah Vvafhlnflon Suu He • a wriu-ln Candida le In Floridi and North Cajollna. Seven! ether *Utti uc in the proctBof meeting the pctUoning requircmrM* to get him on the AriioM ArkinM* Cofuwtiirut IDineii 

lo^ 

Kinia* 

Krmicky Louiaana 

Mirybnd 

MiHachuanu MinneMi MMuippI Nebn*k* 

Nrwfcncy 

New York Onto fcniuyKmnii Rhode Isbnd South Carolina 

Tc« 

Vtr 

Virginia The Wiacansln Gsccn Pany ha* (Dcned wtth other groups and aic coOecting dgnaturc* to gel lUlpb Nader on die UBoc IVeae working on the earn-paignaK woikmglogft Nadet Into the pseddcntial debate*. One of the criteria for the debate* to hb •unduu; In the poOi *o h to impor-lam far everyonr to get the word out that he If running. The nauoml ckarini^touar of GircnaCicen Parry USA ha* *»-ceKcd kundicdr oTcaJh - KM of them due ta> the pubHdry aiound the Nader campaign • of people IntcMed In the GKCM. a* wefl a* Ralph Nadef. t tk 

## GROWING GREEN LAWS 

THE 7TH GENERATION CONSTITUTIONS!-' AMENDMENT * 

byMCKWHALEY.k Pm M the »|t (Mid-fartfe*) wfcuc FM eU' (Kink: MOB fm faint; to MVCtouabgbc far vfal ggy fcocntiofe Ku dew or fcfled to MTDOM. Evoi iKece W M aid 'IWOj •ctivbu* («JD Mfttoike IMOi) kr* M•dtievtd «**» wt diould Kmc dene to BMKI cmftk Mid eemaMnky Aam nuek. Wko I fpokt ftsady •*• c*^ kp cfa« «ffctuncavfaonmritfjj cAiaian. I Mid ike Atttngt b |oin( to p§«toikcm voee, Mid ikry » *»•• " Qrcbc, 7ifc fencntJOB •mndmeM •nicer b limed tf hw^irini Ike KUvin ud hm|bulieM of dw« jmiif neoolc who wffl UOOOK VMMI In *c «MT 3000 »ad hi ihcckdloMdwt fe00ithiaukiar«dbeK«(€rOww« ndUmUmNL The fnjye«.d Mncndn baqaailwiBfam.Hxkf to patoa«« 

THE RIGHTS OF THE PEOPLE TO USE AND EN)OY AIR. WATER. SUNLIGHT AND OTHER RENEWABIC RESOURCES DETERMINTD BY CONGRESS TO BE COMMON PROPERTY SHAU NOT BE IMMURED. NOR SHAU SUCH USE IMPAIR THDR AVAIUB1L. mf FOR FUTURE GENERATIONS. 

Ow dddic* aad ikclr ckJUm (md thcin) ktw • fi|hl te-noic ikMkjrt* UhnerdbudfM. AiLMict •uilijht. ted Mid otter frncwiblr taouicm naed i>d cncniikl u>ktolo(>ca) We. anervc prauaien b die Ceo-lUlHlton MidtoIkt dnin^niplcn drvdmncnt TlUi to Oic Picntae «T the 7ik Caratta Ancnd-OlMayoiko toMetwt imbc uGraM. AMtftliwbe tOKte Vfch BmMU •okatol^kv pd ft to hot • MtioMl det»u bMbwOMM bnk D*y IWfc w luw • bfl bcfcn Cof^iM aiiEuik tVy l*97«irf i luw • bfl bcfcn Caf^ai a« Eutk Oky II idttMeMMytuu ndAe*Uei«byE*flkOiy200a* 

•nUen eBaru BOOB die caunuy If you MI I 

lyoufi" conuct tkc 7ik GttcnOM CgaiMhtot. 1700 EBk Axnue. Aikturf. Wl. MKM. by kt MUM CBMMI be emcd by MilDdMdMl •ick M ur uid wtiec, tic cnettbl M edicfricha-* &M-Mwienul !••!. w KCHtonr •• iker Mt, k««« bec« iu» Ihc • HMfiilMi c/after die fca foOuOM. GtoaMled h Ike prambe c/tkc CeaMJbdWi rVMnbk f«wta| ike Bletdnp of Lfteity 10 eunehu tud M P«urit/). Hfc* cVwrtf * MiMtfbtaWMto• U*t*A 44, Wl* •Mta CMM/ Jb*w/ «• «# AW Of Can** 

«f aW* «W If Ar 

~l i mi la |m •* 

# Vote reen! 

# 52 F A L L 1994 CRELN POLITICS 

# GREEN ELECTIONS '94 

# California running 28 candidates in November 

IV GREG JAN 

On Tuesday. November 8. at least 28 Cali-fornia Greens will be running for election. Included will be 11 partisan candidates, who will be the only California candidates to have the Green Party designation listed be-side their name on the ballot. Three of these partisan candidates wilt be running for state-wide office. This will be the Green Party of California's first statewide contest with the other panics since receiving ballot status in January. 199, 

festatewlde candidates  

> 1

three pioneering statewide candidates are: Danny Moses for Lieutenant Governor. Margaret Garcia for Secretary of State, and Barbara Blong for U.S. Senate. Danny Moses, currently Director of Eanh i and previously Editorial DirectX lor at 'mill <llnh*-nln hrHlMirin'nfr^ Green approach to several of the U. Governor's most important responsibilities. In the Lt. Governor's function as Chair of the State's Economic Development Commis-sion he would emphasize community-based economics. As a member of the State Lands,. Commission he would work for ecosystem integrity. As a member of the University of California Board of Regents and the State University's Board of Trustees he would en-•courage curriculum changes to include ccoliteracy. respect for diversity, and non-violence. His campaign his been endorsed by David Brower. Hazel Menderson. Gary Snyder. Joanna Macy. Ernest Callenbach. Susan Griffin. Carl Anthony. Chzr'.;.-.; Spretnak. and other prominent people. Danny participated in the August 1985 Min-neapolis meeting which founded the Com-mittees of Correspondence (predecessor of the Greens/Green Party USA) and he was aCo-Coordinator of the 1988 "Greening the West" conference, attended by ovet a thou-sand people, which Breath/ helped to spur brccn organizing in Ca|tlem1a. ' "p"" Margaret Garcia, who'brganized rhe Cal Sale Fullerton Greens in. 199],and who completed her year and a half term on the Green Pany of California State Coordinating Committee in 1993. b running on a broad platform of electoral reforms such as propor-tional representation, • binding 'None of the Above* choice on all ballots, moving voting day to an entire weekend, an elected Board .of Regents, major campaign finance reforms. 'and more. She b a published author of po-ems and shon stories, and b on the editorial staff of a major Cabfomia newspaper. De-spite Margaret's solidly progressive platform, her campaign b handicapped by the fact thai' her main opponent, the Democratic Acting Secretary of Slate, b also campaigning (somewhat) on some of these same reforms, and b also Californb's first ever openly gay •major* pany candidate for statewide office. The Greens' challenger to the"Dlajinc Feinstein/Michael Huffington monejr ma- .chines b Barbara Blong. a founding orga-nizer of the San Francisco Green Party, and : an activist on feminbt. homeless, and other issues. Her campaign b clearly distinguished , from her major opponents by her definite I opposition to the *3 Strikes and You're Out* j and 'S.O.S. Anti-Immigrants* California  

> 1

ballot initiatives and her solid support of single-payer health care. Barbara was a Peace and Freedom Party candidate for Slate Sen-

ate in 1976. 

' U.S. Congress candidates 

Among the eight California district partisan candidates, perhaps Craig Coffin, running for the 17th U.S. House of R.presentatives seat in the Santa Cruz-Monterey area, may have the best chance for a good showing and even a possible victory. Because Coffin's in-cumbent Democratic opponent voted for NAFTA, local labor leaden have become Interested in Craig's candidacy. Craig has already met with representatives from SEIU tod the Teamsters, and will be meeting with the Central Labor Council soon. His cam-paign manager was previously Jerry Brown's ;• local campaign manager^ and Craig has al-ready received the endorsement of Brown's L-. We the People organization. Ky . The two other Green California House of Vj. Representatives candidates are Bob Marston. L\y running (br the 23rd district seal in Ventura County, and Kip Kruger. running for the 50lh district seat in San Diego County. Bo faces an incumbent Republican, and will b campaigning for the rights of the undocu-mented, and single payer health care, whi Kip is running against an incumbent Dem • cm. primarily because the incumbent is r >t supporting the Endangered Species Act. 

Five State Legislature candftfotQ, 

Of the five Greens running for seats in the California State Lcgbbture. the only State Senate candidate will be Walt Sheasby. who . also was a candidate in 1992. but for U.S. V House of Representatives. Walt will be run-Ving in the 29th district, in Los Angeles tounty. and will be on the ballot because it /is almost certain that no candidate will re-ceive over 50% of the vole in the special September 13 open primary election to fill this seal, vacated by Republican Frank H ill,who was convicted of extortion and money laundering. The other four state legisbturc candi-dates are vying to be elected to the Califor-nia State Assembly. Perhaps the most inter-esting race for Greens around the country b the 35lh district contest in the Santa Bar-bara-Ventura area, which features former Green Mindy Lorenz as the Democratic stan-dard-bearer, competing against the super-rich Republican heir to the Firestone Tire fortune, and against Green pany candidate 'Tom Stafford (who says he has no money and will hardly be campaig-kiRg) Af ,.•. «ti!y SuflorJ derUicc :•> file foi *t .-»:• V^icj->e uaj uwcl wur M*no-/s S«-...M -• -. change parties in order to significantly in-. crease her chances of actually winning the ]• seat. (However, not all local Greens share Stafford's perspective — some of them, pr-licubrly in the Santa Baibara area, are ac-tively working for Mindy.) Mindy defeated trie local Democratic machine's hand-picked successor, an aide to an incumbent state senator. In the June pri-mary, but as a. ttsull, b in debt, and needs to raise large sums o( money (probably ftom the state Democratic Party apparatus) In order to have a reasonable chance of win-ning. (For the record, Mindy b not the only former California Green running as a Demo-crat this November—in Contra Costa County's 10th U.S. House of Representatives district. Ellen Schwartz, who had been briefly registered with uSe Green Party, b the long-shot Democrat challenger to in-cumbent Republican Bill Baker.) The other three Green State Assembly candidates arc Hank Chapot. running against longtime Berkeley Democratic'in-cumbent Tom Bates, in the Hth district: Tim Fitzgerald, running against incumbent Democrat Dom Concse in the 23td district in the San Jose area; and Charlie Wilkens. running against incumbent Republican Paula Boland in the 38th district in Los An-geles County. Charlie has a chance to do relatively well as the Democrat in the race is an untested 19-year old college student. 

Five Incumbent Greens up for re-election 

In Alamcda County. Dona Spring will be running for re-election to the Berkeley City Council. One candidate has decided to chal-lenge her for thb 4th district seat, which represents an area where currently about 7% of the voters are registered Green, just slightly less than the percentage of Republi-cans. Dona was tblc to appoint about a dozen Green Pany members to various City commissions during her first 20 months in office. In Southern California, three candidates are running for re-election: Barbara Can and William Bretz In San Diego County, and Glenn Bailey in Los Angles County. Can b running for the U Mesa-Spring Valley School Board. Bretz b running for the Crest-.i Dchesa Planning Group, and Bailey b run- •ning foi the Malibu-Las Virgenes-Topanga \Resource Conservation District. In Santa Clan County, incumbent Todd Cooper is running for another term oh the Evergreen Resource Conservation District. With the election of Greens Nancy Bemardi and John Beall in 1992. Green Pany mem-bers have, controlled the Board for the past two yean, and have been able to institute 

# 53 more environmental programs and perspec-tives than their predecessors. In total, four candidates will be running for three avail-able seats, including a second Green: John Bemardi. 

Twelve other non-partisan candidates 

San Diego County Greens are running nine non-partisan candidates this November. In addition to Barbara Can's and William Breu's re-election bids discussed above. Su-san Wolfe-Fleming is running for the Grossmont Union High School District Board. Leo Bennetl-Cauchon is running for the Mountain Empire School District Board. Steve Saini is running for the Helix Water Board. Timothy Moore is running for the Ramona Municipal Water District Board. Celesta Owen is running for the Grossmont Hospital Board, and Bonnie Gendron and Bnan McCall ate running for the Alpine Community Planning Group. Wolfe-Firm-ing ran for the Grossmont Board in 1992 and almost was elected; Saint, a former co-coordinator of the State Campaigns and Candidairs Working Group, ran for the La Mesa City Council in 1992. In Humboldt County. Jason Kirkpatrick is running for the Arcau City Council. Jason was formerly Student Body President at Humboldt State University and hopes 10 maintain the "Green presence" on the City Council by replacing Creen Bob Ornelas. who is retiring. Altogether, four candidates are running for two available seats; approxi-mately 11% of Arcau voters are currently registered Green. The three final non-pnisan California Green candidates are: Sharon Hushka. run-ning for the Simi Valley School Board in Ventura County; Jane Kramer, running for the Peralta Community College Board of Trustees in Alamcda Count)-, and Jon Stevens, running for the Santa Monica City Council in Los Angle* County. According to Bub Marston (who is running for the U.S. House of Representatives—see above). Hushka has a well-organized campaign and has a fairchance of winning, despite the fact that a total of six candidates are vying for the two available seau. including one in-cumbent and two religious nghl candidates. For mart information iibuul California tandiJaia. or ihr Cicrn Purl) of California, fttate ionlmi. Giren Purl.) of California ClruringrwiiM. 1008 10th Si. <H82. Sdtra-mrnluCA 95«H. (9J6) •HJI-.HJ7. Gua JAN 11 A MIHIII of nu Gum FAIII 01 (AUIOINIA Suit CAnrAlftNS AND CANOIOATII WOIIIM Giour AH» nCMAII Of TNI GlIlN PAIII Ol AlAHtOA COUNTT CAMPAIGN! AMI CAHDI»AUS 

mil. G R E E N POLITICS 

# IOCAI UPDATES 

Editor's notci 

To novejrour Cren locai't actMttn listed here, make sure that you tend copies of four focal newsletter or. even better. written up-States lo (Ac Grans Clearinghouse. Communl-calion and cmu-ft riilizatlon of Ideal between groups Is tonal (Ac Crecns/Crccn Party USA Is all aJboul. tal w neea'/ONr tola to do W California Green Party activist and Alameda County ICouncil member Brace Mast was elected 10 the Albany city council in April, joining Dona Spring in neighboring Berkeley as the East Bay's second Green city councilor and the state Green Party's fifth. Mast came in first in this city of 10.000 with 2.068 votes in a four- way race for two seats. Incumbent Elizabeth Baker polled 1 .932 to finish second. Incumbent Bill Cain received 1.713 and Stephan Pasiis received 446. (from Mike Feinstein) • The Greens of Sao Diego have decided I lo run against incumbent Congressman Bob I Filner (D-SOth) because he will not co-spon-I sor the Endangered Species Act. The Greens feel the reauihoruation of ihe ESA is per-haps the most significant environmental vote facing the Congress this session. While nearly 100 members have co-sponsored HR 2043 (Siudds bill). Filner has not only re-fused lo sign on. but has declined 10 meet or communicate with the Gicen Party. Sierra Club and Audubon Society. While Gieens were out collecting signa-tures (a'nd registering close lo 100 new Greens) to put Kip Krueger on the ballot. jothers were contacting Filner's offices in San , Diego and Washington. D.C. The message jwas simple: if Filner would co-sponsor MR 2043. Greens would drop the candidacy. Filner read about the campaign in the papers ' and had his chief of suff call the Gieens right away. "He told us his boss is an envirnnm»ni«i. ist and. of course, he's going to vote for HR 2043.* said Dan Tarr. who fielded calls from Filner's office. "He said Filner will probably co-sponsor the Studds bill later this month. When I asked him what he's wailing for. he had no answer." -In the meantime, the Greens are' using Kip's campaign to build a new local in south San Diego County. The Chaparral Greens, the local S01(c)(3) non-profit group, have taken the lead in defending San Diego open space by Ming a CEQA lawsuit against Baldwin Com-pany. the developer of Otay Ranch. Baldwin plans lo build approximately 27.000 dwell-ings on open space in east San Diego Coun-ly. This development will disrupt and frag-ment critical habitat and destroy the coun-ty's General Plan in one shot. There were scaleddown project alternatives that would be less damaging to the land and its sur-rounding communities, but they were not considered. The suit is being handled by San Diego's top environmental attorney on a contin-gency basis. Steven Crandall successfully represented Earth Island Institute in a suit against the San Onofre nuclear power plant and has fronted over $20,000 to keep the suit progressing, (from Steven Saint) 

Colorado 

The Boulder Green Alliance have entered long-range community pbnning discussions underway by the city government and city council. The group submitted a letter en-dorsing mixed residential and commercial land usage, further development of alterna-tive transportation systems, and advocating more cooperative planning between Boulder County municipalities, businesses and citi-zens. The Northern Colorado Greens have been doing outreach to a group of people in Grceley. Colorado who are thinking about starting a Green local. Members have also been involved in local Transportation Board meetings. The Sopris/El Jcbcl Greens have been very active in promoting alternative trans-portation in the Roaring Fork Valley and have joined with the Sierra Club and other local groups in opposing the four-lane ex-pansion of Colorado 82 between Aspen and Basalt. The group is also involved in coalition-building with the local Latino community •via a valley-wide task force, and has voiced public support for striking Gly Market em* pbyees. It is also actively opposing a pro-posed new golf course and. with the Siena Club, putting pressure on a local mining company lo restore local streams, (from FM-(ureJfciu newsletter) 

Florida 

. - The Florida Green Party is running three ! I candidates this year. They are Johnny Ardls i I for U.S. Senate. Diana Starr for Florida •" House of Representatives District 5. and Denny Wolfe for Commissioner of Agricul-ture. The law concerning ballot access for mi-nor political parties is so unfair that it will probably prevent the pany from getting on the ballot this November. Three percent of the registered voters in the geographical area in which a candidate is running would have ;to sign ballot petitions. In the case of Johnny ! and Denny. 196.000 people—three percent of the registered voters in the stale—would be needed. Green locals all over the stale are working on the petitions, but the over-whelming number required makes it un-. likely thai the party will have enough to qualify for ballot access. (fromGrern Line newsletter) The Florida Greens/Green Party of Florida have taken up a bwsuil against the stale of Florida, challenging the state's re-strictive third party balloi access laws. The Florida Greens are also involved in Florid-ians United Against Discrimination, a coali-tion of groups opposing a Colorado-style referendum that would cancel all civil rights protection for homosexuals in Florida, (from Escambia County Greens newsletter) The Escambia County Greens had a busy year. In November. 1993. the group hosted Ron Daniels for a speaking engage-ment entitled "The Resurgence of Racism'— a much needed focus in the region. That same month, the group organized a protest against War Toys it • local toy store, on the International Day of Protest Against War Toys. In February of 1994. the Greens co-organized a demonstration with the War Resister's League, of the Blue Angel Mara-thon, at PensacoU Naval Air Station, with networking help from the Clearinghouse. The group org«nlied • Micccufal FcnMcob Eanh Day Festival In April. All year, the Escambia County Greens worked to place Johnny Ardis. Diana Starr, and Denny Wolfe on the ballot. The group was unsuccessful, but the effort increased the Greens' visibility and provided educa-tional opportunities. The Escambia County Greens are currently in the process of pro-ducing their own public access Cable TV show and are planning to bunch a local cur-rency next year. 

# 55 Synthesis/Regeneration 10 

# A Magazine of Green Social Thought 

Illustration by Brad Massingill 

# NUKES AND PUBLIC HEALTH 

also featuring: The Nader Campaign; A Green President?; Third Parties '96; Maine Green Party Ballot Initiative on Clear Cutting; Majority Preference Voting; Ending Business Extortion of Local Tax Giveaways; Post-Mortem on Staley Struggle 

## Spring 1996 $3.95 The Electoral Challenge! 

A Movement-Building Strategy for '96 

# The Green Party and the Nader Campaign 

by Daniel Solnit, Green Party of California 

On November 27, Ralph Nader entered the Green Party of California's presidential primary as pan of a "people's campaign 1* to reclaim our po-litical process from the control and corruption of corporate interests. The Green Party of Maine recently placed him on their ballot as well, and other states are organizing to do the same. Nader's agreement was the culmination of months of discussion and diplomacy by greens and other activists around the country, and represents the Greens* first opportunity to mobilize significant numbers of people at a national scale. It also raises some important questions. 

Why run for president? At first glance, this appears the opposite of''grassroots, bottom-up" organiz-ing, and in a traditional money-and-media-driven campaign, it would be. However, as Nader's statement sug-gests, this is a bottom-up campaign: the focus here is entirely on the is-sues and the people. It is up to us build this into a groundswell for re-form, for democracy, for a new so-cial agenda based on justice and human needs, not entrenched power and profit. Why Ralph Nader? He is an icon of personal integrity, honesty, humility, and public service; polls rate his'trustworthiness higher than that of any other public figure. As the antithesis of a corrupt politician, Nader lends tremendous credibility to calls for electoral reform. As a lifelong adversary of corporate America, he represents the power of ordinary- people to defeat wealthy interests and change the "system". Nader is the ideal catalyst for crowing a movement around politi-cal reform and democratic re-newal—and he is already committed to running. Why now? With some notable exceptions, US Greens have not yet demonstrated the leadership or or-ganizing ability to pull off anything this big; isn't it premature? Many of us feel that the time is ripe for such an effort, that a crucial window of opportunity exists which we should not let pass. Public resentment of politicians and the media, frustration with the electoral process, and a * general mistrust of government is extremely widespread, perhaps more so than at any time in the past SO years. Electoral reform and "good government" are the most unifying themes on the political landscape, one which could potentially unite 70 -80% of the US public. It'bridges almost all wedge issues, from race in '92, and which accounts in part for Buchanan's dramatic showing in early primaries. If the empty rheto-ric of populist revolt can attract such support, what will the real thing bring? Do we dare leave the field entirely to billionaires and right-wing demagogues? Why are we running? What are our goals? First, of course, to elect Nader president. Clearly a long shot, but achievable under the right circumstances. The numbers are there: in '92 over 80% of the electorate voted against Clinton, or Bush, or both—or didn't vote at all. That is our constituency. There are more people who would like to vote for Nader than for Clinton or Dole; 

...in '92 over 80% of the electorate voted against Clinton, or Bush, or both—or didn't vote at all...There are more people who would like to vote for Nader than for Clinton or Dole... 

and affirmative action to reproduc-tive rights and foreign policy. Eve-rybody wants to "throw the bums out and clean up the s>-stem." This growing reaction is defin-ing a new political model, replacing the obsolete Liberal/Conservative spectrum with a contest between populism (creative, inclusive, decen-tralized power, community-based policy making) and bureaucratic centralism (exclusive, centralized, hierarchical, distant, inefficient, in-flexible). This is also the one issue which neither Democrats nor Re-publicans can truly address; despite their relentless (and increasingly desperate) posturing as outsid-crs/rcbcls/reformers/populists, they are, in fact, the problem. Politicians of both parties arc widely perceived as power holders in a corrupt, money-dominated system gone bad; the opportunity to focus and express this widespread resentment could give rise to a powerful and broad-based popular movement. It is this hunger for a genuine, populist alternative which resulted in one out of five voters choosing Perot we will have to reach enough of those people with the message, and surmount the enormous barriers to becoming a credible contender. Second, we can shift the center of gravity, gain leverage with Clin-ton on key issues. This may seem the most pragmatic goal, but it's only a short-term, "band-aid** strat-egy; lasting change rarely results from this kind of leverage, which disappears as soon as the election is over. It also defines us in relation to the Democrats, and if not part of alarger strategy, leads to co-optation, opportunism, and loss of grass-roots legitimacy. (Consider Jesse Jack-son's decision to remain a "player" in the Democratic party rather than work to support an independent Rainbow Coalition.) We need to avoid framing this campaign as an attempt to influence the Democrats. Doing so sends the message to the public that we are not serious, that we have no chance of winning, that Clinton is our only hope, and that our only measure of success is a Democratic reaction. This keeps us "petitioning the power     

> I 28 kynUiesls/Rr|«icradon 10: A Magazine of Green Social Thought Spring 1996

# 51 holders, rather than empowering the people," and discourages those who want to build an alternative. This also sends the message to Clin-ton/Democrats that we are not a credible threat, that we will not go the distance or risk costing them the elec-tion, that when pushed we will obediently fall into line behind their machine; in other words, that they can (and will) continue to ignore us. The only way we will impact the Clinton administration or the Democratic Party is by focusing on our own agenda and running all-out to win, to challenge the system, and especially to get people actively de-manding reform and new political choices. Third, we can open up the public debate—raise the real issues, ask questions, offer alternatives and so-lutions, challenge and de-legitimize the two-party monopoly and politics as usual; we can raise hopes, raise expectations, and raise hell. This is a classic green crack-in-the-wall approach—it depends especially on forcing media access (Nader in de-bates), and building our own alter-native media/ information networks. Fourth, we can continue build-ing a multi-issue grassroots move-ment. This is (in my opinion) the foremost goal, around which our strategies should be built. Mass movements are the primary means of real social change, and our point of real strength. This means focusing on the conditions of ordinary peo-ple's lives, not candidates personali-ties and media buzz. It means working for lasting change in the structure of society, in the distribu-tion of power and resources—not just changing who sits at the top. It means looking far beyond 1996, envisioning the society we want to leave to future generations, figuring out our next step toward that future, and working on it steadily. Above all, we need to define success on our terms. If we increase democracy and access to power, if we mobilize new people, if we lay a foundation for future organizing, then we will have won regardless of who sits in the White house. But won't Nader just be a "spoiler,** taking votes from Clinton and helping elect a Republican? As Nader said on Donahue: "I can't spoil it; it's already spoiled!'* When Democrats run corrupt careerists, wage expensive and dirty media blitzes, ignore the issues, and try to look more like the Republicans every year, they do not endear them-

We are not attracting Clinton Democrats; we are attracting the disaffected from all across the spectrum...a majority (54%) do NOT believe "voting for a third party is throwing away your vote'*... 

selves to most Americans. Demo-crats lose elections because they arc unable to persuade enough people to vote for them, not because someone offered the voters a choice. Blaming third parties for Democratic defeats assumes that we cannot have real democracy or meaningful choice, that the system is broken beyond repair, and that we should settle for the "lesser of two evils*'. This is the politics of fear, and it is what keeps so many of us feeling powerless or fed up or just disinterested. The Democratic Party can keep sliding to the right because they assume that anyone left of center has nowhere else to go, and that they can take us for granted without ever addressing our needs or concerns. Our message is that we should NOT settle, NOT go along with this charade, but rather demand and work for real choice and genuine democracy. Both big money parties have sold themselves to corporate interests; whether the winner is Democrat or Republican, the corpo-rate class wins every time—and we all lose. Since he has failed to veto almost every bad piece of legislation put on his desk, a vote for Clinton is essentially a vote for more of the Gingrich agenda. Instead of voting from fear, we can vote our hope, our dreams, and our demands! We should also challenge the assumption that we are pulling votes from Clinton. A recent Field poll posed three-way races between Clinton, Dole, or Perot, and Clinton, Dole, or Nader. In both races Clin-ton lead Dole by the same margin: 8-9%. This indicates that many of the same voters who chose Perot also chose Nader, and that a so-called "liberal'* third candidate has almost the same impact as a "conservative." We are not attracting Clinton Demo-crats; we are attracting the disaf-fected from all across the spectrum. The poll also revealed that a major-ity (54%) do NOT believe "voting for a third party is throwing away your vote, and an astonishing 76% believe voting third party "sends a message that the [political system needs to change". (SF Chronicle 12/19/95) (Unfortunately, poll-sters did not ask how many believe voting for Republicans or Democrats is "throwing away your vote.") Will large num-bers of people really work for these goals? I believe they will, if we can awaken their hope and passion for democracy. The public's anger is often reactive or confused: we know we're being used and abused, but \\c often don't understand exactly how. why, and by whom. Immersed in media misinformation, with no widely understood analysis or expla-nation of it's causes, our anger is. often diverted into short-sighted re-active measures (term limits, budget cuts) or scapc-goating (anti-immigrant Proposition 187, attacks on affirmative action) or used to turn us against our own best interests (voting down universal health care). Reactive anger is also shallow: it is only good for one vote, one check, one letter; it cannot sustain a long-term multi-issue movement. As soon as it's initial effort fails to solve the underlying problem, it will shift to another target, or turn to frustration or despair. Wealth) cor-porate interests can afford to keep pushing "hot buttons"' \\ith media blitzes; we need to do the more painstaking work of building sus-tainable, long-term movements for change. To do so, we must reach beyond this anger, to people's hope for the future, their desire for a bet-ter, more just and democratic soci-

ety. Electoral work is always a means, a method of movement building. It is a way to challenge the system, educate people, and build pressure for democratic reforms. It is a step in reclaiming government as a check on corporate power, rather than a tool of it. The Nader cam-paign is our next step toward a more effective coalition of populist/ pro-gressive forces, toward a more democratic electoral system, and ultimately, toward a greener world. Join us! -v  

> Synthesis/Regeneration 10: A Magazine of Green Social Thought Spring 199</29/

# A Green President? 

by Lloyd Sirecker, Ralph Party of California 

/ am permitting the Green Party of California to put my name on their March J 996 primary ballot to broaden the narrow agenda that the 'major 'party candidates parade before the electorate. I intend to stand with others around the country as a catalystfor the creation of a new model of electoral politics, not to run any campaign. The campaign u;// be run by the people themselves and will bejust as serious as citizens choose to make it. It will be a campaign for democracy waged by the private citizens who choose to become public citizens. I will not seek nor accept any campaign contributions—but I welcome civic energy to build democracy so as to strengthen and make more useable our democratic processes for a just, productive and sustainable society. —Ralph Nader 

With these words Ralph Nader became a candi-date for the Green Party of California's (GPCa) nomination as President of the United States of America. There's lots of good stuff here: an acknowledg-ment that the political agenda as set forth by the De-mopublicans is "narrow" and needs to be "broadened/ 1 by a candidate who intends to "stand with others;" a project to create a "new model for electoral politics;*' a campaign, "for democracy waged by private citizens who choose to become public citizens." Sounds great, yes?! And better yet, "our" can-didate "welcome[s]"civic energy to build democracy and make more useable our democratic proc-esses..." Best of all, perhaps, he doesn't want any of our money! So what's the problem? Doesn't this statement indeed "sound great;" aren't we Greens extremely fortunate to have such a widely respected progressive crusader acknowledge our efforts, our programs and platforms struggled over for more than a decade, our "community-based" political strategy? Aren't we indeed fortunate that, as the ""new kids on the block," we are suddenly important enough to worn- the libcralists at the MrM- York Times'! Well, for starters, in case you haven't been pay-ing attention. Nader's cam-paign has nothing at all to do with the Greens. To my knowledge, Mr. Nader is not even a member (in any definition) of any Green organization. I *m told that he has read the GPCa's Platform, and says it's "the best he's ever seen," but its not clear to me that his campaign has any association with this document (and I have no idea whether or not he has seen, or commented upon, the TG/GPUSA Program—if this is to be a national campaign, this seems relevant to 

me). I'm glad to hear that he likes the California Plat-form, of course, especially since the GPCa virtually out its bank account to publish our Policy Di~ •>ns for him to read (while the Party "locals" are 

The "citizens' campaign" is proposed as a means of placing the "right 91 people in positions of power over us, not to accomplish a thorough re-organization of power as such. He does not here, and has not anywhere that I am aware of, challenged the corporate form per se... 

starving for funds...). It would be a shame to have spent all that time, and money, to generate a docu-ment which great men didn't read. No: Ralph Nader is not graciously assenting to "permit" us to use his name in order to further a spe-cifically Green agenda, he is running to manipulate the Democrats, to turn Clinton to the "left" and to return that dying organization to its "traditional constituency" which is, of course, the long-abused strata of white middle class consumers. (Those of us who had imagined that constituency to be organized industrial workers, Americans of color, family farm-ers, the poor, the homeless, and the otherwise disen-franchised, seem to have slept through the 1980s; there is a "new tradition*' on the "left"...) Of course, many have fled into our leafy em-brace to escape the chill they have experienced in the Democratic Party's triumphal march to the right. The most frequently voiced concern among these (temporarily?) wayward Demos is that the Party of their fathers seems to have rolled over to expose its throat in submission to corporate interests. For these folks, it probably seems like less of a hike to leave the Demos with Ralph on board. One thing which must be acknowledged about Nader is that he has for decades been seeking to leash corpo-rate power. But let's notice a cou-ple of things here. For one, Nader asserts the impor-tance of making "more useable our democratic processes...". No sense here that we ought to question, as many Greens do, the whole notion that "our processes" are in fact "democratic" in the first place. Our problem is not, according to Nader, inherent in the existing political structures and the theoretical basis for them—Lockean individual-ism; ''normative elitist liberalism;" and the sanctity* of "private property." The problem lies in the abuses upon and intrusions into this "best of all possible" political forms, made increasingly easy by its own diminishing authority to regulate corporations. Thus Nader, it would seem, is comfortable with the idea that one group of people makes decisions, and en-forces their implementation, while the rest of us   

> lynlhesls/RegMitntton 10: A Magazine of Green Social Though! Spring 1996

merely perform the periodic ritual of marking a bal-lot. The "citizens' campaign" is proposed as a means of placing the "right" people in positions of power over us, not to accomplish a thorough re-organization of power as such. He does not here, and has not anywhere that I am aware of, challenged the corpo-rate form per se t neither in govern-ment nor in the economic sector. Furthermore, let's also notice that, while Nader wishes "to strengthen and make more useable our democratic processes," to what endl".. .for a just, productive and sustainable society (emphasis added)." Isn't it precisely this ideology, the ideology of human beings as "producers" and "consumers" in an endless stream/cycle of commodity production which the Greens have been challenging at the root? How does one reconcile "justice" and "sustainability" with this productivist mentality wherein the basic questions are presumed to be about the "just" distri-bution of "goods," rather than about the whole con-cept of homo economicusl We must be extremely clear about this: "justice" and "sustainability" are objectives which can con-ceivably be attained through severely authoritarian means. "Freedom," however, is a very different con-cept than "justice." Freedom—the condition under which we are all nurtured toward the fullest possible development of our individual potentialities—is, or ought to be, our objective; and freedom is something which must be attained by and for ourselves: no one can legislate or mandate the "realm of freedom" into existence! 

Turning the Coin 

Ralph is going all the way to the general and us Greens are going with him to the While House... 

> —Mike Feinstein, GPCa

Let's look at the other side of this coin; let's for-get all that I've said above, assume Nader is "green" as hell, and ask whether or not this "Green Man"—or any Green, man or woman—should receive our sup-port for a run at the "bully pulpit." This question needs to be addressed from a number of perspectives. First, and most obvious, Nader is a white, middle class heterosexual man. I hope this is not a "crime" in its own right—I am all those things too (though the term "middle class" is, at best, ambiguous, and I gave up being a "White Man," with the help of my friends in SNCC [Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee], 30 years ago). But any Green candidacy for a major, partisan office (especially the Presidency) is, I hope we are all "realistic" enough to see, educational at most. All the cheer-leading and pep-rallies we might hold ought not to obscure the fact that, even if Nader runs in the General Election, this fellow will not be "our" next president. Given that, precisely what is it we are "educating" people about? We are educating peo-ple into a re-affirmation of power as structured. Even if Nader were to stand and proclaim (which he definitely will not do) that what must happen is the radical decentralization of all economic and political institutions and processes, he would be doing it from a position above the heads of the people, offering us "empowerment" as we crane our necks looking up at the podium. "Grassroots democracy," __^____________ "decentralization," and "community-based economics" become 

No matter what he says, "campaign promises" which, even if 

the message received is that we need a hero... 

they could be delivered in such a way (which they cannot), would be meaningless, empty, and hollow —form without substance. No matter what he says, the message received is that we need a hero ("crusader") to invade and conquer the existing hierarchy, to rationalize it and "return" it to "the people" (who, of course, he "represents'^. 

Building a MOVEMENT 

> How ironic that a party espousing 'future focus' ami long term planning is using Nader as a quick fix for our dwindling numbers...

—Margaret Garcia: a GREEN In my view, it is the project of building a grass-roots movement for fundamental changes, both in structures and in "consciousness," that the Greens arc about—if I'm wrong, I've been deceived. Many seem to agree with this, but see the Nader campaign as a means to that end; this is the same "many* 1 who have made the same basic argument for the estab-lishment of Green Parties in the first place. Indeed, the Nader candidacy—and the manner in which it has been foisted upon us—indicate the inherent logic of Party formation: what good's a Party without a can-didate? (What, he asked rhetorically, ever happened to the "anti- Party party"?) It may be true that a campaign driven by a high-visibility personality will serve to re-vitalize Green Parties; the question, however, is whether such ac-tivities will in any way assist a Green Movement. 1 won't drag out all the arguments about "Party" -v-"Movement," but the questions are in fact insepara-ble. Some allege that a sustainable and free Green future can only be achieved by utilizing the existing institutions, ''transforming" them as we go. These folks argue that grassroots democracy = universal suffrage and broad participation in existing "democratic" institutions. The anti-theory "civil so-ciety" argument is one with which Nader is comfort-able as well. But a grassroots movement, focusing upon sweeping and substantive social change—a move-ment which not only explicitly "calls for" but achieves radical democratization by creating expan-sive counter-institutions—is not something which can be furthered by hitching up our fortunes to any indi-vidual personality. Such a movement will only de-velop if and when we stop believing in "leaders," and successfully propagate our disbelief. And this "propaganda by deed" must be the creation of the future within and ultimately beyond the false and anti-human "limitations" of the present.  

> Synthesis/Regeneration 10: A Migizine of Green Social Thought Spring 1

# Third Parties '96: Birds of a Feather... 

by Walt Contreras Sheasby, Green Party Candidate, 27th Congressional District, Los Angeles County At the Third Parties '96 conference in Washington, DC, January 5-6, C-SPAN televised a panel with the soaring label of" Crossover Politics: Transcending the Old Labels of Left, Right, and Center.** This struck a number of participants as quite a flight of fancy. Are we pretending that we can fly without any sense of direction or of the topography of the land? Every new brood resents being tagged with old labels, but the way to go beyond the leg bands the media puts on us is to focus like a falcon on the specific issues and put our talons into the political substance. But perhaps we should first take a bird's eye view of the Left, Right, and Center distinctions. John Rensenbrink of the Green Politics Network, the main sponsor of the conference, argued that Third Parties '96 had to break out of the conventional categories of Left and Right to build "a broad-based, po-tentially majoritarian multi-party alliance.*' The idea may go back to the 1978 slogan of the German group, Green Action Future, M We are neither left nor right; we are in front." It was taken literally in 1983 when the German Greens first entered the Bundestag and insisted on being seated between the liberal Left (Social Democrats) and Right (Christian Democrats). This language even entered con-ventional "middling* 1 politics, as when Bill Clinton informed an in-terviewer that he has moved neither right nor left: he's moved out in front! The very etymology of left and right is political. Left has its origins in the negative, with the French gauche meaning awkward, as in a country bumpkin or raw peasant, someone green; the Latin sinister is harmful and dangerous, and the Old English lyft means weak or foolish, paired ofr with right only in the 13th Century. In old lore, these lesser qualities reside in the poor side of the body, but also in the body politic. Thc'oppositc, right, derives from the Indo-European base, r*g-, meaning to lead in a straight line, to direct or rule, as in the French droll derived from the Latin directus, and Latin rex, German Reich, French rot, and English regent for king. It is the strong side of the body, but a right (in feudal English word-smithing) is also a claim by the mighty, the noble, that makes them rich and correct, righteous and erect, sometimes even rigid, though not ssarily in that order. In 1789 the vocabulary of poli-tics took a bit of a turn in France, when the gauche stood up and de-manded their droits. As the various parts of French society took their seats in the Constituent Assembly of 1789-91, the Monarchists were seated appropriately on the right side the right that resisted any loss of power by the elite. From that day on, the terms Left and Right have kept that basic meaning. These terms were soon vexed by the rise of Robespierres's dictator-ship and later quibbles like the rise of fascism (a revolutionary over-throw of the Old Order by a new right mimicking the left) and Stalin-ism (a tyranny like fascism that pa-raded under the icons of the Left while devouring the remnants of socialism and humanism). In spite of all things modern and the rather unfair word-smithing, the term "Left" retained a positive con-notation among the masses of the world, and the term "Right* 1 was often avoided by its believers be-

...the political terms Right and Left probably will be used until a society polarized between masses and elite no longer exists... 

of the hall, from the chair's point of view, and the radicals were seated on the left, separated by a middle group in the center. During the de-bate on the royal veto, these parties came to be known as the Left, Cen-ter and Right, with other names ex-pressing assigned seats, so that Montagnards occupied the upper gallery or mountain and the party of the Plains sat on the lower floor. The debate underscored options offered by the left that led toward greater power to the masses and by cause of its negative impact on the masses. Both sides overlook that one cannot exist without the other, since one's meaning refers to its opposite. A leftist Utopia is inapt, since it im-plies a viable elite with right-wing defenses, as is the opposing dream of a perfect hierarchical order, since the right's raison d'etre is the de-fense of the elite from sinister sub-version and riot. Left and Right arc like Marx's reflex-categories: no king without subjects, no seller  

> ..I

# Third Parties 

Jan 5,1996. Judith Mohling (CO Peace Mission). Steve Perez (Student Caucus. U of MO). Mike Castro NM Green Party). Tony Affigne (Rl Green Party). Sam Jordan (DC Statehood Party). Photo by Nike Zachmanoglou Q   

> Synthesis/Regeneration 10: A Magazine of Green Social Thought Spring 1996

without a buyer, no proletariat with-out a bourgeoisie, no slave without a master. If so, then the political terms Right and Left probably will be used until a society polarized between masses and elite no longer exists, and it doesn't do Alexander Cock-burn any good to complain, "Why should we be dominated by a politi-cal labeling system based on where people sat in the Constituent As-sembly in Versailles in 1789? (The Mrtio/i,Julyl7, 1995)." One of the Crossover panelists at Third Parties '96 expressed his own frustration with the labeling system in a radio interview with Lenora Fulani and Fred Newman of the Pa-triot Party: I think the main issue here is can we reach across to essentially the Reform Party and anybody that's on the grassroots whether they be right, left or center....! know that you all here at the Patriot Party have actually been... reaching out to all sides of the grassroots, which I commend you for.... I find that the right grassroots is perhaps a little bit more open-minded than the left grassroots. Left progres-sives tend to think they know eve-rything. That happens within the Green Party a lot.... Lenora Fulani had joined Fred Newman in the early 1980's to build the New Alliance Party, declaring it a " black-led, women-led, multira-cial, pro-gay, independent political organization.** Downplaying its origins in Lyndon LaRouche's cult, NAP recruited a following in New York City and elsewhere through its own cultish social therapy, which required joiners to do "self-empowering work,'* usually in one of NAP's organizations. Despite its claims, as Jill Nelson pointed out in Ms. Magazine (May/June 1992)," You'd be hard-pressed to find any progressive organization—gay, straight, black, whatever—that will align with NAP.'* The NAP was criticized for rule-or-ruin tactics, disrupting the Na-tional Welfare Rights Organization and the People's Party, ripping off supporters of the Rainbow Coalition, and nearly wrecking the California Peace and Freedom Party. The Fed-eral Election Commission fined its 1992 presidential campaign $612,557 for fraudulently claiming that amount in federal matching funds. In April 1994 the NAP officially dissolved into the Patriot Party, a small group mainly in Pennsylvania that had networked briefly with Gov. Lowell Weicker, Gordon Black, a pollster who joined Ross Perot, and other independents. As Perot put his Reform Party on the California ballot in late 1995', the Patriot Party announced it was merging, but it has kept a separate identity. In a January 31.1996 "Open Letter to Third Parties *96" from the National Independent Politics Summit, Ted Click and others criti-cized the idea of "transcending left, right and center" where "in addition to the participation of Greens, So-cialists and other progressive groups, the Libertarian, Patriot and Reform parties have been invited to partici-pate." One observer commented that, To be fair, a lot of the people ad-vocating these left-right-center al-liances are only advocating it on a limited basis—khat we can work together on the 'political democ-racy* issues (ballot access reform, proportional representation, cam-paign finance reform, etc.)....But somehow, along the way, they be-gan deluding themselves that we were political soulmaies. Linda Martin, a key organizer of TP '96, had a clear motivation for the conferences: "I watched in hor-ror from my seat in suburban Vir-ginia and saw them [the GOP] mount a major assault on all the government programs, services and protections I hold dear... while the so-called progressive dems stood silently by...and the "New Dems"...[and] nearly all our elected politicos have now joined the ridicu-lous Balanced Budget Chorus.** For independent progressives, however, this divided them, not only from the Congress and the White House, but also from'the new Right and Center parties. In reality, Linda Martin's stance was impossible while nestling with the Libertarian, Reform, and Patriot parties. These groups are equally frenzied about zeroing-out the budget deficit and proclaiming victory over a bombed-out welfare state, a fixation compa-rable to the start of the US war in Vietnam. The budget mania was promoted by former Sen. Paul Tsongas in the early 1992 primaries, and the baton was picked up by Ross Perot After his election, Clinton and the New Democrats dropped their job stimu-lus platform to please the Fed and the big money markets and substi-tuted Perot's platform. Democrats in turn found themselves co-opted by the GOP budget Hawks and nudged to a seven year target. In an "Open Letter to the White House" last November, Marian Wright Edelman of the Children's Defense Fund said the destruction of social programs in the name of sav-ing children from future indebted-ness "...is the domestic equivalent of bombing Vietnamese villages in order to save them." In fact, the deficit was largely a legacy of Cold War military- spending and the paral-lel neglect of the inner cities and schools. In sharp contrast, the Libertarian. Reform and Patriot Panics all joined the flight of the Hawks, with the Patriot Party saying, "it is necessary for the federal government to adopt a balanced fiscal budget on a yearly basis, beginning with the year 2000." On the contrary'. For the sake of future generations, the Doves must prevail if we are to reduce poverty, disease and crime, co-existing for a time with the dreaded Red regimen of deficit spending. We need to plan a balanced economy, not a balanced budget. We should also meet the "right grassroots," testing their ppcn-mindedness, and convincing them that their concern for popular sover-eignty puts them on the Left with us. and not with rich power brokers. And we should absorb a warn-ing: " The next Left could fail if ? like the mainstream liberals, it ignores the structural nature of the crisis, or if it backs off from the advocacy of that bottom-up democratization of the economy that is precisely what separates it from the shrewd Right (Michael Harrington, The Next Left. Henry Holt & Co.: New York, 1986)." We need to enlist the millions of students, workers, women, minori-ties and the poor who are the in-tended victims of the Hawks, and that cannot be done if these birds of prey are the first ones invited into the nest. Third Parties '96 has to articulate a new strategy, nurture its real offspring of progressive state parties, and create real alliances with real allies.
