Title: Hillary for America video 'Getting Started' April 12, 2015

URL Source: https://p2016.org/ads/clintonv041215.html

Markdown Content:
### Hillary for America

"Getting Started"+

2:18 video from April 12, 2015.

[Music, very jazzy, drums at start]

Woman: I'm getting ready for a lot of things.

A lot of things.

Woman: It's spring so we're starting to get the gardens ready and my tomatoes are legendary here in my own neighborhood.

Woman: My daughter is about to start kindergarten next year and so we're moving, just so she can belong to a better school.

Man: Mi hermano y yo estamos empezando un premier negocio.

Woman: After five years of raising my children, I am now going back to work.

Woman: Every day we're trying to get more and more ready and more prepared.Man: A baby boy, coming your way.

Woman: Right now I'm applying for jobs. It's a look into what the real world will look like after college.

Man: I'm getting married this summer to someone I really care about.

Child: I'm going to be in the play and I'm going to be in a fish costume...for little tiny fishes.

Woman: I'm getting ready to retire soon. Retirement means reinventing yourself in many ways.

Woman: Well we've been doing a lot of home renovations...Man: But most importantly, we really just want to teach our dog to quit eating the trash. Woman: And so we have high hopes for 2015 that that's going to happen.

Man: I've started a new career recently. This is a fifth generation company, which means a lot to me. This country was founded on hard work, and it really feels good to be a part of that.

Hillary Clinton: I'm getting ready to do something too. I'm running for president.

Americans have fought their way back from tough economic times, but the deck is still stacked in favor of those at the top.

Everyday Americans need a champion, and I want to be that champion, so you can do more than just get by; you can get ahead and stay ahead. Because when families are strong, America is strong.

So I'm hitting the road to earn your vote.

Because it's your time, and I hope you'll join me on this journey.

* * *

Notes: This is Hillary Clinton's much anticipated announcement video. It runs about two and a quarter minutes, but Clinton herself doesn't appear until one and a half minutes into the video. The key message of the first one and a half minutes is diversity. Individuals representative of most major Democratic constituency groups speak: women, seniors, Latinos, African-Americans, youth, gays, Asian-Americans, working moms, and blue collar workers (+).The gender balance does skew towards women. One notices that more of the faces are women and in the two clips which include both a man and a woman speaking, the woman's remarks lead off. The video makes a balanced appeal to dog-lovers and cat-lovers, including one scene with a dog and one scene with a cat (although the dog has a more active role).In essence the video focuses on ordinary folks in the midst of their everyday lives, and in this approach o ne sees a definite influence of President Obama's re-election campaign In her brief remarks Clinton acknowledges the issue of income inequality, stating that "the deck is still stacked in favor of those at the top."

 Compare: 

Hillary Clinton presidential exploratory committee announcement - Jan. 20, 2007

Obama for America launch video "It Begins with Us" - April 4, 2011****

Copyright © 2015 Eric M. Appleman/Democracy in Action.
