Title: Quiz 8.1 - Presidential Nominations and Political Campaigns Analysis

URL Source: https://www.studocu.com/en-us/document/liberty-university/administration-of-justice-organizations/quiz-8-1-quiz/29382634

Published Time: 2022-06-21T08:52:08+02:00

Markdown Content:
1.   The primary system and the nomination process

Presidential campaigns include primaries and caucuses leading up to party nominating conventions. While voting in primaries occurs in the privacy of a voting booth, caucus-goers are required to publicly declare support for the candidate of their choosing at a party meeting. Until 1972, nominations were driven by caucuses that involved mostly party elites, largely because rank-and-file party members were barred or discouraged from participating. Party reforms that took effect in 1972, and that have been adjusted since then, have led to far more primaries than caucuses and more rank-and-file voters taking part in nomination contests.

Analysts suggest that primary-centric nominations result in more-contentious nominations as candidates appeal to less active voters than before the 1970s-era rule changes. The public is now more involved in nominations but is also more often exposed to intraparty conflict, which invites negative perceptions of the nominees and their ability to win elections and govern.

In 2008, the Democratic race between Barack Obama, Hillary Clinton, and others was particularly contentious as no candidate had won enough convention delegates to be nominated until the last primary in early June.

Examine the cartoon and answer the questions that follow.

Copyright Mike Luckovich/Cartoonist Group

Statement True or False

Currently, the presidential nomination process includes more caucuses than primaries.

False

Presidential primaries allow greater opportunity for rank-and-file party members to participate than do caucuses.

True

Party caucuses expose the public to more intraparty conflict than do party primaries.

False

Since 1970s-era reforms, the public has become more involved in the party nomination process.

Statement True or False

True

Points: 1 / 1

Close Explanation Explanation: Prior to the 1970s, party caucuses controlled by party elites dominated the presidential nominating process. Party reforms instituted in 1972 altered the presidential nominating process to include the use of more presidential primaries in which rank-and-file party voters were granted more power to participate. As a consequence of these changes, the public has become involved in the presidential nominating process while also experiencing greater exposure to intraparty conflict.

Which of the following statements presents an accurate analysis of the political cartoon?

The political cartoon shows a defiant U. Senator Hillary Clinton refusing to concede and vowing to fight through the court system when the election proved too close to call. The political cartoon shows U. Senator Hillary Clinton conceding an election, even though she believes herself to be the better candidate. U. Senator Barack Obama is depicted in the political cartoon heartily endorsing fellow candidate U. Senator Hillary Clinton after an amiable nominating process in 2008.

1.   Partisan identification and vote choice

Political parties filter how the public learns about politics. Positive or negative feelings about the Republican and Democratic Parties often contribute to positive or negative feelings about officeholders and candidates. It is common for individuals to form opinions about candidates and officeholders if they know only their party label.

Parties also act as vote guides because voters often select candidates who share their party label. Individuals claiming no party (independents) tend to vote for candidates from more than one party on the same ballot more often than do individuals who identify with a party. (This ticket splitting occurs, for example, when a person votes Republican for one office and Democratic for a different office.) A person voting for the same party members for Congress and the president is called a straight ticket voter. The percentage of people who call themselves independents has increased since the 1960s, though many self-identified independents tend to lean toward one of the two major parties.

Candidates challenging incumbents often argue that they are disadvantaged because media coverage of incumbents running for reelection focuses both on their role as officeholders and as candidates, which may prompt concerns about fair treatment during election campaigns.

Read the excerpt and answer the questions that follow.

The Final Days of the Media Campaign 2012
-----------------------------------------

November 19, 2012

Obama Enjoys Surge in Positive Coverage the Last Week of the Race; Attention to Romney Drops

In the final week of the 2012 presidential campaign, Barack Obama enjoyed his most positive run of news coverage in months. Only during the week of his nomination convention was the treatment in the press more favorable.

During this final week, from October 29 to November 5, positive stories about Obama (29%) outnumbered negative ones (19%) by 10 points. A week earlier, negative coverage of Obama had exceeded positive by 13 points. The final week of the campaign marked only the second time in which positive stories about Obama outnumbered negative dating back to late August.

For Mitt Romney in the final week, the tone of coverage remained largely unchanged from the previous two weeks. Negative stories in the press outnumbered positive ones 33% to 16%.

But Romney may have suffered in final days from the press focusing less on him relative to his opponent. After receiving roughly identical levels of coverage for most of October, in the last week of campaigning Obama was a significant presence in eight out of 10 stories compared with six in 10 for Romney—one of the biggest disparities in any week after Labor Day.

(Source: “The Final Days of the Media Campaign 2012,” Pew Research Journalism Project, Pew Research Center’s Journalism Project Staff, last modified November 19, 2012, journalism/2012/11/19/final-days-media-campaign-2012)

Which of the following is accurate regarding the role of the media in elections? Check all that apply.

The media report the news. Campaign events are broadcast over the media. The media host and broadcast debates between candidates. Both candidate- and organization-developed advertisements are broadcast via the media.

Points: 1 / 1

Close Explanation Explanation: The media fulfill different roles with regard to elections in the United States. First, media organizations report the news. It is in this capacity that the media may extend the greatest influence, and therefore, this is the area in which the media receive the greatest charges of bias. The media also broadcast campaign events, host debates, and sell commercial availability for candidate- and organization- developed advertisements. According to the excerpt, during the final week of the 2012 presidential election, Barack Obama

received more positive than negative coverage, as well as more overall coverage, evidenced by a presence in eight out of ten campaign stories during that same crucial week before the

election. Points: 1 / 1

Close Explanation Explanation:

1.   Classic campaign advertising

Campaigns began using television advertisements in the early 1950s as television became more common throughout the country. Different advertisements are designed to garner support for candidates on different dimensions. Some may be intended to simply raise a candidate’s name recognition, reminding people that a candidate is on the ballot. Others may highlight a candidate’s skills, achievements, or policy positions.

Candidates also “go negative,” highlighting damaging positions, actions, or behaviors of their opponent. Many voters may claim to dislike these advertisements; however, some research has shown that negative advertisements can be effective in the long run.

Television advertising for political campaigns also came of age in an era when viewers’ choices were far more limited. With three major networks, candidates could be assured of reaching a large swath of the voting public with their ad buys. As the number of entertainment options has grown, candidates have shifted their emphasis in creating ads, often hoping for ads that will find momentum online through social media sharing and media coverage. Such ads can gain significant attention for a

Close Explanation Explanation:

1.   The advantages of incumbency

Incumbency reelection rates tend to be high. Once elected, incumbent candidates enjoy certain advantages for reelection, including name recognition, free mail or franking privileges, support from colleagues, and party backing. Incumbents also have a public service record on which they can run. Name recognition is derived from the candidates’ own self-promotion by conducting media interviews, public events covered by the media, and the use of franking privileges allowing incumbent elected officials to keep their names and public service records in the public eye.

Political action committees (PACs) are groups formed by business, labor, or interest groups in order to raise and spend money on political campaigns. PACs give far more money to, and spend far more money on behalf of, incumbents seeking reelection compared with challengers. These financial advantages enable incumbents to spend more money on their campaigns and raise their name recognition. In most cases, political party fundraising efforts tend to be more successful when raising money to support incumbents rather than challengers.

All of these factors give incumbents advantages over challengers in elections.

The tables below list the top PAC fund recipients during the House and Senate races of 2018 as of June 21, 2018. Examine the tables and answer the questions that follow.

Note: *Incumbent seeking reelection.

House Candidates PAC Receipts

*Brady, Kevin (R-TX08) $2,355,

*McCarthy, Kevin (R-CA23) $2,333,

*Walden, Greg (R-OR02) $2,191, *Stivers, Steve (R-OH15) $1,883, *Ryan, Paul (R-WI01) $1,871,

*Roskam, Peter (R-IL06) $1,813,

House Candidates PAC Receipts

*   *Hoyer, Steny H. (D-MD05) $1,648,
*   *Paulsen, Erik (R-MN03) $1,590,
*   *Denham, Jeff (R-CA10) $1,578,
*   *Neal, Richard E. (D-MA01) $1,549,
*   *Heller, Dean (R-NV) $3,582, Senate Candidates PAC Receipts
*   *Heitkamp, Heidi (D-ND) $3,370,
*   *Donnelly, Joe (D-IN) $3,274,
*   *Stabenow, Debbie (D-MI) $3,215,
*   *Casey, Bob (D-PA) $3,142,
*   *Tester, Jon (D-MT) $3,053,
*   *Brown, Sherrod (D-OH) $3,013,
*   *Barrasso, John (R-WY) $2,891,

Voters now expect, or anticipate, that candidates will develop a web and social media presence, which has arguably helped mobilize young people and minority voting. These tools have also helped change how campaigns use resources for in-person voter interactions. Candidates must also be aware of—and in some cases, answer for—their social media presence prior to their candidacy..

Read the excerpt, watch the video, and answer the questions that follow.

With “Dashboard,” Obama Campaign Aims to Bridge
-----------------------------------------------

Online and Off
--------------

The Obama campaign today launched its much anticipated Dashboard platform, described by National Field Director Jeremy Bird in a video as “the organizing network of supporters helping to reelect Barack Obama.” Read The Wall Street Journal for a healthy skeptical take. (No, a website does not a president make.) But, with that out of the way, we’re freed up to consider what’s meaningful and potentially powerful about the work they’ve done.

Log into Dashboard, tell it where you live, and it connects you to your “neighborhood team,” the basic building block of the Obama organizing model famously espoused by Harvard’s Marshall Ganz. From there, you get your call tools—empowering you to ring up your neighbors and sing to them the virtues of the Obama health care bill, your event-planning tools, and inspirational content living under the banner of “Get Fired Up.” There’s information on your assigned team leader and other team members. And, importantly, there’s a section labeled simply “Numbers.” For a campaign that eats metrics for breakfast and data for lunch, this is where the action is. It’s a means of tracking all that it is a volunteer does for a campaign, from calls made to voters registered to team meetings attended.

(Source: Nancy Scola, “With Dashboard, Obama Campaign Aims to Bridge Online and Off,” The Atlantic, May 24, 2012, theatlantic/politics/archive/2012/05/with-dashboard-obama- campaign-aims-to-bridge-online-and-off/257606/)

Play

Current Time1:

/

Duration Time1: Loaded: 0% Progress: 0% 1:

Fullscreen 00: Mute Captions Transcript Video supplied by Obama for America

Which of the following show the impact of the use of advanced technology on political campaigns? Check all that apply.

Candidates’ social media presence is rarely a part of their campaign. The use of advanced technology has changed candidate strategies. The changing technologies modern American political campaigns have access to have an impact on both the type of candidate likely to run as well as the type of candidate likely to win campaigns for elective office in the United States. In general, the use of advanced technology makes it harder to vote. Points: 1 / 1

Close Explanation Explanation: The use of advanced technology in modern-day political campaigns has changed candidate strategies and who chooses to run for office. In some cases, this leads to self-financed candidates who can take on the larger costs of campaigns that leverage expensive advertising, for example. In other cases, candidates who may not have access to traditional campaign resources can take advantage of low-cost technologies and small-dollar fundraising strategies. The durability of a candidate’s social media presence can also become an issue in a campaign, as a candidate may have to answer for prior statements or behavior that surface.

What is the main purpose of Dashboard?

The use of Dashboard provides a virtual reality in which a candidate’s avatar interacts with voters in a virtual world, thus reducing the costs of running a national political campaign. Concerned with the growing isolation of the American voter, the Obama reelection campaign created Dashboard as a way to increase the likelihood that candidates will interact with voters in person, face to face. The Obama campaign created Dashboard to connect supporters in an online field office to help register, sway, and turn out voters on Election Day, in order to help President Obama win reelection.

1.   Campaign finance, PACs, and super PACs

Extolling the virtues of freedom of the press as determined by the Citizens United decision, this cartoon shows how anyone may publish campaign materials claiming to represent candidate views on issues. The cartoon defends the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act (BCRA) as a good law that grants greater free speech rights to individuals, political parties, and corporate America.

1.   Analyzing data and drawing conclusions

Political scientists use data in many forms to analyze political and social phenomena and draw conclusions. Researchers may use census data, government statistics, public opinion surveys, historical documents, interviews, and other materials such as news articles to test hypotheses. One of the classic questions in political science is who turns out to vote in elections. The answer to this question varies depending on the type of election, as well as how one measures voter turnout. Presidential election years have different turnout patterns than midterm election years. Some measures use voting age population, or citizens over the age of 18. Others use voting eligible population, which excludes people over the age of 18 but ineligible to vote such as prisoners and felons who have lost the right to vote. Yet others measure voter turnout as a proportion of registered voters.

Political scientists may use tables, charts, graphs and other statistical tools, as well as written analyses, to communicate their findings. Income and education are strongly correlated with various political behaviors. However, interpreting the relationship between income and education depends on what data researchers use. Researchers can use broad-based data covering an entire population, such as a census. Researchers can also choose to investigate certain cases or examples, which may yield more in-depth information, but not necessarily broad conclusions.

One of the classic questions in political science is who turns out to vote in elections. The answer to this question varies depending on the type of election, as well as how one measures voter turnout. Presidential election years have different turnout patterns than midterm election years. Some measures use voting age population, or citizens over the age of 18. Others use voting eligible population, which excludes people over the age of 18 but ineligible to vote such as prisoners and felons who have lost the right to vote. Yet others measure voter turnout as a proportion of registered voters.

Examine the graph and answer the questions that follow.

If a researcher wanted to show the most optimistic view of voter turnout, which measure would the researcher use?

Percentage of Voting Age Population Percentage of Registered Voters Percentage of Voting Eligible Population Points: 1 / 1

Close Explanation Explanation: If a researcher wanted to show an optimistic view of voter turnout during the time period depicted, they would probably describe turnout as a percentage of registered voters. This is consistently the highest level of voter turnout in the data presented.

Which of the following statements is true? Check all that apply.

The percentage of registered voters who turn out to vote has never gone over 80%. Voter turnout is consistently higher in presidential election years than in midterm elections. The lowest level of turnout is percentage of voting age people who voted in midterm elections. Voter turnout as a percentage of eligible voters is consistently lower than as a percentage of voting age population.
