Title: 

URL Source: https://www.fppc.ca.gov/content/dam/fppc/NS-Documents/LegalDiv/Regulations/ProposedRegs/IP%20Meetings/Manual%201%20(IP%20Draft).pdf

Published Time: Wed, 11 Mar 2020 05:48:36 GMT

Markdown Content:
DRAFT Informat Ion for State Cand Idate S,the Ir Controlled 

C omm Ittee S, and PrImar Ily  formed Comm Ittee S for 

State Cand Idate S M anual 1

California Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

1 (866) ASK-FPPC / www.fppc.ca.gov 

Draft September 2015 DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Contents - 1  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Content S

Introduction  Introduction – 1 

Chapter 1  – State Contribution and Expenditure Rules  1 1

A State Candidate Contribution Limits 

B Voluntary Expenditure Ceiling 

C Transfers Between a Candidate’s Controlled Committees 

D Post-Election Fundraising: Net Debts Outstanding 

E Officeholder Committees 

F Other Committees 

Chapter 2  – Getting Started  2 1

A Candidates: No Election Committee 

B Starting a Campaign Committee 

C Form 501 – Candidate Intention Statement 

D Form 410 – Statement of Organization 

E Form 497 – 24-hour Contribution Report 

F A Multipurpose Organization May Qualify as a Committee 

Chapter 3  – Finances/Recordkeeping  3 1

A Committee Treasurer and Principal Officer 

B Candidate/Officeholder Responsibilities 

C Education 

D Audits 

E Campaign Bank Accounts 

F Recordkeeping 

G Mass Mailings, Telephone Calls, and Notices to Contributors of $5,000 or More 

Chapter 4  – Contributions  4 1

A What Is a Contribution? 

B Reporting a Contribution Received 

C Contribution Exceptions 

D Aggregating Contributions 

E Reporting Various Types of Contributions 

F $5,000 Major Donor Notice 

G Valuing Nonmonetary Contributions 

H Common Political Party Expenditures DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Contents - 2  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Content S

Chapter 5  – Contribution Restrictions  5 1

A Restrictions under the Political Reform Act 

B Public Funds and Public Resources 

C Campaign Contributions and Disqualification 

Chapter 6  – Use of Campaign Funds  6 1

A Campaign Expenditures 

B Surplus Funds 

Chapter 7  – Communications  7 1

A Payments for Communications a Candidate’s Campaign Makes 

B Payments for Communications Others Make 

C Issue Ads: E-530 

D Other Communications 

E Non-Contributions 

Chapter 8  – Advertisement Disclaimers  8 1

A Which Communications Require an Ad Disclaimer? 

B How Must the Disclaimer Appear? 

C Advertisement Disclaimers for Communications by Candidate Committees for their 

D Advertisement Disclaimers for Independent Expenditure Ads Made by Committees 

E Mass Mailings – E-Mails and Postal Mailings 

F Telephone Calls 

G Electronic Media Ads 

H Newspaper, Radio and Television Ads 

I Paid Spokespersons for Ballot Measure Ads 

J Form 511 Paid Spokesperson Report 

K Paid Online Communication Disclosure 

L Updating a Disclaimer 

M Penalties 

Chapter 9  – Committee Report – Form 460  9 1

A Form 460 

B How to Complete the Summary Page 

C Schedule A – Monetary Contributions Received 

D Schedule B – Loans Received 

E Schedule C – Nonmonetary Contributions Received 

F Schedule D – Expenditures Supporting/Opposing Other Candidates, Measures and 

Primarily Formed to Support or Oppose a Candidate 

own Election 

Committees DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Contents - 3  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Content S

G Expenditure Rules 

H Schedule E – Payments Made 

I Schedule F – Accrued Expenses (Unpaid Bills) 

J Schedule G – Payments Made by an Agent or Independent Contractor 

K Schedule H – Loans Made to Others 

L Schedule I – Miscellaneous Increases to Cash 

Chapter 10  – Form 460: When to File  10  1

A General Information 

B When to File 

C Electronic Filing – Form 460 

D Multiple Controlled Committees 

E CalPERS/ CalSTRS Elections 

F Recall Elections 

G Judicial Candidates, Officeholders Primarily Formed Committees, Central 

H Other Campaign Forms 

Chapter 11  – After the Election  11  1

A Defeated Candidates 

B Successful Candidates 

C Future Election: Transfers 

D Primarily Formed Committees 

E When to Terminate the Committee 

F Requirements to Terminate a Committee 

G Reopening of Terminated Candidate Controlled Committees 

H Administrative Termination by the FPPC’s Enforcement Division 

Chapter 12  – Reporting Independent Expenditures  12  1

A Primarily Formed Committees to Support or Oppose State Candidates 

B Form 410 – Statement of Organization 

C Form 497 – 24-Hour Contribution Report 

D Form 496 – 24-Hour Independent Expenditure Report 

E Form 462 – Verification of Independent Expenditures 

F Form 460 – Recipient Committee Campaign Report 

G Form T10 – Top Ten Contributor List 

H Candidate Election Committees 

Appendix  – About the Political Reform Act/How to Get Help  Appendix – 1 

Cover image courtesy of 

hikehalfdome.com 

Committee Candidates DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Introduction 1- 1  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Introdu CtIon 

Introdu CtIon 

The purpose of California’s Political Reform Act (Act) is to ensure 

that disclosure of political payments is accurate, timely, and made in 

a transparent manner. Clear and accurate disclosure is essential for 

making voters aware of who is paying for political messages so they 

can evaluate the content and make informed decisions when voting. 

In California, the true source of a contribution must be disclosed. This 

manual sets out the campaign reporting requirements for: 

• Candidates and Controlled Committees for State and Statewide 

offices  (e.g.,  Governor,  Superintendent  of  Public  Instruction, 

Senate and Assembly) 

• Members seeking the elected position to the Board of 

Administration of the Public Employees’ Retirement System 

(CalPERS) or Teachers’ Retirement Board (CalSTRS) 

• Committees primarily formed to support or oppose state 

candidates 

Campaign Forms 

Form  Purpose  Chapter 

501  Voluntary Expenditure Ceiling selection  2

410  Committee ID number  2

497  24-hour reporting of $1,000+ donors and $5,000+ 

donors 

2

470  Candidates Spending less than $2,000  2

E-530  Issue Advocacy Reporting  7

511  Paid Spokesperson Reporting  8

460  Campaign Financial Report  9

462  Independent  Expenditure  Verification  Report  12 

496  Independent Expenditure 24-hour reporting  12 

T10  Independent Expenditure Report of Committees of 

$1,000,000+ 

12 DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Introduction 1- 2  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Local  candidates  and  officeholders,  their  controlled  committees,  and 

committees primarily formed to support or oppose a local candidate(s) 

should refer to FPPC’s Campaign Disclosure Manual 2. 

Since the Political Reform Act was approved by California voters 

in 1974, there have been more than 200 amendments to the Act’s 

campaign disclosure provisions. This manual has been prepared to 

assist committees in complying with the Act’s numerous and often 

detailed rules. The manual is written in a “user friendly” format so that 

committees have a resource guide. Each chapter provides a list of 

statutes and regulations that provide authority for the information in 

that chapter. The statutes and regulations may be accessed on the 

FPPC website. 

In addition, federal and state tax laws and other rules may also apply. 

The Appendix contains telephone numbers and website addresses 

for the Federal Election Commission, the Internal Revenue Service, 

the California Franchise Tax Board, and the Federal Communications 

Commission. 

Controlling Law 

This manual summarizes key campaign disclosure laws and 

regulations and draws from years of FPPC staff advice on complying 

with the Act’s campaign disclosure laws. Each committee’s activity is 

different, however, and may raise issues not discussed in this manual. 

If there are any discrepancies between the manual and the Act or its 

corresponding regulations, the Act and its regulations will control. 

Need Help? 

If you need assistance, the Fair Political Practices Commission 

(FPPC) provides advice by email and through a toll-free telephone 

advice line. The FPPC does not provide third party advice or advice 

on past conduct. The FPPC website ( www.fppc.ca.gov ) contains 

forms, manuals, and a wealth of other helpful information. 

Email Advice  Telephone Advice 

advice@fppc.ca.gov  1-866-ASK FPPC 

(1-866-275-3772) DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 1. 1  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Cha Pter  1State Contr Ibut Ion and 

exPend Iture  rule S

This chapter contains information on contribution and expenditure 

rules  for  candidates  and  officeholders  seeking  a state  elective  office. 

The chapter reviews: 

• Contribution Limits 

• Voluntary Expenditure Ceilings 

• Transfers 

• Post-Election Fundraising 

• Officeholder  Committees 

• Legal Defense Committees 

• Recall Committees 

For information about ballot measure committees controlled by a state 

candidate  or  officeholder,  see  FPPC  Campaign  Disclosure  Manual  3. 

A State Candidate Contribution Limits 

A candidate  seeking  election  to  a state  office  is  subject  to  contribution 

limits from a single source per election. For purposes of contribution 

limits, the primary, general, special, and special runoff elections are 

separate elections. The chart below shows the limits per contributor 

and  type  of  office  sought.  Contribution  limits  may  increase  or 

decrease every two years based on changes in the Consumer Price 

Index. Regulations that set forth the amounts are adopted by the 

Commission. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 1. 2  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Per Election Limits on Contributions to State Candidates 

(For Elections Occurring from January 1, 2015 – December 31, 2016) 

Candidates seeking a state office and committees that make contributions to state candidates are subject to contribution limits from a single source. (Sections 85301 - 85303.) Contributions from affiliated entities are aggregated for purposes of the limits. (Regulation 18215.1.) The chart below shows the current limits per contributor for state offices. The primary, general, special, and special run-off elections are considered separate elections. Contribution limits to candidates apply to each election. Contribution limits to officeholder and other committees apply on a calendar year basis. Contact your city or county about contribution limits for local offices. 

Contribution Limits to State Candidates Per Election Contributions to Other State Committees Per Calendar Year 

Contributor Sources 

Candidate or Officeholder Person (individual, business entity, committee/PAC) Small Contributor Committee (see definition on page 2) Political Party 

Senate and Assembly $4,200 $8,500 No Limit CalPERS/CalSTRS $4,200 $8,500 No Limit Lt. Governor, Secretary of State, Attorney General, Treasurer, Controller, Supt. of Public Instruction, Insurance Commissioner, and Board of Equalization $7,000 $14,100 No Limit Governor $28,200 $28,200 No Limit 

Contributor Sources 

Committee Person (individual, business entity, committee/PAC) 

Committee (Not Political Party) that Contributes to State Candidates (PAC) $7,000 Political Party Account for State Candidates $35,200 Small Contributor Committee $200 Committee Account NOT for State Candidates (Ballot Measure, PAC, Political Party) No Limit* 

Contributions to State Officeholder Committees Per Calendar Year 

Contributor Sources 

Committee Any Source (Person, Small Contributor Committee or Political Party) Aggregate From All Sources 

Senate and Assembly $3,500 $58,500 CalPERS/CalSTRS $3,500 $58,500 Lt. Governor, Secretary of State, Attorney General, Treasurer, Controller, Supt. of Public Instruction, Insurance Commissioner, and Board of Equalization $5,900 $117,100 Governor $23,400 $234,200 *State committees (including political parties and PACs) may receive contributions in excess of the limits identified above as long as the contributions are NOT used for state candidate contributions. (Regulation 18534.) 

www.fppc.ca.gov FPPC Advice: advice@fppc.ca.gov (1.866.275.3772 ) 

FPPC TAD • 007-12-2014 (rev 1) • Page 1 of 2 

Timing 

There are no restrictions on when a candidate may begin to fundraise 

for  a state  office,  and  contributions  for  a general  or  special  general 

election may be raised at the same time or prior to a primary or special 

primary  election  for  the  same  office. 

A candidate who is defeated in the primary or special primary election, 

or who withdraws from the general or special general election, must 

return contributions received for the general or special general election 

to the contributors on a pro rata basis, less the cost of raising and 

administering the funds and general election expenses paid prior to 

the primary election (e.g., media purchases).  However, contributions 

(other than loans) made by a state candidate to his or her own 

campaign may not be returned to the candidate. 

Loans 

Loans  are  contributions  subject  to  limits.  However,  if  a loan  has 

been repaid, the lender, guarantor, endorser, or cosigner may make 

additional contributions to the same committee up to the limit. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 1. 3  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Candidate’s Personal Funds 

Contribution limits do not apply to a candidate’s personal funds 

contributed to his or her own campaign. However, a state candidate 

may not have loans to his or her campaign of more than $100,000 

outstanding at any one time and may not charge interest. The 

$100,000 limit on personal loans applies to loans from the candidate’s 

personal funds as well as loans from a commercial lending institution 

which the candidate lends to his or her campaign. “Campaign” 

includes both the primary and general, or special and special runoff, 

elections. However, a candidate may loan each committee for a 

different  office  or  term  of  office  $100,000. 

Extensions of Credit 

When there is an agreement with the provider of goods or services 

that a state candidate or committee will pay for goods or services 

on credit, the goods or services may become a contribution to the 

candidate  and  be  subject  to  contribution  limits  if  it  remains  unpaid  after 

45 days. Refer to Regulation 18530.7. 

Contributions from a State Lobbyist 

Personal Contributions  A state lobbyist may not contribute to a 

state  officeholder  or  candidate’s  campaign  if  the  lobbyist  is  registered 

to  lobby  the  agency  of  the  elected  officer  or  the  agency  to  which  the 

candidate is seeking election. The lobbyist may not contribute to any 

other committee controlled by that state candidate, including a ballot 

measure committee, a local committee, a legal defense fund, or an 

officeholder  account.  A lobbyist  may,  however,  contribute  to  a state 

candidate’s federal election committee. 

Fundraising Events  A fundraiser held in the home of a state lobbyist 

is considered a contribution; therefore, a lobbyist or a cohabitant of a 

lobbyist is prohibited from holding a fundraiser in his or her home for 

a state  officeholder  or  candidate  seeking  election  to  a governmental 

agency that the lobbyist is registered to lobby. A similar prohibition 

applies  to  lobbying  firms  holding  fundraisers  in  their  offices. 

Ex 1.1  - In July, a State 

Senate candidate had an 

outstanding loan of $50,000 

to his primary election 

campaign committee. The 

candidate may loan no 

more than $50,000 to his 

general election campaign 

committee. The candidate 

may loan $100,000 to his 

campaign committee for a 

future election to statewide 

office. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 1. 4  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

In  addition,  a lobbying  firm  owned  by  a registered  lobbyist  may  not  rent 

its  firm’s  offices  as  a fundraising  venue  to  an  officeholder  or  candidate 

the  firm  is  registered  to  lobby  or  to  one  of  its  clients  to  benefit  an 

officeholder  or  candidate  the  firm  is  registered  to  lobby. 

A lobbying  firm  may,  however,  host  a meeting  that  is  not  a fundraising 

event  in  its  office  for  the  benefit  of  an  officeholder  or  candidate  if  the 

total cost of the meeting is $500 or less, exclusive of the value of the 

office  as  a venue. 

Contributions to Other State Candidate Committees 

State  candidate  election  committees  are  subject  to  contribution  limits 

for contributions to another state candidate’s election committee. The 

limit is the same contribution limit imposed on legislative candidates. 

This contribution limit applies to the aggregate total of contributions 

made from the personal funds or assets of the candidate and 

contributions made by all committees controlled by that candidate. For 

example, in 2016, an Assembly member may not contribute more than 

$4,200 to a State Controller’s election committee even though the limit 

for  the  statewide  office  from  other  contributors  is  higher. 

Contributions Over the Limit 

Committees are not in violation of the contribution limits if an “over the 

limit” contribution is not deposited and is returned to the contributor 

within 14 days of receipt. For nonmonetary contributions, the item 

itself, its monetary value, or the monetary amount which exceeds the 

limit must be returned to the contributor within 14 days of receipt. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 1. 5  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

The voluntary 

expenditure ceiling 

does not apply to a 

candidate for judicial office 

or a candidate for a state 

public employee retirement 

board. 

Quick 

Tip 

B Voluntary Expenditure Ceiling 

State candidates must declare on the Candidate Intention Statement 

(Form 501) whether they accept the voluntary expenditure ceiling 

established for each election. Candidates who accept the ceiling are 

designated in either the state ballot pamphlet (statewide candidates) 

or the voter information portion of the sample ballot (Senate and 

Assembly candidates) and may purchase space to place a 250-word 

statement there. 

The  candidate  must  choose  to  accept  or  reject  the  expenditure  ceilings 

for both the primary and general (or special primary and special 

general)  elections  at  the  time  of  filing  Form  501.  Until  the  deadline 

for  filing  nomination  papers  (Elections  Code  Section  8020),  the 

candidate may amend the Form 501 up to two times to change his or 

her expenditure ceiling declaration, as long as the candidate has not 

exceeded the applicable expenditure ceiling. In addition, a candidate 

who declined the ceiling for the primary (or special) election but did 

not exceed it may amend his or her Form 501 within 14 days after the 

primary (or special) election to accept the ceiling for the general (or 

special runoff) election. 

All  expenditures  for  a state  office  election  must  be  made  by  the 

candidate’s designated campaign committee for that election. 

Campaign  expenditures  for  a particular  state  office  may  not  be  made 

by any other committee controlled by the candidate. 

Voluntary expenditure ceilings may increase or decrease every two 

years based on changes in the Consumer Price Index. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 1. 6  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Voluntary Expenditure Ceilings for Candidates for Elective State 

For Elections Occurring January 1, 2015 - December 31, 2016 

Expenditures that count toward the voluntary expenditure ceiling 

include  only  “campaign  expenditures.”  Generally,  these  expenditures 

(including unpaid bills) must be counted toward the next election that 

follows the date of the expenditure. Expenditures made on the day 

of an election must be counted toward that election. Expenditures 

covered by this rule include the following: 

• Purchase, mailing, or distribution of campaign literature, signs, 

buttons, bumper stickers, and similar items. 

• Telephone banks, including costs of design, operation, 

installation, or rental of telephone lines and equipment; 

toll  charges;  personnel  costs;  rental  of  office  space;  and 

associated consultants’ fees. 

• Professional services, including campaign consultants and 

pollsters,  unless  specific  fees  or  costs  are  allocated  to  a

different election under a contract with the person providing the 

services. 

www.fppc.ca.gov FPPC Advice: advice@fppc.ca.gov (1.866.275.3772 ) 

FPPC TAD • 007-12-2014 (rev 1) • Page 1 of 1 

tention Statement (Form 501) whether they accept the voluntary expenditure ceiling established for each election. Candidates who accept the ceiling are designated in either the state ballot pamphlet (statewide candidates) or the voter information portion of the sample ballot (Senate and Assembly candidates) and may purchase space to place a 250-word statement there. 

Voluntary Expenditure Ceilings for State Candidates 

Office Primary/Special Election General/Special Runoff Election 

Assembly $564,000 $987,000 

Senate $846,000 $1,269,000 Board of Equalization $1,410,000 $2,115,000 Lt. Governor, Attorney General, Insurance Commissioner, Controller, Secretary of State, Supt. of Public Instruction, Treasurer $5,640,000 $8,460,000 Governor $8,460,000 $14,100,000 CalPERS/CalSTRS (Section 85400) N/A N/A 

Offices DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 1. 7  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

• Overhead  expenses,  including  office  space,  utilities,  office 

equipment, furnishings, supplies, internal copying and printing, 

monthly telephone charges, personnel costs, and travel 

expenses. 

Expenditures for radio, television, newspaper, or other media 

advertising  count  toward  the  election  following  the  date  specified  in 

the contract for dissemination of the advertisement. If the ad will be 

published or broadcast on the day of an election, the expenditure 

counts toward that election. 

Expenditures for campaign fundraising are counted toward the 

election for which the funds were raised. If it is not possible to allocate 

fundraising costs using this method, the expenditures are allocated to 

the election following the date they were made. 

Nonmonetary contributions of the goods or services described above 

received (except those received from a political party) must be counted 

if an expenditure for equivalent goods or services would have been 

made by the candidate’s committee. 

Candidates who accept the voluntary expenditure ceiling must 

disclose on the Form 460 (Recipient Committee Campaign Statement) 

Summary Page, Section 22, the total amount of expenditures that are 

attributable to each election. 

Expenditures made by a candidate’s committee that  do  not  count 

toward the voluntary expenditure ceiling include, but are not limited to: 

1.  Contributions to other candidates or committees; 

2.  Costs  associated  with  preparing  and  filing  campaign  disclosure 

reports; 

3.  Candidate  filing  fees; 

4.  Costs of ballot pamphlet or sample ballot statements; 

5.  Officeholder  expenses,  election  night  celebrations,  and  other 

non-campaign expenditures; and 

6.  Post-election expenditures made to raise funds to pay off net 

debts. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 1. 8  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Lifting the Voluntary Expenditure Ceiling 

A candidate contributing personal funds to his or her own campaign 

in excess of the voluntary expenditure ceiling lifts the expenditure 

ceiling  for  all  candidates  seeking  the  same  office  who  have  accepted 

the voluntary expenditure ceiling, whether in the primary (or special) or 

general (or special runoff) election. This is the  only  event that lifts the 

expenditure ceiling. A candidate who accepts the expenditure ceiling 

and makes expenditures in excess of the ceiling has violated the Act. 

A candidate who contributes personal funds in excess of the voluntary 

expenditure ceiling must amend the Form 501 within 24 hours of 

making the contribution and disclose the date on which the personal 

contributions exceeded the expenditure ceiling. Personal funds 

transferred from another committee controlled by the candidate 

must  be  counted  for  this  purpose.  The  Form  501  must  be  filed  with 

the Secretary of State by personal delivery or guaranteed overnight 

delivery. This amendment requirement is not necessary if no 

opponent accepted the voluntary expenditure ceiling. 

C Transfers Between a Candidate’s Controlled Committees 

A state candidate may transfer funds from one of his or her controlled 

election committees to another. Except as discussed below, funds 

transferred from one of a state candidate’s controlled election 

committees  to  another  are  subject  to  contribution  limits.  The 

transferred  funds  must  be  attributed  to  specific  contributors  of  the 

committee making the transfer and count toward the amount those 

contributors may give to the committee receiving the transfer. 

The committee making the transfer must choose between two 

attribution  methods.  The  first  is  “LIFO”  (last  in,  first  out).  This  means 

that the amount to be transferred will be attributed to the most recent 

contributors to the transferring committee. The other method is “FIFO” 

(first  in,  first  out),  which  means  transferred  funds  will  be  attributed  to 

the earliest contributors. Once the transferring committee has chosen 

LIFO or FIFO, it may not change the method of attribution. 

Ex 1.2  - Dianne Sample 

is a candidate for State 

Senate and did not accept 

the voluntary expenditure 

ceiling. As her primary 

election approached, 

Dianne made several 

contributions and on May 

12 her contributions to 

her own campaign totaled 

$1,000,000, more than the 

amount of the ceiling for 

the primary election that 

year. Even though Dianne 

did not originally accept 

the voluntary expenditure 

ceiling, within 24 hours she 

must amend her Form 501 

and file it with the Secretary 

of State by personal delivery 

or by guaranteed overnight 

delivery, indicating May 12 

as the date her personal 

contributions exceeded 

the voluntary expenditure 

ceiling. The ceiling is now 

lifted for all candidates 

running for State Senate 

in her district, including 

candidates of other parties, 

for the remainder of the 

primary election and the 

general election. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 1. 9  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Example: 

A city council member is running for State Senate in 2016. She 

uses the LIFO accounting method to transfer funds from her city 

council committee to her Senate committee as outlined in the table 

below. Because the 2016 contribution limit is $4,200, only $4,200 of 

X Corporation’s original $5,000 contribution may be transferred to the 

Senate committee. Abbe Winkler has already contributed $3,700 to 

the Senate committee, so only $500 of her original $1,000 contribution 

may be transferred from the local committee to the Senate committee. 

Donor  Date of 

Original 

Contribution 

Amount of 

Original 

Contribution 

Funds 

Attributed to 

Contributor 

Ted Smith  10/25/2012  $1,000  $1,000 

X Corp.  11/02/2012  5,000  4,200 

Abbe Winkler  12/5/2012  1,000  500 

The committee making the transfer must report the transfer as an 

expenditure on Schedule E of the Recipient Committee Campaign 

Statement (Form 460). The committee receiving the transfer must 

report the transfer on Schedule A. 

The following are listed on Schedule A: 

• The date of the transfer and the name, address, and 

identification  number  of  the  committee  making  the  transfer; 

• The name, address and, if applicable, the occupation and 

employer  or  committee  identification  number  of  the  contributor 

to whom the transferred funds are being attributed (as disclosed 

on  the  campaign  statement  filed  when  the  contributions  were 

originally received or as contained in the committee’s records at 

the time of the transfer); 

• The original date of the transferred contribution; and 

• The amount of the transferred contribution, including the 

cumulative amount received from the contributor in the calendar 

year and the amount attributed to the contributor per election. 

Some  electronic  filing  formats  may  be  different. 

Answers to common 

questions about 

transfers conclude the 

chapter. 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 1. 10  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

The committee making the transfer must maintain records that identify 

the  specific  contributors  to  whom  any  transferred  contributions  have 

been attributed. If the transferring committee no longer is required 

to maintain detailed records, the receiving committee shall maintain 

either: 

• The full name of the contributor; 

• The date and amount being transferred for each contributor, and 

if the contribution is a loan, the interest rate for the loan; and 

• The cumulative amount of contributions transferred attributed to 

that contributor 

OR 

• Copies  of  the  transferring  committee’s  original  verified  and  filed 

campaign reports that show the original contribution received 

from each contributor to whom a transferred contribution is 

attributed. 

Page of Type or print in ink Amounts may be rounded to whole dollars 

NAME OF FILER 

Schedule A (Continuation Sheet) Monetary Contributions Received 

I.D. NUMBER SCHEDULE A (CONT.) 

Statement covers period from through CALIFORNIA FORM 460 

PER ELECTION TO DATE 

(IF REQUIRED) CUMULATIVE TO DATE 

CALENDAR YEAR (JAN. 1 - DEC. 31) 

AMOUNT 

RECEIVED THIS PERIOD 

IF AN INDIVIDUAL, ENTER OCCUPATION AND EMPLOYER 

(IF SELF-EMPLOYED, ENTER NAME 

OF BUSINESS) 

DATE RECEIVED 

SUBTOTAL $ 

FULL NAME, STREET ADDRESS AND ZIP CODE OF CONTRIBUTOR (IF COMMITTEE, ALSO ENTER I.D. NUMBER) CONTRIBUTOR 

CODE **Contributor Codes IND – Individual COM – Recipient Committee (other than PTY or SCC) OTH – Other (e.g., business entity) PTY – Political Party SCC – Small Contributor Committee IND COM OTH PTY SCC IND COM OTH PTY SCC IND COM OTH PTY SCC IND COM OTH PTY SCC IND COM OTH PTY SCC 

FPPC Form 460 (January/05) FPPC Toll-Free Helpline: 866/ASK-FPPC (866/275-3772) 

X/X/20XX X/X/20XX x xx Committee to Elect Greer for Senate 20XX 1234567 10/XX/20XX Greer for City Council 20XX (Transfer) 10 J Street, Sacramento, CA 95814 (ID 1214287) 10/25/2012 Ted Smith 7239 Hawthorne Blvd. Rancho Palos Verdes, CA 90274 

✔ Dentist, Smith Smiles $1,000 $1,000 20XXP: $1,000 11/2/2012 X Corporation 1500 8th Avenue Los Angeles, CA 90013 ✔ $4,200 $4,200 20XXP: $4,200 12/5/2012 Abbe Winkler 1495 Spruce Street La Habra Heights, CA 90631 

✔ Firefighter/Paramedic, La Habra Heights Fire Department $500 $4,200 20XXP: $4,200 $5,700 

Clear Sch A Con Print Form DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 1. 11  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Exceptions: 

• Surplus Funds:  Campaign committee funds that are “surplus 

funds” may not be transferred to a future election. A defeated 

candidate’s campaign committee funds become surplus 90 

days after the post-election reporting period (either June 30 or 

December  31)  following  the  election.  For  specific  guidance, 

refer to Regulation 18951. 

• Carryover:  A state candidate may carry over campaign funds 

from the primary election to the subsequent general election 

for  the  same  elective  office  without  attribution.  Non-surplus 

campaign funds may also be carried over from one state 

election  to  the  next  election  for  the  same  office  without 

attribution. 

To carry over funds from one state election to the next election for 

the  same  office  (e.g.,  from  a 2014  Assembly  election  to  the  2016 

Assembly election), the funds must be transferred to a new campaign 

bank account and committee established for the next election, and the 

transfer must occur after the date of the election for which the funds 

were raised. 

The transferring committee reports the transfer as an expenditure on 

Schedule E and the committee receiving the funds reports the transfer 

as an increase to cash on Schedule I. 

A candidate  that  formed  a campaign  committee  for  a specific  election 

and  chooses  not  to  seek  the  office  and  is  not  on  the  ballot  may  not 

“carryover” the funds, but may transfer the funds with attribution to 

another future election committee. 

• Transferring Assets:  It is not necessary to value and attribute 

a committee’s usual assets (such as supplies, furnishings, and 

office  equipment)  that  are  being  transferred  from  one  controlled 

committee to another of the candidate’s controlled committees. 

A committee must report the purchase or sale of these assets, 

but need not report the transfer. 

Detailed records must be maintained on transfers. 

State candidates 

may raise funds after 

an election only to pay 

net debts outstanding. 

Campaign funds may not 

be carried over to a future 

election committee if the 

existing committee has net 

debt from the prior election. 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 1. 12  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

D Post-Election Fundraising: Net Debts Outstanding 

State candidate election committees may receive contributions after 

an election only to pay net debts outstanding from the election. The 

primary and general elections are separate elections for purposes of 

calculating net debt. In addition, the contribution limits applicable to 

the election apply to any new contributions received to pay debt. 

To calculate net debts outstanding, the following are added together: 

• An amount necessary to cover the cost of raising funds to pay 

outstanding debts; 

• Costs related to complying with post-election requirements, 

such  as  filing  campaign  statements,  and  other  necessary 

administrative costs associated with winding down the 

campaign,  including  office  space  rental,  staff  salaries,  and  office 

supplies; 

• The total amount of unpaid debts, loans, and accrued 

expenditures incurred with respect to the election; and 

• Legal fees and expenses incurred in connection with monitoring 

a ballot recount or the counting of absentee or provisional 

ballots. 

That amount is reduced by: 

• The total cash on hand available to pay those debts and 

obligations, including: currency; balances on deposit in banks, 

savings and loan institutions, and other depository institutions; 

traveler’s  checks;  certificates  of  deposit;  treasury  bills;  and  any 

other committee investments valued at fair market value; and 

• The total amounts owed to the candidate controlled committee 

in the form of credits, refunds of deposits, returns, or 

receivables, or a commercially reasonable amount based on the 

collectibility of those credits, refunds, returns, or receivables. 

As new funds are received, the amount of the net debts outstanding 

is reduced. The amount of new contributions may not exceed the 

amount of net debts outstanding on the date the contribution is 

Ex 1.3  - Phil ran for State 

Assembly in 2014. After 

the primary election, he 

had $50,000 in cash left and 

owed $95,000 in unpaid 

loans and accrued expenses. 

He may raise $45,000 to pay 

this debt, plus an amount 

needed to cover fundraising 

expenses and other 

administrative costs. All 

contributions received are 

subject to the contribution 

limits that were in effect for 

the 2014 election. 

Ex 1.4  - Larry ran for State 

Senate in 2014. After the 

general election, he had 

$85,000 in cash left and 

owed only $60,000 in 

accrued expenses from the 

primary election and none 

from the general election. 

He may not raise additional 

funds into the 2014 

committee. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 1. 13  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

received. Any contribution that exceeds the amount of net debts 

outstanding  must  be  returned  to  the  contributor  within  14  days.  Under 

limited circumstances, the Executive Director of the Fair Political 

Practices Commission may extend the date of termination or allow a 

terminated committee to reopen. See Regulation 18404.1. 

E. Officeholder Committees 

An  elected  state  officer  may  accept  contributions  after  the  date  of  the 

election for the purpose of paying expenses associated with holding 

the  office  to  which  the  officer  was  elected.  A separate  bank  account 

and  committee  must  be  established  for  this  purpose.  Officeholder 

contributions  are  subject  to  calendar  year  limits  on  both  the  amount 

per contributor and the aggregate total that may be raised. In 

addition,  officeholder  contributions  must  be  cumulated  (in  full)  with  any 

other contributions from the same contributor(s) for any other future 

elective  state  office  for  which  the  officeholder  maintains  a controlled 

committee  during  the  term  of  office  in  which  the  contribution  is 

received.  Officeholder  contributions  may  not  be  used  for  contributions 

or transfers to any state or local committee or for any “election-related” 

activities. 

Candidates seeking a state office and committees that make contributions to state candidates are subject to contribution limits from a single source. (Sections 85301 - 85303.) Contributions from affiliated entities are aggregated for purposes of the limits. (Regulation 18215.1.) The chart below shows the current limits per contributor for state offices. The primary, general, special, and special run-off elections are considered separate elections. Contribution limits to candidates apply to each election. Contribution limits to officeholder and other committees apply on a calendar year basis. Contact your city or county about contribution limits for local offices. 

Contribution Limits to State Candidates Per Election Contributions to Other State Committees Per Calendar Year 

Contributor Sources 

Candidate or Officeholder Person (individual, business entity, committee/PAC) Small Contributor Committee (see definition on page 2) Political Party 

Senate and Assembly $4,200 $8,500 No Limit CalPERS/CalSTRS $4,200 $8,500 No Limit Lt. Governor, Secretary of State, Attorney General, Treasurer, Controller, Supt. of Public Instruction, Insurance Commissioner, and Board of Equalization $7,000 $14,100 No Limit Governor $28,200 $28,200 No Limit 

Contributor Sources 

Committee Person (individual, business entity, committee/PAC) 

Committee (Not Political Party) that Contributes to State Candidates (PAC) $7,000 Political Party Account for State Candidates $35,200 Small Contributor Committee $200 Committee Account NOT for State Candidates (Ballot Measure, PAC, Political Party) No Limit* 

Contributions to State Officeholder Committees Per Calendar Year 

Contributor Sources 

Committee Any Source (Person, Small Contributor Committee or Political Party) Aggregate From All Sources 

Senate and Assembly $3,500 $58,500 CalPERS/CalSTRS $3,500 $58,500 Lt. Governor, Secretary of State, Attorney General, Treasurer, Controller, Supt. of Public Instruction, Insurance Commissioner, and Board of Equalization $5,900 $117,100 Governor $23,400 $234,200 *State committees (including political parties and PACs) may receive contributions in excess of the limits identified above as long as the contributions are NOT used for state candidate contributions. (Regulation 18534.) 

www.fppc.ca.gov FPPC Advice: advice@fppc.ca.gov (1.866.275.3772 ) 

FPPC TAD • 007-12-2014 (rev 1) • Page 1 of 2 DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 1. 14  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Ex 1.5  - A Senator won 

election in 2014. In January 

2015, the senator opened 

an officeholder committee 

and a committee to run 

for Lieutenant Governor 

in 2016. Contributions to 

the Senate officeholder 

committee count 

towards the contributor’s 

contribution limit for the 

Lieutenant Governor office. 

Thus, a donor’s single 

contribution of $3,500 to 

the officeholder committee 

is also counted toward 

the contribution limit for 

the Lieutenant Governor’s 

election committee. 

To determine the applicable contribution limit to an elected state 

officer’s  officeholder  account,  use  the  lower  of  the  following: 

1.  The calendar year contribution limits applicable to the 

officeholder  committee  in  the  table  above  (aggregate  and 

individual), or 

2.  The lowest per election contribution limit (the aggregate of the 

primary and general election limits) applicable to any future 

state  office  for  which  the  officeholder  maintains  a controlled 

committee  at  any  time  during  his  or  her  term  of  office. 

Officeholder  funds  must  be  held  in  a single  bank  account  at  a financial 

institution located in the State of California and must be separate 

from  any  campaign  bank  account  established  for  election  to  office. 

A Statement  of  Organization  (Form  410)  must  be  filed  when  $2,000 

or  more  is  received.  The  committee  is  subject  to  the  same  reporting 

deadlines as an election committee. 

If  an  officeholder  committee  receives  a monetary  contribution(s) 

exceeding the allowable contribution limit, the portion of the 

contribution that exceeds the limit must be returned to the contributor 

within 14 days of receipt. 

A contribution must also be returned within 14 days when a 

contribution exceeds the allowable contribution limit applicable to a 

future  state  office.  The  portion  of  the  contribution  that  exceeds  the 

limit must be returned within 14 days of receipt or within 14 days of the 

date  the  officeholder  files  a Statement  of  Organization  (Form  410)  for 

the future election, whichever is earlier. This situation may apply when 

a statewide  elected  officer  seeks  a legislative  office. 

Unlike  controlled  committees  set  up  for  election  purposes,  an 

officeholder  account  may  be  redesignated  as  an  officeholder  account 

for  a future  term  of  the  same  office  by  amending  the  officeholder 

committee’s Statement of Organization (Form 410). DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 1. 15  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Contributions  may  not  be  received  after  the  officeholder’s  term  of 

office  ends  or  the  date  he  or  she  leaves  office,  whichever  is  earlier. 

The  officeholder  must  terminate  the  committee  within  90  days  of  the 

earlier date. During the 90-day period, funds may only be used for: 

• Paying  outstanding  officeholder  expenses; 

• Repaying  contributions  to  contributors  to  the  officeholder 

account; 

• Making  a donation  to  a bona  fide  charitable,  educational,  civic, 

religious,  or  similar  tax-exempt,  nonprofit  organization,  if  no 

substantial  part  of  the  proceeds  will  have  a material  financial 

effect  on  the  officeholder,  a member  of  his  or  her  immediate 

family, or the committee treasurer; 

• Paying for reasonable professional and administrative services. 

F Other Committees 

Legal Defense Committees 

State  candidates  and  officeholders  may  establish  a legal  defense 

fund to defray attorney’s fees and other related legal costs incurred 

for  the  candidate  or  officeholder’s  legal  defense  if  the  candidate 

or  officeholder  is  subject  to  a civil  or  criminal  proceeding,  or  an 

administrative proceeding arising directly out of the conduct of an 

election campaign, the electoral process, or the performance of the 

officeholder’s  governmental  activities  and  duties. 

A separate bank account and committee must be established. The 

legal  defense  committee  will  file  campaign  statements  at  the  same 

times and in the same places as the candidate’s election committee. 

Contributions  raised  for  a legal  defense  fund  are  not  subject  to 

contribution limits or the voluntary expenditure ceiling. 

The Form 410 must 

specify the legal 

dispute or disputes for which 

the legal defense fund was 

established. 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 1. 16  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Legal defense funds may only be raised in an amount reasonably 

calculated to pay attorney’s fees and other legal costs related to the 

defense  of  the  candidate  or  officeholder,  as  well  as  administrative 

costs directly related to compliance with recordkeeping and reporting 

requirements. They may not be used for fundraising, media or political 

consulting  fees,  mass  mailings  or  other  advertising,  or  for  paying  fines, 

penalties,  judgments  or  settlements,  or  to  return  contributions. 

Refer to Regulation 18530.4. 

Recall Election Committees 

All committees that raise and spend funds in connection with a recall 

election have full reporting and disclosure obligations. 

Target Officeholder.  A state  officeholder  who  is  the  target  of  a recall 

may  form  a separate  committee  to  oppose  the  qualification  of  the 

recall  measure  and,  if  the  recall  petition  qualifies,  the  recall  election. 

The  officeholder  may  instead  use  his  or  her  existing  committee  or  a

committee formed for a future election. 

If a separate committee is formed, the following rules apply: 

• The  committee  may  be  established  only  after  the  officeholder 

receives a notice of intent to recall under Elections Code 

Section 11021. 

• A Statement  of  Organization  (Form  410)  must  be  filed  and  a

separate bank account must be established. 

• The committee name must include the word “recall” and the 

target  officer’s  name. 

• Contributions  to  the  committee  are  not  subject  to  limits  and  the 

voluntary expenditure ceiling does not apply. 

• After the recall election, or if the recall petition fails, funds left 

over become restricted “surplus funds” and must be spent within 

30 days. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 1. 17  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Replacement Candidate  A candidate running to replace an 

officeholder  who  is  the  target  of  a recall  is  subject  to  the  contribution 

limits and the voluntary expenditure ceiling provisions. A replacement 

candidate  must  file  campaign  forms  (e.g.,  Form  501,  Form  410,  Form 

497, Form 460) in the same manner as a candidate seeking a regular 

election. 

Committee Primarily Formed to Support or Oppose a Recall  A

committee formed to support or oppose a recall is considered to be 

a ballot measure committee. Refer to FPPC Campaign Disclosure 

Manual 3 for guidance. 

Answering Your Questions 

A A state candidate’s controlled ballot measure committee 

has a debt of $25,000  May the state candidate’s election 

committee loan $25,000 to the ballot measure committee? 

Yes. The candidate’s election committee may loan or 

contribute to the state candidate’s ballot measure committee, 

but not the other way around. Funds raised under limits 

(election committees) may be used for political, legislative or 

governmental purposes, such as a contribution or loan to the 

ballot measure committee. But, ballot measure committee funds 

are not raised under limits so they may not be contributed or 

loaned to a state candidate’s election committee or used for that 

candidate’s election. See Regulation 18521.5. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 1. 18  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

B A legislator opened a committee for statewide office. 

During the campaign, the legislator transferred funds, 

using attribution, into the statewide committee  The 

attribution method used resulted in some contributor’s 

funds being allocated to both the primary and the general 

statewide election committee  If the legislator is defeated 

in the primary election, what are the rules on returning 

the contributions in the statewide committee that were 

allocated to the general election? 

The funds in the statewide election committee must be returned 

to the contributors on a pro rata basis less any expenses 

associated with the raising and administration of the general 

election. 

C A statewide election committee plans to transfer, with 

attribution, funds to a future Senate election committee 

May the committee allocate contributor’s funds to only the 

primary election? 

Yes. As long as the attribution method is consistent, a 

committee may allocate its funds to only the primary election. 

D My campaign committee for the Assembly has no debt and 

a small amount of cash  May I continue to raise funds into 

that committee after the election? 

No. You may not raise funds after an election for purposes 

other than paying net debt. 

E Must I open an officeholder account to raise funds to pay 

officeholder expenses after the election? 

Officeholder  expenses  may  be  paid  from  an  officeholder 

committee  or  any  election  committee  established  for  the  office 

held, including a future reelection committee. All contributions 

raised  into  the  future  election  committee  are  subject  to  the 

contribution limits for that election. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 1. 19  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

F I am a member of the Assembly and plan to run for State 

Senate. May I pay officeholder expenses for my Assembly 

seat from the campaign bank account set up for my Senate 

election? 

No.  Officeholder  expenses  may  be  paid  only  from  an  account 

established  for  the  office  you  hold. 

G I opened an officeholder committee following my election 

and I also control a ballot measure committee  May other 

state candidates contribute campaign funds from their 

election committee to my committees? 

Yes.  Both  committees  are  subject  to  the  contribution  limits  for 

contributions received from another state candidate. Refer to 

Regulation 18535. 

H Following my election to the Assembly, my committee 

had $25,000 in cash on hand and $75,000 in outstanding 

loans and accrued expenses  May I keep the $25,000 for 

officeholder expenses, or carry over the funds to a new 

committee for my reelection campaign, and raise new 

funds to pay the debt? 

No. You may only raise new funds after the election to pay net 

debts outstanding. Your committee’s net debt outstanding is 

$50,000 ($75,000 in outstanding loans and accrued expenses, 

less the $25,000 in cash on hand). Therefore, only $50,000 

may be raised, plus amounts needed to raise the funds. 

I Are contributions received to pay debt from a prior 

Assembly election subject to contribution limits? 

Yes.  They  are  subject  to  the  contribution  limits  established  for 

that election. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 1. 20  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

J I am a candidate for the Legislature  If I receive a 

contribution on the day after the election that was mailed 

prior to the election, may I keep the contribution if my 

committee has no debt? 

No. A contribution is “received” on the date the candidate or 

committee obtains possession or control of it. And, since there 

is no net debt, the contribution may not be deposited and must 

be returned within 14 days of receipt. 

K I was a candidate for federal office. How much may I 

transfer from my federal campaign committee to my 

committee for State Senate? 

Your federal committee may transfer funds to the State Senate 

committee  subject  to  the  attribution  requirements  described  in 

this chapter. The funds must be attributed to individual donors 

to your federal committee and may not cause a donor to exceed 

the applicable contribution limit to the Senate committee. 

L I am a State Senator and will be seeking local office. 

If I transfer funds from my Senate committee to the 

local election committee, may I receive replacement 

contributions from contributors to the Senate committee? 

No. The contributions may not be replaced because, under the 

Act, contributions that are transferred to a local committee are 

not  required  to  be  attributed  to  specific  contributors. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 1. 21  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

M A Senator opened a committee to run for statewide 

office. The statewide election committee received new 

contributions and funds were transferred from the Senate 

election committee using the LIFO attribution method  If 

a decision is made to close the statewide committee, may 

the funds be transferred back to the Senate committee? 

Yes. The funds may be transferred, and must be attributed 

to  specific  contributors  from  the  statewide  committee  using 

the LIFO or FIFO accounting method. The committee must 

ensure that no contributor, at any time, exceeded the applicable 

contribution limits. 

N I lost the primary election for State Assembly and my 

expenditures came very close to the voluntary expenditure 

ceiling (“VEC”) which I accepted  May the remaining funds 

be used for a party for campaign volunteers and for a 

mailer refuting some lies told about me by my opponent? 

Will either of these expenditures count toward the VEC? 

These expenditures do not count against the VEC and are 

permissible only before the funds become “surplus funds.” See 

Chapter 6 for additional information. 

O An Assembly member opened a 2018 Senate election 

committee  Contributions from the Assembly committee 

were transferred, subject to attribution, to the 2018 Senate 

Committee. In 2015, the Senate office became vacant and 

a special election was held for the office. The 2018 Senate 

election committee transferred contributions, subject to 

attribution, to the 2015 special election committee  May a 

contributor whose contribution was transferred to the 2015 

committee make new contributions to the 2018 committee? 

Yes, so long as the contributor’s new contribution does not 

exceed the applicable contribution limit for the 2018 election. 

(FPPC Advice letter: 06-172) DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 1. 22  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

P May a Senate candidate, who was successful in the primary 

election, use contributions that were designated for the 

general election to pay primary election debt? 

The Senate committee may not use contributions that were 

designated for the general election to pay primary election debt, 

unless the aggregate of any contributions attributed to a single 

contributor, when combined with all the contributions made 

by that contributor to the primary election, do not exceed the 

applicable primary election contribution limit. 

(FPPC Advice Letter: 04-088) DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 1. 23  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Authority 

The  following  Government  Code  sections  and  Title  2 regulations 

provide authority for the information in this chapter: 

Government Code Sections 

82015  Contribution. 

82047  Person. 

82024  Elective  State  Office. 

82053  Statewide  Elective  Office. 

85203  Small Contributor Committee. 

85204.5  Special Election Cycle and Special Runoff Election Cycle. 

85205  Political Party Committee. 

85301  Limits on Contributions from Persons. 

85302  Limits on Contributions from Small Contributor 

Committees. 

85303  Limits on Contributions to Committees and Political 

Parties. 

85304  Legal Defense Fund. 

85305  Restrictions on Contributions by Candidates. 

85306  Transfers  Between  a Candidate’s  Own  Committees;  Use 

of Funds Raised Prior to Effective Date. 

85307  Loans. 

85314  Special Elections and Special Runoff Elections as 

Separate Elections. 

85315  Elected  State  Officer  Recall  Committees. 

85316  Post-Election Fundraising. 

85317  Carry Over of Contributions. 

85318  Contributions  Received  for  Primary  and  General 

Elections. 

85319  Returning Contributions. 

85321  Post-Election Fundraising; Elections Held Prior to 

January 1, 2001. 

85400  Voluntary Expenditure Ceilings. 

85401  Candidate  Acceptance  or  Rejection  of  Expenditure 

Ceilings. 

85402  Lifting  Expenditure  Limits;  Opponent’s  Use  of  Personal 

Funds. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 1. 24  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

85403  Violations of Voluntary Expenditure Limits. 

85600  Ballot Pamphlet Designation. 

85601  Candidate Access to Ballot Pamphlet. 

85702  Contributions from Lobbyists. 

89519  Use  of  Surplus  Campaign  Funds. 

Title 2 Regulations 

18215  Contribution. 

18215.1  Contributions; When Aggregated. 

18421.1  Disclosure of the Making and Receipt of Contributions. 

18421.4  Reporting Cumulative Amounts for State Elections and 

State Recipient Committees. 

18503  Small Contributor Committees. 

18530.4  Legal Defense Funds. 

18530.7  Extensions of Credit. 

18530.8  Personal Loans. 

18531  Return of Excessive Contributions. 

18531.2  Refunding  General  Election  Contributions. 

18531.5  Recall Elections. 

18531.61  Treatment of Debts Outstanding After an Election— 

Contributions Accepted on or After January 24, 2004. 

18531.62  Elected  State  Officeholder  Bank  Accounts. 

18534  Required Committee Bank Accounts. 

18535  Restrictions on Contributions Between State Candidates. 

18536  Transfer and Attribution of Contributions. 

18537  Contribution Limits and Application to Repaid Loans. 

18537.1  Carry Over of Contributions. 

18540  Voluntary Expenditure Ceilings. 

18541  Voluntary  Expenditure  Limits—Notification  and 

Designation Requirements. 

18542  Notification  of  Personal  Contributions  in  Excess  of  the 

Voluntary Expenditure Limits. 

18543  Lifting of Voluntary Expenditure Limits. 

18544  Campaign Contribution and Voluntary Expenditure COLA 

Formula. 

18545  Contribution Limit and Voluntary Expenditure Ceiling 

Amounts. 

18572  Lobbyist  Contributions—Making  a Contribution  Defined. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 2. 1  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Cha Pter  2Gett InG Started 

This chapter outlines the initial forms required to open a campaign 

committee  when  an  individual  is  seeking  a state  office.  The  term 

“candidate”  includes  non-incumbent  candidates,  officeholders, 

officeholders  running  for  reelection,  and  officeholders  running  for 

election  to  another  office. 

This chapter also includes the initial forms required of a committee 

primarily formed to support or oppose a single state candidate or a 

group of state candidates all being voted on in the same election, but 

which is not controlled by the candidate(s) who is being supported. 

These committees often make independent expenditures to either 

support or oppose the state candidate. The forms required when 

independent expenditures are made are reviewed in Chapter 13. 

The  initial  forms  may  be  filed  several  years  before  the  candidate’s 

election. 

A Candidates: No Election Committee 

A state candidate listed on the ballot who does not plan to raise or 

spend $2,000 or more in a calendar year (including the candidate’s 

personal  funds)  must  file  the  Form  470  (Officeholder  and  Candidate 

Campaign Statement  — Short Form) and possibly the Form 501 

(Candidate Intention Statement) with the Secretary of State. 

• Form 470 (Officeholder and Candidate Campaign 

Statement — Short Form)  The Form 470 is used by 

candidates who do not anticipate raising or spending $2,000 

or  more  in  a calendar  year.  Generally,  the  Form  470  is  due 

no  later  than  the  deadline  for  the  first  preelection  statement. 

However,  depending  upon  the  specific  facts,  it  may  be  required 

earlier  if  financial  activity  occurs  prior  to  the  opening  of  the 

election nomination period. Candidates should contact the 

FPPC for guidance. A Form 470 Supplement is required if the 

$2,000 threshold is met or exceeded in the calendar year. See 

instructions on the one-page form. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 2. 2  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

• Form 501 (Candidate Intention Statement)  The Form 501 

must  be  filed  when  a candidate  raises  or  spends  any  money, 

including the candidate’s personal funds. For example, if the 

candidate will receive $500 from another source, the Form 501 

must  be  filed  and  a campaign  bank  account  established.  When 

a candidate’s  only  expenditure  is  the  payment  for  filing  and 

ballot statement fees, the Form 501 is not required. 

B Starting a Campaign Committee 

Candidate  Committees  file: 

Form 501 – Candidate Intention Statement 

Form 410 – Statement of Organization 

Form 497 – 24-hour Contribution Report 

Primarily  Formed  Committees  file: 

Form 410 – Statement of Organization 

Form 497 – 24-hour Contribution Report 

See Chapter 12 for Independent Expenditure Forms 

During  the  election  period,  candidates  must  also  file  a Statement 

of  Economic  Interests  (Form  700)  by  the  filing  deadline  for  election 

candidacy  papers.  The  Form  700  discloses  personal  financial 

interests such as stocks, real property and private business income as 

well as gifts and travel payments. 

Bank Account 

A state candidate must establish a separate bank account and 

committee for each election. The same bank account and committee 

may be used for both the primary and general elections (or for special 

and special runoff elections). The bank account must be established 

at  a financial  institution  in  California. 

Campaign contributions may not be commingled with any individual’s 

personal funds. All contributions must be deposited in, and 

expenditures must be made from, the campaign bank account. Except 

as  noted  below,  candidates  must  first  deposit  personal  funds  to  be 

used for the campaign in the campaign bank account before making 

campaign expenditures, even if the candidate does not expect to be 

reimbursed. 

The Political Reform 

Act does not require a 

federal tax ID number. But, 

most banks will require one 

in order to open a campaign 

bank account. A tax ID 

number may be obtained on 

the IRS website, 

www.irs.gov. 

Quick 

Tip 

Elected officials 

are included as 

“candidates” under the Act 

until they have left elective 

office and terminate all 

committees. 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 2. 3  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Exceptions: 

• Candidates  may  use  their  personal  funds  to  pay  a filing  fee  or 

a ballot  statement  fee  without  first  depositing  the  funds  into  the 

campaign account. 

• An  officeholder  may  use  personal  funds  to  pay  officeholder 

expenses. (See Chapter 3.) 

• A candidate may contract with a vendor or collecting agent to 

collect contributions prior to promptly transferring the funds 

to the candidate’s campaign bank account without violating 

the requirement that the candidate have no more than one 

bank account. Fees deducted by the vendor are considered 

expenditures from the campaign bank account at the time they 

are deducted. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 2. 4  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

C Form 501  – Candidate Intention Statement 

Candidates  establishing  an  election  committee  must  file  Form  501  with 

the Secretary of State before soliciting or receiving any contributions 

or making campaign expenditures from personal funds. File a Form 

501 for each election, including reelection committees. 

Completing the Form 501 

Type of Statement 

Mark  the  initial  box  for  the  first  form  filed.  Future  changes  must  be 

identified  in  the  amendment  section. 

Candidate and Office Information 

Enter the candidate’s full name, street address (a business address 

may be used), and a daytime telephone number. A fax number and 

CANDIDATE INTENTION STATEMENT 

501 CALIFORNIA FORM 

For Of ficial Use Only 

Date Stamp 

1 Candidate Information: 

NAME OF CANDIDATE (Last, First, Middle Initial) STREET ADDRESS CITY 

OFFICE SOUGHT (POSITION TITLE) 

2 State Candidate Expenditure Limit Statement: 

(Check one box) 

I accept the voluntary expenditure ceiling for the election stated above. I do not accept the voluntary expenditure ceiling for the election stated above. Amendment: I did not exceed the expenditure ceiling in the primary or special election held on: / / and I accept the voluntary expenditure ceiling for the general or special run-off election. 

3 Veri fi  cation: 

I certify under penalty of perjury under the laws of the State of California that the foregoing is true and correct. 

Executed on , Signature 

(month, day, year) (Candidate) 

OFFICE JURISDICTION DAYTIME TELEPHONE NUMBER 

( )

DISTRICT NUMBER, if applicable. 

FAX NUMBER (optional) ( )E-MAIL (optional) 

AGENCY NAME ZIP CODE 

Candidate Intention Statement Type or Print in Ink 

Initial Check One: Amendment (Explain) 

FPPC Form 501 (April/2011) FPPC Toll-Free Helpline: 866/ASK-FPPC (866/275-3772) 

Primary/general election 

(Year of Election) Special/runoff election 

(Year of Election) (CalPERS and CalSTRS candidates, judges, judicial candidates, and candidates for local of fi ces do not complete Part 2.) 

STATE NON-PARTISAN PARTY: 

(Mark if applicable) 

On / / , I contributed personal funds in excess of the expenditure ceiling for the election stated above. State (Complete Part 2.) City County Multi-County: (Year of Election) (Name of Multi-County Jurisdiction) 

Greer, Kim C. 916 111-2222 916 111-2221 Greer@gmail.com 

10 J Street Sacramento CA 95814` Senator State Senate 2 Republican 20XX 2016 2016 

Clear Form Print Form DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 2. 5  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

e-mail  address  may  also  be  provided.  Enter  the  title  of  the  office 

sought (e.g., State Assembly Member), the agency name (e.g., State 

Assembly), and the district number, if applicable. Enter the political 

party  affiliation  if  seeking  a partisan  office,  or  check  the  “Non-Partisan” 

box. Check the “State” box and enter the year of the election for the 

office  being  sought.  The  month  and  day  are  not  required. 

State Candidate Expenditure Ceiling Statement 

A state  candidate  must  indicate  whether  he  or  she  accepts  or  rejects 

the voluntary expenditure ceiling. A candidate who accepts the ceiling 

is designated in either the state ballot pamphlet (statewide candidates) 

or the voter information portion of the sample ballot (Senate and 

Assembly candidates) and may purchase space to place a 250-word 

statement in the pamphlet. The candidate’s choice includes both the 

primary and general (or special primary and special general) elections 

at  the  time  of  filing  Form  501. 

Exception:  The voluntary expenditure ceiling does not apply 

to  judicial  candidates,  or  candidates  for  the  Board  of  the  Public 

Employees’ Retirement System (CalPERS) or the Teachers’ 

Retirement Board (CalSTRS). 

Amending Expenditure Ceiling Declaration 

• Until  the  deadline  for  filing  nomination  papers  (Elections  Code 

Section 8020), a candidate may amend the Form 501 up to two 

times to change his or her expenditure ceiling declaration, as 

long as the candidate has not exceeded the expenditure ceiling. 

• A candidate who declined the ceiling for the primary (or special) 

election, but did not exceed the ceiling, may amend the Form 

501 within 14 days after the primary (or special) election to 

accept the ceiling for the general (or special runoff) election. 

Personal Funds Notification 

When a state candidate contributes personal funds to his/her own 

campaign that exceed the applicable expenditure ceiling, this date 

must  be  identified  on  an  amended  Form  501  within  24  hours  by 

guaranteed overnight delivery, personal delivery or electronically. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 2. 6  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Verification 

A candidate  must  sign  the  Form  501  under  penalty  of  perjury. 

D Form 410 – Statement of Organization 

All  committees  must  file  the  Form  410,  which  identifies  the  committee’s 

purpose  and  officers. 

Committees must pay an annual $50 fee to the Secretary of State. 

Proceeds from the fee are dedicated for the Secretary of State’s new 

computer system. 

New committees:  The $50 fee is due no later than 15 days after 

filing  an  initial  Form  410. 

Annual Fee:  January 15 until the committee terminates. This 

fee is wavied when a new committee paid the 

fee in the last three months of a calendar year. 

Failure to pay the fee results in a $150 penalty, for a total assessment 

of  $200.  Failure  to  pay  this  fine  will  result  in  a referral  to  the  FPPC’s 

Enforcement Division and likely more penalites. The FPPC has 

established  a specific  violation  program  for  committees  that  fail  to  pay 

the fee. 

There is no provision for extension of the deadline and fee payment. 

A committee that ceases activity by December 31 of the current year 

must  file  its  terminating  Form  410  with  the  Secretary  of  State  on  or 

before January 31 of the next year, otherwise the annual fee will be 

assessed. 

When and Where to File the Form 410 

10-Day Deadline:  File the original and one copy of the Form 410 with 

the Secretary of State within 10 days of raising or spending $2,000 

or  more.  The  Form  410  may  be  filed  earlier  (before  fundraising)  and 

a committee  will  file  an  amendment  when  the  committee’s  $2,000 

threshold is met. File by mail or personal delivery. 

Ex 2.1  - On February 15, a 

state candidate opened a 

campaign bank account with 

a personal loan of $2,500. 

The Form 410 is due by 

February 25. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 2. 7  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

24-Hour Deadline:  A new committee formed during the last 16 days 

before  the  election  must  file  the  Form  410  within  24  hours  by  fax, 

guaranteed overnight delivery, personal delivery, or online. 

File  the  Form  410  with  the  office  of: 

Secretary of State 

Political Reform Division 

1500 11th Street, Suite 495 

Sacramento, CA 95814 

Committee ID Number 

The  Secretary  of  State’s  office  assigns  the  committee  an  identification 

number which are available on the Cal-Access section of the 

Secretary  of  State’s  website.  Contact  the  Secretary  of  State’s  office  at 

(916) 653-6224 with any other questions about obtaining a committee 

identification  number. 

Amending the Form 410 

10-Day Deadline:  Generally,  when  any  information  on  the  Form  410 

changes,  an  amendment  must  be  filed  within  10  days  of  the  change. 

This is especially important if the committee has a new treasurer or 

principal  officer(s)  since  the  individuals  listed  on  the  most  recently  filed 

Form 410 are liable for the committee’s activity. 

24-Hour Deadline: If any of the following changes occur in the last 16 

days before the election, an amendment must be filed within 24 hours: 

• The name of the committee; 

• The  treasurer  or  other  principal  officers; 

• Any candidate who controls the committee; or 

• Any  committee  with  which  the  committee  acts  jointly. 

The Form 410 amendment must be sent by fax, guaranteed overnight 

delivery, personal delivery, or online. 

Detailed instructions accompany the form. 

Ex 2.2  - A group collecting 

contributions to oppose a 

candidate running for State 

Treasurer received 10 checks 

of $500 each on March 1. 

Because they qualified as a 

committee on that date, the 

Form 410 is due on or before 

March 11. 

If a person or 

group qualifies as a 

committee within 90 days 

before the election, a Form 

497 (24-hour Contribution 

Report) must be filed 

within 24 hours of receiving 

contributions totaling in the 

aggregate $1,000 or more. A 

Form 497 may be required 

before the committee ID 

number is assigned. 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 2. 8  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Completing the Form 410 

1 Statement Type 

Initial:  New  committees  indicate  the  date  of  qualification  or 

mark  the  “Not  Yet  Qualified”  box. 

Amendment:  Amending  information  on  a previously  filed  Form  410. 

Termination:  Closing a committee. See Chapter 11 for the 

requirements. 

2 Committee Information 

Candidate Controlled Committees  A candidate controlled 

committee must include in its name the last name of the candidate, 

the  office  sought,  and  the  year  of  the  election  (e.g.,  Greer  for  Senate 

20XX). 

Primarily Formed Committees  A committee primarily formed to 

support or oppose a candidate(s) must include the last name of each 

candidate,  the  office  sought,  the  year  of  the  election,  and  must  state 

whether the committee supports or opposes the candidate(s) (e.g., 

Committee  Opposing  Griffin  for  Governor  20XX). 

Complete all required 

fields on the Form 410. 

An ID number may not be 

assigned if required fields 

are not completed. 

Quick 

Tip 

Statement of Organization Recipient Committee CALIFORNIA FORM 410 

SIGNATURE OF CONTROLLING OFFICEHOLDER, CANDIDATE, OR STATE MEASURE PROPONENT SIGNATURE OF CONTROLLING OFFICEHOLDER, CANDIDATE, OR STATE MEASURE PROPONENT DATE 

For Official Use Only 

1. Committee Information 3. Verification 

DATE 

DATE DATE I have used all reasonable diligence in preparing this statement and to the best of my knowledge the information contained herein is true and complete. I certify under penalty of perjury under the laws of the State of California that the foregoing is true and correct. 

Executed on Executed on Executed on Executed on 

Date Stamp SIGNATURE OF TREASURER OR ASSISTANT TREASURER SIGNATURE OF CONTROLLING OFFICEHOLDER, CANDIDATE, OR STATE MEASURE PROPONENT 

By By By By 

Statement Type Initial 

Not yet qualified or 

/ /

Date qualified as committee 

Termination – See Part 5 

List I.D. number: 

#

/ /

Date of Termination 

Amendment 

List I.D. number: 

#

/ /

Date qualified as committee (If applicable) 

2. Treasurer and Other Principal Officers 

NAME OF COMMITTEE STREET ADDRESS (NO P.O. BOX) CITY STATE ZIP CODE AREA CODE/PHONE COUNTY OF DOMICILE JURISDICTION WHERE COMMITTEE IS ACTIVE MAILING ADDRESS (IF DIFFERENT) NAME OF TREASURER NAME OF ASSISTANT TREASURER, IF ANY 

Attach additional information on appropriately labeled continuation sheets. 

FAX / E-MAIL ADDRESS CITY STATE ZIP CODE AREA CODE/PHONE CITY STATE ZIP CODE AREA CODE/PHONE NAME OF PRINCIPAL OFFICER(S) CITY STATE ZIP CODE AREA CODE/PHONE STREET ADDRESS (NO P.O. BOX) STREET ADDRESS (NO P.O. BOX) STREET ADDRESS (NO P.O. BOX) 

FPPC Form 410 (Dec/2012) FPPC Advice: advice@fppc.ca.gov (866/275-3772) www.fppc.ca.gov 

✔

✔

Committee to Elect Greer Senate 20XX 

10 J Street 

Sacramento CA 95814 (916)111-2222 

Greer@gmail.com 

Sacramento Senate District 2 Susan Hon 10 J Street Sacramento CA 95814 (916)111-2222 Manuel Ramirez 10 J Street Sacramento CA 95814 (916)111-2222 DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 2. 9  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Sponsored Committees  If a primarily formed committee is 

sponsored by a business entity, organization, or association, the name 

of the sponsor must also be included in the name of the committee. 

See  Government  Code  Sections  82048.7  and  84106,  and  Regulation 

18419 for information about sponsored committees. 

Provide the committee’s street address (a business address may 

be  used)  and  mailing  address.  A post  office  box  may  be  used  as  a

mailing address. The committee may have more than one mailing 

address. List the committee’s fax number and e-mail address. 

County of Domicile and Jurisdiction Where Committee is Active 

Indicate the county in which the committee is located and the county in 

which the committee is active. These may be different. 

Treasurer, Assistant Treasurer, and Other Principal Officers 

All committees must have a treasurer and may have an assistant 

treasurer. There are no restrictions on who may be a treasurer or 

assistant treasurer, but no individual should assume the position of 

treasurer  or  assistant  treasurer  as  a mere  figurehead.  The  committee 

may not accept contributions or make expenditures before a treasurer 

is appointed or while the treasurer’s post is vacant, even if there is an 

assistant treasurer. 

If the committee treasurer is unavailable to carry out his or her duties 

for an extended time, a new treasurer should be designated and the 

committee’s Statement of Organization (Form 410) must be amended. 

A committee primarily formed to support or oppose a candidate(s) 

must  also  identify  the  committee’s  principal  officer(s).  If  the  committee 

treasurer  is  the  only  principal  officer  of  the  committee,  the  treasurer 

must  be  identified  as  both  the  treasurer  and  the  principal  officer.  A

principal  officer  is  an  individual  that  is  responsible  for  approving  the 

committee’s political activity, such as: 

• Authorizing the content of the committee’s communications. 

• Authorizing expenditures, including contributions. 

• Determining the committee’s campaign strategy. 

The Secretary of 

State’s office may 

reject the filing of a Form 

410 if the committee’s e-mail 

address is not included. 

Quick 

Tip 

Ex 2.3  - Briana Bentley 

is running for Assembly 

in a district located in 

San Francisco, but the 

committee’s address is in 

Marin County where the 

treasurer has her office. The 

Form 410 should indicate 

that the county of domicile 

is Marin County and the 

jurisdiction where the 

committee is active as San 

Francisco County. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 2. 10  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

3. Verification 

The  treasurer  or  assistant  treasurer  must  complete  the  verification. 

A candidate must sign committee forms for candidate controlled 

committees. If a candidate serves as his or her own treasurer, the 

candidate must sign on both lines. 

When two or three candidates control a committee, each candidate 

must  sign  the  verification.  Only  one  candidate’s  signature  is  required  if 

more than three candidates control the committee. 

The principal officer(s) 

is not required to sign 

the Form 410 verification. 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 2. 11  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

4 Type of Committee 

Controlled Committee 

Provide  the  name  of  the  candidate,  office  sought  (include  district 

number,  if  applicable),  year  of  election,  and,  if  the  office  sought  is 

partisan, indicate the political party to which the candidate belongs. 

Check  the  “Non-Partisan”  box  for  a nonpartisan  office  (e.g.,  CalSTRS 

or  CalPERS  office). 

Primarily Formed Committee 

Provide  the  name  of  the  candidate,  the  office  sought  (include  district 

number, if applicable), and indicate whether the committee supports or 

opposes the candidate. A sponsored committee must also complete 

the applicable section. 

Statement of Organization Recipient Committee CALIFORNIA FORM 410 

NAME OF CANDIDATE/OFFICEHOLDER/STATE MEASURE PROPONENT PARTY • List the name of each controlling officeholder, candidate, or state measure proponent. If candidate or officeholder controlled, also list the elective office sought or held, and district number, if any, and the year of the election. • List the political party with which each officeholder or candidate is affiliated or check “nonpartisan.” • If this committee acts jointly with another controlled committee, list the name and identification number of the other controlled committee. 

4. Type of Committee Complete the applicable sections. COMMITTEE NAME I.D. NUMBER 

Page 2 

INSTRUCTIONS ON REVERSE 

Controlled Committee 

CANDIDATE(S) NAME OR MEASURE(S) FULL TITLE (INCLUDE BALLOT NO. OR LETTER) CANDIDATE(S) OFFICE SOUGHT OR HELD OR MEASURE(S) JURISDICTION (INCLUDE DISTRICT NO., CITY OR COUNTY, AS APPLICABLE) 

Primarily Formed Committee Primarily formed to support or oppose specific candidates or measures in a single election. List below: 

ELECTIVE OFFICE SOUGHT OR HELD (INCLUDE DISTRICT NUMBER IF APPLICABLE) SUPPORT SUPPORT OPPOSE OPPOSE CHECK ONE YEAR OF ELECTION NAME OF FINANCIAL INSTITUTION ADDRESS STATE ZIP CODE CITY • All committees must list the financial institution where the campaign bank account is located. 

AREA CODE/PHONE BANK ACCOUNT NUMBER 

Nonpartisan 

Nonpartisan 

FPPC Form 410 (Dec/2012) FPPC Advice: advice@fppc.ca.gov (866/275-3772) www.fppc.ca.gov 

Committee to Elect Greer Senate 20XX Bank of Sacramento (650)333-4444 123456789 22 L Street Sacramento CA 95814 Kim Greer Senate District 2 2016 Republican DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 2. 12  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

E Form 497 – 24-hour Contribution Report 

A state candidate controlled committee, including those formed for a 

CalPERS or CalSTRS election, and a primarily formed committee for 

state  candidates  must  file  Form  497  when: 

◦ 24 Hours: Contributions that total in the aggregate $1,000 

or more are received from a single source during the 90-day 

election cycle. 

◦ 24 Hours: Contributions that total in the aggregate $1,000 

or more are made to another candidate, ballot measure 

committee or political party during the 90-day election cycle. 

◦ 10 Days: A candidate controlled committee receives a 

single contribution of $5,000 or more at any time other than 

during a 90-day election cycle. This report does not apply to 

Committees Primary Formed to Support or Oppose a State 

Candidate. 

◦ 10 Days: A single contribution of $5,000 or more is made to 

support or oppose a single state ballot measure. 

The  Form  497  is  filed  electronically  with  the  Secretary  of  State.  No 

paper copies of this report are required, and no copies are required to 

be  filed  with  other  filing  officers. 

Reports due on a weekend or state holiday, other than the 

weekend before an election, are extended to the next business day. 

Committees  receiving  a late  non-monetary  contribution  must  file  form 

497 within 48 hours of the date the contribution was received. 

A committee that receives a contribution of $5,000 or more from a 

non-recipient committee (e.g., individual or business entity) must 

provide the donor with a notice. See Chapter 4. 

Form 497 is not required when a transfer of funds is made from one 

candidate election committee to another committee controlled by 

the same candidate (e.g., a contribution from the candidate’s current 

election committee to the candidate’s re-election committee). 

All controlled 

committees of a 

candidate must file the 

24-hour and 10 day 

contribution reports. 

The 90-day election 

cycle includes the 90 

days before an election and 

the date of the election. 

Quick 

Tip 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 2. 13  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

A single  Form  497  may  be  filed  showing  the  value  of  multiple 

nonmonetary contributions. If the actual value is not known at the 

time  of  filing,  a good  faith  estimate  of  the  value  may  be  provided.  If 

the value reported differs by 20 percent or more, amend the Form 497 

within 24 hours from the time the committee knows that the estimated 

value is incorrect. For example, the value of phone banking services 

over a period of 10 days may be reported on a single Form 497. The 

form must be amended if the reported value changes by 20 percent or 

more. 

Notes: 

During  the  90-day  election  cycle,  the  Form  497  is  required  in  the  first 

two examples and is not required in the second two examples. 

• A contribution of $1,000 or more is received by another 

committee controlled by the candidate (i.e., legal defense, ballot 

measure, prior election). 

• A donor made two contributions, on different dates both in 

the 90-day period, for the candidate’s primary election; one 

contribution was for $750 and the second contribution was for 

$500.  A Form  497  must  be  filed  upon  receipt  of  the  second 

contribution. 

• A donor made two contributions; a $500 contribution to the 

candidate’s past election committee and a contribution of $500 

to the current election committee. A Form 497 is not required as 

a $1,000 or more was not received for a single election. 

• A donor made two contributions; one was earmarked for the 

primary election for $750 and a second contribution of $500 was 

earmarked for the general election. A Form 497 is not required 

as $1,000 or more was not received in connection with one 

election even if the contributions were deposited in the same 

bank account. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 2. 14  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

497 Contribution Report Type or print in ink Amounts may be rounded to whole dollars 

AMOUNT 

RECEIVED 

IF AN INDIVIDUAL, ENTER OCCUPATION AND EMPLOYER (IF SELF-EMPLOYED, ENTER NAME OF BUSINESS) 

DATE RECEIVED 

497 CONTRIBUTION REPORT 

CALIFORNIA FORM 

Date Stamp 

FULL NAME, STREET ADDRESS AND ZIP CODE OF CONTRIBUTOR (IF COMMITTEE, ALSO ENTER I.D. NUMBER) CONTRIBUTOR 

CODE *For Of ficial Use Only 

497 NAME OF FILER 

AREA CODE/PHONE NUMBER 

STREET ADDRESS 

CITY STATE ZIP CODE I.D. NUMBER (if applicable) 

1 Contribution(s) Received 

IND COM OTH PTY SCC 

Date of This Filing Report No Amendment to Report No No of Pages FPPC Form 497 (March/2011) FPPC Toll-Free Helpline: 866/ASK-FPPC (866/275-3772) 

IND COM OTH PTY SCC IND COM OTH PTY SCC (explain below) Reason for Amendment: Check if Loan %Provide interest rate Check if Loan %Provide interest rate Check if Loan %Provide interest rate **Contributor Codes IND – Individual COM – Recipient Committee (other than PTY or SCC) OTH – Other (e.g., business entity) PTY – Political Party SCC – Small Contributor Committee 

Clear Page Print Form 

Committee to Elect Greer Senate 20XX 916-111-2222 1234567 10 J Street Sacramento CA 95814 11/3/20XX 111 11/2/20/XX John Swig 10 Golden Gate Drive San Francisco, CA 94118 Retired $4,000 11/2/20XX SolarTown 3 Chip Street Austin, TX 78701 $2,000 11/2/20XX CA Energy Association Small Contributor Committee 2 L Street Sacramento, CA 95814 (ID 1239782) $5,000 

CANDIDATE AND OFFICE OR 

MEASURE AND JURISDICTION FULL NAME, STREET ADDRESS AND ZIP CODE OF RECIPIENT (IF COMMITTEE, ALSO ENTER I.D. NUMBER) 

DATE MADE DATE OF ELECTION (IF APPLICABLE) 

AMOUNT OF CONTRIBUTION 

2 Contribution(s) Made 497 Contribution Report Type or print in ink Amounts may be rounded to whole dollars 

497 CONTRIBUTION REPORT 

CALIFORNIA FORM 

Date Stamp For Of ficial Use Only 

497 NAME OF FILER 

AREA CODE/PHONE NUMBER 

STREET ADDRESS 

CITY STATE ZIP CODE I.D. NUMBER (if applicable) 

Date of This Filing Report No Amendment to Report No No of Pages 

(explain below) 

Clear Page Print Form 

Committee to Elect Greer Senate 20XX 916-111-2222 1234567 10 J Street Sacramento CA 95814 11/3/20XX 111 11/2/20XX Yes on Props 10 and 12 A Coalition Supporting Green Energy, Sponsored by Solar Companies (ID 1246666) Props 10 and 12 - State $10,000 20XX DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 2. 15  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

F A Multipurpose Organization May Qualify as a Committee 

A multipurpose organization that makes contributions or independent 

expenditures may qualify as a recipient committee and be required 

to register and disclose donors whose funds were used for political 

purposes. If the organization’s only contributions or independent 

expenditures are made to support or oppose a candidate, the 

organization may qualify as a committee primarily formed to support 

or oppose that candidate. For purposes of the Act, multipurpose 

organizations include: 

• Nonprofit  organizations  with  tax  exempt  status  under  501(c)(3) 

to 501(c)(10) of the Internal Revenue Code 

• Federal and out-of-state political action committees (PACs) 

• Trade and professional associations 

• Civic and religious organizations 

• Fraternal societies 

• Educational institutions 

Such  organizations  should  review  Government  Code  Section  84222 

and Regulation 18422 for more information. An organization may also 

seek  advice  from  the  FPPC  if  specific  facts  are  provided. 

Ex 2.4  - A trade association 

raises money from member 

donors for charitable and 

civic events in the state. 

One year, the association, 

from its general fund of 

membership dues, makes 

$60,000 in independent 

expenditures to support a 

candidate for Governor. The 

association had not raised 

the money for political 

purposes and did not reach 

an agreement with its 

donors that their payments 

may be used for political 

purposes. Under Section 

84222, the association 

qualifies as a recipient 

committee primarily formed 

to support the Governor. 

Ex 2.5  - A federal political action committee (“PAC”) files disclosure reports 

with the FEC and made a single contribution in the amount of $10,000 to a 

committee primarily formed to oppose a candidate for State Superintendent. 

Under Section 84222, the federal PAC also qualifies as a California recipient 

committee. If this is the federal PAC’s only contribution, it must register as a 

committee primarily formed to oppose the candidate for State Superintendent. 

In  addition  to  filing  the  Form  410,  the  Form  460,  and  the  Form  497,  a

committee primarily formed to support or oppose a candidate(s) that 

makes  independent  expenditures  must  file  the  reports  reviewed  in 

Chapter 12. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 2. 16  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Authority 

The  following  Government  Code  sections  and  Title  2 regulations 

provide authority for the information in this chapter: 

Government Code Sections 

81004  Reports  and  Statements;  Perjury;  Verification. 

81004.5  Reports and Statements; Amendments. 

81007  Mailing of Report or Statement. 

82007  Candidate. 

82013  Committee. 

82016  Controlled Committee. 

82025  Expenditure. 

82036  Late Contribution. 

82044  Payment. 

82047.5  Primarily Formed Committee. 

82048.7  Sponsored Committee. 

84101  Statement of Organization; Filing. 

84102  Statements of Organization; Contents. 

84103  Statement of Organization; Amendments. 

84106  Sponsored  Committee;  Identification. 

84206  Candidates Who Receive or Spend Less than $2,000. 

84203  Late Contribution: Reports. 

84203.3  Late In-Kind Contributions. 

84222  Multi-purpose Organizations. 

85200  Statement of Intention to be a Candidate. 

85201  Campaign Bank Account. 

85203  Small Contributor Committee. 

85204  Election Cycle for 24-Hour Reports. 

85400  Voluntary Expenditure Ceilings. 

85401  Candidate  Acceptance  or  Rejection  of  Expenditure 

Ceilings. 

87201  Candidates (Statement of Economic Interests). DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 2. 17  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Title 2 Regulations 

18402  Committee Name. 

18406  Short  Form  for  Candidates  or  Officeholders  Who 

Receive and Spend Less than $2,000 in a Calendar 

Year. 

18419  Sponsored Committees. 

18422  Mulitpurpose Organization Political Activity Transparency. 

18426.1  Assistant Treasurer. 

18430  Committee Controlled by More Than One Candidate. 

18520  Statement of Intention to Be a Candidate. 

18521  Establishment of Separate Controlled Committee for 

Each Campaign Account. 

18531.5  Recall Elections. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 3. 1  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Cha Pter  3fInan CeS/reCordkee PI nG

One of the fundamental purposes of the Political Reform Act 

(Act), an initiative passed by the voters, is to ensure that receipts 

and expenditures in election campaigns are truthfully and fully 

disclosed. In order to do so, an individual that chooses to act as a 

committee  treasurer,  assistant  treasurer,  or  principal  officer  must 

know  and  practice  the  finance  and  recordkeeping  requirements  and 

responsibilities discussed in this chapter. 

A. Committee Treasurer and Principal Officer 

Every committee must have a treasurer before the committee may 

accept contributions or make expenditures. Although there are no 

restrictions on who may be a treasurer, in order to adequately perform 

the  duties,  the  treasurer  must  understand  the  campaign  finance  laws 

and his or her responsibilities under the Act. The candidate controlling 

the committee may be the treasurer or assistant treasurer for his or 

her own committee.  No individual should accept the position of a 

committee treasurer as a mere figurehead. 

Contributions may not be accepted and expenditures may not 

be made if the treasurer’s post is vacant at any time, even if the 

committee has an assistant treasurer. If the treasurer is unavailable 

to carry out his or her duties, a new treasurer must be designated 

and the committee’s Statement of Organization (Form 410) must be 

amended.  The  individual  listed  on  the  most  recent  Form  410  filed  with 

the Secretary of State continues to be liable until an amendment is 

filed  to  designate  a new  treasurer. 

The committee treasurer or assistant treasurer must sign and verify all 

reports  and  statements  filed.  The  verification  is  signed  under  penalty 

of  perjury  and  indicates  that: 

• the signer has used all reasonable diligence in preparing the 

statement; and 

• to the best of his or her knowledge, the statement is both true 

and complete. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 3. 2  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

The signer is legally responsible for the accuracy and completeness 

of the document, even if it is prepared by a third party, including a 

professional accountant. An unsigned statement is considered “not 

filed”  and  is  subject  to  late  fines. 

Exception: 

If a candidate’s committee makes independent expenditures in 

connection with a ballot measure, FPPC Form 462 must be signed by 

the candidate. The treasurer is not a signatory. 

Treasurer Responsibilities 

A committee treasurer is required to: 

• Establish  a system  of  recordkeeping  sufficient  to  ensure 

that contributions and expenditures are recorded promptly 

and accurately in compliance with the Act’s recordkeeping 

and disclosure requirements. (Following the recordkeeping 

guidelines in this manual ordinarily constitutes compliance with 

this requirement.) 

• Maintain campaign records personally or monitor records kept 

by others. 

• Take steps to ensure all of the Act’s requirements are met 

regarding receipt, expenditure, and reporting of campaign funds. 

• Prepare campaign statements personally or carefully review the 

statements and underlying records prepared by others. 

• Correct any inaccuracies or omissions, and inquire about any 

information that would cause a person of reasonable prudence 

to question the accuracy of the campaign statements. Among 

the circumstances that might give rise to an inquiry regarding 

a contribution are: the size of the contribution; the reported 

source; the likelihood of that source making a contribution of 

that size; the manner in which the contribution is recorded in 

the campaign records; and all other circumstances surrounding 

receipt of the contribution. 

Reconciling the 

committee’s bank 

statement with the 

committee’s records 

regularly will ensure 

accuracy and make 

completing the campaign 

forms easier. 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 3. 3  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Assistant Treasurer Responsibilities 

An assistant treasurer may be designated on the Statement 

of Organization (Form 410). In the event that the treasurer is 

unavailable, the assistant treasurer is required, like the treasurer, to 

use reasonable diligence in preparing and reviewing any campaign 

statements that he or she signs, and must certify to that effect under 

penalty  of  perjury.  For  statements  signed  by  the  assistant  treasurer, 

both the treasurer and the assistant treasurer are liable for any 

violations pertaining to that report. 

There are no restrictions on who may be an assistant treasurer, 

although he or she should know the reporting obligations, restrictions, 

and prohibitions provided under the law. For a controlled committee, 

the candidate may be designated as the assistant treasurer. 

Principal Officer(s) Responsibilities 

A primarily  formed  committee  must  designate  a principal  officer(s) 

on  the  Statement  of  Organization  (Form  410).  The  principal  officer  is 

also responsible for maintaining detailed accounts, records, bills and 

receipts necessary to prepare campaign statements. If no individual 

other than the treasurer has the primary responsibility for approving 

the political activity of the committee as described in this manual, the 

treasurer  must  be  identified  as  both  the  treasurer  and  the  principal 

officer. 

B. Candidate/Officeholder Responsibilities 

A candidate  or  officeholder  is  required  to: 

• Carefully  review  the  campaign  statements  prepared  for  filing  by 

the  committee  and  ensure  that  the  statements  are  properly  filed. 

• Correct any inaccuracies and omissions in campaign 

statements of which the candidate is aware, and check and 

correct any information on campaign statements which a person 

of reasonable prudence would question based on all of the 

surrounding circumstances. 

Campaign committees 

should adopt 

internal controls and best 

practices to protect the 

committee’s funds against 

fraudulent activities and the 

misappropriation of funds. 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 3. 4  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

• Make sure that the treasurer is exercising all reasonable 

diligence in the performance of his or her duties. 

• Take whatever steps are necessary to replace the treasurer or 

raise the treasurer’s performance to required standards if the 

candidate  or  officeholder  knows,  or  has  reason  to  know,  that 

the treasurer is not exercising all reasonable diligence in the 

performance of his or her duties. 

• Perform with due care any other tasks assumed in connection 

with the raising, spending, or recording of campaign funds 

insofar as such tasks relate to the accuracy of information 

entered on campaign statements. 

C Education 

The FPPC provides educational workshops for candidates and 

treasurers. In addition, there are numerous instructional materials 

available on the website. Candidates and treasurers may also seek 

advice from FPPC staff by calling the toll-free advice line 

(866-275-3772) or emailing questions to advice@fppc.ca.gov. 

D Audits 

The Act authorizes audits. Most of the mandatory audits of 

candidates, their controlled committees, and primarily formed 

committees that support or oppose candidates are conducted by 

the  Franchise  Tax  Board.  Committees  established  for  officeholder 

expenses  and  legal  defense  are  also  subject  to  mandatory  audits 

under  the  Act  if  the  controlling  candidate  or  officeholder’s  election 

committee is selected for audit. 

Mandatory  audits  for  the  office  of  State  Controller  and  members  of 

the Board of Equalization are conducted by the Fair Political Practices 

Commission. Discretionary audits of any candidate and committee 

may be conducted by the Franchise Tax Board or the Fair Political 

Practices Commission. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 3. 5  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Statewide Candidates 

All  candidates  for  statewide  office  who  raise  or  spend  $25,000  or  more 

in  a primary  or  general  election  are  subject  to  audit.  In  addition,  ten 

percent of such candidates who raise and spend less than $25,000 

are selected for audit on a random basis. 

Supreme Court, Court of Appeal, Member of the Board of 

Equalization 

Candidates for Supreme Court, Court of Appeal, or Board of 

Equalization who raise or spend $25,000 or more in a primary or 

general  election  are  subject  to  audit. 

State Legislature 

Twenty-five  percent  of  the  Senate  districts,  twenty-five  percent  of  the 

Assembly  districts  and  twenty-five  percent  of  contested  Superior  Court 

offices  are  randomly  selected.  Only  candidates  who  raised  or  spent 

$15,000  or  more  in  the  selected  races  are  subject  to  audit. 

Primarily Formed Committees for State Candidates 

Primarily  formed  committees  are  subject  to  audit  if  the  committee  has 

expended more than $10,000. Certain committees, found to be in 

substantial  compliance,  may  be  subject  to  random  based  audits. 

Pre-Election Audits 

The FPPC and FTB at the direction of the FPPC may audit any record 

required to be maintained under the Act to ensure compliance even if 

the  record  is  related  to  a report  that  has  not  yet  been  filed. 

Compel Disclosure 

The  FPPC  may  seek  injunctive  relief  in  superior  court  to  compel 

disclosure. 

The candidate and the 

treasurer may be fined 

by the FPPC if reporting and 

recordkeeping requirements 

are not met. Violations of 

the Act are punishable by 

fines of up to $5,000 per 

violation. 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 3. 6  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

E Campaign Bank Accounts 

Primarily Formed Committees 

A non-candidate controlled “primarily formed committee” is not 

required to maintain a separate bank account; however, it is 

recommended that they do so. Committees may not commingle 

campaign contributions with any individual’s personal funds. 

Candidate Controlled Committees 

Candidates who anticipate soliciting or receiving contributions from 

others, or who anticipate spending $2,000 or more of their personal 

funds in connection with their election, must open a campaign bank 

account.  A candidate’s  personal  funds  used  to  pay  the  filing  fee  or  the 

ballot statement fee do not count toward the $2,000 threshold. 

Establishing the Account 

The  account  may  be  established  at  any  financial  institution  (i.e., 

bank,  credit  union)  located  in  California.  Under  the  Act’s  one  bank 

account  rule,  a candidate  or  officeholder  may  only  have  one  controlled 

committee with one bank account per election. Candidates running for 

one  office  while  holding  another  must  establish  a separate  campaign 

bank  account  for  each  office,  but  may  not  have  more  than  one  bank 

account  per  office  per  election. 

State candidates may establish a separate bank account and 

committee for the primary and general elections, but are not required 

to do so. However, a separate bank account and committee are 

required each time a candidate runs for reelection or for a different 

elective  state  office.  State  candidates  may  not  redesignate  a campaign 

bank  account  for  a different  election,  even  if  it  is  for  the  same  office. 

All campaign contributions must be deposited into the campaign 

bank account and all campaign expenditures must be made from the 

campaign bank account. Candidates must deposit  personal funds 

to be used for the campaign in the campaign bank account  before 

making campaign expenditures. 

Campaign 

contributions may not 

be commingled with any 

individual’s personal funds. 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 3. 7  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Exceptions: 

• Candidates  may  use  their  personal  funds  to  pay  a filing  fee  or 

a ballot  statement  fee  without  first  depositing  the  funds  into  the 

campaign account. 

• An  officeholder  may  use  personal  funds  to  pay  officeholder 

expenses. 

• A candidate may contract with a vendor or collecting agent to 

receive contributions. Funds must be promptly transferred to 

the candidate’s campaign bank account. Fees deducted by 

the vendor are reportable expenditures on the date they are 

deducted. 

Expenditures from Multiple Accounts 

A candidate who has more than one campaign committee must make 

all expenditures in connection with an election from the campaign 

bank account established for that election, including: 

• Campaign strategic planning and fundraising expenses; 

• Services and actual expenses of outside political consultants, 

the campaign treasurer, other staff, pollsters, and other persons 

who provide services directly in connection with the election; 

• Voter registration and get-out-the-vote drives; and 

• Payments for mailings, political advertising, yard signs, opinion 

polls or surveys, and other communications if the payments are 

either: 

1.  For a communication that makes reference to the candidate’s 

future election or status as a candidate; or 

2.  Made three months prior to an election for which the candidate 

has  filed  a Candidate  Intention  Statement  (Form  501),  a

declaration of candidacy, or nomination papers with an elections 

official,  or  any  other  documents  necessary  to  be  listed  on  the 

ballot  for  an  elective  office. 

The Political Reform 

Act does not require 

a federal tax ID number. 

However, most banks will 

require one in order to open 

a campaign bank account. 

A tax ID number may be 

obtained on the IRS website, 

www.irs.gov. 

Quick 

Tip 

Ex 3.1  - Marshall Wu, a State 

Assemblymember, still has 

an open committee from the 

Assembly election. Marshall 

is running for State Senate 

in the next election and 

has opened another bank 

account and committee for 

that race. He must use the 

campaign bank account for 

the Senate campaign to pay 

for mailers and all other 

expenses related to the 

upcoming Senate election. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 3. 8  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Investments 

Campaign funds may be transferred from a campaign bank account 

to  certificates  of  deposit,  interest-bearing  savings  accounts,  money 

market funds, or similar accounts. The funds must come from a 

campaign  bank  account  designated  for  a specific  office  and  be 

deposited  in  investment  accounts  established  only  for  that  office.  The 

funds must be redeposited into the same campaign bank account 

before being used for campaign expenses. 

Credit Accounts 

One or more credit accounts may be established for each campaign 

bank account. A single credit card, however, may not be designated 

for more than one campaign bank account. In addition, payment of 

charges on a credit account must be made only from the appropriate 

campaign bank account. 

In lieu of establishing a new credit account, a candidate may designate 

an existing personal credit card with a zero balance as the campaign 

credit card (list the card number and date of designation in the 

campaign records). The candidate must ensure that no personal 

expenses are charged to this account until after the election and after 

all campaign charges have been paid with funds from the campaign 

bank account. Once all campaign expenses charged to the account 

have been paid, the candidate may resume using the card for personal 

purposes. 

Petty Cash 

Candidates may use campaign funds to establish a petty cash fund at 

each  campaign  office  so  long  as  the  following  conditions  are  met: 

• A petty cash fund may not hold more than $100 at any time. 

• No expenditure of $100 or more may be made from the fund. 

• The fund may be used only for expenses associated with the 

election  to  the  specific  office  or  for  the  expenses  of  holding  the 

office  for  which  the  petty  cash  fund  was  established. 

• Once the funds are spent, payments made from petty cash must 

be reported as expenditures. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 3. 9  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Officeholder Committees, Legal Defense Committees, and Recall 

Elections 

State  candidates  and  officeholders  may  establish  separate  accounts 

and committees to raise  funds  for  officeholder  expenses,  legal 

defense,  and  opposition  to  the  officeholder’s  recall.  (See  Chapter  1.) 

All  of  these  committees  are  subject  to  the  recordkeeping  requirements 

discussed in this chapter.  In addition, legal defense committees must 

keep separate detailed accounts, records, bills, and receipts for each 

legal dispute. 

A treasurer for a candidate controlled ballot measure committee 

should refer to FPPC Campaign Manual 3 for guidance. 

F Recordkeeping 

An accurate and organized record must be kept of all campaign 

contributions received and expenditures made. All individuals who 

handle contributions and make expenditures must be aware of and 

practice the recordkeeping procedures required by the Political Reform 

Act and FPPC regulations outlined in this manual. While others may 

be involved, the candidate and treasurer remain legally responsible 

for the controlled committee’s records. Moreover, the treasurer and 

each  principal  officer,  as listed on the committee’s Statement of 

Organization (Form 410), remain legally responsible for the records of 

a committee primarily formed for a state candidate. 

Record Retention 

Candidates and committees must keep all records, including original 

source documentation, for a period of four years from the date the 

campaign  statement  relating  to  the  records  was  filed. 

Exceptions: 

• Elected  state  officers  serving  a four-year  term  must  keep  for  five 

years records associated with the campaign statements they 

filed  during  the  first  year  following  their  election. 

• The  electronic  filing  declaration  required  to  be  filed  with  Form 

E-530  must  be  kept  for  five  years  following  the  date  the  report  is 

filed. 

Ex 3.2  - Sharon Goldstein, a 

State Assemblymember, filed 

her first campaign statement 

on January 31, 2015. The 

records associated with 

completing that statement, 

such as receipts and 

information on contributors, 

must be retained until 

January 31, 2019. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 3. 10  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Records of Contributions Received and Other Receipts 

Two types of records are required for receipts: a  daily record ,

showing how much money was received on any given day; and a 

contributor record , with detailed information on each contributor of 

$25 or more. The daily record requirement may be met simply with 

bank statements, copies of checks received, or other documentation 

that provides the required information listed below. 

Date Received 

A monetary contribution is received on the date that the candidate 

or committee, or an agent of the candidate or committee, obtains 

possession or control of the cash, check, or other form of contribution, 

not the date it is deposited in the bank account. Contributions 

received by electronic methods such as wire transfer, credit card, or 

debit account transactions are also received on the date the candidate 

or committee obtains possession or control of the funds. The following 

list provides examples: 

• A contributor makes a contribution over the telephone. The 

contribution is “received” by the committee on the date the 

contributor gives his or her debit/credit account information to 

the committee. 

• A contributor makes a contribution via the Internet and the 

committee reviews the online transaction before the contribution 

is processed. The contribution is “received” by the committee 

on the date the committee receives the payment information. 

• A contributor makes a contribution via the Internet and the 

contribution is made by direct deposit without review and before 

transaction reports are produced. The contribution is “received” 

by the committee when the committee has possession of the 

funds. 

• A contributor makes a contribution by text message. The 

contribution is “received” by the committee on the date that the 

mobile fundraising vendor, acting as agent of the committee, 

obtains possession or control of the contribution. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 3. 11  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

• A contributor agrees to make contributions via installment 

payments by authorizing the committee to periodically charge 

his or her credit card or withdraw funds from his or her account. 

The contribution is “received” when the committee, or an agent 

of the committee, obtains possession or control of the funds for 

each installment payment. The contribution reported is only the 

amount of each installment payment when received. Installment 

payments scheduled to take place in the future, but not yet 

received, are not reportable. 

Receipts Under $25 

A daily lump sum total must be kept for contributions received under 

$25 and miscellaneous receipts under $25. 

Contributor Records 

Contributions: $25 to $99  99 

For each monetary or nonmonetary contribution or loan of $25 

or more, the date received, amount, type of contribution, and full 

name and  street  address, including zip code, of the contributor 

must be documented. In addition, the total amount received from 

the contributor over the course of the current calendar year (the 

“cumulative amount”) must be recorded. 

Contributions: $100 or More 

If contributions totaling $100 or more are received from an individual, 

in addition to the information required for contributions of $25 or 

more as described above, the contributor’s occupation and employer 

must be recorded. If the contributor is self-employed, that fact also 

must be noted along with the name of his or her business. If a check 

is received from a business entity, generally the contributor is the 

business entity, not the person who signs the check. 

A contribution of $100 or more must be returned if the 

contributor’s name,  street  address, and, if the contributor is 

an individual, his or her occupation and employer are not in 

the committee’s records within 60 days from receipt of the 

contribution DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 3. 12  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Such contributions may be deposited in the committee’s bank account 

pending receipt of the information, in which case they must be 

reported  on  the  next  campaign  statement  required  to  be  filed  (including 

the $5,000 and $1,000 election cycle reports - Form 497) .

The Recipient Committee Campaign Statement (Form 460) must be 

amended within 70 days from its closing date to disclose the missing 

contributor information unless the contribution is returned to the donor. 

The $5,000 and $1,000 reports –  Form 497  need not be amended. 

The committee also must note in its records the date the contributor 

information is received, if that date is different than the date the 

contribution is received. 

When a contribution cannot be returned to the contributor  within 60 

days from the date the contribution was received, the contribution 

amount  must be paid to the Secretary of State for deposit in the state’s 

general fund. 

If a contribution is returned to the contributor by check and the check is 

not cashed by the contributor within 90 days, the contribution must be 

paid to the Secretary of State within the following 30 days for deposit 

in the state’s general fund. 

Intermediaries 

For contributions of $25 or more made through an intermediary 

(see Chapter 4), records with the above information for both the 

intermediary and the contributor are required. 

Affiliated Entities 

Information  from  affiliated  entities  (see  Chapter  4)  that  describes  the 

connection  of  affiliated  contributors  must  be  maintained  in  the  records. 

Nonmonetary Contributions 

If the contribution is nonmonetary and valued at $25 or more, a 

description and the fair market value of the contribution must be 

recorded. (See “Valuing Nonmonetary Contributions” in Chapter 4.) 

Ex 3.3  - Stanley Hughes, 

a State Senate candidate, 

received a contribution of 

$100 from Martha Andersen 

on June 1. The only 

information he had was her 

name and address as listed 

on her check. On his semi-

annual statement covering 

the reporting period through 

June 30, he reported 

receiving $100 from Martha, 

listed her name and address, 

and indicated that he would 

amend his statement when 

he received her occupation 

and employer information. 

By July 31 of that same year, 

even after writing to Martha, 

Stanley still did not have 

Martha’s occupation and 

employer information. The 

committee must return $100 

to Martha. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 3. 13  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Loans Received 

If the contribution is a loan of $25 or more, in addition to the above 

information for monetary contributions, the following information must 

be recorded: 

• Interest rate of the loan, if any; 

• Due date of the loan, if any; and 

• Name and  street  address of any guarantor and the amount 

guaranteed, if any. The occupation and employer of any 

individual who guarantees a loan of $100 or more must also be 

recorded. 

If a candidate receives a loan from a commercial lending institution 

for his or her campaign, both the institution and the candidate are 

reported as the source of the loan. 

State candidates who make loans to their own campaign committee 

from personal funds may not charge the committee interest. In 

addition, state candidates may not have personal loans, including 

loans from a commercial lending institution, outstanding to their 

campaigns exceeding $100,000 at any one time. (See Chapter 1.) 

Documentation for Contributions Received and Other Receipts 

The  committee  must  keep  copies  of  all  documents  reflecting  deposits 

made  and  all  records  reflecting  campaign  bank  account  balances, 

such as bank statements, check registers, and passbooks. 

The following documents produced or received by the committee 

also must be kept for receipts of $25 or more: copies of contributor 

checks, contributor cards, letters of transmittal, notices received from 

contributors, memoranda or other records that describe the method 

used to determine the fair market value of donated goods or services 

(nonmonetary contributions), and loan agreements or other documents 

that  reflect  indebtedness. 

Documentation for electronic transactions must include information 

collected when debiting the contributor’s account, such as itemized DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 3. 14  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

transaction  reports  (including  the  credit  card  confirmation  number), 

debit/credit account transaction records, and credit card receipts or 

vouchers. Documentation of contributions received over the Internet 

must include a record of the transaction created and transmitted by the 

cardholder including the cardholder’s name,  street  address and card 

number. 

For contributions or other receipts of $100 or more, copies of any 

letters or other communications sent by the committee to obtain the 

documents listed above must be kept. 

Expenditures Made 

Expenditures: Under $25 

A daily lump sum total of all expenditures under $25 must be kept. 

Expenditures: $25 or More 

For expenditures of $25 or more to a single payee, or a series of 

payments for a single product or service that total $25 or more, the 

following must be recorded: 

• Full name and street address, including zip code, of payee; 

• Expenditure amount; 

• Date the expenditure was made or, for accrued expenses, the 

date the goods or services were received; and 

• Description of the goods or services received. 

Contributions to Other Candidates or Committees and 

Independent Expenditures 

For expenditures that are contributions or independent expenditures, 

the amount of the expenditure and the cumulative amount paid in 

that  calendar  year  in  connection  with  the  officeholder,  candidate, 

committee, or ballot measure must be recorded. 

For all such expenditures of $25 or more, the following information is 

required: DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 3. 15  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

• Date the contribution or independent expenditure was made; 

• Whether the expenditure was an independent expenditure; 

• Name  of  the  officeholder  or  candidate  and  the  office  and 

district he or she holds or for which he or she seeks nomination 

or election, or the number or letter of the measure and the 

jurisdiction  in  which  the  measure  is  to  be  voted  on;  and 

• Cumulative amount spent on behalf of the candidate, measure, 

or committee. 

Loans Made to Others 

The following additional information must be kept for loans made by 

the committee: interest rate, if any; due date, if any; and full name 

and street address of anyone guaranteeing the loan or who is liable 

directly, indirectly, or contingently for the loan. (For restrictions on 

loans to others, see Chapter 6.) 

Transfers to Another Controlled Committee of the Candidate 

A state candidate’s controlled committee that transfers funds using the 

LIFO  or  FIFO  method  must  keep  records  of  the  specific  contributors 

attributed to each transfer. In the event that a transferring committee 

is no longer required to keep such documents, the receiving committee 

may use copies of the transferring committee’s campaign statements 

or  other  available  records  that  confirm  the  identity  of  the  original 

contributors. (See Chapter 1.) 

Expenditures by Agents and Independent Contractors 

Agents must provide the treasurer information and documentation 

related to campaign expenditures made on behalf of the committee so 

that all of the reporting requirements are met. 

Deadlines to provide the treasurer information: 

• No  later  than  three  working  days  of  the  deadline  for  filing  a

campaign statement other than the Form 496 or Form 497. 

• Within 24 hours of the time for reporting the expenditure on 

Form 496 or Form 497. 

See Chapter 9 for a 

detailed discussion 

and examples of when 

a contribution is made. 

Chapter 7 describes 

communications that are 

considered independent 

expenditures. 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 3. 16  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Expenditure Limits 

Candidates who have accepted the voluntary expenditure ceiling must 

maintain records identifying how campaign expenditures that count 

toward the ceiling were allocated. (See Chapter 1 for information on 

the voluntary expenditure ceiling and to determine which expenditures 

count toward the ceiling.) 

Expenditures for Gifts, Meals and Travel 

A candidate controlled committee that makes an expenditure of $100 

or more for a gift, meal, or travel, must keep a dated memorandum or 

some other form of dated written record containing a brief description 

of the political, legislative, or governmental purpose of the expenditure, 

as well as the information described below: 

• Gifts:  The date of the expenditure, a description of the gift, and the 

name  of  any  recipient  who  received  a benefit  of  $50  or  more. 

• Meals:  The date of the meal, the name of each individual who 

attended the meal, and whether he or she is a member of the 

candidate’s household or someone who has authority to approve 

expenditures of campaign funds. 

• Travel:  The dates of travel, the destination, the name of each 

individual who traveled, and whether he or she is a member of the 

candidate’s household or someone who as authority to approve 

expenditures of campaign funds. 

Documentation for Expenditures 

All bank and credit card records for expenditures must be kept. 

For expenditures of $25 or more, keep canceled checks, bills, 

invoices, or statements; receipts; credit card charge slips; vouchers; 

contracts; loan agreements; and other documents produced or 

received  by  the  committee  reflecting  additional  obligations.  Copies 

of canceled checks may be retained if the copies contain a legible 

image of the front and back of the canceled check and the copies are 

obtained  from  the  financial  institution. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 3. 17  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

If no receipt, voucher, or invoice is available, a voucher should be 

written as soon as possible with the date and amount of the payment, 

the name of the payee, and a description of the goods or services 

received. A voucher is not required for payments under $25. 

G Mass Mailings, Telephone Calls, and Notices to 

Contributors of $5,000 or More 

The following must be retained for a period of four years following the 

date  the  campaign  statement  relating  to  the  records  is  filed: 

• Mailers  A copy of any mass mailing sent by the committee 

(see Chapter 7) 

• Political Calls  A script of the call or a copy of the recorded 

phone message when the committee pays for more than 500 

telephone calls to expressly advocate support for or opposition 

to a candidate or ballot measure (see Chapter 8) 

• Major Donor Notices . A copy  or  record  of  all  notifications  to 

contributors of $5,000 or more (see Chapter 4) 

Expenditures may be 

made electronically 

using a bank account, 

credit card, debit card, or 

electronic payment service 

(e.g., PayPal) so long as 

detailed records are kept. 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 3. 18  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Answering Your Questions 

A If, in the early days of the campaign, the candidate is not 

able to find someone to serve as the campaign treasurer, 

may the candidate serve in that capacity until another 

person is found? 

Yes. In fact, a separate treasurer is never required. The 

candidate may serve as treasurer throughout the campaign. 

B Are there any specific accounting qualifications for 

someone to be able to serve as treasurer, or any conditions 

which would disqualify someone from being able to serve 

as treasurer? 

No. 

C What should be done if the treasurer and assistant 

treasurer, or the candidate, are not able to sign before the 

deadline? 

In  order  to  ensure  that  the  statement  is  filed  on  time,  you 

may  submit  the  filing  if  it  is  signed  by  one  of  the  following:  the 

candidate, treasurer, or assistant treasurer. If the candidate’s 

signature is missing, submit an amendment to provide his or her 

signature as soon as possible. Likewise, if both the treasurer 

and assistant treasurer are unavailable, submit an amendment 

to provide the required signature as soon as possible. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 3. 19  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Authority 

The  following  Government  Code  sections  and  Title  2 regulations 

provide authority for the information in this chapter: 

Government Code Sections 

82015  Contribution. 

82018  Cumulative Amount. 

82025  Expenditure. 

82044  Payment. 

82047.5  Primarily Formed Committee. 

82047.6  Principal  Officer. 

84100  Treasurer. 

84104  Recordkeeping. 

84105  Notification  to  Contributors. 

84300  Cash and In-Kind Contributions; Cash Expenditures. 

84302  Contributions by Intermediary or Agent. 

84306  Contributions Received by Agents of Candidates or 

Committees. 

84307  Commingling with Personal Funds. 

84310  Identification  Requirements  for  Telephone  Calls. 

85201  Campaign Bank Account. 

85304  Legal Defense Fund. 

85315  Elected  State  Officer  Recall  Committees. 

85318  Contributions  Received  for  Primary  and  General 

Elections. 

85501  Prohibition on Independent Expenditures by Candidate 

Controlled Committees. 

85700  Donor Information Requirements; Return of Contributions. 

89511.5  Use  of  Personal  Funds  for  Incumbent  Elected  Officers. 

90000  Responsibility. 

90001  Mandatory Audits and Investigations. 

90002  Audits and Investigations; Time. 

90003  Discretionary Audits. 

90006  Audit and Investigation by Commission. 

90007  Auditing  Guidelines  and  Standards. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 3. 20  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Title 2 Regulations 

18401  Required Recordkeeping for Chapter 4. 

18402.1  Principal  Officers. 

18421.1  Disclosure of the Making and Receipt of Contributions. 

18421.2  Street Address. 

18421.3  Reporting of Contributions and Expenditures Collected by 

Contract Vendors or Collecting Agents. 

18421.31  Text Message Contributions. 

18421.7  Reporting  an  Expenditure  for  a Gift,  a Meal,  or  Travel. 

18426.1  Assistant Treasurer. 

18427  Duties of Treasurers and Candidates with Respect to 

Campaign Statements. 

18427.1  Notification  to  Contributors  of  Filing  Obligations. 

18428  Reporting of Contributions and Independent Expenditures 

Required to be Aggregated. 

18432.5  Intermediary. 

18440  Telephone Advocacy. 

18521  Establishment of Separate Controlled Committee for 

Each Campaign Account. 

18521.5  Ballot Measure Committees Controlled by Candidates for 

Elective  State  Office. 

18523  Nondesignated Contributions or Loans. 

18524  Investment and Expenditure of Candidates’ Campaign 

Funds. 

18525  Incumbent Candidates’ Election Expenses and 

Officeholder  Expenses. 

18530.4  Legal  Defense  Funds  - State  Candidates  and  Officers. 

18531.5  Recall Elections. 

18531.62  Elected  State  Officeholder  Bank  Accounts. 

18534  Required Committee Bank Accounts. 

18536  Transfer and Attribution of Contributions. 

18570  Return  of  Contributions  with  Insufficient  Donor 

Information. 

18994  Auditing and Investigations. 

18995  Standards  and  Guidelines  for  Auditing  Statements  and 

Reports. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 4. 1  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Cha Pter  4C ontr Ibut Ion S

This  chapter  begins  with  the  definition  of  “contribution”  and  provides 

guidelines necessary for proper reporting, including a discussion on 

valuing nonmonetary contributions. Contributions to state candidates 

and  committees  are  subject  to  the  limits  described  in  Chapter  1. 

A What Is a Contribution? 

A “contribution” is a monetary or nonmonetary payment received by a 

candidate or committee for which the candidate or committee has not 

provided full and adequate consideration in return. A contribution may 

take any of the following forms: 

• Money (cash, check, credit card, wire transfers, text 

contributions); 

• Nonmonetary items (donated goods or services, discounts); 

• Payments made by a third party for advertising or other 

communications coordinated with the committee; 

• Loans (including loan guarantees, co-signing, and lines of 

credit); 

• Extensions of credit for goods or services; 

• Money, nonmonetary items, and loans from the candidate to his 

or her own committee or from the candidate’s family; and 

• Enforceable promises to make a payment (for example, a 

contributor  promises,  in  writing,  to  pay  for  specific  goods  or 

services and, based on that written promise, the committee 

expends funds or enters into a legally-enforceable contract to 

purchase the goods or services). 

Contributions of $100 

or more may never be 

made or received in cash. 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 4. 2  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

B Reporting a Contribution Received 

Each type of contribution is reported differently. In fact, when 

a contribution is received is determined in part by what type of 

contribution it is. 

A monetary  contribution is received on the date the candidate, 

committee, or an agent of the committee obtains possession or control 

of the cash, check, or other item that constitutes the contribution. 

When an agent of the committee, such as a campaign consultant, 

receives a contribution for the committee, the agent must notify the 

treasurer no later than the closing date of the next campaign statement 

due. The date of the contribution is the date the agent obtained 

possession of the contribution. (See Chapter 3.) 

A nonmonetary  contribution is received on the  earlier  of the following: 

• The date funds were expended by the contributor for the goods 

or services; 

• The date the candidate, committee, or an agent of the 

committee obtained possession or control of the goods or 

services; or 

• The  date  the  candidate  or  committee  received  the  benefit  of  the 

expenditure. 

A nonmonetary contribution of  employee services  is made by the 

contributor and received by the candidate or committee on the  payroll 

date  of the employee. See the discussion later in this chapter for 

information about how to value a contribution of employee services. 

An  enforceable promise  is received on the date the candidate, 

committee, or an agent of the committee, receives documents 

verifying that a contributor has made a legally enforceable promise to 

make a payment. A person makes an “enforceable promise to make a 

payment” if he or she: 

• Guarantees,  furnishes  security  for,  endorses  or  cosigns  a loan; 

Ex 4.1  - A committee’s 

campaign consultant 

received a hand-delivered 

check at a May 14, Friday 

evening fundraiser. The 

check was delivered to the 

committee’s treasurer the 

following Monday, May 

17. The contribution was 

received on May 14, the 

day the committee’s agent 

obtained possession of the 

check. 

Ex 4.2  - The committee 

also contracts with a 

website service to receive 

contributions over the 

Internet. The website service 

sends the committee’s 

treasurer an e-mail each 

time a contributor logs on 

to the website service and 

enters his or her donor 

information and credit card 

number. By logging onto 

the website service, the 

treasurer can accept the 

contribution and receive 

the funds. The committee 

reports receipt of the 

contribution on the date it 

receives the e-mail because 

it controls the contribution 

on that date. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 4. 3  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

• Makes and delivers a post-dated check; or 

• Establishes a line of credit at a bank or other commercial 

lending institution for a candidate or committee. 

Exceptions: 

A pledge card is not considered an enforceable promise to make a 

payment. “Enforceable promise” also does not include a contributor’s 

agreement to make future installment payments through wire transfer, 

credit card transaction, debit account transaction, or similar electronic 

payment. 

An  extension of credit  is a contribution when there is an agreement 

between the provider of goods or services and a state candidate or 

his or her controlled committee that payment for goods or services 

provided to the candidate or committee will be made at a later date. 

An extension of credit does not become a contribution if the candidate 

or committee pays for the goods or services on or before the earlier of: 

• 45 days after the date of the invoice; 

• 45 days from the date the goods or services are delivered; or 

• For ongoing services, 45 days after the date of the invoice as 

long as the services are billed no less frequently than on a 

three-month billing cycle. 

If the candidate or committee does not pay for the goods or services 

within 45 days as described above, an extension of credit does not 

become a contribution if  all  of the following requirements are met: 

• The credit arrangement is recorded in writing; 

• It is the regular business of the provider of the goods or services 

to provide similar goods or services; 

• The goods and services are provided in the ordinary course 

of business and on the same terms and conditions offered to 

customers generally; DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 4. 4  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

• The provider enters into the agreement with the intent that the 

candidate or committee will pay in accordance with the terms of 

the written agreement and the provider does not know that the 

candidate or committee would not be able to pay; and 

• The provider makes reasonable efforts to collect the full amount 

of the payment within four months of the date that the payment 

is due under the terms of the written agreement. 

C Contribution Exceptions 

There  are  many  exceptions  to  the  definition  of  “contribution.” 

Exceptions for certain types of political communications are also 

discussed in detail in Chapter 7. Some of the most common 

exceptions include: 

Volunteer Personal Services: 

If an individual donates his or her personal or professional services to 

a campaign  (including a volunteer’s travel expenses) , no contribution 

has been made or received  as long as there is no understanding of 

reimbursement. 

However, if an employer donates employee services to a campaign, 

and any employee spends more than 10 percent of his or her 

compensated time in a calendar month performing campaign activity 

for one or more campaigns, the employer has made a nonmonetary 

contribution to the committee. Determine the contribution amount by 

allocating the gross salary to the time spent on campaign activity. See 

“Employee Time” later in this chapter for additional information. 

Home/Office Fundraisers  (Other than a Lobbyist or Lobbying 

Firm): 

If a person, other than a lobbyist (or a cohabitant of a lobbyist) 

or lobbying firm,  holds a fundraiser or other campaign event in his 

or  her  home  or  office,  the  costs  incurred  by  the  occupant  of  the  home 

or  office  need  not  be  reported  as  long  as  the  total  cost  of  the  event 

is $500 or less. However, if someone else donates food, beverages, 

or anything else of value to the event, the fair market value of those 

Ex 4.3  - Katz Construction, 

Inc. has agreed to let an 

Assembly candidate use 

some empty offices in its 

building for her campaign 

headquarters. The company 

does not normally rent space 

in its building, but they have 

estimated the fair market 

value of the space rental 

at $1,000 per month. The 

company and the candidate 

have a written agreement 

stating that the rent is due 

on the first of each month. 

Because Katz Construction 

does not provide rental 

office space in the normal 

course of business, if the 

candidate does not pay each 

month’s rent within 45 days 

of the first of the month, 

the $1,000 will become a 

nonmonetary contribution 

to her campaign on the 46th 

day and will be reportable 

on Schedule C of Form 460 

and subject to contribution 

limits. 

Ex 4.4  - Your neighbor holds 

a fundraiser in his home for 

your committee. He spends 

$250 on decorations, food, 

and drinks for the event. A 

coworker brings some door 

prizes with a fair market 

value of $50. Since the total 

cost of the event is under 

$500, your neighbor’s $250 

is not reportable. However, 

since your coworker is 

not the occupant of the 

home, her nonmonetary 

contribution of $50 is 

reportable, although not 

itemized. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 4. 5  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

donated goods is a nonmonetary contribution. In addition, the donated 

goods must be counted to determine whether the total cost of the 

event is $500 or less. 

Home/Office Fundraisers Restrictions of Lobbyists and Lobbying 

Firms: 

The  home/office  fundraiser  exception  does  not  apply  to  a state  lobbyist 

or to a cohabitant of a state lobbyist. A registered state lobbyist may 

not  make  a contribution  to  an  elected  state  officer  or  candidate  for 

elective  state  office  if  the  lobbyist  is  registered  to  lobby  the  official’s 

agency or the agency for which the candidate is seeking election. 

A fundraiser held in the home of a lobbyist is considered a contribution; 

therefore, a lobbyist is prohibited from holding a fundraiser in his or 

her home for a candidate seeking election to a governmental agency 

that the lobbyist is registered to lobby. A similar prohibition applies to 

lobbying  firms  holding  fundraisers  at  their  offices. 

Note: 

• A lobbying  firm  may  host  a campaign  meeting  that  is  not 

a fundraising  event  in  the  firm’s  office  for  the  benefit  of  an 

officeholder  or  candidate  if  the  total  cost  is  $500  or  less, 

exclusive  of  the  value  of  the  office  as  a venue. 

• A lobbying  firm  owned  by  a lobbyist  may  not  rent  its  firm’s  office 

as  a fundraising  venue  to  an  officeholder  or  candidate  the  firm  is 

registered to lobby. 

• A lobbying  firm  owned  by  a lobbyist  may  not  rent  its  firm’s 

offices  as  a fundraising  venue  to  one  of  its  clients  (a  lobbyist 

employer)  to  benefit  an  officeholder  or  candidate  the  firm  is 

registered to lobby. 

Social Media – Internet Communications: 

Uncompensated  Internet  activity  by  an  individual,  such  as  sending 

or forwarding electronic messages, social networking, blogging, 

Ex 4.5  - A business hosts 

a campaign fundraiser in 

its conference room. The 

business spends $450 for 

beverages. A separate 

business entity provides 

the food valued at $200. 

Since the total cost of the 

event now exceeds $500, 

both businesses have made 

nonmonetary contributions 

that must be reported by 

your committee. 

For the home/office 

fundraiser contribution 

exception to apply, the 

total cost of the event must 

be $500 or less no matter 

how many candidates or 

committees benefit from the 

event. 

A state lobbyist may 

not hold a fundraiser 

for a local candidate/ 

officeholder who is seeking 

election to a state office. 

Quick 

Tip 

Quick 

Tip 

Ex 4.6  - Your friends send 

e-mails to their family and 

friends and post on their 

personal social networking 

sites communications 

supporting your campaign. 

Since your friends are not 

being compensated, these 

activities are not reportable 

even if you provided your 

friends with campaign 

materials. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 4. 6  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

creating or hosting a website, to support or oppose a candidate or 

ballot measure is not considered a contribution or expenditure. Certain 

Internet communications require advertisement disclaimers as outlined 

in Chapter 7. 

Member Communications: 

Payments made by an organization (including a political party, union or 

trade association) for certain communications that are sent only to the 

organization’s members, employees, shareholders, or their families, 

are not contributions to a candidate endorsed in the communications. 

For example, if a union sends a mailing to only its membership, 

supporting your campaign, the cost of the mailing is not a reportable 

contribution. (See Chapter 4.) 

Gifts: 

A payment  or  other  benefit  to  a candidate  or  official  that  is  made 

principally for personal purposes (not political purposes) is a gift 

unless  the  candidate  or  official  provides  payment  or  services  of  equal 

or  greater  value.  Generally,  gifts  are  subject  to  annual  limits  and  must 

be  disclosed  by  the  candidate  or  official  on  a Form  700  (Statement  of 

Economic Interests). For additional information about gifts, see the fact 

sheet on the FPPC’s website entitled , Limitations and Restrictions on 

Gifts, Honoraria, Travel and Loans. 

Payments for Legislative, Governmental, or Charitable Purposes: 

Behested payments made in connection with a legislative, 

governmental, or charitable purpose, are not considered to be made 

for political or personal purposes; therefore, they are not considered 

contributions or gifts. However, if the payment is made at the behest 

of  an  elected  official  and  the  payment(s)  totals  $5,000  or  more  from  a

single  source  in  a calendar  year,  the  official  is  required  to  file  a Form 

803 (Behested Payment Report) as described in Chapter 11. 

Contribution Restrictions 

• There are contribution limits for state candidates and 

committees that make contributions to state candidates. 

(See Chapter 1.) DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 4. 7  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

• There are restrictions on receiving contributions applicable to 

all committees. For example, contributions of $100 or more 

must be made by written instrument and may not be made or 

received in cash. (See Chapter 5.) 

• Contributions of $100 or more must be returned if the 

contributor’s name, address, occupation, and employer are 

not obtained within 60 days of receipt of the contribution. (See 

Chapter 3.) 

D Aggregating Contributions 

Contributions received from certain combinations of individuals and 

entities must be added together to determine the total amount that will 

be treated as received from a single contributor. These rules apply for 

purposes of the contribution limits and reporting. 

The following are aggregated: 

• Contributions from the personal funds of an individual and 

contributions made by an entity when the same individual 

directs and controls the entity’s contributions. 

• Contributions  from  two  or  more  entities  if  a majority  of  the  same 

persons directs and controls the contributions of each entity. 

• Contributions  made  by  entities  that  are  majority  owned  by  any 

person  with  the  contributions  of  the  majority  owner  and  all  other 

entities  majority  owned  by  that  person,  unless  those  entities  act 

independently in their decisions to make contributions. 

The following are basic examples to provide general guidance 

regarding aggregation of contributions. Every case is unique and if 

these examples are not helpful, contact the FPPC for advice. 

The term “person” 

includes an individual, 

proprietorship, firm, 

partnership, joint venture, 

syndicate, business trust, 

company, corporation, 

limited liability company, 

and association. 

Quick 

Tip 

Ex 4.7  - Sally Perez contributed $98 from her personal funds and another $98 

from the funds of her wholly-owned business, Flowers by Sally Perez, to the 

Anderson Committee. Because contributions from an individual and his or 

her business, or from any other account he or she directs and controls, are 

considered to be from a single contributor, the Anderson Committee must 

itemize both contributions and report a cumulative amount received from Sally 

and her business of $196 on its committee campaign statement. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 4. 8  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

E Reporting Various Types of Contributions 

Credit Card, Electronic, and Other Types of Contributions 

Contributions may be received by credit card, wire transfer, debit 

account transaction, or similar electronic payment options (including 

contributions received via the Internet or telephone). All of the 

reporting and recordkeeping requirements apply to these contributions. 

(See Chapter 3.) Some tips are: 

• For contributions of $25 or more, the committee treasurer 

should make sure that a copy of the credit card voucher or other 

documentation is sent to the committee as soon as practicable 

after the contributions are made. 

• The entire amount charged to the contributor is reported as a 

contribution. 

• Fees associated with this type of fundraising, or deducted by the 

Ex 4.8  - EXtream Snowboards, Inc., made a contribution of $250 to the 

Johnson Committee. EXtream Snowboards, Inc., is a wholly-owned subsidiary 

of LeesureTech Industries, which also made a contribution of $250 to the 

Johnson Committee. If there was coordination between EXtream Snowboards 

and LeesureTech Industries, their contributions are considered to be from a 

single contributor. The Johnson Committee must itemize both contributions 

and report a cumulative amount received of $500 on its campaign statement. 

Ex 4.9  - William Smith is a developer with four separate corporations. William 

makes political contributions from his personal funds and directs and controls 

the contributions of each of his corporations. William made a contribution of 

$1,600 from his personal funds and contributions of $2,000 from the funds 

of one of his corporations to the Perez for Assembly Committee for the 2008 

primary election. The committee may not receive any additional contributions 

from Smith or his corporations for the primary election. 

Ex 4.10  - Southwest TeleCom has a greater than 50% ownership interest 

in American TeleCom. Each entity, entirely on its own and with separate 

decisionmaking bodies, makes a contribution of $1,000 to Senator Yadon. The 

senator does not aggregate these contributions because Southwest TeleCom 

and American TeleCom acted completely independently in their decisions to 

make the contributions. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 4. 9  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

vendor before the contributions are sent to the committee, are 

reported as expenditures; the fees are not deducted from the 

amount of each contribution reported. 

Fundraisers 

The full amount (face value) of a fundraiser ticket is a reportable 

contribution. 

Auctions and Garage Sales: 

When items are donated for auction or sale at a fundraiser, the 

donated item is a nonmonetary contribution. (See below for 

determining the value.) When someone buys an item, the payment is 

usually considered a “Miscellaneous Increase to Cash” and is reported 

as such. If any one person or entity pays $100 or more, the payment is 

itemized. 

However, when someone pays more for an item than it is worth, 

the amount that is equal to the fair market value is reported as a 

miscellaneous increase to cash and the amount over the fair market 

value as a monetary contribution. Each is itemized at $100. 

Bar Receipts: 

Funds received by selling drinks at a fundraiser at fair market value 

are reported as miscellaneous increases to cash, not contributions. 

Raffle Tickets: 

Receipts  from  the  sale  of  raffle  tickets  at  a fundraiser  are  reported 

as  contributions.  Items  donated  for  raffle  prizes  are  reported  as 

nonmonetary contributions. (Note that Penal Code Section 319 

imposes  some  restrictions  on  raffles.) 

Intermediary 

An intermediary is a person or entity that makes a contribution 

on behalf of another person. For example, an employee who is 

reimbursed for a contribution by his/her employer is not the true source 

of the funds, but the intermediary of the employer’s contribution. 

Ex 4.11  - Your committee 

holds a fundraiser and 

charges $1000 per person. 

After the event, you 

determine that it cost 

your committee $60 per 

person to pay the caterer, 

hall rental, entertainment, 

invitations, etc. Report on 

Schedule A of the Form 460 

each contributor’s name, 

address, occupation, and 

employer and the full $1000 

per ticket contribution. Do 

not subtract $60 from each 

ticket sold. 

Ex 4.12  - Andy Foster owns 

an electronics store and 

donates a TV worth $500 

to your committee. At your 

committee’s auction, Gloria 

Fernandes bids $600 for 

the TV. Itemize $500 as a 

nonmonetary contribution 

from Andy’s store. Then, 

itemize $500, that part of 

Gloria’s payment which is 

the fair market value of 

the TV, as a miscellaneous 

increase to cash. Also 

itemize $100, the amount 

over the fair market value, 

as a monetary contribution 

from Gloria. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 4. 10  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

For each contribution of $100 or more from an intermediary, the name, 

address, and, if applicable, the occupation/employer information 

must be disclosed for both the true source of the contribution and the 

intermediary. 

Failure to disclose the true source of a contribution is considered 

one of the most serious violations of the Political Reform Act 

Candidates and committees are required to check and, if necessary, 

correct any information regarding the true source of a contribution that 

a person of reasonable prudence would question based on all of the 

surrounding circumstances. If there is reason to question the source 

of a contribution, i.e., if there is reason to believe the information 

contained on the contribution check does not contain the name of the 

person who is actually making the contribution, the donor should be 

asked if he or she is acting as an intermediary for the true source of 

the contribution. 

This manual cannot address all scenarios that may need to be 

questioned, but it is prudent to question unusually large contributions 

from sources unfamiliar with the candidate or his/her agents; a series 

of  contributions  from  a single  employer;  and,  significant  contribution 

from  a nonprofit  organization  or  multipurpose  organization  that  is  not 

registered as a political committee on the Secretary of State’s website. 

Joint Checking Accounts and Business Accounts 

Individuals (including spouses) may make separate contributions from 

a joint  checking  account.  For  reporting  purposes,  the  full  amount  of 

the contribution is reported as coming from the individual who signs 

the check. If two or more individuals sign the check, the contribution 

is divided equally between or among the signers, unless there is an 

accompanying document signed by each individual whose name is 

printed on the check which clearly indicates a different apportionment. 

A check  drawn  on  a joint  checking  account  that  is  signed  by  an 

individual not listed on the check (e.g., an accountant) must be 

accompanied by a document signed by at least one of the individuals 

listed on the check stating to whom the check is to be attributed. 

Ex 4.13  - Berry Barr and 

Vienna Waltz each made 

a $100 contribution from 

their personal funds to 

support Tina Baker for 

State Treasurer, with the 

understanding that they 

would be reimbursed by 

their employer, the Music 

Company. Berry and Vienna 

must tell the committee 

that they are acting as 

intermediaries on behalf of 

their employer, the Music 

Company. Tina’s campaign 

statement must show the 

$200 contribution from the 

Music Company, and also 

Berry Barr and Vienna Waltz 

as intermediaries of $100 

each. 

Ex 4.14  - An organization 

collects ten contributions 

of $200 each earmarked 

for a candidate’s campaign. 

The organization deposits 

the contributions and 

provides the campaign 

committee one check from 

the organization rather than 

providing ten individual 

checks. The committee 

reports the organization 

as an intermediary and 

the individuals as the 

contributors. 

Ex 4.15  - Linda and Jerry 

Nelson have a joint checking 

account. From this account, 

Linda signed a $100 check 

payable to Friends of Joshua 

Truman. The committee 

identifies Linda Nelson as 

the contributor of the full 

$100. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 4. 11  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Generally,  if  a check  is  drawn  on  the  account  of  a business  entity,  the 

contributor is the business entity, not the person who signs the check. 

Minor Children 

A contribution made by a child under the age of 18 is presumed to be 

a contribution from his or her parent or guardian. 

Transfers and Carryover from a Prior Campaign 

A state candidate may carry over funds from one election to the 

next  election  for  the  same  office,  and  may  transfer  funds  from  one 

controlled  committee  to  another  committee  for  a different  office, 

subject  to  certain  restrictions.  (See  Chapter  1.) 

Contributions from Other Candidates 

Candidates and committees may receive contributions, within the 

applicable  contribution  limits,  from  other  candidates  or  officeholders. 

(See Chapter 1.) 

Undesignated Contributions 

Candidates  soliciting  contributions  for  more  than  one  office  that 

receive an undesignated contribution may deposit the contribution in 

any of their campaign bank accounts. 

Undesignated  monetary  contributions  must  be  deposited  in  a

campaign bank account within 30 days of receipt. Nonmonetary 

contributions must be allocated to a particular committee within 30 

days of receipt or by the deadline for the reporting period in which the 

nonmonetary contribution is received, whichever is earlier. 

F $5,000 Major Donor Notice 

Committees receiving one or more contributions totaling $5,000 or 

more in a calendar year from an individual or entity that made the 

contribution(s) from personal, business, or corporate funds must send 

the  contributor  written  notice  that  they  have  a filing  obligation. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 4. 12  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Generally,  the  notice  must  be  mailed,  faxed  or  e-mailed  to  the 

contributor within two weeks of receiving contributions totaling $5,000 

or more. But, if a contribution of $10,000 or more is received in the 90 

days prior to the election, the notice must be mailed, faxed or e-mailed 

to the contributor within one week. 

A copy of each notice or a record of all notices showing the date sent 

and the name and address of the person receiving the notice must be 

retained. 

The notice is not required for: 

• a subsequent contribution from the same contributor in the 

same calendar year; 

• if the contribution was from a candidate or campaign committee. 

The notice may be tailored as long as it contains language 

substantially similar to the language below: 

Major Donors 

If your contribution(s) to this committee and to other California state or 

local committees total(s) $10,000 or more in a calendar year, California 

law  requires  you  to  file  a Major  Donor  Committee  Campaign  Statement 

(Form  461).  The  deadline  and  location  for  filing  this  statement  will 

depend upon the timing and type of contribution(s) you have made. 

For additional information, see www.fppc.ca.gov. 

Multipurpose organizations including nonprofits 

If  your  organization  is  a multipurpose  group,  it  may  qualify  as  a major 

donor  committee  required  to  file  Form  461  or  as  a recipient  committee 

required  to  file  the  Form  460  dislosing  donors.  Refer  to  Government 

Code Section 84222 and FPPC Regulation 18422. Additional 

information is on the FPPC’s website. 

24 Hour Reports 

Major  donors  and  mulitpurpose  organizations  that  trigger  reporting 

obligations  must  also  file  a 24-hour  Contribution  Report  (Form  497)  if 

you: DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 4. 13  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

• Make contributions totaling $1,000 or more to a single 

candidate, any of the candidate’s controlled committee, or to a 

committee primarily formed to support or oppose a candidate or 

ballot measure during the 90 days before the election in which 

the candidate or measure is being voted. 

• Make contributions totaling 1,000 or more to a state or county 

political party committee during the 90 days prior to a state 

election, including state special elections. 

Electronic Filing 

State committees that make contributions of $25,000 or more must 

file  electronically  with  the  Secretary  of  State.  State  committees  that 

must  file  the  Form  497  (24-hour  Contribution  Report)  must  file  this 

form electronically even if the $25,000 threshold has not yet been 

met.  For  more  information,  contact  the  Secretary  of  State’s  office  at 

(916)653-6224.  Local  committees  should  contact  the  local  jurisdiction 

to  determine  if  there  are  electronic  filing  requirements. 

Late Filing Penalties and Fines 

Failure  to  file  campaign  statements  may  result  in  late  filing  penalties 

of  $10/day  (state  committees  may  be  fined  $20/day  if  they  must  file 

electronically  and  on  paper)  and  fines  up  to  $5,000/violation. 

FPPC Assistance 

For  assistance  with  your  filing  obligations,  contact  the  Fair  Political 

Practices Commission toll free at (866) ASK-FPPC, send an email to 

advice@fppc.ca.gov, or refer to their website: www.fppc.ca.gov. 

G Valuing Nonmonetary Contributions 

This section provides assistance in determining how to value 

nonmonetary contributions so that they may be reported accurately. 

The varieties of nonmonetary contributions are vast, so not all 

possibilities are presented. Contact the FPPC for assistance. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 4. 14  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Fair Market Value 

When a nonmonetary contribution is received, the fair market value 

of the goods or services must be reported. If the committee does not 

know the fair market value of a nonmonetary contribution, such as an 

original piece of artwork, the committee may send a letter requesting 

that the contributor provide the value of the contribution in writing. The 

contributor is legally obligated to provide an amount if the value of the 

contribution is $100 or more. 

If a business donates the use of an employee to work on a campaign, 

the amount the individual is paid for working on the campaign is 

reportable only if the employee spends more than 10% of his or her 

compensated time in a calendar month working on the campaign. 

If a committee receives discounts on goods or services it purchases 

and the discounts are not offered to the public in the regular course of 

business, the discount is a nonmonetary contribution which must be 

reported. 

Mailings 

Generally,  the  fair  market  value  of  a mailing  is  reported  as  a

contribution when the mailing expressly advocates support of or 

opposition to a candidate and was made at the behest of the affected 

candidate. 

Multiple Candidates and Measures: 

If a mailer expresses support of or opposition to more than one 

candidate or ballot measure, the fair market value attributable to 

each may be calculated by prorating the costs among the featured 

candidates and ballot measures. The prorated value is based on the 

amount of space allotted to each candidate or measure supported or 

opposed in the mailer. 

The value of a mailer that supports or opposes candidates and 

measures  being  voted  on  in  different  jurisdictions  may  be  prorated 

based on the number of mailers sent to each candidate or ballot 

measure’s  jurisdiction. 

Ex 4.16  - The owner of an 

audio-visual store donates 

a television set worth $500 

to your committee for sale 

at an auction. Although 

the set costs the store 

owner less than $500, the 

fair market value of the 

television (the amount it 

would cost any member of 

the public to purchase the 

set from the store) is $500. 

Therefore, the nonmonetary 

contribution from the store 

owner is $500. 

Ex 4.17  - An accounting firm 

provides your committee 

with the services of an 

accountant during the last 

month of the campaign. 

The accountant spends 

25% of her time working 

for the campaign, for which 

her gross compensation 

from the accounting firm 

is $2,500. The amount of 

the contribution from the 

accounting firm is $2,500. 

Ex 4.18  - Your committee 

receives a 50% discount 

on a printing job that 

normally costs $1,200. 

The committee receives a 

contribution of $600. 

Volunteer personal 

services are not 

considered to be a 

nonmonetary contribution. 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 4. 15  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Political and Non-Political Material: 

The cost of a mailing containing both express advocacy in support 

of or opposition to a candidate and other nonpolitical material can be 

prorated. Costs directly associated with the political message are 

reportable by the candidate, including, for example, compensation 

paid to employees who spend more than 10% of their compensated 

time in a calendar month producing or mailing the political materials, 

and the pro rata cost of paper, envelopes, and postage. The allocation 

may be based on the additional weight of the political material or 

the comparative number of pages as between the political and 

non-political material. 

Member Communications: 

Payments made by an organization or its sponsored committee 

for a communication that supports or opposes a candidate are not 

contributions or expenditures as long as the communication is made 

only to the organization’s members, employees, or shareholders, 

or the families of its members, employees, or shareholders. The 

communication may not be for general public advertising, such as 

billboards, newspaper ads, or radio or television ads. (See Chapter 4.) 

Bulk Rate Permits: 

Use  of  an  organization’s  bulk  rate  permit  is  a nonmonetary 

contribution from the organization. If the committee pays the actual 

postage costs incurred under the bulk rate permit, the fair market 

value of the contribution is either: 

The price the organization paid for the bulk mailing permit; or 

The difference in postage costs between the bulk mailing rate and that 

of regular mail. 

If the organization pays for the costs of the mailing using its bulk rate 

permit, and the committee does not have such a permit, the value 

of the contribution is (1) the amount it would have cost to pay for the 

mailing using regular mail; or (2) the cost of the bulk rate mailing plus 

the cost of a permit. 

Ex 4.19  - A Chamber of 

Commerce produces and 

mails a one-page flyer 

urging voters to vote for a 

gubernatorial candidate and 

against two ballot measures. 

Half of the flyer is devoted 

to supporting the candidate 

and the other half equally 

opposes the measures. The 

Chamber coordinates the 

mailing with candidate. The 

total cost of producing and 

mailing the flyer is $14,000. 

The candidate received a 

nonmonetary contribution 

valued at $7,000. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 4. 16  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Phone Banks 

The use of business telephones for phone banking is a non-monetary 

contribution. The fair market value of the use of the phones is 

calculated to determine the amount reported as a nonmonetary 

contribution, even if only local calls are made. One method to 

determine the fair market value is to contact organizations that provide 

phone banks as a business. 

Polls and Surveys 

A person or entity that provides data from a public opinion poll 

or survey to a candidate or committee is making a nonmonetary 

contribution if the candidate or committee requests the data or the 

data are used for political purposes. FPPC staff has advised that a 

formula utilized by the Federal Election Commission may be used 

for valuing polling or survey data, as long as the formula is used in a 

reasonable manner to provide a fair estimate. The formula calculates 

the value based on the age of the data. The chart below illustrates 

the fair market value of data based on the number of days that pass 

from the date the entity originally received the data to the date the data 

were provided to the candidate or committee. 

Age of Data  Value 

0 - 15 days  Full Value 

16 - 60 days  50% 

61 - 180 days  5% 

More than 180 days  No Value 

When  only  a portion  of  a survey  is  provided  to  or  for  the  benefit  of  a

candidate, the nonmonetary contribution is the prorated portion of the 

total value of the survey. 

Ex 4.20  -A PAC 

commissioned a public 

opinion poll to determine 

voters’ attitudes about 

candidates running for 

Governor, candidates in 

a Senate district, and a 

city ballot measure. The 

PAC may prorate the 

poll’s cost by determining 

the questions/responses 

relevant to the particular 

candidate. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 4. 17  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

H Common Political Party Expenditures 

State Candidates often work closely with state and county political 

party  committees.  Political  party  committees  are  not  subject  to 

contribution limits for monetary and non-monetary contributions made 

to state candidates, however, the contributions must be reported 

and made from the party’s state candidate support account which is 

subject  to  contribution  limits. 

The following chart provides guidance on common political 

party activity coordinated with a state candidate. Non-monetary 

contributions are reported on Form 460 – Schedule C. 

Activity  Reporting 

Renting  Office  Space  Yes 

Volunteer Precinct walking  Yes, if the party is paying expenses for the individuals. 

Phone Banks  Yes. See Chapter 8 for disclaimer requirements 

Voter  Identification  Yes. Payments for poll research and similar work are contributions 

Employees  Yes. See earlier discussion of 10% employee rule 

Voter Registration  No-as long as all of the following applies to the registration material: 

• No expressly advocacy for a candidate’s election; 

• Does not solicit contributions for a candidate; and 

• Does not make reference to the candidate’s election. 

I Returning Contributions 

There are several provisions in the Act and FPPC regulations that 

regulate the return of contributions. 

Reporting: 

A contribution is not required to be reported if it is not deposited, 

cashed, or negotiated and it is returned to the contributor before the 

closing date of the campaign statement on which it would otherwise be 

reported. 

A “late contribution” (a contribution of $1,000 or more received during 

the last 90 days before an election) is not required to be reported if it is 

not deposited, cashed, or negotiated and it is returned within 24 hours DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 4. 18  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

of receipt. Once a contribution is deposited, cashed, or negotiated, 

it must be disclosed on the next campaign statement, even if it is 

subsequently returned. 

Contributions in Excess of the Contribution Limits: 

A monetary contribution that exceeds the contribution limits on its 

face, or when aggregated with other contributions from the contributor, 

may not be deposited, cashed, or negotiated and must be returned 

to the donor within 14 days of receipt. In the case of a nonmonetary 

contribution, the contribution must be returned or a monetary refund 

must be given to the contributor within 14 days of receipt. 

Defeated Candidates: 

If a state candidate is defeated in a primary election or withdraws 

from the general election, general election funds must be refunded 

to contributors on a pro rata basis, less any expenses associated 

with raising and administering the funds, and any general election 

expenses that were paid prior to the primary election or the 

candidate’s withdrawal (e.g., media purchases). See Chapter 1. 

Returning Contributor Contributions: 

A committee may return a donor’s contribution at any time, unless the 

donor is the state candidate. Candidate loans are also restricted. See 

Chapter 1. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 4. 19  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Answering Your Questions 

A We are holding a $100-a-plate fundraiser for our committee 

The actual cost of the event to our committee will be 

$25 per person  When someone gives us $100 to attend 

the dinner, do we report $100 as a contribution, or do 

we subtract the $25 cost and report receiving a $75 

contribution? 

The cost of the ticket for the fundraiser is the amount of the 

contribution. Report $100 as the contribution. 

B When we send out a fundraising letter, are we required to 

put our committee identification number on the invitation? 

There  is  no  requirement  to  put  the  identification  number 

anywhere on the mailer. However, many campaigns do so 

because if other committees, or others with their own reporting 

obligations, contribute to your committee, they will need your 

identification  number  to  complete  their  campaign  reports. 

C We would like to hold a raffle at our next fundraiser. Are 

there any restrictions on raffles? 

The  Political  Reform  Act  does  not  restrict  raffles.  However, 

Penal  Code  319  does  prohibit  some  raffles.  This  code  is 

interpreted and enforced by each county’s district attorney. 

Contact  the  local  district  attorney  where  the  raffle  will  be  held 

for further information. Of course, be sure all of the reporting 

and recordkeeping requirements are met. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 4. 20  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

D If my next door neighbor, spends $1,000 on an event to 

help raise funds for two different candidates and the event 

is held in her home, has she made a contribution to each 

committee? 

Yes. The total cost of a home fundraiser must be $500 or less, 

or the event will qualify as a nonmonetary contribution. This is 

true  no  matter  how  many  committees  benefit  from  the  event. 

E May a non-profit organization hold a joint fundraiser with a 

political committee? 

Yes.  However,  any  costs  incurred  by  the  non-profit  organization 

which are not reimbursed by the political committee would be 

considered  to  be  a nonmonetary  contribution  from  the  non-profit 

to  the  political  committee.  The  non-profit  organization  should 

contact the IRS for any possible restrictions based upon the 

organization’s tax status. 

F Three candidates wish to conduct individual polls  A

polling firm has offered a reduced rate because all three 

polls can be combined using one very large sample  Are 

the candidates receiving contributions from the polling 

firm because of the discounted fee, and are the candidates 

making contributions to each other? 

To the extent each candidate pays only his or her share of the 

cost of the poll, the candidates are not making contributions to 

each  other.  Additionally,  if  the  polling  firm  provides  the  discount 

as part of its standard business policy of providing discounts in 

similar situations and does not provide the discount for political 

purposes, the candidates will not receive a contribution from the 

polling  firm. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 4. 21  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Authority 

The  following  Government  Code  sections  and  Title  2 regulations 

provide authority for the information in this chapter: 

Government Code Sections 

82015  Contribution. 

82018  Cumulative Amount. 

82025  Expenditure. 

82025.5  Fair Market Value. 

82047  Person. 

84105  Notification  of  Contributors. 

84211  Contents of Campaign Statements. 

84216  Loans. 

84300  Cash and In-Kind Contributions; Cash Expenditures. 

84302  Contributions by Intermediary or Agent. 

84306  Contributions Received by Agents of Candidates and 

Committees. 

85308  Family Contributions. 

85311  Affiliated  Entities;  Aggregation  of  Contributions  to  State 

Candidates. 

85312  Communications to Members of an Organization. 

85319  Returning Contributions. 

85700  Donor Information Requirements; Return of Contributions. 

Title 2 Regulations 

18215  Contribution. 

18215.1  Contributions; When Aggregated. 

18215.2  Uncompensated  Internet  Activity  by  Individuals  that  is  not 

a Contribution or Expenditure. 

18216  Enforceable Promise to Make a Payment. 

18225  Expenditure. 

18421.1  Disclosure of the Making and Receipt of Contributions. 

18421.3  Reporting of Contributions and Expenditures Collected by 

Contract Vendors or Collecting Agents. 

18423  Payments for Personal Services as Contributions and 

Expenditures. 

18427.1  Notification  to  Contributors  of  $5,000  or  More. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 4. 22  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

18428  Reporting of Contributions and Independent Expenditures 

Required to be Aggregated. 

18430  Committee Controlled by More Than One Candidate. 

18432.5  Intermediary. 

18523  Nondesignated Contributions or Loans. 

18530.7  Extensions of Credit. 

18531  Return of Excessive Contributions. 

18531.2  Refunding  General  Election  Contributions. 

18531.7  Payments for Communications—Section 85312. 

18533  Contributions from Joint Checking Accounts. 

Advice Letter 15-065 (Lobbyist Fundraising) DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 5. 1  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Cha Pter  5C ontr Ibut Ion  reStr IC tIon S

Although the Political Reform Act (Act) is primarily a disclosure law, 

there are several important restrictions and prohibitions on receiving 

contributions. This chapter reviews these restrictions and prohibitions, 

as well as some that are contained in laws other than the Political 

Reform Act. 

In addition, while the receipt of campaign contributions generally 

will  not  create  a conflict  of  interest  for  an  elected  officeholder  in  the 

performance of his or her duties, contributions may be the source 

of  a conflict  of  interest  for  officeholders  or  candidates  who  are 

also appointed to certain boards or commissions. The section on 

“Disqualification  and  Campaign  Contributions”  covers  this  area  of  the 

law. 

The Act also imposes the following restrictions on state candidates. 

These issues are reviewed in Chapter 1. 

• Contribution limits 

• Voluntary expenditure ceiling 

• Surplus funds 

• Transfers of committee funds for future elections 

• Post election fundraising limits 

A Restrictions under the Political Reform Act 

Reporting the True Donor 

If a contribution of $100 or more is received from a single source in a 

calendar  year,  the  source  must  be  identified  on  the  committee’s  Form 

460. If a contribution is received through an intermediary, both the 

intermediary  and  the  true  source  of  the  contribution  must  be  identified. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 5. 2  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Failure to disclose the true source of a contribution is often referred 

to as campaign money laundering, which is a serious violation of the 

Act. One type of common violation is when an employer reimburses 

individual employees for contributions so that the committee receiving 

the contributions discloses the employees rather than the true source 

of the contribution (the employer) on campaign disclosure reports. 

Another occurrence is when a person (organization, business, 

individual) makes a contribution to another person with the condition, 

agreement or understanding that the payment will be subsequently 

used for political purposes, such as a contribution to another 

committee. It is a violation for persons to conceal their identities by 

contributing through another person. 

Committee treasurers must inquire about any information that a 

person of reasonable prudence would question based on all available 

information. It is not possible to describe every situation that might 

trigger  a duty  for  a treasurer  to  inquire  if  a contribution  is  identified 

correctly. Some examples are the size of the contribution, the reported 

source, and the likelihood of that source making a contribution of the 

size reported. 

If it is discovered that a committee received a contribution and the 

donor  and  intermediary  were  not  properly  identified,  the  contribution 

must  be  paid  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  deposit  in  the  State  General 

Fund. 

Cash Contributions 

The committee may not accept a cash contribution of $100 or more. 

Such a contribution will not be deemed “received” if it is not deposited 

or spent and is returned to the contributor prior to the end of the 

reporting period of the campaign statement on which the contribution 

would otherwise be reported. Even if the contribution is inadvertently 

deposited, it is not deemed “received” if it is refunded within 72 hours 

of receipt. However, a cash contribution of $1,000 or more that 

is received in the 90 days before the election that is inadvertently 

deposited must be refunded within 48 hours in order to not be deemed 

“received.” 

Even if change is 

immediately provided, 

a committee may not accept 

$100 or more in cash from a 

single source. For example, 

if the committee is holding a 

fundraiser and charging $50 

per person, an attendee may 

not pay with a $100 bill. The 

payment must be made by 

personal check, debit card, 

or credit card. 

Quick 

Tip 

Ex 4.1  - A committee 

receives contributions 

of $1,000 each from six 

different individuals in the 

same week. The committee 

treasurer and campaign 

fundraiser did not make 

specific solicitations to 

the individuals. Upon the 

treasurer’s request, the 

individuals state that they all 

work for the same employer. 

The committee treasurer 

has a duty to inquire to 

determine if the employer 

reimbursed the employees 

and should be reported as 

the donor. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 5. 3  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Anonymous Contributions 

Anonymous contributions of $100 or more are prohibited. If the 

committee receives a cash contribution of $100 or more from an 

unknown source, it must be sent to the Secretary of State for deposit 

in  the  State  General  Fund. 

Missing Contributor Information: 

A contribution of $100 or more must be returned within 60 days of 

receipt if the candidate or committee has not obtained the contributor’s 

name, address, and in the case of a contributor who is an individual, 

his or her occupation and employer. (See Chapter 3.) 

Contributions Made by Money Orders/Cashier’s Checks/ 

Traveler’s Cheques 

Contributions of $100 or more made by money order, cashier’s check, 

or traveler’s cheque are prohibited and must be returned to the 

contributor, or, if made anonymously, sent to the Secretary of State for 

deposit  in  the  State  General  Fund. 

All monetary contributions of $100 or more must be made by written 

instrument (such as a check) containing the name of the donor and 

drawn from the account of the donor or the intermediary. Contributions 

may also be received by credit card (including over the Internet), wire 

transfer, or other electronic means. (See Chapter 3.) 

Contributor’s Legal Name 

Contributions must be made in the name by which the contributor is 

identified  for  legal  purposes. 

Commingling Funds 

Campaign funds may not be commingled with any individual’s 

personal funds; they must be kept in an account separate from any 

account that contains personal funds. In general, campaign funds 

may not be used for personal expenses. 

Campaign 

contributions must be 

kept separate from personal 

funds and may not be used 

for personal expenses. 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 5. 4  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Contributions Delivered in State Office Buildings 

A contribution may not be delivered to or received by another person, 

personally or through an agent, in the State Capitol or any other state 

office  building  for  which  the  State  of  California  pays  the  majority  of  the 

rent. “Personally delivered” includes the delivery of a copy or facsimile 

of a contribution, and the original or a copy of a contribution transmittal 

letter. This prohibition does not apply to contributions received or 

delivered  in  a legislative  district  office  or  those  sent  by  postal  mail. 

Contributions from State Lobbyists 

A state  lobbyist  may  not  make  a contribution  to  an  elected  state  officer 

or  a candidate  for  elective  state  office  if  the  lobbyist  is  registered  to 

lobby  the  governmental  agency  of  the  elected  officer  or  the  agency 

to which the candidate is seeking election. The lobbyist also may 

not  contribute  to  a local  committee  controlled  by  a state  officer  or 

candidate  for  elective  state  office. 

State Lobbyist and Lobbying Firm Fundraisers 

A fundraiser held in the home of a state lobbyist is considered a 

contribution; therefore, a lobbyist or a cohabitant of a lobbyist is 

prohibited from holding a fundraiser in his or her home for a candidate 

seeking election to a governmental agency that the lobbyist is 

registered  to  lobby.  This  includes  a local  candidate/officeholder  that 

is  seeking  election  to  a state  office.  A similar  prohibition  applies  to 

lobbying  firms  holding  fundraisers  at  their  offices. 

Contributions from Foreign Governments or Foreign Principals 

Committees are prohibited from soliciting or accepting contributions 

from a foreign government or foreign principal in connection with a 

candidate  or  ballot  measure  in  any  state  or  local  election.  (52  U.S.C. 

Section  30118  and  Government  Code  Section  85320  of  the  Act.) 

For purposes of this prohibition, a “foreign principal” includes: 

• A foreign political party. 

• An  individual  outside  the  United  States,  unless  the  individual  is 

a United  States  citizen. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 5. 5  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

• A corporation  outside  of  the  United  States,  unless  it  is  organized 

or  created  by  the  laws  of  the  United  States  or  any  place  subject 

to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  United  States,  and  its  principal  place  of 

business  is  within  the  United  States. 

• A foreign partnership, association, corporation, or organization. 

• A domestic subsidiary of a foreign corporation if the decision 

to  contribute  or  expend  funds  is  made  by  an  officer,  director,  or 

management employee of the foreign corporation who is not a 

citizen  of  the  United  States  or  a lawfully-admitted  permanent 

resident  of  the  United  States. 

Contributions, expenditures, or independent expenditures made by a 

lawfully-admitted permanent resident (e.g., a “green card” holder) of 

the  United  States  are  permitted. 

Soliciting Contributions from Public Employees 

Government  Code  Section  3205  prohibits  a local  candidate  from 

knowingly, directly or indirectly, soliciting a political contribution 

from any employees of his or her agency or from a person on an 

employment list of that agency. There is an exception for solicitations 

that  are  made  to  a significant  segment  of  the  public.  For  further 

information,  contact  the  Attorney  General’s  office  or  the  local  district 

attorney. 

B Public Funds and Public Resources 

The Political Reform Act prohibits the payment of public moneys, in 

the  form  of  matching  funds  or  cash  subsidiaries,  for  the  financing 

of elections, except for elections in charter cities and counties. In 

addition, laws outside the Act prohibit the use of public resources, 

such  as  office  equipment,  staff  time,  etc.,  for  campaign  or  personal 

purposes.  (Education  Code  Section  7054;  Gov.  Code  Section  8314; 

Penal Code Section 426; and  Vargas v. City of Salinas  (2009) 46 Cal 

4th 1.) 

Using public resources 

for campaign purposes 

is prohibited. 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 5. 6  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Government  Code  Section  54964  prohibits  an  officer,  employee 

or consultant of a local agency from expending or authorizing the 

expenditure of any local agency funds to support or oppose a 

candidate or ballot measure. For further information about laws 

outside  the  Act,  contact  the  Attorney  General’s  office  at  (800) 

952-5225 or the local district attorney. 

C. Campaign Contributions and Disqualification 

Generally,  campaign  contributions  received  in  connection  with  an 

elective  office  do  not  serve  as  the  basis  for  disqualifying  an  official 

from voting on a matter affecting the contributor. However, if an 

elected  official  or  candidate  also  holds  a position  on  an  appointed 

board or commission, he or she may be restricted from soliciting or 

receiving campaign contributions from persons with business before 

the  board  or  commission.  He  or  she  may  be  subject  to  Government 

Code Section 84308 which: 

• Prohibits  an  officer  from  soliciting,  accepting,  or  directing 

campaign contributions of more than $250 from any party, 

participant, or agent of a party or participant, while a proceeding 

involving a license, permit, or other entitlement for use is 

pending  before  the  officer’s  agency  and  for  three  months 

following the date of that decision. This prohibition applies even 

when the contribution is for another candidate. 

• Requires disclosure of all such campaign contributions and also 

requires  an  official’s  disqualification  from  making  decisions  in 

certain  proceedings  in  which  the  official  is  acting  in  an  appointed 

position  if  the  official  has  received  more  than  $250  in  campaign 

contributions from a party or participant within 12 months 

preceding the decision. 

Who is Covered? 

Generally,  appointed  board  members,  commissioners,  or  individuals 

who head state or local government agencies and who make decisions 

in proceedings involving licenses, permits, or other entitlements for 

use  are  subject  to  Section  84308.  Common  positions  include: 

Ex 4.2  - A planning 

commissioner serves as the 

treasurer for a legislator’s 

campaign. The planning 

commissioner may not 

solicit, accept, or direct a 

campaign contribution of 

more than $250 for the 

legislator’s campaign from 

a party, participant, or 

agent whose proceeding is 

pending before the planning 

commission. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 5. 7  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

• Planning Commissioners 

• Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO) members 

• Members of redevelopment agencies which are not entirely 

comprised of elected members of the same agency 

• Transportation Authority members 

• Air Quality Management District members 

• Waste Management Authority members 

• California Coastal Commissioners 

Exempted Agencies 

Section 84308 does not apply to the following agencies: 

• Judicial branch 

• Legislature 

• Board  of  Equalization  (Gov.  Code  Section  15626  applies) 

• Constitutional  officers 

• Local agencies whose members are elected by the voters (e.g., 

board of supervisors, city council, or school board) 

• Committees of an agency that are comprised solely of elected 

members of the same agency (e.g., city councilmembers who 

serve  on  the  city’s  budget  and  finance  committee) 

• Elected members of an agency, all of whom also serve as the 

governing body of another agency (i.e., city councilmembers 

who also serve on the city’s redevelopment agency board) DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 5. 8  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Authority 

The  following  Government  Code  sections  and  Title  2 regulations 

provide authority for the information in this chapter: 

Government Code Sections 

82015  Contribution. 

84300  Cash and In-Kind Contributions; Cash Expenditures. 

84301  Contributions  Made  Under  Legal  Name. 

84302  Contributions by Intermediary or Agent. 

84304  Anonymous Contributions. 

84307  Commingling with Personal Funds. 

84308  Contributions  to  Officers;  Disqualification. 

84309  Transmittal  of  Campaign  Contributions  in  State  Office 

Buildings. 

85700  Donor Information Requirements; Return of Contributions. 

85701  Laundered Contributions. 

85702  Contributions from Lobbyists. 

85704  Prohibition on Earmarking. 

Title 2 Regulations and Opinion 

18215  Contribution. 

18432.5  Intermediary. 

18438.1  Officers  and  Agencies  Under  Government  Code  Section 

84308. 

18438.5  Aggregated  Contributions  Under  Government  Code 

Section 84308. 

18438.6  Solicitation,  Direction,  and  Receipt  of  Contributions  Under 

Government  Code  Section  84308. 

18438.7  Prohibitions  and  Disqualification  Under  Government  Code 

Section 84308. 

18438.8  Disclosure  Under  Government  Code  Section  84308. 

18439  Definition  of  “Personally  Deliver.” 

18572  Lobbyist  Contributions  – Making  a Contribution  Defined. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 6. 1  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Cha Pter  6

The FPPC has fined 

committees for 

payments made from a 

campaign account that 

were used for the following 

personal purposes: auto 

care services, doctor visits, 

clothing, and personal life 

insurance premiums. 

Quick 

Tip 

uSe of Cam PaIG n fund S

The  use  of  campaign  funds  by  candidates,  elected  officials,  and  others 

who control the expenditure of campaign funds, is strictly regulated. 

The expenditure of campaign funds must be reasonably related to a 

political, legislative, or governmental purpose. 

If  an  expenditure  confers  a substantial  personal  benefit  on  the 

candidate,  officeholder,  or  any  individual  authorized  to  approve 

campaign expenditures, the expenditure must be directly related to a 

political, legislative, or governmental purpose. A substantial personal 

benefit  means  an  expenditure  of  campaign  funds  which  results  in  a

direct  personal  benefit  with  a value  of  more  than  $200. 

The  following  are  examples  of  specific  expenditures  and  the  rules 

regarding the use of campaign funds for such purposes. If the 

examples are not helpful, contact the FPPC for assistance about 

whether  or  not  a specific  use  of  campaign  funds  is  permissible  by 

sending  an  e-mail  with  specific  facts  to  advice@fppc.ca.gov.  Political 

expenditures to other committees are discussed elsewhere in this 

manual. 

A Campaign Expenditures 

Election Night Celebrations 

Costs associated with election night celebrations or similar campaign 

events are considered to be directly related to a political, legislative, or 

governmental purpose; therefore, campaign funds may be used. 

Attorneys’ Fees 

Generally,  attorneys’  fees  and  other  costs  related  to  administrative, 

civil, or criminal litigation may only be paid with campaign funds if 

the litigation is directly related to activities of the committee that are 

consistent  with  its  primary  objectives.  Campaign  funds  may  be  used  to 

pay for expenses related to the following: 

• Action to halt defamation; DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 6. 2  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Ex 5.1  - A volunteer buys 

bagels for the morning shift 

of volunteer workers. After 

providing the treasurer with 

a receipt for bagels, the 

treasurer may reimburse the 

volunteer for his expenses so 

long as the reimbursement 

is made within 45 days of 

the payment. 

• Defense of an action to halt defamation; 

• Defense of an action for violation of state or local campaign, 

disclosure, or election laws; 

• Litigation to secure a place on the ballot or challenge the 

wording of the ballot pamphlet; 

• Contested election; 

• Election recount; and 

• Compliance expenses (for example, completing campaign 

disclosure reports). 

NOTE:  Attorney Fees and Regulated Costs does not include a 

payment  or  reimbursement  for  a fine,  penalty,  judgment  or  settlement, 

or a payment to return or disgorge contributions made to any other 

committee  controlled  by  the  candidate  or  officer  and  expenses  for 

fundraising, media or political consulting fees, mass mailing or other 

advertising, except as expressly authorized by the Act. 

Reimbursements 

The candidate must deposit personal funds in the campaign bank 

account and make expenditures from that account instead of spending 

personal funds for the campaign and later seeking reimbursement 

from campaign funds. However, any other individual (e.g., a volunteer 

or campaign worker) may make expenses from personal funds and 

be reimbursed, so long as the expenses are incurred for political, 

legislative, or governmental purposes and repayment is made within 

45  days.  An  officeholder  may  use  personal  funds  and  be  reimbursed 

for  “officeholder”  expenses.  (See  Chapter  8 for  specific  reporting  rules 

and deadlines for reimbursements.) 

Automobile Lease or Purchase 

When making payments associated with leasing, purchasing, or 

operating a vehicle, such as insurance, maintenance, and repairs, 

the campaign committee must be the lessee or hold title to the 

vehicle.  Additional  titleholders  may  not  be  the  candidate,  officeholder, DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 6. 3  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Ex 5.2  - A candidate has 

been asked to attend a 

formal event honoring 

the mayor. Since he does 

not own a tuxedo, he may 

rent one with campaign 

funds since the event is 

directly related to a political 

purpose. 

Ex 5.3  - A fundraiser will 

be held to raise funds for 

a veteran’s memorial at 

the local civic center. The 

committee is permitted to 

donate campaign funds 

because the payment has 

a political, legislative, or 

governmental purpose. 

Ex 5.4  - Your committee 

would like donate funds to 

a homeless shelter where 

your spouse is a salaried 

employee. It is determined 

that a substantial part of 

the proceeds would benefit 

your spouse; therefore, 

this expenditure is not 

permissible. 

treasurer, or any other person who may approve campaign 

expenditures, or a member of any such person’s immediate family 

(spouse or registered domestic partner and dependent children). 

Additional  lessees  may  not  be  the  candidate,  officeholder,  treasurer,  or 

a member of any of these persons’ immediate family. 

Reimbursed Automobile Expenses 

Campaign  funds  may  be  used  to  reimburse  an  officeholder,  candidate, 

immediate family member, treasurer, and committee staff for use of a 

personal vehicle if the use is directly related to a political, legislative, or 

governmental purpose. Documentation should be kept which includes 

the trip’s purpose and mileage in a manner approved by the Internal 

Revenue Service for deducting mileage expenses. The rate for 

reimbursement may not exceed that allowed under Internal Revenue 

Code Section 162. For more details, the Internal Revenue Service 

may be contacted at (800) 829-1040 (www.irs.gov). 

Clothing 

Clothing is a personal expense. The committee may not use 

campaign funds to pay for a candidate’s business or casual clothing. 

Specialty  clothing,  such  as  formal  wear  worn  by  an  officeholder  or 

candidate, may be purchased with campaign funds if the use of such 

clothing is directly related to a political, legislative, or governmental 

purpose. 

Contributions to Other Candidates and Committees 

Candidates may make contributions to other candidates and 

committees unless prohibited by local rules. Contributions to certain 

state  committees  are  subject  to  limitations. 

Donations 

Campaign funds may be used to make donations or loans to bona 

fide  charitable,  educational,  civic,  religious,  or  similar  tax-exempt, 

nonprofit  organizations  as  long  as  the  donation  or  loan  is  reasonably 

related to a political, legislative, or governmental purpose. In addition, 

the  donation  may  not  personally  benefit  the  officeholder,  candidate, DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 6. 4  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

The campaign 

committee may pat 

a fine assessed by the 

Secretary of State for a late 

campaign statement. 

Quick 

Tip 

committee treasurer, or any individual with authority to approve the 

expenditure of campaign funds, or any such person’s immediate 

family member (spouse or registered domestic partner and dependent 

children). 

Equipment and Appliances 

Campaign funds may be used to buy, lease, or refurbish equipment 

or appliances, but only if their use is directly related to a political, 

legislative, or governmental purpose. As with restrictions on vehicles, 

the committee must hold title, or be the lessee, on the equipment; no 

individual may be listed as owner or lessee. 

Fines, Penalties, Judgments, and Settlements 

Generally,  campaign  funds  may  be  used  to  pay  the  following  fines, 

penalties,  judgments,  and  settlements: 

• Parking citations received while performing political, legislative, 

or governmental activities. 

• Fines assessed in relation to situations in which the use of 

campaign  funds  to  pay  for  an  attorney  is  specifically  allowed 

under the Act. 

• Fines  imposed  for  late  filing  of  campaign  statements  and 

Statements of Economic Interests (Form 700). 

Prohibited Payments: 

• Campaign  funds  of  any  amount  may  not  be  used  to  pay  a fine, 

penalty,  judgment,  or  settlement  relating  to  an  improper  use  of 

campaign funds or an action involving bribery under Penal Code 

Section 86. 

• Campaign  funds  cannot  be  used  to  pay  a fine,  penalty,  judgment 

or settlement, if the action was related to using campaign funds 

for  personal  purposes.  See  Government  code  Section  89513 

for  specific  explanations. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 6. 5  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Food 

A committee may use campaign funds to purchase a meal with a 

cost of $200 or less, so long as the expenditure is reasonably related 

to a political, legislative, or governmental purpose. However, if the 

aggregate cost of the meal is more than $200, the expense must be 

directly related to one of these purposes. When a candidate controlled 

committee reports itemized expenditures for gifts, meals, or travel, 

specific  details  must  be  included  as  described  in  Chapter  8. 

Gifts 

Unless  directly  related  to  a political,  legislative,  or  governmental 

purpose, personal gifts may not be paid for with campaign funds. 

However, gifts of less than $250 in a calendar year to campaign 

employees or workers are permitted because they are considered to 

be directly related to a political, legislative, or governmental purpose. 

When a candidate controlled committee reports itemized expenditures 

for  gifts,  meals,  or  travel,  specific  details  must  be  included  as 

described in Chapter 8. 

Health-Related Expenses 

A committee  may  use  campaign  funds  to  pay  for  health  care  benefits 

for its employees or independent contractors. However, campaign 

funds may not be used to pay for other health-related expenses such 

as health club dues, special dietary foods, or medical check-ups. 

Loans 

Campaign funds may be used to make loans to other political 

committees,  subject  to  applicable  limits,  if  any. 

Campaign  funds  may  also  be  used  to  make  loans  to  bona  fide 

charitable,  educational,  civic,  religious,  or  similar  tax-exempt,  nonprofit 

organizations,  so  long  as  the  loan  does  not  personally  benefit  the 

officeholder,  candidate,  committee  treasurer,  or  any  individual  with 

authority to approve the expenditure of campaign funds, or any such 

person’s immediate family member. The loan must be reasonably 

related to a political, legislative, or governmental purpose. Campaign 

funds may not be loaned to an individual or to an entity other than 

those described above. 

Ex 5.5  - An officeholder 

attends a dinner sponsored 

by the police department 

to honor a local good 

Samaritan. Since the 

expenditure is directly 

related to a governmental 

purpose, the campaign may 

pay for her attendance even 

if the total cost is more than 

$200. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 6. 6  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Professional Services 

When the committee reasonably requires the services of 

professionals, such as accountants or attorneys, their fees may be 

paid with campaign funds as these expenditures are considered to 

be directly related to a political, legislative, or governmental purpose. 

(See below for restrictions on salary and compensation.) 

Real Property 

The committee may not purchase real property. It may, however, 

lease property for up to one year, so long as its use is directly related 

to a political, legislative, or governmental purpose. The candidate, 

officeholder,  committee  treasurer,  any  individual  with  authority  to 

approve the committee’s expenditures, or an immediate family 

member of any of these persons may not be a lessee or sublessor, or 

hold legal title to the leased property. 

Refunding Contributions 

The return of contributions to contributors, other than the state 

candidate, is permitted. A state candidate may provide the committee 

a personal loan which does not exceed $100,000. 

Returning Contributions Lacking Contributor Information 

When a contribution of $100 or more is received in a calendar year 

from a single contributor, the committee must disclose the contributor’s 

name and address, and, if the contributor is an individual, his or 

her occupation and employer. If the committee does not have this 

information in its records within 60 days of receipt of the contribution, it 

must be returned to the contributor. (See Chapter 2.) 

Salary and Compensation 

The  candidate  or  officeholder,  or  any  individual  authorized  to  approve 

the committee’s expenditures, may not receive a salary or other 

compensation from the committee for the performance of political, 

legislative, or governmental activities. The committee may pay for 

professional services such as an accountant, however, even if the 

accountant has authority to sign committee checks. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 6. 7  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

A spouse  or  domestic  partner  of  an  elected  officer  or  a candidate  for 

elective  office  may  not  receive,  in  exchange  for  any  services  rendered, 

compensation from campaign funds held by a controlled committee of 

the  officer  or  candidate. 

A committee may pay for the professional services of a public 

employee, if the employee’s services are rendered while on vacation, 

leave or outside of compensated public time. 

Security Systems 

A candidate may use campaign funds to purchase an electronic 

security system. To do so, the candidate must have received 

threats to his or her physical safety because of his or her status as a 

candidate  or  elected  official  and  the  incidents  must  be  verified  by  an 

appropriate law enforcement agency. No more than $5,000 may be 

spent and a report to the FPPC is required. 

Tickets for Entertainment and Sporting Events 

Campaign funds may not be used to purchase entertainment and 

sporting  event  tickets  for  use  by  the  candidate  or  officeholder,  or  staff 

of the committee, unless attendance at the event is directly related to a 

political, legislative, or governmental purpose. 

Tickets to Political Fundraisers 

A committee  may  purchase  tickets  to  political  fundraisers  (subject  to 

any  applicable  contribution  limits)  for  the  candidate,  officeholder,  or  his 

or  her  immediate  family,  or  an  officer,  director,  employee,  or  staff  of  the 

committee  or  the  officeholder’s  governmental  agency. 

Travel 

A committee may use campaign funds to pay for travel or 

accommodations  for  the  candidate  or  officeholder,  any  individual  with 

authority to approve the committee’s expenditures, or staff of the 

committee so long as the standards set by Internal Revenue Code 

Sections 162 and 274 (deduction of travel expenses for tax purposes) 

are complied with. Contact the Internal Revenue Service at (800) 

829-1040 or for more information. When a candidate controlled DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 6. 8  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

committee reports itemized expenditures for gifts, meals, or travel, 

specific  details  must  be  included  as  described  in  Chapter  8. 

Airline Mileage Programs 

Some airlines have mileage programs that allow individuals to earn 

free tickets or other awards. These mileage credits and awards 

belong to the individual traveler, not the committee. The committee is 

not required to report either the receipt of the mileage credit awards or 

the redemption of the credits. 

B Surplus Funds 

There are restrictions on how campaign funds held by an elected 

officeholder  or  candidate  may  be  spent  once  the  funds  become 

“surplus.” Surplus funds may not be used for a future election. See 

Chapter 11 for information about all requirements that must be met in 

order to use leftover campaign funds for a future election before the 

funds become surplus. 

Campaign  funds  held  by  an  officeholder  become  surplus  on  the  90th 

day  after  the  officeholder  leaves  the  office  for  which  the  funds  were 

raised, or on the 90th day after the end of the postelection reporting 

period following his or her defeat, whichever occurs last. Campaign 

funds held by a non-incumbent defeated candidate or a candidate 

that withdrew become surplus on the 90th day after the postelection 

reporting period following the election. The end of the postelection 

reporting  period  is  June  30  for  elections  held  during  the  first  six  months 

of the calendar year and December 31 for elections held during the 

last six months of the calendar year. 

Surplus funds may only be used to make the following 

expenditures: 

• Payments  for  outstanding  campaign  debts  or  officeholder 

expenses. 

• Refunds to contributors. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 6. 9  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

• Donations  to  a bona  fide  charitable,  educational,  civic,  religious, 

or  similar  tax-exempt,  nonprofit  organization,  provided  no 

substantial  part  of  the  proceeds  will  have  a material  financial 

effect on the candidate, on any member of the candidate’s 

immediate family (spouse or registered domestic partner and 

children), or the campaign treasurer. 

• Contributions to a political party or committee, so long as 

the funds are not used to make contributions in support of or 

opposition  to  a candidate  for  elective  office.  (For  example, 

funds earmarked for overhead expenses.) 

• Contributions to support or oppose any candidate for federal 

office,  any  candidate  for  elective  office  in  a state  other  than 

California, or any ballot measure. 

• Payments for professional services or attorneys’ fees for 

litigation that arises out of campaign or election activities. 

• Payment for an electronic security system. Contact the FPPC 

for  information  about  specific  requirements  that  must  be  met. 

Answering Your Questions 

A Are there private firms that provide treasurer or campaign 

reporting services? 

Yes. The FPPC does not endorse or recommend any particular 

private  firm.  Candidates  may  find  useful  information  on  the 

websites of the California Political Attorney’s Association and 

the California Political Treasurers Association. 

B I am a candidate  I make long-distance phone calls on 

my home phone to request support from organizations 

statewide  How may I pay for them? 

When the bill arrives and there are additional charges that can 

be directly attributed to the campaign activity, the committee 

should pay for that portion. If the personal charges are 

not changed by the campaign activity, there is no reporting 

required. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 6. 10  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

C May I use campaign funds to pay a babysitter for the 

evenings that I am out campaigning? 

You may use campaign funds to pay a babysitter, but only up to 

$200 per event. 

D As a candidate, I will be using my personal car to get 

around during the campaign  Is mileage considered a 

reportable contribution if I do not want to be reimbursed? 

No. Incidental use of your personal car for campaign purposes 

is not considered a contribution and is not reportable. 

E May I use campaign funds to have an additional telephone 

line put in my home? 

Yes, as long as the additional phone line is used for campaign 

purposes only. If, after the campaign, you choose to retain the 

additional phone line for personal purposes, you must pay the 

campaign what it would cost to install an additional line at that 

time. 

F Is it permissible to use campaign funds to pay an 

independent contractor (e  g , the campaign consultant) 

additional money if I win my election? 

Yes. You may use campaign funds to pay a contractor for fees 

that are part of the written contract. 

G May I host a victory party or give bonuses to my campaign 

workers? 

Yes. In most cases, the bonuses would be considered gifts and 

would be limited to, less than $250 per calendar year. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 6. 11  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

H I lost my legislative election and have funds remaining 

May I, a non-incumbent, use the leftover funds to run again 

in two years for the same office? 

If you wish to use funds left over from an unsuccessful race for 

a future  election  to  the  same  office,  file  a new  Form  501  and 

new Form 410 within 90 days after the end of the postelection 

reporting  period.  For  elections  occurring  in  the  first  six  months 

of the calendar year, the end of the postelection reporting 

period is June 30. For elections occurring in the last six months 

of the calendar year, the end of the postelection reporting 

period is December 31. Transfer the funds to a new campaign 

bank account. Funds must be attributed to contributors using 

either the LIFO or FIFO accounting method. (See Chapter 1.) If 

the funds become “surplus,” they may not be used for a future 

election. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 6. 12  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Authority 

The  following  Government  Code  sections  and  Title  2 regulations 

provide authority for the information in this chapter: 

Government Code Sections 

82025  Expenditure. 

82044  Payment. 

84307.5  Fundraising Payments Made to a Spouse or Domestic 

Partner. 

85201  Campaign Bank Account. 

85319  Returning Contributions. 

85501  Prohibition on Independent Expenditures by Candidate 

Controlled Committees. 

85700  Donor Information Requirements; Return of Contributions. 

89510  Acceptable Contributions. 

89511  Campaign Funds Held by Candidates and Committees. 

89511.5  Use  of  Personal  Funds  for  Incumbent  Elected  Officers. 

89512  Expenditures  Associated  with  Seeking  or  Holding  Office. 

89513  Use  of  Campaign  Funds  for  Specific  Activities. 

89514  Use  of  Campaign  Funds  for  Attorney’s  Fees. 

89515  Use  of  Campaign  Funds  for  Donations  and  Loans. 

89516  Use  of  Campaign  Funds  for  Vehicle  Expenses. 

89517  Use  of  Campaign  Funds  for  Real  Property,  Appliances  or 

Equipment. 

89517.5  Use  of  Campaign  Funds  for  Security  System. 

89518  Use  of  Campaign  Funds  for  Compensation. 

89519  Use  of  Surplus  Campaign  Funds. 

Title 2 Regulations 

18526  Reimbursement of Expenditures. 

18570  Return  of  Contributions  with  Insufficient  Donor  Information. 

18951  Surplus Funds. 

18960  Direct  Personal  Benefit  Defined. 

18961  Incidental  Use. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 7. 1  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Cha Pter  7C ommun IC at Ion S

Campaigns reach the voters through political communications 

including television, radio, and Internet advertising, mailers, billboards, 

precinct-walking,  and  flyers.  The  Political  Reform  Act  requires  that 

the committee report most payments in connection with political 

communications as direct expenditures, nonmonetary contributions 

to the campaign, or independent expenditures. As discussed below, 

however, certain types of communications may not be reportable at 

all,  or  may  be  subject  to  special  reporting  requirements.  This  chapter 

reviews common communications in a campaign and how payments 

for the communications are reported. 

The Act also requires “paid for by” disclaimers on campaign ads to 

inform voters who is paying for a communication. Chapter 8 discusses 

the disclaimer requirements that apply to communications, including 

mass mailings, made by candidate controlled committees for their own 

election and communications made by non-controlled committees that 

are primarily formed to support or oppose a candidate. 

A Payments for Communications a Candidate’s Campaign 

Makes 

In most cases, a candidate’s campaign committee will be funding 

the  bulk  of  the  communications  to  elect  that  candidate  to  office. 

When a candidate’s campaign committee makes expenditures 

for communications in furtherance of the candidate’s election, the 

committee simply reports these direct expenditures. The expenditures 

are reported on the committee’s Form 460. 

B Payments for Communications Others Make 

Generally,  when  someone  other  than  the  candidate  or  his  or  her 

committee pays for a communication that expressly advocates support 

of the candidate, and the communication is coordinated with or “made 

at the behest” of the affected candidate, the candidate has received a 

nonmonetary contribution  that the candidate’s controlled committee 

must report. 

Communications that a 

candidate’s controlled 

committee pays for to 

support the candidate’s own 

election are direct campaign 

expenditures, reported on 

Form 460. 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 7. 2  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Payments for communications expressly advocating support of or 

opposition to a candidate, that are not coordinated with or made at 

the behest of the candidate, are  independent expenditures , and the 

affected candidate is not required to report the payments. The person 

making the independent expenditure, however, may have reporting 

obligations. 

Whether a communication is a contribution, an independent 

expenditure, or some other type of reportable payment depends 

on several facts, including whether the communication “expressly 

advocates”  support  of  or  opposition  to  a clearly  identified  candidate 

or ballot measure. The information and examples below may be of 

assistance in making that determination. It is impossible, however, to 

address all of the types of communications in a campaign. If presented 

with  specific  facts,  FPPC  staff  may  provide  assistance. 

Communications that a candidate’s controlled committee pays for to 

support his or her own candidacy, or to oppose his or her opponent, 

are direct campaign expenditures, not contributions or independent 

expenditures. 

In most cases, communications that a non-candidate controlled 

committee primarily formed to support or oppose a candidate pays for 

are considered contributions or independent expenditures. 

1 Coordinated Communications - Nonmonetary Contributions 

When someone other than the candidate or his or her committee 

pays for a communication that is coordinated with or “made at the 

behest” of the candidate or his or her committee, the payment for the 

communication is a nonmonetary contribution to the affected candidate. 

Coordination - “Made at the Behest” 

A payment is coordinated with or “made at the behest” of the candidate 

or committee under each of the following situations: 

• It is made at the request, suggestion, or direction of, or in 

cooperation, consultation or coordination with the committee for 

whose  benefit  the  expenditure  is  made. 

If a third party pays 

for communications 

supporting or opposing the 

election of a candidate, 

these may be nonmonetary 

contributions to the 

candidate, if coordinated 

with the candidate, or 

independent expenditures. 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 7. 3  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

• The candidate or committee has made or participated in making 

any decision about the content, timing, location, mode, intended 

audience, distribution, or placement of the communication. 

• The creator, producer, or person paying for the communication 

has had a discussion and agreement with the candidate or 

committee regarding the content, timing, location, mode, 

intended audience, volume of distribution, or placement of the 

communication. 

An expenditure is  presumed to be coordinated  or “made at the 

behest” of a candidate or committee if: 

• Committee’s Needs  It is based on information about the 

candidate’s or committee’s campaign needs or plans the 

candidate or committee provides to the person making the 

expenditure. 

• Agent  It is made by or through any agent of the candidate 

or committee in the course of the agent’s involvement in the 

current campaign. 

• Common Consultants  The person making the expenditure 

retains the services of a person who provides the candidate or 

committee with professional services related to campaign or 

fundraising strategy for the same election. 

• Republication  The communication reproduces, republishes, 

or disseminates a communication designed, produced, paid 

for, or distributed by the candidate or committee in whole or 

substantial part. 

However, an expenditure is  not coordinated  or made at the behest of 

a candidate or committee merely because: 

• Interview  A person interviews the candidate or committee’s 

agent on issues affecting the person making the expenditure. 

• Candidate Material  The person making the expenditure has 

obtained a photograph, biography, position paper, press release, 

or similar material from the candidate or his or her committee. 

When a 

communication 

that expressly advocates 

support of a candidate is 

paid for by someone other 

than the candidate or his 

or her committee, and the 

communication is “made at 

the behest” of the affected 

candidate, the candidate 

must report the payment as 

a nonmonetary contribution. 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 7. 4  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

• Public Appearance  The person making the expenditure 

has invited the candidate or committee representative to 

make a public appearance before the person’s members, 

employees, shareholders, or their families provided that there 

is no discussion with the candidate or committee prior to the 

expenditure related to details of the expenditure. 

• Contribution  The person making the expenditure has made a 

contribution to the candidate or committee. 

• Expenditure  The person makes an expenditure in response 

to  a general,  non-specific  request  for  support  by  a candidate 

or committee, provided that there is no discussion with the 

candidate or committee prior to the expenditure relating to 

details of the expenditure. 

• A person informs a candidate or committee that the person 

has made an expenditure, provided that there is no exchange 

of information, not otherwise available to the public, relating to 

details of the expenditure. 

• The expenditure is made at the request or suggestion of the 

candidate  or  committee  for  the  benefit  of  another  candidate  or 

committee. 

Regulation  18225.7,  summarized  above,  specifies  when  a

communication is considered independent versus made at the behest 

of a candidate or committee. Because the determination is based 

on  specific  facts,  persons  are  encouraged  to  contact  the  FPPC  for 

guidance. 

2 Independent Expenditures 

An independent expenditure is a payment for a communication that: 

• Expressly advocates  the election or defeat of a  clearly 

identified candidate  or  the  qualification,  passage  or  defeat  of  a

clearly  identified  measure,  and 

• The communication is  not coordinated  with or “made at the 

behest” of the affected candidate or committee. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 7. 5  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Clearly Identified Candidate 

A communication  clearly  identifies  a candidate  when  it  uses 

the candidate’s name, photograph, or status as a candidate or 

officeholder.  If  a communication  includes  a group  of  candidates  and 

refers  to  some  well-defined  characteristic  of  the  group,  the  candidates 

are  clearly  identified  even  if  it  does  not  use  specific  names. 

Express Advocacy 

A communication expressly advocates support of or opposition to a 

clearly  identified  candidate  under  the  following  scenarios: 

• Magic Words  The communication uses words such as “vote 

for,” “elect, “support,” “cast your ballot,” “vote against,” “defeat,” 

or  “reject.” 

• Unambiguously Urges  The communication is made within 

60  days  prior  to  an  election,  it  refers  to  a clearly  identified 

candidate, and when taken as a whole, it unambiguously 

urges a particular result in an election. The message must be 

susceptible of no reasonable interpretation other than as an 

appeal  to  vote  for  or  against  a specific  candidate. 

A committee or person making independent expenditures must 

be aware that the communication cannot be coordinated with the 

affected candidate or measure committee. If there is coordination, the 

payments are reported as contributions. 

When a 

communication 

that expressly advocates 

support of a candidate is 

not “made at the behest” of 

the affected candidate, the 

payment is considered an 

independent expenditure 

and the candidate does 

not report the payment. 

The person making the 

payment may have reporting 

obligations. 

Quick 

Tip 

Ex 7.1 - A legislative candidate paid for a mailing that quoted the Governor’s 

verbal endorsement of his candidacy. Although the Governor was also on the 

ballot, the flyer did not ask voters to vote for the Governor. Therefore, the flyer 

was not to a contribution to the Governor committee. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 7. 6  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

C Issue Ads: E-530 

When a committee produces an advertisement featuring a state 

candidate but the message does not expressly advocate the election 

or defeat of the candidate, the committee has made was is commonly 

referred to as an “issue ad.” For example an advertisement in a 

newspaper  might  state  “Thank  you  Governor  Nyland,  for  Supporting 

California’s Children.” 

When a committee spends $50,000 or more for such a communication 

and the ad is disseminated during the 45 days before an election and 

the  ad  clearly  identifies  a state  candidate  appearing  on  the  ballot,  the 

Form  E-530  must  be  filed  electronically  with  the  Secretary  of  State 

within 48 hours. 

Ex 7.2  - An individual paid $4,000 for a newspaper ad stating “Vote for Autumn 

Gomez.” The communication expressly advocates support for a clearly 

identified candidate and must be reported either as a contribution if it was 

made at the candidate’s behest or as an independent expenditure if it was not. 

Later, the same individual paid $2,000 for post card-sized flyers that simply 

stated, “Vote on Election Day.” This communication is not reported as a 

contribution or independent expenditure because it did not expressly advocate 

support of or opposition to a candidate or measure. 

Ex 7.3  - Friends of Gomez, a non-candidate-controlled committee primarily 

formed to support Autumn Gomez’s candidacy, printed campaign literature 

stating, “Vote for Autumn Gomez.” The communication included a copy 

of a photograph the committee obtained from the public information 

counter at Ms. Gomez’s campaign headquarters. Ms. Gomez did not in any 

way coordinate with the committee in producing the campaign literature. 

Therefore, the committee made an independent expenditure, not a 

contribution to Ms. Gomez’s campaign. 

On the other hand, if the committee contacted Ms. Gomez and arranged 

for a professional photographer to meet with her for the purpose of taking 

photographs for the mailer, the committee would be making a nonmonetary 

contribution to her campaign. 

Ex 7.4  - During Curt Anthony’s campaign, two newspaper advertisements 

supporting Mr. Anthony were published without his knowledge or consent. 

Because the payments for these communications were not coordinated 

with him or made at his behest, they were independent expenditures by the 

person(s) funding the ads and were not reportable by Mr. Anthony’s campaign. 

The person(s) who paid for the ads may have a filing obligation. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 7. 7  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

The report must disclose the amount and date of the payment(s), 

and  the  name  of  and  office  sought  by  the  candidate(s)  identified 

in the communication. In addition, if $5,000 or more was received 

or promised from a single source to pay for the communication, 

the name, address, occupation, and employer (if applicable) of the 

contributor, as well as the date and amount received or promised, 

must be reported. 

The report is available on the Secretary of State’s website. 

Contribution limits apply to a committee that makes these issue ads. 

Refer to Section 85310 and Regulation 18539.2. 

D Other Communications 

Endorsements 

A candidate endorsement may become a contribution or an 

independent expenditure when a payment is made in connection with 

the endorsement. 

Frequently, a candidate will publish his or her endorsement by another 

official.  As  long  as  the  communication  does  not  advocate  the  election 

of  the  endorsing  official  (or  the  defeat  of  that  official’s  opponent),  a

payment made to communicate the endorsement is not a contribution 

to  the  endorsing  candidate  or  official,  even  though  the  endorsement 

was made at the behest of both individuals. 

If a candidate pays for a communication supporting his or her own 

candidacy that also supports or opposes a ballot measure, the 

payment is not a contribution or independent expenditure made in 

connection with the ballot measure. 

If a candidate pays for a communication that supports another 

candidate, and the payment is not made at the behest of the endorsed 

candidate, the payment is not considered to be an independent 

expenditure if: (1) the candidate paying for the communication also 

is included in the communication; (2) the non-paying candidate 

is listed on the same ballot as the paying candidate; and (3) the 

communication is targeted only to potential voters in the paying 

candidate’s district. 

Ex 7.5  - The president of a 

state association announces 

at its annual meeting that 

the association endorses 

John Law for Attorney 

General. Merely making 

an oral endorsement is 

not a contribution to or 

independent expenditure for 

John Law. 

Closer to the election, at the 

request of candidate John 

Law, the association mails 

a special flyer to the voters 

announcing its endorsement 

of him. Because the mailing 

was made at the behest 

of the candidate, the 

association has now made a 

nonmonetary contribution 

to John Law. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 7. 8  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Ex 7.6  - Emmelyn Chin, a State Senator running for reelection, sent out a flyer 

to registered voters in her district asking them to support her candidacy. The 

flyer also encouraged the voters to vote for Lorraine Sweet for Governor, 

although this endorsement was not made at Ms. Sweet’s behest. Because 

the gubernatorial election and State senate election would appear on the 

same ballot for those living in Ms. Chin’s district (and the flyer was sent only 

to voters in that district), the payment for the flyer is not an independent 

expenditure. 

Social Media – Internet Communications 

Paid Advertisements on Internet  A paid advertisement that a 

candidate or committee places on the Internet is reportable under the 

Act. A candidate or committee that pays to place a communication on 

another person’s website must report the expenditure on a campaign 

statement. Similarly, a candidate must report a payment to purchase 

e-mail addresses or any payment for general or public advertisements 

on Internet sites. 

Uncompensated Individuals’ Internet Activity  When an individual 

who is not compensated by a candidate or committee sends 

communications over the Internet (e.g., e-mails, social networking, 

blogging, website postings, and hyperlinks) that support or oppose 

a candidate or measure, these activities do not constitute reportable 

contributions or expenditures. Regulation 18215.2 creates a “safe 

harbor” for uncompensated individuals’ political activity on the Internet. 

Paid Blogger  The safe harbor for an individual’s uncompensated 

Internet activity does not apply to a blogger a committee pays to 

support or oppose a candidate or measure. The committee must 

report payments to that individual. The safe harbor also does not 

apply  to  a blogger  who  receives  a majority  of  his  or  her  advertisement 

revenue from a single candidate or committee because he or she is 

not considered to be providing uncompensated personal services. 

See Chapter 8 for the 

disclaimer and sender 

identification requirements 

for mass mailings that 

a candidate controlled 

committee or a committee 

primarily formed to support 

or oppose a candidate sends. 

Quick 

Tip 

Ex 7.7  - John is running 

for State Assembly and 

his neighbor George 

posts his support for 

John’s candidacy on 

Facebook. In his Facebook 

post, George includes a 

picture of John that he 

got from John’s website. 

The communication is 

not reportable because 

George was not paid for his 

Facebook post. 

Ex 7.8  - Camille is running 

for state office and she pays 

Julia to post a message 

on Julia’s blog supporting 

Camille’s candidacy. 

Camille’s committee must 

report the payment as an 

expenditure on the Form 

460. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 7. 9  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

E Non-Contributions 

There are some communications that are not considered to be 

contributions to the candidate or the candidate’s controlled committee. 

Debates 

If a nonpartisan organization hosts a debate or other forum and invites 

at least two opposing candidates, a payment for the event is not a 

contribution to the candidates. 

Similarly, a payment for a debate or forum sponsored by a political 

party  or  a committee  affiliated  with  a political  party  is  not  a contribution 

if  a majority  of  the  candidates  for  the  party’s  nomination  are  invited  to 

participate. 

Meetings 

A payment  made  by  a bona  fide  service,  social,  business,  trade, 

union, or professional organization for reasonable overhead expenses 

associated with a regularly-scheduled meeting at which a candidate 

speaks is not a contribution if the organization pays no additional costs 

in connection with the speaker’s attendance. 

Non-Political Communications 

A payment made at the behest of a candidate for a communication by 

the candidate or any other person is not a contribution to the candidate 

if the communication: 

• Does not contain express advocacy; 

• Does not refer to the candidate’s election campaign, or his or 

her  opponent’s  qualifications  for  office;  and 

• Does not solicit contributions to the candidate or to third persons 

for use in support of or opposition to the candidate. 

Ex 7.9  - The League of 

Women Voters invited all 

candidates for Assembly 

District 81 to speak at a 

forum. Only one candidate 

attended, but since at least 

two candidates running for 

the same office were invited, 

the cost of the forum is 

not a contribution to the 

candidate who attended. 

Ex 7.10  - At a union’s 

regularly-scheduled monthly 

meeting, one candidate 

was invited to solicit 

votes. The union did not 

incur any additional costs 

in connection with the 

speaker’s presentation, 

so the union made no 

contribution. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 7. 10  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Member Communications 

Payments made by an organization or its sponsored committee 

for a communication that supports or opposes a candidate are not 

contributions or expenditures as long as the communication is made 

only to the organization’s members, employees, or shareholders, 

or the families of its members, employees, or shareholders. 

The payments may not be for general public advertising, such 

as billboards, newspaper ads, or radio or television ads. If the 

organization’s sponsored committee makes the payment, the 

committee would report the payments as being made for general 

member communications. 

Payments made by a political party for a communication that supports 

a candidate are not contributions to the candidate as long as the 

communication is distributed only to the party’s members, employees, 

and families of its members and employees. The party must report 

the payments, however, as if they were contributions or independent 

expenditures. 

News Stories 

A payment for the cost of publishing or broadcasting a news story, 

commentary, or editorial is not a contribution when the payment is 

made by a federally regulated broadcast outlet or a regularly published 

newspaper, magazine or other periodical of general circulation that 

routinely carries news, articles, and commentary of general interest. 

Voter Registration 

A payment made at the behest of a candidate as part of voter 

registration or get-out-the-vote activities is not a contribution if the 

communication does not expressly advocate support of or opposition 

to the candidate. 

Voting Records 

An  entity  may  publish  the  voting  records  of  public  officials.  As  long 

as only the voting records are published, the communication is not 

considered a contribution or an independent expenditure. 

Ex 7.11  - Your campaign 

consultant asks a labor 

organization to send a 

mailing supporting your 

election. The mailing 

will be sent only to the 

organization’s membership. 

The mailing is not a 

contribution to you. Later, 

the campaign consultant 

asks the organization to send 

the mailing to all registered 

voters in your district. The 

mailing to the voters is a 

contribution to you. 

Ex 7.12  - The Green Party 

pays for a mailing supporting 

your candidacy to all of its 

members five days before 

your election. The cost of 

the mailing exceeds $1,000. 

The Party must file a Form 

497 (24-hour Contribution 

Report). You are not 

required to disclose the 

mailing as a contribution. 

Ex 7.13  - At the behest 

of an elected official, an 

organization paid for a voter 

registration booth at a local 

fair. No other literature was 

distributed at the booth. 

The payment for the voter 

registration booth was not a 

contribution to the official. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 7. 11  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Answering Your Questions 

A A labor union pays for a mailing advocating the election 

of a candidate for state senate  The mailing list includes 

both union members and non-union members and 20% of 

the mailing costs are attributed to non-union members 

Must the candidate report the full cost of the mailing as a 

nonmonetary contribution? 

No. The candidate may pro-rate the cost and report as a 

nonmonetary contribution only the mailing costs for the non-

union members. 

B A representative of an environmental organization 

interviewed a candidate for Assembly about issues 

affecting the environment  Later, the candidate learned 

that the organization paid for a radio advertisement 

advocating the candidate’s election  Must the candidate 

report a nonmonetary contribution? 

No. An expenditure is not made at the behest of a candidate 

just  because  a person  interviews  the  candidate  on  issues 

affecting the person making the expenditure. As long as the 

candidate did not coordinate with the organization to produce 

the advertisement in any other way, the organization made an 

independent expenditure, not a contribution to the candidate. 

C I was elected to a state office in November. May I assist 

an independent expenditure committee that supported my 

candidacy in retiring its debt now that the election is over? 

No. An “independent expenditure” is made without the 

coordination, cooperation, or consultation of the candidate. If 

you assist the committee, the expenditures are not considered 

independent. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 7. 12  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Authority 

The  following  Government  Code  sections  and  Title  2 regulations 

provide authority for the information in this chapter: 

Government Code Sections 

82015  Contribution. 

82025  Expenditure. 

82031  Independent Expenditure. 

82044  Payment. 

82047  Person. 

84211  Contents of Campaign Statement. 

84310  Identification  Requirements  for  Telephone  Calls. 

84503  Advertisement for or Against Ballot Measures. 

84506  Independent Expenditures; Advertisements. 

85310  Communications Identifying State Candidates. 

85312  Communications to Members of an Organization. 

Title 2 Regulations 

18215  Contribution. 

18215.2  Uncompensated  Internet  Activity  by  Individuals  that  is  not 

a Contribution or Expenditure. 

18225  Expenditure. 

18225.7  Made At the Behest of. 

18421.5  Reporting an Expenditure for Paid Online 

Communications. 

18450.1  Definitions.  Advertisement  Disclosure. 

18531.7  Payments for Communications – Section 85312. 

18539.2  Reporting  Payment  Pursant  to  Government  Code  Section 

85310. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 8. 1  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Cha Pter  8

A Which Communications Require an Ad Disclaimer? 

Candidate Controlled Committees 

Under  the  Act,  a candidate  controlled  committee  must  include  a

disclaimer on mass mailings and certain telephone calls advocating 

the candidate’s own election. In addition, radio and television 

advertisements require a “paid for by” disclaimer or sponsor 

identification  under  Federal  Communications  Commission  rules 

(FCC).  The  Act  does  not  require  a specific  disclaimer  on  other 

communications such as billboards and yard signs when they are paid 

for by a candidate controlled committee in support of the candidate’s 

advert IS ement  dISC la Imer S

This chapter describes the disclaimers required by the Political 

Reform Act (Act) on mass mailings and other advertisements made by 

candidate controlled committees and committees primarily formed to 

support or oppose a candidate. A disclaimer is the portion of a political 

message  that  identifies  the  person  or  entity  who  paid  for  or  authorized 

the communication. The basic disclaimer for most communications 

is “paid for by [committee name].” The disclaimer ensures that the 

committee  paying  for  the  ad  is  identified.  The  Act  does  not  regulate 

the truth or accuracy of political communications given that the First 

Amendment provides broad protection for political speech. 

Disclaimer Example: 

Manuel Alvarez for Senate 

Paid for by 

Manuel Alvarez 

for Senate 20XX 

P.O.  Oakmont, CA 

95434 

Manuel Alvarez has 

served his community 

by volunteering in our 

schools and serving on 

the school board. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 8. 2  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

own campaign. However the FPPC recommends placing “paid for 

by [committee name]” and the committee’s ID number on all public 

campaign materials. 

Primarily Formed Committees Making Independent Expenditures 

Under  the  Act,  committees  that  are  primarily  formed  to  support 

or oppose a candidate must include a disclaimer on the following 

communications: 

• Mass mailings, including e-mails (must identify the sender) 

• Paid telephone calls (must identify the candidate or committee 

who paid for or authorized the call) 

• Radio ads (must include “paid for by” FCC disclaimer) 

• Television ads (must include “paid for by” FCC disclaimer) 

• Electronic media ads 

• Newspaper ads 

• Billboards 

• Yard signs 

• Door hangers 

• Flyers 

• Posters 

Advertisement Disclaimer Exceptions 

Generally,  a disclaimer  is  not  required  on  the  following  advertisements: 

• Regular-size campaign buttons, pins, bumper stickers, or 

magnets 

• Pens, pencils, rulers, mugs, potholders, key tags, golf balls and 

similar small campaign promotional items where a disclaimer 

cannot be conveniently printed 

• T-shirts, caps, hats, and other articles of clothing 

Check with your local 

elections office for 

rules on the placement of 

campaign signs and any 

other applicable local rules. 

Also check the rules on 

placing temporary political 

signs in California’s Outdoor 

Advertising Act Sec. 5405.3, 

on the Department of 

Transportation’s website. 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 8. 3  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

• Skywriting and airplane banners 

• Committee checks and receipts 

B How Must the Disclaimer Appear? 

Disclaimers on political ads must be clear and conspicuous so they 

may be easily understood by the public. Written disclaimers must be 

printed clearly and legibly. Spoken disclaimers must be clearly audible 

and intelligible. Disclaimers must also be written or spoken in the 

same language used in the advertisement. The charts on the next 

page specify requirements for color contrast, print font size, and the 

amount of time the disclaimer is required to appear on. 

C Advertisement Disclaimers for Communications by 

Candidate Committees for their own Election 

The disclaimer on a communication made by a candidate’s committee 

for his or her own election must include the disclaimer “paid for by 

[committee name],” unless otherwise noted in the chart below. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 8. 4  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Communication  Manner Display 

All mass mailings - more than 200 

(including electronic mail messages, 

faxes, Twitter feeds) 

• Candidate’s committee name/address 

(on file with Form 410) on outside of 

mailing (If no Form 410 on file, use 

candidate name/address.) 

• Only committee name required on 

electronic messages 

• If sent by more than one candidate/ 

committee: 

◦ Also on at least one insert in the 

mailing 

• No less than 6 point type/contrasting 

print color 

• Return envelopes (if included 

in solicitation) – committee’s 

name, address and ID number are 

recommended but not required 

Telephone calls advocating candidate’s 

own election 

(500 or more) - made by: 

• Vendors (“robo” calls) or 

• Paid individuals other than the 

candidate, campaign manager or 

volunteers 

• Any time during the message 

• Must identify the candidate that 

paid for the call or an organization 

authorizing the call that files 

campaign reports 

• Must state that the call is 

“paid for by” or “authorized 

by” the identified candidate or 

organization 

• Examples: This call was paid 

for by Senator Jones; This call 

was authorized by (name of 

committee). 

• No ID required on telephone calls 

personally dialed by candidate, 

campaign manager or volunteers 

The Political Reform Act does not require a specific disclaimer on the following 

communications paid for by a candidate’s campaign committee in support of 

his or her own campaign, although the FPPC recommends placing “paid for 

by committee name” and the committee ID number on all public campaign 

materials. 

Newspaper, radio and television ads  • Radio or television advertisements 

require “paid for by” or sponsor 

identification under FCC rules 

• Check the Elections Code for 

newspaper ad requirements DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 8. 5  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

D Advertisement Disclaimers for Independent Expenditure 

Ads Made by Committees Primarily Formed to Support or 

Oppose a Candidate 

When a committee primarily formed to support or oppose a candidate 

pays for an advertisement that is an independent expenditure, the 

advertisement disclaimer must include, unless otherwise noted: (1) 

“paid for by [committee name];” (2) “not authorized by a candidate or 

a committee controlled by a candidate;” and (3) a list of its top two 

donors of $50,000 or more. 

Communication  Manner Display 

All mass mailings 

(more than 200) 

(see note) 

• Committee name/address (on file 

with Form 410 or 461) on outside of 

mailing in no less than 10 point type/ 

contrasting print color 

• An insert in the mailing must also 

state that the ad was not authorized by 

the candidate or a committee controlled 

by the candidate 

Telephone calls 

(more than 200) - made by vendors 

(“robo” calls) or paid individuals 

• Disclaimer must state that the call 

is “paid for by” committee name 

• Must be at least 3 seconds either 

at the beginning or end of the call 

Radio  • Must be at least 3 seconds either 

at the beginning or end of the ad 

Television  • Both written and spoken at the 

beginning or end of ad 

• Not less than 4 seconds 

• Size and contrasting color must be 

legible to average viewer 

• Exception  - no spoken disclosure 

required if written statement 

is shown for at least 5 seconds 

on a 30 second broadcast or 10 

seconds on a 60 second broadcast 

Electronic media 

(Websites, blogs, Twitter feeds, faxes, 

social media pages - i.e. Facebook) 

• “Paid for by committee name” 

and committee ID number are 

recommended but not legally 

required 

Billboards, yard signs, business cards, 

door hangers, flyers, and posters 

• “Paid for by committee name” 

and committee ID number are 

recommended but not legally 

required DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 8. 6  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Electronic Media 

1.  Websites, blast e-mails and 

Facebook posts 

2.  Ads of limited size 

(micro bar, button ad, ads limited 

to 500 characters or less) 

3.  SMS texts 

4.  Electronic ads sent in an audio 

format 

5.  Electronic ads sent in a video 

format 

1.  Disclaimer statement must be in 

the same font size as majority of 

text and displayed conspicuously 

near the ad 

2.  Ad must provide disclaimer via 

rollover, link, or other connection 

to website with the disclaimer 

3.  Include the committee ID number 

and if technically possible link 

to the committee’s campaign 

statement on Secretary of State’s 

website 

4.  Same requirements as for radio 

ads above 

5.  Same requirements as for 

television ads above 

Newspaper ads  • 10 point type in contrasting color 

• Also check the Elections Code 

Billboards 

Yard Signs  (more than 200) 

• 5% of height of advertisement in 

contrasting color 

Door hangers, flyers, posters, and 

oversized campaign buttons and 

bumper stickers 

(buttons 10” across or larger and 

stickers 60 sq inches or larger) (all more 

than 200) 

• 10 point type in contrasting color 

Note:  Two display rules exist for mass mailings paid for by an 

independent expenditure. A mass mailing must have the committee 

name and address on the outside of an envelope in 6-point type; while 

the manner of display for the ad disclaimer requires the committee 

name in no less than 10-point type. Often a one-page mailer may 

combine the display rules with both the committee name and address 

in no less than 10-point type although the address may be at 6-point 

type. 

Disclaimer Example: “Paid for by Citizens to Re-Elect Senator 

Woods  20XX,  major  funding  by  International  Workers  Association 

and California Insurance Committee. This ad was not authorized by 

Senator Woods or a committee controlled by Senator Woods.” DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 8. 7  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

E Mass Mailings – E-Mails and Postal Mailings 

A “mass mailing” is made when more than 200 substantially similar 

pieces of mail have been sent within a calendar month. A mass 

mailing also includes more than 200 substantially similar messages 

distributed to the public within a calendar month through electronic 

mail (“e-mail”). Solicitation letters, notices of fundraising events, 

newsletters sent by the candidate or committee, and other types of 

campaign literature are common types of mass mailings. 

E-Mail Disclaimers 

E-mails must include the committee’s name and the words “paid for 

by”  immediately  adjacent  to  and  above,  or  immediately  adjacent  to  and 

in  front  of,  the  required  identification.  The  disclaimer  must  be  in  no 

less than 6-point type and in a color that contrasts with the background 

(Example: no light blue disclaimers on a blue background). 

The committee 

ID number is not 

required to be included 

on mass mailings, but 

the FPPC recommends 

that committees include 

the committee name and 

ID number on all public 

campaign materials. 

Quick 

Tip 

From:  Rreynolds@yahoo.com 

To:  Voter1@gmail.com 

Cc: 

Subject:  Reynolds for Assembly 20XX 

Don’t forget to vote for Reynolds on Tuesday! This message was paid for 

by Reynolds for Assembly 20XX. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 8. 8  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Mailings Sent by More than One Candidate Controlled 

Committees 

A mass mailing sent by more than one candidate controlled committee 

must  include  the  words  “paid  for  by”  immediately  adjacent  to  and 

above,  or  immediately  adjacent  to  and  in  front  of,  the  name  and 

address of the committee that is paying the greatest share of the 

mass mailing including costs for designing, printing, and postage. This 

disclaimer must appear on the outside of each piece of mail. If two or 

more committees pay equally for the mailer, the name and address 

of at least one of the committees must be shown on the outside and 

the names and addresses of all committees must appear on at least 

one insert. The disclaimer must be in no less than 6-point type and 

in a color that contrasts with the background (Example: no light blue 

disclaimers  on  a blue  background).  A post  office  box  may  be  used  as 

the address only if the committee’s street address is on its Statement 

of  Organization  (Form  410)  on  file  with  the  Secretary  of  State. 

Jordan Cooper 

315 S. Fairfield Street 

Torrance, CA 90503 

Paid For By 

Roxie Reynolds for Senate 20XX 

1615 Skate Street 

Torrance, CA 90503 

Postal Mailing Disclaimers 

A mass mailing sent by a candidate controlled committee must 

include  the  words  “paid  for  by”  immediately  adjacent  to  and  above,  or 

immediately  adjacent  to  and  in  front  of,  the  name  and  address  of  the 

committee on the outside of each piece of postal mail. The disclaimer 

must be in no less than 6-point type and in a color that contrasts 

with the background (Example: no light blue disclaimers on a blue 

background).  A post  office  box  may  be  used  as  the  address  only  if  the 

committee’s street address is on its Statement of Organization (Form 

410)  on  file  with  the  Secretary  of  State. 

If two or more 

candidate controlled 

committees pay equally for 

a mass mailing, the names 

and addresses of each of the 

committees must appear on 

at least one insert. 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 8. 9  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Committees Primarily Formed to Support or Oppose a Candidate 

A mass mailing paid for by a primarily formed committee as an 

independent expenditure  supporting or opposing a candidate must 

include  the  words  “paid  for  by”  immediately  adjacent  to  and  above,  or 

immediately  adjacent  to  and  in  front  of,  the  name  and  address  of  the 

committee. It must also include a statement that the mailing was “not 

authorized by a candidate or a committee controlled by a candidate.” 

Two display rules exist for mass mailings paid for by an independent 

expenditure. The committee name must appear in no less than 

10-point type, but the address required on the outside of the envelope 

may appear in 6-point type. For a one-page mailer, committees 

often combine the display rules and use 10-point type for both the 

committee name and address even though the address may be 

displayed in 6-point type. An insert in the mailing must also state that 

the ad was “not authorized by the candidate or a committee controlled 

by the candidate.” 

The disclaimer must also list the committee’s top two contributors 

of $50,000 or more, if any. If the committee can show, that 

contributions received from the two highest contributors have been 

used for expenditures unrelated to the candidate featured in the 

communication, the committee may disclose the contributors making 

the next largest cumulative contributions of $50,000 or more. 

Recordkeeping for Mass Mailings 

For each mass mailing, the following information must be retained in 

the committee’s records for a period of four years: 

• A sample of the mailing. 

• A record of the date of the mailing. 

• The number of pieces sent. 

• The method of postage used. 

A mass mailing paid 

for by an independent 

expenditure must include a 

statement that the mailing 

was not authorized by a 

candidate or a committee 

controlled by a candidate. 

An independent 

expenditure is a payment for 

communications expressly 

advocating support of or 

opposition to a candidate, 

which are not coordinated 

with or made at the behest 

of the candidate. 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 8. 10  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

F Telephone Calls 

Calls Made by Candidate Controlled Committees for their own 

Election 

If a candidate controlled committee pays for  500 or more  similar 

telephone calls made by vendors (“robo” calls) or paid individuals 

advocating the candidate’s own election, the name of the organization 

that authorized or paid for the call must be disclosed to the recipient 

of  the  call.  If  the  organization  authorizing  the  call  does  not  have  filing 

obligations under the Act, the name of the candidate that paid for the 

call must be disclosed to recipients. The disclosure must include the 

words “paid for by” or “authorized by.” The disclaimer is not required 

for telephone calls personally dialed by the candidate, campaign 

manager, or volunteers. 

Calls Made by Committees Primarily Formed to Support or 

Oppose a Candidate 

If a primarily formed committee pays for  more than 200  similar 

telephone calls that expressly advocate support for or opposition to a 

candidate, the name of the committee must be disclosed to recipients. 

The disclosure must include the words “paid for by” or “authorized by.” 

The disclaimer is required for telephone calls that are independent 

expenditures. If the call is an independent expenditure, the disclaimer 

must also state that the call was “not authorized by the candidate or 

a committee controlled by the candidate” and include an additional 

disclaimer that lists its top two donors of $50,000 or more. 

Anonymous “robo” 

calls are a violation 

of the Act. Committees are 

prohibited from contracting 

with a vendor for political 

calls that does not disclose 

who paid for or authorized 

the calls. 

Quick 

Tip 

Ex 7.1  - Senator Reitz pays a vendor to make calls to 1,500 local voters to 

encourage them to reelect her to Senate. The disclaimer must state that the 

telephone calls were paid for by the candidate’s committee. For example, “[t] 

his call was paid for by Reelect Senator Reitz 20XX.” 

Ex 7.2  - At Senator Reitz’s request, Citizens for Better Schools (a general 

purpose committee) pays a vendor to make calls to 1,500 local voters to 

encourage them to reelect Senator Reitz to the city council. The disclaimer 

must identify the committee paying for the call or the candidate authorizing 

the call. For example, “[t]his call was paid for by Citizens for Better Schools” or 

“[t]his call was authorized by Senator Reitz.” DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 8. 11  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Recordkeeping for Telephone Calls 

A committee must retain for a period of four years the following records 

for each telephone call: 

• If the message was live, a script of the call. 

• If the message was recorded, a copy of the recording. 

G Electronic Media Ads 

The  Act  does  not  require  a specific  disclaimer  on  electronic  media 

ads, including websites, Internet ads, and mobile ads paid for by 

a candidate’s committee for his or her own election. However, the 

FPPC recommends placing “paid for by [committee name]” and the 

committee ID number on all public campaign materials. 

Committees primarily formed to support or oppose a candidate making 

independent  expenditures  for  electronic  media  ads  are  subject  to  the 

“paid for by [committee name]” requirement and additional disclaimer 

requirements as described in the chart earlier in this chapter. In 

general, the required disclaimer must be displayed in full. For 

example, a Facebook post must include the full disclaimer. 

An abbreviated disclaimer may be used in electronic media messages 

only  if  it  is  impracticable  or  extremely  difficult  to  include  the  full 

disclaimer information (such as severe size, space, or character-limits 

constraints) and when other methods of displaying the information 

(such as a rollover display or click through to a webpage with 

disclosure information) are not available. For example, an abbreviated 

disclaimer may be used if a campaign sends blast text messages to 

voters. 

H Newspaper, Radio and Television Ads 

The  Act  does  not  require  a specific  disclaimer  on  newspaper,  radio, 

and television ads paid for by a candidate’s committee for his or her 

own election. However, the FCC requires that radio and television ads DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 8. 12  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

include  “paid  for  by”  or  sponsor  identification.  Committees  primarily 

formed to support or oppose a candidate making independent 

expenditures for a newspaper, radio, or television ad to support or 

oppose  a candidate  are  subject  to  the  “paid  for  by  [committee  name]” 

disclaimer requirements as described in the chart earlier in this 

chapter. For newspaper ad requirements, candidates and committees 

should also check the Elections Code. 

I Paid Spokespersons for Ballot Measure Ads 

Generally,  candidate  controlled  committees  and  primarily  formed 

committees spend campaign funds only in connection with the 

candidate’s election. However, there may be times when a committee 

wants to pay for an advertisement to support or oppose a ballot 

measure. 

The  Act  requires  specific  disclosure  when  any  committee  uses  a

paid spokesperson in an advertisement to support or oppose a ballot 

measure.  The  committee  must  (1)  file  a Paid  Spokesperson  Report, 

Form 511 (see Chapter 10) for an individual’s appearance in a ballot 

measure advertisement and (2) include a disclaimer on the ad in the 

situations below. 

$5,000 payment to an individual in an ad:  The committee makes 

expenditures totaling $5,000 or more for an individual’s appearance in 

an  advertisement  to  support  or  oppose  the  qualification,  passage  or 

defeat of a state or local ballot measure. 

Disclaimer on ad:  “(Spokesperson’s name) is being paid by this 

campaign or its donors.” 

Any payment to an individual in an ad portraying a professional 

(nurse, doctor, firefighter, scientist, engineer, lawyer, etc.):  The 

committee makes expenditures of any amount to an individual for his 

or  her  appearance  in  an  ad  supporting  or  opposing  the  qualification, 

passage or defeat of a state or local ballot measure that states or 

suggests that the individual is a member of an occupation that requires 

licensure,  certification,  or  other  specialized,  documented  training  to 

engage in that occupation. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 8. 13  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Disclaimer on ad:  “Persons portraying members of 

an occupation in this advertisement are compensated 

spokespersons not necessarily employed in those occupations.” 

Note:  If the individual in the ad is actually a member of the 

occupation portrayed, the committee may omit this disclaimer, 

and shall maintain documentation of the individual’s license or 

certification  for  the  occupation.  Upon  request  from  the  FPPC, 

the committee must provide documentation of an individual’s 

occupation by electronic means within 24 hours. 

The advertisements include print, television, and radio ads, as well 

as telephone messages. The disclaimers on the ads must be shown 

in highly visible Roman font for print or television ads, or spoken in a 

clearly audible manner for radio ads or telephone messages. 

If the committee pays 

for a spokesperson in 

an advertisement to support 

or oppose a ballot measure, 

the committee may also be 

required to file the Form 511 

(Paid Spokesperson Report). 

See Chapter 10. 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 8. 14  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

J Form 511 Paid Spokesperson Report 

When and Where to File 

File Form 511 with the Secretary of State within 10 days of making 

or promising payments to the individual that will appear in the ballot 

measure  advertisement(s).  Electronic  filers  must  also  file  a paper 

copy. 

How to Complete Form 511 

Complete  the  address  fields  and  the  treasurer  or  assistant  treasurer 

must  sign  the  verification.  Amendments  must  be  filed  as  soon  as 

possible along with an explanation. 

Payments Made Fields 

Date: List the date the payments were made or the services were 

received, whichever is earlier. 

Spokesperson: 

• List the name and address of the individual who was paid 

$5,000 or more to appear in the ballot measure advertisement; 

or 

Payments Made Attach additional information on appropriately labeled continuation sheets. 

DATE AMOUNT 

Paid Spokesperson Report Type or print in ink. Amounts may be rounded to whole dollars. CALIFORNIA FORM 

Date Stamp For Official Use Only 

511 NAME OF FILER 

STREET ADDRESS CITY STATE ZIP CODE E-MAIL (Optional) AREA CODE/PHONE NUMBER BALLOT MEASURE SUPPORTED OR OPPOSED (INCLUDE BALLOT NUMBER OR LETTER AND JURISDICTION) NAME AND ADDRESS OF SPOKESPERSON (OCCUPATION MAY BE REQUIRED - SEE INSTRUCTIONS) Support Oppose I have used all reasonable diligence in preparing this report. I have reviewed the report and to the best of my knowledge the information contained herein is true and complete. I certify under penalty of perjury under the laws of the State of California that the foregoing is true and correct. Executed on DATE 

Verification 

Support Oppose Support Oppose By SIGNATURE OF TREASURER/ASSISTANT TREASURER/FILER 

Amendment (explain) ID # (If required) 

FPPC Form 511 (Jan/2015) FPPC Advice: advice@fppc.ca.gov (866/275-3772) www.fppc.ca.gov 

Committee to Elect Greer for Senate 20XX 1234567 (916) 111-2222 Greer@gmail.com 

10 J Street Sacramento CA 95814 10/XX/20XX Jerry Nelson, Teacher 34 Rio Circle, Sacramento, CA 95826 Prop 10 - STATE 

✔

$2,500 DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 8. 15  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

• List the name of an individual paid any amount for his or her 

appearance in a printed, televised or radio advertisement or in 

a telephone message that supports or opposes a state or local 

measure  and  the advertisement states or suggests that the 

individual is a member of an occupation that requires licensure, 

certification  or  other  specialized,  documented  training  as  a

prerequisite to engage in that occupation. 

Ballot  Measure:  Identify  the  measure,  jurisdiction  and  mark  support  or 

oppose. 

Amount: Provide the amount paid to the spokesperson. 

K Paid Online Communication Disclosure 

The Act requires recipient committees to provide additional 

expenditure reporting under Regulation 18421.5 when the committee 

pays a person to provide favorable or unfavorable content about a 

candidate or ballot measure. This rule applies whenever the committee 

pays for online communications on: (1) an Internet site other than 

the committee’s own website or web log (“blog”), whether one’s own 

or another’s; (2) provides content for or posting on a social media 

platform or service; or (3) provides video content for posting online. 

Committees  must  report  specific  details  of  the  payment,  including 

the amount of the payment, the payee, the name of the individual 

providing  content,  and  the  name  of  the  website  or  the  URL  on  which 

the  communication  is  published  in  the  first  instance.  See  Chapter  9 –

Committee  Reports  for  specific  reporting  requirements. 

In lieu of the additional reporting requirement, a disclaimer may be 

posted instead so long as it is presented in a clearly conspicuous 

manner with the paid online content, and included each time the 

content appears on the Internet or other digital platform. For example, 

the following disclaimer would satisfy this requirement: “The author 

was paid by the Committee to Re-Elect Senator Santos in connection 

with this posting.” 

Ex 7.3  - A candidate’s 

election committee will file 

Form 511 as it hired a public 

relations firm to produce 

a television advertisement 

opposing a state ballot 

measure and a teacher was 

paid $500 to appear in the 

ballot measure ad. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 8. 16  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

L Updating a Disclaimer 

Advertisement disclaimers must be revised if a committee’s name 

changes or there is a new $50,000 donor. Television, radio, electronic 

media,  or  “robo”calls  must  be  amended  within  five  calendar  days. 

Print media, mass mailings, or other tangible items must be amended 

every time an order to reproduce is placed. 

M Penalties 

Failing to comply with the Act’s disclaimer requirements may result 

in  fines  of  up  to  $5,000  per  violation.  In  addition,  any  person 

who violates the disclaimer requirements for ballot measure and 

independent  expenditure  advertisements  may  be  liable  for  fines  of 

up to three times the cost of the advertisement, including placement 

costs. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 8. 17  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Answering Your Questions 

A Are the disclaimer rules the same for candidate controlled 

committees and committees primarily formed for 

candidates that will be making independent expenditures? 

No. Stricter disclaimer rules apply to independent expenditure 

advertisements because it is less clear to the public who is 

responsible for these ads. The Act requires disclaimers on a 

broader range of advertisements when they are paid for by 

a committee making independent expenditures. (See the ad 

disclaimer charts in this chapter for additional information.) 

B A committee primarily formed for a candidate has agreed 

to pay for several types of communications (yard signs, 

a billboard, door hangers) to advocate support of the 

candidate  The advertisements are prepared by the 

candidate’s campaign consultant  What disclaimers are 

required, if any? 

The Act does not require a disclaimer for these advertisements 

since they are not independent expenditures. The primarily 

formed committee must provide the candidate with the value 

of the advertisements and both committees must report the 

amount as a nonmonetary contribution. 

C If a business entity includes a copy of a candidate’s flyer in 

its regular monthly mailing, is the candidate required to be 

identified on the outside of the mailer? 

No.  The  candidate’s  name  and  address  must  be  identified  on 

the  flyer  only. 

D If a committee has more than one address, can any of the 

addresses be used on mass mailings? 

Any address that is on the committee’s Statement of 

Organization  (Form  410)  on  file  with  the  Secretary  of  State  may 

be used. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 8. 18  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

E A committee pays for a candidate’s mailing as a 

nonmonetary contribution  Must the committee paying for 

the mailing or the candidate’s committee be identified on 

the outside of the mailing? 

The  committee  that  pays  for  the  mailing  must  be  identified  on 

the outside of the mailing. 

F If a committee is sending a postcard-type mailing, may the 

name of the committee appear only once? 

Yes. The name may appear only once. The committee’s 

address must also be included. 

G Where on the outside of the mailing must the candidate or 

committee identification be placed? 

There  is  no  specific  requirement  for  the  location  of  the  sender 

identification  as  long  as  it  appears  on  the  outside  of  the  mailing. 

The  words  “paid  for  by”  must  be  immediately  adjacent  to  and 

above,  or  immediately  adjacent  to  and  in  front  of,  the  committee 

name and address. 

H A committee is sending out blast text messages with ads 

opposing a candidate  Is a disclaimer required 

Yes. SMS messages sent by a committee making independent 

expenditures should at a minimum include the abbreviated 

disclosure consisting of the committee’s ID number. (Example: 

FPPC #1234567). If possible, the text should include a link to a 

website with the full disclaimer information (see chart above) or 

link to the committee’s campaign statement on the Secretary of 

State’s website. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 8. 19  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

I What type of disclosure is required for a paid political 

consultant who sends independent expenditure ads 

through Twitter? 

Full disclosure information is required on the sender’s 

landing page on Twitter. (Example: “This ad was paid for by 

Sarah Johnson and was not authorized by the candidate 

or a committee controlled by the candidate.” If applicable, 

information regarding the two top $50,000 donors must also be 

posted.) Alternatively, the tweet may include a link to a webpage 

with the full disclosure information and the sender’s FPPC #. 

Individuals who post on Twitter often use shortened hyperlinks 

(or  URL  shorteners)  that  link  or  direct  a reader  to  a full  story  or 

source. While full disclosures may not be possible to include in 

the tweet itself, there are reasonable alternative ways to provide 

recipients with required disclosure. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 8. 20  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Authority 

The  following  Government  Code  sections  and  Title  2 regulations 

provide authority for the information in this chapter: 

Government Code Sections 

82031  Independent Expenditure. 

82041.5  Mass Mailing. 

82044  Payment. 

82047  Person. 

84211  Contents of Campaign Statement. 

84303  Expenditure by Agent or Independent Contractor. 

84305  Requirements for Mass Mailing. 

84310  Identification  Requirements  for  Telephone  Calls. 

84506  Independent Expenditures; Advertisements. 

84511  Ballot Measure Ads; Paid Spokesperson Disclosure. 

85312  Communications to Members of an Organization. 

Title 2 Regulations 

18215  Contribution. 

18225  Expenditure. 

18225.7  Made At the Behest of. 

18401  Required Recordkeeping for Chapter 4. 

18421.5  Reporting an Expenditure for Paid Online 

Communications. 

18435  Definition  of  Mass  Mailing  and  Sender. 

18440  Telephone Advocacy. 

18450.1  Definitions.  Advertisement  Disclosure. 

18450.4  Content of Disclosure Statements. Advertisement 

Disclosure. 

18450.5  Amended Advertising Disclosure. 

18450.11  Spokesperson Disclosure. 

18523.1  Written Solicitation for Contributions. 

18531.7  Payments for Communications – Section 85312. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 1  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Cha Pter  9C omm Ittee  rePort – form 460 

Candidate controlled committees, including legal defense fund and 

officeholder  committees,  use  the  Campaign  Statement  (Form  460)  to 

report  campaign  financial  activity.  This chapter provides instructions 

on how to complete the form. 

Key provisions: 

• Reports  are  due  by  specified  deadlines.  Filing  schedules  are 

posted on the FPPC website. 

• State  committees  with  financial  activity  of  $25,000  or  more  must 

file  electronically.  Software  programs  are  available  as  well  as  a

free  program  provided  by  the  Secretary  of  State’s  Office: 

www.sos.ca.gov. 

• As this manual version goes to press, all campaign statements 

must  be  filed  on  paper  with  a “wet”  signature  including  those 

that  are  also  filed  electronically.  The  FPPC  website  will  post  a

notification  if  paper  copies  are  not  required. 

• Generally,  one  of  the  first  campaign  reports  filed  by  a candidate 

seeking  office  is  the  Form  497  (24-Hour  Contribution  Report) 

reviewed in Chapter 2. The Form 460 also includes the 

information disclosed on a Form 497 in addition to other 

expenditures and receipts. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 2  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

A Form 460 

How to Complete the Cover Page 

Period Statement Covers 

If  this  is  the  first  report  of  the  calendar  year,  the  “from”  date  should  be 

January 1. Otherwise, this date should be the day after the closing 

date  of  the  most  recently-filed  campaign  statement. 

Date of Election 

When  filing  a preelection  statement  in  connection  with  an  election, 

provide the date of the election. 

FPPC Form 460 (January/05) FPPC Toll-Free Helpline: 866/ASK-FPPC (866/275-3772) State of California 4 Verification 

I have used all reasonable diligence in preparing and reviewing this statement and to the best of my knowledge the information contained herein and in the attached schedules is true and complete. I certify 

under penalty of perjury under the laws of the State of California that the foregoing is true and correct. 

By Signature of Treasurer or Assistant Treasurer By Signature of Controlling Officeholder, Candidate, State Measure Proponent or Responsible Officer of Sponsor By Signature of Controlling Officeholder, Candidate, State Measure Proponent By Signature of Controlling Officeholder, Candidate, State Measure Proponent Executed on Date Executed on Date Executed on Date Executed on Date 

Type or print in ink 

SEE INSTRUCTIONS ON REVERSE 

Date of election if applicable: 

(Month, Day, Year) 

Recipient Committee Campaign Statement Cover Page 

For Official Use Only 

Page of 

COVER PAGE 

CALIFORNIA FORM 

Date Stamp 

3 Committee Information 

COMMITTEE NAME (OR CANDIDATE’S NAME IF NO COMMITTEE) 

MAILING ADDRESS (IF DIFFERENT) NO. AND STREET OR P.O. BOX 

Statement covers period from through 

(Government Code Sections 84200-84216.5) 

1 Type of Recipient Committee: All Committees – Complete Parts 1, 2, 3, and 4 

STREET ADDRESS (NO P.O. BOX) 

CITY STATE ZIP CODE AREA CODE/PHONE 

Treasurer(s) 

NAME OF TREASURER NAME OF ASSISTANT TREASURER, IF ANY MAILING ADDRESS CITY STATE ZIP CODE AREA CODE/PHONE 

460 

CITY STATE ZIP CODE AREA CODE/PHONE OPTIONAL: FAX / E-MAIL ADDRESS 

MAILING ADDRESS CITY STATE ZIP CODE AREA CODE/PHONE OPTIONAL: FAX / E-MAIL ADDRESS 

I.D. NUMBER 

2 Type of Statement: 

Preelection Statement Semi-annual Statement Termination Statement (Also file a Form 410 Termination) Amendment (Explain below) Quarterly Statement Special Odd-Year Report Supplemental Preelection Primarily Formed Ballot Measure Committee Controlled Sponsored 

(Also Complete Part 6) 

Officeholder, Candidate Controlled Committee State Candidate Election Committee Recall 

(Also Complete Part 5) 

Primarily Formed Candidate/ Officeholder Committee 

(Also Complete Part 7) 

General Purpose Committee 

Sponsored Small Contributor Committee Political Party/Central Committee Statement - Attach Form 495 X/X/20XX X/X/20XX 11/X/20XX x xx 

✔ ✘ ✔

Committee to Elect Greer for Senate 20XX 1234567 10 J Street Sacramento CA 95814 916-111-2222 Susan Hon 10 J Street Sacramento CA 95814 916-111-2222 Manuel Rameriz 10 J Street Sacramento CA 95814 916-111-2222 

Clear Cover Pg1 Print Form DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 3  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Parts 1 and 2: Type of Committee and Type of Statement 

Candidates and Primarily Formed Committees for State Candidates 

will mark the relevant boxes to identify the statement type. A 

complete  replacement  filing  is  required  when  amending  a report  filed 

electronically  with  the  Secretary  of  State.  A committee  that  only  files 

paper reports may submit only the cover page and the amended 

schedules.  Provide  an  explanation  when  filing  an  amendment. 

Part 3: Committee Information 

When completing this section, make sure the information is the same 

as that listed on the committee’s Statement of Organization, Form 410. 

If  the  committee  has  not  received  an  identification  number  from  the 

Secretary of State, enter “pending” in the “I.D. Number” box. 

Part 4: Verification 

The committee treasurer or the assistant treasurer named on the 

committee’s Statement of Organization, Form 410, must review 

and sign the statement and a controlled committee must include 

the  signature  of  the  officeholder  or  candidate.  Only  the  treasurer  or 

assistant treasurer must sign the statement for a Primarily Formed 

State Candidate committee. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 4  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Part 5: Officeholder or Candidate Controlled Committee 

Provide  the  name  of  the  officeholder  or  candidate  controlling  the 

committee  and  indicate  the  office  sought  or  held  including  the  location 

and district number, if any. List other committees the candidate 

controls and any a primarily formed committee supporting the 

candidate’s election. 

Part 7: Primarily Formed Candidate/Officeholder Committee 

Committees Primarily Formed to Support or Oppose a state candidate 

complete this section. 

Page of 

COVER PAGE - PART 2 

CALIFORNIA FORM Recipient Committee Campaign Statement Cover Page — Part 2 Type or print in ink 460 5 Officeholder or Candidate Controlled Committee 

NAME OF OFFICEHOLDER OR CANDIDATE 

Related Committees Not Included in this Statement: List any committees not included in this statement that are controlled by you or are primarily formed to receive contributions or make expenditures on behalf of your candidacy. 

NAME OF TREASURER 

COMMITTEE NAME YES NO 

I.D. NUMBER 

CONTROLLED COMMITTEE? COMMITTEE ADDRESS STREET ADDRESS (NO P.O. BOX) CITY STATE ZIP CODE AREA CODE/PHONE OFFICE SOUGHT OR HELD (INCLUDE LOCATION AND DISTRICT NUMBER IF APPLICABLE) RESIDENTIAL/BUSINESS ADDRESS (NO. AND STREET) CITY STATE ZIP NAME OF TREASURER 

COMMITTEE NAME YES NO 

I.D. NUMBER 

CONTROLLED COMMITTEE? COMMITTEE ADDRESS STREET ADDRESS (NO P.O. BOX) CITY STATE ZIP CODE AREA CODE/PHONE 

6 Primarily Formed Ballot Measure Committee 

NAME OF BALLOT MEASURE 

DISTRICT NO. IF ANY 

Identify the controlling officeholder, candidate, or state measure proponent, if any 

NAME OF OFFICEHOLDER, CANDIDATE, OR PROPONENT 

OFFICE SOUGHT OR HELD JURISDICTION SUPPORT 

OPPOSE BALLOT NO. OR LETTER 

7 Primarily Formed Candidate/Officeholder Committee List names of officeholder(s) or candidate(s) for which this committee is primarily formed. 

NAME OF OFFICEHOLDER OR CANDIDATE NAME OF OFFICEHOLDER OR CANDIDATE OFFICE SOUGHT OR HELD OFFICE SOUGHT OR HELD SUPPORT 

OPPOSE 

SUPPORT 

OPPOSE NAME OF OFFICEHOLDER OR CANDIDATE OFFICE SOUGHT OR HELD SUPPORT 

OPPOSE 

Attach continuation sheets if necessary 

NAME OF OFFICEHOLDER OR CANDIDATE OFFICE SOUGHT OR HELD SUPPORT 

OPPOSE 

FPPC Form 460 (January/05) FPPC Toll-Free Helpline: 866/ASK-FPPC (866/275-3772) State of California 

x xx Kim Greer 

Senate District 2 10 J Street Sac, CA 95814 

Greer for Assembly 20XX 1245567 Susan Hon ✔

10 J Street Sacramento CA 95814 916-111-2222 

Clear Cover Pg2 Print Form DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 5  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

B How to Complete the Summary Page 

The Summary Page lists the totals of all contributions received and 

expenditures made during the period covered by the statement and 

the cumulative amounts of contributions received and expenditures 

made during the calendar year. 

Column A 

This  column  reflects  the  totals  found  on  the  summaries  located  at 

the bottom of each schedule attached to the statement. If there is 

no activity to report on a particular schedule, place a zero on the 

appropriate line. Never leave a line in Column A blank. 

This page to be completed 

after the I.P. period. 

SEE INSTRUCTIONS ON REVERSE 

NAME OF FILER 

Campaign Disclosure Statement Summary Page Page of Type or print in ink Amounts may be rounded to whole dollars 

I.D. NUMBER 

Current Cash Statement 

12. Beginning Cash Balance ....................... Previous Summary Page, Line 16 $13. Cash Receipts ................................................... Column A, Line 3 above 

14. Miscellaneous Increases to Cash ........................... Schedule I, Line 4 

15. Cash Payments .................................................. Column A, Line 8 above 

16. ENDING CASH BALANCE .......... Add Lines 12 + 13 + 14, then subtract Line 15 $

If this is a termination statement, Line 16 must be zero. 

CALIFORNIA FORM 

SUMMARY PAGE 

Expenditures Made 

6. Payments Made ....................................................... Schedule E, Line 4 $ $7. Loans Made ............................................................. Schedule H, Line 3 

8. SUBTOTAL CASH PAYMENTS .................................... Add Lines 6 + 7 $ $

9. Accrued Expenses (Unpaid Bills) ............................... Schedule F, Line 3 

10. Nonmonetary Adjustment .......................................... Schedule C, Line 3 

11. TOTAL EXPENDITURES MADE ................................ Add Lines 8 + 9 + 10 $ $

17. LOAN GUARANTEES RECEIVED ........................... Schedule B, Part 2 $

Cash Equivalents and Outstanding Debts 

18. Cash Equivalents ........................................ See instructions on reverse $19. Outstanding Debts ......................... Add Line 2 + Line 9 in Column B above $

Contributions Received 

1. Monetary Contributions ........................................... Schedule A, Line 3 $ $2. Loans Received ...................................................... Schedule B, Line 3 

3. SUBTOTAL CASH CONTRIBUTIONS ......................... Add Lines 1 + 2 $ $4. Nonmonetary Contributions .................................... Schedule C, Line 3 

5. TOTAL CONTRIBUTIONS RECEIVED ........................... Add Lines 3 + 4 $ $

460 Statement covers period from through Column B 

CALENDAR YEAR TOTAL TO DATE 

Column A 

TOTAL THIS PERIOD 

(FROM ATTACHED SCHEDULES) 

Calendar Year Summary for Candidates Running in Both the State Primary and General Elections 

1/1 through 6/30 7/1 to Date 20. Contributions Received $ $21. Expenditures Made $ $

Expenditure Limit Summary for State Candidates 

*Amounts in this section may be different from amounts reported in Column B. Date of Election (mm/dd/yy) Total to Date 

22 Cumulative Expenditures Made* (If Subject to Voluntary Expenditure Limit) FPPC Form 460 (January/05) FPPC Toll-Free Helpline: 866/ASK-FPPC (866/275-3772) 

To calculate Column B, add amounts in Column A to the corresponding amounts from Column B of your last report. Some amounts in Column A may be negative figures that should be subtracted from previous period amounts. If this is the first report being filed for this calendar year, only carry over the amounts from Lines 2, 7, and 9 (if any). / // /$$X/X/20XX X/X/20XX x xx Committee to Elect Greer For Senate 20XX 1234567 

Clear Summ Pg Print Form DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 6  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Column B 

Amounts shown on Lines 2, 7, and 9 of Column B are carried forward 

from year to year (and statement to statement) until they are paid. 

If  this  is  the  first  statement  of  the  calendar  year,  this  column  should 

reflect  the  same  totals  as  found  in  Column  A,  except  for  Lines  2, 

3, 5, 7, 8, 9, and 11 (if applicable). Otherwise, Column B totals are 

calculated  by  adding  the  figures  in  Column  B from  the  last  statement 

filed  with  the  figures  found  in  Column  A of  the  current  statement. 

(Note: The amounts reported on Lines 2, 7, and 9 of Column B should 

be the same as the total outstanding amounts disclosed in column (d) 

of Schedules B, H and F respectively, of the current report.) 

The  figures  in  Column  B reflect  the  cumulative  amounts  received  since 

January 1 of the current calendar year. 

The cumulation period for a statement is almost always a calendar 

year. An exception to calendar year cumulation applies if the 

committee  is  required  to  file  a preelection  statement  in  one  year  in 

connection with an election held in another year, such as elections 

held in January or early February. When this happens, the cumulation 

period begins on January 1 of the year before the election and ends on 

the  closing  date  of  the  semi-annual  statement  filed  after  the  election. 

Lines 1-5 

Collectively, these lines represent contributions received: monetary, 

nonmonetary, and loans. 

Lines 6-11 

These lines together represent expenditures made: payments, 

loans made, accrued expenses (bills that are still outstanding), and 

nonmonetary  adjustments. 

Lines 12-16 

The  Current  Cash  Statement  section  should  reflect  the  committee’s 

actual cash condition at the end of the reporting period. If deposits or 

expenditures have been made that have not cleared the account, the 

committee’s bank balance may not match the ending cash balance. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 7  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Do not deduct investments made with committee funds from Line 12 

or Line 16 if the investment can be readily converted to cash; e.g., the 

purchase  of  certificates  of  deposit,  shares  in  interest  bearing  accounts, 

or  money  market  funds.  Reflect  the  investment  amounts  in  the  total 

amount of cash available. 

Line 12 

Make  sure  that  this  figure  is  the  same  as  the  figure  shown  on  Line  16 

(Ending  Cash  Balance)  of  the  most  recently  filed  statement.  If  this  is 

the  first  statement  of  the  calendar  year  and  no  previous  statement  has 

been  filed  for  this  committee,  but  money  was  raised  or  spent  in  the 

previous year that did not equal  $1,000  or more, enter the amount of 

cash on hand as of December 31. Otherwise, enter zero. 

Line 13 

This  figure  represents  a total  of  all  monetary  contributions  and  loans 

received during the reporting period. Nonmonetary contributions 

should not be included. 

Line 14 

This amount represents all items, such as interest on a bank account, 

that increase the cash position but are not considered contributions. 

The amount is carried forward from Schedule I, Miscellaneous 

Increases  to  Cash.  Together,  Lines  13  and  14  reflect  all  the  money  that 

has been received during the current reporting period. 

Line 15 

This  figure  represents  the  total  amount  the  committee  has  spent  during 

the reporting period, including loans made and any accrued expenses 

paid. 

Line 16 

This amount represents the total of Lines 12, 13, and 14 minus Line 

15. The amount reported on Line 16 must equal the total amount of 

cash the committee has in its campaign bank account and the amount 

of  all  funds  held  in  interest  bearing  accounts,  certificates  of  deposit, 

money market accounts, shares in government bonds, or any other DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 8  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

investments that can be readily converted to cash. 

If this is a termination statement, Line 16 must be zero. 

Line 17 

This  figure  is  carried  forward  from  Schedule  B,  Part  2.  The  amount 

represents the total of all loan guarantees, endorsements, or security 

received during the period. 

Line 18 

This  figure  includes  investments  that  cannot  be  readily  converted 

to cash, as well as the balance due on all outstanding loans the 

committee has made to others. 

Do not include any amount that is invested in interest bearing 

accounts,  certificates  of  deposit,  money  market  accounts,  or  any  other 

investments that can be readily converted to cash. This amount should 

be  part  of  the  ending  cash  figure  reported  on  Line  16. 

Line 19 

Report  the  total  of  all  money  owed  by  the  committee.  Using  Column  B, 

add Line 2 (loans received) and Line 9 (accrued expenses). 

Lines 20 & 21 

If  an  officeholder  or  candidate  is  being  voted  upon  in  both  the  state 

primary and general elections, and the statement covers a period 

during the last six months of the year, the committee is required to 

report a lump sum amount of contributions received and expenditures 

made.  Complete  this  section  for  the  preelection  statements  filed  in 

connection with the November election, as well as the semi-annual 

statement due in January after the election. 

Contributions Received:  Under  1/1  through  6/30,  report  the  total 

contributions received using Column B, Line 5 from the Summary 

Page  of  the  statement  that  ended  6/30.  Subtract  this  figure  from  the 

total contributions reported on the Summary Page for the current 

period using Column B, Line 5. Enter this amount under 7/1 to Date. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 9  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Expenditures Made:  Under  1/1  through  6/30,  report  the  total 

expenditures made using Column B, Line 11 from the Summary Page 

of  the  statement  that  ended  6/30.  Subtract  this  figure  from  the  total 

expenditures reported on the Summary Page for the current period 

using Column B, Line 11. Enter this amount under 7/1 to Date. 

Line 22 

Candidates who have accepted the voluntary expenditure ceiling for 

a particular election must disclose on that election committee’s report 

the total amount of expenditures made through the end of the reporting 

period  that  are  subject  to  the  expenditure  ceiling  for  the  election. 

Report the date of the election and the total amount expended for that 

election. Report totals for the primary and general elections separately. 

This information is not required if the expenditure ceiling has been 

lifted. Include nonmonetary contributions received, except for those 

received from a political party. In addition, goods or services received 

during a reporting period for which no payment has been made 

(accrued expenses, Schedule F) must be counted. Once an accrued 

expense has been reported on Line 22, do not count the expense 

again when it is paid. It is not necessary to amend a previously-

reported  expenditure  total  to  reflect  any  subsequent  adjustments,  such 

as refunds. (See Chapter 1 for information on voluntary expenditure 

ceilings, including what expenditures must be included.) 

Answering Your Questions 

A Is there any circumstance where Line 16, Ending Cash 

Balance, would show a negative amount? 

If you report a negative amount on Line 16, this means that 

either you have made a mathematical error in your calculations 

or you are overdrawn at the bank. Rounding off also may cause 

a small negative in the cash on hand balance. 

B Is there any circumstance where an amount in Column A 

would be negative? 

Yes. As loans and accrued expenses are paid down, the 

amount  reflected  in  Column  A may  be  a negative  amount. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 10  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

C What should I do if I am unable to balance my accounting 

records by the filing deadline? 

The Political Reform Act does not provide for deadline 

extensions. Complete the form as accurately as you can and 

file  by  the  deadline.  File  an  amended  form  as  soon  as  possible. 

General Rules for Reporting Contributions Received 

Refer  to  Chapter  4 for  specific  reporting  rules  related  to  receiving 

contributions. Among other important issues, that chapter reviews: 

• Major  Donor  notices 

• Joint checking account reporting 

• Intermediary reporting 

• Affiliated  entity  rules 

• Home/office  fundraisers 

• Aggregating contributions 

Detailed Reporting Rules 

Contributor Information:  A committee must always report the true 

source of a contribution. A committee must have in its records for 

each contribution of $100 or more the contributor’s name, address, 

and, if the contributor is an individual, his or her occupation and 

employer. Contributions may be deposited in the committee’s bank 

account pending receipt of the information. The campaign statement 

must be amended within 70 days from its closing date to disclose the 

missing contributor information unless the contribution was returned to 

the donor. 

A contribution  must  be  returned  if  the  contributor  identification  is  not 

received within 60 days. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 11  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Donor Information (contributors of $100 or more) 

Complete  Incomplete 

Retired  Next Door Neighbor 

Consultant, A Better Business Agency  Owner 

Self Employed, No Separate Business Name  Friend 

Homemaker or Student  ABBA (no acronyms) 

Private Investor: stocks and bonds  Business Person 

Lawyer, Ortiz and Smith  Investor 

Unable to return a contribution:  When a contribution cannot 

be returned to the contributor within 60 days from the date the 

contribution was received, the contribution amount must be paid to 

the  Secretary  of  State  for  deposit  in  the  State  General  Fund.  City  and 

county committees must make the payments to the general fund of the 

local  jurisdiction  in  which  the  committee  is  active  (e.g.,  a city  general 

purpose committee must make the payment to the city’s general fund). 

If a contribution is returned to the contributor by check but the check is 

not cashed by the contributor within 90 calendar days, the contribution 

amount must be paid within 30 days to the Secretary of State for 

deposit  in  the  State  General  Fund.  City  and  county  committees  must 

make  the  payments  to  the  general  fund  of  the  local  jurisdiction  in 

which the committee is active. 

Reporting cumulative amounts:  Contributions from the same 

source (including aggregated contributions) are cumulated from 

January 1 through December 31. When reporting the cumulative 

amount of contributions received from any one source, include all 

monetary and nonmonetary contributions, and loans (including loan 

guarantees) received by contributor. 

When  a committee  must  file  a preelection  statement  in  one  year  in 

connection with an election held in another year (e.g., a January 

special election) the cumulation period begins on January 1 of the year 

before the election and ends on the closing date of the semi-annual 

statement  filed  after  the  election. 

A committee must pay 

to the State General 

Fund the amount of a 

returned contribution never 

cashed by the donor. See 

Regulation 18570. 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 12  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Returned Contributions 

Not Deposited:  Do not report a contribution returned to the contributor 

and not deposited prior to the closing date of the campaign statement. 

A contribution received in the 90 days before the election is not 

required to be reported if it not deposited, negotiated, or cashed and is 

returned to the contributor within 24 hours of receipt. 

List on Schedule A contributions deposited or negotiated, or which 

were not returned prior to the closing date of the campaign statement. 

A committee must report a contribution even if it was not honored by a 

financial  institution  due  to  insufficient  funds.  In  those  cases,  both  the 

receipt and the return of the contribution may be reported on Schedule 

A (the return will be reported as a negative amount) if the committee 

returns the check to the contributor during the same reporting period. 

Otherwise, the return of the contribution must be reported on Schedule 

E. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 13  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

C Schedule A  – Monetary Contributions Received 

Most monetary contributions are listed on Schedule A. However, 

loan payments are reported on Schedule B or Schedule H and 

miscellaneous receipts are reported on Schedule I. 

Schedule A Monetary Contributions Received Page of Type or print in ink Amounts may be rounded to whole dollars 

PER ELECTION TO DATE 

(IF REQUIRED) CUMULATIVE TO DATE 

CALENDAR YEAR (JAN. 1 - DEC. 31) 

AMOUNT 

RECEIVED THIS PERIOD 

IF AN INDIVIDUAL, ENTER OCCUPATION AND EMPLOYER 

(IF SELF-EMPLOYED, ENTER NAME 

OF BUSINESS) 

DATE RECEIVED 

SEE INSTRUCTIONS ON REVERSE 

NAME OF FILER I.D. NUMBER SCHEDULE A 

SUBTOTAL $ CALIFORNIA FORM Statement covers period from through Schedule A Summary 

1. Amount received this period – itemized monetary contributions. (Include all Schedule A subtotals.) ........................................................................................................ $ 2. Amount received this period – unitemized monetary contributions of less than $100 ............................. $ 3. Total monetary contributions received this period. (Add Lines 1 and 2. Enter here and on the Summary Page, Column A, Line 1.) ....................... TOTAL $ 

FULL NAME, STREET ADDRESS AND ZIP CODE OF CONTRIBUTOR (IF COMMITTEE, ALSO ENTER I.D. NUMBER) CONTRIBUTOR 

CODE **Contributor Codes IND – Individual COM – Recipient Committee (other than PTY or SCC) OTH – Other (e.g., business entity) PTY – Political Party SCC – Small Contributor Committee IND COM OTH PTY SCC 

460 

IND COM OTH PTY SCC IND COM OTH PTY SCC IND COM OTH PTY SCC IND COM OTH PTY SCC 

FPPC Form 460 (January/05) FPPC Toll-Free Helpline: 866/ASK-FPPC (866/275-3772) 

X/X/20XX X/X/20XX x xx Committee to Elect Greer for Senate 20XX 1234567 11/2/20XX John Swig, 10 Golden Gate, SF CA 94118 ✔

retired 4,000 8,000 P20XX: 4,000 

G20XX: 4,000 11/2/20XX SolarTown, 3 Chip St, Austin TX 78701 

✔ 2,000 2,000 G20XX: 2,000 11/2/20XX CA Energy Association Small Contributor Committee 2 L Street, Sacramento, CA 95814 1239782 ✔

5,000 5,000 G20XX: 5,000 11/4/20XX Sierra Central Committee, 4 Sattley Rd, Sattley CA 96126 1237896 

✔

9,000 9,000 G20XX: 9,000 11/4/20XX Sanchez for Assembly 20XX, 44 Alhambra St, Sacramento, CA 95815 1244990 ✔ 500 500 G20XX: 500 20,500 

Clear Sch A Print Form DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 14  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Date Received 

List the date the committee obtained possession or control of the 

contribution. For instance, report the date the check was received, 

which may differ from the date on the check or the date the check 

was deposited. For contributions received by electronic transaction 

(such as credit card, debit account, or wire transfer, including those 

received over the Internet), report the date the committee received or 

had control of the credit/debit account information or other payment 

information, or the date the committee received or had control of the 

funds, whichever is earlier. See Chapter 3 for detailed information. 

Contributor Information 

Itemize persons who contribute a cumulative amount of $100 or more 

during the calendar year. Provide each contributor’s name, street 

address, city, state, and zip code. Remember to maintain the names 

and addresses of contributors of $25 or more in your records. 

Contributor Codes 

For each itemized contributor, check the box indicating whether the 

contributor is an individual, a committee, “other” (such as a business 

entity), political party, or small contributor committee. 

Ex 9.1  - Duncan contributed 

$99 during the year’s first 

reporting period and his 

contribution was reported 

with other contributors who 

donated less than $100. 

During the second reporting 

period, Duncan contributed 

another $99 and now 

must be listed on Schedule 

A. Show $99 as received 

“this period” and report a 

“cumulative amount” of 

$198. 

Page of Type or print in ink Amounts may be rounded to whole dollars 

NAME OF FILER 

Schedule A (Continuation Sheet) Monetary Contributions Received 

I.D. NUMBER SCHEDULE A (CONT.) 

Statement covers period from through CALIFORNIA FORM 460 

PER ELECTION TO DATE 

(IF REQUIRED) CUMULATIVE TO DATE 

CALENDAR YEAR (JAN. 1 - DEC. 31) 

AMOUNT 

RECEIVED THIS PERIOD 

IF AN INDIVIDUAL, ENTER OCCUPATION AND EMPLOYER 

(IF SELF-EMPLOYED, ENTER NAME 

OF BUSINESS) 

DATE RECEIVED 

SUBTOTAL $ 

FULL NAME, STREET ADDRESS AND ZIP CODE OF CONTRIBUTOR (IF COMMITTEE, ALSO ENTER I.D. NUMBER) CONTRIBUTOR 

CODE **Contributor Codes IND – Individual COM – Recipient Committee (other than PTY or SCC) OTH – Other (e.g., business entity) PTY – Political Party SCC – Small Contributor Committee IND COM OTH PTY SCC IND COM OTH PTY SCC IND COM OTH PTY SCC IND COM OTH PTY SCC IND COM OTH PTY SCC 

FPPC Form 460 (January/05) FPPC Toll-Free Helpline: 866/ASK-FPPC (866/275-3772) 

X/X/20XX X/X/20XX x xx Committee to Elect Greer for Senate 20XX 1234567 10/XX/20XX Greer for City Council 20XX (Transfer) 10 J Street, Sacramento, CA 95814 (ID 1214287) 10/25/2012 Ted Smith 7239 Hawthorne Blvd. Rancho Palos Verdes, CA 90274 

✔ Dentist, Smith Smiles $1,000 $1,000 20XXP: $1,000 11/2/2012 X Corporation 1500 8th Avenue Los Angeles, CA 90013 ✔ $4,200 $4,200 20XXP: $4,200 12/5/2012 Abbe Winkler 1495 Spruce Street La Habra Heights, CA 90631 

✔ Firefighter/Paramedic, La Habra Heights Fire Department $500 $4,200 20XXP: $4,200 $5,700 

Clear Sch A Con Print Form DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 15  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Occupation and Employer, I  D Number, and Intermediary 

Information 

If the contributor is an individual, provide the individual’s occupation 

and employer, or, if self-employed, provide the name of the business. 

Do not leave this blank. If this information has not been obtained, put 

“requested” or similar language in this column and amend Schedule 

A when the information has been received. Contributions of $100 or 

more must be returned within 60 days of receipt if this information is 

not obtained. 

If the contributor is a recipient committee, report that committee’s 

identification  number.  If  the  identification  number  has  not  yet  been 

assigned or is unknown, report the full name, street address, city, 

state, and zip code of that committee’s treasurer. 

If a contribution is received through an intermediary, provide the name, 

street address, city, state, zip code, and, if applicable, occupation 

and employer of both the intermediary and the true source of the 

contribution. 

Amount 

Report the amount of the contribution. 

Cumulative to Date 

Contributions from a single source are cumulated from January 

1 through December 31. The amount listed in the “Cumulative to 

Date-Calendar Year” column will differ from the “Amount Received 

This Period” column if the committee has received other contributions, 

including nonmonetary contributions, loans, or loan guarantees from 

the same source during in the year. There is an exception to calendar 

year  cumulation  if  the  committee  is  required  to  file  a preelection 

statement in one year in connection with an election held in another 

year, e.g., certain January/February elections. When this happens, the 

cumulation period begins on January 1 of the year before the election 

and  ends  on  the  closing  date  of  the  semi-annual  statement  filed  after 

the election. 

A candidate and 

spouse do not file 

a Form 461 (Major Donor 

Campaign Statement) for 

personal contributions made 

from community funds to 

the controlled committee. 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 16  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Per Election to Date 

State candidates must to complete the “Per Election to Date” column. 

For each itemized contribution, disclose the type of election, the year 

of the election, and the amount received from the contributor for that 

election. For example, an Assembly candidate who receives an $8,400 

check intended for both the primary and general elections would 

disclose per election amounts of $4,200 P-year of the election and 

$4,200  G-year  of  the  election.  These  figures  may  include  amounts 

received in different calendar years. 

Abbreviations for Disclosing Per Election Cumulative Amounts 

P=Primary 

G=General 

S=Special 

R=Runoff 

Schedule A Summary 

Complete the summary section of each schedule after completing the 

corresponding schedule. Each summary provides detailed instructions 

for every line. 

Ex 9.2  - In April 2014, Stella 

contributed $1,000 for a 

candidate’s primary election, 

and in July 2014, she 

contributed $1,000 for the 

general election. In October 

2014, she contributed 

$2,000 to pay debt from 

the primary election. When 

itemizing the October 

contribution, disclose per 

election totals as: $3,000 

P-14 and $1,000 G-14. 

A state candidate 

may not return his or 

her personal contributions 

reported on Schedule A. 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 17  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

D Schedule B – Loans Received 

Use  Schedule  B to  report  activity  on  loans  received  by  the  committee. 

Outstanding loans are reported on each campaign statement until they 

are paid. Schedule B has two parts: 

• Part 1 lists loans received or outstanding, and the repayment, 

forgiveness, or payment by a third party of a loan previously 

received. 

• Part 2 lists information on loan guarantors. 

IND COM OTH PTY SCC 

Statement covers period from through 

I.D. NUMBER SCHEDULE B - PART 1 Type or print in ink Amounts may be rounded to whole dollars Schedule B – Part 1 Loans Received Page of SUBTOTALS $ 

SEE INSTRUCTIONS ON REVERSE 

NAME OF FILER 

CALIFORNIA FORM 460 $ $

IF AN INDIVIDUAL, ENTER OCCUPATION AND EMPLOYER 

(IF SELF-EMPLOYED, ENTER 

NAME OF BUSINESS) 

INTEREST PAID THIS PERIOD 

CUMULATIVE CONTRIBUTIONS 

TO DATE 

FULL NAME, STREET ADDRESS AND ZIP CODE 

OF LENDER 

(IF COMMITTEE, ALSO ENTER I.D. NUMBER) ORIGINAL AMOUNT OF 

LOAN 

OUTSTANDING 

BALANCE 

BEGINNING THIS 

PERIOD 

AMOUNT 

RECEIVED THIS PERIOD 

AMOUNT PAID OR FORGIVEN 

THIS PERIOD 

OUTSTANDING 

BALANCE AT CLOSE OF THIS PERIOD 

(b) (c) (e) 

$

DATE INCURRED 

(Enter (e) on Schedule E, Line 3) CALENDAR YEAR $PER ELECTION $%RATE $*Amounts forgiven or paid by another party also must be reported on Schedule A. ** If required. 

Schedule B Summary 

1. Loans received this period .................................................................................................................... $ (Total Column (b) plus unitemized loans of less than $100.) 2. Loans paid or forgiven this period ......................................................................................................... $ (Total Column (c) plus loans under $100 paid or forgiven.) (Include loans paid by a third party that are also itemized on Schedule A.) 3. Net change this period. ( Subtract Line 2 from Line 1.) ............................................................... NET $ 

Enter the net here and on the Summary Page, Column A, Line 2. (May be a negative number) 

(a) (d) 

$$

(f) (g) 

PAID $

FORGIVEN 

$$

DATE DUE 

$

$

DATE INCURRED 

CALENDAR YEAR $PER ELECTION $%RATE $$$PAID $

FORGIVEN 

$$

DATE DUE 

$

DATE INCURRED 

CALENDAR YEAR $PER ELECTION $%RATE $$$PAID $

FORGIVEN 

$$

DATE DUE 

IND COM OTH PTY SCC IND COM OTH PTY SCC 

FPPC Form 460 (January/05) FPPC Toll-Free Helpline: 866/ASK-FPPC (866/275-3772) 

*** ** ** 

††††Contributor Codes IND – Individual COM – Recipient Committee (other than PTY or SCC) OTH – Other (e.g., business entity) PTY – Political Party SCC – Small Contributor Committee X/X/20XX X/X/20XX x xx Committee to Elect Greer for Senate 20XX 1234567 Sierra Bank 200 Main Street Portola CA 96122 

✔

2,000 002,000 6/30/20XX 220 2,000 11/1/20X N/A N/A Mary Greer, 300 Gulling St. Portola CA 96122 

✔

Greer Hair Styles, self employed 4,000 0

✔

4,000 00 0 4,000 7/1/20XX 4,000 P:4,000 2,000 4,000 2,000 20 2,000 4,000 (2,000) 

Clear Sch B-1 Print Form DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 18  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Part 1  – Loans Received 

Lender Information 

Provide the name, street address, city, state, and zip code of each 

lender of $100 or more. 

Financial Institution 

If  a financial  institution,  such  as  a bank,  has  loaned  the  committee 

money or the committee has drawn on a line of credit, report the 

institution as the lender by listing its name and address, including zip 

code. If the candidate has obtained a loan from a commercial lending 

institution for which he or she is personally liable, report both the 

candidate and the institution as the lender. 

Individual 

If the lender is an individual, also provide the individual’s occupation 

and employer, or, if the contributor is self-employed, provide the name 

of the business. Do not leave this column blank. If this information 

has not been obtained, put “requested” or similar language in this 

column and amend Schedule B, Part 1 once the information has been 

obtained. 

Officeholder/Candidate 

Officeholders  and  candidates  may  report  personal  funds  as  a loan  on 

Schedule B. A state candidate may not have an outstanding personal 

loan of more than $100,000 to an election committee at any one time, 

including loans from a commercial lending institution for which the 

candidate is personally liable. 

Contributor Codes 

For each itemized lender, check the box indicating whether the lender 

is an individual, committee, “other” (such as a business entity), political 

party, or small contributor committee. 

Report each loan 

separately, even if 

the committee has received 

more than one loan from a 

single source. 

Quick 

Tip 

Do not report the 

repayment of a loan 

on Schedule E. Only the 

“Interest Paid This Period” 

should be reported on 

Schedule E. 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 19  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

(a) Outstanding Balance Beginning This Period 

Enter the outstanding loan balance at the beginning of this 

reporting  period  (Column  (d)  of  the  last  report  filed).  If  the  loan 

was received this period, enter zero or leave Column (a) blank. 

(b) Amount Received This Period 

Enter the amount received from the lender during this reporting 

period. If this loan was received in a previous reporting period, 

enter zero or leave Column (b) blank. 

(c) Amount Paid or Forgiven This Period 

Enter the amount of any reduction of the loan during this 

reporting period. Check whether the reduction was a payment or 

forgiveness. When the lender forgives all or part of a loan, or a 

third party makes a payment on a loan, also report the lender or 

third party on Schedule A. Enter zero or leave this column blank if 

no payments were made this reporting period. 

(d) Outstanding Balance at Close of This Period 

Enter the outstanding balance of the loan at the close of this 

reporting period. Enter the due date, if any. 

(e) Interest Paid This Period 

Enter the interest rate and the amount of interest paid on the 

loan(s) during this reporting period. If the lender is not charging 

interest, indicate “none” on the “interest rate” line. Interest paid is 

reported separately from payments made on the loan principal. 

Interest payments are also transferred to the Schedule E 

Summary. 

State candidates 

may not charge their 

committees interest for the 

use of their personal funds. 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 20  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

(f) Original Amount of Loan 

Enter the original amount of the loan and the date it was 

received.  If  this  is  the  first  time  the  loan  is  being  reported,  this  is 

the same amount as reported in Column (b). 

(g) Cumulative Contributions to Date 

Enter the cumulative amount of contributions (including loans, 

loan guarantees, monetary and nonmonetary contributions) 

received from the lender during the calendar year covered by this 

statement. 

State candidates are also required to report the amount received 

per contributor per election. For each itemized loan, disclose the 

type of election, the year of the election, and the amount received 

from the contributor for that election. For example, an Assembly 

candidate who receives an $8,400 loan intended for both the 

primary and general elections would disclose per election 

amounts  of  $4,200  P-year  of  the  election  and  $4,200  G-year 

of  the  election.  These  figures  may  include  amounts  received  in 

different calendar years. When a loan is repaid, the cumulative 

amount may be reduced by the amount repaid. 

A loan is a contribution unless it is received from a commercial 

lending institution in the ordinary course of business. It is not 

necessary to disclose cumulative amounts for loans that are not 

contributions. 

Summary 

As loans are paid, Line 3 of the summary section of Schedule B 

will eventually be a negative amount. When transferring a negative 

figure  from  Line  3 to  the  Summary  Page,  Column  A,  Line  2,  be  sure 

to subtract the amount from the previous report, Column B, Line 2, to 

determine  the  figure  for  this  report’s  Column  B,  Line  2. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 21  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Part 2  – Loan Guarantors 

Guarantor Information 

If someone other than the controlling candidate guarantees, co-signs, 

endorses, or provides security for a loan of $100 or more, enter 

the name and address of the guarantor and, if the guarantor is an 

individual, his or her occupation and employer, or, if self employed, the 

name of the business. 

Contributor Codes 

For each itemized guarantor, check the box indicating whether the 

guarantor is an individual, committee, “other” (such as a business 

entity), political party, or small contributor committee. 

Loan 

Enter the name of the lender or the entity at which a line of credit was 

established and the date of the loan or the date the line of credit was 

established. 

I.D. NUMBER 

Schedule B – Part 2 Loan Guarantors Type or print in ink Amounts may be rounded to whole dollars 

SEE INSTRUCTIONS ON REVERSE 

NAME OF FILER 

Page of 

AMOUNT GUARANTEED 

THIS PERIOD 

Statement covers period from through 

SCHEDULE B - PART 2 

CALIFORNIA FORM 460 

IF AN INDIVIDUAL, ENTER OCCUPATION AND EMPLOYER 

(IF SELF-EMPLOYED, ENTER 

NAME OF BUSINESS) FULL NAME, STREET ADDRESS AND ZIP CODE OF GUARANTOR (IF COMMITTEE, ALSO ENTER I.D. NUMBER) 

BALANCE 

OUTSTANDING 

TO DATE 

CUMULATIVE 

TO DATE CALENDAR YEAR $PER ELECTION 

(IF REQUIRED) 

$LOAN CONTRIBUTOR 

CODE Enter on Summary Page, Line 17 only. 

SUBTOTAL $

LENDER DATE LENDER DATE LENDER DATE LENDER DATE IND COM OTH PTY SCC IND COM OTH PTY SCC IND COM OTH PTY SCC IND COM OTH PTY SCC 

FPPC Form 460 (January/05) FPPC Toll-Free Helpline: 866/ASK-FPPC (866/275-3772) 

CALENDAR YEAR $PER ELECTION 

(IF REQUIRED) 

$CALENDAR YEAR $PER ELECTION 

(IF REQUIRED) 

$CALENDAR YEAR $PER ELECTION 

(IF REQUIRED) 

$X/X/20XX X/X/20XX x xx Committee to Elect Greer for Senate 20XX 1234567 Bob Hurt Systems 10 Oak Street Sacramento, CA 95822 ✔

Sierra Bank 11/1/20XX 2,000 2,000 

20XXG: 2,000 2,000 2,000 

Clear Sch B-2 Print Form 

AMOUNT GUARANTEED 

THIS PERIOD 

IF AN INDIVIDUAL, ENTER OCCUPATION AND EMPLOYER 

(IF SELF-EMPLOYED, ENTER 

NAME OF BUSINESS) FULL NAME, STREET ADDRESS AND ZIP CODE OF GUARANTOR (IF COMMITTEE, ALSO ENTER I.D. NUMBER) 

BALANCE 

OUTSTANDING 

TO DATE 

CUMULATIVE 

TO DATE CALENDAR YEAR $PER ELECTION 

(IF REQUIRED) 

$LOAN CONTRIBUTOR 

CODE Enter on Summary Page, Line 17 only. 

SUBTOTAL $

LENDER DATE LENDER DATE LENDER DATE LENDER DATE IND COM OTH PTY SCC IND COM OTH PTY SCC IND COM OTH PTY SCC IND COM OTH PTY SCC 

FPPC Form 460 (January/05) FPPC Toll-Free Helpline: 866/ASK-FPPC (866/275-3772) 

CALENDAR YEAR $PER ELECTION 

(IF REQUIRED) 

$CALENDAR YEAR $PER ELECTION 

(IF REQUIRED) 

$CALENDAR YEAR $PER ELECTION 

(IF REQUIRED) 

$Committee to Elect Greer for Senate 20XX 1234567 Bob Hurt Systems 10 Oak Street Sacramento, CA 95822 ✔

Sierra Bank 11/1/20XX 2,000 2,000 

20XXG: 2,000 2,000 

2,000 

Clear Sch B-2 Print Form DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 22  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Amount Guaranteed This Period 

Enter the amount guaranteed this period, if applicable. For lines of 

credit, enter the full amount established or secured by the guarantor 

during the period. (Report amounts drawn on a line of credit on 

Schedule B – Part 1.) 

Cumulative to Date 

Enter the cumulative amount of contributions (including loans, loan 

guarantees, monetary and nonmonetary contributions) received from 

the guarantor during the calendar year covered by the statement. 

State candidates are also required to report the amount guaranteed 

per contributor per election. For each itemized loan guarantee, 

disclose the type of election, the year of the election, and the amount 

guaranteed by the contributor for that election. For example, an 

Assembly candidate who receives a $7,200 loan guarantee where 

the loan is intended for both the primary and general elections would 

disclose per election amounts of $3,600 P-year of the election and 

$3,600  G-year  of  the  election.  These  figures  may  include  amounts 

received in different calendar years. 

Balance Outstanding to Date 

Report the outstanding balance for which the guarantor is liable at the 

close of this reporting period. 

Loan guarantees are 

not included in the 

Schedule B Summary, but 

are carried forward in a 

lump sum to Line 17 of the 

Summary Page. 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 23  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

E Schedule C – Nonmonetary Contributions Received 

Use  Schedule  C to  report  nonmonetary  contributions  received  by  the 

committee. Nonmonetary contributions (also referred to as in-kind 

contributions) are goods or services provided to the committee for 

which it does not pay the fair market value. The fair market value is 

the amount the committee would pay for the goods or services on 

the open market; whatever it would cost any member of the general 

public to obtain the same good or service. Chapter 4 reviews rules on 

in-kind contributions. Common examples include: 

• Items donated to your campaign such as laptops and printers. 

• Signs, postage, and printing. 

• Use  of  office  equipment,  including  office  telephones  used  after 

hours, for phone banking. 

• Food and entertainment provided for a fundraiser. 

• Use  of  an  airplane. 

Schedule C Nonmonetary Contributions Received 

I.D. NUMBER 

Attach additional information on appropriately labeled continuation sheets. 

CUMULATIVE TO 

DATE CALENDAR YEAR (JAN 1 - DEC 31) 

AMOUNT/ 

FAIR MARKET 

VALUE 

PER ELECTION TO DATE 

(IF REQUIRED) 

DATE RECEIVED 

Type or print in ink Amounts may be rounded to whole dollars 

DESCRIPTION OF 

GOODS OR SERVICES SCHEDULE C 

Page of SEE INSTRUCTIONS ON REVERSE 

NAME OF FILER 

Schedule C Summary 

1. Amount received this period – itemized nonmonetary contributions. (Include all Schedule C subtotals.) ..................................................................................................................... $ 2. Amount received this period – unitemized nonmonetary contributions of less than $100 .................................... $ 3. Total nonmonetary contributions received this period. (Add Lines 1 and 2. Enter here and on the Summary Page, Column A, Lines 4 and 10.) ...................... TOTAL $ 

Statement covers period from through SUBTOTAL $ 

IF AN INDIVIDUAL, ENTER OCCUPATION AND EMPLOYER 

(IF SELF-EMPLOYED, ENTER 

NAME OF BUSINESS) FULL NAME, STREET ADDRESS AND ZIP CODE OF CONTRIBUTOR (IF COMMITTEE, ALSO ENTER I.D. NUMBER) CONTRIBUTOR 

CODE *IND COM OTH PTY SCC 

CALIFORNIA FORM 460 

IND COM OTH PTY SCC IND COM OTH PTY SCC IND COM OTH PTY SCC 

FPPC Form 460 (January/05) FPPC Toll-Free Helpline: 866/ASK-FPPC (866/275-3772) 

*Contributor Codes IND – Individual COM – Recipient Committee (other than PTY or SCC) OTH – Other (e.g., business entity) PTY – Political Party SCC – Small Contributor Committee X/X/20XX X/X/20XX x xx Committee to Elect Greer for Senate 20XX 1234567 11/3/XX State Central Committee 10 L Street Sacramento, CA 95814 777888 ✔

Mailing 6,420 $500,000 20XXG: 500,000 11/1/XX Smith for Governor 20XX 80 I Street Sacramento, CA 95814 1239000 

✔ Email List 300 300 20XXG: 300 10/27/XX Sam Richards 89 West Ave Piedmont, CA 94611 

✔ Principal Richards LLC Private flight 2,300 4,600 20XXP: 2,300 

20XXG: 2,300 10/25/XX Gold Springs Golf Course 78 Newport Way Auburn, CA 94622 ✔

discount on golf fees for fundraiser 4,000 4,000 20XXG: 4,000 13,020 

Clear Sch C Print Form DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 24  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

• Discounts or rebates that are not extended to the general public. 

• Mailing lists, including email lists. 

• Compensation paid by an employer to an employee who spends 

more than 10% of his or her compensated time in a calendar 

month working on behalf of a committee. Compensation 

includes  gross  wages  paid  and  any  benefits  in  lieu  of  wages, 

such as stock options or an annuity purchase. Compensation 

does  not  include  routine  fringe  benefits,  such  as  the  employer’s 

payments to a health plan or payroll taxes. 

• Forgiveness of an accrued expense by the creditor. 

• An extension of credit that has become a contribution. 

Date Received 

A nonmonetary contribution is received on the earlier of the following: 

• The date that funds are spent by the contributor; or 

• The date the candidate or committee obtains possession or 

control  of  the  goods  or  services,  or  receives  the  benefit  of  the 

expenditure. 

For an extension of credit, the date the extension of credit became a 

contribution; generally, that is 46 days following the date the invoice 

was received or the date the goods or services were received, 

whichever is earlier. (See Chapter 4 for detailed information.) 

Contributor Information Occupation/ Employer and Amount 

Columns 

Itemize contributors of $100 or more. If the contributor is an individual, 

in addition to his or her street address, city, state, and zip code, 

provide occupation and employer information, the amount received 

this period, and the cumulative amount to date. 

Ex 9.3  - A PAC printed a 

brochure supporting the 

candidate’s election and 

delivered the brochures to 

the candidate on February 

22. Report February 22 as 

the date the contribution 

was received even if the 

brochures are not mailed to 

voters for several days. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 25  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Contributor Codes 

For each itemized contributor, check the box indicating whether the 

contributor is an individual, committee, “other” (such as a business 

entity), political party, or small contributor committee. 

Description of Goods or Services 

Provide a brief description of the goods or services received. 

Amount/Fair Market Value 

Report the value of the nonmonetary contribution received. 

Cumulative to Date 

Enter the cumulative amount of contributions (including loans, loan 

guarantees, monetary and nonmonetary contributions) received from 

the contributor during the calendar year covered by the statement. 

Per Election to Date 

State candidates are also required to report the amount received per 

contributor per election. For each itemized contribution, disclose the 

type of election, the year of the election, and the amount received 

from the contributor for that election. For example, an Assembly 

candidate who receives an $8,400 check intended for both the primary 

and general elections would disclose per election amounts of $4,200 

P-year  of  the  election  and  $4,200  G-year  of  the  election.  These  figures 

may include amounts received in different calendar years. 

Schedule C Summary 

The total of nonmonetary contributions reported on Line 3, Schedule C 

summary section, is reported on the Form 460 Summary Page as both 

a contribution (Line 4, Column A) and an expenditure (Line 10, Column 

A). 

An artist’s personal 

time to design 

advertising is not a 

contribution but the amount 

paid to an employee who 

spends over 10% of their 

time in a calendar month to 

design campaign advertising 

is a contribution. 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 26  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

F Schedule D – Expenditures Supporting/Opposing Other 

Candidates, Measures and Committees 

Schedule D is a summary of payments reported on Schedules E, F, 

and H that are contributions or independent expenditures to support 

or oppose other candidates, measures, and committees. Do not report 

payments made to support the controlling candidate’s own candidacy, 

or to oppose the candidate’s opponent(s) on Schedule D. 

Types of Expenditures Include: 

• A monetary contribution or loan to another candidate or 

committee 

• A payment to a vendor for goods or services for a candidate or 

committee (i.e., a nonmonetary contribution) 

SEE INSTRUCTIONS ON REVERSE 

NAME OF FILER 

Schedule D Summary of Expenditures Supporting/Opposing Other Candidates, Measures and Committees Page of SUBTOTAL $ Type or print in ink Amounts may be rounded to whole dollars 

I.D. NUMBER 

Statement covers period from through 

SCHEDULE D 

Schedule D Summary 

1. Itemized contributions and independent expenditures made this period. (Include all Schedule D subtotals.) ......................................................... $ 

2. Unitemized contributions and independent expenditures made this period of under $100 ..................................................................................... $ 3. Total contributions and independent expenditures made this period. (Add Lines 1 and 2. Do not enter on the Summary Page.) ............ TOTAL $ 

NAME OF CANDIDATE, OFFICE, AND DISTRICT, OR 

MEASURE NUMBER OR LETTER AND JURISDICTION, 

OR COMMITTEE DATE TYPE OF PAYMENT PER ELECTION TO DATE 

(IF REQUIRED) CUMULATIVE TO DATE 

CALENDAR YEAR (JAN. 1 - DEC. 31) Support Oppose DESCRIPTION 

(IF REQUIRED) 

Support Oppose Monetary Contribution Nonmonetary Contribution Independent Expenditure 

CALIFORNIA FORM 460 

Support Oppose 

AMOUNT THIS 

PERIOD Monetary Contribution Nonmonetary Contribution Independent Expenditure Monetary Contribution Nonmonetary Contribution Independent Expenditure 

FPPC Form 460 (January/05) FPPC Toll-Free Helpline: 866/ASK-FPPC (866/275-3772) 

X/X/20XX X/X/20XX x xx Committee to Elect Greer for Senate 20XX 1234567 11/2/20XX Yes on Prop 10 Statewide A Coalition Supporting Green Energy, Sponsored by Solar Companies 1246666 

✔

✔

10,000 10,000 10/23/20XX No on Prop 22, Statewide Measure Committee to Oppose Prop. 22 a group of Business and Trades for Fair Taxation 1235555 

✔

✔

Mailing List 500 500 10,500 

Clear Sch D Print Form DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 27  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

• A donation to a candidate or committee of goods on hand, or 

the payment of salary or expenses for a campaign employee 

who spends more than 10% of his or her compensated time in a 

calendar month working for another candidate or committee 

• A payment for a communication (e.g., a mailing, billboard, radio 

ad) that expressly advocates the election/passage or defeat of a 

clearly-identified  candidate  or  ballot  measure,  but  the  payment 

is not made to, or at the behest of, the candidate or ballot 

measure committee (See Chapter 7 regarding independent 

expenditures.) 

Schedule D Instructions 

Date 

Report the date the contribution or independent expenditure was 

made. A monetary contribution is made on the date it is mailed, 

delivered,  or  otherwise  transmitted  to  the  officeholder,  candidate,  or 

committee. 

A nonmonetary contribution is made on the earlier of the following: 

• The date an expenditure is made for the goods or services; or 

• The date the candidate, committee, or an agent obtains 

possession or control of the goods or services. 

An independent expenditure is made on the date the communication is 

mailed, delivered, broadcast, or otherwise disseminated to the public. 

The payment for a communication which is never transmitted is not an 

independent expenditure and need not be reported on Schedule D. 

Report the expenditure on Schedule E. 

Contributions from 

a state candidate to 

another state candidate are 

subject to limits. 

A committee pays for 

a campaign mailing 

for a local candidate. The 

mailing is sent to voters on 

September 4 and the invoice 

is paid October 15. Report 

September 4 as the date the 

contribution was made. 

Quick 

Tip 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 28  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Candidate and Office, Measure and Jurisdiction, or Committee 

If a total of $100 or more is contributed or expended during a calendar 

year to support or oppose a single candidate, ballot measure, or a 

general purpose committee (e.g., a political party), disclose the name 

of  the  candidate  and  the  office  sought  or  held,  the  number  or  letter  and 

jurisdiction  of  the  ballot  measure,  or  the  name  of  the  general  purpose 

committee. For each candidate or measure listed, indicate whether the 

payment was made to support or oppose the candidate or measure. 

Type of Payment 

Check one of the boxes indicating the type of payment. If the payment 

is a nonmonetary contribution, provide a description of the payment. 

Amount This Period 

Provide the amount(s) of contributions or independent expenditures 

made this period relative to each candidate, measure, or committee. 

Cumulative to Date Calendar Year 

Report the cumulative amount contributed to or expended to support 

or oppose each itemized candidate, ballot measure, or committee 

since January 1 of the current calendar year. If contributions are 

made to more than one election committee controlled by the same 

candidate, report the total amount contributed to all of the committees. 

Do not cumulate contributions made to a candidate and to that 

candidate’s controlled ballot measure committee. 

Per Election to Date 

Report the cumulative amount per election that has been contributed 

to  each  candidate  that  is  subject  to  state  contribution  limits. 

Contribution of Goods When No Payment is Made 

If goods on hand are contributed to another candidate or committee 

(e.g., paper, copier), describe the goods or services in the 

“Description” column, and disclose the fair market value of the 

contribution. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 29  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

G Expenditure Rules 

An expenditure is “made” on the date the payment is made or the date 

the committee receives the goods or services, whichever is earlier. 

Expenditures of campaign funds must have a political, legislative, or 

governmental purpose. 

Use  Schedule  E to  report  money  spent  by  the  committee  during  the 

reporting period other than loans and loan repayments. 

Use  Schedule  F to  report  amounts  owed  by  the  committee  for  goods 

or services received but not paid for by the end of the reporting period. 

Ex 9.4  - During November, your committee: 

(a) Paid a deposit on a room for a fundraiser to be held January 10; 

(b) Ordered and received the fundraiser invitations for which you were billed 

but had not made a payment by December 31; and 

(c) Ordered, but did not receive, flowers for the fundraiser for which you will 

be billed at the end of January. 

On your semi-annual statement covering the period ending December 31, 

report the payment for the room deposit on Schedule E. Because you received 

the invitations but had not paid for them by December 31, disclose the 

outstanding amount on Schedule F. The cost of the flowers will not be reported 

until the next reporting period because you did not pay for nor receive the 

flowers during the period covered by the statement. 

Semi-Annual Statements:  Unpaid  administrative  overhead  expenses 

of the committee, such as rent, utilities, phones, or employee 

salaries, need not be reported on Schedule F if the committee has 

not received a bill in the normal course of business or if the due date 

for the payment is after the closing date of the statement. Regular 

administrative overhead does not include contracts for services such 

as accounting, legal, campaign consulting, and public relations. 

Pre-election Statements:  When a closing date falls in the middle 

of a month, it is not necessary to list services, including legal and 

accounting, as an outstanding expense if the service is regularly 

invoiced at the end of the month. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 30  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Itemization 

Itemize each payment or accrued expense of $100 or more to a single 

payee, and any payments totaling $100 or more for a single product 

or service made during the period. If the committee has entered into 

an agreement to make payments over time for a product or service, 

other than general administrative expenses such as rent and utilities, 

the unpaid balance may be reportable on Schedule F as an accrued 

expense. 

Transfers to Savings Accounts 

Do not report on Schedule E the transfer of campaign funds into a 

savings  account,  certificate  of  deposit,  money  market  account,  or  the 

purchase of any other asset that can be readily converted to cash. 

Report these amounts as cash on hand on the Summary Page, Line 

16. 

Transfers 

Report transfers of funds to another committee controlled by the 

candidate on Schedule E. 

Contributions and Independent Expenditures 

If the committee makes contributions or independent expenditures 

to  support  or  oppose  other  candidates,  officeholders,  or  committees, 

in addition to reporting the payments or accrued expenses on 

Schedule E or F, complete Schedule D. For payments made for 

goods or services that are nonmonetary contributions or independent 

expenditures, also identify the candidate, committee, or ballot measure 

supported or opposed by the expenditure in the “Description of 

Payment” column on Schedule E or F. 

Ex 9.5  - On June 30, your committee received two bills for June services. One 

bill was from an outside accounting firm and the other for office rent. The due 

date for both invoices is July 15. If, on June 30, the committee has not paid the 

two bills, the bill from the outside accounting firm is reported on Schedule F as 

an accrued expense on your semi-annual statement; the rent bill, however, is 

not. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 31  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Subvendor Payments 

An expenditure(s) made by an agent or independent contractor (such 

as  a campaign  worker,  consulting  firm,  or  advertising  agency)  of  $500 

or more on behalf of the committee, must be reported in the same 

detail as if it paid directly by the committee. These are commonly 

known as “subvendor payments.” Following are some reporting 

examples: 

• Development of campaign strategy; 

• Design or management of campaign literature or advertising; 

• Advertising time or space; and 

• Surveys, polls, signature gathering, and door-to-door solicitation 

of voters. 

Agents and independent contractors must provide the committee with 

the required payment information  no later than  three working days 

prior  to  when  the  campaign  statement  must  be  filed  (or  within  24  hours 

for a contribution or independent expenditure made within 90 days 

of the date of the election). Do not report the agent or independent 

contractor’s own overhead and operating expenses. The committee 

records must have receipts, invoices, and other documentation of 

subvendor payments. 

In many cases, funds paid to an agent or independent contractor in 

one reporting period will not be used by the agent or contractor until a 

subsequent reporting period. Report payments to the agent/contractor 

on Schedule E of the campaign statement covering the period in which 

the payment was made. When the agent/contractor spends the money, 

report subvendor payments on the campaign statement covering the 

period in which the agent/contractor made the expenditures; itemize 

payments made by the agent/contractor of $500 or more. 

Committees are fined 

for not reporting 

subvendors. 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 32  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Subvendor  payments  are  most  commonly  reported  on  Schedule  G, 

but may be reported on Schedule E or F along with the payment made 

or owed to the agent/contractor. When itemizing subvendor payments 

on Schedule E or F, do not include the payments in the “Amount Paid” 

column,  as  this  will  inflate  expenditure  totals. 

Credit Card Payments 

When reporting payments to a credit card company, report the name, 

street address, city, state, zip code, and the amount of payment. 

In addition, provide the name, street address, city, state, and zip 

code of any vendor that received $100 or more, the amount paid 

to each vendor itemized, and a code or description of the payment. 

If a payment on the credit card has not been made by the end of 

the reporting period, or only partial payment has been made, report 

the amount outstanding to the credit card company on Schedule F. 

Payments  to  the  credit  card  company  should  be  reflected  on  Schedule 

E, when payments are made, and Schedule F, when there is a balance 

still owing at the end of the reporting period. Vendors are not required 

to be listed more than one time. 

Contingency Payments 

If the committee has entered into an agreement to pay a contingency 

fee, such as a bonus to a consultant if the campaign is successful, 

report the fee amount on Schedule F only if it is outstanding at the end 

of the campaign. The fee is not required to be reported as an accrued 

expense until it is due. 

Reimbursements 

Candidates 

Candidates may not use their personal funds for campaign 

expenses  (except  for  filing  and  ballot  statement  fees)  without  first 

depositing them into the campaign bank account. 

Volunteers, Employees, Agents, and Contractors 

Volunteers (including a candidate’s spouse), employees, and agents 

or independent contractors, e.g., a consultant or an advertising agent, 

On December 31 

a state committee 

received goods but had 

not paid the financial 

institutuion that issued the 

credit card. Report the 

vendor and the financial 

institution on the semi-

annual report, Schedule F. 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 33  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

may be reimbursed for goods, services, or travel expenses when the 

following criteria are met: 

• The treasurer is provided with a dated receipt and a written 

description of each expenditure prior to reimbursement; 

• The reimbursement is paid within 45 calendar days after the 

expenditures are made; and 

• There is a written contract between the committee and the 

agent/independent contractor providing for the reimbursement 

of expenditures. (Volunteers and employees do not need a 

written contract.) 

If the reimbursement does not occur within 45 calendar days, the 

expenditure is considered a nonmonetary contribution from the 

volunteer, paid employee, or agent/independent contractor, unless the 

person seeking reimbursement has made a good faith effort to obtain 

reimbursement and is unable to collect from the committee. 

Officeholders 

Officeholders  may  be  reimbursed  for  expenses  related  to  holding 

office  paid  for  from  personal  funds  when  the  following  criteria  are  met: 

• The  officeholder  provides  the  committee’s  treasurer  with  a dated 

receipt and a written description of the expenditure; and 

• Reimbursement occurs: 

◦ For a monetary expenditure: Within 90 calendar days after the 

officeholder  incurs  the  expense. 

◦ For a credit card or charge account: Within 90 calendar days 

of the end of the billing period. 

If the reimbursement does not occur within the 90-day period, the 

amount must be reported as a nonmonetary contribution from the 

officeholder  to  the  committee  and  no  reimbursement  may  occur. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 34  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

An  officeholder  may  be  reimbursed  from  either  the  controlled 

committee campaign bank account established for election to the 

incumbent  term  of  office,  from  an  officeholder  account  established  for 

that  office,  or  from  a controlled  committee  bank  account  established 

for  a different  election  to  the  same  office,  if  all  of  the  conditions 

mentioned above are met. When reporting reimbursements to the 

officeholder,  subvendor  payments  of  $100  or  more  must  be  itemized. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 35  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

H Schedule E – Payments Made 

Name and Address of Payee 

Itemize each payment of $100 or more made to a single payee during 

the reporting period, and any payments totaling $100 or more made 

during the period for a single product or service. Include the name, 

street address, city, state, and zip code of the payee. Do not use a 

post  office  box  number  when  reporting  the  address  of  a payee  or 

creditor. 

SEE INSTRUCTIONS ON REVERSE 

NAME OF FILER 

Schedule E Payments Made Page of CODES: If one of the following codes accurately describes the payment, you may enter the code. Otherwise, describe the payment. 

CODE OR DESCRIPTION OF PAYMENT AMOUNT PAID 

SUBTOTAL $ Type or print in ink Amounts may be rounded to whole dollars 

I.D. NUMBER 

Statement covers period from through 

SCHEDULE E 

RAD radio airtime and production costs RFD returned contributions SAL campaign workers’ salaries TEL t.v. or cable airtime and production costs TRC candidate travel, lodging, and meals TRS staff/spouse travel, lodging, and meals TSF transfer between committees of the same candidate/sponsor VOT voter registration WEB information technology costs (internet, e-mail) MBR member communications 

MTG meetings and appearances 

OFC office expenses PET petition circulating PHO phone banks POL polling and survey research POS postage, delivery and messenger services PRO professional services (legal, accounting) PRT print ads 

Schedule E Summary 

1. Itemized payments made this period. (Include all Schedule E subtotals.) .............................................................................................................. $ 

2. Unitemized payments made this period of under $100 .......................................................................................................................................... $ 3. Total interest paid this period on loans. (Enter amount from Schedule B, Part 1, Column (e).) ............................................................................... $ 4. Total payments made this period. (Add Lines 1, 2, and 3. Enter here and on the Summary Page, Column A, Line 6.) ............................. TOTAL $ 

CMP campaign paraphernalia/misc. CNS campaign consultants CTB contribution (explain nonmonetary)* CVC civic donations FIL candidate filing/ballot fees FND fundraising events IND independent expenditure supporting/opposing others (explain)* 

LEG legal defense 

LIT campaign literature and mailings NAME AND ADDRESS OF PAYEE 

(IF COMMITTEE, ALSO ENTER I.D. NUMBER) 

CALIFORNIA FORM 460 * Payments that are contributions or independent expenditures must also be summarized on Schedule D FPPC Form 460 (January/05) FPPC Toll-Free Helpline: 866/ASK-FPPC (866/275-3772) 

X/X/20XX X/X/20XX x xx Committee to Elect Greer for Senate 20XX 1234567 Modler Strategic Services, LLC 12 12th Ave, Studio City CA 91604 TEL 40,000 Yes on Prop 10 A Coalition Supporting Green Energy, Sponsored by Solar Companies 1246666 4 J Street, Sacramento, CA 95814 CTB 10,000 Party Rentals, 20 R St. West Sacramento, CA 95691 FND 456 50,456 

Clear Sch E Print Form DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 36  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

CODE OR DESCRIPTION OF PAYMENT AMOUNT PAID 

SUBTOTAL $ Statement covers period from through 

SCHEDULE E (CONT.) 

Type or print in ink Amounts may be rounded to whole dollars Schedule E (Continuation Sheet) Payments Made 

SEE INSTRUCTIONS ON REVERSE Page of 

I.D. NUMBER 

NAME AND ADDRESS OF PAYEE 

(IF COMMITTEE, ALSO ENTER I.D. NUMBER) 

CALIFORNIA FORM 460 CODES: If one of the following codes accurately describes the payment, you may enter the code. Otherwise, describe the payment. 

* Payments that are contributions or independent expenditures must also be summarized on Schedule D 

RAD radio airtime and production costs RFD returned contributions SAL campaign workers’ salaries TEL t.v. or cable airtime and production costs TRC candidate travel, lodging, and meals TRS staff/spouse travel, lodging, and meals TSF transfer between committees of the same candidate/sponsor VOT voter registration WEB information technology costs (internet, e-mail) MBR member communications 

MTG meetings and appearances 

OFC office expenses PET petition circulating PHO phone banks POL polling and survey research POS postage, delivery and messenger services PRO professional services (legal, accounting) PRT print ads CMP campaign paraphernalia/misc. CNS campaign consultants CTB contribution (explain nonmonetary)* CVC civic donations FIL candidate filing/ballot fees FND fundraising events IND independent expenditure supporting/opposing others (explain)* 

LEG legal defense 

LIT campaign literature and mailings 

FPPC Form 460 (January/05) FPPC Toll-Free Helpline: 866/ASK-FPPC (866/275-3772) 

NAME OF FILER X/X/20XX X/X/20XX x xx Committee to Elect Greer for Senate 20XX 1234567 Nelson, Copren and Lucci, LLP 10 Washington St, Los Angeles, CA 90071 PRO 5,489 Southwest Airlines, 10 S Street Dallas TX 775235 TRS RT SMF to LAX Candidate 10/28/XX 456 Brown and Brown Services 20 Washington Daly City, CA 94015 POL 35,000 Supper Club 1800 J Street Sacramento, CA 95814 Dinner for 4 including Candidate and Treasurer 10/30/XX 320 State General Fund, 1500 11th St, Sac CA 95814 RFD Contribution was returned for insufficient donor information and never negotiated by donor. 125 41,390 

Clear Sch E-Con Print Form DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 37  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Code or Description of Payment 

When itemizing payments, provide either a code or a description of 

the payment. (Expenditure codes are explained in detail in the Form 

460, Schedule E instructions.) If none of the codes listed on Schedule 

E fully explains the expenditure, leave the code column blank and 

provide a brief description of the expenditure. If several expenditures 

are made to one vendor during the same reporting period, all of the 

payments to the vendor may be reported in a single record. When 

coding the expenditures, use the code that represents the largest 

share  of  the  expenditures,  and  the  description  field  for  the  other  codes 

or a description. Alternatively, each expenditure may be reported 

separately by category. 

Expenditures for Gifts, Meals and Travel 

A candidate controlled committee that makes an expenditure of $100 

or more for a gift, meal, or travel, must keep a dated memorandum or 

some other form of dated written record containing a brief description 

of the political, legislative, or governmental purpose of the expenditure, 

as well as the information described below: 

• Gifts:  The date of the expenditure, a description of the gift, and the 

name  of  any  recipient  who  received  a benefit  of  $50  or  more. 

• Meals:  The date of the meal, the name of each individual who 

attended the meal, and whether he or she is a member of the 

candidate’s household or someone who has authority to approve 

expenditures of campaign funds. 

• Travel:  The dates of travel, the destination, the name of each 

individual who traveled, and whether he or she is a member of the 

candidate’s household or someone who as authority to approve 

expenditures of campaign funds. 

Payment of Accrued Expenses 

When paying accrued expenses previously reported on Schedule 

F, report all payments on Schedule E, itemizing at $100. Subvendor 

information is only required to be reported once, and does not need 

to be reitemized on Schedule E if it was disclosed on Schedule F of a 

previous report. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 38  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Schedule E Summary 

The total amount of expenditures is reported on Line 4 of the summary 

section of Schedule E and on the Form 460 Summary Page, Column 

A, Line 6. If the committee is paying interest on an outstanding loan, 

in addition to reporting the amount on Schedule B, Part 1, Column (e), 

also report the amount on Line 3 of the summary section of Schedule 

E. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 39  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

I Schedule F – Accrued Expenses (Unpaid Bills) 

Name and Address of Creditor 

Itemize each accrued expense of $100 or more owed to a single 

creditor. Provide the name, street address, city, state, and zip code of 

the  creditor.  Do  not  use  post  office  box  numbers.  Continue  to  list  an 

unpaid bill until it is paid. 

Code or Description of Payment 

When itemizing accrued expenses, provide either a code (see 

Schedule E instructions on the previous page) or a description of the 

outstanding payment. If none of the codes listed on Schedule F fully 

explains the outstanding payment, leave the code column blank and 

provide a brief description of the goods or services. 

Statement covers period from through 

I.D. NUMBER SCHEDULE F 

Schedule F Summary 

1. Total accrued expenses incurred this period. (Include all Schedule F, Column (b) subtotals for accrued expenses of $100 or more, plus total unitemized accrued expenses under $100.) ............................................ INCURRED TOTALS $ 

2. Total accrued expenses paid this period. (Include all Schedule F, Column (c) subtotals for payments on accrued expenses of $100 or more, plus total unitemized payments on accrued expenses under $100.) ................................. PAID TOTALS $ 

3. Net change this period. ( Subtract Line 2 from Line 1. Enter the difference here and on the Summary Page, Column A, Line 9.) ................................................................................................................................................ NET $ 

Type or print in ink Amounts may be rounded to whole dollars Page of Schedule F Accrued Expenses (Unpaid Bills) 

SEE INSTRUCTIONS ON REVERSE 

NAME OF FILER NAME AND ADDRESS OF CREDITOR 

(IF COMMITTEE, ALSO ENTER I.D. NUMBER) 

May be a negative number 

$

CODE OR DESCRIPTION OF PAYMENT 

(a) 

OUTSTANDING BALANCE BEGINNING 

OF THIS PERIOD 

(b) 

AMOUNT INCURRED 

THIS PERIOD 

(c) 

AMOUNT PAID 

THIS PERIOD (ALSO REPORT ON E) 

(d) 

OUTSTANDING 

BALANCE AT CLOSE OF THIS PERIOD 

SUBTOTALS $ $$CALIFORNIA FORM 460 CODES: If one of the following codes accurately describes the payment, you may enter the code. Otherwise, describe the payment. 

* Payments that are contributions or independent expenditures must also be summarized on Schedule D 

RAD radio airtime and production costs RFD returned contributions SAL campaign workers’ salaries TEL t.v. or cable airtime and production costs TRC candidate travel, lodging, and meals TRS staff/spouse travel, lodging, and meals TSF transfer between committees of the same candidate/sponsor VOT voter registration WEB information technology costs (internet, e-mail) MBR member communications 

MTG meetings and appearances 

OFC office expenses PET petition circulating PHO phone banks POL polling and survey research POS postage, delivery and messenger services PRO professional services (legal, accounting) PRT print ads CMP campaign paraphernalia/misc. CNS campaign consultants CTB contribution (explain nonmonetary)* CVC civic donations FIL candidate filing/ballot fees FND fundraising events IND independent expenditure supporting/opposing others (explain)* 

LEG legal defense 

LIT campaign literature and mailings 

FPPC Form 460 (January/05) FPPC Toll-Free Helpline: 866/ASK-FPPC (866/275-3772) 

X/X/20XX X/X/20XX x xx Committee to Elect Greer for Senate 20XX 1234567 Wells Fargo Bank (credit card) 10 Front Street Palo Alto, CA 94301 0 2,400 0 2,400 subvendors: Carolyn's Sweets, 2 X St, Sacramento, CA 95814 $500; Party Time, 10 Auburn Rd, Sacramento CA 95826 $600; Raleys,12 Folsom Blvd, Sac CA 95826 $456 FND (itemize subvendors at $100 +) 2,400 2,400 

Clear Sch F Print Form DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 40  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

If several accrued expenses are owed to one vendor during the same 

reporting period, all of the accrued expenses to the vendor may be 

reported in a single record. When coding accrued expenses, use the 

code that represents the largest share of the accrued expenses, and 

the  description  field  for  the  other  codes  or  a description.  Alternatively, 

each accrued expense may be reported separately by category. 

Amount Columns 

For each itemized accrued expense, report any outstanding balance 

remaining for the accrued expense from the previous period in 

column (a), the amount of new accrued expenses incurred this period 

in column (b), the amount paid this period in column (c), and any 

outstanding balance at the close of the period in column (d). 

When payments on accrued expenses are made, in addition to 

itemizing payments of $100 or more on Schedule F, itemize the 

payments on Schedule E. Include unitemized payments on accrued 

expenses on Line 2 of the summary section of Schedule E. 

Estimating Accrued Expenses 

If the exact amount of a debt or obligation is unknown, an estimate 

may be reported. When the exact amount is known, the committee 

must 1) amend the statement on which the estimated amount was 

reported;  or  2)  make  an  adjustment  on  the  next  campaign  statement 

by showing the difference between the estimated amount and the 

actual amount in column (b), Amount Incurred This Period. If the actual 

amount is less than the estimate, the amount listed in column (b) 

should be a negative number and subtracted from the totals. When 

reporting estimated amounts or corrections to estimated amounts, 

note that fact on the campaign statement. 

Forgiven Accrued Expenses or Third Party Payments 

If a creditor reduces or forgives a debt previously reported on 

Schedule F, or if another person pays a debt for the committee: 

• Indicate that the debt was forgiven, reduced, or paid by a 

third party and write “See Schedule C” in the “Description of 

Ex 9.6  - On its second 

preelection statement, the 

committee reported an 

estimated accrued expense 

of $5,000 owed to ABC 

Printing. An invoice was 

received during the next 

reporting period showing 

the actual amount owed 

as $4,500. On Schedule 

F, column (a) of its next 

statement, the committee 

will report an outstanding 

accrued expense of $5,000. 

In column (b), the amount 

incurred this period will 

be a negative $500. The 

committee paid the entire 

bill and therefore will report 

$4,500 as paid this period 

in column (c), with a zero 

balance in column (d). DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 41  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Payment” column. Also report the creditor/payor and the amount 

as a nonmonetary contribution on Schedule C. 

• Report the amount forgiven, reduced, or paid by a third party in 

the “Amount Paid This Period” column and indicate that it was 

a forgiveness or third party payment or report the amount as a 

negative number in the “Amount Incurred This Period” column. 

Do not report the amount on Schedule E. 

Extensions of Credit as Contributions 

When there is an agreement with the provider of goods or services 

that the committee will pay for the goods or services on credit, the 

goods or services may become a contribution to the candidate and be 

subject  to  contribution  limits  if  the  debt  remains  unpaid  after  45  days. 

If a contribution in the form of an extension of credit has previously 

been reported on Schedule F as an accrued expense, disclose the 

creditor and the amount as a nonmonetary contribution on Schedule 

C. 

On Schedule F, indicate that the debt has become a contribution, 

showing the amount as a negative number in the “Amount Incurred 

This Period” column. 

Outstanding Accrued Expenses 

Line  9,  Column  B of  the  Summary  Page  should  reflect  the  total  of  all 

outstanding accrued expenses. Accrued expenses are carried forward 

on future statements until paid. 

Schedule F Summary 

Line 3 of the summary section of Schedule F will be a negative amount 

when payments on accrued expenses are more than the amount of 

new accrued expenses. Transfer the amount to the Summary Page, 

Column  A,  Line  9 as  a negative  amount  and  subtract  it  from  the  figure 

in Column B of the previous campaign statement to determine the 

figure  for  Column  B,  Line  9 of  this  statement. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 42  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Answering Your Questions 

A When are unpaid bills reportable as accrued expenses? 

The basic rule is that you must report an accrued expense any 

time you have received goods or services but have not paid for 

them by the end of the reporting period. 

B What if I have not yet received an invoice from the vendor? 

If you have received the goods or services, you must report 

the accrued expense even if you have not received an invoice. 

If you do not know the exact amount owed, you may estimate 

the amount. When reporting an estimate, note that fact on 

Schedule F. 

C We have a contract to pay our campaign consultant $1,000 

per month  If the closing date of the campaign statement 

falls during the middle of the month, say March 17, must 

we report an accrued expense for the period March 1 

through March 17? 

No. When you have agreed in writing to pay a contractor a set 

amount at regular intervals, it is not necessary to prorate the 

amount owed to the contractor if the reporting period closes 

before the end of the contract period. 

D When an accrued expense is owed and there are 

subvendor payments, when are the subvendors reported? 

For example, if we report an accrued expense owed on a 

credit card and list the subvendors, must we reitemize the 

subvendors again on Schedules E and F when the accrued 

expense is paid? 

No. It is not necessary to reitemize subvendors when payments 

are made on accrued expenses, or if an accrued expense is 

reported on more than one statement. In this example, the 

subvendors  must  be  reported  on  the  first  statement  disclosing 

the accrued expense owed to the credit card company. On 

subsequent statements, only the credit card company must be 

itemized. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 43  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

J Schedule G – Payments Made by an Agent or Independent 

Contractor 

Use  Schedule  G to  report  payments  made  on  behalf  of  the  committee 

by agents (such as campaign workers) and independent contractors 

(such  as  a consulting  firm  or  an  advertising  agency).  This  schedule 

may be used in lieu of itemizing these amounts on Schedules E or F. 

Agents and independent contractors must provide the committee with 

the required payment information no later than three working days 

prior  to  the  filing  deadline  of  the  campaign  statement  (or  within  24 

hours for a late contribution or late independent expenditure). 

CODE OR DESCRIPTION OF PAYMENT AMOUNT PAID 

Schedule G Payments Made by an Agent or Independent Contractor (on Behalf of This Committee) Page of Type or print in ink Amounts may be rounded to whole dollars 

SCHEDULE G I.D. NUMBER SEE INSTRUCTIONS ON REVERSE 

NAME OF FILER 

NAME OF AGENT OR INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR 

Statement covers period from through 

Attach additional information on appropriately labeled continuation sheets. TOTAL* $ 

* Do not transfer to any other schedule or to the Summary Page. This total may not equal the amount paid to the agent or independent contractor as reported on Schedule E. 

NAME AND ADDRESS OF PAYEE OR CREDITOR 

(IF COMMITTEE, ALSO ENTER I.D. NUMBER) 

CALIFORNIA FORM 460 CODES: If one of the following codes accurately describes the payment, you may enter the code. Otherwise, describe the payment. 

* Payments that are contributions or independent expenditures must also be summarized on Schedule D FPPC Form 460 (January/05) FPPC Toll-Free Helpline: 866/ASK-FPPC (866/275-3772) 

RAD radio airtime and production costs RFD returned contributions SAL campaign workers’ salaries TEL t.v. or cable airtime and production costs TRC candidate travel, lodging, and meals TRS staff/spouse travel, lodging, and meals TSF transfer between committees of the same candidate/sponsor VOT voter registration WEB information technology costs (internet, e-mail) MBR member communications 

MTG meetings and appearances 

OFC office expenses PET petition circulating PHO phone banks POL polling and survey research POS postage, delivery and messenger services PRO professional services (legal, accounting) PRT print ads CMP campaign paraphernalia/misc. CNS campaign consultants CTB contribution (explain nonmonetary)* CVC civic donations FIL candidate filing/ballot fees FND fundraising events IND independent expenditure supporting/opposing others (explain)* 

LEG legal defense 

LIT campaign literature and mailings X/X/20XX X/X/20XX x xx Committee to Elect Greer for Senate 20XX 1234567 Modler Strategic Services KCRA TV 10 Broadway, Sacramento, CA 95814 TEL 12,400 KFMB TV 2 Ocean Street, San Diego, CA 92111 TEL 24,300 36,700 

Clear Sch G Print Form DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 44  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Name and Address of Payee or Creditor 

Itemize payments of $500 or more made by the agent or independent 

contractor. Provide the name, street address, city, state, and zip code 

of  the  payee.  Do  not  use  post  office  box  numbers.  See  the  general 

rules for Schedules E and F instructions for additional information. 

Do  not  transfer  Schedule  G totals  to  any  other  schedule  or  to  the 

Summary Page. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 45  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

K Schedule H – Loans Made to Others 

Schedule H is for reporting loans  made  by the committee. Outstanding 

loans are reported on each campaign statement until they are paid. 

Generally,  campaign  funds  may  be  used  to  make  loans  to  other 

candidates,  officeholders,  or  bona  fide  charitable,  educational,  civic, 

religious,  or  similar  tax-exempt  non-profit  organizations.  There  are 

restrictions on loans to any other person, including a candidate who 

controls  the  committee,  or  to  a non-profit  organization  that  is  affiliated 

with  a candidate,  the  treasurer,  or  other  committee  officials. 

Because a loan is considered a contribution, loans to other candidates 

and  committees  are  subject  to  applicable  state  or  local  contribution 

limits. Loans to other candidates and committees must also be 

reported on Schedule D. 

For each loan of $100 or more that was made or was outstanding 

during the reporting period, disclose the recipient’s name and address 

and, if the recipient is an individual, his or her occupation and 

employer or, if self-employed, the name of the business. 

Schedule H Loans Made to Others* 

SCHEDULE H 

Type or print in ink Amounts may be rounded to whole dollars Schedule H Summary 

1. Loans made this period .................................................................................................................................................. $ (Total Column (b) plus unitemized loans of less than $100.) 2. Payments received on loans ........................................................................................................................................... $ (Total Column (c) plus unitemized payments of less than $100.) 3. Net change this period. ( Subtract Line 2 from Line 1.) .......................................................................................... NET $ 

(Enter the net here and on the Summary Page, Column A, Line 7.) 

* Loans that are contributions to another candidate or committee must also be summarized on Schedule D Loans forgiven must also be reported on Schedule E 

IF AN INDIVIDUAL, ENTER OCCUPATION AND EMPLOYER 

(IF SELF-EMPLOYED, ENTER 

NAME OF BUSINESS) 

Statement covers period from through 

I.D. NUMBER 

Page of 

FULL NAME, STREET ADDRESS AND ZIP CODE 

OF RECIPIENT 

(IF COMMITTEE, ALSO ENTER I.D. NUMBER) SEE INSTRUCTIONS ON REVERSE 

NAME OF FILER 

CALIFORNIA FORM 460 

(May be a negative number) 

SUBTOTALS $ $ $

INTEREST RECEIVED 

CUMULATIVE 

LOANS TO DATE 

ORIGINAL AMOUNT OF 

LOAN 

OUTSTANDING 

BALANCE 

BEGINNING THIS 

PERIOD 

AMOUNT 

LOANED THIS PERIOD REPAYMENT OR 

FORGIVENESS 

THIS PERIOD 

OUTSTANDING 

BALANCE AT CLOSE OF THIS PERIOD 

(b) (c) (e) 

$

DATE INCURRED 

(Enter (e) on Schedule I, Line 3) 

CALENDAR YEAR $PER ELECTION $%RATE $

(a) (d) 

$$

(f) (g) 

PAID $

FORGIVEN 

$$

DATE DUE 

$

$

DATE INCURRED 

CALENDAR YEAR $PER ELECTION $%RATE $$$PAID $

FORGIVEN 

$$

DATE DUE 

FPPC Form 460 (January/05) FPPC Toll-Free Helpline: 866/ASK-FPPC (866/275-3772) 

*** ** 

**If Required 

X/X/20XX X/X/20XX x xx Committee to Elect Greer for Senate 20XX 1234567 Friends of Strand Citrus Heights City Council 2016 10 K Street, Sacramento CA 95814 1244332 10,000 00010,000 N/A 0N/A 10,000 1/1/20XX 10,000 N/A 0 0 10,000 0

Clear Sch H Print Form DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 46  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

(a) Outstanding Balance Beginning This Period 

Enter the outstanding loan balance at the beginning of this reporting 

period  (Column  (d)  of  the  last  report  filed).  If  the  loan  was  received  this 

period, Column (a) should be left blank. 

(b) Amount Loaned This Period 

Enter the amount loaned to the recipient during this reporting period. If 

this loan was made in a previous reporting period, Column (b) should 

be left blank. 

(c) Repayment or Forgiveness This Period 

Enter the amount of any reduction of the loan during this reporting 

period. Indicate whether the loan was paid or forgiven. If the 

committee forgives a loan, also report the transaction on Schedule E 

and, if the recipient of the loan is a candidate or committee, report the 

forgiveness as a contribution on Schedule D. 

(d) Outstanding Balance at Close of This Period 

Enter the outstanding balance of the loan at the close of this reporting 

period. Enter the due date, if any. 

(e) Interest Received 

Enter the interest rate and amount of interest received on the loan 

during this reporting period. Interest received is reported separately 

from payments received on the loan principal. Interest received is also 

transferred to the Schedule I Summary. 

(f) Original Amount of Loan 

Enter the original amount of the loan and the date it was made. If this 

is  the  first  time  the  loan  is  being  reported,  this  will  be  the  same  amount 

as reported in Column (b). DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 47  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

(g) Cumulative Loans to Date 

For each loan made during this reporting period that is a contribution, 

enter the cumulative amount of contributions (including loans, loan 

guarantees, monetary and nonmonetary contributions) made to the 

recipient during the calendar year covered by the statement. If the 

recipient  is  subject  to  state  contribution  limits,  also  enter  the  total 

amount contributed in connection with each election and identify the 

election year. (Loans to candidates or other committees must also be 

reported on Schedule D.) 

Line 3 will be a negative amount when payments received this 

period are greater than the amount of new loans made. Transfer the 

amount  to  the  Summary  Page,  Column  A,  Line  7 as  a negative  figure 

and  subtract  this  amount  from  the  figure  in  Column  B,  Line  7 on  the 

previous  statement  filed  to  determine  the  amount  to  report  in  this 

statement’s Column B, Line 7 of this statement. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 48  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

L Schedule I – Miscellaneous Increases to Cash 

Report on Schedule I increases to the committee’s cash position that 

are not monetary contributions, loans, or repayments of loans made to 

others. 

Examples 

• Refunds received on deposits, such as a room rental deposit, or 

from over-payment of bills 

• Refunds  for  overpayment  of  election  filing  fees 

• Interest  received  from  financial  institutions 

Schedule I Miscellaneous Increases to Cash Type or print in ink Amounts may be rounded to whole dollars Page of 

I.D. NUMBER SEE INSTRUCTIONS ON REVERSE 

NAME OF FILER 

AMOUNT OF 

INCREASE TO CASH DESCRIPTION OF RECEIPT DATE RECEIVED 

Schedule I Summary 

1. Itemized increases to cash this period. ....................................................................................................................... $ 

2. Unitemized increases to cash of under $100 this period. ............................................................................................ $ 3. Total of all interest received this period on loans made to others. (Schedule H, Column (e).) ................................. $ 4. Total miscellaneous increases to cash this period. (Add Lines 1, 2, and 3. Enter here and on the Summary Page, Line 14.) ........................................................................................................................... TOTAL $

Attach additional information on appropriately labeled continuation sheets. SUBTOTAL $ 

SCHEDULE I 

Statement covers period from through 

FULL NAME AND ADDRESS OF SOURCE (IF COMMITTEE, ALSO ENTER I.D. NUMBER) 

CALIFORNIA FORM 460 FPPC Form 460 (January/05) FPPC Toll-Free Helpline: 866/ASK-FPPC (866/275-3772) 

X/X/20XX X/X/20XX x xx Committee to Elect Greer for Senate 20XX 1234567 10/31 Wells Fargo 10 Front Street, Palo Alto, CA 94301 Interest Earned 105 11/30 Wells Fargo 10 Front Street, Palo Alto, CA 94301 Interest Earned 130 12/31 Wells Fargo 10 Front Street, Palo Alto, CA 94301 Interest Earned 140 10/4 Lacey Smith, 2 Kip Street, Sacramento, CA 95814 returned contribution 125 11/2 Embassy Suites, 40 Capital Mall, Sacramento, CA 95814 deposit return 500 1,000 

Clear Sch I Print Form DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 49  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

• The amount of a check that was never negotiated by the 

recipient 

• Interest payments received on loans made to others 

• Receipts from the sale of committee assets 

• Proceeds, up to the fair market value, of items sold at a garage 

sale or auction 

• Transfers of “carry over” funds received by a controlled 

committee from another committee controlled by the same 

candidate. An example of a “carry over” transaction would show 

the  prior  committee  in  the  Name  of  Source  field  (e.g.  Friends 

of  Molleda  for  Assembly  2014”  and  in  the  description  field  a

notation such as “carry over funds.” There is no requirement 

to list donors of the prior committee. See FPPC Regulation 

18537.1  for  specific  guidance. 

Report the date the committee received the miscellaneous receipt. 

Itemize sources of $100 or more. Provide the full name, street 

address,  city,  state,  and  zip  code  of  the  source.  Post  office  box 

numbers are not acceptable. Provide a description of the receipt and 

the amount. 

The total amount of miscellaneous increases to cash is reported on 

Line 4 of the summary section of Schedule I and on the Summary 

Page, Column A, Line 14. 

When reporting 

sources who have 

purchased donated items, 

e.g., items sold at an 

auction, report the amount 

received, up to the fair 

market value, on Schedule 

I. Any amount in excess of 

the fair market value is a 

contribution and reported 

on Schedule A. 

All decreases to cash 

must be reported as 

expenditures on Schedule E 

or H. 

Quick 

Tip 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 50  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Authority 

The  following  Government  Code  sections  and  Title  2 regulations 

provide authority for the information in this chapter: 

Government Code Sections 

81004  Reports  and  Statements;  Perjury;  Verification. 

81004.5  Reports and Statements; Amendments. 

82013  Committee. 

82015  Contribution. 

82018  Cumulative Amount. 

82025  Expenditure. 

82025.5  Fair Market Value. 

82044  Payment. 

84105  Notification  of  Contributors. 

84211  Contents of Campaign Statement. 

84212  Forms; Loans. 

84213  Candidate  Verification. 

84216  Loans. 

84216.5  Loans Made by a Candidate or Committee. 

84302  Contributions by Intermediary or Agent. 

84303  Expenditures by Agent or Independent Contractor. 

84306  Contributions Received by Agents of Candidates and 

Committees. 

85306  Transfers  Between  a Candidate’s  Own  Committees;  Use 

of Funds Raised Prior to Effective Date. 

85307  Loans. 

85319  Returning Contributions. 

85700  Donor Information Requirements; Return of 

Contributions. 

89511.5  Use  of  Personal  Funds  for  Incumbent  Elected  Officers. 

89515  Use  of  Campaign  Funds  for  Donations  and  Loans. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 9. 51  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Title 2 Regulations 

18215  Contribution. 

18215.1  Contributions; When Aggregated. 

18216  Enforceable Promise to Make a Payment. 

18225  Expenditure. 

18401  Required Recordkeeping for Chapter 4. 

18421  Cash Equivalents. 

18421.1  Disclosure of the Making and Receipt of Contributions. 

18421.2  Street Address. 

18421.3  Reporting of Contributions and Expenditures Collected by 

Contract Vendors or Collecting Agents. 

18421.4  Reporting Cumulative Amounts for State Elections and 

State Recipient Committees. 

18421.6  Reporting Accrued Expenses. 

18421.9  Reporting Expenditures Charged to a Credit, Debit or 

Charge Card by a Candidate or Committee. 

18423  Payments for Personal Services as Contributions and 

Expenditures. 

18427.1  Notification  to  Contributors  of  $5,000  or  More 

18428  Reporting of Contributions and Independent Expenditures 

Required to be Aggregated. 

18431  Reporting of Expenditures by an Agent or Independent 

Contractor. 

18432.5  Intermediary. 

18526  Reimbursement of Expenditures. 

18530.7  Extensions of Credit. 

18533  Contributions from Joint Checking Accounts. 

18536  Transfer and Attribution of Contributions. 

18537.1  Carry Over of Contributions. 

18570  Return  of  Contributions  with  Insufficient  Donor  information. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 10. 1  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Cha Pter 10 form 460: W hen to  fIle 

This  chapter  reviews  when  committees  file  the  Recipient 

Committee Campaign Statement (Form 460). The Form 460 is the 

comprehensive report that discloses all receipts and expenditures of 

a committee, including payments previously reported on a Form 497. 

State  committees  must  file  the  Form  460  with  the  Secretary  of  State, 

the  committee’s  filing  officer.  The  candidate,  treasurer  or  assistant 

treasurer  sign  the  Form  460  under  penalty  of  perjury. 

A General Information 

Filing officer: 

State  Committees  file  reports  with  the  Secretary  of  State  (“SOS”).  A

report  may  be  required  to  be  filed  with  a local  filing  officer  if  the  state 

candidate/officeholder  is  not  an  E-filer  or  maintains  a local  committee. 

The  CalSTRS  or  CalPERS  offices  receive  a Form  460  copy  from 

committees formed for those elections. 

All  reports  filed  under  the  Political  Reform  Act  are  public  records. 

Most state committee reports can be viewed at 

http://cal-access.sos.ca.gov/campaign/ .

Filing Schedules: 

The  FPPC  posts  on  its  website  filing  schedules  for  state  elections.  A

filing  officer  is  not  required  to  send  reminder  notices  about  upcoming 

filing  deadlines. 

Deadlines: 

Deadlines  that  fall  on  a Saturday,  Sunday  or  official  state  holiday 

are extended to the next business day. There is no provision in 

the  Political  Reform  Act  for  the  FPPC  or  the  SOS  to  extend  a filing 

deadline. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 10. 2  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Amendments: 

A committee must amend a Form 460 to report missing contributor 

information no later than 70 days from the close of the reporting period 

in  which  the  contribution  was  disclosed.  Amendments  filed  for  other 

purposes  should  be  filed  as  soon  as  possible. 

Late Fines: 

A fine  of  $10  per  day  may  be  assessed  for  each  day  a statement  is 

late.  A committee  that  must  file  both  a paper  and  electronic  report  may 

be  fined  $20  a day.  A committee  may  request  a waiver. 

Failure to File: 

The  SOS  must  refer  committees  that  do  not  file  reports  to  FPPC’s 

Enforcement Division. Administrative penalties of up to $5,000 per 

violation may be assessed. 

B When to File 

Semi-Annual Statements 

A committee  must  file  a semi-annual  statement  whether  or  not  the 

committee  received  contributions  or  made  expenditures.  The  first 

day of a reporting period always begins the day after the reporting 

period  of  the  last  Form  460  filed  or  January  1.  In  election  years,  the 

semi-annual  Form  460  will  begin  after  a pre-election  filing.  The  filing 

schedule  will  have  specific  dates  identified. 

A semi-annual  statement  may  be  filed  early;  however,  an  amendment 

must  be  filed  before  the  deadline  if  all  contributions  and  expenditures 

have not been disclosed. 

Semi – Annual Period  Deadline 

January 1 – June 30  July 31 

July 1 – December 31  January 31 DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 10. 3  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Preelection Statements 

In  addition  to  semi-annual  statements,  committees  must  file  two 

preelection statements before the election in which the candidate is 

listed on the ballot. For example, a committee formed for a legislative 

race  voted  on  in  a June  primary  will  file  two  pre-election  statements 

and  a semi-annual  statement  reporting  all  financial  activity  between 

January 1 - June 30. 

Candidates: Fundraising less than $2,000 

A candidate that will be listed on a state election ballot election 

but does not raise $2,000 or more in a calendar year or establish 

a campaign  committee  may  file  a one-page  Form  470  Campaign 

Statement  Short  Form.  In  general,  the  Form  must  be  filed  by  the  first 

pre-election deadline for a June election. 

A candidate that was not listed on the June ballot but is listed on a 

November  ballot  must  file  by  July  31  or  the  first  pre-election  statement, 

whichever  is  first.  Refer  to  the  form  instructions  and  relevant  filing 

schedule. 

State Officeholders Not on a Ballot 

A state  officeholder  who  will  not  appear  on  the  ballot  is  not  required 

to  file  preelection  statements  unless  the  committee  makes  any 

contribution or an independent expenditure of $500 or more during a 

reporting period. 

Non-E-filers may fax 

a Form 460 that is 30 

pages or less. However, the 

paper Form 460, with a wet 

signature, must be mailed or 

delivered within 24 hours of 

the filing deadline. 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 10. 4  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Fair Political Practices Commission Filing Schedule for State Candidate Controlled Committees June 7, 2016 Ballot 

Deadline Period Form Not es 

Feb 1, 2016 

Semi-Annual 

* – 12/31/1 5 460  All committees must file this report. 

 The January 31 deadline falls on a Sunday, so the deadline is extended to the next business day. 

Within 10 Business Days 

$5,000 Report 

Ongoing – file any time other than 90-day election cycle 

497 Only e-filers file this report: 

 File if a contribution of $5,000 or more is received from a single source. 

 No paper copy is required. 

Within 24 Hours 

Election Cycle Reports 

3/ 9/1 6 – ** 497  File if a contribution of $1,000 or more in the aggregate is received from a single source. 

 File if a contribution of $1,000 or more in the aggregate is made in connection with a candidate or ballot measure being voted on the June 7 ballot or made to a political party committee. 

 The recipient of an in-kind contribution must file a Form 497 within 48 hours from the time the in-kind or non-monetary contribution is received. 

 E-file only – no paper copy is required. 

Mar 2 2, 201 6

Pre-Election 

1/1/1 6 – 3/17/1 6 460  All committees must file this report .

May 2 6, 201 6

Pre-Election 

3/18 /1 6 – 5/21 /1 6 460  All committees must file this report. 

 Paper copies must be filed by personal delivery or guaranteed overnight service only. 

Aug 1, 2016 

Semi-Annual 

5/ 22/16 – 6/30/1 6 460  All committees must file this report. 

 The July 31 deadline falls on a Sunday, so the deadline is extended to the next business day. 

Additional Reports 

 E-filers only: Payments of $5,000 or more in connection with a state ballot measure will require 

filing the 496/497. 

 Form 511: File within 10 days of making either of the following expenditures related to an advertisement to support or oppose a ballot measure: 1) A payment totaling $5,000 or more to an individual to appear in an advertisement, or 2) A payment of any amount to an individual portraying a member of a licensed occupation (i.e., nurse, doctor, firefighter). E-filers also file online. 

 Form E-530: Committees that make a payment of $50,000 or more during the 45 days prior to an election for a communication that identifies a state candidate being voted upon in the election but does not expressly advocate the election or defeat of the candidate file within 10 days. No paper copy is required. Page 1 of 3 California Campaign Filing Schedule 2016 - 01 

FPPC E-mail Advice advice@fppc.ca.gov Toll-Free Advice Line 1-866-ASK-FPPC Website: www.fppc.ca.gov State Cand 05/15 DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 10. 5  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Fair Political Practices Commission 

 * Period Covered: The period covered by any statement begins on the day after the closing date of the last statement filed, or January 1 if no previous statement has been filed. 

 ** 24-Hour Reports: 

o Form 497 filed for contributions received must be filed through the date of the election. 

o Form 497 filed in connection with contributions made to other candidates/measures and political parties must be filed through the day before the election. 

o Form 496 filed in connection with a state election must be filed through the date of the election. 

o Form 496 filed in connection with a local election must be filed through the day before the election. 

 E-Filer: A state committee that has received contributions or made expenditures totaling $25,000 or more. 

 Form 460: All state committees, including e-filers, must also file paper reports. 

 Form 497: All reports filed online only. 

 Paper Filings: All paper filings may be filed by first class mail unless otherwise noted. 

 Where to File: State committees file reports with the Secretary of State. Only candidate controlled committees that are not e-filers file paper copies with the elections official at the candidate's county of domicile. 

 Filing Deadlines: Deadlines are extended when they fall on a Saturday, Sunday, or an official state holiday. This extension does not apply to any 24-hour contribution reports (Form 497) that are due the weekend before the election. Such reports must be filed within 24 hours regardless of the day of the week and are subject to a $10 per day late fine. 

 Penalties: Failure to file a statement on time subjects a committee to a fine of $10 per day on both the paper and the e-filed version (e.g., $20 per day for a late e-filed Form 460). Failure to file a statement could result in an enforcement penalty of $5,000 per violation. 

 Contribution Limits: Refer to the contribution limits chart on the FPPC website. 

 Public Documents: All statements are public documents. Campaign manuals and instructional materials are available at www.fppc.ca.gov, click on the Campaign link. 

 Multiple Committees: All committees controlled by a state candidate listed on the June ballot must file statements on the pre-election filing deadlines, in addition to the committee formed for this election. For example, a candidate for Senate listed on the June 7, 2016 ballot who maintains an Assembly officeholder committee must file pre-election reports for both committees even if the Assembly committee has not received or made payments. Page 2 of 3 California Campaign Filing Schedule 2016 - 01 

FPPC E-mail Advice advice@fppc.ca.gov Toll-Free Advice Line 1-866-ASK-FPPC Website: www.fppc.ca.gov State Cand 05/15 

Fair Political Practices Commission 

 Committees making independent expenditures to support or oppose other candidates or ballot measures also file: 

o 462 : A verification form must be e-mailed to the FPPC within 10 days of an independent expenditure of $1,000 or more. 

o 465 : This form is due on applicable pre-election/semi-annual deadlines in connection with the candidate or ballot measure election. 

o 496 : This form is due within 24 hours when made in a 90-day period of the election. Refer to the candidate or ballot measure election filing schedule.** 

 As of July, 2015, legislation is pending that may change this filing schedule. 

Fair Political Practices Commission 

 Committees making independent expenditures to support or oppose other candidates or ballot measures also file: 

o 462 : A verification form must be e-mailed to the FPPC within 10 days of an independent expenditure of $1,000 or more. 

o 465 : This form is due on applicable pre-election/semi-annual deadlines in connection with the candidate or ballot measure election. 

o 496 : This form is due within 24 hours when made in a 90-day period of the election. Refer to the candidate or ballot measure election filing schedule.** 

 As of July, 2015, legislation is pending that may change this filing schedule. Page 3 of 3 California Campaign Filing Schedule 2016 - 01 

FPPC E-mail Advice advice@fppc.ca.gov Toll-Free Advice Line 1-866-ASK-FPPC Website: www.fppc.ca.gov State Cand 05/15 DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 10. 6  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

C Electronic Filing – Form 460 

Most  state  committees  must  file  the  Campaign  Disclosure  Form, 

Form 460, electronically with the Secretary of State as well as on 

paper.  Electronic  filings,  commonly  referred  to  as  E-filing,  are  required 

once contributions received or expenditures made total $25,000. A 

candidate must include all controlled committee contributions and 

expenditures to determine if the $25,000 is met. The period for 

cumulating contributions and expenditures began January 1, 2000. 

Until  a committee  triggers  the  electronic  filing  threshold  only  paper 

reports  are  required.  However,  once  electronic  filing  requirements 

have  been  triggered,  all  future  reports  filed  by  the  candidate’s 

controlled  committees  must  be  filed  electronically  (including  local 

committees controlled by a state candidate). The Form 460 must also 

be  filed  on  paper. 

D Multiple Controlled Committees 

A state  candidate  or  elected  officer  may  only  control  one  committee 

and one bank account per election. But, a candidate may control 

other committees for purposes such as supporting or opposing a ballot 

measure,  preparing  for  a legal  defense  or  for  officeholder  expenses. 

Each  of  the  committees  must  file  reports  when  the  state  candidate’s 

election  committee  must  file  pre-election  reports  and  file  semi-annual 

reports. This rule provides voters a complete summary of the funds 

received and payments made by the candidate. 

There  are  specific  deadlines  to  close  a committee  if  formed  for  an 

earlier local or state election or for a legal defense proceeding. 

E CalPERS/ CalSTRS Elections 

Elected members of the Board of Administration of the CalPERS and 

CalSTRS,  candidates  for  these  offices,  their  controlled  committees 

and committees formed to support or oppose these candidates must 

file  the  Form  460  and  a copy  with  the  Secretary  of  State  and  one  copy 

with  the  relevant  board’s  office  in  Sacramento.  Committees  must 

E-file  if  contributions  or  expenditures  total  $25,000  or  more. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 10. 7  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Candidates  and  officeholders  that  have  a controlled  committee 

must  file  semi-annual  statements  and  pre-election  statements.  The 

pre-election  filing  schedule  is  different  from  other  state  candidates  as 

it relates to the ballot period as determined by the relevant board. The 

FPPC  publishes  a filing  schedule. 

F Recall Elections 

All candidates and committees that raise and spend funds in 

connection with a recall have full reporting and disclosure obligations. 

The  FPPC  will  prepare  a filing  schedule  when  a recall  election  is  held. 

Target Officer: 

The  target  officer  may  establish  a separate  ballot  measure  committee 

to oppose the recall. The contribution and voluntary expenditure limits 

do  not  apply.  The  committee  must  file  quarterly  reports,  semi-annual 

reports and pre-election reports as well as 24-hour reports within the 

election cycle and outside the election cycle. See FPPC Campaign 

Manual 3 for more information. 

Replacement Candidate: 

The  replacement  candidate  is  subject  to  the  contribution  and  voluntary 

expenditure  limits.  The  replacement  candidate  must  file  semi-annual 

reports, pre-election reports and the 24-hour reports within the election 

cycle and outside the election cycle. 

Committee Primarily Formed to Support or Oppose a Recall: 

Such  committees  are  ballot  measure  committees  and  are  not  subject 

to the contribution and voluntary expenditure limits. A committee must 

file  quarterly  reports,  semi-annual  reports  and  pre-election  reports 

as well as 24-hour reports within the election cycle and outside the 

election cycle. See FPPC Campaign Manual 3 for more information. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 10. 8  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

G.  Judicial Candidates, Officeholders Primarily Formed 

Committees, Central Committee Candidates 

Judges,  judicial  candidates  and  committees  primarily  formed  to 

support  of  oppose  a judicial  candidate  file  the  Form  460  with  the 

Secretary  of  State.  The  committees  must  file  reports  electronically 

and on paper if contributions and expenditures reach $25,000 or more. 

A committee  that  is  not  required  to  E-file  must  file  a copy  of  the  Form 

460 with the county of domicile. 

Superior Court Elections: Although committees formed for Superior 

court  judicial  elections  must  file  campaign  reports  with  the  Secretary 

of  State,  the  committees  are  not  state  committees  as  such  offices 

are  not  listed  in  the  Act’s  definition  of  elective  state  office.  See  FPPC 

Campaign Manual 2 for more information. 

Committees Primarily Formed to Support or Oppose a State 

Candidate:  These  committees  must  file  semi-annual  and  pre-election 

statements, Form 460, in the same manner as the candidate’s election 

committee. Because these committees frequently make independent 

expenditures, treasurers should refer to Chapter 12. 

County Central Committee Members and Candidates: An elected 

member of, or a candidate for election to, a county central committee 

of  a qualified  political  party  who  receives  contributions  of  less  than 

$2,000 and who makes expenditures of less than $2,000 in a calendar 

year  is  exempt  from  the  requirements  to  file  campaign  statements.  If 

the  threshold  of  $2,000  is  exceeded,  the  candidate  must  file  reports 

in  the  same  manner  as  all  other  state  candidates,  including  filing  the 

Form 460, Form 410, Form 501, Form 470 Supplement and Form 497. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 10. 9  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

H Other Campaign Forms 

The chart below summarizes other campaign forms reviewed in this 

manual. 

Campaign Forms 

Form  Purpose  Chapter 

501  Voluntary Expenditure Ceiling selection  2

410  Committee ID number  2

497  24-hour reporting of $1,000+ donors and $5,000+ 

donors 

2

470  Candidates Spending less than $2,000  2

E-530  Issue Advocacy Reporting  7

511  Paid Spokesperson Reporting  8

460  Campaign Financial Report  9

462  Independent  Expenditure  Verification  Report  12 

496  Independent Expenditure 24-hour reporting  12 

T10  Independent Expenditure Report of Committees of 

$1,000,000+ 

12 DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 10. 10  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Authority 

The  following  Government  Code  sections  and  Title  2 regulations 

provide authority for the information in this chapter: 

Government Code Sections 

81004.5  Reports and Statements; Amendments. 

81007  Mailing of Report or Statement. 

81007.5  Faxing of Report or Statement. 

81008  Public Records; Inspection; Reproduction; Time; 

Charges. 

82027  Filing  Officer. 

83116  Violation of Title. 

84200  Semi-Annual Statements. 

84200.5  Preelection Statements. 

84200.8  Time for Filing Preelection Statements for Elections Not 

Held in June or November of an Even-Numbered Year. 

84200.9  Time  for  filing  Pre-election  Statements  for  Candidate  for 

CalPERS and CalSTRS 

84206  Candiates Who Receive or Spend Less Than $2,000. 

84207  County Central Committee Candidates Who Receive or 

Spend Less Than $2,000. 

84215  Campaign Reports and Statements; Where to File. 

84605  Who Shall File Online. 

91013  Late Filing of Statement or Report; Fees. 

Title 2 Regulations 

18110  Duties  of  Filing  Officers  – Campaign  Statements. 

18116  Reports and Statements; Filing Date. 

18405  Candidates with Multiple Controlled Committees. 

18406  Short  Form  for  Candidates  or  Officeholders  Who  Receive 

and Spend Less than $2,000 in a Calendar Year. 

18426  Semi-Annual Statement Early Filing. 

18531.5  Recall Elections. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 11. 1  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

# 11 Cha Pter 

after the  ele CtIon 

After  the  election,  a candidate’s  future  filing  obligations  are  determined 

by  whether  he  or  she  was  elected  to  office  or  not.  The  Political  Reform 

Act (Act) requires a state candidate controlled election committee that 

has no “net debts outstanding” after the election to terminate within 24 

months. The Act does not require a state candidate controlled election 

committee with “net debts outstanding” or a committee primarily 

formed committee to support or oppose a candidate to terminate within 

a specific  timeframe,  but  a committee  that  remains  open  must  continue 

to  file  semi-annual  statements  and  pay  the  $50  annual  committee  fee 

until it terminates. 

This chapter addresses the reporting requirements for successful 

candidates, defeated candidates, primarily formed committees, and 

the guidelines for terminating a campaign committee. 

For  information  about  officeholder  expense  accounts,  legal  defense 

funds, and recall elections, see Chapter 1. For information about 

ballot measure committees controlled by a state candidate or 

officeholder,  see  Campaign  Disclosure  Manual  3. 

A Defeated Candidates 

Form 470 Filers 

Following  the  election,  a defeated  candidate  who  filed  the  Form  470 

(Officeholder  and  Candidate  Campaign  Statement  – Short  Form)  has 

no further reporting obligations as long as less than $2,000 was raised 

or spent during the calendar year. 

Form 460 Filers 

Following  the  election,  a defeated  candidate  must  continue  to  file 

the Form 460 (Recipient Committee Campaign Statement) on a 

semi-annual basis and pay the $50 annual committee fee as long as 

the committee remains open. In addition, other special reports may 

be required depending on the committee’s activity. As discussed DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 11. 2  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

below, a state candidate controlled committee that has  no “net debt 

outstanding” must terminate no later than 24 months  after the 

election in which the candidate was defeated. 

A candidate who is defeated in the primary or special primary election, 

or who withdraws from the general or special general election, must 

return contributions received for the general or special general election 

to the contributors on a pro rata basis, less the cost of raising and 

administering the funds and general election expenses paid prior to 

the primary election. See Chapter 1 for additional information. 

If there are leftover funds and the candidate want to use the funds for 

a future election, the funds must be transferred as discussed later in 

this chapter. 

B Successful Candidates 

The  requirements  discussed  below  apply  to  candidates/officeholders 

immediately following the election and for subsequent non-election 

years.  An  officeholder  retains  his  or  her  status  as  a “candidate” 

under  the  Act  and  must  continue  to  file  campaign  reports  – either 

the Form 460 (Recipient Committee Campaign Statement) or the 

Form  470  (Officeholder  and  Candidate  Campaign  Statement  – Short 

Form)  – until  he  or  she  has  left  elective  office  and  terminated  his  or 

her  committee.  See  “Candidates  Using  Campaign  Funds  for  a Future 

Election” below for the requirements that must be met in order for a 

candidate/officeholder  to  use  leftover  campaign  funds  for  to  run  for 

reelection  or  to  run  for  election  to  a different  office. 

Officeholders Who Filed Form 470 During Campaign 

After  the  election,  a candidate  who  filed  the  Form  470  (short  form)  in 

connection  with  the  election  has  no  additional  filing  obligations  that 

calendar  year.  As  long  as  a candidate/officeholder  does  not  have 

an  open  committee,  a Form  470  must  be  filed  by  July  31  of  each 

subsequent non-election year. This may apply to CalPERS and 

CalSTRS  elected  officers. 

Each year consult the 

FPPC campaign filing 

schedule. 

A candidate who 

is defeated in the 

primary or special primary 

election must return 

contributions received 

for the general or special 

general election. See 

Chapter 1. 

Quick 

Tip 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 11. 3  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Officeholders Who Filed Form 460 During Campaign 

After the election, a successful candidate with a controlled committee 

must  continue  to  file  the  Form  460  on  a semi-annual  basis  and  pay  the 

$50 annual committee fee until the committee terminates. In addition, 

the  committee  must  file  the  Form  497  for  contributions  of  $5,000  or 

more and if the committee makes contributions and independent 

expenditures other reports will likely be required. 

Once  an  officeholder  terminates  the  committee,  he  or  she  may 

be  required  to  file  the  Form  470  the  following  year.  However,  if  a

candidate/officeholder  has  an  open  committee  at  any  time  during  a

calendar  year,  the  Form  470  (short  form)  may  not  be  filed  instead  of 

the Form 460. 

A committee controlled by a state candidate for election purposes 

may receive contributions after an election only to pay “net debts 

outstanding”  from  the  election.  An  elected  state  officer  may  open  an 

officeholder  account  for  the  purpose  of  paying  expenses  associated 

with  holding  the  office  to  which  the  officer  was  elected.  See  Chapter  1

for  additional  information  about  net  debts  outstanding  and  officeholder 

accounts. 

$5,000 Electronic Reports 

A state  officeholder  committee  that  files  campaign  reports 

electronically  must  continue  to  file  the  $5,000  reports  discussed 

in Chapter 2 until the 90-day election cycle before his or her next 

election. 

Behested Payment Reports (Form 803) 

A state  elected  officer  who  fundraises  for  worthy  causes  in  his  or 

her community, such as for a local school, to build a new community 

center  or  restore  a historic  building,  may  have  to  file  a “behested 

payments” report. Behested payments are donations made to a 

charity  or  a government  agency  at  the  request  of  an  elected  official  for 

a legislative, governmental or charitable purpose. 

These payments are not made for personal purposes (i.e., gifts) or 

campaign purposes (i.e., contributions). DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 11. 4  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

A common  example  is  an  elected  officer  co-sponsoring  a charitable, 

governmental,  or  legislative  event  with  outside  sources  such  as  a job 

fair or a conference on public policy issues. 

Form 803 Filing Procedures: 

• File the Form 803 when a person donates $5,000 or more in 

a calendar year to charitable organizations or events at the 

request  of  the  elected  officer. 

• Once a source has made a behested payment(s) of $5,000 or 

more during the calendar year, subsequent payments of any 

amount from that source during the calendar year must be 

reported. 

• File  the  Form  803  with  the  elected  officer’s  agency  (e.g., 

Statewide  office,  Legislature)  within  30  days  following  the  date 

of the payment. 

• The agency must send a copy of the Form 803 to the FPPC. 

The FPPC posts the reports on its website. 

Form 803 Exceptions: 

• A Form 803 is not required of a non-elected state candidate. 

• A payment  is  not  subject  to  behested  payment  reporting  if 

the payment is made in response to a fundraising solicitation 

from a charitable organization requesting a payment where 

the  solicitation  does  not  “feature  an  elected  officer,”  even  if  the 

solicitation  includes  an  elected  officer’s  name.  A solicitation 

“features  an  elected  officer”  when  it  includes  the  officer’s 

photograph  or  signature,  or  singles  out  the  elected  officer.  An 

elected  officer  is  also  “featured”  in  a solicitation  if  the  roster 

or  letterhead  listing  the  governing  body  contains  a majority 

of  elected  officers.  See  Regulation  18215.3  for  additional 

information. 

• A payment  is  not  subject  to  behested  payment  reporting  if  the 

elected  officer  makes  a request  for  a payment  from  a local, 

state, or federal government agency and the payment will be 

used  in  the  regular  course  of  the  official  agency  business  of  the 

officer. 

Note:  See AB 1544. Legislation may change the behested payment 

reporting requirements. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 11. 5  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

FPPC Form 803 (December/09) FPPC Toll-Free Helpline: 866/ASK-FPPC (866/275-3772) 

California Form Behested Payment Report 

1. Elected Officer or CPUC Member (Last name, First name) 

Designated Contact Person (Name and title, if different) 

Agency Street Address Amendment 

Date Stamp $ (Round to whole dollars.) (Complete all information.) 

Date of Payment: Amount of Payment: (In-Kind FMV) 

Purpose: (Check one and provide description below.) 

Payment Type: Brief Description of In-Kind Payment: E-mail (Optional) 

Agency Name Behested Payment Report 

Legislative Governmental 

Monetary Donation or In-Kind  Goods  or  Services 

Address City State Zip  Code 

Name Name Address City State Zip  Code 

803 

(month, day, year) 

For Official Use Only 

Area Code/Phone Number Date of Original Filing: 

(month, day, year) 

Charitable 

(Provide description below.) 

Payee Information (For additional payees, include an attachment with the names and addresses.) 3

Payor Information (For additional payors, include an attachment with the names and addresses.) 2

5 Amendment Description or Comments 4 Payment Information A Public Document 

(See Part 5) 

6 Verification 

I certify,  under  penalty  of  perjury  under  the  laws  of  the  State  of  California,  that  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge,  the  information  contained 

herein is true and complete. Executed on DATE By SIGNATURE OF ELECTED OFFICER OR CPUC MEMBER 

Describe the legislative, governmental, charitable purpose, or event: 

Kim Greer 

California State Senate State Capitol, Room 2055 Austin Florez, Chief of Staff 916-555-3434 aflorez@casenatemail.com ABC Insurance Company 456-250 Stockton Street Rancho Cordova CA 95670 Boys and Girls Club of California 555 10th Street Sacramento CA 95814 08/15/XX $5,000 Charitable fundraiser to support the Boys and Girls Club. 8/31/XX 

Clear Form Print Form 

[Signature Required] DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 11. 6  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

C Future Election: Transfers 

A candidate  or  officeholder  may  transfer  leftover  campaign  funds 

to  another  committee  for  a future  election  to  the  same  office  or  to  a

different  office  so  long  as  the  funds  are  not  considered  “surplus  funds” 

and the committee does not have “net debts outstanding.” 

Campaign funds become surplus on the 90th day after the 

closing date for the postelection reporting period or upon the 

90th day after the date of leaving office, whichever occurs last. 

Surplus  campaign  funds  are  subject  to  restrictions,  as  described  in 

Chapter 6, and may not be used for a future election. 

In order for a candidate to use leftover campaign funds for a future 

election, the candidate must: 

• File  a new  Form 501  (Candidate Intention Statement) for the 

specific  future  election; 

• File a new  Form 410  (Statement of Organization); and, 

• Open a  new bank account  Transfers  to  a different  office  must 

be  attributed  to  specific  contributors  a described  in  Chapter  1. 

D Primarily Formed Committees 

Generally,  a committee  established  primarily  to  support  or  oppose 

a particular candidate(s) will terminate after the election, but the 

committee may remain open to: 

• Raise funds to pay debts. 

• Support or oppose other candidates or measures. The 

committee will need to amend its Statement of Organization 

(Form  410)  to  reflect  the  change. 

A primarily  formed  committee  must  continue  to  file  semi-annual 

campaign statements (i.e., Form 460 or Form 450) and pay the $50 

annual fee as long as the committee remains open. 

Ex 11.1  - After the election, 

the committee primarily 

formed to support candidate 

Jones decides to support 

candidate Lopez in the 

next election. In order to 

do so, the committee must 

file an amended Form 410 

(Statement of Organization) 

and will continue to file 

campaign statements. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 11. 7  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

E When to Terminate the Committee 

Certain committees (e.g., state candidate controlled committees with 

no  “net  debts  outstanding”)  have  specific  deadlines,  discussed  below, 

for terminating the committee. Other committees (e.g., state candidate 

controlled committee  with  “net debts outstanding”) are not required 

to  terminate  within  a specific  timeframe.  All  committees  must  meet 

the  criteria  specified  in  the  “Requirements  to  Terminate  a Committee” 

section below. 

State Candidate Controlled Election Committees with No Net 

Debts Outstanding 

A state candidate controlled election committee that has  no  “net debts 

outstanding” must be terminated  no later than 24 months  after the 

earliest  of  the  date  the  candidate  is  defeated,  leaves  office  or  the  term 

of  office  for  which  the  committee  was  formed  ends  or,  for  withdrawn 

candidates, no later than 24 months after the election from which the 

candidate withdrew. 

State Officeholder with a Local Committee 

A candidate  who  is  elected  to  state  office  must  terminate  any 

controlled committees that were formed for local elections held 

concurrent  with  or  prior  to  their  election  to  state  office.  The  local 

committee(s) must be terminated  within 24 months  of the candidate’s 

election  to  state  office. 

Requests for Extension 

A committee may, for good cause, seek an extension of time to comply 

with the termination requirements. Such a request must be submitted 

to the FPPC’s Executive Director prior to the original due date for the 

committee’s termination, and must include evidence of good cause for 

the request. 

State Candidate Controlled Election Committees With Net Debts 

Outstanding 

A state candidate controlled election committee that has “net debts 

outstanding” after the election does not have a deadline to terminate. 

The  committee  must  continue  to  file  semi-annual  campaign  statements 

Ex 11.2  - Paulina Kinder 

was elected to the state 

Assembly on November 4, 

2014. She must terminate 

her local committee formed 

for the county board of 

supervisors by November 4, 

2016. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 11. 8  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

(Form 460) and pay the $50 annual committee fee until the committee 

terminates. 

Committees Primarily Formed to Support or Oppose a State 

Candidate 

Primarily formed committees do not have a deadline to terminate. 

But, the committee may need to change its committee status if it 

remains  open  after  the  election.  The  committee  must  continue  to  file 

semi-annual campaign statements (i.e., Form 460 or Form 450) and 

pay the $50 annual committee fee until the committee terminates. 

F Requirements to Terminate a Committee 

A committee may terminate only if  all  of the following criteria are met: 

• The committee has ceased receiving contributions or making 

expenditures and does not anticipate receiving contributions or 

making expenditures in the future; 

• The committee has no remaining campaign funds; 

• The  committee  has  filed  all  required  campaign  statements, 

disclosing all reportable transactions, including the disposition of 

leftover funds;  and 

• The committee has eliminated all debts, or has no intention or 

ability to discharge debts. 

A committee  must  file  a Form  410  and  a final  Form  460  or  Form  450. 

On the Form 410, the “Termination” box must be checked. List the 

committee’s  identification  number  and  the  date  of  termination;  the  date 

of termination generally is the date all funds have been expended. 

Complete Section 1 and the treasurer or assistant treasurer must sign 

the  verification.  For  candidate  controlled  committees,  the  controlling 

officeholder/candidate  also  must  sign  the  verification. 

Form  450  or  460  also  must  be  filed  showing  that  all  funds  have  been 

expended and the committee has no cash on hand. Check the 

“Termination” box on the cover page. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 11. 9  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

File the original and a copy of the Form 410 with the Secretary of 

State.  File  the  Form  450  or  460  in  the  committee’s  regular  filing 

locations. 

Terminating with Debt and Notice to Creditors 

A committee may terminate with debt, but must dispose of all 

cash prior to closing its bank account. No new contributions may 

be received and no further expenditures may be made once the 

committee has been terminated. The committee must give at least a 

60-day notice of its impending termination to all creditors. The notice 

must  include  the  date  the  committee  expects  to  file  its  Form  410 

termination statement. 

G Reopening of Terminated Candidate Controlled 

Committees 

Generally,  once  a committee  has  terminated,  no  transactions  may  be 

made by the committee unless a request to reopen the committee is 

submitted to and approved by the FPPC’s Executive Director. 

Exceptions: 

• Receipt of a refund from a governmental entity (such as an 

overpayment  of  filing  fees). 

• Receipt of a refund from a vendor or other person if the 

committee did not know of its entitlement prior to termination 

and the refund(s) total no more than $10,000. 

To report the refunds described above, the terminated committee must 

file  a Form  460  for  the  period  in  which  the  refund  was  received  and 

report the refund as a miscellaneous increase to cash on Schedule 

I of the Form 460 and as an expenditure on Schedule E when the 

funds are spent. (See Chapter 6 for the permissible uses of campaign 

funds.) For the rules related to transferring the refund to another 

committee,  see  Regulation  18404.1.  The  refund  of  a filing  fee  paid  by 

personal funds does not need to be reported. 

Ex 11.3  - At the end of 

November, after winning her 

election, Arlene decides to 

terminate her committee 

files a Form 410 termination 

statement and a Form 460 

termination statement 

showing that the committee 

has no remaining cash. On 

the Form 460 Cover Page, 

Type of Statement section, 

she will mark both the 

termination and semi-annual 

boxes and enter December 

31 as the closing date of the 

statement. Unless there is 

additional activity, Arlene is 

not required to file a semi-

annual report on January 31. 

Ex 11.4  - A defeated 

candidate in a November 

election closed the campaign 

committee in December. In 

February of the following 

year, a $1,500 refund from 

the county elections office 

for an overpayment of filing 

fees was received. The 

candidate must disclose 

receipt of the refund on 

Schedule I of the Form 460. 

The refund must be used for 

a permissible expenditure 

as described in Chapter 6, 

such as to pay outstanding 

debts or to make a donation 

to a charity, and disclosed 

on Schedule E. File the Form 

460 with the SOS. If the 

candidate paid the filing 

fee with personal funds no 

disclosure is required. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 11. 10  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

A state candidate controlled committee may submit a request to the 

FPPC’s Executive Director to reopen a terminated committee for any 

of the following reasons: 

• To receive a refund or similar payment received after termination 

of the committee, other than a refund described above that 

allows the committee to accept without reopening; 

• To  pay  a fine  as  permitted  under  Government  Code  Section 

89513(c); 

• To pay expenses incurred in connection with an audit or 

investigation of the committee; 

• To  pay  litigation  expenses  as  permitted  under  Government 

Code  Sections  89513  and  89514,  other  than  expenses  subject 

to the legal defense fund provisions; or 

• For any other good cause shown that would further the 

disclosure requirements or contribution limits of the Act. 

H Administrative Termination by the FPPC’s Enforcement 

Division 

The FPPC’s Enforcement Division may terminate a committee if the 

committee failed to: 

• File a campaign statement in the previous 12 months, and the 

committee had an ending cash balance of $3,000 or less on its 

last campaign statement; 

• File a campaign statement in the previous 12 months, the 

committee had an ending cash balance of $5,000 or less on its 

last campaign statement, and the committee owes $2,000 or 

more to the controlling candidate; 

• File a campaign statement in the previous 48 months; or 

• Respond to the Enforcement Division’s reasonable efforts to 

contact  the  committee  regarding  the  committee’s  failure  to  file 

campaign statement or failure to pay annual fees. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 11. 11  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

The Enforcement Division must provide the committee with written 

notice of a proposed termination 45 days prior to terminating the 

committee. The Enforcement Division will not terminate a committee if 

the  committee  files  a written  objection  to  the  termination.  If  no  written 

objection  is  received  within  45  days,  the  committee  automatically 

terminates without further notice. See Regulation 18404.2 for 

information about reinstating an administratively terminated committee 

and prohibited activity after termination. 

Answering Your Questions 

A I lost in the June primary election so I need to refund the 

general election contributions, less administrative and 

fundraising expenses  Must I refund the general election 

contributions to all donors who contributed to the general 

election, or may I choose to return the contributions of 

some donors while allocating general election expenses to 

others, thereby reducing or eliminating the refunds payable 

to particular donors? 

You must refund the general election funds “on a pro rata 

basis,” less any expenses associated with the raising and 

administration of general election contributions. You may not 

allocate expenses to particular donors – the expenses must be 

distributed  proportionally  among  all  donors.  See  Government 

Code Section 85318. 

B I lost in the June primary election  I am in the process 

of refunding the general election contributions, less 

administrative and fundraising expenses  If I am unable to 

locate some of the donors, may the refunds be donated to 

a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization? 

No. If a donor fails to accept his or her refund, the committee 

must  pay  the  funds  to  the  State  General  Fund. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 11. 12  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

C May I terminate my committee even if I have outstanding 

debt owing to creditors? 

Yes.  When  you  file  your  termination  statements  showing 

outstanding debt, you are declaring that you do not have the 

ability to discharge debts, loans, or other obligations. However, 

if you plan to raise additional funds, or pay the outstanding debt 

with personal funds, you may not terminate. 

D After terminating my committee, I received an invoice for 

legal services that needs to be paid  Is it permissible to 

pay the invoice with my personal funds without reopening 

the committee? 

No. You must reopen the committee and deposit personal 

funds into the committee’s bank account before paying the 

invoice. A request to reopen your committee must be submitted 

to the FPPC’s Executive Director. The only transactions that 

may occur without reopening a committee is receipt of a refund 

from a governmental entity or receipt of a refund from a vendor 

or other person if the committee did not know of its entitlement 

prior to termination and the refund is no more than $10,000. 

(See Regulation 18404.1.) DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 11. 13  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Authority 

The  following  Government  Code  sections  and  Title  2 regulations 

provide authority for the information in this chapter: 

Government Code Sections 

82015  Contribution. 

84103  Statement of Organization; Amendment. 

84200  Semi-Annual Statements. 

84206  Candidates Who Receive or Spend Less than $1,000. 

84214  Termination. 

85200  Statement of Intention to be a Candidate. 

85201  Campaign Bank Account. 

85318  Contributions  Received  for  Primary  and  General  Elections. 

89513  Use  of  Campaign  Funds  for  Specific  Activities. 

89514  Use  of  Campaign  Funds  for  Attorney’s  Fees. 

89519  Surplus Funds. 

Title 2 Regulations 

18215  Contribution. 

18215.3  Behested Payments Reporting. 

18404  Termination of Candidate’s and Committees’ Filing 

Requirements. 

18404.1  Termination and Reopening of Committees. 

18406  Short  Form  for  Candidates  or  Officeholders  Who  Receive 

and Spend Less than $1,000 in a Calendar Year. 

18426  Semi-Annual Statement Early Filing. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 12. 1  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Cha Pter 12 rePort InG Inde Pendent 

exPend Iture S

This chapter reviews the reporting forms required when a committee 

primarily formed to support or oppose a state candidate makes 

an independent expenditure. Information on candidate election 

committees that make independent expenditures is reviewed at the 

end of the chapter. 

An independent expenditure is a payment for a communication that 

expressly advocates the support or opposition of a candidate but is 

not made at the behest of the candidate or his or her agents. Refer 

to Chapters 4 and 7, which review contribution and communications 

rules, for more information. 

A Primarily Formed Committees to Support or Oppose 

State Candidates 

Generally,  the  requirements  and  restrictions  outlined  in  this  manual 

apply to a committee primarily formed to support or oppose a state 

candidate, including the following: 

• The recordkeeping rules and the duties imposed on the 

committee treasurer and assistant treasurer. 

• The  notification  to  major  contributors  of  $5,000  or  more. 

• Mandated committee advertisement disclaimers, including the 

names of the top two donors of $50,000 or more. 

• Committee funds must be used for a political, legislative or 

governmental purpose. 

A committee primarily formed to support or oppose a state candidate 

that  only  makes  independent  expenditures  is  not  subject  to  the 

following: 

• Contribution limits. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 12. 2  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

• The requirement to complete the Form 501 - Statement of 

Intention. 

• The  requirement  to  terminate  by  a specific  deadline. 

The Act requires several reporting forms when primarily formed state 

candidate committees make independent expenditures. The forms are 

reviewed in the following order: 

• Form 410:  A committee ID number must be assigned and 

specific  naming  rules  apply. 

• Form 497:  Discloses donors to the committee of $1,000 or 

more. 

• Form 496:  Discloses independent expenditures of $1,000 or 

more. 

• Form 462:  Discloses candidates supported or opposed and 

requires  a principal  officer  to  verify  that 

coordination did not occur with the candidate. 

• Form 460:  Discloses the committee’s receipts, contributions, 

and payments. 

• Form T10:  Discloses the top 10 donors of $10,000 or more 

if the primarily formed committee has received 

contributions of $1,000,000 or more. 

B Form 410 – Statement of Organization 

A complete review on how to complete the Statement of Organization, 

Form 410, is addressed in Chapter 2. A committee making 

independent expenditures should note: 

• The committee name must include the last name of each 

candidate,  the  office  sought,  and  the  year  of  the  election  and 

must state whether the committee supports or opposes the 

candidate(s) (e.g., Committee to Support Doe for Senate 20XX). DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 12. 3  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

C Form 497 – 24-Hour Contribution Report 

During the 90-day election cycle, a committee primarily formed to 

support  or  oppose  a state  candidate  must  file  Form  497  when  it 

receives  contributions that total in the aggregate $1,000 or more from 

a single  source.  The  Form  497  must  also  be  filed  if  the  committee 

makes  contributions that total in the aggregate $1,000 or more. 

The  Form  497  is  filed  electronically  with  the  Secretary  of  State.  No 

paper copies of this report are required, and no copies are required to 

be  filed  with  other  filing  officers. 

The Form 497 is due within 24 hours of receiving or making 

contributions aggregating $1,000 or more. 

Exceptions: 

• The deadline for a Form 497 that is due on a weekend or state 

holiday, other than the weekend before an election, is extended 

to the next business day. 

• A committee that receives a non-monetary or in-kind 

contribution  during  the  90-day  election  cycle  must  file  the  Form 

497 within 48 hours of the date the contribution is received. 

Completing Form 497 

• Name of Filer  Enter the committee’s name, phone number, 

ID  number,  and  address.  Provide  the  date  of  filing,  the  report 

number, and the number of pages. If an amendment is being 

filed,  mark  the  “Amendment”  box. 

• Part 1  Contributions Received  Enter the date the 

contribution was received, the name and address of the 

contributor, the contributor code (i.e., IND), and the amount 

received. If the contributor is an individual, enter the individual’s 

occupation and employer. If the individual is self-employed, 

enter the name of the business. If the contribution received is a 

loan, enter the interest rate, if any. 

During the 90-day 

election cycle, a Form 

497 is required if a single 

source made two $500 

contributions to the same 

committee. 

The 90-day election 

cycle includes the 90 

days before an election and 

the date of the election. 

Quick 

Tip 

Quick 

Tip DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 12. 4  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

• Part 2  Contributions Made  Enter the date the contribution 

was made, the recipient’s name and address, the name of the 

candidate  and  the  office  he  or  she  seeks  or  holds,  and  the 

amount of the contribution. 

See Chapter 2 for more information and illustrations. 

D Form 496 – 24-Hour Independent Expenditure Report 

The Form 496 is required for each independent expenditure of $1,000 

or more made during the 90-day election cycle. 

File Form 496 electronically with the Secretary of State within 24 hours 

of making the independent expenditure(s). No paper copies of this 

report  are  required,  and  no  copies  are  required  to  be  filed  with  other 

filing  officers. 

Reporting examples: 

• A committee makes an independent expenditure by paying 

for an advertisement opposing two candidates. The ad costs 

$40,000 and features the candidates equally. The committee 

must  file  a separate  Form  496  for  each  candidate  and  disclose 

$20,000 for each candidate. 

• A committee makes a $500 independent expenditure 60 days 

before the election and a second independent expenditure 

of $600, 20 days before the election. A Form 496 is required 

within 24 hours of the second payment. 

• A committee makes a $1,500 independent expenditure 60 

days  before  the  election  and  files  a Form  496.  A second 

independent expenditure of $600 is made 20 days before the 

election. Another Form 496 is not required until independent 

expenditures of $400 or more are made. 

Completing Form 496 

• Name of Filer  Enter the committee’s name, phone number, 

ID  number,  and  address.  Provide  the  date  of  filing,  the  report 

number, and the number of pages. If an amendment is being 

filed,  mark  the  “Amendment”  box. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 12. 5  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

• Part 1  Candidate or Measure Supported or Opposed 

Enter the name of the candidate supported or opposed by 

the  independent  expenditure,  the  office  sought  or  held  by  the 

candidate, and the district number, if applicable. Mark the 

applicable “Support” or “Oppose” box. A separate Form 496 

must  be  filed  for  each  candidate  or  measure. 

Note:  A committee must review the communication to determine the 

candidate(s)  or  committee(s)  that  should  be  identified.  For  example, 

if a communication only advocates opposition to Candidate Hill, 

Candidate Hill’s information is listed and the “Oppose” box is marked. 

But, if a communication supports Candidate Jones and opposes 

Candidate  Lieu,  two  separate  Form  496s  must  be  filed  – one  for 

Candidate Jones and one for Candidate Lieu. The value for each 

is determined by prorating the costs among the candidates and/or 

committees supported or opposed. 

• Part 2  Independent Expenditures Made  Enter the date 

the independent expenditure was made. In the “Description 

of  Expenditure”  field,  enter  the  type  of  expenditure  (e.g.,  radio 

advertisement, billboard, or mailing) and the cumulative-to-

date  total  for  that  candidate  or  measure.  In  the  amount  field, 

enter  the  amount  of  the  specific  expenditure  disclosed  in  the 

description  field. 

• Part 3  Contributions of $100 or More Received  Disclose 

contributions of $100 or more received since the closing date of 

the last campaign statement (Form 460) through the date of the 

independent expenditure. Enter the date received, the name 

and address of the contributor, the contributor code (i.e., IND), 

and the amount received. If the contributor is an individual, 

enter the individual’s occupation and employer. If the individual 

is self-employed, enter the name of the business. If the 

contribution received is a loan, enter the interest rate, if any. 

Once a contribution is reported, it is not necessary to report that 

contribution on any additional Form 496. 

Cumulative-To-Date Totals  If the cumulative-to-date total is accurate 

on  the  most  recently  filed  Form  496,  the  committee  is  not  required  to 

amend the cumulative-to-date total amount on previous reports. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 12. 6  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

2 Independent Expenditures Made Attach additional information on appropriately labeled continuation sheets. 

NAME OF CANDIDATE SUPPORTED OR OPPOSED 

OFFICE SOUGHT OR HELD SUPPORT OPPOSE 

1 List Only One Candidate or Ballot Measure NAME OF BALLOT MEASURE SUPPORTED OR OPPOSED 

BALLOT NO./LETTER JURISDICTION SUPPORT OPPOSE DATE DESCRIPTION OF EXPENDITURE AMOUNT 

CALIFORNIA FORM 

For Of ficial Use Only 

496 

STREET ADDRESS CITY STATE ZIP CODE 

I.D. NUMBER (if applicable) 

Date of This Filing Report No Amendment to Report No No of Pages 

AREA CODE/PHONE NUMBER 

FPPC Form 496 (March/2011) FPPC Toll-Free Helpline: 866/ASK-FPPC (866/275-3772) 

(explain below) Reason for Amendment: 

DISTRICT NO. David Johnson 

Governor N/A xx/xx/20xx Research and consulting services $5,300 xx/xx/20xx Mailer $37,263 Cumulative to Date: $222,900 

Clear Page Print Form 

AMOUNT 

RECEIVED DATE RECEIVED 

NAME OF FILER 496 Independent Expenditure Report 

I.D. NUMBER (If applicable) 

496 INDEPENDENT EXPENDITURE REPORT FULL NAME, STREET ADDRESS AND ZIP CODE OF CONTRIBUTOR (IF COMMITTEE, ALSO ENTER I.D. NUMBER) CONTRIBUTOR 

CODE 

IF AN INDIVIDUAL, ENTER OCCUPATION 

AND EMPLOYER 

(IF SELF-EMPLOYED, ENTER NAME OF BUSINESS) ** 

CALIFORNIA FORM 496 FPPC Form 496 (March/2011) FPPC Toll-Free Helpline: 866/ASK-FPPC (866/275-3772) 3 Contributions of $100 or More Received 

If loan, enter interest rate, if any %INTEREST RATES **Contributor Codes IND – Individual COM – Recipient Committee (other than PTY or SCC) OTH – Other (e.g., business entity) PTY – Political Party SCC – Small Contributor Committee 

*Major donor and independent expenditure 

committees that do not receive contributions are not required to complete Part 3. If loan, enter interest rate, if any %If loan, enter interest rate, if any %If loan, enter interest rate, if any %If loan, enter interest rate, if any %If loan, enter interest rate, if any %IND COM OTH PTY SCC IND COM OTH PTY SCC IND COM OTH PTY SCC IND COM OTH PTY SCC IND COM OTH PTY SCC IND COM OTH PTY SCC *xx/xx/20xx Advocates for Fair Housing - ID 741857 (provide address it will be redacted) Sacramento, CA 95814 $10,000 xx/xx/20xx Mary Ann Morris (provide address it will be redacted) Sacramento, CA 95826 Retired $2,000 xx/xx/20xx ABC Company (provide address it will be redacted) Lansing, Michigan 48901 $23,000 

Clear Page Print Form DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 12. 7  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

E Form 462  – Verification of Independent Expenditures 

The  Form  462  is  filed  when  a committee  makes  an  independent 

expenditure(s) totaling in the aggregate $1,000 or more in a calendar 

year to support or oppose a single candidate or measure. The 

Form  462  identifies  the  committee’s  principal  officer.  The  officer 

acknowledges,  under  penalty  of  perjury,  that  the  committee’s 

independent expenditures were not coordinated with the listed 

candidate (or the opponent) and that the committee will report all 

contributions and reimbursements as required by law. 

Principal Officer.  A principal  officer  is  an  individual  primarily 

responsible for approving the political activity of the committee such 

as: 

• Authorizing the content of communications. 

• Authorizing independent expenditures. 

• Determining the committee’s campaign strategy. 

Filing Form 462 

Email the Form 462 to the FPPC (form462@fppc.ca.gov) within 10 

days  from  the  date  of  the  first  independent  expenditure  of  $1,000  or 

more.  A specific  candidate  must  be  identified  only  once  per  election. 

The primary and general elections are separate elections. Thus two 

forms are required if a committee makes independent expenditures 

supporting/opposing a candidate listed on both the primary and 

general election ballots. Maintain the originally signed form for four 

years. 

Completing Form 462 

This  one  page  form  identifies  the  committee  making  the  independent 

expenditure, the candidate or measure supported or opposed by the 

independent expenditure and the name of a committee’s principal 

officer.  If  the  committee’s  Form  410  lists  more  than  one  principal 

officer,  any  of  those  officers  may  sign  the  Form  462. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 12. 8  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

F Form 460 – Recipient Committee Campaign Report 

A primarily formed committee to support or oppose a state candidate 

must  complete  the  Form  460.  Generally,  the  same  reporting  rules  and 

filing  deadlines  apply  to  these  committees  as  to  the  state  candidate. 

Refer to Chapters 9 and 10. 

Form 462 

Verification of Independent Expenditures CALIFORNIA FORM 462 

Amendment (Explain) 

1. Name of Committee: 

NAME OF RECIPIENT COMMITTEE, ENTITY OR INDIVIDUAL COMMITTEE ID # BUSINESS STREET ADDRESS STATE ZIP CODE 

2. Candidates or Measures: 

This committee has reported independent expenditure(s) to support or oppose the candidate(s) or measure(s) listed on a ballot for the election date identified below. (Note: The reporting of an independent expenditure may occur after this form is filed if an independent expenditure is made before the 90 day-24 hour reporting period of Government Code Sections 84204 and 85500.) 

NAME OF CANDIDATE (First/Last)/BALLOT MEASURE NAME OF CANDIDATE (First/Last)/BALLOT MEASURE NAME OF CANDIDATE (First/Last)/BALLOT MEASURE NAME OF CANDIDATE (First/Last)/BALLOT MEASURE SUPPORT SUPPORT SUPPORT SUPPORT OPPOSE OPPOSE OPPOSE OPPOSE ELECTION DATE ELECTION DATE ELECTION DATE ELECTION DATE OFFICE SOUGHT OR HELD/ BALLOT NO./LETTER OFFICE SOUGHT OR HELD/ BALLOT NO./LETTER JURISDICTION AND DISTRICT, IF ANY 

3. Verification (Check One) :

I have not received any unreported contributions or reimbursements to make these independent expenditures. I have not coordinated any expenditure made during this reporting period with the candidate or the opponent of the candidate who is the subject of the expenditure, with the proponent or the opponent of the state measure that is the subject of the expenditure, or with the agents of the candidate or the opponent of the candidate or the state measure proponent or opponent. I certify under penalty of perjury under the laws of the State of California that the following is true and correct. 

Signature Printed Name Signed on (month, day, year) 

This verification form identifies an individual responsible for ensuring that the campaign committee’s independent expenditures were not coordinated with the listed candidate or measure committee (or the opponent) and that the committee will report all contributions and reimbursements as required by law. An independent expenditure is not subject to state or local contribution limits. 

OFFICE SOUGHT OR HELD/ BALLOT NO./LETTER JURISDICTION AND DISTRICT, IF ANY CITY 

Principal Officer Candidate/Officeholder State Ballot Measure Proponent 

TELEPHONE NUMBER E-MAIL ( )JURISDICTION AND DISTRICT, IF ANY OFFICE SOUGHT OR HELD/ BALLOT NO./LETTER JURISDICTION AND DISTRICT, IF ANY 

FPPC Form 462 (Dec/2012) FPPC Advice: advice@fppc.ca.gov (866/275-3772) www.fppc.ca.gov 

Committee to Oppose Smith for Senate District 2 2016 12123XX 11 K Street Sacramento CA 95814 ssss@xxxxx.com 916 111-1111 Jack Walton ✔ Senate 2 06/07/2016 Susan Smith ✔ Senate 2 06/07/2016 

✔

John Doe [Signature Required] X/XX/20XX DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 12. 9  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

G Form T10  – Top Ten Contributor List 

A committee primarily formed to support or oppose a state candidate 

that receives $1,000,000 or more, and has received contributions of 

$10,000  or  more  from  a single  source,  must  file  the  Form  T10  with  the 

FPPC by email (T10@fppc.ca.gov). 

Deadlines: 

• Within 24 hours (or the next business day) of meeting or 

exceeding the $1,000,000 threshold if the threshold is met 

within the 16-day period before the election, or 

• Within three business days of meeting or exceeding the 

$1,000,000 threshold if the threshold is met at any time other 

than during the 16-day period before the election. 

Completing Form T10: 

• Part 1  Committee Information  Enter the committee’s name, 

ID number, date of submittal, report number (e.g.,1,2), contact 

information, treasurer’s name, and the date of election. 

• Part 2b  Candidate Supported or Opposed  List the 

candidate  supported  or  opposed,  office  sought  and  district,  if 

any. 

• Part 3  Reasons for Update  Identify the reason for an 

updated  submission  (e.g.,  new  person  qualified,  ranking  order 

changed). 

• Part 4  Top Contributors  Identify the contributor, type of 

committee (if applicable), ID number (if any), city, state and 

cumulative amount. To determine the cumulative amount 

received from a contributor, the committee must count the 

cumulative amount of contributions from a single source for the 

primary and general elections combined. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 12. 10  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Subsequent Submissions: 

File an updated top 10 contributor list when any of the following 

occurs: 

• A new  person  qualifies  as  a top  10  contributor. 

• A person who is an existing top 10 contributor makes additional 

contributions. 

• The relative ranking order of the top 10 contributors changes. 

• The reporting committee changes its name to add or delete a 

candidate. 

The deadlines to file a subsequent submission are: 

• Within 24 hours (or the next business day) of the change if there 

are changes to the top 10 list within the 16-day period before 

the election. 

• Within three business days of the change if there are changes 

to the top 10 list at any time other than during the 16-day period 

before the election. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 12. 11  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Top Ten Contributor List CALIFORNIA FORM T10 Committees Primarily Formed (Government Code Section 84223) for State Ballot Measures or Candidates FPPC Form T10 (Aug/2014) FPPC Advice: advice@fppc.ca.gov (866/275-3772) 

www.fppc.ca.gov 

Part 1: Committee Information Committee Name: ID Number: Date Submitted: Report Number: Contact Name (last, first) : Phone Number: Email Address: Treasurer’s Name (last, first) :Date of Election: Primarily Formed Ballot Measure Part 2a: Measure(s) Supported or Opposed Measure # Support Oppose Part 2b: Candidate Supported or Opposed Candidate Name 

(last, first) 

Office Sought District, if any Support Oppose Primarily Formed Candidate Part 3: Reason For Update If Subsequent Submission (Check at least one box )

A new person qualified as a top 10 contributor. A person who is an existing top 10 contributor made 

additional contributions. 

The relative ranking order of the top 10 

contributors changed. 

The reporting committee changed its name to add or 

delete a ballot measure or candidate. 

Other (explain): 

Businesses supporting John Doe for Senate 2016 sponsored by the Local Business Association in San Diego County 1375000 May xx,20xx 1Nelson, Linda (916) 222-2222 LNelson@gmail.com Nelson, Linda June xx,2016 ■

Doe, John Senate XX 

Clear boxes Clear boxes Clear part 2b 

Top Ten Contributor List CALIFORNIA FORM T10 Committees Primarily Formed (Government Code Section 84223) for State Ballot Measures or Candidates FPPC Form T10 (Aug/2014) FPPC Advice: advice@fppc.ca.gov (866/275-3772) 

www.fppc.ca.gov 

Part 4: Top Contributors Contributor ID Number of Recipient Committee or Major Donor, if any City State Cumulative Amount Recipient Committee or Major Donor, if applicable 

ABC Company Major Donor San Diego CA 12,000 John Jacobs Major Donor San Diego CA 11,000 Sally Hon Major Donor Del Mar CA 10,000 San Diego Citizens to Support Free Enterprise Recipient Com 123456 Bonita CA 10,000 

Golfers Association of San Diego Major Donor El Cajon CA 10,000 Retired Naval Community Volunteers Assocation Major Donor San Diego CA 10,000 Hector Gomez Major Donor San Diego CA 10,000 Professor Emily Howard Major Donor San Diego CA 10,000 Jerry Stern Major Donor San Diego CA 10,000 Williams and Williams LLP Major Donor Bonita CA 10,000 DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 12. 12  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

H Candidate Election Committees 

Government  Code  Section  85501  states  that  a controlled  committee 

of a candidate may not make independent expenditures and may 

not contribute funds to another committee for the purpose of making 

independent expenditures to support or oppose other candidates. 

However, a recent Sacramento County Superior Court decision in 

Charles R. “Chuck” Reed v. Fair Political Practices Commission  found 

Section  85501  unconstitutional  and  enjoined  the  Commission  from 

enforcing that provision. 

Before making an independent expenditure to support or oppose 

another candidate, committees should seek advice from the FPPC. An 

advice letter ( Downing , No. A-14-148) has been issued on the matter. 

A candidate  controlled  committee  for  elective  office  may  make 

independent expenditures to support or oppose a ballot measure. 

The following reports, reviewed earlier, also apply if the independent 

expenditure is $1,000 or more. 

Form 496:  Discloses independent expenditures of $1,000 or more. 

Form 462:  The  candidate  verifies  that  coordination  did  not  occur 

with the affected candidate or measure. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Chapter 12. 13  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Authority 

The  following  Government  Code  sections  and  Title  2 regulations 

provide authority for the information in this chapter: 

Government Code Sections 

82036  Late Contribution. 

82036.5  Late Independent Expenditure. 

84203  Late Contribution; Reports. 

84203.3  Late In-Kind Contributions. 

84204  Late Independent Expenditures; Reports. 

85501  Prohibition on Independent Expenditures by Candidate 

Controlled Committees. 

Title 2 Regulations 

18425  Late Contribution; Reports. 

18225.7  Made at the Behest of. 

18422.5  Top Contributor Disclosure by Committees Primarily 

Formed for State Ballot Measures or Candidates. 

18428  Reporting of Contributions and Independent Expenditures 

Required to be Aggregated. 

18550  24-Hour Independent Expenditure Reports. 

18550.1  Independent and Coordinated Expenditures. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Appendix - 1  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

aPP end Ix

about the Pol ItIC al  reform 

aCt/hoW to Get  hel P

The Political Reform Act of 1974 

The Political Reform Act (the “Act”) was a voter-approved initiative 

on  the  1974  primary  election  ballot.  One  of  the  major  provisions  of 

the Act requires the truthful and accurate disclosure of campaign 

contributions and expenditures during elections. 

The Fair Political Practices Commission 

The Fair Political Practices Commission (FPPC) is the independent, 

nonpartisan state agency authorized to implement, interpret, and 

enforce the provisions of the Act. The Commission is comprised 

of  a full-time  chair  appointed  by  the  Governor,  and  four  part-time 

commissioners, one each appointed by the Controller, the Attorney 

General,  the  Secretary  of  State,  and  the  Governor.  Each  member 

serves a four-year term and no more than three members may be from 

the  same  political  party.  FPPC  staff  is  comprised  of  five  divisions: 

Executive, Administration, Enforcement, Legal, and Technical 

Assistance. 

Governing Statutes 

The  Political  Reform  Act  is  contained  in  Government  Code  Sections 

81000 – 91014. 

Regulations 

Regulations interpreting the Political Reform Act are located at Title 2, 

Division 6 of the California Code of Regulations, beginning at Section 

18109. 

Opinions and Advice Letters 

The FPPC periodically issues opinions interpreting provisions of the 

Political Reform Act. The opinions are adopted at a public meeting, 

with opportunity for input from interested persons. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Appendix - 2  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

In addition, FPPC staff issues written advice letters as to the 

applicability of the Political Reform Act and regulations to a particular 

factual situation. Refer to the information on requesting written advice 

from the FPPC available on the FPPC website. 

Contact Information for the FPPC 

Fair Political Practices Commission 

428 J Street, Suite 620 

Sacramento, CA 95814 

(916) 322-5660 

(866) 275-3772 – Toll-free 

www.fppc.ca.gov 

Twitter: @CA_FPPC 

Facebook: CA FPPC 

FPPC Website 

Visit  the  FPPC  website  (www.fppc.ca.gov)  to  get  copies  of  specific 

advice letters, sign up for RSS feeds, or to be put on mailing lists. The 

Commission’s website also contains a wealth of helpful information, 

including: 

• The Political Reform Act and its corresponding regulations 

• Commission opinions 

• Notices of Commission meeting dates, agendas, supporting 

documentation for agenda items, and meeting summaries 

• Forms  required  by  the  Act  (also  available  at  the  FPPC’s  offices, 

the  Secretary  of  State’s  offices,  and  many  local  clerks’  offices) 

• Manuals, fact sheets, and useful summaries of the law 

• Schedules of upcoming seminars and educational workshops DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Appendix - 3  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Additional Campaign Manuals 

Additional copies of this manual, and manuals for other types of 

campaign committees are available from the FPPC, the Secretary of 

State,  and  many  city  clerks  and  county  elections  offices.  Manuals  are 

available for: 

• Local  candidates,  Superior  Court  judges,  their  controlled 

committees, and committees primarily formed to support/oppose 

local candidates 

• General  purpose  recipient  committees  (including  PACs, 

sponsored committees, political party committees, and county 

central committees) 

• Ballot measure committees 

• Major  donor  and  independent  expenditure  committees 

• Slate mailer organizations 

Obtaining Information Elsewhere 

A subscription for regulations is available from: 

Barclay’s Law Publishing 

P.O. Box 3066 

South San Francisco, CA 94083 

(800) 888-3600 

Opinions and advice letters are available from these subscription 

services: 

Westlaw (800) 328-9352 

Database: “CA-ETH” 

(Advice letters from 1986 to present) 

Lexis-Nexis (800) 227-9597 

Database: “CA Fair Political Practices Commission” 

(Advice letters from 1990 to present) DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Appendix - 4  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Other Resources 

The Secretary of State, city clerks, and county clerks or registrars 

of  voters  are  the  filing  officers  for  campaign  disclosure  statements. 

Committee  statements  will  be  filed  with  the  Secretary  of  State  or  the 

local  elections  office,  depending  on  whether  the  filer  is  a state  or  local 

candidate or committee. 

Secretary of State 

The Secretary of State is also responsible for issuing campaign 

committee  identification  numbers. 

(916) 653-6224 

www.sos.ca.gov 

Federal Election Commission 

The Federal Election Commission answers questions regarding 

federal elections and contributions to all candidates from national 

banks, national corporations, and foreign nationals. 

Federal Election Commission 

999 E Street, NW 

Washington, DC 20463 

(800) 424-9530 

www.fec.gov 

Franchise Tax Board 

The California Franchise Tax Board is responsible for responding 

to questions regarding tax status, tax-deductibility of political 

contributions, 501(c)(3) groups, audits, or any tax-related questions. 

(800) 852-5711 or (800) 338-0505 

www.ftb.ca.gov DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Appendix - 5  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

Internal Revenue Service 

The Internal Revenue Service provides assistance regarding federal 

tax  laws  and  obtaining  a taxpayer  identification  number. 

(877) 829-5500 (located in Washington, D.C.) 

(800) 829-3676 (taxpayer ID number) 

www.irs.gov 

Federal Communications Commission 

The Federal Communications Commission answers questions 

regarding rates for purchasing broadcast time and equal access to 

broadcast media. 

(888) 225-5322 (located in Washington, D.C.) 

www.fcc.gov 

Email: fccinfo@fcc.gov 

Local Campaign Ordinances 

A city  or  county  officeholder,  candidate,  or  committee  may  be 

subject  to  additional  reporting  or  other  requirements  under  a local 

campaign ordinance. Common examples include the requirement 

to  file  campaign  statements  electronically,  local  contribution  limits, 

lower  itemization  thresholds,  or  the  requirement  to  file  an  additional 

preelection statement. A city or county campaign ordinance may 

never preempt state law. 

Privacy Information Notice 

Information required on all FPPC forms is used by the FPPC to 

administer  and  enforce  the  Political  Reform  Act  (Government  Code 

sections 81000 – 91014 and California Code of Regulations sections 

18110 – 18997). All information required by these forms is mandated 

by the Political Reform Act. Failure to provide all of the information 

required  by  the  Act  is  a violation  subject  to  administrative,  criminal 

or civil prosecution. All reports and statements provided are public 

records open for public inspection and reproduction. DRAFT Fair Political Practices Commission 

advice@fppc.ca.gov 

Appendix - 6  Campaign Manual 1 

Draft September 2015 

If you have any questions regarding this Privacy Notice, please contact 

the FPPC at: 

General  Counsel 

428 J Street, Suite 620 

Sacramento, CA 95814 

(916) 322-5660 

Campaign  statements  are  filed  with  the  Secretary  of  State  and  city  and 

county  filing  officers,  depending  upon  the  type  of  committee. 

Enforcement 

The  Fair  Political  Practices  Commission,  the  Attorney  General,  county 

district attorneys, and elected city attorneys of charter cities have 

enforcement authority under the Act. Failure to provide all or any part 

of the information required by the Political Reform Act is a violation 

subject  to: 

• An administrative enforcement proceeding before the Fair 

Political Practices Commission; 

• A criminal misdemeanor proceeding; 

• A civil action; and 

• Levying  of  late  penalties  by  filing  officers. 

Penalties of up to $5,000 per violation of the Political Reform Act may 

be imposed.
