Title: Pres. Trump Swears in Jeanine Pirro as Interim U.S. Attorney : CSPAN : May 29, 2025 6:27am-6:59am EDT : Free Borrow & Streaming : Internet Archive

URL Source: https://archive.org/details/CSPAN_20250529_102700_Pres._Trump_Swears_in_Jeanine_Pirro_as_Interim_U.S._Attorney

Markdown Content:
6:27 am

pres. trump: timing is ok.

6:28 am

thank you very much. we are honored to swear in jeanine pirro, someone i've known for a long time. she is an incredible person, an incredible woman, as our new interim united states attorney for the district of columbia. that's a big deal. i would like to congratulate janine and her whole family. we have christine with us and alex i know is in a very, very important place right now. the two children, but they are not children anymore.

6:29 am

i have heard that christine you are doing unbelievably well, very successful at a great law firm, so it is great to have you with us. thank you very much. over five decades, jeanine pirro, known by millions as judge jeanine, has devoted her life to the pursuit of justice, the defense of freedom, and fair, equal, and impartial law. she was a great d.a.. i remembered very well she was as good as anybody i've seen. she began her career in 1975 as an assistant district attorney in westchester county new york where she prosecuted violent crimes. that was a serious prosecute. she went after real criminals, not fake criminals like we seem to do today nowadays. people that shouldn't be prosecuted. including rape, murder, and a tireless warrior on behalf of the most vulnerable people in our society. in that role jeanine helped

6:30 am

create one of our first domestic violence bureaus, i think it was the first. as chief shear revolutionize victim protection in bold and innovative policies like very few people even thought of. in 1990, janine became the first female judge in westchester county history. had an unbelievable distinguished career. the following year she presided over numerous complex criminal cases. the reason there were complex as other judges were not able to understand them. they used to give her the complex cases because other people didn't understand them, including high-stakes felony narcotics trials. her judicial record earned her the name number one judge in 1990 by the independent fund for modern courts. that is nationwide. outstanding judge. the following year, judge jeanine was elected westchester county district attorney became

6:31 am

the top prosecutor for a jurisdiction that included some of the largest suburbs in new york city, including yonkers and white plains. a big deal. as district attorney, jeanine tackled high-profile violent crime cases and established one of the nation's most successful cybercrime units to combat online child abuse. she was way ahead of a lot of people. they still aren't there. from what i hear. they are still not there in many cases back there where we come from. in addition to her stellar legal career jeanine also excelled in news media, as you know. she has become one of the most beloved political figures through her time on television. she has been very, very successful at anything called television. she got out of what she was doing. frankly, she does them both great, but to me she will always be known as a great lawyer and a great prosecutor, which is what she is doing now. jeanine pirro, i have no doubt,

6:32 am

will be an exceptional u.s. attorney for the district of columbia, one of the truly most important positions in our country of any position, where she will restore public safety in our nation's capital, break up of vicious street gangs, and ensure equal justice under the law. you'll see very big improvements in the d.c. area, that i can promise you. i want to congratulate jeanine. i want to congratulate you, christine, and your whole family on this undertaking. as you know, pam bondi is doing an unbelievable job as a real leader in the fight against crime. pa heard about this -- pam heard about this and said i will have to find time for jeanine. she doesn't have time to do this but for jeanine she did and will be doing the swearing in. pam, thank you for the great job you're doing and for swearing and our friend, justice jeanine. thank you.

6:33 am

>> i jeanine pirro do solemnly swear, that i will support and defend the constitution of the united states, against all enemies foreign and domestic, and that i will bear true faith and allegiance to the same. and that i take this obligation freely without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion, and that i will well and faithfully discharge the duties of the office upon which i am about to enter, so help me

6:34 am

god. >> congratulations. >> thank you. [applause] ms. pirro: thank you mr. president and madame attorney general, both my friends for many years. long ago i went to law school to study about justice and to bring justice to victims of violent crimes. women, children, and the elderly. i thought to give them a voice in a system that was both blind and deaf to their concerns. i dedicated my heart and soul to making sure that there was a system that responded to them. my profile and my prosecutorial successes garnered public attention and my life took unexpected turns. through all of this, president

6:35 am

trump, you have remained as steadfast as one of my earliest supporters and champions. you never wavered. you were always steadfast, trustworthy, and confident. today, mr. president, you bring me back to my roots. and it is a larger arena, but no less an arena where we need justice. where we need to send a message that justice will be honored in the district of columbia. and, just last week, here in our nation's capital, two people on the brink of beginning their life had hopes and dreams that were never realized because a cold-blooded murderer made a decision to shoot them down on the streets on a cold, rainy night in our nation's capital. this will not go without just

6:36 am

accounting. my voice should be heard loud and clear. no more. no more tolerance of hatred. no more mercy for criminals. violence will be addressed directly with the appropriate punishment. this city will again become a shining city on a hill in an america that president trump has promised to make great again and will make safe again. mr. president, american thinks you, and i -- thanks you, and i thank you. [applause] [indiscernible]

6:37 am

>> mr. president, on russia? on russia, mr. president? do you believe the russians are being disrespectful when they say your criticisms of putin are simply an emotional response?do wants to end the war? pres. trump: i will tell you within two weeks. we will find out soon. we will find out whether or not he is tapping us along or not. if he is we will respond a little differently, but it will take about a week and a half to two weeks. mr. wycoff is here doing a phenomenal job. he is dealing with them very strongly right now. they seem to want to do something, but until the documents are signed i can't tell you. nobody can. i can say this.

6:38 am

i am very disappointed at what happened a couple of nights now where people were killed in the middle of what you would call a negotiation. i'm very disappointed by that. very, very disappointed. please. >> -- the growing humanitarian crisis and military operation -- handling of the situation of the war? pres. trump: we are dealing with the whole situation of gaza, getting food to the people of gaza. it has been a very nasty situation. a very nasty fight. october 7 was a very nasty day. the worst i think i've seen. it was a horrible day and people won't forget that either. we will see how that all works out. you want to see a couple of words about gaza because you have some information. steven witkoff, do you want to come up for a second? you might give them a little

6:39 am

information as to what's happening with gaza and israel. we are having good talks with iran. we will find out if that means anything. we are having good talks. mr. wycoff: i think that we are on the precipice of a new terms sheet that will hopefully be delivered later today. i have some very good feelings about getting to a long-term resolution, temporary cease-fire, long-term resolution , a peaceful resolution of that conflict. >> mr. president, you said yesterday that putin was playing with fire. what are the consequences if russia continues -- pres. trump: i am not going to tell you exactly, but the words speak pretty loud.

6:40 am

we are not happy about that situation. i think we are doing very well with iran. we are doing very well with gaza. we are doing very well with iran and i think we are going to see something very sensible. there are only two outcomes. you know the two outcomes. the smart outcome and the violent outcome. i don't think anyone wants to see the second, but i think we've made a lot of progress. we'll see. they still have to agree to the final stages of the document, but i think you will be very well surprised what happens there. it could be a great thing for them and they could have a great country into the future. >> elon musk in a television interview criticized the one, big beautiful bill saying that he was disappointed it undercut the doge efforts. what are your reactions? pres. trump: number one, we have to get a lot of votes. we need to get a lot of support.

6:41 am

we had to get it through the house. we have no democrats. if it were up to the democrats they would take the 65% increase. this country will have a 65% increase in taxes and other problems, big problems, almost bigger than that. we will have a 65% increase as opposed to the largest tax cut in the history of our country. we will be negotiating that bill . i'm not happy about certain aspects of it, but i'm thrilled by other aspects. it is the big beautiful bill, but the beautiful is because of all of the things we have. the biggest being the level of tax cutting that we are going to be doing. we are going to make people really be able to -- we will have the lowest tax rate we've ever had in the history of our country and tremendous amount of benefits going to the middle income people of our country.

6:42 am

low and middle income people of our country. so, we are going to see what happens because as you know this and is negotiating with us and then they have to go back to the house. it has a way to go. speaker johnson and thune have done an incredible job. leader thune has done a fantastic job. and they are working together with me and others. i think we have an amazing -- if we pull this off -- remember, we have zero democrat votes because they are bad people. there is something wrong with them. they let people for into our country. the single biggest problem is we had 21 million people pour into our country, probably higher than that, people who weren't supposed to be here. many of those people are bad. drug dealers, the mentally insane. they were closing mental institutions all over the world. they are coming into our country and we are getting them out. we are having a hard time because some judges are not making it very easy for us. it is tough enough.

6:43 am

they approved that, they allowed that to happen to our country. we don't have one democrat vote. if i were a democrat i would be voting for this ill and i would get elected to any position i want as a democrat. they are crazy. they're voting for a 65% tax increase, and they are only doing it for hatred. they're not doing it for any reason. they know it's terrible. terrible politics in my opinion. we have no democrat votes. that means we have to get almost all republican votes, and i think we are very close to doing that. i think it will be very successful. please. >> multiple a -- multiple analysts have said that trump chickens out when it comes to tariffs. what is your response? chicken out. pres. trump: chicken out? i've never heard that. because i reduced china from 145% like i said down to 100% and then down to another number? i said you have to open up your whole country. i said i gave the european union

6:44 am

a 50% tax tariff, and they called up and they said, please, let's meet right now, let's meet right now. i said, ok, i will give you until june 9. i said, what is the date? they weren't willing to meet. after i did what i did they said we will meet anytime you want. we have an and date of july 9. you call that chickening out? we have a trillion dollars now invested, committed to investing when biden didn't have practically anything. this country was dying. we have the hottest country anywhere in the world. i went to saudi arabia and the king told me. we have the hottest country in the world right now. six months ago this country was stone cold dead. we had a dead country. we had a country people didn't think were going to survive. you ask a nasty question like that.it is called negotiation.

6:45 am

you set a number. if i set a number at a ridiculously high number and i go down a little bit, little bit , they want me to hold that number, 145% tariff. even i said, that really got up. it got up because of internal and other things. you add it up. where are we now? one under 45%. i don't know if they're going to be nice to us, but we were very nice to china, and in many ways i think that we really helped china tremendously. you know, they were having great difficulty because we were basically going cold turkey with china doing no business because of the tariff, because it was so high, but i knew that. don't ever say what you said. that is a nasty question. to me, that is the nastiest question. go ahead. >> president zelenskyy said he is ready to sit down with you

6:46 am

and vladimir putin in geneva, and it sounds like general kellogg is working on preparations for that. are you planning to sit down with the two of them? pres. trump: i will if it is necessary. i think at this point -- i wish it would have been that way a couple of months ago, but at this point we are working on president putin. we will see where we are. i think we are doing fine, but we'll see. i don't like what is happening. i don't like when i see rockets being shot into cities, that is no good. i'm not going to allow it. >> you said there war never would have started -- pres. trump: it didn't happen. >> he doesn't seem willing to do anything you want him to do. you still believe that he wouldn't have launched the war? pres. trump: we would have never had a war if i were president. if the election weren't rigged he wouldn't have had the war. he wouldn't have had the war, you wouldn't have had inflation, you wouldn't have had october 7. that wouldn't have happened because iran was stone cold broke. they didn't have money to give

6:47 am

to hamas and hezbollah. you wouldn't have had the most embarrassing moment in the history of our country in afghanistan. you wouldn't have had inflation. energy costs. i brought inflation down to practically zero. all of the groceries, all of the eggs, all of the things you've been hearing about our back down, way down from where they were. i did something in performance that no one has seen. i have to say, in four months, i said it before and everyone is talking about it all over the world, we have the hottest country anywhere in the world right now. we are the only country anyone is talking about. >> -- pres. trump: if i'm close to getting a deal i don't want to screw it up. i'm a lot tougher than the people you're talking about. you have to know when to use that. if i think it is going to hurt the deal -- this is not my work. this is [video clip] -- this is biden's war,

6:48 am

president zelenskyy's war, and putin's war. i made the money. i went to saudi arabia, qatar, and uae and we brought back five $1 trillion. i made that money in about two hours, the money that we are talking about. think of it. $300 billion we've spent with no checks, no balances, they just send cash. you can imagine what has happened to that money. i never saw anything like it in my life. i am more interested because i picked up $5.1 trillion and by the way got a beautiful, big, magnificent, free airplane for the united states air force. i'm very proud of that, too. they tried to say it is trump's airplane. sure. frankly, it is much too big. >> when you expect that to be air force one? pres. trump: it is in the

6:49 am

country being refitted for military standard. >> how much will it cost to refit it? pres. trump: i don't know. a helluva lot less. we were waiting too long from boeing. boeing has to get its act together. >> the arrangement that was just announced is that an arrangement that you would consider for tiktok as well? pres. trump: a totally different kind of deal. we have to do it properly we will probably have to get china's approval. china is never easy. china is never easy. but i think we will be able to save tiktok. tiktok was very good to me. i won the young people by 37%. no republican has ever won, and i won by 37%. charlie kirk will tell you tiktok helped. charlie kirk helped also. he happens to be here. he loves that we mention that name, right, charlie? i appreciate all the help. with young people we won by 37%

6:50 am

and you helped. tiktok was amazing. he was the first one. he said, get on tiktok. i have a little bit of a warm spot. i should say quid pro quo. no, tiktok was very good to me. i won young people. i don't know if it was because of tiktok, but something happened. no republican has ever won -- they call them young people. young people you can define a lot of different ways, but i won every age group in young people. it never happened. won by 37%. that's a lot. >> did you warn prime minister netanyahu against taking actions that could disrupt the talks in a phone call last week? pres. trump: i would like to be honest. yes, i did. next question, please. >> senate republicans want -- pres. trump: not a warning, i

6:51 am

said i don't think it is appropriate. >> what did you tell him? pres. trump: i said i don't think it is appropriate right now. because if we can settle it with a very strong document, very strong, with inspections and no trust. i don't trust anybody. i don't trust anybody, so no trust. we wanted very strong. we can go in and take whatever we want, blow up whatever we want with no one being killed. we can blow up a lab and no one is in the lab as opposed everyone being in the lab. i said this would be inappropriate to do right now because we are very close to a solution. that could change at any moment. it could change with a phone call. right now, i think they want to make a deal. if we can make a deal, save a lot of lives. [overlapping questions] >> a deal with iran?

6:52 am

pres. trump: over the next couple of weeks if it happens. >> winco the administration -- when could the administration -- for the french student visas. pres. trump: for the foreign visas? the foreign visas for what? >> college students. pres. trump: you are off of israel now talking about colleges. we will see. harvard has been a disaster. they have taken five plus, $5 million plus. $5 billion. we would have never found this out. they are taking $5 billion, and i would rather see that money go to trade schools. by the way, they are totally anti-semitic at harvard, and some other colleges too, in all

6:53 am

fairness to them. it has been very exposed. i think that they are dealing very badly. every time that they fight they lose another 250 million dollars. yesterday we found another $100 million. they have a fund. an endowment. $52 billion, alright? they got a lot of that from the united states. i think that it's ridiculous. i think everyone is coming up to me saying, we love the idea of trade schools. with that kind of money and money from others, but money from them. you can have the best trade schools anywhere in the world. you give them to iowa, indiana, a lot of good well-run states. you give them the money. they can only be used for trade schools. they will teach people how to build motors, cars, a guy. we are building hundreds of billions of dollars worth of ai

6:54 am

plants, already started, many of them. we have never had a boom like we are having right now. you will see it. there has never been anything like it. we are up to $14 trillion in investments. there has never been anything close. you look at biden had people leaving as opposed to investing. they are doing it because of really november 5. they are doing it because of the tariffs. the tariffs have been tremendous. well, i can promise you, and i have great respect for the people at the european union. they would not be over here today negotiating if i did not put a 50% tariff on. the sad thing is now when i make a deal with them and it is something much more reasonable, they will say, he was chicken, he was chicken. that is unbelievable. i usually have the opposite. they say you are too tough.

6:55 am

>> mr. president, on harvard there were some jewish students protesting on campus yesterday. they said they don't want you making these huge cuts, cutting off student visas to harvard in their name. pres. trump: harvard has to show us their lists. they have foreign students. 31% of their students are foreign-based. almost 31%. we want to know where those students come from. are they troublemakers? what countries do they come from? if someone is coming from a certain country and they are 100% fine, which i hope most of them are, but many of them won't be, you'll see very radical people. they are taking people from areas of the world that are very radicalized and we do not want them making trouble in our country. i saw yesterday that in the middle of the u.k. there was a nice, young man who wants to go back to school at harvard. i want to check his -- but we want to be able to see. these countries aren't helping us. they are not investing in harvard.

6:56 am

we are. why would 31%, why a number so big? number one, i think they should have a cap of around 15%, not 31%. we have people who want to go to harvard and other schools and they cannot get in because we have foreign students. i want to make sure that the foreign students are people who can love our country. we don't want to see shopping centers exploding. we don't want to see the kind of riots that you had. many of those students were troublemakers caused by the radical left lunatics of this country. one more question. >> will you pardon the people who are accused of conspiring to kidnap governor gretchen whitmer? pres. trump: i will take a look at it. it has been brought to my attention. i did watch the trial. he looked to me like somewhat of a railroad job, i will be honest to you. it looked at people said stupid things. they were drinking and i think they said stupid things. i will look at that. a lot of people were asking that

6:57 am

question from both sides, actually. a lot of people think they got railroaded. a lot of people think they got railroaded. and probably some people -- one more. go ahead. >> when will the confrontation with harvard end? pres. trump: i don't know. harvard has to behave themselves. harvard is treating our country with great disrespect and all they are doing is getting in deeper and deeper. they have to behave themselves. i am looking out for the country and for harvard. i want harvard to do well. i what harvard to be great again, probably. how can it be great when you have harvard announce two weeks ago that they are going to teach remedial mathematics, remedial? they are going to teach low-grade mathematics. like two plus two equals four. how can these people get into harvard if they cannot do basic mathematics? people with 1600 on their boards

6:58 am

and they can't get in. they are bragging about how they are teaching basic mathematics. where do these people come from? we have to look at the list. harvard has to understand, the last thing i want to do is hurt them. they are hurting themselves. they are fighting. columbia has been really, they were very bad what they have done, very anti-semitic, and a lot of other things, but they are working with us on finding a solution. they have taken off the hot seat. harvard wants to fight. they want to show how smart they are. they are getting their ass

6:59 am

18 Views

info Stream Only

Uploaded by TV Archive on May 29, 2025
