Title: 2020 China Military Power Report

URL Source: https://media.defense.gov/2020/sep/01/2002488689/-1/-1/1/2020-dod-china-military-power-report-final.pdf

Published Time: Sat, 08 Mar 2025 03:43:28 GMT

Number of Pages: 200

Markdown Content:
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 

Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 

iOFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 

Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

# Military and Security Developments 

# Involving the People’s Republic of China 

# 2020 

# Annual Report to Congress 

A Report to Congress Pursuant to the National Defense Authorization Act for 

Fiscal Year 2000, as Amended 

Section 1260, “ Modi fications to Annual Report on Military and Security Developments Involving the 

People’s Republic of China,” of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020 , Public 

Law 116 -92 , which amends the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Ye ar 2000, Section 

1202, Public Law 106 -65, provides that the Secretary of Defense shall submit a report “in both 

classified and unclassified form, on military and security developments involving the People’s Republic 

of China. The report shall address the c urrent and probable future course of military -technological 

development of the People’s Liberation Army and the tenets and probable development of Chinese 

security strategy and military strategy, and of the military organizations and operational concepts 

supporting such development over the next 20 years. The report shall also address United States -

China engagement and cooperation on security matters during the period covered by the report, 

including through United States -China military -to -military contacts , and the United States strategy for 

such engagement and cooperation in the future.” OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 

Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 

# PREFACE :

# A 20 YEAR RETROSPECTIVE ON CHINA’S 

# STRATEGY AND ARMED FORCES OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

i

For 20 years, the Department of Defense (DoD) has provided Congress with an annual report on 

military and security developments involving the People’s Republic of C hina (PRC). These reports 

have assessed the contours of China’s national strategy, its approach to security and military affairs, 

and potential changes in the PRC’s armed forces over the next 20 years, among other matters. 2020 

marks an important year for the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) as it works to achieve important 

modernization milestones ahead of the Chinese Communist Party’s (CCP) broader goal to transform 

China into a “moderately prosperous society” by the CCP’s centenary in 2021. As the United S tates 

continues to respond to the growing strategic challenges posed by the PRC, 2020 offers a unique 

opportunity to assess both the continuity and changes that have taken place in the PRC’s strategy and 

armed forces over the past two decades. 

DoD’s first annual report to Congress in 2000 assessed the PRC’s armed forces at that time to be a 

sizable but mostly archaic military that was poorly suited to the CCP’s long -term ambitions. The report 

recognized the CCP’s objective was for the PRC to become a “stro ng, modernized, unified, and 

wealthy nation.” Despite these great power aspirations, the PLA lacked the capabilities, organization, 

and readiness for modern warfare. Yet the CCP understood these deficiencies and set long -term goals 

to strengthen and transf orm its armed forces in a manner commensurate with its aspirations to 

strengthen and transform China. 

DoD’s 2000 report assessed that the PLA was slowly and unevenly adapting to the trends in modern 

warfare. The PLA’s force structure and capabilities focus ed largely on waging large -scale land warfare 

along China’s borders. The PLA’s ground, air, and naval forces were sizable but mostly obsolete. Its 

conventional missiles were generally of short range and modest accuracy. The PLA’s emergent cyber 

capabilitie s were rudimentary; its use of information technology was well behind the curve; and its 

nominal space capabilities were based on outdated technologies for the day. Further, China’s defense 

industry struggled to produce high -quality systems. Even if the PR C could produce or acquire modern 

weapons, the PLA lacked the joint organizations and training needed to field them effectively. The 

report assessed that the PLA’s organizational obstacles were severe enough that if left unaddressed 

they would “inhibit the PLA’s maturation into a world -class military force.” 

Two decades later, the PLA’s objective is to become a “world -class” military by the end of 2049 —a

goal first announced by General Secretary Xi Jinping in 2017. Although the CCP has not defined what 

a “w orld -class” military means, within the context of the PRC’s national strategy it is likely that Beijing 

will seek to develop a military by mid -century that is equal to —or in some cases superior to —the U.S. 

military, or that of any other great power that th e PRC views as a threat. As this year’s report details, 

the PRC has marshalled the resources, technology, and political will over the past two decades to 

strengthen and modernize the PLA in nearly every respect. Indeed, as this report shows, China is 

alrea dy ahead of the United States in certain areas such as :OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

ii  

> >

Shipbuilding: The PRC has the largest navy in the world, with an overall battle force of 

approximately 350 ships and submarines including over 130 major surface combatants. In 

comparison, the U .S. Na vy’s battle force is approximately 293 ships as of early 2020.  

> >

Land -based conventional ballistic and cruise missiles: The PRC has more than 1,250 ground -

launched ballistic missiles (GLBMs) and ground -launched cruise missiles (GLCMs) with ranges 

between 500 and 5,500 kilometers. The United States currently fields one type of conventional 

GLBM with a range of 70 to 300 kilometers and no GLCMs.  

> >

Integrated air defense systems: The PRC has one of the world’s largest forces of advanced long -

range surface -to -air s ystems —including Russian -built S -400s, S -300s, and domestically produced 

systems —that constitute part of its robust and redundant integrated air defense system 

architecture. 

More striking than the PLA’s staggering amounts of new military hardware are the r ecent sweeping 

efforts taken by CCP leaders that include completely restructuring the PLA into a force better suited 

for joint operations, improving the PLA’s overall combat readiness, encouraging the PLA to embrace 

new operational concepts, and expanding the PRC’s overseas military footprint. 

Despite the PLA’s progress over the past 20 years, major gaps and shortcomings remain. The PRC’s 

leaders are aware of these problems, and their strategy envisions the PLA undergoing almost 30 more 

years of modernizati on and reform. Of course, the CCP does not intend for the PLA to be merely a 

showpiece of China’s modernity or to keep it focused solely on regional threats. As this report shows, 

the CCP desires the PLA to become a practical instrument of its statecraft w ith an active role in 

advancing the PRC’s foreign policy, particularly with respect to the PRC’s increasingly global interests 

and its aims to revise aspects of the international order. 

Given the continuity in the PRC’s strategic objectives, the past 20 ye ars offer a harbinger for the future 

course of the PRC’s national strategy and military aspirations. Certainly, many factors will determine 

how this course unfolds. What is certain is that the CCP has a strategic end state that it is working 

towards, which if achieved and its accompanying military modernization left unaddressed , will have 

serious implications for U.S. national interests and the security of the international rules -based order. 

> Report scope: This report covers security and military developme nts involving the PRC until the end of 2019.
> Developments in 2020, including the implications of the COVID -19 pandemic, will be covered in DoD’s 2021 report.

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 

Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 

iii 

Th is page left intentionally blank OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 

Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 

iv 

# EXECUTIVE SUMMARY OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

v

UNDERSTANDING CHINA’ S STRATEGY 

China’s National Strategy  

> >

The Peopl e’s Republic of China’s (PRC’s) strategy aims to achieve “the great rejuvenation of the 

Chinese nation” by 2049. China’s strategy can be characterized as a determined pursuit of political 

and social modernity that includes far -ranging efforts to expand Chi na’s national power, perfect 

its governance systems, and revise the international order.  

> >

The Chinese Communist Party (CCP) frames this strategy as an effort to realize long -held 

nationalist aspirations to “return” China to a position of strength, prosperit y, and leadership on 

the world stage.  

> >

The CCP’s leadership has long viewed China as embroiled in a major international strategic 

competition with other states, including, and in particular, the United States.  

> >

In 2019, China intensified its efforts to advan ce its overall development including steadying its 

economic growth, strengthening its armed forces, and taking a more active role in global affairs. 

Foreign Policy  

> >

The PRC’s foreign policy seeks to revise aspects of the international order on the Party’s t erms 

and in accordance with ideas and principles it views as essential to forging an external environment 

conducive to China’s national rejuvenation.  

> >

In 2019, the PRC recognized that its armed forces should take a more active role in advancing its 

foreign policy, highlighting the increasingly global character that Beijing ascribes to its military 

power. 

Economic Policy  

> >

The CCP prioritizes economic development as the “central task” and the force that drives China’s 

modernization across all are as, including i ts armed forces.  

> >

China’s economic development supports its military modernization not only by providing the 

means for larger defense budgets, but through deliberate Party -led initiatives such as O BOR and 

Made in China 2025, as well as the systemic benefits of China’s growing national industrial and 

technological base. 

Military -Civil Fusion (MCF) Development Strategy  

> >

The PRC pursues its MCF Development Strategy to “fuse” its economic and social development 

strategies with its security strategies to build an integrated national strategic system and capabilities 

in support of China’s national rejuvenation goals. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

vi  

> >

MCF encompasses six interrelated efforts: (1) fusing the China’s defense industrial base and its 

civilian technology and industrial base; (2) integrati ng and leveraging science and technology 

innovations across military and civilian sectors; (3) cultivating talent and blending military and 

civilian expertise and knowledge; (4) building military requirements into civilian infrastructure and 

leveraging civ ilian construction for military purposes; (5) leveraging civilian service and logistics 

capabilities for military purposes; and, (6) expanding and deepening China’s national defense 

mobilization system to include all relevant aspects of its society and eco nomy for use in 

competition and war.  

> >

While MCF has broader purposes than acquiring foreign technology, in practice, MCF means 

there is not a clear line between the PRC’s civilian and military economies, raising due diligence 

costs for U.S. and global entit ies that do not desire to contribute to the PRC’s military 

modernization. 

Defense Policy & Military Strategy  

> >

The PRC has stated its defense policy aims to safeguard its sovereignty, security, and development 

interests. China’s military strategy remains bas ed on the concept of “active defense.”  

> >

In 2019, the PLA remained primarily oriented towards longstanding regional threats while 

emphasizing a greater global role for itself in accordance with China’s defense policy and military 

strategy.  

> >

China’s leaders st ress the imperative of meeting key military transformation markers set in 2020 

and 2035. These milestones seek to align the PLA’s transformation with China’s overall national 

modernization so that by the end of 2049, China will field a “world -class” milita ry.  

> >

The CCP has not defined what it means by its ambition to have a “world -class” military. Within 

the context of China’s national strategy, however, it is likely that China will aim to develop a 

military by mid -century that is equal to —or in some cases su perior to —the U.S. military, or that 

of any other great power that China views as a threat to its sovereignty, security, and development 

interests. 

MISSIONS, TASKS, & M ODERNIZATION OF CHIN A’S ARMED FORCES IN 

THE “NEW ERA”  

> >

The PRC’s strategy includes advanc ing a comprehensive military modernization program that aims 

to “basically” complete military modernization by 2035 and transform the PLA into a “world -

clas s” military by the end of 2049.  

> >

The PLA’s evolving capabilities and concepts continue to strengthen the PRC’s ability to counter 

an intervention by an adversary in the Indo -Pacific region and project power globally. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

vii  

> >

In 2019, the PLA continued to make progress implementing major structural reforms, fielding 

modern indigenous systems, building readiness, a nd strengthening its competen cy to conduct joint 

operations.  

> >

China has already achieved parity with —or even exceeded —the United States in several military 

modernization areas, including : 

> –

Shipbuilding : The PRC has the largest navy in the world, with an over all battle force of 

approximately 350 ships and submarines including over 130 major surface combatants. In 

comparison, the U .S. Navy’s battle force is approximately 293 ships as of early 2020. China 

is the top ship -producing nation in the world by tonnage and is increasing its shipbuilding 

capacity and capability for all naval classes.  

> –

Land -based conventional ballistic and cruise missiles : The PRC has developed its 

conventional missile forces unrestrained by any international agreements. The PRC has more 

th an 1,250 ground -launched ballistic missiles (GLBMs) and ground -launched cruise missiles 

(GLCMs) with ranges between 500 and 5,500 kilometers. The United States currently fields 

one type of conventional GLBM with a range of 70 to 300 kilometers and no GLCMs . 

> –

Integrated air defense systems : The PRC has one of the world’s largest forces of advanced 

long -range surface -to -air systems —including Russian -built S -400s, S -300s, and domestically 

produced systems —that constitute part of its robust and redundant integra ted air defense 

system (IADS) architecture. 

Developments in the PLA’s Modernization and Reform  

> >

The People’s Liberation Army Army (PLAA) is the largest standing ground force in the world. 

In 2019, the PLAA continued to transition into a modern, mobile, and lethal ground force by 

fielding upgraded combat system s and communications equipment and enhancing its ability to 

conduct and manage complex combined -arms and joint operations.  

> >

The People’s Liberation Army Navy (PLAN) —the largest navy in the world —is an 

in creasingly modern and flexible force that has focused on replacing previous generations of 

platforms with limited capabilities in favor of larger, modern multi -role combatants. As of 2019, 

the PLAN is largely composed of modern multi -role platforms featuri ng advanced anti -ship, anti -

air, and anti -submarine weapons and sensors.  

> –

Naval Shipbuilding and Modernization: The PLAN remains engaged in a robust 

shipbuilding and modernization program that includes submarines, surface combatants, 

amphibious warfare ship s, aircraft carriers, and auxiliary ships as well as developing and 

fielding advanced weapons, sensors, and co mmand and control capabilities. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

viii  

> >

The People’s Liberation Army Air Force (PLAAF) and PLAN Aviation together constitute 

the largest aviation forces i n the region and the third largest in the world, with over 2,500 total 

aircraft and approximately 2,000 combat aircraft. The PLAAF is rapidly catching up to Western 

air forces across a broad range of capabilities and competencies.  

> >

The People’s Liberation A rmy Rocket Force (PLARF) is responsible for the PRC’s strategic 

land -based nuclear and conventional missile forces. The PLARF develops and fields a wide variety 

of conventional mobile ground -launched ballistic missiles and cruise missiles. The PRC is 

devel oping new intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) that will significantly improve its 

nuclear -capable missile forces. The number of warheads on the PRC’s land -based ICBMs capable 

of threatening the United States is expected to grow to roughly 200 in th e next five years. 

– The PRC is expanding its inventory of the multi -role DF -26, a mobile, ground -launched 

intermediate -range ballistic missile system capable of rapidly swapping conventional and 

nuclear warheads. 

– The PRC’s robust ground -based conventional m issile forces compliment the growing 

size and capabilities of its air - and sea -based precision strike capabilities.  

> >

The PLA Strategic Support Force (SSF) is a theater command -level organization established 

to centralize the PLA’s strategic space, cyber, el ectronic, and psychological warfare missions and 

capabilities. The SSF Network Systems Department is responsible for cyberwarfare, technical 

reconnaissance, electronic warfare, and psychological warfare. Its current major target is the 

United States.  

> –

The PRC’s Space Enterprise . The PRC’s space enterpr ise continues to mature rapidly. 

Beijing has devoted significant resources to growing all aspects of its space program, from 

military space applications to civil applications such as profit -generating launches ,

scientific endeavors, and space exploration.  

> –

The PLA has historically managed the PRC’s space program. T he SSF Space Systems 

Department is responsible for n early all PLA space operations.  

> –

In 2019, the PRC described space as a “critical domain in internat ional strategic 

competition” and stated the security of space provided strategic assurance to the country’s 

national and social development.  

> >

Military Readiness : In recent years, CCP leaders have directed the PLA to improve its combat 

readiness. This guidan ce is increasingly evident in the intensity of the PLA’s training and the 

complexity and scale of its exercises. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

ix 

Capabilities for Counter Intervention and Power Projection  

> >

The PLA is developing capabilities to provide options for the PRC to dissuade, det er, or, if 

ordered, defeat third -party intervention during a large -scale, theater campaign such as a Taiwan 

contingency.  

> >

The PLA’s anti -access/area -denial (A2/AD) capabilities are currently the most robust within the 

First Island Chain, although the PRC ai ms to strengthen its capabilities to reach farther into the 

Pacific Ocean.  

> >

The PRC also continues to increase its military capabilities to achieve regional and global security 

objectives beyond a Taiwan contingency.  

> >

The PLA is developing the capabilities a nd operational concepts to conduct offensive operations 

within the Second Island Chain, in the Pacific and Indian Oceans, and in some cases, globally. In 

addition to strike, air and missile defense, anti -surface and anti -submarine capabilities 

improvements , China is focusing on information, cyber, and space and counterspace operations. 

Nuclear Deterrence  

> >

China’s strategic ambitions, evolving view of the security landscape, and concerns over 

survivability are driving significant changes to the size, capabil ities, and readiness of its nuclear 

forces.  

> >

China’s nuclear forces will significantly evolve over the next decade as it modernizes, diversifies, 

and increases the number of its land -, sea -, and air -based nuclear delivery platforms.  

> >

Over the next decade, China’s nuclear warhead stockpile —currently estimated to be in the low -

200s —is projected to at least double in size as China expands and modernizes its nuclear forces.  

> >

China is pursuing a “nuclear triad” with the development of a nuclear capable air -launch ed ballistic 

missile (ALBM) and improving its ground and sea -based nuclear capabilities.  

> >

New developments in 2019 further suggest that China intends to increase the peacetime readiness 

of its nuclear forces by moving to a launch -on -warning (LOW) posture w ith an expanded silo -

based force. 

THE PLA’S GROWING GL OBAL PRESENCE  

> >

CCP leaders believe that the PRC’s global activities, including the PLA’s growing global presence, 

are necessary to create a “favorable” international environment for China’s national reju venation.  

> >

The CCP has tasked the PLA to develop the capability to project power outside China’s borders 

and immediate periphery to secure the PRC’s growing overseas interests and advance its foreign 

policy goals. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

x

China’s Global Military Activities  

> >

The PRC has increasingly recognized that its armed forces should take a more active role in 

advancing its foreign policy goals.  

> >

As the PRC’s overseas interests have grown over the past two decades, the Party’s leaders have 

increasingly pushed the PLA to think abou t how it will operate beyond China’s borders and its 

immediate periphery to advance and defend these interests.  

> >

In 2019, the PLA continued to expand its participation in bilateral and multilateral military 

exercises, normalize its presence overseas, and bu ild closer ties to foreign militaries. 

PLA Overseas Basing and Access  

> >

The PRC is seeking to establish a more robust overseas logistics and basing infrastructure to allow 

the PLA to project and sustain military power at greater distances.  

> >

Beyond its current base in Djibouti, the PRC is very likely already considering and planning for 

additional overseas military logistics facilities to support naval, air, and ground forces. The PRC 

has likely considered locations for PLA military logistics facilities in Myan mar, Thailand, 

Singapore, Indonesia, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, United Arab Emirates, Kenya, Seychelles, Tanzania, 

Angola, and Tajikistan. The PRC and Cambodia have publicly denied having signed an agreement 

to provide the PLAN with access to Cambodia’s Ream Nav al Base.  

> >

A global PLA military logistics network could interfere with U.S. military operations and provide 

flexibility to support offensive operations against the United States. 

The PRC’s Influence Operations  

> >

The PRC conducts influence operations to achiev e outcomes favorable to its strategic objectives 

by targeting cultural institutions, media organizations, business, academic, and policy communities 

in the United States, other countries, and international institutions.  

> >

The CCP seeks to condition domestic, foreign, and multilateral political establishments and public 

opinion to accept Beijing’s narratives.  

> >

CCP leaders probably consider open democracies, including the United States, as more susceptible 

to influence operations than other types of governments. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

xi 

RESOURCES AND TECHNO LOGY FOR FORCE MODER NIZATION  

> >

The PRC’s long -term goal is to create an entirely self -reliant defense -industrial sector —fused with 

a strong civilian industrial and technology sector —that can meet the PLA’s needs for modern 

military capa bilities.  

> >

The PRC has mobilized vast resources in support of its defense modernization, including the 

implementation of its MCF Development Strategy, as well as espionage activities to acquire 

sensitive, dual -use, and military -grade equipment.  

> >

In 2019, the PRC announced its annual military budget would increase by 6.2 percent, continuing 

more than 20 years of annual defense spending increases and sustaining its position as the second -

largest military spender in the world. The PRC’s published military budget omits several major 

categories of expenditures and its actual military -related spending is higher than what it states in 

its official budget. 

Science and Technology Goals Supporting Military Modernization  

> >

China seeks to become a leader in key technologies with military potential, such as AI, autonomous 

systems, advanced computing, quantum information sciences, biotechnology, and advanced 

materials and manufacturing.  

> >

China has invested significant resources to fund research and subsidize companies involved in 

strategic S&T fields while pressing private firms, universities, and provincial governments to 

cooperate with the military in developing advanced technologies.  

> >

China continues to undermine the integrity of the U.S. science and technology research enter prise 

through a variety of actions such as hidden diversions of research, resources, and intellectual 

property. 

Foreign Technology Acquisition  

> >

The PRC pursues many vectors to acquire foreign technologies, including both licit and illicit 

means. The PRC’s e fforts include a range of practices and methods to acquire sensitive and dual -

use technologies and military -grade equipment to advance its military modernization goals.  

> >

The PRC leverages foreign investments, commercial joint ventures, mergers and acquisit ions, and 

state -sponsored industrial and technical espionage, and the manipulation of export controls for 

the illicit diversion of dual -use technologies to increase the level of technologies and expertise 

available to support military research, development , and acquisition.  

> >

In 2019, the PRC’s efforts included efforts to acquire dynamic random access memory, aviation, 

and anti -submarine warfare technologies. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

xii 

U.S. -CHINA DEFENSE CONTACTS AND EXCHANG ES IN 2019  

> >

U.S. defense contacts and exchanges conducted in 2 019 supported overall U.S. policy and strategy 

toward China, were focused on reducing risk and preventing misunderstanding in times of crisis, 

and were conducted in accordance with the statutory limitations of the National Defense 

Authorization Act for Fis cal Year 2000, as amended.  

> >

Pursuit of a constructive results -oriented relationship with China is an important part of U.S. 

strategy in the Indo -Pacific region. The 2018 National Defense Strategy seeks areas of cooperation 

with China from positions of U.S. strength, with a long -term aim to set the military -to military 

relationship on a path of strategic transparency and non -aggression, and to encourage China to 

act in a manner consistent with the free and open international order. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

PREFACE i

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY v

CHAPTER 1: UNDERSTANDING CHINA’ S STRATEGY 1

CHAPTER 2: MISSIONS, TASKS, AND MODERNIZATION OF 

CHINA’S ARMED FORCES IN THE “NEW ERA” 38 

CHAPTER 3: FORCES, CAPABILITIES , AND ACT IVITIES ON 

CHINA’S PERIPHERY 94 

CHAPTER 4: THE PLA’S GROWING GL OBAL PRESENCE 122 

CHAPTER 5: RESOURCES AND TECHNOLOGY FOR FORC E

MODERNIZATION 138 

CHAPTER 6: U.S. -CHINA DEFENSE C ONTACTS AND EXCHANGES 154 

SPECIAL TOPIC: CHINA’S 2019 DEFENSE WHITE P APER 159 

SPECIAL TOPIC: THE PLA’ S APPROACH TOWARD INFORMATIZATION AND 

INTELLIGENTIZATION 161 

SPECIAL TOPIC: EMERGING MILITARY CA MPAIGN CONCEPTS 163 

APPENDIX I: CHINA AND TAIWAN FOR CES DATA 164 

APPENDIX II: DEFENSE CONTACTS EXCHANGES 167 

APPENDIX III: SELECTED PLA EXERCIS ES IN 2019 169 

APPENDIX IV : CHINA’S TOP CRUDE SU PPLIERS IN 2019 170 

APPENDIX V: ACR ONYMS 171 OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 

Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 

2

# 1

# UNDERSTANDING 

# CHINA’S STRATEGY OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

1

Understanding the tenets of China’s national strategy is essential to understanding the future course 

of China’s security and military strategy. This in turn offers insights on the current and future course 

of the People’ s Liberation Army’s (PLA) reform and modernization in terms of its strength, 

technological advances, organization, and operational concepts. 

CHINA’S NATIONAL STR ATEGY 

Key Takeaways  

> >

China’s strategy seeks to achieve “the great rejuvenation of the Chinese n ation” by 2049. China’s 

strategy can be characterized as a determined pursuit of political and social modernity that includes 

far -ranging efforts to expand China’s national power, perfect its governance systems, and revise 

the international order.  

> >

The Chin ese Communist Party (CCP) frames this strategy as an effort to realize long -held 

nationalist aspirations to “return” China to a position of strength, prosperity, and leadership on 

the world stage.  

> >

The CCP asserts its absolute leadership and governance sys tems are indispensable to China’s 

national renewal into a “great modern socialist country.”  

> >

In 2019, China intensified its efforts to advance its overall development including steadying 

economic growth, strengthening its armed forces, and taking a more act ive role in global affairs.  

> >

The CCP’s leadership has long viewed China as embroiled in a major international strategic 

competition with other states, including, and in particular, the United States. 

In 2019, the People’s Republic of China (PRC) marked the 70th anniversary of its founding. On 

October 1, 2019, President Xi Jinping presided over the National Day ceremony in Beijing, standing 

atop the Gate of Heavenly Peace overlooking Tiananmen Square in front of a crowd that included the 

collected leaders of the CCP and foreign dignitaries while a massive assembly of forces and modern 

equipment from the PLA prepared to parade. In a brief speech, President Xi noted that it was 70 years 

to the day since Mao Zedong had stood in that very spot and proclaimed the f ounding of the PRC, 

ending what Xi described as the humiliations and misery that China had suffered in the previous 

century. President Xi then remarked, "The Chinese people managed to stand up on their feet and 

embark on a great journey of national rejuven ation...Today a socialist China is standing in the east of 

the world and there is no force that can shake the foundation of this great nation.” OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Se curity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

2

China’s strategy seeks to realize “the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation.” This objective, which 

Presiden t Xi Jinping calls “the Chinese Dream,” is a long -held national aspiration to “restore” China 

to a position of strength, prosperity, and leadership on the world stage. Throughout 2019, China 

continued to pursue this objective in line with the direction tha t the CCP Central Committee put forth 

in Xi’s report to the 19th Party Congress in 2017, which set ambitious policy milestones and laid out 

initiatives for China to further its overall development, strengthen its armed forces, and take a more 

active role i n global affairs. 

China’s leaders characterize their strategy to achieve political and social modernity as a grand national 

endeavor that is sweeping in scope and far -reaching in how it will transform China, and in turn, the 

world. China’s strategy entails deliberate and determined efforts to amass, improve, and harness the 

internal and external elements of national power that will place China in a “leading position.” China’s 

leaders frequently refer to building China’s “composite” national power in this co ntext. China’s 

strategy entails a long -term planning process to attain national rejuvenation that sets objectives, 

priorities, and milestones for the country’s modernization across virtually every aspect of governance 

including economics, political affairs , the rule of law, public order, national security, diplomacy, and 

defense, as well as social affairs, education, science and technology, culture, the environment, and 

other matters. Although Party leaders have consistently pursued national rejuvenation as their goal, 

they have demonstrated a degree of strategic adaptability in execution to seize opportunities and 

manage threats to their strategy. 

China pursues modernity and greater national power from the basis of defending and advancing its 

sovereignty, s ecurity, and development interests. Consequently, China’s national ambitions and 

statecraft cannot be accurately characterized absent the CCP -dominated political system underpinned 

by the Party’s theory of Socialism with Chinese Characteristics and the Par ty itself as the essential 

feature. The objective of this Party -led strategy is reflected in what the Party calls its “basic line,” a 

single sentence in the CCP’s Constitution that serves as the mission of the Party and the cornerstone 

for its policymaking . Last amended at the 19th Party Congress in 2017, it states: 

The basic line of the Communist Party of China in the primary stage of socialism is to lead all 

the people of China together in a self -reliant and pioneering effort, making economic 

development the central task, upholding the Four Cardinal Principles, and remaining committed 

to reform and opening up, so as to see China becomes a great modern socialist country that is 

prosperous, strong, democratic, culturally advanced, harmonious, and beautiful. 

The basic line summarizes the Party’s mission during what it considers China’s current “primary” stage 

of socialist development. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Se curity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

3

External Ambitions. Among the external elements of China’s national strategy are its ambitions to 

create a “favorable” internat ional environment, according to Yang Jiechi, a member of the Politburo 

and a leading Party official on foreign policy. The Party seeks international conditions for the PRC 

that are conducive to its continued development and compatible with its aspirations for China’s 

rejuvenation as a “great modern socialist country.” As Party leaders view a divided China as a weak 

China, they argue that “full reunification” —unification with Taiwan on Beijing’s terms and completing 

Hong Kong and Macau’s integration by the e nd of 2049 —is a fundamental condition of national 

rejuvenation. CCP leaders view it as imperative that a renewed China field a “world -class” military led 

by the Party that can “fight and win” and “resolutely safeguard” the country’s sovereignty, security, 

and development interests. Similarly, the CCP seeks for all countries to adopt a new approach to 

interstate relations that reflect the Party’s principles and its concept of a “community with a shared 

future for mankind.” 

The CCP’s leaders claim that their strategy to achieve national rejuvenation requires the PRC to “lead 

the reform of the global governance system” as they view the current system as antithetical to their 

socialist system and an intolerable constraint on their strategic ends. The Party views aspects of the 

status quo order as incompatible with the sovereignty, security, and development interests of a strong 

and rejuvenated China. To the CCP, revisions are necessary to accommodate China’s development 

and should reflect the CCP’s foreign policy principles, which occupy “the commanding height of 

human morality,” according to the PRC’s Foreign Ministry. 

Key Objectives and Milestones. For decades, China’s leaders have framed the pursuit of modernity 

and power as advancing China along a specific tra jectory with the PRC’s centenary in 2049 as the 

target when China seeks to achieve national rejuvenation and become a “great modern socialist 

country.” From the Party’s perspective of China as a developing nation that must transition into a 

“fully develope d and highly advanced” socialist society, this trajectory involves the CCP shepherding 

China through different stages of gradual but systematic modernization and development. The CCP 

demarcates the stages of China’s strategy with milestones, each with obje ctives and priorities 

determined by the Party’s leaders and planning processes. 

Reflecting on China’s progress at the 19th Party Congress, General Secretary Xi declared that China 

had assumed “…a leading position in terms of economic and technological stre ngth, defense 

capabilities, and composite national strength” and therefore “crossed the threshold into a New Era.” 

Xi’s declaration that China had entered a “New Era” was not a change in strategic objectives, but an 

important signal of confidence that Chin a’s progress was sufficient to tackle the next set of challenges 

in its development. For China’s strategy in the “New Era,” Xi laid out a broad plan to achieve national 

rejuvenation with a timeline linked to two symbolically important centenary milestones reached in OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Se curity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

4

2021 (the CCP’s centenary) and 2049 (the PRC’s centenary). To bridge the lengthy gap between the 

two anniversaries, Xi added interim objectives for 2035 and laid out a broad two -stage modernization 

plan to reach 2049. Further demonstrating the P arty’s confidence in China’s progress, Xi’s objectives 

for 2035 moved up certain mid -century targets set by the Party going back to 1987. 

By the time the CCP marks its centenary in 2021, China aims to complete building a “moderately 

prosperous society in a ll respects.” Beyond 2021, China will use the “moderately prosperous society” 

as the basis for Xi’s “two -stage” plan to achieve national rejuvenation by the PRC’s centenary in 2049. 

In the first stage from 2021 to 2035, the Party aims for China to “basical ly” meet its initial thresholds 

for becoming a “great modern socialist country.” In this stage, China will likely continue to prioritize 

economic development as “the central task,” but rather than rapid economic growth, it will seek to 

address its uneven e conomic development and inequalities that the CCP recognized as the new 

“principal contradiction” in Chinese society in the “New Era.” By 2035, China will also seek to 

increase its economic and technological strength to become a “global leader in innovatio n” and to 

“basically” complete its military modernization. China will also seek to strengthen its international 

“soft power” significantly and improve its domestic rule of law and governance systems. 

In the second stage from 2035 to 2049, the Party will se ek for China to complete its development and 

attain national rejuvenation, The Party defines national rejuvenation as a state in which China is 

“prosperous, strong, democratic, culturally advanced, and harmonious.” A renewed China will have 

realized an int ernational status that Xi describes as being a “global leader in terms of composite 

national strength and international influence.” China will have also attained —among the Party’s many 

goals —its objectives to field a “world -class” military and assume a lea ding position within an 

international order revised in line with China’s overall foreign policy goal to establish a “community 

with a shared future for mankind.” 

Historic Continuity . Understanding the origins of China’s national rejuvenation is crucial to 

understanding how China will likely shape and pursue this strategic objective. CCP leaders have 

consistently framed their efforts as seeking to “restore” China to a preeminent place in the world after 

enduring what the Party characterizes as China’s “centu ry of humiliation” beginning in the 19th 

century as the Qing Dynasty began to disintegrate and lasting until the founding of the PRC in 1949. 

Although the Party’s exact articulation of this goal as “the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation” 

first emerg ed in the late 1980s, the CCP has portrayed itself as a champion of the cause of rebuilding 

China since the 1920s. General Secretary Xi Jinping frequently points to the CCP’s steadfastness to 

the cause of national rejuvenation and describes it as the Party ’s “original aspiration.” OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Se curity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

5

The Party’s objectives and narratives of national rejuvenation speak to the deep impressions left on 

China’s political identity over an era defined by the disintegration of China’s polity, repeated violations 

of China’s sovereignt y by foreign powers, and the prolonged absence of physical and economic 

security for many Chinese people. For a civilization with a history stretching back thousands of 

years —much of it spent as one of the most powerful and advanced civilizations in the wo rld —

nationalist appeals to restore China to greatness are deeply rooted. The threads of national renewal 

can be traced to China’s nationalist revolutionary leaders in the late Qing Dynasty and emerged as a 

common nationalist theme in the fractured politics of China’s Republican era. This resonance is crucial 

to why the CCP portrays China’s rejuvenation as a nationalist project that the Party “shoulders” for 

the country. 

China’s Strategy and the CCP . The Party’s leaders frame Socialism with Chinese Character istics and 

the CCP as indispensable to China overcoming its historical circumstances and attaining national 

rejuvenation. As General Secretary Xi Jinping stated in a speech to the CCP Central Committee in 

2013, “Which ideological system a country implement s depends on one crucial issue: can this ideology 

resolve the historical problems facing the country?” From the Party’s perspective, its leadership and 

systems are uniquely able to restore China’s strength, prosperity, and prestige —underscored with the 

imp licit warning that any deviation from socialism’s path would result in “chaos” and China falling 

behind on its “historic mission.” As Xi stated, “…only socialism can save China —and only Socialism 

with Chinese Characteristics can develop China.” 

CCP leaders flatly reject the notion that the Party has abandoned its socialist ideology in recent decades 

with the introduction of market features into China’s economy or drifted towards a non -ideological 

form of governance. The Party asserts that China remains on t he path of “socialist modernization” 

but it seeks to advance the country gradually as a lesson painfully learned from the Mao -era 

catastrophes that sought rapid progress. Accordingly, the Party claims that to perform its decisive role 

in guiding China into a “great modern socialist country,” it must ensure that the country advances in 

line with “the Four Cardinal Principles.” First stated by Deng Xiaoping and later written into the CCP 

Constitution, these principles direct the Party “to keep to the path of socialism, to uphold the people’s 

democratic dictatorship, to uphold the leadership of the CCP, and to uphold Marxism -Leninism and 

Mao Zedong Thought.” The Four Cardinal Principles are the basis for political and governance 

reforms pursued by the Party and the outer boundaries of its efforts to “reform” and “open up” the 

country.  As General Secretary Xi Jinping told Party cadres in 2014, “promoting the modernization of 

the national governance system and capacity is definitely not Westernization or capitalis m.”  In 

addition to cultivating ideological discipline and fighting corruption within the Party, Xi has sought to 

advance China’s strategy by strengthening the Party’s primacy across China’s governance systems and 

making the Party more effective at managing  China’s political, economic and social problems. Xi’s OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Se curity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

6

emphasis on building the CCP’s institutional capacity and promoting internal unity —which he views 

as the means for the Party to perform its strategic role —has become a prominent feature of his tenure. 

In 2019, the Party continued its efforts to “perfect” its governance systems domestically and 

internationally. Notably, at the Fourth Plenum of the 19th Party Congress in October 2019, convened 

amid trade negotiations with the United States and widespread protests in Hong Kong, the plenum’s 

agenda was heavily focused on improving the Party’s governance systems across all aspects of Chinese 

society. The Fourth Plenum’s focus on Party building and greater ideological coherence seemed to 

underscore the leaders hips’ confidence in the Party’s systems and the need for the Party to manage 

emerging challenges to China’s strategy. 

External Threats and Opportunities. The CCP’s leadership has long viewed China as embroiled in 

a major international strategic competition with other states. Throughout the post -Mao reform era 

and particularly after the end of the Cold War, the Party’s leaders recognized their socialist system 

was —and would remain over the long -term —an underlying source of tension with the West. Given 

the Pa rty’s ambitions to “restore” China’s place in the world and their assessment of China’s relative 

weakness vis -à-vis rival states, CCP leaders recognized China’s growing strength could flare tensions 

with others without careful management. Deng Xiaoping’s r eputed approach to this dilemma, as 

attributed by other Party leaders, was for China to, “hide our capacities and bide our time, preserve 

ourselves, and develop gradually.” Although Party leaders have consistently pursued national 

rejuvenation as their goa l, they have demonstrated a degree of strategic adaptability in execution to 

seize opportunities and manage threats to their strategy. 

Over time, the CCP has characterized China’s view of strategic competition in terms of a rivalry among 

powerful nation st ates as well as a clash of opposing political and governance systems in which 

ideology is a defining characteristic. Speaking to the importance the Party places on perfecting its 

systems and competing with different systems, General Secretary Xi remarked t hat, “System 

advantages are the greatest advantages of a country, and the competition of different systems is the 

most fundamental competition between countries.” Party leaders have described their view of 

competition as entailing aspects of cooperation an d conflict and that the CCP would need to be 

adaptable, flexible, and, above all, patient. The Party’s leaders have also offered a view of competition 

based on relative levels of economic, technological, and military power. Speaking to the CCP Central 

Comm ittee in 2013, General Secretary Xi Jinping remarked that the Party needed to “appreciate” that 

“developed Western nations” would continue to possess “real, long -term advantages” over China in 

the economic, technological, and military domains. Xi argued th at China would need to “diligently 

prepare for a long period of cooperation and of conflict between these two social systems in each of 

these domains.” Lastly, Xi alluded to the core elements of national rejuvenation as China’s approach OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Se curity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

7

to this competition . Xi stated, “most importantly, we must concentrate our efforts on bettering our 

own affairs, continually broadening our comprehensive national power, improving the lives of our 

people, building a socialism that is superior to capitalism, and laying the fo undation for a future where 

we will win the initiative and have the dominant position.” 

Since just prior to the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the PRC’s leaders have consistently 

characterized China’s security environment as undergoing intense changes an d have viewed the 

international order as shifting towards a multipolar system as a consequence of China’s development. 

The Party views a shift towards a multipolar system as vital for China to advance its strategy. China’s 

leaders have eagerly embraced nar ratives of the West’s relative decline and the inevitability of China’s 

rise as largely consistent with their strategy and purported evidence of China’s progress. Despite China 

benefiting enormously from the general peace and prosperity of the current inte rnational system, the 

Party views core aspects of the system as incompatible with its strategy and has offered a vision for a 

revised order premised on its “community with a shared future for mankind.” For example, Beijing 

views U.S. security alliances and partnerships, especially those in the Indo -Pacific region, as 

destabilizing and irreconcilable with the PRC’s sovereignty, security, and development interests. 

Regionally, the PRC’s 2019 defense white paper claims that “Asia -Pacific” countries are “increa singly 

aware that they are members” of China’s “community with a shared future for mankind” and that 

managing disputes through dialogue is its “preferred policy option.” In practice, the PRC often favors 

“dialogue” as a power play and a means of using poli tical, economic, or military coercion rather than 

force. 

Beijing has also expressed concerns over growing global instability and a mounting sense of insecurity 

towards the United States. The PRC’s 2019 defense white paper criticized the United States as th e

“principal instigator” of global instability and driver of “international strategic competition.” The 

PRC’s leadership sees U.S. policy towards China as a critical factor affecting China’s national strategy 

and increasingly views the United States as mor e willing to confront Beijing on matters where U.S. 

and PRC interests are inimical. CCP leaders’ perceptions of intensifying strategic competition driven 

by structural changes in the international system and an increasingly confrontational United States is 

consistent with the Party’s long -held opinion —based on its view of competition between systems —

that the United States seeks to prevent China’s rejuvenation. 

Despite the perceived threats and challenges to its interests, the PRC evaluated the strategic lan dscape 

in 2019 as sufficiently favorable to continue prioritizing its economic and political development in 

support of its strategy. This assessment underscores the contradictions in China’s strategic approach. 

China desires to continue benefiting from the general peace and prosperity it has enjoyed for decades 

under the current international system in order to advance its overall development towards national OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Se curity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

8

rejuvenation. Simultaneously, China’s national ambitions and political and governance systems, 

coup led with growing means and opportunity, induce it to adopt more assertive and revisionist policies 

which threaten the peace and stability Beijing requires to meet its developmental goals. 

As the Party’s leaders seek to translate China’s growing economic an d military means into influence 

to advance their international aspirations, they must also carefully balance China’s expanding interests 

with their priorities and resources. For example, the PRC’s One Belt, One Road (OBOR) initiative 

expands China’s overse as development and security interests. The CCP has signaled this will drive 

China towards expanding its overseas military footprint to protect those interests, which the CCP 

recognizes may provoke pushback from other states. CCP leaders also seem to have r ecognized that 

OBOR and other initiatives have sparked concerns about China’s intentions, leading Beijing to use 

less inflammatory and more tailored rhetoric without altering the initiatives’ fundamental goals. Similar 

tensions can be found in China’s effo rts to advance President Xi’s foreign policy goals such as building 

a “community with a shared future for mankind;” pressing revisions to the international order; and 

establishing diplomatic relationships in accordance with what China calls “strategic part nerships.” 

China seeks to secure and advance its overseas interests without entirely compromising the 

relationships and stability crucial to its continued development —China’s highest priority at this stage 

of its strategy. This tension underscores the incr easingly complex decisions and risks China’s leaders 

must weigh in implementing their strategy. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

2

China’s National Security Concept and Management 

In recent years, China has articulated its view of national security as a broad concept that spans the 

confluence of internal and external threats to the PRC’s interests. Party leaders have identified national 

security as encompassing traditional and non -traditional domestic and foreign threats; the intersection 

of external influences on internal stability; and economic, cultural, societal, and environmental threats. 

Additionally, Beijing has taken steps to define a concept for national security; improve the CCP’s 

ability to develop and coordinate national security policy across party, military, a nd state organs; and 

raise public awareness of national security concerns. These efforts seek to address longstanding 

concerns of China’s leadership that the country’s legacy system of stove -piped party -state 

organizations was ill equipped to meet the grow ing national security challenges that China faces. 

National Security Concept : The CCP’s “Overall National Security Concept” provides the 

framework for China’s national security system, the mission of the Central National Security 

Commission (CNSC), and the basis of China’s national security strategy. First proposed by General 

Secretary Xi Jinping in 2014, China’s state media describes the “Overall National Security Concept” 

as “a powerful ideological weapon and action guide….” According to the Party, the pr emise of the 

concept is that “People's security is the purpose of national security, political security is the foundation 

of national security, and the supremacy of national interests is the criterion of national security.” 

China’s leaders consider people’ s security, political security, and national interests as mutually 

reinforcing aspects of national security. Party outlets describe people’s security as the purpose because 

national security fundamentally must serve the Chinese people and the Chinese natio n. Similarly, the 

Party’s view of political security as the foundation of national security is described in terms of the 

maintenance and “ruling status” of the Party and the system of Socialism with Chinese Characteristics. 

This reflects the Party’s certai nty that its leadership and systems are indispensable to China’s national 

rejuvenation. Party leaders assess the supremacy of national interests as the criterion or standard by 

which the Party expects its stewardship of China’s national security will be ju dged: its ability to 

“resolutely safeguard” China’s sovereignty, security, and development interests. China’s concept also 

views development and security as mutually supporting aspects of national security in which “… 

development is the foundation and purp ose of security, and security is the condition and guarantee of 

development.” 

Central National Security Commission (CNSC): To improve coordination on national security 

matters, the CCP created the Central National Security Commission (CNSC) in 2013. At the first 

CNSC meeting in April 2014, Xi called on the CNSC to establish, “a centralized, unified, highly -

effective and authoritative national security leading system.” The CNSC advises the Politburo, OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Se curity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

3

oversees the coordination of national security issues acr oss the government, and manages crises, 

according to academics. Embracing the Party’s expansive concept of national security, the CNSC’s 

purview covers internal and external national security matters. The CNSC’s mission, codification in 

law, sprawling defi nition of national security, and powerful leadership suggest the CNSC may continue 

to grow as an important party -state organ by the end of Xi’s second term in 2022. 

Membership. China’s top three leaders lead the CNSC: Xi who serves as the CNSC Chairman; Li 

Keqiang (Premier of the State Council); and probably Li Zhanshu (Chairman of the Standing 

Committee of the National People’s Congress). According to reports, CNSC membership may include 

Politburo members, senior government leaders, and senior PLA leaders (including the two Vice 

Chairman of the CMC). The CNSC General Office is responsible for the commission’s daily work 

and is run by senior CCP officials serving in dual -hatted roles in other positions. The current Director 

of the CNSC General Office is like ly Ding Xuexiang, a longtime political aide to Xi according to media 

reports. Ding also serves as the Director of the General Office of the Central Committee and is a 

member of the Politburo. Since May 2018, Chen Wenqing has served as Deputy Director of th e CNSC. 

Chen is also the Minister of State Security and a member of the Politburo. 

National Security Strategy. By 2015, the CCP adopted China’s first national security strategy outline 

following the CNSC’s establishment. PRC media noted the strategy intend s to unify efforts by various 

departments under the central leadership’s guidance. Over the years, China’s leaders and media have 

indicated various national security sub -strategies that cover a variety of issues including Political 

Security, Homeland Secur ity, Military Security, Economic Security, Cultural Security, Societal Security, 

Technology Security, Network Security, Nuclear Safety, Ecological Security, Resource Security, and 

Biosecurity. 

In an effort to raise public awareness of the Party’s national security concepts and emphasize national 

security as a civic responsibility, the 2015 National Security Law designated April 15 of each year as 

National Security Education Day. Recent years have seen schools and universities in China mark the 

day through p ropaganda and education initiatives to raise public awareness of national security 

matters —notably foreign espionage. Indicating the reach and depth the Party desires its national 

security concepts to penetrate into the party -state, the 2015 National Secur ity Law also made provincial, 

autonomous regions, and municipalities responsible for national security work within their 

administrative areas. This has led to the creation of national security committees in the Party’s 

provincial -level organizations, each headed by the province’s party chief. In recent years, provincial 

leaders have used National Security Education Day to highlight their public education efforts and the 

passage and implementation of local “national security” regulations such as the establis hment of a 

rewards system for locals to encourage reporting of suspected espionage. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

4

FOREIGN POLICY 

Key Takeaways  

> >

China’s foreign policy seeks to build a “community with a shared future for mankind” that 

supports its strategy to realize “the great rejuve nation of the Chinese nation.”  

> >

China’s revisionist approach to the international order derives from the objectives of its national 

strategy and the Party’s political and governing systems.  

> >

China’s foreign policy promotes changes to the international system on Beijing’s terms and 

according to ideas and principles it views as essential to its concept of a “community with a shared 

future for mankind.”  

> >

In 2019, the PRC recognized that its armed forces should take a more active role in advancing its 

foreign poli cy, highlighting the increasingly global character that Beijing ascribes to its military 

power. 

In 2019, China’s diplomatic activities continued to carve a more prominent role for Beijing in 

international affairs. China has embraced a new diplomatic framew ork that it terms “Major Power 

Diplomacy with Chinese Characteristics in the New Era,” which is guided by the foreign policy 

direction determined by the CCP Central Committee and set forth in General Secretary Xi Jinping’s 

report at the 19th Party Congress . This framework seeks to advance China’s strategy of national 

rejuvenation by achieving the CCP’s two centenary goals, improving the coordination of China’s major 

domestic and international policies, reforming aspects of the international order, adhering to the CCP 

Central Committee’s direction, and defending China’s “core and major interests.” 

The CCP’s theory of Socialism with Chinese Characteristics underpins the conduct of China’s foreign 

affairs. Since President Xi Jinping assumed power at the 18th Pa rty Congress in 2012, the CCP Central 

Committee has placed greater emphasis on China’s foreign policy advancing “the cause of Socialism 

with Chinese Characteristics.” Yang Jiechi, a top Party official for the PRC’s foreign policy, has 

claimed that adherenc e to Socialism with Chinese Characteristics is the “root and soul for our foreign 

work” and contributes to China’s “wisdom” and “programs to solve mankind’s problems.” 

Importantly, the CCP’s theory shapes the particular contexts and caveats that China app lies to its 

diplomatic concepts and principles. For instance, a tenet of China’s approach is adhering to a “path 

of peaceful development based on mutual respect, cooperation and mutual benefit,” —loaded terms 

that have distinct meanings to Beijing. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Se curity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

5

Accordi ng to Party officials, the overall goal of the PRC’s foreign policy is to build a “community with 

a shared future for mankind” that seeks to shift the international system towards an architecture based 

on the CCP’s principles for how nations should interac t. This goal is essential to how China’s foreign 

policy supports its broader strategy to achieve national rejuvenation. From China’s perspective, 

establishing this “community” is necessary to set the external security and economic conditions for 

China’s na tional rejuvenation by “safeguarding world peace” and “promoting common development” 

according to the Party’s principles. China recognizes it cannot achieve its goals in isolation and seeks 

“all countries” to adopt its diplomatic framework in order to “lea d the way forward for mankind” and 

“open up a road to common development for China and the world.” Lastly, PRC officials 

acknowledge that aspects of the international order are inconsistent with its objectives. China’s 

diplomatic framework seeks to remedy this by promoting changes in a more “just and rational 

direction.” 

China’s revisionist approach to the international order derives from the objectives of its national 

strategy and the Party’s political and governing systems. The PRC does not frame its revi sionist efforts 

as simply opportunistic challenges to the status quo or a significant deviation from the past. Rather, 

Beijing is acting upon its longstanding desire to redesign the architecture of the international order to 

support China’s national rejuve nation, efforts that are married with growing resources and 

opportunities to do so. The PRC’s foreign policy seeks to revise aspects of the international order on 

the Party’s terms and in accordance with ideas and principles it views as essential to forgin g an external 

environment supportive of China’s national rejuvenation. Yang Jiechi refers to global governance 

reforms as a “key issue of China’s foreign work.” China’s foreign policy framework includes several 

efforts to promote and accelerate the transfo rmation in the distribution of power, redefine 

longstanding principles of interstate relations, and reform global governance structures. 

Within the context of “Major Power Diplomacy with Chinese Characteristics in the New Era,” PRC 

officials have describe d how China differentiates its goals and relations according to the power 

relationships among four categories of actors: major powers, peripheral nations, developing nations, 

and international organizations. Among the major powers, China contends that a ne w framework for 

relations is necessary to construct a “stable and balanced development” between the powers —in 

essence a multipolar system. With peripheral nations, China seeks to strengthen these relationships to 

create a more favorable environment along i ts maritime and land borders in accordance with Beijing’s 

“correct view of justice and interests.” For developing countries, China emphasizes solidarity and 

cooperation as well as “actively” carrying out multilateral diplomatic work. This likely refers to the 

importance that China places on attaining support from developing countries within international OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Se curity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

6

organizations such as the World Health Organization (WHO), the International Telecommunication 

Union (ITU), the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), an d others. 

Another tenet of “Major Power Diplomacy with Chinese Characteristics in the New Era” is Beijing’s 

ambition to construct “new types” of bilateral and multilateral relationships among all states. China 

desires for its concepts of mutual respect, co operation , and mutual benefit to provide the basis for 

these “new types” of relations. Yang Jiechi describes China’s “new type” relationships as strategic 

partnerships that follow a new path of “common country -to -country interaction.” Although distinct 

fro m alliance relationships, China’s notion of strategic partnerships are indicative of a relationship that 

meets China’s criteria and is worthy of a higher level of bilateral cooperation. To improve its 

diplomatic support further, China also seeks to create what it calls a “comprehensive global 

partnership network” of its strategic partners in order to form a global “circle of friends.” 

China also promotes reforms to the “global governance system” as part of its diplomatic framework 

in order to reflect the “ profound evolution” of the international order. According to Yang Jiechi, “The 

global governance system is at an important stage of profound evolution, and global governance has 

increasingly become the frontier and key issue of China’s foreign work.” To “s eize the opportunity” 

for reform, China actively participates in the construction of a new, “more balanced” global 

governance system based upon the Party’s principles. For example, China promotes OBOR as an 

“important practical platform for the concept of the community with a shared future for mankind.” 

OBOR also serves to strengthen China’s strategic partnerships, enlarge its network of strategic 

partners, and advance reforms to the international order to support China’s strategy. 

In 2019, the PRC continue d to expand its diplomatic footprint and increase its diplomatic activities in 

the pursuit of its foreign policy goals. Over the course of 2019, the PRC’s formal diplomatic relations 

grew to 180 countries, according to Chinese state media, including severa l countries that bowed to the 

PRC’s pressure and switched their official recognition from Taiwan. Moreover, Beijing contends that 

100 countries have agreed to form a “strategic partnership” with China. In 2019, President Xi Jinping 

made seven foreign trips , visited 12 countries, and attended a number of important international 

conferences such as the G20 Summit. In June 2019 alone, President Xi traveled to Russia, Central 

Asia, North Korea, and Japan. President Xi also hosted a number of large -scale diploma tic events in 

China, including the second “Belt and Road” International Cooperation Summit Forum. 

Throughout 2019, the PRC’s leaders continued to push diplomatic efforts to strengthen China’s 

economic connectivity across the Indo -Pacific region. China’s e fforts led to additional countries and 

international organizations agreeing to cooperate on OBOR. Similarly, the Asian Infrastructure 

Investment Bank, a multilateral development bank whose establishment President Xi spearheaded, OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Se curity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

7

increased its membership to 100 countries. China made progress towards finalizing negotiations for 

the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP), a significant trade agreement among 15 

regional states. China will likely wield significant influence within the RCEP pact given China’s 

economic weight and India’s withdrawal from RCEP negotiations in late 2019. 

In 2019, the PRC recognized that its armed forces should take a more active role in advancing its 

foreign policy, highlighting the increasingly global character that Beij ing ascribes to its military power. 

The PRC’s 2019 defense white paper notably described its armed forces as responding, “faithfully to 

the call for a community with a shared future for mankind.” Moreover, the white paper described the 

“global significance ” of China’s national defense in the “New Era” and called on the PRC’s armed 

forces to act “in the service” of China’s foreign policy goals. The explicit alignment of China’s defense 

policy and armed forces working on the behalf of China’s foreign policy w ithin the framework of 

“Major Power Diplomacy with Chinese Characteristics” marks an important distinction that China 

has typically avoided in the past outside of the context of Taiwan. This change is likely due to Beijing’s 

perception that such an alignme nt is a strategic necessity in the “New Era” and its confidence in the 

PLA’s expanding capacity to support the PRC’s foreign policy. 

Further highlighting the alignment of the PRC’s defense and foreign policies, the 2019 defense white 

paper called for China ’s armed forces to, “actively participate in the reform of global security 

governance system.” China has more prominently recognized the PLA’s role in defending China’s 

overseas interests, with the defense white paper noting that the PLA “promotes internat ional security 

and military cooperation and refines relevant mechanisms for protecting China’s overseas interests.” 

China’s military diplomacy contributes to its foreign policy goals to develop strategic partnerships and 

revise aspects of the internationa l system. The PLA seeks to build a “new model” of security 

partnerships based on the PRC’s foreign policy principles, according to the 2019 defense white paper. 

China’s “new configuration of foreign military relations” aims to deepen China’s global partner ship 

network through greater military cooperation. The PLA keeps close contact with the military 

leadership of neighboring countries through more than 40 reciprocal military visits at and above the 

service commander -level every year. China has set up defen se and security consultations as well as 

working meeting mechanisms with 17 neighboring countries to keep exchange channels open. 

Similarly, China seeks to develop its military relationships in Europe and strengthen military exchanges 

with countries in Afr ica, Latin America, the Caribbean, and the South Pacific. 

China’s willingness to engage in military diplomacy with other countries can vary considerably based 

on its perception of a country’s adherence to China’s diplomatic framework. China has demonstrate d

a willingness to engage in higher levels of military cooperation with countries with which it has OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Se curity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

8

established a strategic partnership in accordance with China’s proprietary criteria. For example, 

China’s “comprehensive strategic partnership of coordinati on” with Russia entails a relatively high 

degree of military cooperation. Sino -Russian military cooperation occurs in practical forms through 

exchanges of training, equipment, technology, high -level visits, and other coordination mechanisms. 

For other stra tegic partnership countries, China seeks to leverage those relationships to reinforce 

China’s systemic preferences and maintain stability in Beijing’s favor. For countries with whom China 

has not established strategic partnerships, such as the United State s, China shapes its military 

cooperation along more minimalist principles of conflict avoidance that emphasize “non -conflict” and 

“mutual respect.” From China’s perspective, these curtailed relationships at least serve its foreign 

policy goal of ensuring s table relations with major powers. 

In this regard, 2019 was a pivotal point for the PLA as it continued to intensify its support to China’s 

foreign policy through active participation in the reform of the global security governance system, and 

to advance China’s strategic partnerships. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

9

China’s Territorial Disputes in Context 

The PRC’s use of force in territorial disputes has varied widely since 1949. Some disputes led to war, 

as in border conflicts with India in 1962 and Vietnam in 19 79. China’s contested border with the 

Soviet Union during the 1960s raised the possibility of nuclear war. In recent cases involving land 

border disputes, China has sometimes been willing to compromise with and even offer concessions 

to its neighbors. Sinc e 1998, China has settled 11 land -based territorial disputes with six of its 

neighbors. In recent years, China has employed a more coercive approach to deal with several disputes 

over maritime features and ownership of potentially rich offshore oil and gas deposits. 

China and Japan have overlapping claims to both the continental shelves and the exclusive economic 

zones (EEZs) in the East China Sea. The East China Sea contains natural gas and oil, though 

hydrocarbon reserves are difficult to estimate. Japan maintains that an equidistant line from each 

country involved should separate the EEZs, while China claims an extended continental shelf beyond 

the equidistant line to the Okinawa Trench. Japan has called for resumed negotiations with China on 

the principl ed consensus reached in 2008 that both sides would respect an equidistant median line in 

the East China Sea for resource development while conducting joint development of oil and natural 

gas fields in a delineated area spanning the line near the northern e nd. Japan is concerned that China 

has conducted oil and gas drilling on the Chinese side of the median line of the East China Sea since 

2013. China continues to contest Japan’s administration of the nearby Senkaku Islands. 

The South China Sea plays an impo rtant role in security considerations across East Asia because 

Northeast Asia relies heavily on the flow of oil and commerce through South China Sea shipping lanes, 

including more than 80 percent of the crude oil to Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan. China cl aims 

sovereignty over the Spratly and Paracel Island groups and other land features within its ambiguous 

self -proclaimed “nine -dash line” – claims disputed in whole or part by Brunei, the Philippines, 

Malaysia, and Vietnam. Taiwan, which occupies Itu Aba I sland in the Spratly Islands, makes the same 

territorial assertions as China. In 2009, China protested extended continental shelf submissions in the 

South China Sea made by Malaysia and Vietnam in two note verbales to the United Nations (UN). In 

its notes, China stated that it has “indisputable sovereignty over the islands in the South China Sea 

and the adjacent waters, and enjoys sovereign rights and jurisdiction over the relevant waters as well 

as the seabed and subsoil thereof” and included its ambiguous “nine -dash line” map. In 2016, a 

tribunal established pursuant to the Law of the Sea Convention ruled that any PRC claim to “historic 

rights” in the South China Sea within the area depicted as the “nine -dash line” could not exceed its 

maritime rights or e ntitlements as specifically set out in the Law of the Sea Convention. China did not OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Se curity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

10 

participate in the arbitration, and PRC officials publicly voiced opposition to the ruling. By the terms 

of the Convention, the ruling is final and binding on China and th e Philippines. 

Tensions with India persist along the northeastern border near the Indian state of Arunachal Pradesh, 

which China asserts is part of Tibet and therefore part of China, and near the Aksai Chin region at the 

western end of the Tibetan Plateau. Chinese and Indian patrols regularly encounter one another along 

the disputed border, and both sides often accuse one another of border incursions. However, Chinese 

and Indian forces have regularly interacted since the 2017 Doklam standoff and generally k ept disputes 

from escalating in 2019. After the 22nd round of India -China border talks held in September 2019, 

China and India agreed for the first time to coordinate patrolling at one disputed point along the Line 

of Actual Control in Arunachal Pradesh as a confidence -building measure to maintain peace at the 

border. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

11 

ECONOMIC POLICY 

Key Takeaways  

> >

China’s military modernization objectives are commensurate with and part of China’s broader 

national development aspirations. China’s economic, political, soc ial, and security development 

efforts are mutually reinforcing and support China’s strategy of national rejuvenation.  

> >

The Party prioritizes economic development as the “central task” and the force that drives China’s 

modernization across all areas, includi ng its armed forces.  

> >

China’s economic development supports its military modernization not only by providing the 

means for larger defense budgets, but through deliberate Party -led initiatives such as OBOR and 

Made in China 2025, as well as the systemic bene fits of China’s growing national industrial and 

technological base.  

> >

China’s tools of economic statecraft include inducements such as infrastructure investments under 

OBOR; industrial and technology policies such as Made in China 2025 that seek foreign 

tech nology transfers in exchange for market access; protectionist policies and legal barriers for 

foreign firms to compete in China’s domestic market; selective observance of trade commitments; 

and economic coercion against other states. 

China’s military moder nization objectives are commensurate with and part of China’s broader national 

development aspirations and work in coordination with China’s economic policies and systems. 

China’s leaders directly link the pace and scale of the PLA’s modernization with the country’s overall 

development. China’s economic, political, social, and military development efforts are mutually 

reinforcing and support its strategy of national rejuvenation. The Party prioritizes China’s economic 

development as the “central task” and f rames its economic system as the means of advancing the 

nation’s overall political and social modernity. In particular, China’s economic statecraft focuses 

intensely on advancing what the Party calls the country’s “productive forces” (e.g., industry, 

techn ology, infrastructure, and human capital) which it views as the means to achieve the country’s 

political and social modernity —including building a “world -class” military. The party -state’s relentless 

efforts to grow and mature China’s national industrial a nd technological base has significant 

implications for China’s military modernization, as well as for China’s global economic partners. 

Rather than a repudiation of the Party’s fundamental ideals, CCP leaders have cast China’s partial 

adoption of market fe atures, part of its “reform and opening up” beginning in the late 1970s, and 

subsequent economic transformation, as evidence that their strategy to modernize China is succeeding. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Se curity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

12 

Party leaders since Deng Xiaoping have consistently rationalized China’s mark et -oriented economic 

reforms as a necessary regression from socialism needed to account properly for China’s historical 

circumstances, which left it significantly underdeveloped. According to the Party, contemporary China 

remains at the beginning stage or the “primary stage of socialism” with a long process of socialist 

modernization ahead. 

Basic Economic System. The Party conceives of China’s economy as constituting the “basic 

economic system” in which public ownership is dominant and state, collective, an d private forms of 

ownership develop side by side. The basic economic system is comprised of China’s public ownership 

economy and the multi -ownership economy. 

Economic Development Goals. Despite headwinds in China’s economic performance in recent 

years, Ch ina has generally continued to pursue the economic policy objectives determined by the CCP 

Central Committee and set forth in Xi’s report to the 19th Party Congress in 2017. According to Xi’s 

report, China’s economic goals are: (1) furthering supply -side s tructural reform; (2) making China a 

country of innovators; (3) pursuing a rural vitalization strategy; (4) implementing the coordinated 

regional development strategy; (5) accelerating efforts to improve the socialist market economy; and, 

(6) making new gr ound in pursuing opening up on all fronts. The CCP sets more specific development 

goals in its Five -Year Plans (FYPs). The PRC is currently executing the 13 th FYP and the CCP is 

formulating the 14 th FYP that will cover 2021 -2025. The priorities and goals i n the FYPs not only 

apply to the government and the public ownership economy, but also serve as implicit guidance from 

the Party to the multi -ownership economy. 

Economic Conditions. In 2019, China’s efforts to stem domestic credit growth and U.S. -China tra de 

tensions exacerbated a slowdown in China’s economy. In March 2019, China lowered its annual real 

gross domestic product growth target for 2019 to between 6 and 6.5 percent, from the previous year’s 

target of “about” 6.5 percent. In the first three quart ers of 2019, China posted an official gross 

domestic product growth rate of 6.2 percent marking the slowest rate of growth in nearly 30 years. 

China’s economic growth has slowed down due to decreases in state -led infrastructure investment and 

urbanization, as well as China’s decision since 2016 to increase oversight on the financial sector and 

risky lending. 

Economic Policies and Practices. The PRC’s introduction of some features of a market economy 

within the “basic economic system” without a full transiti on to a market economy has resulted in laws, 

regulations, and policies that generally disadvantage foreign firms vis - à-vis their Chinese counterparts 

in terms of tradable goods, services sectors, market access, and foreign direct investment. Examples 

of C hina’s unfair economic policies and trade practices include its support to domestic industries at OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Se curity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

13 

the expense of foreign counterparts, commercial joint venture requirements, technology transfer 

requirements, subsidies to lower the cost of inputs, sustainin g excess capacity in multiple industries, 

sector -specific limits on foreign direct investment, discriminatory cybersecurity and data transfer rules, 

insufficient intellectual property rights enforcement, inadequate transparency, and lack of market 

access —particularly in the information and communications technology (ICT), agriculture and service 

sectors. 

In March 2018, an investigation by the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative (USTR) under Section 

301 of the Trade Act of 1974 determined that the acts, policies, and practices of the PRC government 

related to technology transfer, intellectual property, and innovation are unreasonable or discriminatory 

and burden or restrict U.S. commerce, resulting in harm to the U.S. economy of at least $50 billion 

per y ear. Additionally, the USTR’s annual Special 301 Report, which identifies trading partners that 

do not adequately or effectively protect and enforce intellectual property rights and the findings of its 

Review of Notorious Markets for Counterfeiting and Pir acy, has repeatedly identified China as a 

country that has serious intellectual property rights deficiencies. These reports, for example, have 

repeatedly identified China as the world’s leading source of counterfeit and pirated goods. Since 2006, 

USTR has continually placed China on its Priority Watch List, placement on which indicates particular 

problems with respect to intellectual property protection, enforcement, or market access for U.S. 

persons relying on intellectual property. 

The USTR’s 2020 Specia l 301 Report states: “China’s placement on the Priority Watch List reflects 

U.S. concerns with China’s system of pressuring and coercing technology transfer, and the continued 

need for fundamental structural changes to strengthen intellectual property prot ection and 

enforcement, [to include] trade secret theft, obstacles to protecting trademarks, online piracy and 

counterfeiting, the high -volume manufacturing and export of counterfeit goods, and impediments to 

pharmaceutical innovation.” 

Market access remai ns challenging for foreign firms, as China’s restriction of inbound investment 

results in persistent underperformance in other countries’ services exports, particularly in the banking, 

insurance, Internet -related, professional, and retail services sectors. Apart from the Section 301 

investigation, the United States has placed sanctions on specific Chinese firms for violating U.S. 

sanctions against other states, stealing U.S. intellectual property, having ties to the PLA in dual -use 

sectors, and providing su rveillance technology to PRC authorities in Xinjiang. In 2019, the Chinese 

telecommunications firm Huawei came under greater scrutiny due to concerns of its close links with 

the PRC government and its evasion of sanctions on Iran. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Se curity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

14 

A large portion of China’ s economic output results from government and policy -directed investments 

rather than market -based forces. China pursues state -directed investment overseas and encourages 

mergers and acquisitions. Along with heavy investments in infrastructure and commodit ies to support 

its strategic firms, increase economic engagement, and improve economic security, China is investing 

in technologies that will be foundational for future innovations with both commercial and military 

applications. 

China obtains foreign techn ology through foreign direct investment, overseas acquisitions, legal 

technology imports, the establishment of foreign research and development (R&D) centers, joint 

ventures, research and academic partnerships, talent recruitment, and industrial and cyber espionage 

and theft. 

Recent legal proceedings highlight numerous cases of China’s efforts to obtain technology and 

knowledge through theft of trade secrets and economic espionage. In November 2019, a U.S. Federal 

grand jury indicted a PRC national who ha d worked as an imaging scientist for Monsanto and its 

subsidiary, The Climate Corporation, on charges related to economic espionage and stealing trade 

secrets for China. Federal officials stopped him from boarding a flight on a one -way trip to China in 

201 7 with a proprietary algorithm according to the U.S. Department of Justice. In December 2018, 

the U.S. Department of Justice indicted two PRC nationals associated with a hacking group operating 

in China, known as Advanced Persistent Threat 10 (APT10), for conspiracy to commit computer 

intrusions, conspiracy to commit wire fraud, and aggravated identity theft. They worked for a Chinese 

company in association with the PRC Ministry of State Security (MSS) to conduct computer intrusions, 

resulting in the theft of hundreds of gigabytes of sensitive data involving aviation, space and satellite 

technology, manufacturing technology, pharmaceutical technology, oil and gas exploration and 

production technology, communications technology, computer processor technology, and maritime 

technology. In August 2017, a U.S. cybersecurity firm identified a separate hacking group in China, 

referred to as APT41, which has been operating since 2012. APT41 targeted industries associated with 

the PRC’s economic priorities. The hacker s repeatedly targeted tech groups developing machine 

learning, autonomous vehicles, medical imaging, semiconductors, processors, and enterprise cloud 

computing software. 

The PRC’s recent economic policies have promoted innovation focused on strengthening d omestic 

industry, while placing additional restrictions on foreign firms. Recognizing that some of its initiatives 

such as “Made in China 2025” and OBOR have sparked concerns about China’s intentions, China’s 

leaders have adopted less inflammatory rhetoric when promoting these initiatives without altering 

their fundamental strategic goals. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Se curity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

15  

> >

Made in China 2025 : First announced by the PRC in May 2015, the “Made in China 2025” plan 

seeks to increase China’s domestic innovation by setting higher targets for dome stic manufacturing 

in strategic industries such as robotics, power equipment, and next -generation information 

technology by 2020 and 2025. This plan seeks to strengthen China’s domestic enterprises through 

awarding subsidies and other incentives while incr easing pressure on foreign firms to transfer 

technology in order to have market access in China. “Made in China 2025” came under criticism 

from advanced countries for unfairly favoring China’s domestic enterprises at the expense of 

foreign participants in China’s markets. Increasingly aware and sensitive to these concerns, by June 

2018, China began avoiding references to “Made in China 2025” in major policy papers. The PRC 

government ordered its media outlets to downplay use of the term in June 2018. Key ev ents that 

PRC leaders use to set strategic directives have also avoided references to “Made in China,” 

including the 2019 Central Economic Work Conference and the NPC. Despite the adjustments in 

its narrative, China has largely continued implementing the p olicies behind “Made in China 2025.”  

> >

One Belt, One Road (OBOR) : Launched by the PRC in 2013, OBOR seeks to foster closer economic 

integration with countries along China’s periphery and beyond thereby shaping these countries’ 

interests to align with the PRC ’s, while promoting regional stability and dulling criticism over the 

PRC’s approach to issues it views as sensitive. OBOR also helps China’s state -owned enterprises 

(SOEs) find productive uses for their excess capacity in the cement, steel and constructio n sectors, 

as well as creating investment opportunities for China’s large reserve of savings. Countries 

participating in OBOR could develop economic dependence on Chinese capital, which the PRC 

could leverage to pursue its geopolitical interests. The growt h of China’s global economic 

footprint also makes its interests increasingly vulnerable to domestic political transitions in 

participating countries, international and regional turmoil, terrorism, piracy, and serious natural 

disasters and epidemics, which places new requirements on China to address these threats. Some 

OBOR projects could create potential military advantages for the PRC, such as PLA access to 

selected foreign ports to pre -position the necessary logistics support to sustain naval deployments 

in waters as distant as the Indian Ocean, Mediterranean Sea, and Atlantic Ocean to protect its 

growing interests. In 2019, Beijing hosted the Second Belt and Road Forum, during which the 

PRC sought to address growing international skepticism stemming from concerns over 

corruption, indebtedness, environmental sustainability, and lack of transparency surrounding 

OBOR projects.  

> >

Digital Silk Road : The PRC’s Digital Silk Road initiative, announced in 2015 as a digital subset of 

OBOR, seeks to build China -centri c digital infrastructure, export industrial overcapacity, facilitate 

expansion of Chinese technology corporations, and access large repositories of data. The PRC OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Se curity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

16 

also hopes the Digital Silk Road will increase international e -commerce by reducing cross -bord er 

trade barriers and establishing regional logistics centers by promoting e -commerce through digital 

free trade zones. China is investing in digital infrastructure abroad, including next -generation 

cellular networks —such as fifth -generation (5G) networks —fiber optic cables, undersea cables, 

and data centers. The initiative also includes developing advanced technologies including satellite 

navigation systems, artificial intelligence (AI), and quantum computing for domestic use and 

export. 

Legal Framework . T he PRC in recent years has implemented new laws that seek to place further 

restrictions on foreign firms while creating or strengthening the legal framework for the Party’s 

national security concepts and in some cases furthering its Military -Civil Fusion ( MCF) Development 

Strategy (discussed in the next section):  

> >

National Security Law : Adopted in July 2015, the law limits foreign access to the information and 

communications technology (ICT) market in China on national security grounds.  

> >

Counterterrorism Law : Adopted in December 2015, among its provisions, the law requires 

telecommunications operators and Internet service providers to provide information, decryption, 

and other technical support to public and state security organizations “conducting prevention and 

investigation of terrorist activities.”  

> >

Cyber Security Law : The law, which went into effect in June 2017, promotes development of 

indigenous technologies and restricts sales of foreign ICT in China. The law also requires that 

foreign companies submit I CT for government -administered national security reviews, store data 

in China, and seek government approval before transferring data outside of China.  

> >

Intelligence Law : Passed in June 2017, the law allows authorities to monitor and investigate foreign 

and domestic individuals and organizations to protect national security. Specifically, it allows 

authorities to use or seize vehicles, communication devices, and buildings to support intelligence 

collection efforts.  

> >

Cryptography Law : Adopted in October 2019 an d coming into effect in 2020, this law requires 

entities working on cryptography to have management systems in place to ensure sufficient 

security for their encryption. Although the law encourages development of commercial encryption 

technology, its use ca nnot harm national security or the public good. It provides for the State 

Cryptography Administration and its local agencies to have complete access to cryptography 

systems and the data protected by those systems. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Se curity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

17 

In March 2019, the PRC’s NPC passed a new Foreign Investment Law with the stated objective of 

improving the business environment for foreign investors and leveling the playing field between 

foreign businesses and Chinese private firms and SOEs. The law passed in just three months, which 

reflects a n unusually fast turnaround in China where the same level of legislation usually takes years. 

PRC officials have indicated that swift passage of the law was to facilitate U.S. -China trade talks, and 

the law appears to respond to a number of issues raised b y the U.S. Trade Representative’s Section 

301 report related to unfair Chinese trade practices related to intellectual property, technology transfer, 

and innovation. Despite the law’s stated objective, its wording is vague and the most substantial 

provisio ns are not new. 

Economic Coercion. The PRC employs economic coercion to advance its objectives during periods 

of political tensions with other countries. For example, in response to legislation in 2019 that would 

lead to a ban on Huawei operating in German y, China’s ambassador alluded to retaliation against 

German automobile sales in China. In 2017, China used economic and diplomatic pressure in an 

attempt to urge South Korea to reconsider its approval for the United States to deploy the Terminal 

High -Altit ude Area Defense (THAAD) system within its territory. In 2016, after the visit of the Dalai 

Lama to Mongolia, the PRC suspended talks on a major assistance loan, worsening Mongolia’s fiscal 

challenges and eventually driving it to seek a bailout from the In ternational Monetary Fund. China 

also increased fees on imports of mining products from Mongolia and temporarily closed an important 

border crossing. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

18 

MILITARY -CIVIL FUSIO N DEVELOPMENT STRATE GY 

Key Takeaways  

> >

The PRC pursues its Military -Civil Fusion (M CF) Development Strategy to “fuse” its economic 

and social development strategies with its security strategies to build an integrated national 

strategic system and capabilities in support of China’s national rejuvenation goals.  

> >

Although China’s MCF strateg y includes objectives to develop and acquire advanced dual -use 

technology for military purposes and deepen reform of the national defense science and 

technology industries, its broader purpose is to strengthen all of China’s instruments of national 

power b y “fusing” aspects of its economic, military, and social governance.  

> >

China’s MCF development strategy encompasses six interrelated efforts: (1) fusing the China’s 

defense industrial base and its civilian technology and industrial base; (2) integrating and leveraging 

science and technology innovations across military and civilian sectors; (3) cultivating talent and 

blending military and civilian expertise and knowledge; (4) building military requirements into 

civilian infrastructure and leveraging civilian c onstruction for military purposes; (5) leveraging 

civilian service and logistics capabilities for military purposes; and, (6) expanding and deepening 

China’s national defense mobilization system to include all relevant aspects of its society and 

economy fo r use in competition and war.  

> >

Although MCF has broader purposes than acquiring foreign technology, in practice, MCF means 

there is not a clear line between the PRC’s civilian and military economies, raising due diligence 

costs for U.S. and global entities that do not desire to contribute to the PRC’s military 

modernization. 

The PRC pursues its Military -Civil Fusion (MCF) Development Strategy as a nationwide endeavor 

that seeks to “fuse” its economic and social development strategies with its security strat egies to build 

an integrated national strategic system and capabilities in support of China’s national rejuvenation 

goals. The Party’s leaders view MCF as a critical element of their strategy for the PRC to become a 

“great modern socialist country” which i ncludes becoming a world leader in science and technology 

(S&T) and developing a “world -class” military. Although China’s MCF strategy includes objectives to 

develop and acquire advanced dual -use technology for military purposes and deepen reform of the 

na tional defense S&T industries, its broader purpose is to strengthen all of China’s instruments of 

national power by “fusing” aspects of its economic, military, and social governance. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Se curity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

19 

China pursues MCF through six interrelated efforts. Each effort overlaps with the others and has both 

domestic and international components. The Party seeks to implement the MCF Development 

Strategy across every level of China’s party -state from the highest national -level organs down to 

provinces and township. China refers to t hese six aspects as “systems,” which may also be understood 

as mutually supporting lines of effort or components. The six systems in the MCF Development 

Strategy are: 

The Advanced Defense Science, Technology, and Industrial System. This system focuses on 

fusing China’s defense industrial base and its civilian technology and industrial base. This includes 

expanding the private sector’s participation in China’s defense industrial base and supply chains as 

well as improving the efficiency, capacity, and flexib ility of defense and civilian industrial and 

manufacturing processes. This broader participation seeks to transfer mature technologies both ways 

across military and civilian sectors, with the goal to produce outsized benefits for both sectors. This 

also ai ms to increase the competitiveness within the PRC’s defense industrial base in which one or 

two defense SOEs dominate an entire sector. This MCF system also seeks to advance China’s self -

reliance in manufacturing key industrial technologies, equipment, and materials to reduce its 

dependence on imports, including those with dual -uses. The PRC’s MCF -influenced industrial and 

technology endeavors include Made in China 2025 that sets targets for China to achieve greater self -

sufficiency in key industrial areas such as aerospace, communications, and transportation. 

The Military -Civil Coordinated Technology Innovation System. This MCF system seeks to 

maximize the full benefits and potential of the country’s S&T development. Consistent with the CCP 

leadership’s vi ew that high technology and innovation are critical to strengthening China’s composite 

national power, this system develops and integrates advanced technologies across civilian and military 

entities, projects and initiatives —with benefits flowing in both d irections. This includes using cutting -

edge civilian technology for military applications or to more broadly advance military S&T as well as 

using military advancements to push civilian economic development. Although related to the 

Advanced Defense Science , Technology, and Industrial System, this system largely focuses on fusing 

innovations and advance in basic and applied research. Specific efforts in this MCF system include 

strengthening and promoting civilian and military R&D in advanced dual -use technol ogies and cross -

pollinating military and civilian basic research. Additional efforts include promoting the sharing of 

scientific resources, expanding the institutions involved in defense research, and fostering greater 

collaboration across defense and civi lian research communities. This system also seeks to foster “new -

type” research institutions with mixed funding sources and lean management structures that are more 

dynamic, efficient, and effective than the PRC’s wholly state -owned research bodies. Exampl es of OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Se curity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

20 

MCF -influenced dual -use S&T endeavors include China’s Innovation Driven Development Strategy 

and Artificial Intelligence National Project. 

The Fundamental Domain Resource Sharing System. This system includes building military 

requirements into the co nstruction of civilian infrastructure from the ground up as well as leveraging 

China’s civilian construction and logistics capacities and capabilities for military purposes. This 

includes factoring military requirements and dual -use purposes into building civilian private and public 

transportation infrastructure such as airports, port facilities, railways, roads, and communications 

networks. This also extends to infrastructure projects in dual -use domains such as space and undersea 

as well as mobile communi cations networks and topographical and meteorological systems. Another 

element seeks to set common military and civilian standards to make infrastructure easier to use in 

emergencies and wartime. This aspect of MCF has arguably the greatest reach into the PRC’s local 

governance systems as military requirements inform infrastructure construction at the province, 

county, and township levels. The influence of this aspect of MCF is visible in the PRC’s major land 

reclamations and military construction activitie s in the South China Sea, which brought together 

numerous government entities, the PLA, law enforcement, construction companies, and commercial 

entities. It may also have important implications for the PRC’s overseas infrastructure projects and 

investments under OBOR as the PRC seeks to establish a more robust overseas logistics and basing 

infrastructure to allow the PLA to project and sustain military power. 

The Military Personnel (Talent) Cultivation System. This MCF system seeks to blend and 

cultivate mi litary and civilian S&T expertise through education programs, personnel exchanges, and 

knowledge sharing. The purpose of this effort is to improve the utilization of experts able to 

participate in S&T projects irrespective of whether they are military or c ivilian (or even foreign) experts 

and allow expertise to flow more freely across sectors. This aspect of MCF also seeks to reform China’s 

talent cultivation system, which encompasses hundreds of talent recruitment plans, in order to 

improve China’s human c apital, build a highly skilled workforce, and recruit foreign experts to provide 

access to know -how, expertise, and foreign technology. It takes into account all levels of education 

from the Party’s nationwide “patriotic education” programs for children to the matriculation of post -

doctorate researchers within China and at institutions abroad. Many of the PRC’s named “talents” 

programs are likely influenced by MCF planning, as are reforms in its military academies, national 

universities, and research instit utes. 

The Socialized Support and Sustainment System for the PLA. This system entails two major 

efforts that seeks to shift the PLA away from its inefficient self -contained logistics and sustainment 

systems and towards modern streamlined logistics and supp ort services. First, it seeks to harness 

civilian public sector and private sector resources to improve the PLA’s basic services and support OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Se curity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

21 

functions —ranging from food, housing, and healthcare services. The concept is to gain efficiencies in 

costs and per sonnel by outsourcing non -military services previously performed by the PLA while also 

improving the quality of life for military personnel. Second, it seeks to further the construction of a 

modern military logistics system that is able to support and sust ain the PLA in joint operations and 

for overseas operations. This system seeks to fuse the PLA Joint Logistic Support Force’s (JLSF) 

efforts to integrate the military’s joint logistics functions with the PRC’s advanced civilian logistics, 

infrastructure, a nd delivery service companies and networks. These arrangements seek to provide the 

PLA with modern transportation and distribution, warehousing, information sharing, and other types 

of support in peacetime and wartime. This fusion also seeks to provide the PLA with a logistics system 

that is more efficient, higher capacity, higher quality, and global in reach. 

The National Defense Mobilization System. This MCF system binds the other systems as it seeks 

to mobilize China’s military, economic, and social reso urces to defend or advance China’s sovereignty, 

security and development interests. The Party views China’s growing strength as only useful to the 

extent that the party -state can mobilize it. China views mobilization as the ability to use precisely the 

ins trument, capability, or resource needed, when needed, for the duration needed. Within the PLA, 

the reforms in 2015 -16 elevated defense mobilization to a department called the National Defense 

Mobilization Department (NDMD), which reports directly to the Ce ntral Military Commission (CMC). 

The NDMD plays an important role in this system by organizing and overseeing the PLA’s reserve 

forces, militia, and provincial military districts and below. This system also seeks to integrate the state 

emergency management system into the national defense mobilization system in order to achieve a 

coordinated military -civilian response during a crisis. Consistent with the Party’s view of international 

competition, many MCF mobilization initiatives not only seek to reform how China mobilizes for war 

and responds to emergencies, but how the economy and society can be leveraged to support China’s 

strategic needs for international competition. 

Development and Significance. The Party has explored the concept of leveraging or integ rating the 

combined contributions of the military and civilian sectors since the PRC’s founding. The current 

MCF concept initially took root in the early 2000s as the Party sought methods to enhance China’s 

overall development. This led Party leaders to ca ll for improving “military -civilian integration” that 

echoed the collaboration between the defense and civilian sectors that China observed in the United 

States and other developed countries. Implementation of these efforts stalled due to a lack of 

central ized government control and the organizational barriers that exist across the party -state. 

Coinciding with the 11th Five Year Plan (FYP) (2006 -2010), China began replacing “military -civilian 

integration” with “military -civilian fusion.” In 2007, Party offi cials publicly noted the change from OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Se curity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

22 

“integration” to “fusion” was not merely cosmetic, but represented a “theoretical ‘great leap’ following 

a long period of trial and error.” 

Since that time, MCF’s ambitions have grown in scope and scale as the Party has come to view it as a 

means to bridge China’s economic and social development with its security development in support 

of the PRC’s national strategy to renew China. As such, the Party has continued to elevate MCF’s 

importance. In 2015, the CCP Central Com mittee elevated the MCF Development Strategy to a 

national -level strategy to serve as a “bridge” between the PRC’s national development strategy and its 

national security strategy that seeks to build an “integrated national strategic system and capabilitie s,” 

all of which support the PRC’s goal of national rejuvenation. 

Management and Implementation. The overall management and implementation of the MCF 

Development Strategy involves the most powerful organs in the party -state: the Politburo, the State 

Counci l (notably the National Development and Reform Commission), and the CMC. In addition to 

signifying its importance, the CCP Central Committee’s elevation of the MCF Development Strategy 

to a national -level strategy also intended to overcome obstacles to imp lementation across the party -

state. 

This elevation also led to the establishment of the Central Commission for Military Civilian Fusion 

Development (CCMCFD) in 2017, chaired by General Secretary Xi Jinping, Premier Li Keqiang, 

several other members of the Politburo Standing Committee, two State Councilors, both CMC Vice 

Chairmen, 12 Ministry -level leaders, and others. The stated objective of the CCMCFD is to build 

China’s “national strategic system and capabilities.” This commission works to improve the “to p-level 

design” of MCF and overcome impediments to implementation. The elevation of the MCF 

Development Strategy and the creation of the CCMCFD signals the importance that Party leaders 

place on MCF and the scope and scale of the strategy’s ambitions. 

MCF Linkages. Each MCF system entails linkages between dozens of organizations and government 

entities, including:  

> >

Ministry -level organizations from the State Council: Examples include the National Development and 

Reform Commission, Ministry of Foreign Affairs , Ministry of Industry and Information 

Technology, Ministry of Education, and key state entities such as the State Administration of 

Science and Technology in National Defense and others.  

> >

Lead military organs subordinate to the Central Military Commission : CMC Strategic Planning Office, Joint 

Political, Logistics, and Equipment Development Departments, as well as operational units and 

the regional military structure at the Military District and Sub -District levels; military universities OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Se curity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

23 

and academies such a s National Defense University, Academy of Military Science, National 

University of Defense Technology, and service institutions.  

> >

State -sponsored educational institutions, research centers, and key laboratories : prominent examples include 

the “Seven Sons of National Defense” (Harbin Institute of Technology, Nanjing University of 

Science and Technology, Northwestern Polytechnical Institute, Beijing Institute of Technology, 

Harbin Engineering University, Beihang University, Nanjing University of Aeronautics an d

Astronautics), as well as certain PLA -affiliated laboratories of Tsinghua University, Beijing 

University, and Shanghai Jiaotong University, North University of China, and others.  

> >

Defense industry : the ten major defense SOEs still fill their traditional roles providing weapons and 

equipment to the military services. Many defense SOEs consist of dozens of subsidiaries, sub -

contractors, and subordinate research institutes.  

> >

Other SOEs and quasi -private companies : high profile examples include PRC high -tech c orporations 

and important SOEs like China Ocean Shipping Company (COSCO), China National Offshore 

Oil Company, and major construction companies that have roles in OBOR projects as well as 

helping the PRC build out occupied terrain features in the South Chi na Sea.  

> >

Provincial governments : In practice, many MCF efforts involve partnerships between provincial or 

city government entities and military district departments and PLA departments. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

24 

DEFENSE POLICY AND M ILITARY STRATEGY 

Key Takeaways  

> >

The PRC has sta ted its defense policy aims to safeguard its sovereignty, security, and development 

interests. China’s military strategy remains based on the concept of “active defense.”  

> >

China’s leaders stress the imperative of strengthening the PLA into a “world -class” m ilitary by the 

end of 2049 as an essential element of its strategy to rejuvenate China into a “great modern socialist 

country.”  

> >

The CCP has not defined what it means by its ambition to have a “world -class” military by the 

end of 2049. Within the context of China’s national strategy, however, it is likely that China will 

aim to develop a military by mid -century that is equal to —or in some cases superior to —the U.S. 

military, or that of any other great power that China views as a threat to its sovereignty, se curity, 

and development interests.  

> >

In 2019, the PLA remained primarily oriented towards longstanding regional threats while 

emphasizing a greater global role for itself in accordance with China’s defense policy and military 

strategy.  

> >

Throughout 2019, the P LA continued to pursue ambitious modernization efforts, implement 

major organizational reforms, and improve its combat readiness. 

The PRC has stated its defense policy aims to safeguard its national sovereignty, security, and 

development interests. China’ s leaders view these interests as foundational to their national strategy. 

In 2019, China’s defense policy and military strategy primarily oriented the PLA towards longstanding 

regional threats. At the same time, China’s leaders increasingly cast the armed forces as a practical 

instrument to defend Beijing’s expanding global interests and to advance its foreign policy goals within 

the framework of “Major Power Diplomacy in a New Era.” China’s military strategy is based on 

“active defense,” a concept that ad opts the principles of strategic defense in combination with 

offensive action at the operational and tactical levels. To adapt the PRC’s armed forces to long -term 

trends in global military affairs and meet the country’s evolving national security needs, Ch ina’s leaders 

stress the imperative of meeting key military transformation targets set in 2020 and 2035. These 

milestones seek to align the PLA’s transformation with China’s overall national modernization so that 

by the end of 2049, China will field a “wor ld -class” military. Throughout 2019, the PLA continued to OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Se curity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

25 

pursue these ambitious modernization efforts, implement major organizational reforms, and improve 

its combat readiness. 

Strategic Assessment. A key driver of the PRC’s defense policy is how China’s leaders perceive the 

relative threats and opportunities facing the country’s comprehensive development. In 2019, the PRC 

published a new defense white paper, China’s National Defense in the New Era, which outlined 

China’s views of the international and “As ia -Pacific” security landscape and offered insights into its 

defense policy and military strategy. According to the paper, Beijing views the international 

environment as undergoing “profound changes unseen in a century.” The PRC presents a relatively 

optim istic assessment that, “… the configuration of strategic power is becoming more balanced. The 

pursuit of peace, stability and development has become a universal aspiration of the international 

community with forces for peace predominating over elements of war.” 

Yet the PRC also concludes that “international strategic competition is on the rise” and expresses 

deep concerns at what it sees as growing sources of instability in the near -term. Offering no 

introspection on Beijing’s own role in stirring geopolit ical tensions through its economic practices, 

military activities and modernization, excessive maritime territorial claims, or efforts to revise aspects 

of global governance, the PRC describes the international system as being “…undermined by growing 

hegem onism, power politics, unilateralism and constant regional conflicts and wars.” Similarly, the 

PRC contends that global military competition is intensifying and that “major countries” are adjusting 

their security and military strategies, reorganizing their militaries, and are developing new types of 

combat forces to “seize the strategic commanding heights in military competition.” 

Defense Policy. The PRC’s stated defense policy is to “resolutely safeguard” its sovereignty, security, 

and development interest s, according to its 2019 defense white paper —offering continuity with past 

statements by PRC senior leaders and other official documents. The 2019 defense white paper also 

identifies China’s national defense aims that support these interests, likely offere d in order of 

importance:  

> >

to deter and resist aggression;  

> >

to safeguard national political security, the people’s security and social stability;  

> >

to oppose and contain “Taiwan independence”;  

> >

to crack down on proponents of separatist movements such as “Tibet independence” and the 

creation of “East Turkistan”;  

> >

to safeguard national sovereignty, unity, territorial integrity and security; OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Se curity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

26  

> >

to safeguard China’s maritime rights and interests;  

> >

to safeguard China’s security interests in outer space, electromagnetic space and cyberspace;  

> >

to safeguard China’s overseas interests; and,  

> >

to support the sustainable development of the country. 

Party -Army Relations 

The PLA is the principal armed wing of the CCP and, as a party -army, does not directly serve the 

state. Th e CCP Central Military Commission (CMC), currently chaired by Xi Jinping, is the highest 

military decision -making body in China. As a party -army, the PLA is a political actor. As a constituency 

within the Party, it participates in the PRC’s political and g overnance systems. As the ultimate 

guarantor of the Party’s rule and political and governance systems, the PLA’s missions include formal 

and informal domestic security missions in addition to its national defense missions. Although visible 

differences betw een the CCP and the PLA are extremely rare, in recent years outside observers have 

pointed out that Party leaders and official propaganda have increasingly emphasized the principles of 

the Party’s absolute control over the PLA and the PLA’s loyalty to the Party, despite the fact that the 

officer corps is composed almost entirely of Party members. 

Military Strategic Guidelines . The Chairman of the CMC issues military strategic guidelines to the 

PLA that provide the foundation of China’s military strategy. The military strategic guidelines set the 

general principles and concepts for the use of force in support of the CCP’s strategic objectives, 

provide guidance on the threats and conditions the armed forces should be prepared to face, and set 

priorities for planning, modernization, force structure, and readiness. The CCP leadership issues new 

military strategic guidelines whenever they perceive it necessary to shift the PLA’s priorities based on 

the Party’s perceptions of China’s security environment or chang es in the character of warfare. 

Recent trends suggest China may have recently reviewed and adjusted its military strategic guidelines. 

In early 2019, PRC state media indicated senior -level meetings were being held to “establish the 

military strategy of the ‘New Era.’” The PRC’s 2019 defense white paper states that the PLA is 

implementing guidelines for the “New Era” that, “…actively adapt to the new landscape of strategic 

competition, the new demands of national security, and new developments in modern warf are…” 

PRC official media in the latter half of 2019 echoed these themes and described the guidelines as OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Se curity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

27 

constituting a notable change. The PRC’s defense white paper may reflect changes in the guidelines 

given its emphasis on the intensification of global m ilitary competition, the increase in the pace of 

technological change, and the military modernization themes introduced by General Secretary Xi at 

the 19 th Party Congress. 

These developments are notable because the CCP leadership has issued new military st rategic 

guidelines only a few times since the end of the Cold War. In 1993, the CMC under Jiang Zemin 

directed the PLA to prepare to win “local wars” under “high -tech conditions” after observing U.S. 

military operations in the Gulf War. In 2004, the CMC under Hu Jintao ordered the military to focus 

on winning “local wars under informatized conditions.” In 2014, the CMC under Chairman Xi Jinping 

issued new guidelines that placed greater focus on conflicts in the maritime domain and fighting 

“informatized l ocal wars.” 

Military Strategy: Active Defense. China’s military strategy is based on active defense, a concept 

that adopts the principles of strategic defense in combination with offensive action at the operational 

and tactical levels. Active defense is ne ither a purely defensive strategy nor limited to territorial 

defense. Active defense encompasses offensive and preemptive aspects. It can apply to the PRC acting 

externally to defend its interests. Active defense is rooted on the principle of avoiding init iating armed 

conflict, but responding forcefully if challenged. China’s 2019 defense white paper reaffirmed active 

defense as the basis for its military strategy. Minister of National Defense Gen Wei Fenghe reiterated 

this principle of active defense in hi s speech at the Ninth Beijing Xiangshan Forum in 2019, stating 

that China “will not attack unless attacked but will surely counterattack if attacked.” 

First adopted by the CCP in the 1930s, active defense has served as the basis for the PRC’s military 

stra tegy since its founding in 1949. Although China has adjusted and tailored the specifics of active 

defense over time based on changes in strategic circumstances, its general principles have remained 

consistent. Contemporary Chinese writings describe the ten ets of active defense as:  

> >

Adhere to a position of self -defense and stay with striking back. This describes the basic principle for the 

use of military force under active defense. The PRC’s 2019 defense white paper describes this 

principle as, “We will not attack unless we are attacked, but we will surely counterattack if 

attacked.” Active defense may entail defensive counterattacks in response to an attack or 

preemptively striking an adversary preparing to attack.  

> >

Combine strategic defense with operational and tactical offense. This aspect offers two approaches to warfare 

influenced by Mao Zedong’s notion of using defense and offensive in turns. First, active defense 

may involve offensive campaigns, operations, and tactical actions in support of the strategi cOFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Se curity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

28 

defense. These may occur rapidly and along “external lines.” Second, it uses strategic defense to 

weaken the enemy and set the conditions to transition into strategic offense in order to secure 

victory.  

> >

Taking the operational initiative. This aspect emp hasizes the effective use of offensives at the 

operational and tactical levels, avoiding enemy strengths, and concentrating on building 

asymmetric advantages against enemy weaknesses to “change what is inferior into what is 

superior.”  

> >

Strive for the best p ossibilities. This calls for thorough peacetime military preparations and planning 

based on fighting the most challenging threat under the most complicated circumstances “in order 

to get the best results.” This aspect stresses the importance of setting con ditions in advance and 

suggests it is preferable to be prepared and not fight, than to fight unprepared.  

> >

The dialectical unity of restraining war and winning war. This tenet seeks to resolve the dilemma that using 

too little force may protract a war instea d of stopping it while the unconstrained use of force may 

worsen a war and make it harder to stop. Calling for the “effective restraint of warfare,” this tenet 

seeks to avoid war first through sufficient military preparations and powerful conventional and 

strategic forces that act in concert with political and diplomatic efforts to “subdue the enemy’s 

troops without fighting.” If war is unavoidable, however, this aspect calls for restraining war by 

taking the “opening move” and “using war to stop war.”  

> >

Sold iers and the people are the source of victory. This integrates the concept of active defense with the 

concept of “people’s war.” People’s war comprises subordinate military strategies, ”guerrilla war” 

and ”protracted war” that Mao saw as a means to harness the capacity of China’s populace as a 

source of political legitimacy and mobilization to generate military power. Contemporary Chinese 

writings link people’s war to national mobilization and participation in wartime as a whole -of -

nation concept of warfare .

Military Missions and Tasks . The CMC directs the PLA to be ready and able to perform specific 

missions and tasks to support the Party’s strategy and defend the PRC’s sovereignty, security, and 

development interests. The PLA’s missions and tasks in the “N ew Era” include: safeguarding China’s 

territorial sovereignty and maritime rights and interests; maintaining combat readiness; conducting 

military training under real combat conditions; safeguarding China’s nuclear weapons and its interests 

in the space an d cyber domains; countering terrorism and maintaining stability; protecting the PRC’s 

overseas interests; and participating in emergency response and disaster relief. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

29 

The PRC’s Internal Security Forces 

The PRC’s internal security forces consist prima rily of the Ministry of Public Security (MPS), the Ministry of 

State Security (MSS), the People’s Armed Police (PAP), the PLA, and the militia. The Party relies on these 

forces to address challenges ranging from protests over political, social, environment al, or economic problems, 

to terrorism and natural disasters. For example, in 2019, the PRC’s internal security forces in Xinjiang oversaw 

extensive detentions of Uyghurs at detention camps, mass surveillance, suppression of religious activities, and 

searc hes of personal property. In 2019, the PRC deployed the PAP in Shenzhen and probably in Hong Kong 

to bolster PLA Hong Kong Garrison elements positioned to respond to protests. The PRC’s 2019 defense 

white paper claimed that since 2012 it has deployed 950, 000 PLA and PAP soldiers and 1.41 million militia 

personnel for domestic emergency response and disaster relief. 

Ministry of Public Security (MPS). The MPS leads the PRC’s civilian national police, which serves as the 

first -line force for public order. The key mission of the MPS is domestic law enforcement and the “maintenance 

of social security and order” with duties including anti -rioting and anti -terrorism. 

Ministry of State Security (MSS). The MSS is the PRC’s main civilian intelligence and counterintel ligence 

service. The missions of the MSS are to protect the PRC’s national security; secure political and social stability; 

implement the State Security Law and related laws and regulations; protect state secrets; conduct 

counterintelligence; and investiga te organizations or people inside China who carry out or direct, support, or 

aid other people perceived to harm national security. 

People’s Armed Police (PAP). The PAP is a paramilitary component of the PRC’s armed forces. Its primary 

missions include inte rnal security, maintaining public order, maritime security, and assisting the PLA in times 

of war. As part of a reorganization of China’s security structures, in 2018, the CMC assumed direct control of 

the PAP. The same reform also subordinated the China C oast Guard (CCG) to the PAP. 

People’s Liberation Army (PLA). In addition to its national defense mission, the PLA has formal and 

informal roles in the PRC’s internal security. As the principal armed wing of the CCP, the PLA is the ultimate 

guarantor of the CCP’s survival and supports other internal security forces as necessary. For example, the PLA 

may provide transportation, logistics, and intelligence to assist local public security forces with internal security. 

The PLA’s active and reserve forces are au thorized under the 1997 National Defense Law to directly “assist in 

maintaining public order” when CCP leaders consider it necessary. 

Militia . The militia is an armed reserve force of civilians available for mobilization. It is distinct from the 

PLA’s rese rve forces. Militia units organize around towns, villages, urban sub -districts, and enterprises and 

vary widely in composition and mission. The PRC’s 1997 National Defense Law authorizes the militia to assist 

in maintaining public order. The People’s Armed Forces Maritime Militia (PAFMM) is a component of the 

militia and its tasks include safeguarding maritime claims, which it often performs in conjunction with the 

PLAN and the CCG. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

30 

Modernization Objectives and Targets . Within the context of the Party’s str ategy, the 

modernization of the PRC’s armed forces is not merely a policy preference or a momentary endeavor 

that may fade over time in importance. Rather, modernization of the armed forces is an indispensable 

element of the Party’s national strategy to mo dernize the country. As the PRC’s 2019 defense white 

paper states, “Building a fortified national defense and a strong military commensurate with the 

country’s international standing and its security and development interests is a strategic task for China’ s

socialist modernization ” [emphasis added]. Throughout 2019, the PLA continued to pursue ambitious 

modernization objectives, implement major organizational reforms, and improve its combat readiness 

in line with the goals and timelines announced by General Secretary Xi Jinping at the 19 th Party 

Congress in 2017. The PRC’s goals for modernizing its armed forces in the “New Era,” as stated in 

the 2019 defense white paper, are:  

> >

By 2020 : “To generally achieve mechanization…with significantly enhanced informatio nization 

and greatly improved strategic capabilities;”  

> >

By 2035 : “To comprehensively advance the modernization of military theory, organizational 

structure, military personnel, and weaponry and equipment in step with the modernization of the 

country and bas ically complete the modernization of national defense and the military …”; and,  

> >

In 2049 : “To fully transform the people’s armed forces into world -class forces.” 

The PLA’s modernization goals set by Chairman Xi Jinping and the CMC align with and provide 

sup port to the broader elements of China’s national strategy, including the two centenary milestones 

in 2021 and 2049 and the interim waypoint in 2035. China wants to “generally” complete the PLA’s 

mechanization and make “major progress” toward informatizatio n by the end of 2020. This is ahead 

of the CCP’s centenary in 2021, the point at which the Party seeks to complete building China into a 

“moderately prosperous society.” Beyond 2021, the PLA’s major modernization goals follow the 

Party’s “two -step” nationa l development approach to achieving national rejuvenation in 2049. In the 

first stage from 2021 to 2035, the PLA will seek to “basically complete” military modernization by 

2035, at which point China will have “basically” met the Party’s initial thresholds of a “great modern 

socialist country.” In the second stage from 2035 to 2049, the PLA will aim to complete its 

transformation into a “world -class” military in support of the Party’s goal to finish national 

modernization and fully realize its renewal as a “great modern socialist country.” 

Although China’s leaders view building military strength as a strategic imperative, they also place 

important caveats on these objectives. For example, Chairman Xi’s direction to the PLA to “basically 

complete” modernizati on by 2035 should also occur “in step with the modernization of the country.” OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Se curity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

31 

These qualifications serve several purposes that highlight the interlocking nature of the Party’s 

strategic planning. First, as the PRC’s interests continue to expand as it devel ops, the Party expects 

the PLA to keep pace with the country’s evolving interests and be ready and able to defend its progress. 

Second, linking the PLA’s transformation to the country’s transformation allows Party leaders to signal 

the scope and scale of t he internal changes they expect the PLA to implement, particularly given its 

historic resistance to reforms that challenge its risk -adverse organizational culture or threaten vested 

bureaucratic interests. Finally, these qualifications provide flexibility to the Party’s leaders to modulate 

military resources and defense objectives based on the conditions of the country’s overall 

development. This offers the PRC’s leaders flexibility to adapt to changing economic or international 

conditions and ensure milita ry investments support —rather than compromise —the strategy. 

Defense Ambitions . The CCP has not defined what it means by its ambition to have a “world -class” 

military by the end of 2049. Within the context of China’s national strategy, however, it is likely that 

China will seek to develop a military by mid -century that is equal to —or in some cases superior to —

the U.S. military, or that of any other great power that China views as a threat to its sovereignty, 

security, and development interests. Given the far -reaching ambitions the CCP has for a rejuvenated 

China, it is unlikely that the Party would aim for an end state in which China would remain in a position 

of military inferiority vis -à-vis the United States or any other potential rival. For China to aim l ower 

or otherwise willingly accept a permanent condition of military inferiority would seem anathema to 

the fundamental purpose of becoming a “great modern socialist country.” However, this does not 

mean that China will aim for the PLA to mirror the U.S. m ilitary in terms of capacity, capability, or 

readiness. China will likely develop its “world -class” military in a manner that best suits the needs of 

China’s armed forces to defend and advance the country’s interests and how the PLA —guided by the 

Party —ada pts to the changing character of warfare. Additionally, China’s military modernization 

ambitions do not necessarily shed light on how the PRC may intend to use force or posture its forces 

abroad in the future. 

Readiness . As with other aspects of China’s gr owing strength, the Party views the PLA’s long -term 

development as useful to the extent that the party -state can wield it. Alongside modernizing the PLA’s 

capabilities and organizational reform, China’s leaders have identified enhancing the combat readines s

of the armed forces as an important element in developing China’s military strength. In recent years, 

Chairman Xi Jinping and senior military leaders have continued to emphasize the need to build the 

PLA’s combat readiness so it can “fight and win.” This emphasis has not only entailed the PLA 

conducting more training, but making its training more rigorous and realistic as well as addressing 

issues in the PLA’s training and education systems relating conducting complex joint operations and 

adapting to othe r aspects of modern warfare. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

32 

Non -War Military Activities (NWMA) 

PLA writings divide military operations into two categories: war and non -war. The PLA’s concept of 

non -war military activities (NWMA) is an expansive and diverse set of military operations r anging 

from humanitarian assistance and disaster relief (HA/DR) to suppressing domestic unrest to maritime 

rights protection. PLA writings describe NWMA as serving a variety of political purposes, occurring 

at varying intensities and durations, and may inc lude the threat of violence or the use of violence from 

low levels to levels approaching war. According to PLA writings, NWMA are an important “strategic 

means” for the military to serve the national political interest. Additionally, the PLA views NWMA as 

an effective way for it to support and safeguard China’s development, as a means to expand the PRC’s 

global interests, and an opportunity to gain valuable operational experience. 

NWMA can be conducted internationally or domestically and encompass activitie s in multiple 

domains. NWMA can notably include operations in which the PLA uses coercive threats and/or 

violence below the level of armed conflict against states and other actors to safeguard the PRC’s 

sovereignty and national interests. NWMA can also ble nd military and law enforcement activities 

including for maritime rights protection, border and coastal defense, air and sea control, deterrence 

operations, suppression of domestic unrest, and other forms of stability maintenance operations. 

NWMA also incl udes military diplomacy, HA/DR, counterterrorism, counterpiracy, counterdrug, 

peacekeeping, and noncombatant evacuation operations. In the past, PRC official writings have 

described aspects of NWMA as military operations other than war (MOOTW). 

Along wit h the CCP leadership’s focus on improving the PLA’s combat readiness, in recent years PLA 

media outlets have noted shortcomings in the military’s training and education systems that reportedly 

left some commanders —particularly at the operational level —inad equately prepared for modern 

warfare. In recent years, PLA media outlets have identified the need for the military to address the 

“Five Incapables” problem: that some commanders cannot (1) judge situations; (2) understand higher 

authorities’ intentions; (3 ) make operational decisions; (4) deploy forces; and, (5) manage unexpected 

situations. Although PLA writings do not specify how widespread the “Five Incapables” are, PLA 

media outlets have consistently raised them. One outside expert has noted this may in dicate the PLA 

lacks confidence in its proficiency to execute its own operational concepts. Additionally, senior Party 

and PLA leaders are keenly aware that the military has not experienced combat in decades nor fought 

with its current suite of capabilitie s and organizational structures. PLA leaders and state media 

frequently call on the force to remedy the “peacetime disease” that manifests in the form of lax training 

attitudes and practices that are viewed as hindering combat readiness. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Se curity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

33 

The CMC and PLA co ntinue to take determined steps to rectify these issues and strengthen the PLA’s 

readiness. Starting in 2018, the PLA introduced a “rolling” training outline to ensure continuity in 

training and more dynamically adjust training to new requirements. In Janu ary 2019, the PLA updated 

its Outline of Military Training and Evaluation to emphasize realistic and joint training across all warfare 

domains. The 2019 outline reflects the PLA’s push to streamline various training requirements 

established by national -lev el authorities, the theater commands, and services, as well as to enhance 

accountability for training standards and increase peacetime combat readiness. In February 2019, 

Chairman Xi issued a new regulation to the PLA that formally expanded the supervision of military 

training with inspectors and a new oversight system. According to PRC state media, the regulation 

sought to “rectify practices that are inconsistent with the requirements of actual combat” and correct 

“peacetime malpractices.” Similarly, the P RC’s 2019 defense white paper claimed the PLA (and PAP 

and militia) are placing a higher priority on combat readiness, enhancing training under realistic 

combat conditions, organizing contests and competitions to encourage training, and stepping up 

oversig ht of training to ensure adherence to training standards to “uproot peacetime ills.” Chapter 2 

discusses the PLA’s 2019 training and exercises in detail. 

Anticorruption Campaign. Anticorruption investigations in the PLA are a component of a Party -

wide effo rt that General Secretary Xi strengthened and accelerated shortly after taking office. The 

stated goal of these campaigns is to safeguard the legitimacy of the CCP, root out corruption, improve 

governance, and centralize Xi’s and the Party’s authority. Mil itary discipline inspectors led by the CMC 

Discipline Inspection Commission have targeted individual power networks and occupational 

specialties historically prone to corruption, such as officers connected to disgraced former CMC Vice 

Chairmen Xu Caihou an d Guo Boxiong and, more recently, to General Fang Fenghui and General 

Zhang Yang. The Party demoted more than 70 PLA officers for their alleged involvement in Fang 

Fenghui’s bribery scheme; Fang was sentenced to life in prison in February 2019. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 

Annual Report to Congress: Military and Se curity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 

34 OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

35 

Chi na’s Military Leadership 

The military’s highest decision -making body, the Central Military Commission (CMC), is technically 

a department of the CCP Central Committee. The CMC Chairman is a civilian, usually serving 

concurrently as the General Secretary of the CCP and President of China. Following the 19th Party 

Congress, the CMC consists of two vice chairs, the chiefs of the Joint Staff and Political Work 

Departments, the head of the Discipline Inspection Commission, and the Minister of National 

Defense. 

Me mbers of the CCP Central Military Commission 

Chairman Xi Jinping’s appointment as Party General Secretary and CMC Chairman in 2012 and his 

selection as President in the spring of 2013 represented the first simultaneous transfer of all three of 

China’s top positions to an incoming leader in recent decades. Xi was reappointed to his Party 

positions at the 19th Party Congress and was reappointed president in spring 2018 at the NPC. The 

same meeting also granted approval to remove presidential term limits, pot entially allowing Xi to 

remain president beyond his second term. In 2016, Xi was announced as the commander -in -chief of 

the CMC’s Joint Operations Command Center (JOCC) and was named “core” leader of the CCP 

Central Committee. Prior to becoming CMC Chairma n, Xi served as the CMC’s only civilian Vice 

Chairman under Hu Jintao. Xi’s father was an important military figure during China’s communist 

revolution and was a Politburo member in the 1980s. The younger Xi served as an aide to a defense 

minister early in his career and had regular interactions with the PLA as a provincial Party official. In 

meetings with U.S. officials, Xi has emphasized improving military -to -military relations between China 

and the United States. 

Vice Chairman General Xu Qiliang is the f irst career PLA Air Force (PLAAF) officer appointed 

China’s top uniformed official. Xu is a public advocate for reform and guides the effort as a deputy 

secretary of the CMC’s reform leading group. Xu previously served on the CMC as the PLAAF 

commander, wh ere he oversaw rapid force modernization and expanded the air force’s foreign 

engagement. He may have crossed paths with Xi Jinping early in his career, when both men served in 

Fujian Province. Xu was the first PLAAF officer to serve as deputy chief of the General Staff 

Department (GSD) since the Cultural Revolution period, and – at 54 years of age at the time – the 

youngest in PLA history. Xu is serving a third term as a CMC member. 

Vice Chairman General Zhang Youxia is China’s second -most senior officer a nd former head of 

the Equipment Development Department. Zhang gained rare experience as a combat commander 

during China’s brief war with Vietnam in 1979. Zhang formerly commanded the Shenyang Military 

Region, which shared a border with North Korea and Russ ia. Zhang is one of China’s military OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Se curity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

36 

“princelings.” His father, a well -known military figure in China, served with Xi Jinping’s father at the 

close of China’s Civil War in 1949. Zhang is currently serving his second term on the CMC. 

Minister of National D efense General Wei Fenghe was appointed at the NPC in March 2018. Wei 

is the PLA’s third -most senior officer and manages its relationship with state bureaucracies and foreign 

militaries. Unlike the U.S. Secretary of Defense, he is not part of the chain of command and his 

primary policy influence is derived from membership in the CMC. Wei served in multiple missile bases 

across different military regions and held top posts in the headquarters of the former PLA Second 

Artillery Corps, the PLA Rocket Force’s ( PLARF’s) predecessor, before being promoted in late 2010 

to Deputy Chief of the General Staff – the first officer from the Second Artillery to do so. Wei was 

previously the PLARF commander. Wei is serving a second term as a CMC member. 

Joint Staff Departme nt Chief General Li Zuocheng oversees PLA operations, a narrowing of the 

wider responsibilities held by the former GSD prior to reforms initiated in 2015. Li is one of few 

remaining active duty PLA officers with combat experience and is recognized as a com bat hero for 

his service in the PRC’s border war with Vietnam. He was also the first PLA Army (PLAA) 

commander after the PLAA became a separate service in 2015. Li previously commanded the 

Chengdu Military Region, which was responsible for the sensitive ar ea of Tibet. 

Political Work Department Director Admiral Miao Hua oversees the PLA’s political work, 

including propaganda, organization, and education. Miao is a former Army officer who switched 

services to the Navy in December 2014 when he became political commissar of the PLA Navy 

(PLAN). Miao may have ties to Xi from his time serving in the 31st Group Army in Fujian Province, 

when his career overlapped with Xi’s. Miao participated as the PLAN political commissar during the 

Navy’s OBOR cruise conducted in mid -2017. 

Secretary of the Discipline Inspection Commission General Zhang Shengmin oversees the 

highest -level organization responsible for investigating military violations of Party discipline. Zhang 

is also a deputy secretary and third ranking member on t he standing committee of the Party’s 

Discipline Inspection Commission. Zhang’s appointments indicate the Party’s commitment to the 

anticorruption campaign in the military. Shortly after his appointment to the CMC, Zhang was 

promoted to the rank of general, the highest rank in the military. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 

Annual Report to Congress: Military and Se curity Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 

37 

# 2

# MISSIONS, TASKS, AND 

# MODERNIZATION OF CHI NA’S 

# ARMED FORCES IN THE  “NEW ERA” OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEF ENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

38 

Key Takeaways  

> >

With a force that totals approximately two million personnel in the regular forces, the PLA has 

sought to modernize its capabilities and improve its proficiencies across all warfare domains so 

that as a joint force it can conduct the range of land, air, and maritime operations as well as space, 

counterspace, electronic warfare (EW), and cyber operations.  

> >

The PLA’s evolving capabilities and concepts continue to strengthen the PRC’s ability to counter 

an intervention by a third party in a conflict along China’s periphery and project power globally.  

> >

In 2019, the PLA continued to make progress implementing major structural reforms, fielding 

modern indigenous systems, building readiness, and strengthening its competency to conduct joint 

operations.  

> >

China has already achieved parity with —or even exceeded —the United States in several military 

modernization areas, including shipbuilding, land -based conventional ballistic and cruise missiles, 

and integrated ai r defense systems. 

DEVELOPMENTS IN THE PLA’S MODERNIZATION AND REFORM 

The PRC’s strategy of national rejuvenation entails strengthening and adapting its armed forces to the 

long -term trends in global military affairs and meeting the country’s evolving nati onal security needs. 

During the last two decades, the PRC has invested in and improved the PLA’s capabilities to address 

a range of security objectives beyond its continued emphasis on Taiwan contingencies. The PLA’s 

evolving capabilities and concepts cont inue to strengthen the PRC’s ability to counter an intervention 

by a third party in a conflict along China’s periphery, project power globally, and deter nuclear attack. 

With a force that totals approximately two million personnel in the regular forces, th e PLA has sought 

to modernize its capabilities and improve its proficiencies across all warfare domains so that as a joint 

force it can conduct the range of land, air, and maritime operations as well as space, counterspace, 

electronic warfare (EW), and cyb er operations. China has already achieved parity with —or even 

exceeded —the United States in several military modernization areas, including shipbuilding, land -

based conventional ballistic and cruise missiles, and integrated air defense systems. Recognizing that 

joint operations, information flows, and rapid decision -making are vital in modern warfare, the PRC 

continues to place a high priority on modernizing the PLA’s capability to command complex joint 

operations in near and distant battlefields. The PRC i s seeking to enhance the PLA’s joint command 

and control systems, joint logistics systems, and command, control, communications, computers, 

intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (C4ISR) systems. The PRC is also modernizing, OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

39 

diversifying, and expan ding its nuclear forces as well as deepening the PLA’s interoperability and 

integration with the PRC’s paramilitary and militia forces. 

In recent years, the CCP’s efforts to strengthen its armed forces have also included undertaking the 

most comprehensive restructuring of the PLA’s command and control arrangements, forces structure, 

and administrative organs in its history. These reforms have sought to reinforce the CCP’s control of 

the military, improve the PLA’s ability to conduct joint operations, increa se its combat effectiveness, 

and address longstanding issues such as corruption and the institutional primacy of the army over the 

other services. 

Status of 2020 Milestones (Mechanization and Reform) . Although the PLA continued to make 

progress towards its modernization and reform goals throughout 2019, the PLA might be unable to 

meet several of the milestones that it planned to achieve by 2020. Among the PLA’s modernization 

goals set by the CCP leadership is to “generally achieve mechanization” by 2020. Ho wever, the PRC’s 

2019 defense white paper noted that the PLA had “yet to complete the task of mechanization,” 

suggesting it was also unlikely that the PLA would achieve this goal by the end of 2020. Additionally, 

PLA officials have indicated that the third (and final) stage of PLA reforms would take place in 2021 

or 2022. The PRC’s original timetable from late 2015 for the completion of the PLA’s reforms 

indicated that 2020 was the target for completion. References to 2021 or 2022 may imply the PLA is 

a yea r or two behind in completing its reforms. Both of these years are significant for the CCP. The 

Party aims for China to achieve its “moderately prosperous society” goal by the CCP’s centenary in 

2021. The CCP will also hold its 20th Party Congress in 2022. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

40 

PEOPLE’S LIBERATION ARMY ARMY (PLAA) 

Key Takeaways  

> >

The PLAA is the world’s largest standing ground force, with approximately 915,000 active -duty 

personnel in combat units.  

> >

In 2019, the PLAA continued to transition into a more modern, mobile, and leth al ground force 

through the fielding of upgraded combat systems and the integration of communications 

equipment and other technologies. The PLAA’s modernization seeks to improve its ability to 

conduct joint operations in a high -intensity conflict and proje ct power abroad.  

> >

In 2019, the PLAA continued to create and mature formations at lower echelons that are more 

operationally flexible and better suited to conducting and managing complex combined -arms and 

joint operations.  

> >

In 2019, the PLAA demonstrated a si gnificant increase in training at both the service -level and 

joint -level and it continued to implement more realistic training methods. 

The People’s Liberation Army Army (PLAA) is the world’s largest standing ground force, with 

approximately 915,000 active -duty personnel in combat units. The PLAA is the primary ground 

fighting force for the PLA. The PRC’s 2019 defense white paper described the PLAA’s tasks as 

transitioning from “regional defense” to trans -theater operations with an emphasis on improving its 

capabilities to conduct multi -domain, trans -theater, and sustained operations “so as to build a new 

type of strong and modernized land force.” In 2019, the PLAA continued efforts to transition into a 

more modern, mobile, and lethal ground force through th e fielding of upgraded combat systems and 

the integration of communications equipment and other technologies, to improve its ability to project 

power and conduct joint operations in a high -intensity conflict in line with the CCP’s modernization 

goals. Thro ughout 2019, the PLAA also continued to implement the major PLA -wide structural 

reforms that began in late 2015 and improving its combat readiness. 

Force Structure and Organization . In 2019, the PLAA continued to create and mature formations 

at lower echel ons that are more operationally flexible and better suited to conducting and managing 

complex combined -arms and joint operations. The PLAA’s forces are organized into five Theater 

Army Commands, the Xinjiang military command, and the Tibet military command . The PLAA has 

now standardized its 13 group armies (roughly a U.S. corps -level equivalent), which were reduced in 

number from 18 in 2017 as part of an effort to downsize and streamline the PLAA’s force structure. 

Each group army now includes multiple comb ined -arms brigades. In total, these 78 combined -arms 

brigades serve as the PLAA’s primary maneuver force. These brigades vary in size and composition. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

41 

The PLAA delineates its combined -arms brigades into three types: heavy (tracked armored vehicles), 

medium (wheeled armored vehicles), and light (high -mobility, mountain, air assault and motorized) 

and can contain up to 5,000 troops each. Each group army controls six additional brigades responsible 

for operational element functions: an artillery brigade, an ai r defense brigade, an army aviation (or air 

assault) brigade, a special operations forces (SOF) brigade, an engineer and chemical defense brigade, 

and a sustainment brigade. Although the PLAA has standardized its group armies, it does retain a 

number of no nstandard independent divisions and brigades that exist outside of the group armies. 

These units are typically located in areas the CCP considers sensitive including Xinjiang, Tibet, Hong 

Kong, and Beijing. 

The PLAA continues to emphasize the group army -co mbined -arms brigade -battalion structure to 

reinforce combat capabilities at the tactical level and improve multi -domain operations. At the brigade 

and battalion levels, the PLAA reorganized and consolidated its staff structure to refine and 

synchronize pla nning and operational support efforts. Combined -arms brigades’ subordinate 

combined -arms battalions have become the PLAA’s basic tactical unit for joint operations. The PLAA 

has staffed and restructured its combined -arms battalions to enable them to conduc t operations with 

greater independence from higher echelons. Combined -arms battalion commanders now have staff 

officers who assist in the development and implementation of plans and orders in addition to new 

reconnaissance assets and subordinate support un its. Additionally, the variety of combat units at the 

brigade and battalion level provides the PLAA with greater flexibility to tailor force packages. 

Capabilities and Modernization . The PLAA’s modernization continues to emphasize vehicle and 

weapon upgrad es in line with the PLA’s overall modernization priorities and CMC guidance. The 

PRC’s 2019 defense white paper, however, noted that the PLA “has yet to complete the task of 

mechanization,” implying that completing mechanization by the end of 2020 was unli kely. Western 

observers have noted that the CCP’s mechanization goal pertains primarily to the PLA’s ground forces 

and point to the challenges of modernizing the PLAA given its sheer size. For example, equipment in 

PLAA infantry units varies and may includ e a mix of obsolete platforms from the 1960s up to some 

of the region’s most modern and capable platforms. Similarly, PLAA armored units are comprised of 

a wide range of legacy tanks and modernized third -generation main battle tanks. Despite the PLA’s 

mode rnization ambitions and its demonstrated ability to develop highly modern equipment for ground 

forces, the PLAA has faced challenges acquiring and fielding new equipment in sufficient quantities 

to retire its legacy equipment, although it continues to make progress in this regard. 

In parades, state media, and other venues in 2019, the PLAA sought to highlight various types of new 

and upgraded equipment and vehicles, including small arms, all -terrain vehicles and modern 

camouflage patterns, to demonstrate th e PLAA's commitment and progress towards modernization. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

42 

The PLAA also continues to bolster its armor capabilities in heavy combined -arms brigades with the 

initial fielding of the Type -15 light main battle tank, which can operate in mountainous and soft ter rain 

environments with the firepower of its 105mm main gun. The PLAA’s combined -arms brigades 

continued integrating new communications systems, information warfare platforms and low altitude 

unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) during 2019. The PLAA also fielde d the Z -20 medium lift 

helicopter, which will enhance aviation and air assault brigades’ ability to perform rapid air insertion 

operations, light infantry force projection, and expedited logistics. 

Readiness . After two years of focusing on implementing sig nificant force restructuring, the PLAA 

began shifting its focus toward combined -arms and joint training in 2019. The PLAA increased 

participation in the STRIDE 2019 series of combined -arms exercises, which involved multiple phases 

across the Zhurihe, Quesh an, Sanjie, and Taonan training areas. More PLAA units participated in 

STRIDE 2019 exercises compared to the more limited STRIDE 2018. The PLAA continued high 

utilization of the Zhurihe Joint Training Base to simulate realistic force -on -force, high intensi ty 

conflict and to provide a venue to practice ground -to -air integration. Zhurihe Joint Training Base is 

comparable to the U.S. military’s National Training Center at Fort Irwin, California, with a large 

amount of maneuver space, a dedicated opposing force , and an urban terrain training area. 

The PLAA’s participation in Russia’s national -level military exercise TSENTR -19 in September 2019 

indicated a continued prioritization of combined -arms training with regional partners as well as 

refining its counterter rorism capabilities. Aside from named exercises, the PLAA continued to 

leverage training simulation technology to include virtual reality scenarios and battalion level 

simulators to increase training repetitions and improve skills. PLAA units take a system atic approach 

to training and familiarization when integrating new tactical systems and military equipment into 

subordinate formations prior to testing them in training exercise scenarios. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 

Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 

43 OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEF ENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

44 

PEOPLE’S LIBERATION ARMY NAVY (PLAN) 

Key Takeaways  

> >

The PRC ha s numerically the largest navy in the world with an overall battle force of approximately 

350 ships and submarines, including more than 130 major surface combatants.  

> >

As of 2019, the PLAN is largely composed of modern multi -role platforms featuring advanced 

anti -ship, anti -air, and anti -submarine weapons and sensors.  

> >

The PRC commissioned its first domestically built aircraft carrier in late 2019. China expects its 

second domestically built aircraft carrier to enter service by 2023.  

> >

In 2019, the PRC launched its first Yushen class amphibious assault ship (Type 075 LHA), its first 

class of large deck amphibious warship.  

> >

In the near -term, the PLAN will have the capability to conduct long -range precision strikes against 

land targets from its submarine and surfac e combatants using land -attack cruise missiles, notably 

enhancing the PRC’s global power projection capabilities. 

The People’s Liberation Army Navy (PLAN) is the largest navy in the world with a battle force of 

approximately 350 platforms, including major surface combatants, submarines, ocean -going 

amphibious ships, mine warfare ships, aircraft carriers, and fleet auxiliaries. The PRC’s 2019 defense 

white paper described the PLAN as speeding up the transition of its tasks from “defense on the near 

seas” to “protection missions on the far seas.” The PLAN is an increasingly modern and flexible force 

that has focused on replacing its previous generations of platforms with limited capabilities in favor 

of larger, modern multi -role combatants. As of 2019, the PLA N is largely composed of modern multi -

role platforms featuring advanced anti -ship, anti -air, and anti -submarine weapons and sensors. This 

modernization aligns with the PRC’s growing emphasis on the maritime domain and increasing 

demands for the PLAN to ope rate at greater distances from mainland China. 

The PLAN organizes, mans, trains, and equips the PLA’s naval and naval aviation forces, as well as 

the PLA Marine Corps (PLANMC), which is subordinate to the PLAN. In 2019, the PLAN continued 

to implement stru ctural reforms that began in late 2015 and early 2016. Similar to the other services, 

the PLA -wide reforms removed the PLAN headquarters from conducting operations, which became 

the purview of the PLA’s joint Theater Commands, and focused it on organizing, manning, training, 

and equipping naval forces. The PLAN’s force structure consists of three fleets with subordinate 

submarine flotillas, surface ship flotillas, aviation brigades, and naval bases. The PLAN’s North Sea OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

45 

Fleet is subordinate to the North ern Theater Command, the East Sea Fleet is subordinate to the 

Eastern Theater Command, and the South Sea Fleet is subordinate to the Southern Theater Command. 

Submarines . Modernizing the PLAN’s submarine force remains a high priority for the PRC. The 

PLAN cur rently operates four nuclear -powered ballistic missile submarines (SSBN s) with two 

additional hulls fitting out, six nuclear -powered attack submarines (SSNs), and 50 diesel -powered 

attack submarines (SSs). The PLAN will likely maintain between 65 and 70 su bmarines through the 

2020s, replacing older units with more capable units on a near one -to -one basis. 

China continues to increase its inventory of conventional submarines capable of firing advanced anti -

ship cruise missiles (ASCMs). Since the mid -1990s, th e PLAN has purchased 12 Russian -built Kilo 

class SS units, eight of which are capable of launching ASCMs. During these years, China’s shipyards 

have delivered 13 Song class SS units (Type 039) and 17 Yuan class diesel -electric air -independent -

powered attac k submarine (SSP) (Type 039A/B). The PRC is expected to produce a total of 25 or 

more Yuan class submarines by 2025. 

Over the past 15 years, the PLAN has constructed twelve nuclear submarines – two Shang I class 

SSNs (Type 093), four Shang II class SSNs (T ype 093A), and six Jin class SSBNs (Type 094), two of 

which were awaiting entry into service in late 2019. Equipped with the CSS -N-14 (JL -2) submarine -

launched ballistic missile (SLBM), the PLAN’s four operational Jin class SSBNs represent the PRC’s 

first credible sea -based nuclear deterrent. Each Jin class SSBN can carry up to 12 JL -2 SLBMs. In 

2019, these missiles were displayed at the PRC’s 70 th anniversary parade revealing at least a full 

complement of 12 JL -2s are complete and operational. China’s next -generation Type 096 SSBN, which 

will likely begin construction in the early -2020s, will reportedly carry a new type of SLBM. The PLAN 

is expected to operate the Type 094 and Type 096 SSBNs concurrently and could have up to eight 

SSBNs by 2030. This would align with Chairman Xi Jinping’s 2018 directive for the SSBN force to 

achieve “stronger growth.” 

By the mid -2020s, China will likely build the Type 093B guided -missile nuclear attack submarine. This 

new Shang class variant will enhance the PLAN’s anti -surf ace warfare capability and could provide a 

clandestine land -attack option if equipped with land -attack cruise missiles (LACMs). The PLAN is 

also improving its anti -submarine warfare capabilities through the development of its surface 

combatants and special mission aircraft, but it continues to lack a robust deep -water anti -

submarine warfare ( ASW) capability. 

Surface Combatants . The PLAN remains engaged in a robust shipbuilding program for surface 

combatants, producing new guided -missile cruisers (CGs), gui ded -missile destroyers (DDGs) and OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

46 

corvettes (FFLs). These assets will significantly upgrade the PLAN’s air defense, anti -ship, and anti -

submarine capabilities and will be critical as the PLAN expands its operations beyond the range of the 

PLA’s shore -based air defense systems. In December 2019, China launched the sixth Renhai class 

cruiser (Type 055) and was set to commission the first hull of the class in early 2020. The Renhai carry 

a large load out of weapons including ASCMs, surface -to -air missiles (SA Ms), and anti -submarine 

weapons along with likely LACMs and anti -ship ballistic missiles (ASBMs) when those become 

operational. By the end of 2019, the PRC had launched 23 Luyang III DDGs —including 10 

lengthened Luyang III MODs —with 13 of the 23 Luyang III DDGs operational with the PLAN. 

Both the standard Luyang III and the Luyang III MOD have a 64 -cell multipurpose vertical launch 

system capable of launching cruise missiles, SAMs, and anti -submarine missiles. In 2019, the PLAN 

commissioned its 30 th Jiangka i II class guided -missile frigate (FFG), likely completing the production 

run while it finalizes a follow -on class. The PLAN is augmenting its littoral warfare capabilities, 

especially for operations in the East and South China Seas, with high -rate product ion of the Jiangdao 

class FFLs (Type 056). By the end of 2019, more than 42 Jiangdao class FFLs had entered service out 

of an expected production run of at least 70 ships. The latest FFLs are anti -submarine warfare (ASW) 

variants with a towed -array sonar. The PRC has also built 60 Houbei class wave -piercing catamaran 

guided -missile patrol boats (Type 022) for operations in China’s “near seas.” 

The PLAN continues to emphasize anti -surface warfare capabilities in its force development. The 

PLAN’s frigates and FFLs, as well as modernized older combatants, carry variants of the YJ -83/YJ -

83J ASCM (97 nm, 180 km), while newer surface combatants such as the Luyang II class DDGs are 

fitted with the YJ -62 (215 nm, 400 km). The Luyang III class DDGs and the Renhai cla ss CGs will be 

fitted with a variant of China’s newest ASCM, the YJ -18A (290 nm, 537 km). A few modernized 

destroyers have been retrofitted with the supersonic YJ -12A ASCM (250 nm, 285 km). Eight of the 

PLAN’s 12 Kilo class SSs are equipped with the Russia n-built SS -N-27 ASCM (120 -nm, 222 -km). The 

PRC’s Song class SS, Yuan class SSP, and Shang class SSN will field the PLAN’s newest domestic 

submarine -launched YJ -18 and its variants, which constitute an improvement over the SS -N-27 ASCM. 

The PLAN recognizes that long -range ASCMs require a robust, over -the -horizon (OTH) targeting 

capability to realize their full potential. To fill this capability gap, China is investing in reconnaissance, 

surveillance, command, control, and communications systems at the strate gic, operational, and tactical 

levels to provide high -fidelity targeting information to surface and subsurface launch platforms. 

As the PLAN continues to transition into a global multi -mission force, the addition of land -attack 

capabilities to its modern a rray of anti -surface and anti -air capabilities is a logical next step. In the 

coming years, the PLAN will probably field LACMs on its newer cruisers and destroyers and 

developmental Type 093B nuclear attack submarines. The PLAN could also retrofit its olde r surface OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

47 

combatants and submarines with land -attack capabilities as well. The addition of land -attack 

capabilities to the PLAN’s surface combatants and submarines would provide the PLA with flexible 

long -range strike options. This would allow the PRC to h old land targets at risk beyond the Indo -

Pacific region. 

Amphibious Warfare Ships . China’s investment in LHAs signal its intent to continue to develop its 

expeditionary warfare capabilities. In 2019, China launched its first Yushen class LHA (Type 075) and 

a second Yushen class LHA is under construction with additional hulls expected during the 2020s. 

The Yushen class are highly capable large -deck amphibious ships that will provide the PLAN with an 

all -aspect expeditionary capability. The Yushen class can c arry a large number of landing craft, troops, 

armored vehicles, and helicopters. In addition, the PLAN has seven large Yuzhao class amphibious 

transport docks (LPDs) (Type 071), with an eighth ship expected to commission in 2020. The Yuzhao 

class LPDs and Yushen class LHAs provide the PLA with greater capacity, endurance, and more 

flexibility for long -range operations than the PLAN’s older landing ships, which it has reduced in 

number over the last decade with obsolete units being decommissioned. The Yushen and Yuzhao can 

each carry several of the new Yuyi class air -cushion medium landing craft and a variety of helicopters, 

as well as tanks, armored vehicles and PLAN marines for long -distance deployments. 

Aircraft Carriers . In December 2019, the PRC commissi oned its first domestically built aircraft 

carrier, Shandong , which launched in 2017 and completed multiple sea trials during 2018 -2019. The 

new carrier is a modified version of the Liaoning (Soviet Kuznetsov) design and likewise uses a ski -

jump takeoff me thod for its aircraft. China continued work on its second domestically built aircraft 

carrier in 2019, which will be larger and fitted with a catapult launch system. This design will enable it 

to support additional fighter aircraft, fixed -wing early -warnin g aircraft, and more rapid flight 

operations and thus extend the reach and effectiveness of its carrier based strike aircraft. The PRC’s 

second domestically built carrier is projected to be operational by 2024, with additional carriers to 

follow. 

Auxiliary Ships . The PLAN continues to build a large number of seagoing auxiliary and support 

ships, including intelligence collection ships (AGIs), ocean surveillance ships (AGOSs), fleet 

replenishment oilers (AORs), hospital ships, submarine salvage and rescue sh ips, and various other 

specialized units. Additionally, China’s first domestically built polar icebreaker, Xuelong 2, became 

operational in 2019. It is not operated by the PLAN, but rather by the Polar Research Institute of the 

State Oceanic Administration .

PLA Navy Marine Corps . As the PLAN’s land combat arm, the PLA Navy Marine Corps (PLANMC) 

continues to complete its expansion and focus on expeditionary operations. The PLANMC previously OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

48 

consisted of two brigades (approximately 10,000 personnel) and was l imited in geography and mission 

to amphibious assault and defense of South China Sea outposts. In 2019, the PLANMC continued to 

mature an enlarged force structure of eight brigades intended to be scalable and mobile, modernize its 

capabilities for joint ex peditionary operations —including operations beyond the First Island Chain —

and become more proficient in conventional and irregular warfare. The PLANMC continues to work 

towards fully equipping its four newly established maneuver brigades (in addition to it s two previously 

existing brigades), a SOF brigade, and an aviation (helicopter) brigade. Overall, the PLANMC’s reform 

and modernization has proven slower than expected given the CMC’s milestone for the PLA to 

“generally achieve mechanization” by the end o f 2020 ahead of the CCP’s centenary in 2021. 

The PLANMC’s roles and missions principally include defending PLA bases in mainland China, the 

South China Sea and abroad, conducting amphibious operations to seize and defend small reef and 

island outposts, and conducting non -war military activities (NWMA). Although the PLANMC has 

traditionally focused on its task to assault and defense of small islands in the South China Sea, more 

recently its focus has grown to include expeditionary operations beyond the First Island Chain. The 

PLANMC’s roles under NWMA support the PRC’s efforts to protect its overseas interests including 

resources, infrastructure, and citizens abroad. 

The PLANMC maintains a presence at the PRC’s first overseas military base in Djibouti that ex tends 

Beijing’s military reach and strategic influence in Africa and the Middle East. The PLANMC’s presence 

in Djibouti provides the PRC with the ability to support a military response to contingencies affecting 

China’s investments and infrastructure in th e region and the approximately 1 million PRC citizens in 

Africa and 500,000 in the Middle East. The PLANMC presence in Djibouti also embarks a contingent 

of marines with the PLAN’s Gulf of Aden counterpiracy -focused naval escort task force that supports 

Ch ina’s trade interests. Additionally, the PLANMC supports the PRC’s military diplomacy. For 

example, it has trained with Russian and Thai forces and participated in exchanges with the United 

States and Australia. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEF ENSE 

Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 

49 OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEF ENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

50 

PEOPLE’S LIBERATION ARMY AIR FORCE (PLAA F) AND PLAN AVIATION 

Key Takeaways  

> >

The PLAAF and PLAN Aviation together constitute the largest aviation force in the Indo -Pacific 

region.  

> >

The PLAAF is rapidly catching up to Western air forces. The PLAAF continues to modernize 

with the delivery of domestic ally built aircraft and a wide range of UAVs.  

> >

In October 2019, China signaled the return of the airborne leg of its nuclear triad after the PLAAF 

publicly revealed the H -6N as its first nuclear -capable air -to -air refuelable bomber. 

The People’s Liberation Army Air Force (PLAAF) and PLAN Aviation together constitute the largest 

aviation forces in the region and the third largest in the world, with over 2,500 total aircraft (not 

including trainer variants or UAVs) of which approximately 2,000 are combat airc raft (including 

fighters, strategic bombers, tactical bombers, multi -mission tactical, and attack aircraft). The PLAAF’s 

role is to serve as a comprehensive strategic air force capable of long -range airpower projection. The 

PRC’s 2019 defense white paper d escribed the PLAAF’s missions and tasks as transitioning from 

territorial air defense to “offensive and defensive operations.” In 2017, Lieutenant General Ding 

Laihang assumed the post of PLAAF commander and exhorted the service to build a truly “strategic ”

air force capable of projecting airpower at a long range. The PLAAF is rapidly catching up to Western 

air forces. This trend is gradually eroding longstanding and significant U.S. military technical 

advantages vis -à-vis the PRC in the air domain. 

The CMC ’s intent is to transform the PLAAF into a more effective and capable force that is proficient 

at conducting joint operations. The PLAAF is comprised of aviation, airborne, air defense, radar, 

electronic countermeasure, and communications forces. Amid the wide -ranging reorganization of the 

PLA, the PLAAF has reorganized into five Theater Command Air Forces, established at least six new 

air bases, and restructured previously subordinate regiments into brigades under the new bases by 

disbanding its fighter an d fighter -bomber divisions. 

Fighters . The PLAAF and PLAN Aviation continue to field greater numbers of fourth -generation 

aircraft (now more than 800 of 1,500 total operational fighters, not including trainers) and probably 

will become a majority fourth -gen eration force within the next several years. For fifth -generation 

fighters, the PLAAF operationally fielded limited numbers of its new J -20, while development 

continues on the smaller FC -31/J -31 for export or as a future naval fighter for the PLAN’s next c lass 

of aircraft carriers. During the PRC’s 70th anniversary parade in October 2019, the PLAAF conducted OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

51 

high -profile flyovers of its J -20, and J -16 and J -10C advanced fourth -generation fighters armed with 

the latest air -to -air missiles (AAMs). In addition , the PRC has received delivery of all 24 Su -35 

advanced fourth -generation fighters it purchased from Russia in 2016. Finally, the PLAAF is preparing 

upgrades for the J -20, which may include increasing the number of AAMs the fighter can carry in its 

low -ob servable configuration, installing thrust -vectoring engine nozzles, and adding super cruise 

capability by installing higher -thrust indigenous WS -15 engines. 

Bombers . China’s bomber force is composed of H -6 Badger variants, which are domestically 

produced v ersions of the Soviet Tupolev Tu -16 (Badger) bomber. Despite the relative age of its 

bomber force, China has worked to maintain and enhance the operational effectiveness of these 

aircraft. In recent years, China has fielded greater numbers of the H -6K, a m odernized H -6 variant 

that integrates standoff weapons and features more -efficient turbofan engines for extended -range. 

The H -6K can carry six LACMs, giving the PLA a long -range standoff precision strike capability that 

can range Guam from home airfields i n mainland China. PLAN Aviation has traditionally fielded the 

H-6G to support maritime missions. More recently, PLAN Aviation has begun operating the H -6J, a 

maritime strike version of the H -6K with six weapons pylons for ASCMs. This aircraft carries six 

supersonic long -range YJ -12 ASCMs and can attack warships out to the Second Island Chain –

significantly extending PLAN Aviation’s reach. During the PRC’s 70 th anniversary parade in 2019, the 

PLAAF publicly revealed the H -6N, a derivative of the H -6K optimi zed for long -range strikes. The 

H-6N features a modified fuselage that allows it to carry externally either a drone or an air -launched 

ballistic missile (ALBM) that may be nuclear capable. The H -6N’s air -to -air refueling capability also 

provides it greater reach over other H -6 variants that are not refuelable in air. In addition, the PLAAF 

is seeking to extend its power projection capability with the development of a new stealth strategic 

bomber. PLAAF leaders publicly announced the program in 2016, however commentators speculate 

that it may take more than a decade to develop this type of advanced bomber. 

Special Mission Aircraft . In 2019, the PLAAF publicly debuted its new Y -9 communications 

jamming/electronic countermeasures aircraft (known as the GX -11). This aircraft is designed to 

disrupt an adversary’s battlespace awareness at long ranges. The PLA can conduct air -to -air refueling 

operations to extend the ranges of its fighter and bomber aircraft equipped with refueling probes using 

the H -6U, a modified tanker variant of the H -6 bomber, as well as a small number of larger IL -78 

Midas purchased from Ukraine. In addition, China is developing a tanker variant of its Y -20 heavy -lift 

transport, which will enable the PLAAF to expand its tanker fleet and improve the PLAAF’s ability 

to operate beyond the First Island Chain from bases in mainland China. 

Production and deliveries of the KJ -500 —China’s most advanced airborne early warning and control 

(AEW&C) aircraft —continued at a rapid pace, joining earlier KJ -2000 Mainring and KJ -200 Moth OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

52 

variants. These aircraft amplify PLAAF’s ability to detect, track, and target threats in varying 

conditions, in larger volumes, and at greater distances. These aircraft also help to extend the range of 

the PRC’s integrated air def ense system (IADS) network. Furthermore, China has produced at least 

one KJ -500 with an aerial refueling probe, which will improve the aircraft’s ability to provide persistent 

AEW&C coverage. 

China’s aviation industry continues to advance with deliveries o f its domestic Y -20 large transport 

aircraft and completion of the world’s largest seaplane, the AG600. Both aircraft made debut 

appearances at the Zhuhai Air Show in November 2016. These new transports will supplement and 

eventually replace China’s small fleet of strategic airlift assets, which to date, consists of a limited 

number of Russian -made IL -76 aircraft. These large transports are intended to support airborne C2, 

logistics, paradrop, aerial refueling, and strategic reconnaissance operations as wel l as HA/DR 

missions. 

Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) . The PRC displayed its largest ever suite of UAV aircraft at the 

Zhuhai Air Show in November 2018. In addition to displays of armed -capable reconnaissance UAVs 

such as the Yunying, Caihong CH -4 and CH -5, and Yilong (Wing Loong) series of aircraft, there were 

multiple of displays of low -observable flying -wing aircraft such as the CH -7, Tianying, and Yaoying -

III to complement earlier flying wing UAVs such as the Anjian and Lijian. The Tengden Company 

also d isplayed armed UAVs, such as the TW328, as well as a large dual -engine TW356 transport UAV 

that suspends a large cargo pod between the two large engine nacelles. China has begun deploying its 

Xianglong joined -wing high altitude reconnaissance UAV to airfie lds in Western China and to Hainan 

Island. China is continuing to develop the Shendiao and upgrade the BZK -005 Changying to a larger 

and longer enduring aircraft. During the PRC’s 70 th anniversary parade, the PLA displayed several 

advanced unmanned aerial systems such as the rocket -powered, high -speed Wuzhen -8 and the Gongji -

11 stealth unmanned combat aerial vehicle. 

Air and Missile Defense . The PLAAF possesses one of the largest forces of advanced long -range 

SAM systems in the world, composed of Russian -so urced SA -20 (S -300) battalions and domestically 

produced CSA -9 (HQ -9) battalions. To improve its strategic long -range air defenses, the PRC has 

contracted with Russia to acquire the SA -21 (S -400) SAM system and is developing the CSA -21 (HQ -

9B) as follow -on s to its SA -20s and CSA -9s. The PLAAF conducted its first SA -21 test fires in 

December 2018. The PRC is also developing its indigenous CH -AB -X-02 (HQ -19), which will likely 

have a ballistic missile defense (BMD) capability. China is also developing kinetic -kill vehicle 

technology to field a mid -course interceptor, which will form the upper layer of a multi -tiered missile 

defense. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

53 

Airborne . The PLAAF Airborne Corps comprises up to six airborne combined -arms brigades (to 

include an air assault combined -arms b rigade), a SOF brigade, a service support brigade, and an air 

transport brigade. At least one of the airborne combined -arms brigades is mechanized with air -

droppable tracked ZBD03 infantry fighting vehicles. In 2019, the airborne brigades continued 

integra tion and parachute and heavy drop training, while the air assault brigade emphasized air landing 

operations, rapid force projection, and integration into airborne operations. In summer 2019, elements 

from one of the PLAAF Airborne Corps brigades participat ed in Russia's TSENTR -2019 exercise, 

conducting combined airborne operations including parachute drops and airborne landing operations 

with Russian troops. Additionally, China held a seminar in Beijing focused on airborne integration 

into joint operations and improving airborne training. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEF ENSE 

Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 

54 OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEF ENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

55

PEOPLE'S LIBERATION ARMY ROCKET FORCE (P LARF) 

Key Takeaways  

> >

In 2019, the PLARF advanced long -term modernization plans to enhance its “strategic 

deterrence.”  

> >

In 2019, the PRC launched more ballistic missiles for testing and training than the rest of the world 

combined.  

> >

The PLARF continues to grow its inventories of DF -26 intermediate -range ballistic missiles 

(IRBMs) which is capable of conducting both conventional and nuclear precision strikes against 

ground targets as well as conventional strikes against naval targets . 

> >

The PRC is developing new intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) that will significantly 

improve its nuclear -capable missile forces and will require increased nuclear warhead produ ction, 

partially due to the introduction of multiple independently targetable reentry vehicle (MIRV) 

capabilities.  

> >

The number of warheads on the PRC’s land -based ICBMs capable of threatening the United States 

is expected to grow to roughly 200 in the next five years. 

The PLA Rocket Force (PLARF) organizes, mans, trains, and equips the PRC’s strategic land -based 

nuclear and conventional missile forces and associated support forces and missile bases. The PLARF 

is a critical component of the PRC’s nuclear dete rrence strategy to deter and counter third -party 

intervention in regional conflicts. The PLARF, previously known as the PLA Second Artillery Force, 

was elevated to the status of a full service alongside the PLAA, PLAN, and PLAAF and renamed as 

part of the sweeping PLA reforms initiated in late 2015. According to the PRC’s 2019 defense white 

paper, the PLARF is working towards “enhancing its credible and reliable capabilities of nuclear 

deterrence and counterattack, strengthening intermediate and long -range precision strike forces, and 

enhancing strategic counter -balance capability, so as to build a strong and modernized rocket force.” 

In 2019, the PLARF’s participation in the PRC’s 70 th anniversary military parade was designed to show 

its progress towards go als first publicized by Chairman Xi Jinping in 2016 and 2017 to “achieve a great 

rise in strategic capabilities” and accelerating the PLARF’s pace of development and making enhanced 

“breakthroughs…in strategic deterrence capability.” 

The PLARF fields a var iety of conventional mobile ground -launched short -, medium -, and 

intermediate -range ballistic missiles and ground -launched cruise missiles. The PLARF’s ground -based 

missile forces compliment the air and sea -based precision strike capabilities of the PLAAF and PLAN. 

The PLARF’s conventional missile forces includes the CSS -6 (DF -15) short -range ballistic missile OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

56 

(SRBM) (range 725 -850 km); the CSS -7 (DF -11) SRBM (600 km); the CSS -11 (DF -16) SRBM (more 

than 700 km); land -attack and anti -ship variants of the CSS -5 (DF -21) medium -range ballistic missile 

(MRBM) (approximately 1,500 km); the DF -26 IRBM (approximately 4,000 km); and the CJ -10 (DH -

10) ground -launched cruise missile (GLCM) (approximately 1,500 km). The PLARF’s conventionally 

armed CSS -5 Mod 5 (DF -21D) ASBM variant gives the PLA the capability to conduct long -range 

precision strikes against ships, including aircraft carriers, out to the Western Pacific from mainland 

China. The DF -21D has a range exceeding 1,500 km, is fitted with a maneuverable reentry v ehicle 

(MARV) warhead, and is claimed to be capable of rapidly reloading in the field. The PLARF continues 

to grow its inventories of DF -26 IRBM, which it first revealed in 2015 and fielded in 2016. The multi -

role DF -26 is designed to rapidly swap conventi onal and nuclear warheads and is capable of 

conducting precision strikes in the Western Pacific, the Indian Ocean, and the South China Sea from 

mainland China. 

The PLARF is developing and testing several new variants of theater -range missiles and developin g

capabilities and methods to counter adversary BMD systems. In 2019, the PRC launched more ballistic 

missiles for testing and training than the rest of the world combined. China has placed a heavy 

emphasis on developing and testing hypersonic glide vehicl es. In August 2018, China successfully 

tested the XINGKONG -2 (Starry Sky -2), which it publicly described as a hypersonic waverider 

vehicle. The PLARF also paraded the DF -17 missile for the first time as part of the PRC’s 70 th 

anniversary parade in 2019. 

Th e PLARF is developing ICBMs that will significantly improve its nuclear -capable missile forces with 

more survivable delivery systems and will require increased nuclear warhead production, partially due 

to the introduction of MIRV capabilities. The number o f warheads on land -based PRC ICBMs capable 

of threatening the United States is expected to grow to roughly 200 in the next five years. China’s 

fixed ICBM arsenal consists of 100 ICBMs, including the shorter range CSS -3 (DF -4) as well as the 

silo -based CSS -4 Mod 2 (DF -5A) and MIRV -equipped Mod 3 (DF -5B) which is capable of carrying 

up to five MIRVs. Chinese media suggests a follow -on DF -5C may be in development. The solid -

fueled, road -mobile CSS -10 class missiles complement this force. The CSS -10 Mod 2 (DF -31A), with 

a range in excess of 11,200 km, can reach most locations within the continental United States. Chinese 

media reports suggest a DF -31B might also be in development. Development of the CSS -X-20 (DF -

41), a new MIRV -capable, road -mobile ICBM, continu ed in 2019, and the PRC paraded at least 16 

road -mobile DF -41 launchers during the 2019 parade that Beijing said belonged to two PLARF 

brigades. China appears to be considering additional DF -41 launch options, including rail -mobile and 

silo basing. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEF ENSE 

Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 

57 OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 

Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 

58 OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEF ENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

59 

Conventional Precision Strike 

Short -Range Ballistic Missiles (300 -1,000 km). The PLARF has approximately 200 SRBM 

launchers and over 600 SRBMs. These missile systems include advanced variants with improved 

ranges and accuracy as well as more sophist icated payloads; earlier generations are being phased out 

and replaced by variants with true precision strike capability. 

Medium -Range Ballistic Missiles (1,000 -3,000 km). The PLA fields approximately 150 

conventional MRBMs launchers and more than 150 miss iles which increase the range at which it can 

conduct precision strikes against land targets and naval ships operating out to the First Island Chain. 

Intermediate -Range Ballistic Missiles (3,000 -5,500 km). The PLA’s DF -26 is a road -mobile, 

nuclear and con ventional capable IRBM that is able to conduct near -precision strikes as far away from 

China as Guam in the Second Island Chain. The PLA has fielded approximately 200 IRBM launchers 

and more than 200 missiles. In conjunction with reconnaissance satellites, the PLAN’s expanding 

network of sky wave and surface wave over -the -horizon (OTH) systems provide warning and targeting 

capabilities at extended distances from China to support long -range precision strikes, including 

employment of ASBMs. 

Land -Attack Cruise Missiles. The PLA fields approximately 100 ground -launched LACMs 

launchers and more than 300 missiles for standoff precision strikes. The PLA continues to develop 

additional LACM -variants for deployment with the PLAN and PLAAF. 

Anti -ship Cruise Missiles. China deploys a wide range of advanced ASCMs, with the YJ -83 family 

of missiles the most numerous, and equipping the majority of China’s ships as well as multiple aircraft. 

China has also outfitted several ships with YJ -62 ASCMs. The YJ -18 is a long range, torpedo tube 

launched ASCM with a supersonic terminal sprint. It has likely replaced the older YJ -82 on Song, 

Yuan, and Shang class submarines. China claims its new Luyang III class DDGs and Renhai CGs have 

a vertically launched variant of the YJ -18. Chin a has also developed the long range supersonic YJ -12 

ASCM for the H -6 bomber. At a 2018 exhibition, China displayed a ship -to -ship variant of the YJ -12 

called the YJ -12A and the ground launched anti -ship variant YJ -12B. China has deployed the YJ -12B 

to sev eral outposts in the South China Sea. China carries the Russian SS -N-22 SUNBURN on two 

Russian -built Sovremenny class DDGs. Upgrades to two of the Sovremenny DDGs (Hulls 136 

and 137) allow them to fire the YJ -12A. China also employs the Russian SS -N-27b SI ZZLER on 

eight Russian built Kilo class submarines. 

Ground Attack Munitions. The PLAAF has a small number of tactical air -to -surface missiles (ASMs) 

as well as precision munitions; guidance options include satellite positioning, laser, electro -optic, and OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

60 

imaging infrared. China is developing or adapting a range of smaller ASMs and guided bombs for use 

on its expanding fleet of armed UAVs. 

Anti -Radiation Weapons. The PLA imported Israeli -made Harpy UAVs and Russian -made anti -

radiation missiles during the 19 90s. China is integrating the YJ -91, an indigenous version of the 

Russian Kh -31P (AS -17), into its fighter -bomber force and advertising the ASN -301 anti -radiation 

drone, an improved domestic variant of the Harpy. 

Artillery -Delivered High Precision Munition s. The PLA is fielding long -range rocket artillery 

systems with the range to strike targets within or even across the Taiwan Strait. The most common of 

these systems is the PHL -03 12x300 mm multiple -rocket launcher – similar to the Russian 9A52 -2

Anti -Rad iation Weapons. The PLA imported Israeli -made HARPY UAVs and Russian -made anti -

radiation missiles during the 1990s. China is integrating the YJ -91, an indigenous version of the Russian 

Kh -31P (AS -17), into its fighter -bomber force and advertising the ASN -301 anti -radiation drone, an 

improved domestic variant of the HARPY. 

Artillery -Delivered High Precision Munitions. The PLA is fielding long -range rocket artillery 

systems with the range to strike targets within or even across the Taiwan Strait. The most com mon of 

these systems is the PHL -03 12x300 mm multiple -rocket launcher – similar to the Russian 9A52 -2

SMERCH – with a 150 km range. Improved warheads for these rockets may include vertical 

penetrators and sensor -fuzed munitions. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEF ENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

61 

STRATEGIC SUPPORT FO RCE (SSF) 

Key Takeaways  

> >

The PLA Strategic Support Forces (SSF) is a theater command -level organization established to 

centralize the PLA’s strategic space, cyber, electronic, and psychological warfare missions and 

capabilities.  

> >

The SSF’s Network Systems Dep artment is responsible for information warfare with a mission 

set that includes cyberwarfare, technical reconnaissance, electronic warfare, and psychological 

warfare. Its current major target is the United States.  

> >

The PRC’s 2019 defense white paper describ ed space as a “critical domain in international strategic 

competition” and stated the security of space provided strategic assurance to the country’s national 

and social development.  

> >

The PRC’s space enterprise continues to mature rapidly. Beijing has devot ed significant resources 

to growing all aspects of its space program, from military space applications to civil applications 

such as profit -generating launches, scientific endeavors, and space exploration. 

As part of its efforts to restructure the PLA for modern warfare, the CMC established the PLA 

Strategic Support Force (SSF) in 2016 as a theater command -level organization to centralize the PLA’s 

strategic space, cyber, electronic, and psychological warfare missions and capabilities. The SSF’s 

creation hi ghlights the PRC’s understanding of information as a strategic resource in modern warfare. 

Among the impetuses for the SSF’s establishment was the PLA's apparent concern about the disparity 

between its cyber capabilities and those of the United States and the view of China’s leaders that 

achieving information dominance and denying adversaries the use of the electromagnetic spectrum is 

necessary to seize and maintain the strategic initiative in a conflict. The SSF was formed from 

organizations formerly subo rdinate to the PLA services and the CMC’s General Staff Department 

(GSD) with the goal of creating operational synergies between formerly disparate information warfare 

capabilities to enable the information dominance that the PRC views will be decisive in future wars. 

The SSF reports directly to the CMC and supports the entire PLA with its capabilities. The PRC’s 

2019 defense white paper described the SSF’s modernization goals as “seeking to achieve big 

development strides in key areas and accelerate the in tegrated development of new -type combat forces, 

so as to build a strong and modernized strategic support force.” 

The SSF oversees two deputy theater command -level departments: the Space Systems Department 

responsible for military space operations, and the Network Systems Department responsible for OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

62 

information operations (IO), which includes EW, cyber warfare, and psychological operations. At the 

headquarters level, the SSF has a four -department administrative structure that includes the Staff, 

Equipment, Po litical Work, and Logistics Departments. As a strategic organization, the SSF reports 

directly to the CMC and not to the theater commands. Through its Space Systems Department and 

Network Systems Department, the SSF provides information support derived fro m space -based and 

cyber -based means to all PLA services and the five theater commands. The SFF may be the PRC’s 

first step in the development of a cyber force by centralizing the PLA’s previously disparate cyber 

reconnaissance, cyberattack, and cyber defen se capabilities and units into one organization. 

In March 2019, General Li Fengbiao replaced General Gao Jin as the SSF commander. Lt. Gen. Shang 

Hong and Lt. Gen Ju Qiansheng are the commanders of the Space Systems and Network Systems 

Departments, respect ively. Throughout 2019, the SSF participated in joint exercises and training 

throughout China, including a possible high -level and large -scale joint exercise in the waters and 

airspace off China’s southeastern coast. During 2019, SSF units also exercised e stablishing command 

posts and provided joint communications training to the theater commands. 

Network Systems Department . The SSF Network Systems Department is responsible for 

information warfare with a mission set that includes cyberwarfare, technical rec onnaissance, EW, and 

psychological warfare. By placing these missions under the same organizational umbrella, the Party 

seeks to remedy the operational coordination challenges that hindered information sharing under the 

PLA’s pre -reform organizational stru cture. The integration of cyber and EW elements under one 

organization is a crucial step towards realizing the operational concept of integrated network and 

electronic warfare that the PLA has envisioned since the early 2000s. The Network Systems 

Departmen t operates five theater designated technical reconnaissance bases, most of the former GSD 

Third Department’s (3PLA’s) numbered bureaus, the former GSD 56th, 57th, and 58th Research 

Institutes, and elements of the GSD Fourth Department (4PLA). The Network S ystems Department’s 

current major target is the United States. The Network Systems Department also provides intelligence 

support to the theater commands’ regional focuses. 

> >

The SFF and the “Three Warfares” Concept : The former General Political Department’s 311 

Base, which now falls under the SFF Network Systems Department, performs missions and tasks 

associated with the PLA’s concept of “Three Warfares” which comprises psychological warfare, 

public opinion warfare, and legal warfare. This base is the only pu blicly known organization in the 

PLA that performs psychological warfare operations. The PLA’s psychological warfare mission is 

to shape international public narratives, weaken the enemy’s will, shape diplomatic and political 

narratives, and advance the PR C’s interests through all phases of conflict. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

63 

Space Systems Department . The SSF Space Systems Department is responsible for nearly all PLA 

space operations, including: space launch and support; space surveillance; space information support; 

space telemetr y, tracking, and control; and space warfare. The Space Systems Department seeks to 

resolve the bureaucratic struggles that existed over the PLA space mission, as elements of the mission 

were previously dispersed across several national and service -subordin ate organizations. The PRC 

officially designated space as a new domain of warfare in its 2015 defense white paper, and expects 

space to play an important role in future conflicts by enabling long -range precision strikes and in 

denying other militaries the use of overhead command, control, communications, computers, 

intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (C4ISR) systems. The Space System Department 

operates at least eight bases, including those whose core missions are the launch, tracking R&D, and 

op eration of the satellites vital to China’s overhead C4ISR architecture. The SSF runs tracking, 

telemetry, and command stations in Namibia, Pakistan, and Argentina. The SSF also has a handful of 

Yuan Wang space support ships to track satellite and intercont inental ballistic missile (ICBM) launches. 

SSF Research and Development . The SSF operates several subordinate academic and research 

institutions including the Information Engineering University, Space Engineering University, and the 

former GSD 56th and 57t h Research Institutes. These institutions offer programs in space based 

surveillance, intelligence, weapon launch and early warning, communications and information 

engineering, cryptology, big data, and information attack and defense technology. 

Space and Counterspace Capabilities . The PRC’s space enterprise continues to mature rapidly. 

Beijing has devoted significant economic and political resources to growing all aspects of its space 

program, from military space applications to civil applications such as profit -generating launches, 

scientific endeavors, and space exploration. The PRC’s space enterprise not only includes the SSF but 

also encompasses other military, government, and civilian organizations, including state -owned 

enterprises, academic instituti ons, and commercial entities. The PLA has historically managed the 

PRC’s space program and the SSF Space Systems Department is responsible for nearly all PLA space 

operations. The PRC continues to strengthen its military space capabilities, despite its pub lic stance 

against the weaponization of space. The PLA continues to invest in improving its capabilities in space -

based intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR), satellite communication, satellite navigation, 

and meteorology, as well as human s paceflight and robotic space exploration. China plans to have a 

permanently operating space station by 2022 that will host its own and foreign payloads and 

astronauts. China has built an expansive ground support infrastructure to support its growing on -orb it 

fleet and related functions including spacecraft and space launch vehicle (SLV) manufacture, launch, 

C2, and data downlink. Additionally, the PRC continues to develop counterspace capabilities —OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

64 

including direct ascent, co -orbital, electronic warfare, and directed energy capabilities —that can 

contest or deny an adversary’s access to and operations in the space domain during a crisis or conflict. 

In 2019, China launched 34 SLVs (of which 32 were successful) that placed more than 70 spacecraft 

into orbit inc luding navigation, ISR, and test/engineering satellites, as well as satellites for foreign 

customers. Key developments in 2019 include:  

> >

Advancing Space Launch and Access to Space. In 2019, the PRC continued to develop its space launch 

capabilities, providi ng cost -savings through efficiency and reliability, extending their reach into 

multiple Earth orbits, and improving their capability to rapidly reconstitute space capabilities in 

low Earth orbit. In December 2019, China launched the Long March -5 (LM -5) hea vy lift vehicle 

as part of its return to flight. China plans to use this launch vehicle for lunar and interplanetary 

exploration missions in 2020 and use a variant, the LM -5B, to launch the core module of its space 

station for completion and use by 2022. I n June 2019, China performed its first seaborne launch 

using its LM -11 solid -propellant vehicle. China also successfully launched an updated LM -2C with 

grid fins on its core stage in July 2019, providing greater landing precision of rocket debris and 

lower ing the risk of collateral damage when falling over China. Additionally, two new launch 

vehicles were successful in their maiden flights: Hyperbola -1—built by the private firm iSpace —

and Smart Dragon -1—built by ChinaRocket, a subsidiary of China Academy of Launch Vehicle 

Technology. LinkSpace, another private firm, completed suborbital tests of reusable rocket 

technology for its future NewLine -1 reusable launch vehicle, which is expected in 2021. Finally, 

state -owned commercial company Expace conducted two orbital missions using Kuaizhou -1A 

light -lift vehicles from the Taiyuan Satellite Launch Center within six hours of one another.  

> >

Strengthening Satellite Navigation: Augmenting its regional BeiDou -2 satellite navigation system, the 

PRC moved closer to achie ving global service capabilities through its BeiDou -3 constellation with 

the launching of nine additional BeiDou -3 satellites in 2019. China also launched one BeiDou -2

satellite in 2019 bringing the combined total of operational BeiDou -2 and BeiDou -3 satel lites to 

44. By mid -2020, China plans for the BeiDou -3 worldwide constellation to be at full operating 

capability with 30 satellites, providing mass communication capabilities to its users and additional 

command and control for the PLA, reducing or removin g China’s dependence on U.S. GPS. New 

BeiDou satellites are equipped with radiofrequency inter -satellite links, new atomic clocks, and 

other advanced technologies. Additionally, China plans to offer satellite -based augmentation 

services, a worldwide short message service, and internationally recognized search and rescue 

capabilities. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

65  

> >

Continuing Lunar Exploration: In January 2019, China became the first country to soft land a probe 

on the far side of the Moon with its Chang’e -4 lunar lander. Shortly after re aching the surface, the 

lander deployed China’s second lunar rover, Yutu -2. In May, Yutu -2 completed its primary 

objective of characterizing materials from the Moon’s largest far side crater. Building on these 

missions, China plans to conduct a lunar sampl e return mission in the late 2020s, construct a lunar 

research station around 2025, and establish a crewed lunar research and development base around 

2050.  

> >

Enhancing Data Relay: China launched the first of its second -generation Tianlian -2 data relay 

satell ites in March. Once complete, the Tianlian -2 satellite will reportedly provide faster data 

transmission and greater connectivity between ground control stations and spacecraft in low Earth 

orbit. China could also use the Tianlian -2 satellite constellation to maintain communications with 

future human spaceflight missions, including its planned space station. 

The PLA continues to acquire and develop a range of counterspace capabilities and related 

technologies, including kinetic -kill missiles, ground -based la sers, and orbiting space robots, as well as 

expanding space surveillance capabilities, which can monitor objects in space within their field of view 

and enable counterspace actions. As of May 2018, the PRC’s reconnaissance and remote sensing fleet 

consist ed of more than 120 satellites designed to collect data for civil, commercial, or military owners 

and operators. Reportedly, the PLA owns and operates approximately half of these systems, most of 

which could support situational awareness of regional rivals and potential flashpoints, while 

monitoring, tracking, and targeting an adversary’s forces. In concert with its marked improvements in 

satellite navigation, launch capabilities, and space object surveillance and identification, the PRC is 

developing elect ronic warfare capabilities such as satellite jammers; offensive cyber capabilities; and 

directed -energy weapons. Moreover, China has demonstrated sophisticated, potentially damaging on -

orbit behavior with space -based technologies. China has an operational ground -based Anti -Satellite 

(ASAT) missile intended to target low -Earth orbit satellites, and China probably intends to pursue 

additional ASAT weapons capable of destroying satellites up to geosynchronous Earth orbit . China is 

employing more sophisticated satellite operations and is probably testing dual -use technologies in 

space that could be applied to counterspace missions. 

Although the PRC has not publicly acknowledged the existence of any new programs since it 

confirmed it used an ASAT missile to dest roy a weather satellite in 2007, the PLA’s defense academics 

often publish on counterspace threat technologies. These scholars stress the necessity of “destroying, 

damaging, and interfering with the enemy’s reconnaissance...and communications satellites,” 

suggesting that such systems, as well as navigation and early warning satellites, could be among the 

targets of attacks designed to “blind and deafen the enemy.” OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

66 

JOINT LOGISTIC SUPPO RT FORCE (JLSF) 

Key Takeaways  

> >

The JLSF is establishing support relations hips between joint logistic units and other PLA service 

logistics elements and integrating civilian logistics into military operations.  

> >

The PLA leverages a variety of means and arrangements to use civilian transport resources to 

move military personnel an d equipment more rapidly. 

The PLA Joint Logistic Support Force (JLSF) provides integrated joint logistics support for the PLA. 

Established in 2016, the JLSF intends to be the “backbone” of the PLA’s logistics system. The JLSF’s 

development is central to th e PRC’s efforts to build a joint, lean and efficient “combat -oriented 

modern logistics system,” which Beijing views as essential for modern warfare. The JLSF works to 

streamline the PLA’s joint strategic - and campaign -level logistics by overseeing theater -wide supply 

operations, establishing and coordinating support relationships among the PLA services’ logistics 

elements, conducting joint logistics exercises with the PLA services, and integrating civilian logistics 

resources into military operations. In 20 19, the JLSF conducted exercises of various size, scope, and 

complexity that aimed to improve the PLA’s ability to conduct joint operations. In 2019, the JLSF 

troops made their first public debut at the PRC’s 70 th anniversary parade and the First Party Con gress 

of the JLSF defined its development plans for the next five years. According to the PRC’s 2019 defense 

white paper, the JLSF is “being integrated into the joint operations system to enhance the capabilities 

of integrated joint logistics, so as to bui ld a strong and modernized joint logistic support force.” 

Headquartered at the Wuhan Joint Logistics Support Base, the JLSF has force elements for inventory 

and warehousing, medical services, transport, force projection, oil pipelines, engineering and 

con struction management, reserve equipment, and procurement support. The JLSF provides the PLA 

with joint strategic - and campaign -level logistics, enabling the PLA to conduct large -scale operations. 

The JLSF has five subordinate Joint Logistics Service Center s (JLSCs) aligned with the five theater 

commands that are intend to streamline the PLA’s logistics support. During peacetime, the JLSF 

controls the JLSCs’ operations and activities; during wartime, each theater command assumes control 

of their designated J LSC. 

In 2019, the JLSF focused on increasing mobile support speed and exploring new joint training and 

support opportunities. In the Northern Theater Command, a Shenyang JLSC -subordinate logistic 

support brigade rapidly delivered fuel and other needed supp lies to forward -deployed PLAA elements 

during a field exercise. A field hospital based in the Eastern Theater Command conducted a cross -OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

67 

theater, long -distance mobility exercise to a medical training base in Xi’an, located in the Central 

Theater Command, su pported by the PLAAF Military Medical University. 

The PLA leverages a variety of means and arrangements to use civilian transport resources to move 

military personnel and equipment more rapidly. In 2019, the JLSF routinely integrated civilian logistics 

res ources and equipment into military operations and exercises. During a 2019 exercise, Zhengzhou 

JLSC in the Central Theater Command employed civil air transport to move military personnel and 

equipment more rapidly, reducing its reliance on rail transport. Also in 2019, the Shenyang JLSC 

coordinated the movement of soldiers and equipment across Bohai Bay using a civilian roll -on/roll -

off ship. JOINT LOGISTIC FORCE 2018B, a Central Theater Command exercise held in late 2018, 

featured 37 joint military and civ ilian teams from five provinces and two municipalities operating 

together to set up refueling stations, medical service centers, maintenance centers, and catering 

services. This PLA Zhengzhou JLSC organized exercise was a joint service support exercise tha t

featured civilian -military logistics integration and PLAAF participation. 

MILITARY READINESS 

Key Takeaways  

> >

In recent years, the CMC has directed the PLA to improve its combat readiness. This guidance is 

increasingly evident in the intensity of the PLA’s training and the complexity and scale of its 

exercises.  

> >

The PLA is training to “fight and win” through increasingly realistic combat training that uses 

dedicated “blue force” opponents and other elements to improve realism.  

> >

In 2019, the PLA conducted a na tion -wide exercise across all five -theater commands that included 

all four services, the SSF, and the JLSF. 

In recent years, the CMC has directed the PLA to improve its combat readiness. This guidance is 

increasingly evident in the intensity of the PLA’s t raining and the complexity and scale of its exercises. 

In 2019, the PLA continued to focus its annual training cycle on building readiness through 

increasingly larger -scale and complex joint exercises, service -level exercises, numerous mission -

oriented for ce -on -force exercises, live -fire exercises, and skills -based competition exercises. Notable 

is the PLA’s focus on increasingly realistic combat training using dedicated “blue force” opponents to 

improve realism, training simulation technology, and enacting efforts to strengthen and evaluate 

commanders’ ability to conduct joint operations. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

68 

In 2019, the PLA conducted a nation -wide exercise across all five -theater commands that included all 

four services, the SSF, and the JLSF. Led by the CMC’s Joint Operation al Command Center, the 

exercises sought to test joint coordinated operations of all five military commands and took place at 

multiple locations near Taiwan. The exercise could have been simulating a Taiwan or a Senkaku 

contingency. 

In 2019, the PLAA conduc ted training and evaluations of nearly 200 corps -grade commanders, 

building upon the testing of the 13 group army commanders in 2018. The PLAA conducted the annual 

STRIDE and FIREPOWER exercises in 2019 across multiple theaters with elements of combined -

ar ms brigades represented conducting confrontation drills against dedicated opposing forces. The 

PLAA conducted its annual STRIDE exercise in multiple iterations and focused on evaluating 

offensive and defense combat capabilities of heavy combined -arms briga des. FIREPOWER 

continued the series’ focus on artillery skills during opposing forces operations, with 2019 iteration 

notably including elements of an artillery brigade from the PLA Tibet Military District. 

As part of its wider series of Ingenious Soldier -2019 exercises, the PLAA also conducted a cyber -

simulation exercise, Ingenious Cyber -Electromagnetic Soldier -2019 with approximately 200 troops at 

a Central Theater Command training base. The exercise indicates the emphasis the PLA has on 

electronic counte rmeasures as an operational force in winning wars under informatized conditions. 

The PLAN conducted significant training events throughout 2019 and marked the PLAN’s 70 th 

anniversary in April 2019 with an international fleet review and naval parade in Qing dao and in the 

Yellow Sea. The PLAN displayed more than 32 warships, including the lead ship of its new Renhai 

class guided missile destroyers, its first aircraft carrier —the Liaoning —submarines, destroyers, and 

fighter jets. Nearly 20 foreign vessels from approximately a dozen countries including Russia took part 

in the review. The PRC probably sought to leverage the fleet review to portray its navy as dedicated 

to building a maritime community with a shared future by enhancing cooperation, though particip ating 

navies’ receptivity was uneven. The PLANMC participated in a maritime amphibious assault exercise 

this year off China’s southeastern coast. The exercise incorporated PLANMC amphibious armored 

vehicles and probably tested incorporating the PLANMC in j oint operations. 

The PLAAF continues to bolster its readiness and competencies through four key annual training 

exercises and competitions: RED SWORD, BLUE SHIELD, GOLDEN DART, and GOLDEN 

HELMET. The primary focus of these activities is to prepare for comb at under by training under 

realistic conditions that introduce uncertainty, such as a complex electromagnetic environment. In 

2019, the PLAAF continued its service -level RED SWORD exercise with the focus on systems -on -

systems confrontation. RED SWORD also incorporated the live -fire of air defense systems operating OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

69 

in a degraded electromagnetic environment. The GOLDEN DART exercise incorporated assault 

fighter and bomber tactical drills on a mockup of an integrated air defense system, which included 

blue for ce ground -to -air missiles and surveillance radars. The PLAAF also continues to deploy 

advanced combat aircraft to train in bilateral and multilateral exercises. In 2019, the PLAAF sent two 

H-6K bombers to participate in Russia’s TSENTR exercise. 

The PLARF continued its annual HEAVEN’S SWORD series of exercises in 2019 to focus on 

preparations for realistic combat training for commanders and troops and to enhance the high state 

of readiness for combat forces. In 2019, the exercise featured the nighttime tran sfer of missiles, 

moving to different launch positions, and a “blue force” confrontation drill. 

The SSF conducted a field command post exercise in July 2019 to test troops’ familiarity with 

equipment and refine battlefield communications capabilities in co mplex terrain environments. In 

2019, field hospital teams from JLSF and PLAA hospitals participated in Medical Logistics Forces 

2019A and 2019B cross -theater base rotation exercises. In the exercise series, field medical teams 

practiced maneuvering to medi cal training bases, overseen by PLAA and PLAAF military medical 

universities. Each iteration was the first time the participating medical teams conducted a cross -theater 

mobilization to exercise field medical support capabilities. 

INCREASING INTEROPER ABIL ITY WITH PARAMILITAR Y AND MILITIA 

Key Takeaway  

> >

Interoperability and integration between the PLA and the PRC’s paramilitary forces continues to 

grow in scale and sophistication, including the coordination between the PLAN, the CCG, and 

the People’s Armed Fo rces Maritime Militia (PAFMM). 

People’s Armed Police (PAP). The PAP is a paramilitary police component of the PRC’s armed 

forces and an armed wing of the CCP. Its primary missions include internal security, maritime security, 

and assisting the PLA in times of war. In early 2018, the CMC assumed direct control of the PAP after 

the CCP ended the previous CMC -State Council dual -command system. As part of this reform, the 

PAP also assumed control of the China Coast Guard (CCG) in July 2018 from the PRC’s State Oceanic 

Administration. In addition to these changes, the PAP has undergone a comprehensive reorganization 

and shed missions and some specialized forces for border defense, firefighting, natural resource 

protection (forests, gold mines, and hydropower), al lowing the PAP to focus more on internal security. 

The PAP is comprised principally of the Mobile Corps, the Internal Security Corps, and the CCG. 

The Mobile Corps is comprised of two large mobile contingents at the national level without fixed 

geographic areas of responsibility. The Internal Security Corps covers each of the PRC’s provinces, OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

70 

autonomous regions, and centrally administered cities. Each province has at least one PAP contingent 

focused on rapid response to internal security threats at the prov incial and local level. In 2019, the 

PAP announced the establishment of a new special operations counterterrorism unit called the 

Mountain Eagle Commando Unit, based in the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region to support the 

CCP’s growing counterterrorism eff orts. Unlike the PAP’s two other commando units, the Snow 

Leopard Unit and the Falcon Unit, the Mountain Eagle Unit is reportedly designed to operate in more 

austere terrain environments characterized by mountains and plateaus as opposed to urban warfare. 

In 2018, Chairman Xi Jinping tasked the PAP to improve “combat -ready training” and rapidly 

integrate into the PLA's joint operation system. The PAP is increasingly focusing on internal security 

and joint operations with the PLA and is developing capabilit ies for rapid response, mobility, and 

counterterrorism operations. In addition, the PAP conducts training with foreign counterparts. Since 

at least 2016, PAP forces have likely operated in Tajikistan, patrolling the tri -border region connecting 

Tajikistan, Afghanistan, and China. In 2019, the PAP hosted joint counterterrorism training in China 

and in Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan. 

China’s Coercive Approach 

China’s leaders use tactics short of armed conflict to pursue China’s objectives. China calibrates its 

coercive activities to fall below the threshold of provoking armed conflict with the United States, its 

allies and partners, or others in the Indo -Pacific region. These tactics are particularly evident in China’s 

pursuit of its territorial and maritime cla ims in the South and East China Seas as well as along its 

border with India and Bhutan. 1 In recent years, the PLA has also increased patrols around and near 

Taiwan using bomber, fighter, and surveillance aircraft to signal Taiwan. China also employs non -

mi litary tools coercively, including economic tools during periods of political tensions with countries 

that China accuses of harming its national interests. 

China Coast Guard (CCG). The CCG is subordinate to the PAP and is responsible for a wide range 

of missions under the umbrella of maritime rights protection, including enforcement of the PRC’s 

sovereignty claims, surveillance, protection of fisheries’ resources, anti -smuggling, and general law 

enforcement. In July 2018, the CCG completed its merger into the CMC command structure through 

its subordination to the PAP, which itself is under the CMC like the PLA. This could facilitate closer 

coordination between the CCG and the PLAN. The PRC primarily uses paramilitary maritime law OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

71 

enforcement agencies in ma ritime disputes, selectively using the PLAN to provide overwatch in case 

of escalation. 

The CCG’s rapid expansion and modernization has improved China’s ability to enforce its maritime 

claims. Since 2010, the CCG’s fleet of large patrol ships (more than 1, 000 tons) has more than doubled 

from approximately 60 to more than 130 ships, making it by far the largest coast guard force in the 

world and increasing its capacity to conduct simultaneous, extended offshore operations in multiple 

disputed areas. Furtherm ore, the newer ships are substantially larger and more capable than the older 

ships, and the majority are equipped with helicopter facilities, high -capacity water cannons, and guns 

ranging from 30 mm to 76 mm. A number of these ships are capable of long -en durance and out -of -

area operations. These characteristics give CCG vessels the ability to intimidate local, non -PRC fishing 

boats, as occurred in an October 2016 incident near Scarborough Reef. 

In addition, the CCG operates more than 70 fast patrol combata nts (more than 500 tons), which can 

be used for limited offshore operations, more than 400 coastal patrol craft, and approximately 1,000 

inshore and riverine patrol boats. The CCG is likely to add another 25 -30 patrol ships and patrol 

combatants by the end of the decade before the construction program levels off. 

People’s Armed Forces Maritime Militia (PAFMM). The PAFMM is a subset of China’s national 

militia, an armed reserve force of civilians available for mobilization. Militia units organize around 

town s, villages, urban sub -districts, and enterprises, and vary widely in composition and mission. In 

the South China Sea, the PAFMM plays a major role in coercive activities to achieve the PRC’s political 

goals without fighting, part of broader Chinese milita ry theory that sees confrontational operations 

short of war as an effective means of accomplishing political objectives. The militia has played 

significant roles in a number of military campaigns and coercive incidents over the years, including 

the 2009 ha rassment of USNS Impeccable conducting normal operations, the 2012 Scarborough Reef 

standoff, the 2014 Haiyang Shiyou -981 oilrig standoff, and a large incursion in waters near the 

Senkakus in 2016. 

A large number of PAFMM vessels train with and assist the PLAN and CCG in tasks such as 

safeguarding maritime claims, surveillance and reconnaissance, fisheries protection, logistic support, 

and search and rescue. The government subsidizes various local and provincial commercial 

organizations to operate militia v essels to perform “official” missions on an ad hoc basis outside of 

their regular civilian commercial activities. 

The PAFMM often rents fishing vessels from companies or individual fishermen. However, China 

has also built a state -owned fishing fleet for at least part of its “maritime militia” in the South China OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

72 

Sea. The Hainan provincial government, adjacent to the South China Sea, ordered the building of 84 

large militia fishing vessels with reinforced hulls and ammunition storage, which the militia receiv ed 

by the end of 2016, along with extensive subsidies to encourage frequent operations in the Spratly 

Islands. This particular PAFMM unit is also China’s most professional. Its forces are paid salaries 

independent of any clear commercial fishing responsibi lities and recruited from recently separated 

veterans. 

PLA CAPABILITIES IN DEVELOPMENT 

Key Takeaways  

> >

The PLA is developing capabilities to provide options for the PRC to dissuade, deter, or, if 

ordered, defeat third -party intervention during a large -scale , theater campaign such as a Taiwan 

contingency. U.S. defense planners often refer to these collective capabilities as anti -access/area -

denial (A2/AD) capabilities.  

> >

The PLA is additionally developing the capabilities and operational concepts to conduct of fensive 

operations within the Second Island Chain, in the Pacific and Indian Oceans, and in some cases, 

globally. 

MILITARY CAPABILITIE S FOR A2/AD WITHIN T HE FIRST ISLAND CHAI N

Key Takeaways  

> >

In addition to strike, air and missile defense, anti -surface and anti -submarine capabilities 

improvements, China is focusing on information, cyber, and space and counterspace operations.  

> >

The PLA’s A2/AD capabilities are, to date, the most robust within the First Island Chain, although 

the PRC seeks to strengthen its ca pabilities to reach farther into the Pacific Ocean. 

The PRC’s military modernization plan includes the development of A2/AD capabilities to conduct 

long -range attacks against adversary forces who might deploy or operate within the western Pacific 

Ocean. Th e PLA’s A2/AD capabilities are, to date, the most robust within the First Island Chain, 

although the PRC seeks to strengthen its capabilities to reach farther into the Pacific Ocean. These 

capabilities span the air, maritime, space, electromagnetic, and in formation domains. 

Long -Range Precision Strike. Military modernization has resulted in the rapid transformation of 

the PLA’s missile force. U.S. bases in Japan are in range of a growing number of Chinese MRBMs and 

LACMs. H -6K bomber flights into the wester n Pacific Ocean demonstrate China’s ability to range OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

73 

Guam with air -launched LACMs. The DF -26, which debuted publicly in 2015 and was paraded by 

China again in 2017, is capable of conducting precision conventional or nuclear strikes against ground 

targets, which could include U.S. bases on Guam. PLA writings see logistics and power projection 

assets as potential vulnerabilities in modern warfare – a judgement in accord with an expanding ability 

to target regional air bases, logistics and port facilities, com munications, and other ground -based 

infrastructure. 

Ballistic Missile Defense (BMD). China is working to develop ballistic missile defenses consisting 

of exo -atmospheric and endo -atmospheric kinetic -energy interceptors. In 2016, official media 

confirmed C hina’s intent to move ahead with land - and sea -based mid -course missile defense 

capabilities. The HQ -19 mid -course interceptor has undergone tests to verify its capability against 

3,000 km -class ballistic missiles, and an HQ -19 unit may have begun prelimin ary operations in western 

China. Indigenous radars including the JY -27A and JL -1A – the latter advertised as capable of 

precision tracking of multiple ballistic missiles – reportedly provide target detection for the system. 

The PLA’s long -range SAM invent ory also offers a limited capability against ballistic missiles. China’s 

domestic CSA -9 (HQ -9) long -range SAM system likely has a limited capability to provide point 

defense against tactical ballistic missiles. China has fielded SA -20 (S -300 PMU2) SAMs, an d its SA -21 

(S -400) SAMs may have some capability to engage ballistic missiles, depending on the interceptors 

and supporting infrastructure. 

Surface and Undersea Operations. China continues to construct an array of offensive and defensive 

capabilities to e nable the PLA to gain maritime superiority within the first island chain – the islands 

running from the Kurils, through Taiwan, to Borneo, roughly encompassing the Yellow Sea, East 

China Sea, and South China Sea – and grow toward projecting limited combat power at longer ranges. 

China’s broad range of ASCMs and launch platforms as well as submarine -launched torpedoes and 

naval mines allow the PLAN to create an increasingly lethal, multi -access threat against an adversary 

approaching Chinese waters and opera ting areas. Additionally, the PLA has fielded CSS -5 ASBMs 

specifically designed to hold adversary aircraft carriers at risk when located up to 1,500 km off China’s 

coast, and it has an ASBM variant of the longer range DF -26 IRBM. The PLA’s undersea domain 

capabilities are gradually progressing as well, but it continues to lack a robust deep -water anti -

submarine warfare capability. China is installing undersea monitoring systems, which could improve 

China’s knowledge of the undersea environment. Whether the PLA can collect accurate targeting 

information and pass it to launch platforms in time for successful strikes in sea areas beyond the first 

island chain is unclear. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

74 

Information Operations (IO). China assesses that controlling the information spectrum in th e

modern battlespace is a critical enabler, if not a fundamental prerequisite, of its ability to counter third -

party intervention in a conflict. PLA authors often cite this capability – sometimes termed 

“information blockade” or “information dominance” – as necessary to seize the initiative and set the 

conditions necessary to gain air and sea superiority. This “information blockade” concept likely 

envisions combining military capabilities across space and cyber domains with non -military 

instruments of state power. China’s investment in advanced electronic warfare (EW) systems, 

counterspace capabilities, and cyber operations – combined with more traditional forms of 

information control, such as propaganda and denial via opacity – reflect the priority the PLA places 

on information advantage. 

Space and Counterspace. PLA strategists regard the ability to use space -based systems – and to deny 

them to adversaries – as central to modern warfare. The PLA continues to strengthen its military space 

capabilities, despit e its public stance against the militarization of space. The PLA views space 

operations as a key enabler of PLA campaigns aimed at countering third -party intervention, although 

many PLA writings have not elevated these operations to the level of a separate “campaign.” China 

seeks to enhance C2 in joint operations and establish a real -time surveillance, reconnaissance, and 

warning system, and it is increasing the number and capabilities of its space systems, including various 

communications and intelligence satellites as well as the Beidou navigation satellite system. China also 

continues to develop counterspace capabilities and related technologies, including kinetic -kill missiles, 

ground -based lasers, and orbiting space robots, as well as expanding space su rveillance capabilities, 

which can monitor objects across the globe and in space and enable counterspace actions. 

Cyber Operations. PLA researchers believe that building strong cyber capabilities are necessary to 

protect Chinese networks and advocate seizi ng “cyberspace superiority” by using offensive cyber 

operations to deter or degrade an adversary’s ability to conduct military operations against China. 

Chinese writings suggest cyber operations allow China to manage the escalation of a conflict because 

cy ber attacks are a low -cost deterrent. The writings also suggest that cyber attacks demonstrate 

capabilities and resolve to an adversary. To support A2/AD, Chinese cyber attack operations aim to 

target critical military and civilian nodes to deter or disrup t adversary intervention, and to retain the 

option to scale these attacks to achieve desired conditions with minimal strategic cost. China believes 

its cyber capabilities and cyber personnel lag behind the United States, and it is working to improve 

traini ng and bolster domestic innovation to overcome these perceived deficiencies and advance 

cyberspace operations. 

Integrated Air Defense System (IADS). China has a robust and redundant IADS architecture over 

land areas and within 300 nm (556 km) of its coast that relies on an extensive early warning radar OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

75 

network, fighter aircraft, and a variety of SAM systems. China is also placing radars and air defense 

weapons on outposts in the South China Sea, further extending its IADS. It also employs point 

defenses, pr imarily to defend strategic targets against adversary long -range cruise missiles and airborne 

strike platforms. 

China has increasing numbers of advanced long -range SAMs, including its indigenous CSA -9, Russian 

SA -10 (S -300 PMU), and SA -20 (S -300 PMU1/PMU2 ), all of which have the advertised capability to 

protect against both aircraft and low -flying cruise missiles. To improve its strategic air defenses, China 

has taken initial delivery of the Russian -built S -400 Triumf SAM system as a follow -on to the SA -20 .

Compared to these other systems, the S -400s feature a longer maximum range, improved missile 

seekers, and more sophisticated radars. China manufactures a variety of long -range air surveillance 

radars, including models claiming to support ballistic missil e defense and other models asserting the 

ability to detect stealth aircraft. Marketing materials also emphasize these systems’ ability to counter 

long -range airborne strike and combat support aircraft. PLAAF airborne early warning and control 

(AEW&C) aircr aft such as the KJ -2000 and KJ -500 can further extend China’s radar coverage well 

past the range of its ground -based radars.  

> >

Ballistic Missile Defense (BMD). The PLA’s long -range SAM inventory also offers a limited capability 

against ballistic missiles. Ch ina’s domestic CSA -9 (HQ -9) long -range SAM system likely has a 

limited capability to provide point defense against tactical ballistic missiles. China has fielded SA -

20 (S -300 PMU2) SAMs, and its SA -21 (S -400) SAMs may have some capability to engage ballist ic 

missiles, depending on the interceptors and supporting infrastructure. China is working to develop 

BMD systems consisting of exo -atmospheric and endo -atmospheric kinetic -energy interceptors. 

PRC state media confirmed China’s intent to move ahead with la nd - and sea -based mid -course 

missile defense capabilities in 2016. The HQ -19 interceptor has undergone tests to verify its 

capability against 3,000 km -range ballistic missiles. In addition, China is pursuing a mid -course 

interceptor that may have capabilit ies against IRBMs and possibly ICBMs. 

Air Operations. The PLA’s planned fielding of a fifth -generation fighter force will bolster its air -to -

air capability, adding to the airpower of China’s fourth -generation Russian -built Su -27/Su -30 and J -

11A, and its in digenous J - 10A/B/C, J -11B, and more advanced J -16 fighters. The J -20 and FC -31/J -

31 feature high maneuverability, stealth characteristics, and an internal weapons bay, as well as 

advanced avionics and sensors providing enhanced situational awareness, adva nced radar tracking and 

targeting capabilities, and integrated EW systems. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

76  

> >

The PLAAF’s growing fleet of J -20, J -16, and J -10C fighters operating with KJ -500 AEW&C 

aircraft will enable longer -range A2/AD and counterair operations across the Western Pacific 

Ocean.  

> >

China’s continuing upgrades to its bomber fleet will give it the capability to carry new, longer -

range cruise missiles. In addition, the PLAAF has added an aerial refueling capability to its new 

H-6N, extending its range and/or loiter time. Moreover , China is developing the Y -20U, a new 

tanker variant of its large Y -20 heavy -lift transport, which will enable the PLAAF to significantly 

expand its tanker fleet and improve its power projection capabilities.  

> >

The PLAAF employs the medium -range H -6K bomber , which can carry up to six precision -guided 

CJ -20 air -launched cruise missiles (ALCMs) each, giving it the ability to engage U.S. forces as far 

away as Guam. Since 2016, the PLAAF has steadily increased H -6K operating areas into the 

western Pacific Ocean and the South China Sea. China continues to employ long -range 

circumnavigation flights to deter and intimidate Taiwan.  

> >

The PLAN is currently fielding the H -6J bomber, a maritime derivative of the H -6K, which can 

carry up to six supersonic YJ -12 ASCMs each, allowing for saturation attacks against U.S. naval 

groups within the Second Island Chain. These will supplement the existing PLAN H -6G bombers 

capable of carrying up to four YJ -12 ASCMs. 

MILITARY CAPABILITIE S FOR POWER PROJECTI ON BEYOND THE FIRST 

ISLAND CHAIN 

Key Takeaways  

> >

The PRC continues to increase its military capabilities to achieve regional and global security 

objectives beyond a Taiwan contingency.  

> >

China’s continuing improvements of air and ground -based missile strike capabilities within and, 

inc reasingly, beyond the First Island Chain enable other military assets to operate farther from 

China.  

> >

China continues to build a multi -carrier force. China’s next generation of carriers will have greater 

endurance and a catapult system. 

The PRC continues to increase its military capabilities to achieve regional and global security objectives 

beyond a Taiwan contingency. PLA ground, naval, air and missile forces are increasingly capable of OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

77 

projecting power at greater distances from China and they are expandin g the PLA’s capacity to contest 

U.S. military superiority in the event of a conflict. 

Improvements in China’s air and ground -based missile capabilities to range targets beyond the First 

Island Chain enable other military assets to operate farther from Chin a. These assets can conduct a 

variety of missions, including sovereignty enforcement and offensive operations such as blockades. 

China is also enhancing the PLA’s ISR capabilities to extend the reach of the PLA’s situational 

awareness, enabling timely resp onses to perceived threats. 

PLA Army (PLAA) . Power projection and ground force maneuver for multi -domain operations are 

consistent themes in the PLAA's modernization efforts. The PLAA continues to play a vital role in 

the PRC’s military defense structure, but the CMC demands that the PLAA emphasize long -range 

maneuver capabilities and trans -theater exercises. In order to accommodate this, the PLAA is refining 

its capabilities and prioritizing modernization to prepare for multi -domain, multi -functional 

opera tions, and the ability to sustain those operations. 

The PLAA's restructuring highlighted and empowered the use of combined -arms brigades and 

battalions, and the PLAA has started to place an emphasis on the concept of smaller, more adaptable 

and rapidly dep loyable formations. The rapidly deployable battalions within PLAA combined -arms 

brigades have become the new standard “combat element” for the PLAA for combined -arms and 

joint operations. Medium and light combined -arms battalions are equipped with wheeled, high -

mobility vehicles to support rapid, long -range maneuver while conducting independent operations. 

As a part of the PLA restructuring, the PLAA increased its number of SOF brigades to 15, providing 

PLAA commanders at the tactical and operational levels specialized reconnaissance, sabotage effects ,

and infiltration in support of contingency operations beyond China's borders. During 2019, official 

PLA media published articles and videos discussing the SOF brigades' capacity for long -range 

reconnaissance, air mobility, parachute insertion and joint capability, as well as the use of highly trained 

infantry forces used for rapid strike and seizure operations in unfamiliar locations. 

The PLAA's advancing rotary wing aviation capabilities and, more specifically , its new air assault 

brigades play a vital role in the Army's ability to project power. The PLAA's two air assault brigades 

participated in an array of training scenarios where they were reportedly able to insert infantry forces 

on tactical objectives in an expedited fashion. Additionally, the fielding of the new Z -20 medium -lift 

helicopter will provide the air assault and army aviation brigades with new capabilities for rapid airlift 

and long -range insertion. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

78 

PLA Navy (PLAN). The PLAN continues to develop into a global force, gradually extending its 

operational reach beyond East Asia into a sustained ability to operate at increasingly longer ranges. 

The PLAN’s latest surface and subsurface platforms enable combat operations beyond the reach of 

the PRC’s la nd -based defenses. In particular, China’s aircraft carriers and planned follow -on carriers, 

once operational, will extend air defense coverage beyond the range of coastal and shipboard missile 

systems and will enable task group operations at increasingly l onger ranges. The PLAN’s emerging 

requirement for sea -based land -attack systems will also enhance the PRC’s ability to project power. 

Furthermore, the PLAN now has a sizable force of highly capable logistical replenishment ships to 

support long -distance, l ong -duration deployments, including two new Fuyu class fast combat support 

ships (AOEs) built specifically to support aircraft carrier operations. The PLAN’s expanding fleet of 

large modern amphibious warships will enable it to conduct in a wide range of e xpeditionary 

operations wherever PRC interests are threatened or in support of PRC participation in UN -

sanctioned peacekeeping operations. The expansion of naval operations beyond China’s immediate 

region will also facilitate its non -war military activitie s and further legitimize the PRC’s growing global 

military posture, including its base in Djibouti.  

> >

The PLAN’s force structure continues to evolve, incorporating more platforms with the versatility 

for both offshore and long - distance power projection. Chi na is engaged in series production of 

the Renhai class CG, the Luyang III MOD class DDG, and the Jiangdao class FFL, with the full 

production run of Jiangkai II FFGs probably completed with the delivery of the 30th unit in the 

class. The Renhai CG displace s more than 10,000 tons and can carry an array of long -range ASCMs 

and SAMs. It will likely be able to launch ASBMs and LACMs once these weapons are available. 

The Renhai CG will be China’s premier carrier escort for blue -water operations. Four units are 

currently outfitting, with several more under construction.  

> >

The PLAN continues to extend its strike range with more domestically produced ship -, submarine -

, and aircraft -deployed ASCMs with the exception of a few legacy missiles imported from Russia 

in the 1990s and early 2000s.  

> >

China continues to learn lessons from operating its first aircraft carrier, Liaoning. Its first 

domestically built aircraft carrier, Shandong, was launched in 2017 and commissioned in 

December 2019 —the beginning of what the PLA state s will be a multi -carrier force. China’s next 

generation of carriers, including one that began construction in 2018, will have greater endurance 

and a catapult launch system capable of launching various types of special mission fixed -wing 

aircraft for miss ions such as early warning, EW, and ASW. These improvements would increase 

the striking power of a potential carrier battle group when deployed to areas beyond China’s 

immediate periphery. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

79  

> >

The PLAN continues to build multiple new, large ships that can supp ort force projection 

operations, including LHAs, LPDs, large logistic support ships, and specialized blue -water 

auxiliary ships —including high -capability intelligence collection ships (AGI/AGOS). 

The PLAN’s ability to perform missions beyond the First Isla nd Chain is modest but growing as it 

gains more experience operating in distant waters and acquires larger and more advanced platforms. 

China’s experience in extended range operations primarily comes from extended task group 

deployments and its ongoing cou nterpiracy mission in the Gulf of Aden.  

> >

In June 2019, Liaoning, accompanied by at least five additional ships transited the Miyako Strait 

in the First Island Chain en route to the Western Pacific for what China stated was a routine 

training exercise. The presence of an AOE increases the PLAN’s capability to conduct extended 

carrier operations.  

> >

The PLAN sustained its counter -piracy task groups in the Gulf of Aden in 2019, a ten -year effort 

that is the PRC’s first enduring naval operation beyond the Indo -Pac ific region.  

> >

PLAN AGIs operated beyond the First Island Chain in 2019; one Type 815 Dongdiao -class AGI 

deployed to Australian waters to collect against the trilateral exercise TALISMAN SABER held 

by the United States, Australia, and Japan. 

China has long challenged foreign military activities in its maritime zones in a manner that is 

inconsistent with the rules of customary international law as reflected in the Law of the Sea 

Convention . However, in recent years, the PLA has begun conducting the very same types of military 

activities inside and outside the First Island Chain in the maritime zones of other countries. This 

activity highlights China’s double standard in the application of international law. Examples include 

sending AGIs to collect on military exercises such as the Rim of the Pacific (RIMPAC) exercise off 

Hawaii in 2014 and 2018, TALISMAN SABER off Australia in 2019, and a U.S. missile defense test 

off Alaska in 2017. 

PLAN Marine Corps (PLANMC). Ultimately, the PLANMC will be capable of operatin g from the 

land, sea, and air to support the PLA’s global operations, but this goal will likely not be realized by 

China’s stated goal to complete PLA reforms by 2020. Four new brigades have been established, 

bringing the total number of combat brigades to six, but only the original two brigades are fully mission 

capable. There is no evidence to indicate the new brigades are manned, trained and equipped to 

perform expeditionary missions yet. Additionally, the PLANMC has established an aviation brigade, 

whic h will provide the force with organic aviation capabilities, and a SOF brigade. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

80  

> >

In 2019, the PLAN launched its first full -length, flat -deck LHA, highlighting China’s growing 

maritime power projection capabilities. 

PLA Air Force (PLAAF) and PLA Navy Aviatio n. The PLAAF and PLAN Aviation continued to 

improve their capabilities to conduct offensive and defensive offshore operations such as strike, air 

and missile defense, strategic mobility, and early warning and reconnaissance missions. Although they 

currentl y have limited power projection capability, both the PLAAF and PLAN Aviation are seeking 

to extend their reach. The PLAAF, in particular, has received repeated calls from its leadership to 

become a truly “strategic” air force, able to project power at long distances and advance and defend 

the PRC’s global interests.  

> >

The PLAAF is expanding its inventory of refuelable fighters, developing refuelable variants of the 

H-6 bomber and KJ -500 AEW&C aircraft, and testing a tanker variant of its Y -20 heavy lift 

trans port. Together, these new aircraft will noticeably expand China’s ability to conduct long -range 

offensive air operations.  

> >

Following former PLAAF Commander General Ma Xiaotian’s 2016 public statement that China 

was developing a new generation of long -range bombers, a number of reports suggest the new 

bomber, likely named the H -20, could debut sometime in the next decade with the following 

features: a stealthy design, employing many fifth - generation technologies; a likely range of at least 

8,500 km; a paylo ad of at least 10 metric tons; and a capability to employ both conventional and 

nuclear weaponry.  

> >

The construction of new airfields and hangars on outposts in the South China Sea extends the 

possible operating areas of PLA aviation forces. Future deploymen ts of PLA combat aircraft 

operating from Spratly Island outposts could feature extended range and/or loiter time over the 

South China Sea or even reach into the Indian Ocean. China could also replicate its success 

establishing a naval base in Djibouti to e stablish overseas logistics facilities that would further 

extend and sustain regional and global air operations.  

> >

In 2019, the PLAAF participated in several joint multinational training exercises, as well as its first 

coordinated bomber flight with Russia o n July 23, 2019, which PRC state media described as a 

‘joint strategic air navigation” and was intended to improve coordination and message on strategic 

stability. During the flight, PLAAF H -6K bombers flew in formation with Russian Tu -95 bombers 

between K orea and Japan, prompting multiple intercepts from Japanese and South Korean 

military aircraft. The PRC continued their trend of foreign military competitions and deployed OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

81 

PLAAF aircraft to AVIADARTS 2019 in Russia. However, the PLAAF also sent H -6K bomber s

for the first time to TSENTR 19, Russia’s strategic military exercise.  

> >

In April 2019, Beijing announced that China and Russia would hold their third computer simulated 

combined missile defense exercise in Russia, but it is unclear whether this drill happ ened. China 

and Russia previously conducted similar exercises in 2016 and 2017. 

PLA Rocket Force (PLARF). The PLARF fields multiple missiles capable of strikes within and 

beyond the First Island Chain. Among these are the CSS -5 Mod 5 (DF -21D) ASBM – with a range of 

1,500 km – and a MARV to challenge BMD systems. China also deploys the land -attack CSS -5 Mod 

4 (DF -21C) and the ground -launched CH -SSC -9 (CJ -10) LACM, placing infrastructure on Okinawa 

and the main Japanese islands at risk. The DF -26 IRBM has a m aximum range of 4,000 km and is 

capable of precision strikes against ground and ship targets, potentially threatening U.S. land and sea -

based forces as far away as Guam. 

PLA Strategic Support Force (SSF). The SFF’s strategic space, cyber, and psychological warfare 

capabilities and missions are not bound by geographic constraints and can be used independently or 

to enable and support PLA global power projection operations. China continues to develop a variety 

counterspace capabilities designed to limit or pr event an adversary's use of space -based assets during 

crisis or conflict. In addition to the development of directed -energy weapons and satellite jammers, 

the PLA has an operational ground -based anti -satellite (ASAT) missile intended to target low -Earth 

or bit satellites, and China probably intends to pursue additional ASAT weapons capable of destroying 

satellites up to geosynchronous Earth orbit. 

ADVANCING TOWARD AN INFORMATIZED MILITAR Y

Key Takeaways  

> >

Chairman Xi Jinping has called for the PLA to create a highly informatized force capable of 

dominating all networks and expanding the country’s security and development interests.  

> >

The PLA considers information operations (IO) as a means of achieving information dominance 

early in a conflict, and continues to e xpand the scope and frequency of IO in military exercises.  

> >

The PRC presents a significant, persistent cyber espionage and attack threat to an adversary’s 

military and critical infrastructure systems. 

Chairman Xi Jinping has called for the PLA to create a h ighly informatized force capable of 

dominating all networks and expanding the country’s security and development interests. Chinese OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

82 

military writings describe informatized warfare as the use of information technology to create an 

operational system -of -syst ems, which would enable the PLA to acquire, transmit, process, and use 

information during a conflict to conduct joint military operations across the ground, maritime, air, 

space, cyberspace, and electromagnetic spectrum domains. Ongoing military reforms ar e accelerating 

the incorporation of command information systems enabling forces and commanders to carry out 

missions and tasks more effectively to win informatized local wars. The PLA continues to expand the 

scope and regularity of military exercises simul ating informatized operations and likely views 

conventional and cyberspace operations as a means of achieving information dominance early in a 

contingency or conflict. 

Command, Control, Communications, Computers, and Intelligence (C4I). China continues to 

prioritize C4I modernization as a response to trends in modern warfare that emphasize the importance 

of rapid information sharing, processing, and decision -making. The PLA seeks to modernize itself, 

both technologically and organizationally, to command com plex, joint operations. 

The PLA sees networked, technologically advanced C4I systems as essential to provide reliable, secure 

communications to fixed and mobile command posts, thereby enabling rapid, effective, multi -echelon 

decision -making. These systems were designed to distribute data including intelligence, battlefield 

information, logistical information, and weather reports via redundant, resilient communications 

networks to improve commanders’ situational awareness. The PLA views making near -real -time ISR 

data available to field commanders as especially valuable in streamlining their decision processes. 

China is fielding the Integrated Command Platform to units at multiple levels across the force to 

enable lateral and cross -service communications requi red for joint operations. Digital databases and 

command automation tools allow commanders to simultaneously issue orders to multiple units while 

on the move and they enable units to quickly adapt their actions to shifting conditions in the 

battlespace. 

The se technical improvements are notably boosting PLA operational flexibility and responsiveness. 

As the PLA continues to focus on its ability to fight and win informatized wars, future information 

systems will likely implement emerging technologies such as b ig data, the internet of things, artificial 

intelligence (AI), and cloud computing to provide reliable, automated platforms yielding further 

process efficiencies. The PLA has already begun this process by embracing big data analytics that fuse 

a variety of data to improve automation and to create a comprehensive, real -time picture. 

Electronic Warfare. The PLA considers EW an integral component of modern warfare. China’s EW 

strategy emphasizes suppressing, degrading, disrupting, or deceiving enemy electronic equipment. 

Potential EW targets include adversary systems operating in radio, radar, microwave, infrared and 

optical frequency ranges, as well as adversary computer and information systems. PLA EW units OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

83 

routinely train to conduct jamming and anti -jamming operations against multiple communication and 

radar systems and Global Positioning System (GPS) satellite systems in force -on - force exercises. 

These exercises test operational units’ understanding of EW weapons, equipment, and performance 

but they also e nable operators to improve confidence in their ability to operate effectively in a complex 

electromagnetic environment. In addition, the PLA reportedly tests and validates advances in EW 

weapons R&D during these exercises. 

Cyberwarfare. The development of cyberwarfare capabilities is consistent with PLA writings, which 

identify IO – comprising cyber, electronic, and psychological warfare – as integral to achieving 

information superiority and as an effective means for countering a stronger foe. China has pu blicly 

identified cyberspace as a critical domain for national security and declared its intent to expedite the 

development of its cyber forces. 

The PRC presents a significant, persistent cyber espionage and attack threat to military and critical 

infrastr ucture systems. China seeks to create disruptive and destructive effects —from denial -of -

service attacks to physical disruptions of critical infrastructure — to shape decision -making and disrupt 

military operations in the initial stages of a conflict by targ eting and exploiting perceived weaknesses 

of militarily superior adversaries. China is improving its cyberattack capabilities and has the ability to 

launch cyberattacks —such as disruption of a natural gas pipeline for days to weeks —in the United 

States. 

PL A writings note the effectiveness of IO and cyberwarfare in recent conflicts and advocate targeting 

C2 and logistics networks to affect an adversary’s ability to operate during the early stages of conflict. 

Authoritative PLA sources call for the coordinate d employment of space, cyber, and EW as strategic 

weapons to “paralyze the enemy’s operational system of systems” and “sabotage the enemy’s war 

command system of systems” early in a conflict. Increasingly, the PLA considers cyber capabilities a 

critical co mponent in its overall integrated strategic deterrence posture, alongside space and nuclear 

deterrence. PLA studies discuss using warning or demonstration strikes —strikes against select military, 

political, and economic targets with clear “awing effects” —as part of deterrence. Accordingly, the 

PLA probably seeks to use its cyberwarfare capabilities to collect data for intelligence and cyberattack 

purposes; to constrain an adversary’s actions by targeting network -based logistics, C2, 

communications, commerci al activities, and civilian and defense critical infrastructure; or, to serve as 

a force -multiplier when coupled with kinetic attacks during armed conflict. 

The PLA’s ongoing structural reforms may further change how the PLA organizes and commands 

IO, part icularly as the SSF evolves over time. By consolidating cyber and other IO -related elements, OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

84 

the SSF likely is generating synergies by combining national -level cyber reconnaissance, attack, and 

defense capabilities in its organization. 

Activities Directe d Against the U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) 

PRC -based intrusions continued to target computer systems around the world including those owned 

by the U.S. Government through 2019. These and past intrusions focus on accessing networks and 

extracting inform ation. China uses its cyber capabilities to not only support intelligence collection 

against U.S. diplomatic, economic, academic, and defense industrial base sectors, but also to exfiltrate 

sensitive information from the defense industrial base to gain mil itary advantage. The targeted 

information can benefit China’s defense high -technology industries, support China’s military 

modernization, provide the CCP insights into U.S. leadership perspectives, and enable diplomatic 

negotiations, such as those supporti ng the One Belt, One Road initiative (OBOR). Additionally, 

targeted information could enable PLA cyber forces to build an operational picture of U.S. defense 

networks, military disposition, logistics, and related military capabilities that could be exploit ed prior 

to or during a crisis. The accesses and skills required for these intrusions ar e similar to those necessary 

to conduct cyber operations in an attempt to deter, delay, disrupt, and degrade DoD operations prior 

to or during a conflict. In aggregate, these cyber -enabled campaigns threaten to erode U.S. military 

advantages and imperil the infrastructure and prosperity on which those advantages rely. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

85 

NUCLEAR DETERRENCE 

Key Takeaways  

> >

The PRC’s strategic ambitions, evolving view of the security landsca pe, and concerns over 

survivability are driving significant changes to the size, capabilities, and readiness of its nuclear 

forces.  

> >

China’s nuclear weapons policy prioritizes the maintenance of a survivable nuclear force that can 

retaliate against an adve rsary’s first strike.  

> >

China has long maintained a “no first use” (NFU) policy, although there is ambiguity over the 

conditions under which China would act outside of its NFU policy.  

> >

China’s nuclear forces will significantly evolve over the next decade as it modernizes, diversifies, 

and increases the number of its land -, sea -, and air -based nuclear delivery platforms.  

> >

Over the next decade, China’s nuclear warhead stockpile —currently estimated to be in the low -

200s —is projected to at least double in size as China expands and modernizes its nuclear forces.  

> >

China is pursuing a “nuclear triad” with the development of a nuclear capable air -launched ballistic 

missile (ALBM) and improving its ground and sea -based nuclear capabilities.  

> >

New developments in 2019 fu rther suggest that China intends to increase the peacetime readiness 

of its nuclear forces by moving to a launch -on -warning (LOW) posture with an expanded silo -

based force. 

The PRC’s nuclear weapons policy prioritizes the maintenance of a nuclear force abl e to survive a first 

strike and respond with sufficient strength to inflict unacceptable damage on an enemy. China is 

enhancing peacetime readiness levels for these nuclear forces to ensure their responsiveness. In 

addition, China insists its new generatio n of mobile missiles, with warheads consisting of MIRVs and 

penetration aids, are intended to ensure the viability of its strategic nuclear forces in the face of 

continued advances in U.S. and, to a lesser extent, Russian strategic ISR, precision strike, a nd missile 

defense capabilities. India also plays a factor in China’s nuclear threat perceptions. 

Over the next decade, China’s nuclear warhead stockpile —currently estimated to be in the low -200s —

is projected to at least double in size as China expands and modernizes its nuclear forces. The 

anticipated changes to the capacity, capability, and readiness of China’s nuclear forces in the coming 

years seem likely to outpace potential developments by any adversary that could plausibly threaten OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

86 

China’s ability to retaliate against a first strike. These developments and China’s lack of transparency 

raise concerns that China is not only shifting its requirements for what constitutes a minimal deterrent, 

but that it could shift away from its longstanding minimalist f orce posture. 

No First Use Policy . China has long maintained an NFU policy, stating that it would use nuclear 

forces only in response to a nuclear strike against China. China’s NFU pledge consists of two stated 

commitments: China will never use nuclear wea pons first at any time nor under any circumstances, 

and China unconditionally undertakes not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against any non -

nuclear -weapon state or in nuclear -weapon -free zones. 

There is some ambiguity, however, in the narrative in China over the conditions under which China’s 

NFU policy would no longer apply. Some PLA officers have written publicly of the need to spell out 

conditions under which China might need to use nuclear weapons first; for example, if an enemy’s 

conventiona l attack threatened the survival of China’s nuclear force or of the regime itself. There has 

been no indication that national leaders are willing to attach such nuances and caveats publicly to 

China’s existing NFU policy as affirmed by recent statements by the PRC Foreign Ministry. China’s 

lack of transparency regarding the scope and scale of its nuclear modernization program, however, 

raises questions regarding its future intent as it fields larger, more capable nuclear forces. 

Land -Based Platforms . China’ s nuclear arsenal currently consists of approximately 100 ICBMs, 

including the silo -based CSS -4 Mod 2 (DF -5A) and Mod 3 (DF -5B); the solid -fueled, road -mobile 

CSS -10 -class (DF -31, DF -31A and DF -31AG); and the more limited range roll -out -to -launch CSS -3

(DF -4). This strategic arsenal is complemented by road -mobile, solid -fueled CSS -5 Mod 2 and Mod 6 

(DF -21) MRBMs and DF -26 IRBMs capable of ranging targets in the Indo -Pacific region. Media 

reports suggest that China may be developing a DF -5C and DF -31B ICBM w ith the DF -41 (CSS -X-

20) ICBM fielding possible in the near term. 

Sea -based Platforms . China has constructed six Jin class SSBNs, with four operational and two 

outfitting at Huludao Shipyard. China’s Jin SSBNs, which are equipped to carry up to 12 CSS -N-14

(JL -2) SLBMs, are the country’s first viable sea -based nuclear deterrent. China’s next -generation Type 

096 SSBN reportedly will be armed with a follow -on SLBM, and it will likely begin construction in 

the early - 2020s. Based on the 40 -plus -year service l ife of China’s first generation SSNs, China will 

operate its Jin and Type 096 SSBN fleets concurrently. The current range limitations of the JL -2 will 

require the Jin class SSBNs to operate in areas north and east of Hawaii if China seeks to target the 

eas t coast of the United States. As China fields newer, more capable, and longer ranged SLBMs such 

as the JL -3, the PLAN will gain the ability to target the United States from littoral waters. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

87 

Air Platforms . The PLAAF publicly revealed the H -6N as a long -rang e strategic bomber during the 

70 th anniversary parade in October 2019. The most significant improvements of the H -6N versus 

legacy H -6 bombers is the addition of its air -to -air refueling probe, as well as its recessed fuselage 

modifications that would allo w for external carriage of an ALBM believed to be nuclear capable. 

Future Developments . Over the next decade, China will expand and diversify its nuclear forces, 

likely at least doubling its nuclear warhead stockpile. China probably intends to develop new nuclear 

warheads and delivery platforms that at least equal the effectiveness, reliability, and/or survivability of 

some of the warheads and delivery platforms currently under development by the United States and 

Russia. 

Currently, China probably maintai ns an operational nuclear warhead stockpile in the low -200s. China 

probably has enough nuclear materials to at least double its warhead stockpile without new fissile 

material production. 

China justifies its development of a range of technologies for its nu clear forces —including MARV, 

MIRVs, decoys, chaff, jamming, thermal shielding, and hypersonic glide vehicles —as necessary to 

counter U.S. and other countries’ BMD, ISR, and precision strike systems. China is working to field 

nuclear theater -range, precisio n-strike systems. 

China maintains nuclear -capable delivery systems in the PLARF and PLAN, and the PLAAF has been 

reassigned a nuclear mission. To date, PRC officials have identified both the H -6N bomber and 

China’s future strategic stealth bomber as dual -capable delivery platforms. The PLA is upgrading its 

aircraft with two new ALBMs, one of which may include a nuclear payload. Its deployment and 

integration would provide China for the first time with a viable nuclear triad of delivery systems 

dispersed acr oss land, sea, and air forces. 

China maintained a high level of activity at its Lop Nur nuclear weapons test site throughout 2019, 

according to the U.S. Department of State’s April 2020 Executive Summary of Findings on Adherence to and 

Compliance with Arms Control, Nonproliferation, and Disarmament Agreements and Commitments . The executive 

summary states, “China’s possible preparation to operate its Lop Nur test site year -round, its use of 

explosive containment chambers, extensive excavation activities at L op Nur, and lack of transparency 

on its nuclear testing activities – which has included frequently blocking the flow of data from its 

International Monitoring System (IMS) stations to the International Data Center operated by the 

Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear Test -Ban Treaty Organization – raise 

concerns regarding its adherence to the ‘zero yield’ standard adhered to by the United States, United 

Kingdom, and France in their respective nuclear weapons testing moratoria.” OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

88 

The PRC has no t clarified how its strategic forces will evolve commensurate with its objective of 

having a “world -class” military or if China’s goal of becoming a “great modern socialist country” will 

alter its nuclear deterrence requirements. In its 2019 defense white paper, China reiterated its 

longstanding position that it “…keeps its nuclear capabilities at the minimum level required for 

national security.” However, China’s nuclear forces appear to be on a trajectory to exceed the size of 

a “minimum deterrent” as des cribed in the PLA’s own writings as a small quantity of nuclear weapons 

to strike enemy urban targets. China’s evolving posture is more consistent with what PLA writings 

describe as a “limited deterrent” —a posture that the PLA describes as between a minimu m and 

maximum deterrent. 

Lower -yield Nuclear Weapons . PRC strategists have highlighted the need for lower -yield nuclear 

weapons in order to increase the deterrence value of China’s nuclear force without defining specific 

nuclear yield values. A 2017 defens e industry publication indicated a lower -yield weapon had been 

developed for use against campaign and tactical targets that would reduce collateral damage. The DF -

26 is China’s first nuclear -capable missile system that can conduct precision strikes, and th erefore, is 

the most likely weapon system to field a lower -yield warhead in the near -term. 

Readiness. Although China almost certainly keeps the majority of its nuclear force on a peacetime 

status —with separated launchers, missiles, and warheads —nuclear and conventional PLARF brigades 

conduct “combat readiness duty” and “high alert duty” which apparently includes assigning a missile 

battalion to be ready to launch, and rotating to standby positions as much as monthly for unspecified 

periods of time. Authori tative PLA text books on strategy state “high alert duty” is valuable for the 

defender in a nuclear war, recommending the PLARF adopt a high alert posture conceptually 

comparable to the claimed high alert posture kept by portions of U.S. and Russian nuclea r forces, and 

that such a posture is compatible with the PRC’s active defense concept, NFU policy, and post -strike 

response approach. 

Launch on Warning (LOW) . Increasing evidence emerged in 2019 indicates that China seeks to 

keep at least a portion of its force on a LOW posture. This includes further investment in silo -based 

forces —while building more survivable mobile platforms —that China has previously assessed as 

having low survivability in the absence of a force -wide LOW posture and new developments in its 

early warning capabilities. 

The PRC’s 2015 defense white paper identified “improved strategic early warning, command and 

control…and rapid reaction,” as specific nuclear force modernization goals. In 2015 and 2016, PRC 

official state media reported th at some of its ICBM force was conducting alerts, including the DF -

31A ICBM. It is unclear from these reports what such alerts entailed. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

89 

Commercial imagery from 2019 has revealed that China has constructed an ICBM silo at one of the 

PLARF’s Western training ranges that is smaller than China’s existing CSS -4 (DF -5) silos. According 

to state media, the CSS -X-20 (DF -41) ICBM can be launched from silos; this site is probably being 

used to at least develop a concept of operations for silo basing this system. Ther e are also some 

indications that China may be building new CSS -4 (DF -5) ICBM silos. 

China is working to develop a space -based early warning capability that could support this posture in 

the future. In October 2019, Russia announced plans to assist China in developing their missile -attack 

early warning network, including aiding the development of ground -based radars and potentially 

extending to space -based sensors. China already has several ground -based large phase array radars –

similar in appearance to U.S . PAVE PAWS radars – that could support a missile early warning role. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEF ENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

90 

These images show that new silos, having first been identified in fall 2019 by a non -governmental 

organization’s commercial imagery, appear externally complete. Their si ze precludes use by the DF -5

and may support concept development for a silo -based DF -41 or one of China’s smaller ICBMs. 

When taken with China’s past concerns about silo survivability and ongoing strategic early warning 

developments, these new silos provid e further evidence China is moving to a LOW posture. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEF ENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

91 

PLA Underground Facilities 

The PLA continues to maintain a robust and technologically advanced underground facility (UGF) 

program to protect all aspects of its military forces, including C2, logistics, missile systems, and naval 

forces. China has thousands of UGFs and it continues to construct more each year. The PLA utilizes 

these UGFs to protect valuable assets from the effects of missile strikes and to conceal military 

operations from adversaries. Ch ina’s NFU policy also contributed to the construction of UGFs for 

the country’s nuclear forces, which may have planned to survive an initial nuclear first strike by an 

adversary. 

China began to update and expand its military UGF program in the mid - to late -1980s. This 

modernization effort took on renewed urgency following China’s observation of U.S. and Coalition 

air operations during the 1991 Gulf War and their use in Operation ALLIED FORCE. These military 

campaigns convinced China it needs to build more s urvivable, deeply buried facilities to protect 

military assets from the effects of penetrating conventional munition and nuclear strikes. China will 

likely continue to develop and expand its UGF program to support its expanding forces. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 

Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 

92 

This page left intentionally blank OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEF ENSE 

Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 

93 

# 3

# FORCES, CAPABILITIES , AND 

# ACTIVITIES  ON  CHINA’S 

# PERIPHERY OFFICE OF THE SE CRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

94 

Key Takeaways  

> >

China continues to implement reforms associated with the establishment of the Eastern, Southern, 

Western, Northern, and Central Theater Commands, which are organized based on China’s 

perception of peripheral threats.  

> >

Under the direct ion of the Central Military Commission (CMC), each Theater Command has 

authority over the services and conventional forces within the theater. 

China continues to implement reforms associated with the establishment of five theater commands in 

early 2016. Th e Eastern, Southern, Western, Northern and Central Theater Commands replaced seven 

army -based military regions and are now the highest -ranking joint operations command organizations 

within their respective geographical areas. Each theater command receives direction from the CMC 

and has operational authority over most PLA conventional forces within its theater. The theater 

commands are also responsible for all non -nuclear combat and non -combat operations within their 

area of responsibility. Theater commands are also responsible for developing theater -specific 

command strategies aimed at preparing to fight and win against adversaries, developing joint 

operational plans, assessing military capability requirements for the forces in their theaters, responding 

to crises, and safeguarding the sovereignty and stability of their theaters. The PRC’s threat perceptions 

shape the strategic directions for the theater commands, with levels of emphasis and specific missions 

and tasks varying:  

> >

Eastern Theater Command – Taiwa n, Japan, East China Sea;  

> >

Southern Theater Command – South China Sea, Southeast Asia;  

> >

Western Theater Command – India, South Asia, Central Asia, “counterterrorism” in Xinjiang 

and Tibet;  

> >

Northern Theater Command – Korean Peninsula, Russia;  

> >

Central Thea ter Command – Capital defense; surge support to other theaters. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

95 

EASTERN THEATER COMM AND 

Key Takeaway  

> >

The Eastern Theater Command is oriented toward Taiwan and the East China Sea. 

The Eastern Theater Command likely executes operational control over natio nal defense matters 

related to Taiwan and Japan, including contingencies in and around the Taiwan Strait and the Senkaku 

Islands. In 2019, the Eastern Theater Command focused on a series of training and exercises to 

improve joint operations and combat read iness, organizing exercises and drills consisting of long -

distance training and mobilization, aerial combat, and live -fire training. PLA units located within the 

Eastern Theater Command include three group armies, a naval fleet, two marine brigades, two Ai r

Force bases, and one missile base. The Eastern Theater Command also likely commands all China 

Coast Guard (CCG) and maritime militia ships while conducting Senkakus -related operations.  

> >

In April 2019, the Eastern Theater Command JOCC commanded joint train ing east of Taiwan, 

which they asserted was to train for joint fire and maritime strike. The training included bombers, 

fighters, electronic jamming and intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) aircraft 

circumnavigating Taiwan while naval comba tants trained for mock strikes and helicopters 

delivered an amphibious landing force. In March, two J -11 fighters crossed the unofficial median 

line of the Taiwan Strait, for the first time since 1999. The Eastern Theater Command also likely 

played a signi ficant role in a nationwide exercise across all five theater commands based on the 

locations of some of the exercise activity near Taiwan.  

> >

As of March 2019, the PLA Air Force (PLAAF) assigned its first fifth generation J -20s to an 

operational unit, a figh ter brigade in the Eastern Theater Command, probably to improve its ability 

to respond to U.S. and allied aircraft in the area. In March 2019, a likely Eastern Theater Y -8Q 

anti -submarine warfare (ASW) aircraft was also first observed operating in the East China Sea by 

Japan. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

96 

DEVELOPMENTS IN THE SECURITY SITUATION I N THE TAIWAN STRAIT 

Key Takeaways  

> >

Relations between the PRC and Taiw an remained tense through 2019 . 

> >

The PLA continued Taiwan Strait contingency preparations. 

Relations between the PRC and Tai wan remained at an impasse through 2019. Since the 2016 election 

of Tsai Ing -wen as Taiwan’s president, China halted formal communication with Taiwan and has 

repeatedly stressed that Taiwan must accept the “1992 Consensus” to restart formal engagement. 

Sin ce November 2016, China’s leaders have directly equated the “1992 Consensus” to “one China,” 

which was reaffirmed by President Xi in a January 2019 address to “compatriots” in Taiwan. Taiwan 

President Tsai Ing -wen has continually pledged to maintain the st atus quo in cross -Strait relations and 

called for China to respect Taiwan’s democracy and agree to negotiations without preconditions. 

The PRC also maintained its diplomatic pressure on Taiwan, thwarting Taiwan’s efforts to participate 

in international org anizations such as the World Health Organization, International Civil Aviation 

Organization, and INTERPOL. In 2019, the PRC convinced the Solomon Islands and Kiribati to 

break diplomatic relations with Taiwan. Despite the stalled consultations with the rul ing Democratic 

Progressive Party (DPP), the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) continues to engage with Taiwan’s 

Kuomintang (KMT) party, and the PRC continues to hold lower -level cross -Strait exchanges such as 

the municipal S hanghai -Taipei Twin City Forum. 

The PLA continues to prepare for contingencies in the Taiwan Strait to deter, and if necessary, compel 

Taiwan to abandon moves toward independence. The PLA also is likely preparing for a contingency 

to unify Taiwan with the mainland by force, while simultaneou sly deterring, delaying, or denying any 

third -party intervention on Taiwan’s behalf. As part of a comprehensive campaign to pressure Taiwan 

and the Tsai Administration, China has increased military exercises in the vicinity of Taiwan, including 

circumnavig ation flights by the PLAAF and naval exercises in the East China Sea. 

Taiwan’s national defense report released in 2017 cited concerns that increased PLA military activity 

near Taiwan poses an “enormous threat to security in the Taiwan Strait,” and that Taiwan requires a 

“multiple deterrence strategy,” including an emphasis on developing asymmetric warfare to counter 

PLA advances. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

97 

EAST CHINA SEA 

Key Takeaway  

> >

China continues to use maritime law enforcement ships and aircraft to patrol near the Japan -

administered Senkaku Islands. 

China claims sovereignty over the Japanese -administered Senkaku Islands in the East China Sea, which 

Taiwan also claims. The United States does not take a position on sovereignty of the Senkaku Islands 

but recognizes Japan’s ad ministration of the islands and continues to reaffirm that the islands fall 

within the scope of Article 5 of the U.S. -Japan Mutual Security Treaty. In addition, the United States 

opposes any unilateral actions that seek to undermine Japan’s administration of the islands. China uses 

maritime law enforcement ships and aircraft to patrol near the islands. During 2019, China typically 

maintained a presence in the Senkaku Islands with four CCG ships, which enter the waters within 12 

nm of the islands. The CCG co nducted its longest -ever patrol, 64 days, in the Senkaku Islands 

contiguous zone in 2019, and entered Japanese territorial waters in the Tsugaru Strait. 

Separately, the PLA Navy (PLAN) frequently advances into the Pacific Ocean by passing between 

Japan’s O kinawa and Miyako Islands. The Eastern Theater Navy regularly conducts military exercises 

in the Sea of Japan to prepare for potential conflicts. OFFICE OF THE SE CRETARY OF DEFENSE 

Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 

98 OFFICE OF THE SE CRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

99 

SOUTHERN THEATER COM MAND 

Key Takeaway  

> >

The Southern Theater Command is oriented toward the South China Se a, Southeast Asia border 

security, and territorial and maritime disputes. 

The area of responsibility of the Southern Theater Command covers mainland and maritime Southeast 

Asia, including the South China Sea. This geographic area implies that the Southern Theater 

Command is responsible for securing the South China Sea, supporting the Eastern Theater Command 

in any invasion of Taiwan, responding to territorial disputes, and assuring the security of sea lines of 

communication (SLOCs) seen as vital to China’s global ambitions. PLA units located within the 

Southern Theater Command are two group armies, a naval fleet, two marine brigades, two Air Force 

bases, and two Rocket Force bases. The Southern Theater Command is responsible for responding 

to U.S. freedom of navigation operations in the South China Sea, and likely commands all CCG and 

maritime militia ships conducting operations within China’s claimed “nine -dash line.”  

> >

The Southern Theater Command is responsible for training, force disposition, and operations in 

the South China Sea. In 2019, Southern Theater Command units conducted multiple live -fire drills 

and amphibious training events near PRC -occupied features in the South China Sea. The Southern 

Theater Command also plays a significant role in the PLA’s b ilateral and multilateral exercises with 

countries in Southeast Asia, participating in counterterrorism and naval exercises in 2019.  

> >

The Southern Theater Command commands the PLA Hong Kong and Macao garrisons. In 

August 2019, the PLA Hong Kong and Macao ga rrisons conducted an annual rotation of forces. 

In Hong Kong, PLA and probable People’s Armed Police (PAP) forces deployed into Hong Kong 

by land, air, and sea from Shenzhen at night, however, no forces were observed rotating out of 

Hong Kong. The PRC’s tr oop rotation announcement in 2019 did not include a statement that 

PLA troop and equipment levels remain unchanged. Throughout the months of protests, PAP 

and PLA units have been publicly highlighting their anti -riot, counterterrorism, and disaster 

prevent ion training.  

> >

All the PLA’s 24 Su -35s purchased from Russia are assigned to the Southern Theater Command 

Air Force, and have flown patrols in the South China Sea and into the Western Pacific. The 

Southern Theater Command was the first command to receive th e PLAN’s H -6J maritime strike 

bombers. China’s first -domestically produced aircraft carrier arrived in the Southern Theater 

Command at Yulin Naval Base, very likely its operational base, in November 2019 with embarked 

J-15s. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

100 

SOUTH CHINA SEA 

Key Takeaways  

> >

In 2019, China did not resume South China Sea land reclamation or major military infrastructure 

construction at its seven Spratly Islands outposts . 

> >

China’s outposts are capable of supporting military operations and include advanced weapon 

systems; however, no large -scale air presence has been yet observed in the Spratly Islands . 

> >

In 2019, China deployed PLAN, CCG, and civilian ships in response to Vietnamese and Malaysian 

drilling operations within China’s claimed “nine -dash -line” and construction by the Ph ilippines at 

Thitu Island. 

Developments in the Security Situation . In July 2016, an arbitral tribunal convened pursuant to 

provisions in the 1982 Law of the Sea Convention ruled in a case brought by the Philippines that 

China’s claims to “historic rights” in the South China Sea within the area depicted by the “nine -dash 

line” could not exceed its maritime rights or entitlements as specifically provided in relevant provisions 

of the Law of the Sea Convention. Despite the decision, the PRC continues to use co ercive tactics, 

including the employment of PLA naval and paramilitary vessels, to enforce its claims and advance its 

interests. China does so in ways calculated to remain below the threshold of provoking conflict. China 

has deployed anti -ship cruise missi les (ASCMs) and long -range surface -to -air missiles (SAMs) to the 

Spratly Islands, and fighters and SAMs to the disputed Paracel Islands.  

> >

China states that international military presence within the South China Sea is a challenge to its 

sovereignty. China c ontinues to employ coercive tactics to enforce its claims. In 2019, China 

deployed PLAN, CCG, and civilian ships in response to Vietnamese and Malaysian drilling 

operations within China’s claimed “nine -dash line” and construction by the Philippines at Thit u

Island.  

> >

In July 2019, China and Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) members completed 

the first reading of the China -ASEAN Code of Conduct, with a second and third reading 

remaining before China and ASEAN members finalize the agreement. China and ASEAN 

member states seek to complete negotiations by 2021. The negotiations are unlikely to produce 

substantive outcomes because China and some South China Sea claimants are probably sensitive 

to diplomatic language that limits their activities and a r equirement for ASEAN consensus. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

101 

Outposts Capable of Supporting Military Operations. Since early 2018, PRC -occupied Spratly 

Island outposts have been equipped with advanced anti -ship and anti -aircraft missile systems and 

military jamming equipment, marki ng the most capable land -based weapons systems deployed by any 

claimant in the disputed South China Sea to date. From early 2018 to late 2019, China regularly utilized 

its Spratly Islands outposts to support naval and coast guard operations in the South Ch ina Sea. 

The PRC completed military infrastructure on its three larger outposts in the Spratly Islands at Fiery 

Cross, Subi, and Mischief Reefs by early 2018, including aviation facilities, port facilities, fixed -

weapons positions, barracks, administration buildings, and communications facilities; and shore -based OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

102 

infrastructure on its four smaller outposts in the Spratly Islands —Johnson, Gaven, Hughes, and 

Cuarteron Reefs —by early 2016, including administrative buildings, weapons stations, and sensor 

emplac ements. 

No substantial land has been reclaimed at any of the outposts since the PRC completed its extensive 

artificial manipulation in the Spratly Islands in late 2015, after adding more than 3,200 acres of land 

to the seven features it occupies in the Spr atlys. 

China has stated these projects are mainly to improve marine research, safety of navigation, and the 

living and working conditions of personnel stationed on the outposts. However, the outposts provide 

airfields, berthing areas, and resupply faciliti es that allow China to maintain a more flexible and 

persistent military and paramilitary presence in the area. This improves China’s ability to detect and 

challenge activities by rival claimants or third parties and widens the range of response options 

ava ilable to China. OFFICE OF THE SE CRETARY OF DEFENSE 

Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 

103 OFFICE OF THE SE CRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

104 

WESTERN THEATER COMM AND 

Key Takeaway  

> >

The Western Theater Command is oriented towards India and “counterterrorism” missions 

along the PRC’s western borders. 

The Western Theater Command is geographically the largest theater command wi thin China and is 

likely responsible for responding to conflict with India and terrorist and insurgent threats to and within 

western China. PLA units located within the Western Theater Command include two group armies, 

other Army units under the region’s t wo military districts (Xinjiang and Tibet), three Air Force bases, 

and one Rocket Force base. PAP units responsible for Xinjiang operations are also likely under the 

control of the Western Theater Command. 

Within China, the Western Theater Command focuses on the Xinjiang and Tibet Autonomous 

Regions where the CPP perceives a high threat of separatism and terrorism, particularly among Uyghur 

populations. According to the U.S. Department of State’s 2019 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices ,

the PRC in 20 19 “continued its campaign of mass detention of members of Muslim minority groups 

in the Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region (Xinjiang). Authorities were reportedly to have arbitrarily 

detained more than one million Uyghurs, ethnic Kazakhs, Kyrgyz, and other Muslims in extrajudicial 

internment camps designed to erase religious and ethnic identities. Chinese government officials 

justified the camps under the pretense of combatting terrorism, separatism, and extremism.” 

CHINA -INDIA BORDER 

Key Takeaways  

> >

In 201 9, officials from the PRC and India continued regular meetings regarding their disputed 

border, while low -level face -offs persisted between Chinese and Indian military personnel.  

> >

Chinese and Indian forces both continued construction and patrols in conteste d regions along the 

disputed border, but generally kept tensions from escalating in 2019. 

Chinese and Indian patrols regularly encountered one another along their disputed border, and both 

sides often accuse each other of border incursions. Despite low -lev el face -offs among troops in 2019, 

China and India prevented these incidents from escalating to the level of the 73 -day border standoff 

at the Doklam Plateau in 2017. In 2019, Chinese and Indian forces engaged in regular border meetings 

to discuss disputes . Meanwhile, Chinese and Indian officials continued diplomatic discussions on 

border issues. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

105  

> >

In October 2019, President Xi Jinping met with Prime Minister Narendra Modi in Chennai, India 

to discuss economic relations and the importance of the peaceful reso lution of contentious issues, 

particularly regarding the border. This meeting was the second summit between Xi and Modi, the 

first of which occurred in April 2018 following the 2017 Doklam standoff.  

> >

In August 2019, China submitted “early harvest” proposals regarding China -India border issues 

to India, which was the first time that China had approached India with resolution proposals. 

Although India was not pleased with the proposals, the 22nd meeting of the Special 

Representatives of India and China occurre d in December 2019 and reinforced both sides’ shared 

intent to manage tensions in the border region. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 

Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 

106 OFFICE OF THE SE CRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

107 

NORTHERN THEATER COM MAND 

Key Takeaway  

> >

The Northern Theater Command is oriented toward the Korean Peninsula and Russian border 

security. 

The area of responsibility of the Northern Theater Command includes the majority of China’s borders 

with Mongolia and Russia, North Korea, and the Yellow Sea. The Northern Theater is responsible 

for operations along China’s northern periphery and conducting border stability operations associated 

with a North Korean contingency and northern border contingencies involving Mongolia or Russia. 

PLA units located within the Northern Theater Command are three group armies, a naval fleet, two 

marine brigades, two air bases , and one PLARF base. The Northern Theater Navy would be 

responsible primarily for protecting the sea approaches to northern China, but could provide mission -

critical assets to support other fleets. In 2019, the Northern Theater Command Navy carried out a 

comprehensive anti -submarine drill and a long -range air defense maneuver exercise. The Northern 

Theater Air Force also executed a combat -readiness drill, conducting day and nighttime patrols. 

RELATIONS WITH NORTH KOREA 

Key Takeaways  

> >

China’s strained rel ationship with North Korea appeared to warm somewhat in 2019.  

> >

The PLA continued to conduct military exercises in preparation for a contingency on the Korean 

Peninsula. 

The PRC’s relationship with North Korea appeared to warm somewhat following a period ten sions 

after China increased implementation of UN Security Council resolutions in 2017. China largely 

continues to enforce a number of the UN Security Council’s resolution sanctions against North Korea, 

but Beijing regularly fails to act against illicit shi p-to -ship transfers in China's territorial seas, take action 

against China -based North Korean banking and weapons trade representatives and their activities, and 

continues to import coal —albeit at lower volumes —via Chinese barges and ship -to -ship transfers . In 

2019, President Xi Jinping met twice with Kim Jong -un, complementing numerous lower -level official 

exchanges in both North Korea and China. China and North Korea restarted high -level military 

diplomacy, which included North Korean participation in the PLA Navy’s (PLAN’s) international 

fleet review and several meetings between military officials. These engagements include a high -level OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

108 

visit by the director of the General Political Bureau of the Korean People’s Army Kim Su -gil with 

CMC 

Vice Chairman Zha ng Youxia in Beijing. China’s objectives for the Korean Peninsula include stability, 

denuclearization, and the absence of U.S. forces near China’s border. China’s focus on maintaining 

stability on the Korean Peninsula involves preventing North Korea’s coll apse and military conflict on 

the Peninsula. Toward these ends, China continues to advocate for a dual -track approach towards 

North Korea that embraces both dialogue and pressure, and that encourages the resumption of U.S. -

North Korea talks. 

The PLA conduc ts military exercises in preparation for a contingency on the Korean Peninsula 

including air, land, sea, and chemical defense training events. China’s leaders could order the Northern 

Theater Command to engage in a range of operations in the event of a cri sis. These could include 

securing the China -North Korea border to prevent the flow of refugees or a military intervention into 

North Korea. China could cite the 1961 Treaty of Friendship, Co -operation and Mutual Assistance 

that it signed with North Korea a s a justification to send the PLA into North Korea. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 

Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 

109 OFFICE OF THE SE CRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

110 

CENTRAL THEATER COMM AND 

Key Takeaway 

> The Central Theater Command is oriented toward capital defense and providing surge support to 

other theaters. 

The Central Theater Command is responsible for the defense of the capital, providing security for 

CCP leadership, and serving as a strategic reserve to the other theater commands. The Central Theater 

Command’s area of responsibility stretches from the Bohai Gulf to the interior of China, connecting 

the other four theater commands. Units within the Central Theater Command include three group 

armies, two Air Force bases, and one Rocket Force base. Although the Central Theater Command 

has coastal responsibilities, it lacks a subordinate naval fleet. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 

Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 

111 OFFICE OF THE SE CRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

112 

CHINA’S STRATEGY AND CAPABILITIES DEVELO PMENT IN THE TAIWAN 

STRAIT 

Key Takeaways  

> >

Although China advocates for peaceful unification with Taiwan, China has never renounced the 

use of military force; the circumstances under which China has historically warned it would use 

force remain ambiguous and have evolved over time.  

> >

China has a range of options for military campaigns against Taiwan, from an air and maritime 

blockade to a full -scale amphibious invasion to seize and occupy some or all of Taiwan or its 

offshore islands. 

The PRC appears willing to defer the use of military force as long as it considers that unification with 

Taiwan could be negotiated over the long -term and the costs of conflict outweigh the benefits. China 

argues that the c redible threat of force is essential to maintaining the conditions for political progress 

and preventing Taiwan from making moves toward independence. In January 2019, President Xi 

Jinping publicly reiterated China’s long -standing refusal to renounce the u se of force to resolve the 

Taiwan issue. In the same speech, Xi also reaffirmed China’s longstanding position for peaceful 

unification under the principle of “one country, two systems.” 

The circumstances under which the PRC has historically warned it would use force have evolved over 

time. These circumstances have included:  

> >

Formal declaration of Taiwan independence;  

> >

Undefined moves toward Taiwan independence;  

> >

Internal unrest in Taiwan;  

> >

Taiwan’s acquisition of nuclear weapons;  

> >

Indefinite delays in the r esumption of cross -Strait dialogue on unification;  

> >

Foreign intervention in Taiwan’s internal affairs; and,  

> >

Foreign forces stationed on Taiwan. 

Article 8 of China’s March 2005 Anti -Secession Law states China may use “non -peaceful means” if 

“secessionist for ces . . . cause the fact of Taiwan’s secession from China,” if “major incidents entailing 

Taiwan’s secession” occur, or if “possibilities for peaceful reunification” are exhausted. China’s use of 

such non -specific conditions increases their policy flexibil ity through deliberate strategic ambiguity. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

113 

China continues to view the Taiwan issue as the most important and sensitive issue between the United 

States and China. 

CHINA’S COURSES OF A CTION AGAINST TAIWAN 

The PRC continues to signal its willingness to us e military force against Taiwan. The PLA has a range 

of options to coerce Taipei based on its increasing capabilities in multiple domains. China could pursue 

a measured approach by signaling its readiness to use force or conduct punitive actions against Ta iwan. 

The PLA could also conduct a more comprehensive campaign designed to force Taiwan to capitulate 

to unification, or unification dialogue under China’s terms. Notably, China would seek to deter 

potential U.S. intervention in any Taiwan contingency camp aign – capabilities that the PRC 

highlighted during its October 2019 military parade celebrating its 70 th anniversary. Failing that, China 

would attempt to delay and defeat intervention in an asymmetric, limited war of short duration. In the 

event of a pro tracted conflict, China might choose to escalate cyberspace, space, or nuclear activities 

in an attempt to end the conflict, or it might choose to fight to a stalemate and pursue a political 

settlement. The PLA could initiate the military options listed be low individually or in combination. 

Air and Maritime Blockade. PLA writings describe a Joint Blockade Campaign in which China 

would employ kinetic blockades of maritime and air traffic, including a cut -off of Taiwan’s vital 

imports, to force Taiwan’s capit ulation. Large -scale missile strikes and possible seizures of Taiwan’s 

offshore islands would accompany a Joint Blockade in an attempt to achieve a rapid Taiwan surrender, 

while at the same time, posturing air and naval forces to conduct weeks or months of blockade 

operations if necessary. China will also likely complement its air and maritime blockade operations 

with concurrent electronic warfare (EW), network attacks, and information operations (IO) to further 

isolate Taiwan’s authorities and populace and to control the international narrative of the conflict. 

Limited Force or Coercive Options . China could use a variety of disruptive, punitive, or lethal 

military actions in a limited campaign against Taiwan, probably in conjunction with overt and 

clandesti ne economic and political activities supported by a variety of IO to shape perceptions or 

undercut the effectiveness or legitimacy of the Taiwan authorities. Such a campaign could include 

computer network or limited kinetic attacks against Taiwan’s politic al, military, and economic 

infrastructure to induce fear in Taiwan and degrade the Taiwan population’s confidence in their leaders. 

Similarly, PLA special operations forces (SOF) could infiltrate Taiwan and conduct attacks against 

infrastructure or leaders hip targets. 

Air and Missile Campaign. China could use missile attacks and precision air strikes against air 

defense systems, including air bases, radar sites, missiles, space assets, and communications facilities 

to degrade Taiwan’s defenses, neutralize T aiwan’s leadership, or break the Taiwan people’s resolve. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

114 

Invasion of Taiwan. Publicly available Chinese writings describe different operational concepts for 

an amphibious invasion of Taiwan. The most prominent of these, the Joint Island Landing Campaign, 

envisions a complex operation relying on coordinated, interlocking campaigns for logistics, air, and 

naval support, and EW. The objective would be to break through or circumvent shore defenses, 

establish and build a beachhead, transport personnel and mater iel to designated landing sites in the 

north or south of Taiwan’s western coastline, and launch attacks to seize and occupy key targets or 

the entire island. In 2019, the PLA conducted joint amphibious assault exercises near Taiwan. 

Furthermore, China cont inues to build capabilities that would contribute to a full -scale invasion; in 

2019, the PLA completed construction of its first helicopter dock amphibious assault ship (LHA). 

Large -scale amphibious invasion is one of the most complicated and difficult mil itary operations. 

Success depends upon air and maritime superiority, the rapid buildup and sustainment of supplies 

onshore, and uninterrupted support. An attempt to invade Taiwan would likely strain China’s armed 

forces and invite international interventio n. These stresses, combined with China’s combat force 

attrition and the complexity of urban warfare and counterinsurgency, even assuming a successful 

landing and breakout, make an amphibious invasion of Taiwan a significant political and military risk. 

The PLA is capable of accomplishing various amphibious operations short of a full -scale invasion of 

Taiwan as well. With few overt military preparations beyond routine training, China could launch an 

invasion of small Taiwan -occupied islands in the South Chin a Sea such as Pratas or Itu Aba. A PLA 

invasion of a medium -sized, better -defended island such as Matsu or Jinmen is within China’s 

capabilities. Such an invasion would demonstrate military capability, political resolve, and achieve 

tangible territorial ga in while simultaneously showing some measure of restraint. However, this kind 

of operation involves significant, and possibly prohibitive, political risk because it could galvanize pro -

independence sentiment on Taiwan and generate international opposition. OFFICE OF THE SE CRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

115 

Effect of PLA Reform on a Taiwan Contingency 

One of the overarching goals of the structural reforms to reshape the PLA was to construct a military 

capable of conducting complex joint operations, including those that would be involved in a Taiwan 

cont ingency. PLA reforms seek to clarify command authorities, improving joint integration, and 

facilitating the transition from peace to war. The abolishment of military regions in favor of military 

theaters – in this case, the PLA’s Eastern Theater Command – has also likely streamlined and 

improved the PLA’s ability to conduct yearlong planning and preparation for joint military operations 

across the Taiwan Strait. PLA combat units are likely experiencing temporary decreases in readiness 

and proficiency to con duct large -scale joint operations as they reorganize units, integrate new 

capabilities, and adjust to new command structures. 

A significant addition to the overall structure of the PLA is the establishment of the Strategic Support 

Force (SSF) and the Joint Logistic Support Force (JLSF). During a Taiwan contingency, the JLSF, in 

conjunction with subordinate joint logistics support centers, would coordinate joint logistics and the 

delivery of materiel as well as oversee various civil -military support systems to sustain the campaign. 

The creation of the SSF likely improves the PLA’s ability to execute and coordinate IO (particularly 

cyber, EW, and counterspace) in a Taiwan contingency. It may also improve the PLA’s ability to 

manage and provide space -based reco nnaissance to the CMC and the Eastern Theater Command, 

improving PLA command staffs’ situational awareness of Taiwan’s military units and facilities. The 

PLA is likely still exploring how to reform its joint command processes to integrate IO and ISR 

capabi lities more fully at the theater -level, but structural reforms have removed the biggest barriers to 

integrating these strategic capabilities at the theater -level .

Structural reforms within the military and paramilitary forces also have implications on reso urces and 

operational capabilities available to the PLA for a future Taiwan contingency. OFFICE OF THE SE CRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

116 

THE PLA’S CURRENT PO STURE FOR A TAIWAN C ONFLICT 

PLA Army (PLAA ). The PLAA continues to enhance its readiness to prevent Taiwan independence 

and execute an invasion if necessary. Through their design and training, the PLAA’s restructured and 

improved combined -arms brigades prioritize maneuver, flexibility, and ability to deploy in different 

terrain environments while bringing ample firepower in combat scenarios beyon d China's borders. 

The PLA Eastern Theater Command and Southern Theater Command field multiple amphibious 

combined -arms brigades in relatively close proximity to Taiwan. These amphibious combined -arms 

brigades are outfitted with specialized vehicles and eq uipment, including Type 05 amphibious infantry 

fighting vehicles, amphibious assault guns, and other multi -purpose amphibious vehicles. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

117 

PLAA units continue to conduct amphibious assault training in both single service and joint 

environments. Recent trainin g involving PLAA amphibious elements and PLAN landing craft have 

likely sought to improve the tactical skills necessary to conduct an amphibious assault and provided 

experience to PLAA and PLAN leaders working together in a joint environment. As new system s

proliferate and complex training continues, the PLAA will likely increase its ability to establish, defend, 

and exploit a beachhead lodgment. 

Throughout 2019, the PLAA highlighted training opportunities within their aviation and air assault 

brigades. The PLAA's two air assault brigades provide increased attack, air assault, and close air 

support options for a Taiwan invasion. Additionally, the PLAA’s ongoing fielding of advanced air 

defense, EW, and command and control (C2) systems enhances the combat pow er, force protection, 

and sustainment capabilities of its brigades, which are essential for successful invasion scenarios. 

PLA Navy (PLAN). The PLAN is improving anti -air, anti -surface, and anti -submarine warfare 

capabilities, developing an at -sea nuclear deterrent, and introducing new multi -mission platforms 

capable of striking Taiwan’s naval forces in a cross -Strait conflict as well as conducting diverse 

missions in other contingency operations. New attack submarines and modern surface combatants 

with ant i-air capabilities and fourth -generation naval aircraft entering the force are designed to achieve 

maritime superiority within the First Island Chain as well as to deter and counter any potential third -

party intervention in a Taiwan conflict. China’s amphi bious ship fleet, however, has in recent years 

focused on acquiring a modest number of ocean -going amphibious transport docks (LPDs) and now 

LHAs, indicating a near term focus on regional and eventually global expeditionary missions rather 

than the large n umber of landing ship transports and medium landing craft that would be necessary 

for a large -scale direct beach assault. There is also no indication China is significantly expanding its 

force of LSTs and medium sized landing craft at this time – suggestin g a direct beach -assault operation 

requiring extensive lift is less likely in planning. 

PLA Air Force (PLAAF). The PLAAF has maintained a force posture that provides a variety of 

capabilities for a Taiwan contingency. It has acquired a large number of adva nced aircraft capable of 

conducting operations against Taiwan without requiring refueling, providing it with a significant 

capability to conduct air -superiority and ground -attack operations. A number of long -range air defense 

systems provide a strong layer of defense of China’s mainland against counterattack. In addition, 

China’s development of support aircraft provides the PLAAF with improved ISR capability to support 

PLA operations in a contingency. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

118 

PLA Rocket Force (PLARF). The PLARF is prepared to cond uct missile attacks against high -value 

targets, including Taiwan’s C2 facilities, air bases, radar sites, and others in an attempt to degrade 

Taiwan’s defenses, neutralize Taiwan’s leadership, or break the public’s will to fight. 

Strategic Support Force ( SSF). PLA doctrinal writings emphasize the importance of space and 

cyberspace domains in joint operations. The PRC’s 2019 defense white paper states that its armed 

forces are accelerating the build -up of its cyberspace capabilities, specifically its cyber defenses and its 

ability to detect and counter network intrusions. PLA writings suggest that the SSF would be 

responsible for the use of EW and cyber operations during a Taiwan contingency, as one of the 

missions of the force is “seizing and maintaining ba ttlefield information control in contemporary 

informatized warfare.” The SSF 311 Base would also be responsible for political and psychological 

warfare against Taiwan to influence public opinion and promote the PRC’s interests. 

Joint Logistic Support Forc e (JLSF). The JLSF’s primary goal is to provide joint logistics support 

to the PLA’s strategic and campaign -level operations , such as a Taiwan contingency, by conducting 

C2 of joint logistics, delivering materiel, and overseeing various support mechanisms. 

China’s Amphibious Capabilities 

The PLA continues to make modest gains in amphibious warfare by developing additional capabilities 

to conduct amphibious landings and seize and defend small islands. The PLA has 12 units organized 

and equipped to conduct amphibious operations. Over the last five years, the PLAA and the PLA 

Navy Marine Corps (PLANMC) have fielded new equipment designed specifically for amphibious 

operations such as the ZBD -05 amphibious infantry fighting vehicle and the PLZ -07B amphibious 

self -propelled howitzer. The PLA has also made efforts to improve its ability to insert forces by air, 

restructuring the Airborne Corps and establishing Army air assault units, which would seize key terrain 

and interdict Taiwan counterattacks. Both PLAA an d PLANMC units equipped for amphibious 

operations conduct regular company - to battalion -level amphibious training exercises, and the PLA 

continues to integrate aerial insertion training into larger exercises, to include dropping airborne troops 

from the Y -20 heavy -lift aircraft for the first time. However, the PLA rarely conducts amphibious 

exercises involving echelons above a battalion, though both PLAA and PLANMC units have 

emphasized the development of combined -arms battalion formations since 2012 .OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress :Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

119 

TA IWAN’S DEFENSIVE CAP ABILITIES 

Key Takeaways  

> >

China’s multi -decade military modernization effort has eroded or negated many of the military 

advantages that Taiwan has historically enjoyed the context of a cross -Strait conflict.  

> >

To counter China’s improving capabilities, Taiwan is developing new concepts and capabilities for 

asymmetric warfare. 

Taiwan has historically enjoyed military advantages in the context of a cross -Strait conflict, such as 

technological superiority and the inherent geographic advantages of island defense, but China’s multi -

decade military modernization effort has eroded or negated many of these advantages. Although 

Taiwan is taking important steps to compensate for the growing disparities – building its war reserve 

stocks, growing its de fense -industrial base, improving joint operations and crisis response capabilities, 

and strengthening its officer and noncommissioned officer corps – these improvements only partially 

address Taiwan’s declining defensive advantages. Taiwan’s Ministry of Na tional Defense 2019 National 

Defense Report reflects adjustments to the military’s strategy for defending the island, placing greater 

emphasis on protecting its littorals and near -shore coastal areas. The modified strategy stresses 

enhanced asymmetric capa bilities, as well as suggesting greater reliance on Taiwan’s Air Force and 

Navy. Taiwan’s armed forces are authorized to fill approximately 215,000 billets, including 188,000 

active duty billets. Reservists and civil defense volunteers support the active d uty forces. The Ministry 

of National Defense has stated that its goal is to fill 90 percent of the billets (or approximately 169,000) 

by 2020. Taiwan’s military modernization program envisions a continued decrease in Taiwan’s active 

duty force to approxima tely 175,000 personnel as part of a transition to an all -volunteer force. This 

transition has slowed due to severe difficulties recruiting volunteers. The cost savings from manpower 

reductions provides some margin to improve individual pay and benefits, ho using, and incentive pay; 

however, these savings have been insufficient to cover the full increase in manpower -related costs 

needed to attract and retain personnel under the new system. The unanticipated magnitude of 

transition costs has led Taiwan to dive rt funds from foreign and indigenous defense acquisition 

programs, as well as near -term training and readiness. Taiwan also faces considerable equipment and 

readiness challenges. 

In addition, Taiwan’s military spending remains at approximately two percent of its gross domestic 

product. In August 2019, Taiwan said it would increase the island’s defense budget by 5.2 percent to 

NT $358 billion ($11.6 billion). Meanwhile, China’s official defense budget continues to grow, and for 

2019, is roughly 15 times that of Taiwan, with much of it focused on developing the capability to unify OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

120 

Taiwan with the PRC by force. Recognizing the growing disparity between their respective defense 

expenditures, Taiwan has stated that it is working to develop new concepts and capabi lities for 

asymmetric warfare. Some specific areas of emphasis include offensive and defensive information and 

EW, high -speed stealth vessels, shore -based mobile missiles, rapid mining and minesweeping, 

unmanned aerial systems, and critical infrastructure protection. 

The United States maintains a “one -China” policy that is based on the Taiwan Relations Act (TRA) 

and the three Joint Communiqués. The United States opposes unilateral actions aimed at altering the 

status quo. The United States continues to supp ort the peaceful resolution of cross -Strait issues in a 

manner, scope, and pace acceptable to both sides. 

Consistent with the TRA, the United States contributes to peace, security, and stability in the Taiwan 

Strait by providing defense articles and servi ces to enable Taiwan to maintain a sufficient self -defense 

capability. In May 2020, the White House publicly released a report to Congress entitled, United States 

Strategic Approach to the People’s Republic of China. The report states, “Beijing’s failure t o honor its 

commitments under the communiques, as demonstrated by its massive military buildup, compels the 

United States to continue to assist the Taiwan military in maintaining a credible self -defense, which 

deters aggression and helps to ensure peace an d stability in the region. In a 1982 memorandum, 

President Ronald Reagan insisted ‘that the quantity and quality of the arms provided Taiwan be 

conditioned entirely on the threat posed by the PRC.’” In October 2019, Taiwan announced the 

purchase of F -16V f ighter aircraft for $8 billion. Since 2010, the United States has announced more 

than $23 billion in arms sales to Taiwan. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 

Annual Report to Congress : Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 

121 

# 4

# THE PL A’S GROWING GLOBAL 

# PRESENCE OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress :Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

122 

Key Takeaways  

> >

CCP leaders believe that the PRC’s global activities, including the PLA’s growing global presence, 

are nece ssary to create a “favorable” international environment for China’s national rejuvenation.  

> >

The CCP has tasked the PLA to develop the capability to project power outside China’s borders 

and immediate periphery to secure the PRC’s growing overseas interests and advance its foreign 

policy goals. 

The CCP seeks to create international conditions that are conducive to the PRC’s continued 

development and that are compatible with its aspirations for China’s rejuvenation as a “great modern 

socialist country.” CCP le aders believe that the PRC’s global activities, including the PLA’s growing 

global presence, contribute to creating a “favorable” international environment for China’s national 

rejuvenation. This evolving approach parallels the Party’s view that the initia l decades of the 21st 

century represent a “period of strategic opportunity” to focus on building China’s composite national 

power. 

The CCP has tasked the PLA to develop the capability to project power outside China’s borders and 

immediate periphery to secu re the PRC’s growing overseas interests and advance its foreign policy 

goals. China is focusing efforts to develop security relationships with key countries along its periphery 

and beyond the Second Island Chain. In addition to promoting the One Belt, One Road (OBOR) 

initiative, China almost certainly will seek new cooperative security partnerships with foreign nations, 

including the expansion of the PLA’s global military attaché presence and access, and ensuring more 

reliable, cost -effective, and diverse s ources of energy and other strategic resources. 

The PRC probably will continue to expand the PLA’s global military presence through humanitarian 

assistance, naval escorts and port calls, UN peacekeeping operations (PKO), arm sales, influence 

operations, an d bilateral and multilateral military exercises. Through these engagements, Beijing can 

strengthen and expand its diplomatic relationships to advance its foreign policy goals, to include 

shaping the international system to align with the PRC’s interests, a nd allow the PLA to gain 

operational experience. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress :Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

123 

CHINA’S ONE BELT, ON E ROAD (OBOR) INITIA TIVE 

Key Takeaways  

> >

Beijing uses OBOR to support its strategy of national rejuvenation by seeking to expand global 

transportation and trade linkages to support its d evelopment and deepen its economic integration 

with nations along its periphery and beyond.  

> >

The PRC’s overseas development and security interests under OBOR will drive the PRC towards 

expanding its overseas military footprint to protect those interests. 

Fi rst announced in 2013, China’s OBOR initiative is a signature foreign and economic policy advanced 

by President Xi Jinping. Beijing uses OBOR to support its strategy of national rejuvenation by seeking 

to expand global transportation and trade linkages to support its development and deepen its 

economic integration with nations along its periphery and beyond. China implements OBOR by 

financing, constructing, and developing transportation infrastructure, natural gas pipelines, 

hydropower projects, digital con nectivity, and technology and industrial parks worldwide. PRC leaders 

have touted the economic benefits of OBOR and invited foreign partners to join, promising wealth 

and prosperity to those nations that participate. Since its creation, over 125 countries have signed 

OBOR cooperation documents. OBOR -related spending is difficult to estimate because there is no 

comprehensive list of projects. 

In support of its national strategy, the PRC pursues a range of goals through OBOR to include 

strengthening its terr itorial integrity, increasing its energy security, and expanding its international 

influence. Given the Party views the PRC’s security and development interests as complementary, the 

PRC leverages OBOR to invest in projects along China’s western and southe rn periphery to improve 

stability and diminish threats along its borders. Similarly, OBOR projects associated with pipelines 

and port construction in Pakistan intend to decrease China’s reliance on transporting energy resources 

through strategic choke poin ts, such as the Strait of Malacca. 

The PRC attempts to use the economic influence it accrues through OBOR to encourage participating 

countries to support Beijing’s priorities and objectives on a range of other matters. The PRC applies 

military, intelligenc e, diplomatic, and economic tools to counter perceived threats to OBOR’s long -

term viability, although the party -state lacks the expertise necessary to assess comprehensive risks in 

most OBOR participating countries. China’s leaders have tried to counterac t negative perceptions of 

OBOR to attract potential investors as well as reduce suspicions of Beijing’s intentions. In the wake 

of domestic and international criticism of OBOR, China has attempted to appear more responsive to 

partner -country input, and ope n to wider participation. In April 2019, China hosted leaders from 37 OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

124 

countries and delegates from over 150 countries to the second Belt and Road Forum in Beijing. During 

the forum, PRC leaders attempted to respond to criticism and concerns over corruption , debt 

sustainability, environmental effects, and the CCP’s underlying goals associated with OBOR. 

As the PRC’s overseas development and security interests expand under OBOR, the CCP has signaled 

that its overseas military footprint will expand accordingly to protect those interests, which the CCP 

recognizes may provoke pushback from other states. Some of OBOR’s planned economic corridors 

would transit regions prone to violence, separatism, armed conflict, and instability, putting OBOR -

related projects and PRC citizens working overseas at risk. China’s defense and security outreach has 

sought to extend its ability to project military power to safeguard its overseas interests, including 

OBOR, by developing closer regional and bilateral counterterrorism cooper ation, supporting host -

nation security forces, and other means. 

CHINA’S GLOBAL MILIT ARY ACTIVITIES 

Key Takeaways  

> >

The PRC has increasingly recognized that its armed forces should take a more active role in 

advancing its foreign policy goals.  

> >

As the PRC’s overseas interests have grown over the past two decades, the Party’s leaders have 

increasingly pushed the PLA to think about how it will operate beyond China’s borders and its 

immediate periphery to advance and defend these interests.  

> >

In 2019, the PLA con tinued to expand its participation in bilateral and multilateral military 

exercises, normalize its presence overseas, and build closer ties to foreign militaries. 

As the PRC’s overseas interests have grown over the past two decades, the Party’s leaders hav e

increasingly pushed the PLA to think about how it will operate beyond China’s borders and its 

immediate periphery to advance and defend these interests. More recently, the PRC has recognized 

that its armed forces should take a more active role in advanci ng its foreign policy goals. The PRC’s 

2019 defense white paper notably described its armed forces as responding, “faithfully to the call for 

a community with a shared future for mankind” and called on its military to “actively participate in 

the reform of global security governance system.” In line with this direction, the PLA in 2019 

continued to expand its participation in bilateral and multilateral military exercises, normalize its 

presence overseas, and build closer ties to foreign militaries. The PLA is increasingly likely to couch 

the purpose of its external activities in terms of providing direct support to the PRC’s foreign policy 

goals, such as advancing China’s strategic partnerships through greater military cooperation. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

125 

The PLA’s Evolving Mission s and Tasks . In 2004, one of the “new historic missions” given to the 

PLA by then -President Hu Jintao was to support China’s overseas interests and diplomacy. The 

PLAN’s evolving focus —from “offshore waters defense” to a mix of “offshore waters defense” an d

“open seas protection” —reflects the PLAN’s interest in a wider operational reach. The PLAAF’s 

missions and tasks have similarly evolved towards conducting operations beyond China and its 

immediate periphery and supporting the PRC’s interests by becoming a “strategic” air force. 

Additionally, the PLA has embraced its concept of non -war military activities (NWMA) as an effective 

way for it lend support to and safeguard China’s development, expand the PRC’s global interests, and 

gain valuable operational ex perience. 

The PLAN, PLAAF, PLAA, and SSF have deployed abroad for counterpiracy, humanitarian 

assistance and disaster relief (HA/DR), peacekeeping, training exercises, and space support operations. 

Within the PLA, the PLAN may have the most experience op erating abroad due to its far seas 

deployments and counterpiracy missions, the PLAAF likely has the most experience conducting rapid 

response HA/DR operations abroad, and the PLAA has the most experience conducting PKO. The 

SSF runs tracking, telemetry, an d command stations in Namibia, Pakistan, and Argentina. The SSF 

also has a handful of Yuan Wang space support ships to track satellite and intercontinental ballistic 

missile (ICBM) launches.  

> >

Since 2008, PLAN ships have visited the Middle East, Europe, Afri ca, South Asia, Southeast Asia, 

Oceania, and Latin America. The PLAN has also conducted submarine deployments to the Indian 

Ocean, demonstrating its increasing familiarity with operating in that region and underscoring 

China’s interest in protecting sea li nes of communication (SLOCs) beyond the South China Sea. 

In 2015, three PLAN ships from a Gulf of Aden naval escort task force evacuated 629 PRC 

citizens from Yemen to Djibouti and Oman.  

> >

Since 2002, the PLAAF has delivered aid after natural disasters throu ghout Southeast Asia and 

South Asia, assisted with evacuation from Libya in 2015, and searched for Malaysian aircraft 

MH370 in 2014. 

Counterpiracy Efforts. In 2019, China continued to conduct counterpiracy operations in the Gulf 

of Aden by deploying its 31 st, 32nd, and 33rd naval escort task forces to the area since 2008. The 

32nd Task Force escorted 42 Chinese and foreign ships during its deployment and participated in the 

China -France military exchange and the Russian Navy Day festival celebrations. At th e conclusion of 

deployments, these task groups conduct port calls and held bilateral engagements with host country 

militaries and local Chinese communities, providing additional opportunities for PLA military 

diplomacy. The 32nd Task Force conducted port c alls to Mozambique and Malaysia. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

126 

Peacekeeping Operations . In 2019, China remained the largest troop contributor to UN 

peacekeeping missions among the permanent members of the UN Security Council. China uses it 

participation in UN PKO to highlight its role as a “responsible” global actor and to obtain operational 

experience for the PLA. The PLA uses its participation in PKO to refine its ability to operate beyond 

the PRC’s borders. The PLA highlighted its peacekeeping contributions in the PRC’s 70th annivers ary 

parade in October 2019.  

> >

China provides personnel to UN operations in Sudan, South Sudan, Mali, the Democratic 

Republic of the Congo, Western Sahara, Cyprus, Lebanon and elsewhere in the Middle East. PRC 

personnel deployed to PKO consist of troops, poli ce, staff officers, and experts including 

engineers, medical professionals, and logisticians. In August 2019, the PLAA sent its third 

helicopter detachment to Sudan, transported by PLAAF heavy -lift transport aircraft, and in 

November 2019, sent its sixth p eacekeeping infantry battalion to South Sudan.  

> >

As of December 2019, China was the tenth -largest contributor to UN PKOs with approximately 

2,545 personnel among eight UN PKO missions in Africa, Europe and the Middle East. China’s 

personnel contributions hav e decreased slightly since 2018 from 2,634 personnel in January 2018 

to 2,545 personnel in December 2019. China is the second largest contributor to UN PKO and 

funded 15.21 percent of the total $6.5 billion annual UN peacekeeping budget in 2019, an increas e

from 10.24 percent in 2018. 

Military Cooperation. Recognizing the PLA’s role in defending China’s overseas interests and 

supporting its foreign policy, the PRC’s 2019 defense white paper noted that the PLA “promotes 

international security and military co operation and refines relevant mechanisms for protecting China’s 

overseas interests.” As the PRC’s regional and international interests grow more complex, the PLA’s 

international engagements will likely continue to expand. For example, senior -level militar y visits and 

exchanges provide the PLA with opportunities to increase its officers’ international exposure, advance 

the PRC’s foreign policy goals through military assistance programs, and develop professional 

relationships. Expanding travel abroad for PLA officers enables the PLA to better observe and study 

foreign military command structures, unit formations, and operational training and shape approaches 

to shared security concerns. In 2019, PRC Defense Minister General Wei Fenghe attended the 

Shangri -La Dialogue for the first time since 2011 and spoke on the PRC’s role in the Indo -Pacific 

region. 

The PRC continues to expand the PLA’s participation in bilateral and multilateral military exercises, 

normalizing the PLA’s presence overseas and establishing ti es to foreign militaries. For example, in 

2019 the PLA participated in Russia's national -level exercise TSENTR -19 along with forces from India, OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

127 

Pakistan, Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan. To participate in the exercise, the PLA 

deployed 1,600 personnel from the Western Theater Command and nearly 30 fixed -wing aircraft and 

helicopters. For a list of selected PLA bilateral and multilateral exercises in 2019, see Appendix IV. 

In recent years, China has increased its military cooperation and engagements on security issues with 

the African Union (AU), with an emphasis on peacekeeping capacity building. In addition to providing 

PLA forces and other personnel to several UN PKOs in Africa, the PRC provides support to AU -

sanctioned operations incl uding the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to which it has 

provided equipment and $1.2 million in annual funding. China also provided $100 million dollars of 

military equipment to the AU -supported African Standby Force’s strategic stockpile at th e Continental 

Logistics Base in Douala, Cameroon. In July 2019, the PRC Ministry of National Defense hosted the 

first China -Africa Peace and Security Forum in Beijing. Attended by defense and military 

representatives from 50 African countries, the forum so ught to deepen China’s role in African security 

issues and more broadly promote the PRC’s foreign policy objectives to strengthen its strategic 

partnerships with African countries and further its concept of building a “community with a shared 

future for ma nkind.” 

CHINA -TAJIKISTAN COU NTERTERRORISM COOPER ATION 

Since at least 2016, People’s Armed Police (PAP) forces have likely operated in Tajikistan, patrolling 

the tri -border region connecting Tajikistan, Afghanistan, and China. This is likely tied to th e August 

2016 creation of a quadrilateral counterterrorism coordination mechanism between Afghanistan, 

China, Pakistan, and Tajikistan to jointly strengthen border security against China’s defined “three 

evils,” terrorism, separatism, and religious extremi sm. PAP forces operating in Tajikistan are from 

Xinjiang province, likely also exporting its more suppressive approach to the “three evils.”  

> >

Although the agreement may initially have authorized combined patrols, China now appears to be 

conducting unilatera l patrols in the tri -border region. The PLA is also expanding their cooperation 

with Tajikistan, notably expanding their bilateral counterterrorism exercise in 2019, including 

PLAAF fighters, fighter -bombers, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), and combined c lose -air 

support with Tajik special operations forces (SOF).  

> >

China’s concerns about border stability were probably heightened after U.S. and NATO combat 

forces began withdrawing from Afghanistan in 2014, especially concerns over terrorists moving 

from Afgh anistan into China’s Xinjiang province. In 2015, China passed a counterterrorism law 

authorizing overseas military counterterrorism operations. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

128  

> >

In 2011, China and Tajikistan settled their border dispute in this region by Tajikistan ceding more 

than 300 sq. miles of land to China. Since 2016, China has also agreed to build guard outposts and 

a training facility in the tri -border region, with some reports suggesting the new outposts could 

number as high as 40. 

PRC technology companies may also be collecting f acial recognition data on Tajikistanis with the 

citywide facial recognition supplied since at least 2013, similar to the surveillance equipment installed 

in Xinjiang. 

PLA OVERSEAS BASING AND ACCESS 

Key Takeaways  

> >

The PRC is seeking to establish a more rob ust overseas logistics and basing infrastructure to allow 

the PLA to project and sustain military power at greater distances.  

> >

A global PLA military logistics network could both interfere with U.S. military operations and 

support offensive operations agains t the United States as the PRC’s global military objectives 

evolve.  

> >

Beyond its base in Djibouti, the PRC is very likely already considering and planning for additional 

military logistics facilities to support naval, air, and ground forces projection.  

> >

The PRC has likely considered Myanmar, Thailand, Singapore, Indonesia, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, 

United Arab Emirates, Kenya, Seychelles, Tanzania, Angola, and Tajikistan as locations for PLA 

military logistics facilities. 

The PRC is seeking to establish a more ro bust overseas logistics and basing infrastructure to allow the 

PLA to project and sustain military power at greater distances. Beijing may assess that a mixture of 

military logistics models, including preferred access to commercial infrastructure abroad, e xclusive 

PLA logistics facilities with prepositioned supplies co -located with commercial infrastructure, and 

bases with stationed forces, most closely aligns with the PRC’s overseas military logistics needs. 

Currently, the PRC uses commercial infrastructur e to support all of its military operations abroad, 

including the PLA’s presence in other countries’ territories, including its base in Djibouti. Some of the 

PRC’s OBOR projects could create potential military advantages, such as PLA access to selected 

for eign ports to pre -position the necessary logistics support to sustain naval deployments in waters as 

distant as the Indian Ocean, Mediterranean Sea, and Atlantic Ocean to protect its growing interests. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

129 

PRC official sources assert that military logistics fa cilities, to include its Djibouti base, will be used to 

provide international public goods like support to U.N. operations and HA/DR, and to secure China’s 

lines of communication, citizens and assets abroad. Regardless, a global PLA military logistics netw ork 

could both interfere with U.S. military operations and support offensive operations against the United 

States as the PRC’s global military objectives evolve. Host nations can perform an essential role in 

regulating the PRC’s military operations, as PRC officials very likely recognize that a stable long -term 

relationship with the host nation is critical to the success of their military logistics facilities.  

> >

PRC military academics assert that bases abroad can enable forward deployment of PLA forces 

and su pport military conflict, diplomatic signaling, political change, bilateral and multilateral 

cooperation, and training. They also suggest that a military logistics network could enable 

intelligence monitoring of the U.S. military.  

> >

In August 2017, the PRC of ficially opened its first PLA base in Djibouti. PLA Navy Marines are 

stationed at the base with wheeled armored vehicles and artillery but are currently dependent on 

nearby commercial ports due to the lack of a pier on base. PLA personnel at the facility h ave 

interfered with U.S. flights by lasing pilots and flying drones, and the PRC has sought to restrict 

Djiboutian sovereign airspace over the base. 

Beyond its base in Djibouti, the PRC is very likely already considering and planning for additional 

militar y logistics facilities to support naval, air, and ground forces projection. The PLA’s approach 

likely includes consideration of many different sites and outreach to many countries, but only some 

will advance to negotiations for an infrastructure agreement, status of forces or visiting forces 

agreement, and/or basing agreement. Critical organizations involved in planning and negotiating for 

military logistics facilities are the Central Military Commission (CMC) Joint Staff Department, CMC 

Logistic Support De partment, and service headquarters. China’s overseas military basing will be 

constrained by the willingness of potential host nations to support a PLA presence.  

> >

The PRC has likely considered Myanmar, Thailand, Singapore, Indonesia, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, 

Uni ted Arab Emirates, Kenya, Seychelles, Tanzania, Angola, and Tajikistan as locations for PLA 

military logistics facilities. The PRC has probably already made overtures to Namibia, Vanuatu, 

and the Solomon Islands. Known focus areas of PLA planning are along the SLOCs from China 

to the Strait of Hormuz, Africa, and the Pacific Islands.  

> >

Cambodia declined a U.S. offer to pay to renovate a U.S. -donated building on Ream Naval Base 

in Cambodia. Cambodia may have instead accepted assistance from China or another co untry to 

develop Ream Naval Base. If China is able to leverage such assistance into a presence at Ream 

Naval Base, it suggests that China’s overseas basing strategy has diversified to include military OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

130 

capacity -building efforts. Both the PRC and Cambodia ha ve publicly denied having signed an 

agreement to provide the PLAN access to Ream Naval Base. 

THE PRC’S INFLUENCE OPERATIONS 

Key Takeaways  

> 

The PLA has emphasized the development of its “Three Warfares” concept —comprised of 

psychological warfare, public opi nion warfare, and legal warfare —in its operational planning 

since at least 2003.  

> 

The PRC conducts influence operations to achieve outcomes favorable to its strategic objectives 

by targeting cultural institutions, media organizations, business, academic, an d policy 

communities in the United States, other countries, and international institutions.  

> 

The CCP seeks to condition domestic, foreign, and multilateral political establishments and 

public opinion to accept Beijing’s narratives.  

> 

CCP leaders probably cons ider open democracies, including the United States, as more 

susceptible to influence operations than other types of governments. 

The PLA has emphasized the development of its “Three Warfares” concept —encompassing 

psychological warfare, public opinion warfa re, and legal warfare —in its operational planning since at 

least 2003. Psychological warfare uses propaganda, deception, threats, and coercion to affect the 

adversary’s decision -making, while also countering adversary psychological operations. Public opini on 

warfare disseminates information for public consumption to guide and influence public opinion and 

gain support from domestic and international audiences. Legal warfare uses international and domestic 

laws to gain international support, manage political repercussions, and sway target audiences. China 

views the cyberspace domain as a platform providing opportunities for influence operations, and the 

PLA likely seeks to use online influence activities to support its overall “Three Warfares” concept and 

to u ndermine an adversary’s resolve in a contingency or conflict. 

The PRC conducts influence operations by targeting cultural institutions, media organizations, 

business, academic, and policy communities in the United States, other countries, and international 

institutions. CCP leaders probably consider open democracies, including the United States, as more 

susceptible to influence operations than other types of governments. The PRC’s influence operations 

are coordinated at a high level within the party -state a nd executed by a range of actors, such as the 

United Front Work Department, the Propaganda Ministry, the State Council Information Office, the 

PLA and the Ministry of State Security (MSS). The CCP has a long history of using influence OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

131 

operations for domest ic purposes, including “United Front Work” prior to the formulation of the 

PRC and onwards, to co -opt and align non -Party actors in society. The CCP utilizes United Front 

actors to advocate for the PRC’s sovereignty interests within China and abroad. 

A cor nerstone of the CCP’s approach to influence operations includes appealing to PRC citizens living 

overseas and members of Chinese diaspora populations, regardless of their citizenship, to advance the 

Party’s objectives. The PRC also sometimes uses coercion or blackmail to manipulate its citizens 

overseas to conduct influence operations on behalf of the PRC, such as threatening ethnic Uyghurs 

living in the United States with imprisonment of their family members in China. The PRC’s 

intelligence services often facilitate these operations. Additionally, the PRC targets individuals in other 

countries to support its acquisition of foreign technology. The PRC’s “Thousand Talents Program” 

seeks to recruit individuals primarily, but not exclusively, from relevant dias pora populations and 

recent emigrants from the PRC, as well as foreign national experts whose recruitment the PRC views 

as necessary to its scientific and technical modernization, especially with regard to defense technology. 

The PRC uses its so -called “5 cent army” to spread Party -approved narratives abroad via social media. 

These posts promote positive narratives of the PRC and support Beijing’s programs to try to influence 

public opinion towards the pro -China perspectives. In August 2019, Facebook and Tw itter announced 

they had deleted accounts associated with the PRC that were promoting disinformation regarding the 

protests in Hong Kong. 

The CCP seeks to condition domestic and foreign publics to accept Beijing’s narratives surrounding 

its priorities like OBOR and South China Sea territorial and maritime claims. Furthermore, the PRC 

seeks to harness academia and educational institutions, think tanks, and state -run media to advance its 

soft power campaign in support of the PRC’s interests. For example, the PRC uses its citizens studying 

abroad and academic organizations to spread the Party’s narrative on Tibet and the Dalai Lama. 

Chinese Students and Scholars Associations and Confucius Institutes organize events to support the 

PRC’s sovereignty claims. They also organize protests and lodge complaints against academic 

institutions that fail to comport with the Party’s narratives. 

The PRC’s foreign influence activities also focus on establishing and maintaining influence with power 

brokers within foreign govern ments to promote policies that Beijing views will facilitate its national 

rejuvenation, despite the PRC’s public position that it does not interfere in the internal affairs of other 

countries. China’s diplomatic outreach stresses building personal rapport with influential people, 

providing assistance, and emphasizing “win -win cooperation” through trade and diplomacy. This 

approach allows China to offer expedited, small -scale accomplishments to partners abroad, often in 

exchange for seemingly symbolic gestur es of support to the PRC’s long -term strategic goals. Some OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

132 

countries have begun to implement policy responses to the PRC’s influence activities, including within 

the European Union as well as Australia and New Zealand. 

The PRC uses multilateral forums and international organizations to generate new opportunities to 

expand its influence, strengthen its political influence, promotes strategic messaging that portrays it as 

a responsible global actor, advance its development interests, and limit outside interfe rence in and 

criticism of its initiatives. Towards these ends, the PRC has embraced multilateral organizations such 

as Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa (BRICS), the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, 

the African Union (AU), the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), as well as forums and 

initiatives such as the Forum on China -Africa Cooperation (FOCAC), the China -Arab States 

Cooperation Forum, the “17+1” initiative between China and 17 Central and Eastern European 

countries, and the B elt and Road Forum. 

CHINA IN THE ARCTIC 

Key Takeaway  

> >

In May 2019, the PRC hosted the Arctic Circle China Forum in Shanghai and PRC officials 

highlighted the PRC’s interest in expanding its partnership with countries along what it calls the 

“Polar Silk Ro ad.” 

The PRC has increased activities and engagement in the Arctic region since gaining observer status in 

the Arctic Council in 2013. In May 2019, the PRC hosted the Arctic Circle China Forum in Shanghai 

and PRC officials highlighted the PRC’s interest in expanding its partnership with countries along 

what it calls the “Polar Silk Road.” In January 2018, the PRC published its first Arctic strategy that 

first promoted a “Polar Silk Road” and declared China to be a “near -Arctic State.” The strategy 

identifie s the PRC’s interests, which include access to natural resources and SLOCs, and the 

promotion of an image of the PRC as a “responsible major country” in Arctic affairs that “aims to 

contribute its wisdom to the development of the Arctic region.” The strate gy highlights China’s 

icebreaker vessels and research stations as integral to implementation. 

China maintains research stations in Iceland and Norway and operates two icebreaking research 

vessels. In 2017, the Ukrainian -built Xue Long became China’s first official vessel to traverse the 

Northwest Passage. In late September 2019, Xue Long completed the 10 th Arctic expedition that 

focused on research on the Arctic environment. Last year, China launched its second icebreaking 

research vessel, Xue Long 2. Xue L ong 2 can break ice 1.5 meters thick, compared to Xue Long 1’s 

maximum of 1.2 meters. Furthermore, Xue Long 2 is the first polar research vessel that can break ice 

while moving forwards or backwards. In 2019, Xue Long 2 set sail on its maiden voyage to the OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

133 

Antarctic. The PRC’s SOEs are probably in the very early stages of developing China’s first nuclear -

powered icebreaker; however, it is unclear when the vessel will be completed. 

The PRC’s expanding Arctic engagement has created new opportunities for eng agement between 

China and Russia. In April 2019, China and Russia established the Sino -Russian Arctic Research 

Center. In 2020, China and Russia plan to use this center to conduct a joint expedition to the Arctic 

to research optimal routes of the Northern Sea Route and the effects of climate change. The PRC will 

cover 75 percent of the expedition’s expenses. 

Russian regulations governing the passage along the Northern Sea Route requires foreign states' 

warships to give Russia 45 days’ notice of their intent ion to follow this route, to have a Russian pilot 

on board, and to be subject to Moscow’s decision to refuse passage through the Northern Sea Route. 

This regulation potentially restricts the PLAN’s ability to operate in the Arctic. China and Russia 

support further civilian cooperation between Sino -Russian enterprises in the use of the Northern Sea 

Route, and the Arctic region is an area of opportunity for Sino -Russian commercial cooperation in 

addition to energy development and infrastructure projects such as the Yamal LNG project and LNG 

2. 

CHINA’S HYDROCARBON STRATEGY 

Key Takeaway  

> >

China’s interest in ensuring reliable, cost -effective, and diverse energy sources to support its 

economic growth drives its overseas investments. 

China’s interest in ensuring reliable, cost -effective, and diverse fuel sources to support and sustain its 

economic development has led it to import petroleum and gas from more than 40 countries. In 2019, 

China imported approximately 10.1 million barrels per day of crude oil, which m et approximately 77 

percent of its needs. Also in 2019, China met 43 percent of its natural gas demand with imports, which 

the IEA projects will grow to 46 percent by 2035. Most of China’s oil and natural gas imports come 

primarily from the Persian Gulf, A frica, Russia, and Central Asia. China’s energy investments will help 

diversify transport networks for oil and gas, which could help reduce dependency on strategic 

chokepoints, such as the Strait of Malacca. 

China relies on SLOCs such as the South China Se a and Strait of Malacca for most of its hydrocarbon 

deliveries. In 2019, approximately 77 percent of China’s oil imports and 1 0 percent of its natural gas 

imports transited the South China Sea and Strait of Malacca. Despite China’s efforts to diversify ene rgy OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

134 

suppliers, the sheer volume of oil and liquefied natural gas imported from the Middle East and Africa 

will make securing strategic SLOCs a priority for China for at least the next 15 years. 

Crude oil pipelines from Russia and Kazakhstan to China demons trate China’s interest in increasing 

overland supply. In early 2019, China’s 600,000 -barrels -per -day pipeline from Russia made up 

approximately 6 percent of all crude oil imports. In April 2017, Burma and China commissioned a 

new crude oil pipeline. This 4 40,000 -barrels -per -day pipeline bypasses the Strait of Malacca by 

transporting crude oil from Kyaukpyu, Burma, to Kunming, China. Middle Eastern and African 

countries supplied the crude oil for this pipeline. 

In 2019, approximately 3 4 percent of China’s na tural gas imports (4 5 billion cubic meters) came from 

Turkmenistan by a pipeline that runs through Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan. This pipeline can transport 

55 billion cubic meters per year, and Turkmenistan and China plan to expand it to 80 billion cubic 

met ers per year in 2020. A natural gas pipeline connecting China to Burma can deliver 12 billion cubic 

meters per year, but only 4.6 billion cubic meters of gas was shipped in 2019. In early December 2019, 

the first phase of the Power of Siberia natural gas p ipeline was commissioned, transporting natural gas 

from Russia’s Chayandinskoye gas field to China’s border in Amur Oblast. The contract for this 

pipeline is for 30 years and stipulates that 38 billion cubic meters of natural gas be delivered to China 

each year. A list of China’s top crude suppliers in 2019 is provided in Appendix III. 

MILITARY ATTACHÉ PRE SENCE 

China manages its day -to -day overseas military diplomacy work using PLA officers assigned as military 

attachés in over 110 offices worldwide. C hina’s military attaché presence has grown around the world, 

which reflects China’s increasing global interests. China’s military attachés serve as military advisors 

to the ambassador, support Ministry of Foreign Affairs and PLA foreign policy objectives, and 

perform a variety of duties tied to PLA military and security cooperation, including counterpart 

exchanges with host -nation and third -country personnel. Military attachés also conduct clandestine 

and overt intelligence collection on their countries or areas of assignment. Although the general 

function of an attaché office is the same worldwide, some attaché offices probably prioritize specific 

missions or diplomatic priorities due to close bilateral relations or other factors. 

China’s military attaché o ffices vary in size, generally ranging from two to ten PLA officers. Most 

offices consist of just a few accredited officers; however, offices in countries considered important to 

China’s strategic interests are often considerably larger, potentially includ ing multiple assistant attachés, 

dedicated naval or air force attachés, and support staff. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

135 

CHINA -RUSSIA RELATIO NS 

In June 2019, Russia and China upgraded their relations to a ‘comprehensive strategic partnership of 

coordination in a new era,” pledging closer coordination on global security issues and mutual support. 

This was followed by the PLAAF and the Russian Aerospace Force conducting their first combined 

air patrol in the Asia -Pacific region. For the second year in a row, China participated in a Ru ssian 

strategic command and staff exercise, TSENTR -2019, held this year in the Russian Central Military 

District. Additionally, cooperation between the two militaries includes joint defense technology 

development, exercises, and cooperation on other milita ry modernization initiatives. Despite 

continued military cooperation, the PRC and Russia have denied the creation of a military alliance or 

their intent to enter into an alliance. 

TSENTR -2019 . From mid -late September, China participated in Russia's strateg ic command -staff 

exercise, TSENTR -2019, along with armed forces elements from India, Pakistan, Kyrgyzstan, 

Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan. The aim of the exercise was to test readiness levels of the 

Russian military and interoperability among regio nal partners, while simulating a response to terrorist 

threats in Central Asia. China represented the largest foreign contingent, deploying about 1,600 

ground and air troops from the PLA's Western Theater Command and nearly 30 fixed -wing aircraft 

and helic opters, including H -6 bombers. During the exercise, China and Russia conducted ground 

maneuvers and Chinese and Russian aircraft may have conducted missile and bombing strikes on 

mock enemy targets. The PRC’s Minister of Defense Wei observed part of the ex ercise alongside the 

Russian defense minister and President Vladimir Putin, commenting on the increased level of China -

Russia cooperation. Following last year's VOSTOK exercise, TSENTR marked the second 

consecutive year that China has participated in Russi a's command -staff capstone exercise series. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 

Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 

136 

This page left intentionally blank OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 

Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 

137 

# 5

# RESOURCES AND 

# TECHNOLOGY FOR 

# FORCE MODERNIZATION OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress :Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

138 

Key Takeaways  

> >

The PRC’s long -term goal is to create an entirely self -reliant defense -industrial sector —fused with 

a strong civilian industrial and technology sector —that can meet the PLA’s needs fo r modern 

military capabilities.  

> >

The PRC has mobilized vast resources in support of its defense modernization, including the 

implementation of its Military -Civil Fusion (MCF) Development Strategy, as well as espionage 

activities to acquire sensitive, dual -use, and military -grade equipment.  

> >

In 2019, the PRC announced its annual military budget would increase by 6.2 percent, continuing 

more than 20 years of annual defense spending increases and sustaining its position as the second -

largest military spender in the world. The PRC’s published military budget omits several major 

categories of expenditures and its actual military -related spending is higher than what it states in 

its official budget. 

In spite of forecast difficulties for China’s economic growth in th e 2020s, the Party has the political 

will and fiscal strength to sustain a steady increase in defense spending over the next decade, which 

will help support People’s Liberation Army (PLA) modernization, develop a fused military -civilian 

defense industry, a nd explore new technologies with defense applications. The PRC draws from 

diverse sources to support PLA modernization, including domestic defense investments, domestic 

defense -industrial development, a growing R&D and S&T base, dual -use technologies conve yed in 

part through its MCF strategy, and the acquisition of foreign technology and expertise. 

The PRC’s long -term goal is to create an entirely self -reliant defense -industrial sector —fused with a 

strong civilian industrial and technology sector —that can m eet the PLA’s needs for modern 

capabilities. However, the PLA still looks to import foreign equipment, technologies, and knowledge 

to fill some critical, near -term capability gaps and accelerate its modernization. The PRC leverages 

foreign investments, com mercial joint ventures, mergers and acquisitions, academic exchanges, the 

foreign experience that students and researchers from the PRC gain from studying in foreign nations, 

and state -sponsored industrial and technical espionage, and the manipulation of e xport controls for 

the illicit diversion of dual -use technologies to increase the level of technologies and expertise available 

to support military research, development, and acquisition. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

139 

MILITARY EXPENDITURE S TRENDS 

In early 2019, the PRC announced a 6.2 -percent inflation -adjusted increase in its annual military 

budget to $174 billion, which is approximately 1.3 percent of gross domestic product. This year’s 

budget continues more than 20 years of annual defense spending increases and sustains the PRC’s 

po sition as the second -largest military spender in the world after the United States. The PRC’s defense 

budget has nearly doubled during the past 10 years —data from 2010 through 2019 indicates China’s 

official military budget grew at an annual average of app roximately 8 percent in inflation -adjusted 

terms. Based on its official defense spending figures, which omit several major categories of 

expenditures, the PRC can support continued growth in defense spending for at least the next five to 

ten years, based o n economic data and growth projections. 

China: Official Defense Budget, 2010 –2019 OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

140 

China’s Estimated Military Expenditures . The PRC’s published military budget omits several 

major categories of expenditures, including R&D and foreign weapons procurement. In 2019, China’s 

actual military -related spending could be more than $200 billion, much higher than stated in its official 

budget. However, actual military expenses are difficult to calculate, largely because of China’s poor 

accounting transparency. 

China’s Estimated Defense Budget Growth. If Ch ina’s official defense budget increases annually 

by an average of 6 percent, growing to $270 billion by 2023, the PLA can dedicate more money for 

training, operations, and modernization considering the reduction of the PLA’s size by 300,000 people. 

Economi c forecasters project that China’s economic growth will slow during the next 10 years, falling 

from 6.1 percent in 2019 to 3 percent in 2030, which could slow future defense spending growth. 

Assuming accurate economic projections and a steady defense burde n, China will remain the second -

largest spender after the United States. 

Regional Comparison of the PRC’s 2019 Official Defense Budget 

> (adjusted for inflation)

Billion (USD) 

PRC (official budget)  $174.0 

India  $61.7 

Japan  $53.9 

Russia (national def ense budg et)  $54.8 

South Korea  $39.8 

Taiwan  $10.9 OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress :Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

141 

DEVELOPMENTS AND TRE NDS IN CHINA’S DEFEN SE SYSTEM 

Key Takeaways  

> >

China has substantially reorganized its defense -industrial sector to improve weapon system 

research, development, acquisition, testi ng, evaluation, and production.  

> >

China’s Military -Civil Fusion (MCF) Development Strategy is a key part of its defense sector 

reform. 

S&T Industry and Innovation : China has substantially reorganized its defense -industrial sector to 

improve weapon system re search, development, acquisition, testing, evaluation, and production. As 

part of the 13th Five -Year Plan (2016 –2020), China implemented a number of critical reforms with 

the objective of increasingly its competitiveness in key defense industries. Focus ar eas include 

aerospace engines —including turbofan technology —and gas turbines; quantum communications and 

computing; innovative electronics and software; automation and robotics; special materials and 

applications; nanotechnology; neuroscience, neural resea rch, and artificial intelligence (AI); and deep -

space exploration and on -orbit servicing and maintenance systems. China also is applying substantial 

R&D resources to nuclear fusion, hypersonic weapons technology, and the deployment and hardening 

of its exp anding multipurpose satellite constellation.  

> >

In 2016, the Central Military Commission (CMC) established the Science and Technology 

Commission, an independent high -level defense research body subordinated to the CMC. The 

Science and Technology Commission or ganizes and guides cutting -edge technological innovation 

in military technology and seeks to increase the pace of military technology development to 

modernize the PLA using both civilian and military S&T resources.  

> >

In early 2017, the PLA set up the Scienti fic Research Steering Committee, which is subordinate to 

the CMC, consisting of scientists and engineers that have experience with cutting -edge 

technologies. Modeled on the U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, this agency seeks 

to fuel technolog ical innovations with military applications. Along with the Science and 

Technology Commission, the steering committee will spearhead S&T innovation by advising the 

CMC on early -stage research projects.  

> >

In July 2017, China reorganized the PLA’s top three ac ademic institutes —the PLA Academy of 

Military Science (AMS), National Defense University, and National University of Defense 

Technology —as part of its PLA reform initiative. Under the new structure, AMS will focus on OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

142 

scientific research related to military affairs, facilitating closer ties between military theory and S&T 

development.  

> >

China’s MCF Development Strategy is a key part of China’s defense sector reform. China 

emphasizes assimilating private sector innovation into the defense -industrial base. Respo nsibility 

for MCF was centralized in 2017 with the establishment of the Central Commission for Integrated 

Military and Civilian Development, which is subordinate to the CCP Central Committee. 

Two of the most influential proponents in promoting and enforcin g China’s, S&T initiatives are the 

State Administration for Science, Technology, and Industry for National Defense and the CMC’s 

Equipment Development Department, which monitor and guide the state and military sides of China’s 

defense -industrial apparatus, respectively. The Equipment Development Department and its military 

service counterparts cooperate with China’s 10 state -owned defense -industrial corporations through 

a network of military representative bureaus and offices to supervise quality control an d defense 

contract compliance. 

The National Science Foundation of China (NSFC), the China Academy of Sciences (CAS), and the 

Ministry of Science and Technology are key to S&T decision making and funding and to promoting 

basic and applied research, scientif ic innovation, and high -tech integration throughout China’s 

scientific, engineering, and civil -military industrial complex. CAS is China’s highest academic 

institution for comprehensive R&D in the natural and applied sciences, and it reports directly to th e

State Council in an advisory capacity. CAS works closely with NSFC, and much of its work contributes 

to products for military use. The NSFC and CMC Science and Technology Commission are key 

advisers on emerging and disruptive technologies and signed a fi ve -year strategic cooperation 

agreement in August 2016 to collaborate on civil -military innovation and basic research for national 

defense. 

Artificial Intelligence. China views AI as critical to its future military and industrial power. China is 

making str ategic investments worldwide in AI to reap national security and economic benefits. AI is 

a central component in many of China’s publicly released national plans. The Next Generation AI 

Plan details China’s AI strategy and outlines China’s goals of using c ommercial and military entities to 

gain parity with the world leaders in AI by 2020, achieving major breakthroughs in AI by 2025, and 

establishing China as the global leader in AI by 2030. The PRC is pursuing a whole -of -society effort 

to become a global le ader in AI, which includes designating select private AI companies in China as 

“AI champions” to emphasize R&D in specific dual -use technologies. Many of these “AI champions,” 

including Huawei and Hikvision, are major suppliers of AI surveillance technolog y worldwide. In 2019, 

the private PRC -based company Ziyan UAV exhibited armed swarming drones that it claimed use AI OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

143 

to perform autonomous guidance, target acquisition, and attack execution. During the past five years, 

China has made achievements in AI -ena bled unmanned surface vessels, which China plans to use to 

patrol and bolster its territorial claims in the South China Sea. China has also tested unmanned tanks 

as part of research efforts to integrate AI into ground forces’ equipment. 

MILITARY INDUSTRIA L BASE TRENDS 

Key Takeaways  

> >

Many of China’s missile programs are comparable to other international top -tier producers; China 

can use aspects of the S -400 surface -to -air missile (SAM) system it began receiving from Russia in 

2018 to reverse -engineer capabil ities it lacks.  

> >

China is the top ship -producing nation in the world by tonnage and has the capability to produce 

naval gas turbine and diesel engines as well as shipboard weapons and electronic systems, which 

makes it nearly self -sufficient for all shipbui lding needs. 

Missile and Space Industry. Most of China’s missile programs, including its ballistic and cruise 

missile systems, are comparable in quality to other international top -tier producers. China produces a 

wide range of missiles —ballistic, cruise, a ir -to -air, and surface -to -air —for the PLA and for export, 

and it continues to expand its missile test facilities. The PRC publicly debuted a new supersonic cruise 

missile and hypersonic glide vehicle during the 70 th anniversary parade in October 2019. Also in 2019, 

China tested and deployed the advanced S -400 SAM systems it received from Russia in 2018. In 2018, 

China highlighted the development of its first beyond -visual -range air -to -air missile (AAM). 

The PRC’s space industry, historically managed by the PLA, is rapidly expanding its intelligence, 

surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR), navigation and communication satellite constellations and 

making substantial strides in its space launch capabilities, human spaceflight, and lunar exploration 

programs. Ho wever, the PRC is placing greater emphasis on decentralizing and diversifying its space 

industry to increase competition, resulting in a complex structure of military, political, defense -

industrial, and commercial sectors. China has developed a “quick res ponse” space launch vehicle 

(SLV) to increase its attractiveness as a commercial small satellite launch provider and to rapidly 

reconstitute low Earth orbit space capabilities; its mixed -ownership enterprises offer remote sensing, 

launch, and communication services. 

Naval and Shipbuilding Industry. China, the top ship -producing nation in the world by tonnage, 

is increasing its shipbuilding capacity and capability for all naval classes, including submarines, surface 

combatants, and transport and amphibious s hips. China’s two largest state -owned shipbuilders —the OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

144 

China State Shipbuilding Corporation and the China Shipbuilding Industry Corporation, merged in 

November 2019 creating the world’s largest shipbuilder as measured by production capacity. China 

domestic ally produces its naval gas turbine and diesel engines, as well as almost all shipboard weapons 

and electronic systems, making it nearly self -sufficient for all shipbuilding needs. 

Armaments Industry. China’s production capacity is improving in nearly ever y category of PLA 

ground systems, including armored personnel carriers, assault vehicles, air defense artillery systems, 

artillery systems and pieces, and main and light battle tanks. Notably, China began testing unmanned 

Type 59 tanks in November 2018. Ch ina can produce ground weapon systems at or near world -class 

standards; however, quality deficiencies persist with some exported equipment, which is inhibiting 

China’s ability to expand its export markets. 

Aviation Industry. China is advancing its domestic aviation industry through two major state -owned 

aircraft corporations, AVIC and the Commercial Aircraft Corporation of China (COMAC). AVIC 

designs and produces China’s military aircraft including the J -20 fifth -generation fighter, the Y -20 large 

transport , and the future H -20 flying wing stealth bomber. COMAC produces large passenger aircraft 

and aims to compete in the commercial airliner market. COMAC is producing the ARJ21 regional jet, 

flight -testing the C919 airliner, and working with Russia to develop the CR929 wide -body airliner. 

China is the second -largest exporter of UAVs. However, China’s aviation industry is unable to produce 

reliable high -performance aircraft engines and relies on Western and Russian engines, such as the 

Franco -American CFM Leap 1C that powers the COMAC C919 and the Russian D -30 that powers 

the Y -20 and H -6K and H6 -N variants. China is developing the CJ -1000, AEF3500, and WS -20 high -

bypass turbofan engines to power the C919, CR929, and Y -20, respectively. 

S&T GOALS IN SUPPORT OF MILITARY MODERNIZATI ON 

Key Takeaways  

> >

China’s effort to build national corporate champions that achieve rapid market dominance across 

a range of technologies directly complements the PLA’s modernization efforts. The PRC intends 

to leverage its commercial se ctor to realize the PLA’s modernization goals.  

> >

China seeks to become a leader in key technologies with military potential, such as AI, autonomous 

systems, advanced computing, quantum information sciences, biotechnology, and advanced 

materials and manufactu ring. China’s implementation of AI and a quantum communication 

network demonstrates the speed and scale with which it intends to deploy certain emerging 

technologies. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

145  

> >

China has mobilized vast resources to fund research and subsidize companies involved in strategic 

S&T fields while pressing private firms, universities, and provincial governments to cooperate with 

the military in developing advanced technologies. China has also reorganized its military research 

institutions and key military think tanks to pr ovide the PLA advanced capabilities and a modern 

warfighting doctrine.  

> >

The PRC continues to undermine the integrity of the U.S. S&T research enterprise through a 

variety of actions such as hidden diversions of research, resources, and intellectual property .

China’s S&T Goals and Plans. The PRC has issued an array of major national plans over the last 

decade that stress indigenous innovation and the rapid development of strategic S&T sectors, such as 

information and communications technology (ICT), high -end manufacturing, quantum technology, 

alternative energy, and biotechnology. The PRC’s 13th Five -Year Plan calls for accelerating research 

on “majorly influential disruptive technologies” and the pursuit of “leapfrog” S&T developments in 

order to win “a compe titive advantage in the new round of industry transformation.” While slowly 

increasing funding for basic research, China has made comprehensive efforts to grow the country’s 

inventive capabilities over the last decade.  

> >

The 2017 National Artificial Intellig ence Plan describes steps for China to become the “world’s 

major AI innovation center” by 2030 and calls for the country to accelerate the integration of AI 

with the economy, society, and national defense. The plan foresees a great expansion in the 

“breadt h and depth of AI applications in… national defense construction.”  

> >

Other plans address the development of various sectors of China’s robust Internet ecosystem, 

including cloud computing, big data, e -commerce, and next -generation broadband wireless 

communi cations networks, including fifth -generation (5G) wireless networks. Due to information 

sharing requirements with the PRC’s security services as required by PRC laws, worldwide 

expansion of 5G networks by PRC companies will challenge the security and resil iency of other 

countries’ networks. 

The commercial sector increasingly drives breakthroughs in advanced dual -use technologies, and PRC 

companies have research efforts aimed at generating breakthroughs in emerging technologies. China 

continues to execute “ Made in China 2025,” an ambitious industrial policy centered around “smart 

manufacturing,” that seeks to create a vanguard of corporations in the PRC that are global leaders in 

ten strategic industries. These industries include new generation information t echnology, high -grade 

machine tooling and robotics; aerospace equipment; marine engineering equipment and high -tech 

ships; advanced rail transportation equipment; new -energy automobiles; electric power equipment; 

agricultural equipment; new materials; and biomedicine and high -tech medical devices. The plan OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

146 

stresses the need to replace imported technology with domestically produced technology, a goal that 

corresponds with China’s desire to reduce its reliance on other nations and develop a fully indigenous 

defense sector. In addition to presenting an economic challenge to nations that export high -tech 

products, the plan directly supports China’s military modernization goals by stressing proprietary 

mastery of advanced dual -use technologies. China’s leaders ha ve used less inflammatory rhetoric 

regarding “Made in China 2025” in response to concerns from advanced industrial countries regarding 

the PRC’s licit and illicit acquisition of intellectual property pursuant to that policy. 

Heavy Government and Corporate Sector Investment. The PRC has mobilized vast resources to 

fund research and subsidize companies involved in strategic S&T fields while pressing private firms, 

universities, and provincial governments to cooperate with the military in developing advanced 

technologies. Although China remains reliant on certain types of foreign technology, the country’s 

decades -long execution of a strategy of advancing domestic S&T and R&D through large -scale 

technology transfer has deepened the expertise of scientists and en gineers in the PRC and placed them 

at, or near, the forefront of many scientific fields.  

> >

The PRC’s state investment funds established to support priority industries have marshalled 

hundreds of billions of dollars in capital.  

> >

China expects to field an exasc ale computer based on domestically produced technology by 2020, 

ahead of the United States, the European Union, and Japan.  

> >

China conducted the first quantum -secured intercontinental videoconference in September 2017 

and plans to have a satellite -enabled, g lobal, quantum -encrypted communications capability 

operational by 2030. China is also reportedly building the world’s largest quantum research facility 

slated to open in the city of Hefei in 2020. China already has a 2,000 km secure quantum 

communication g round line between Beijing and Shanghai and plans to expand the line across 

China.  

> >

In 2019, scientists in the PRC claimed to have developed a human brain -computer interface to 

send targeting information directly to a search -and -rescue drone. Also in 2019, a separate group 

of scientists claimed to have developed a brain -computer interface that enabled human -thought 

control of a rat in a maze, signifying China’s interest advanced human -machine teaming 

technologies. 

China’s private sector, led by Internet comp anies Baidu, Alibaba, and Tencent and 

telecommunications equipment manufacturers Huawei and Zhongxing Telecommunications 

Company Ltd. (ZTE), is driving the development of emerging technologies, such as facial recognition OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

147 

and 5G, by establishing innovation centers and funding technology startups, or in the case of 5G, 

competing to build the world’s next -generation networks. PRC technology companies are also 

expanding into overseas markets, in some cases by offering smart city technologies, a development 

that could increase their access to foreign talent and data.  

> >

In 2017, China designated Alibaba, Baidu, iFlytek, and Tencent as the country’s official “AI 

Champions,” with SenseTime joining in 2018. This designation gives these companies the lead for 

setting na tional technical standards and enables extensive cooperation with China’s national 

security community. In 2019, China added ten new companies, including Huawei, Hikvision, 

Megvii, and Yitu, to the champions list.  

> >

In November 2017, the PRC startup Yitu won a U.S. government -sponsored competition 

involving facial recognition technology. Yitu, along with other PRC AI and facial recognition firms 

like SenseTime, Megvii, and Deepglint, reportedly received hundreds of millions of dollars in 

investments in 2017. C hina is the world’s largest market for video surveillance technologies.  

> >

The 2017 National Intelligence Law requires PRC companies, such as Huawei and ZTE, to 

support, provide assistance, and cooperate in China’s national intelligence work wherever they 

ope rate. 

Potential Military Applications. China’s pursuit of an innovation -driven economic model supports 

its goal of building a “modern and specialized military capable of fighting and winning wars in the 

information age.” China intends to harness its commer cial technology sector to accomplish the PLA’s 

goal of intelligentized warfare. The PLA has reorganized a key military think tank —the Academy of 

Military Sciences (AMS) —and reasserted this organization’s leadership of military science research 

programs. Th e CMC has tasked the revamped AMS to drive defense innovation, conduct enhanced 

academic outreach, and to ensure that the PLA’s warfighting theory and doctrine fully capitalize on 

disruptive technologies like AI and autonomous systems.  

> >

Researchers at the C hina Academy of Sciences reportedly developed an early version of an AI -

powered decision -support system that the PRC Ministry of Foreign Affairs is field -testing with its 

diplomats. The system uses deep learning and a neural network for “geopolitical envir onment 

simulation and prediction.” 

The PRC is pursuing a number of advanced military capabilities with disruptive potential such as 

hypersonic weapons, electromagnetic railguns, directed energy weapons, and counterspace capabilities. 

The country’s effort t o build national corporate champions that achieve rapid market dominance 

across a range of frontier technologies directly complements the PLA’s modernization efforts and OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

148 

carries serious military implications. Given China’s willingness to deploy emerging te chnologies rapidly 

and at massive scale as well as China’s focus on MCF, the PLA would likely quickly benefit from any 

scientific breakthroughs with military utility. Potential military applications of some emerging 

technologies include:  

> >

AI and Advanced Ro botics : enhanced data exploitation, decision support, manufacturing, unmanned 

systems, and command, control, communications, computers, intelligence, surveillance, and 

reconnaissance (C4ISR).  

> >

Semiconductors and Advanced Computing : enhanced cyber operations and weapons design, and 

shortened R&D cycles.  

> >

Quantum Technologies : secure global communications, enhanced computing and decryption 

capabilities, undersea target detection, and enhanced submarine navigation.  

> >

Biotechnology : enhanced warfighter selection an d performance, advanced human -machine teaming.  

> >

Hypersonic and Directed Energy Weapons : global strike and defeat of missile defense systems, anti -

satellite (ASAT)/missile/ unmanned aircraft system capabilities.  

> >

Advanced Materials and Alternative Energy : imp roved military equipment and weapon systems. 

FOREIGN TECHNOLOGY ACQUISITION 

Key Takeaways  

> >

The PRC pursues many vectors to acquire foreign technologies, including both licit and illicit 

means. The PRC’s efforts include a range of practices and methods to acquire sensitive and dual -

use technologies and military -grade equipment to advance its military modernization goals.  

> >

The PRC leverages foreign investments, commercial joint ventures, mergers and acquisitions, and 

state -sponsored industrial and technical e spionage, and the manipulation of export controls for 

the illicit diversion of dual -use technologies to increase the level of technologies and expertise 

available to support military research, development, and acquisition.  

> >

In 2019, the PRC’s efforts includ ed efforts to acquire dynamic random access memory, aviation, 

and anti -submarine warfare (ASW) technologies. 

In 2019, the PRC continued to supplement its national S&T and industrial modernization by obtaining 

foreign technologies and knowledge through a va riety of means both licit and illicit. China is investing OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

149 

in and seeking to acquire critical technologies that will be foundational for future innovations both for 

commercial and military applications, including AI, robotics, autonomous vehicles, quantum 

information sciences, augmented and virtual reality, financial technology, and biotechnology. The line 

demarcating products designed for commercial versus military purposes is blurring with these new 

technologies. Imports : China acquires dual -use, export co ntrolled technology by applying for licenses 

through the U.S. Department of Commerce. The majority of China’s imports have traditionally been 

electronic and materials processing and test, inspection, and production equipment. 

Activities Supporting China’s Military Modernization . The PRC is actively pursuing an intensive 

campaign to obtain foreign technology through imports, foreign direct investment, talent recruitment, 

and R&D and academic collaborations. The PRC uses a variety of licit means to acquire fo reign 

technology and knowledge to supplement its S&T industrial base, including its military -industrial base. 

These efforts include:  

> >

Imports . China acquires technology via imports and transfers from foreign industries. U.S. industry 

transfers dual -use expo rt controlled technologies to China by applying for export licenses through 

the Department of Commerce.  

> >

Foreign Direct Investment . China invests in or outright purchases foreign companies that have 

technology, facilities, and people working in key technol ogy areas.  

> >

Talent Recruitment . The PRC uses various incentive strategies to attract foreign personnel to work 

on and manage strategic programs and fill technical knowledge gaps. For example, Beijing’s 

“Thousand Talents Program,” recruits individuals from P RC diaspora populations, persons with 

familiar ties or ties of affection in the PRC, recent emigrants from the PRC, and foreign national 

experts whose recruitment the PRC views as necessary to its scientific and technical 

modernization, especially with reg ard to defense technology.  

> >

Research and Development and Academic Collaborations . China actively seeks partnerships with private, 

government, and academic research labs to gain exposure to cutting -edge technology and 

researchers. These partnerships also pro vide China with the technical expertise to run, manage, 

and organize such facilities. 

In several of these areas, China’s methods and practices undermine the integrity of the U.S. science 

and technology research enterprise. These actions include hidden dive rsions of research and/or 

resources, undermining peer review and grant award processes, failing to provide reciprocity for 

scientists and institutions engaged in scientific research, and violating the principles of impartiality and OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

150 

objectivity in scientifi c research that guard against improper influence and the distortion of scientific 

knowledge. 

ESPIONAGE ACTIVITIES SUPPORTING CHINA’S MILITARY 

MODERNIZATION. 

Multiple U.S. criminal indictments since 2015 involve PRC nationals, naturalized U.S. citizens or 

permanent resident aliens from the PRC, and U.S. citizens, procuring and exporting controlled items 

to China, according to a U.S. Department of Justice summary of major U.S. export enforcement, 

economic espionage, and sanctions -related criminal cases. The PRC’s efforts to acquire sensitive, dual -

use, or military -grade equipment included radiation hardened integrated circuits, monolithic 

microwave integrated circuits, accelerometers, gyroscopes, naval and marine technologies, syntactic 

foam trade secrets, sp ace communications, military communication jamming equipment, dynamic 

random access memory, aviation technologies, and ASW technologies. Recent cases include:  

> >

In October 2019, a PRC national was sentenced to 40 months in prison for conspiring to export 

mil itary - and space -grade technology illegally from the United States to China. The PRC national 

worked with other individuals in China to purchase radiation -hardened power amplifiers and 

supervisory circuits used for military and space applications.  

> >

In Novem ber 2018, a PRC national residing in the United States was charged with conspiring to 

export devices with military applications to PRC government and military actors. The PRC 

national fulfilled instructions from the PLA to obtain dual -use technology used f or ASW and other 

advanced military capabilities. This included remotely operated side scan sonar systems, 

hydrophones, robotic boats, unmanned underwater vehicles, and unmanned surface vehicles.  

> >

In October 2018, a group of PRC Ministry of State Security (M SS) intelligence officers, associated 

cyber actors, and other co -conspirators were indicted on charges of conspiring to steal sensitive 

technological information related to turbofan engines used in commercial airliners. At the time of 

the intrusions, a PRC state -owned enterprise (SOE) was developing a comparable engine for use 

in commercial aircraft manufactured in China and elsewhere.  

> >

In October 2018, an MSS officer was arrested and charged with economic espionage involving 

the of trade secrets for civilia n and military aircraft technology related to engineering services and 

signature material, advanced communication systems, jet engines and aircraft propulsion, and 

engine containment structures from leading U.S. aviation firms. In addition, the officer tar geted 

industry experts for recruitment by facilitating travel to China under the guise of delivering OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

151 

university presentations. The intelligence officer also provided monetary compensation and other 

forms of reimbursement to these experts.  

> >

In September 2018 , a PRC SOE was implicated in a conspiracy to commit economic espionage 

through the theft, conveyance, and possession of stolen trade secrets from a U.S. semiconductor 

company. The U.S. company is a global leader in the semiconductor industry and specializ es in 

dynamic random -access memory (DRAM). China identifies DRAM development as a national 

priority. 

Illicit Diversion of Dual -Use Technologies Supporting China's Military Modernization . One 

of the key tenets of the U.S. export control system is the expect ation that the applicant, the foreign 

end -user and their affidavits on how the technology will be used are truthful and genuine. The PRC’s 

laws and its Military Civil -Fusion Development Strategy, however, means that civil -end use exports 

can be diverted wi thout the exporter’s knowledge. The PRC’s National Intelligence Law and National 

Security Law provide the legal authority for the PRC to compel civilian companies in China to hand 

over U.S. and other foreign -origin technologies, including dual -use technolo gies. MCF through top -

down direction for deeper integration, resource sharing, and interoperability between China’s civilian 

and military sectors further muddies the waters between a civil end user and military end user. 

The PRC has learned how to structur e exports in a manner to help it circumvent U.S. export controls, 

sometimes outright deceiving an exporter on the end user and end use and other times providing the 

exporter with the veneer of a legal end user and end use. For example, in 2012, a Western d efense 

company plead guilty to violating the U.S. Arms Export Control Act for exporting restricted U.S. 

defense technology to China that was used in the development of the PLA’s first modern military 

attack helicopter, the Z -10. According to the Department of Justice press release, China sought to 

develop its military attack helicopter under the guise of a civilian medium helicopter program in order 

to secure Western assistance. The release states that while the company knew that supplying China’s 

Z-10 proj ect with U.S. -origin components would be illegal, the PRC importer claimed it was 

developing a civilian version of the helicopter in parallel with the military version. Anticipating its 

work on China’s military attack helicopter would open the door to a fa r more lucrative civilian 

helicopter market in China, the company “purposely turned a blind eye to the helicopter’s military 

application.” The company determined on its own that its exports for the Z -10 did not constitute 

“defense articles” requiring a U.S . export license. In 2018, a PRC national was charged with violating 

export laws for exporting 60 hydrophones, used to detect and monitor sound underwater, without 

obtaining export licenses and concealing that a military research institute in the PRC was the true end -

user. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 

Annual Report to Congress : Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 

152 

This page left intentionally blank OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 

Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 

153 

# 6

# U.S. -CHINA  DEFENSE  CONTACTS 

# AND EXCHANGES OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

154 

Key Takeaways  

> >

DoD engagement with China supports overall U.S. policy and strategy toward China.  

> >

DoD’s defense contacts and exchanges with China in 2019, which included multiple senior level 

engagemen ts, helped advance the Department’s effort to build a constructive results -oriented 

defense relationship with China. 

U.S. defense contacts and exchanges conducted in 2019 supported overall U.S. policy and strategy 

toward China. The 2017 National Security S trategy , the 2018 National Defense Strategy , the 2018 Nuclear 

Posture Review , and the 2019 Missile Defense Review recognize the growing trend of military competition 

in a dynamic security environment. The United States will compete from a position of stren gth while 

encouraging China to cooperate with the United States on security issues where our interests align. 

DoD engagements with China are limited, and focused, on reducing risk and preventing 

misunderstanding in times of increased tension. Engagements a re conducted in accordance with the 

statutory limitations of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2000, as amended. 

Defense contacts and exchanges with China seek to build the structures and habits necessary to 

prevent, defuse, and manage crises. In 2019, DoD’s plan for defense contacts and exchanges with 

China focused on three interconnected priorities: (1) encouraging China to act in ways consistent with 

the free and open international order; (2) promoting risk reduction and risk managem ent to limit the 

potential for misunderstanding or miscalculation; and (3) establishing the communications 

mechanisms necessary to de -escalate incidents before they become crisis or conflict. 

The pace and scope of the PRC’s military modernization and expan sion provides opportunities as well 

as challenges for U.S. defense relations. As the PRC’s military develops and expands its reach globally, 

the risk of an accident or miscalculation also increases, putting a premium on risk reduction efforts 

and highlight ing the need to ensure the operational safety of forces operating in close proximity, as 

well as the need to establish crisis communication mechanisms. 

Pursuit of a constructive results -oriented relationship with China is an important part of U.S. strategy 

in the Indo -Pacific region. The 2018 National Defense Strategy seeks areas of cooperation with China 

from positions of U.S. strength, with a long -term objective to set the military -to military relationship 

on a path of strategic transparency and non -aggre ssion, and to encourage China to act in a manner 

consistent with the free and open international order. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

155 

DEFENSE CONTACTS AND EXCHANGES IN 2019 

Key Takeaways  

> >

High -level contacts enable U.S. leaders to challenge PRC behaviors that are inconsistent with the 

free and open international order, gain insight into China’s strategic intent, manage differences, 

and cooperate where our interests align.  

> >

For example, the Secretary of Defense met with the PRC Minister of National Defense on the 

sidelines of multination al events several times during the year.  

> >

Recurring exchanges serve as a mechanism for dialogue at the strategic and policy -levels, including 

risk reduction and practical cooperation.  

> >

Functional engagements focus on risk reduction and communication to promo te operational 

deconfliction and coordination.  

> >

Exchanges improve the ability to interact and coordinate in providing international public goods 

in areas of mutual interest. 

DoD conducts all contacts with China in a manner consistent with the relevant provi sions of the 

National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2000, as amended. 

In 2019, the U.S. and China defense relationship focused on strategic communications and reducing 

the risk of misunderstanding or miscalculation. 

DoD continued to make progre ss with the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) in developing the capacity 

to cooperate in multilateral settings. The two militaries participated in a Disaster Management 

Exchange with an emphasis on deconfliction in a Multinational Coordination Cell. Such exam ples of 

defense engagement enable risk reduction and enhance understanding of how each side responds to 

humanitarian disasters. As the 2018 National Defense Strategy states, the United States is “open to 

opportunities for cooperation but from a position of strength and based on our national interests. 

Should cooperation fail, we will be ready to defend the American people, our values, and interests.” 

Selected visits and exchanges are below. A complete list of 2019 engagements is in Appendix II. 

High -Level V isits and Engagements. High -level contacts are an important means to exchange 

views on the international security environment, to identify areas of common interest, to manage OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

156 

differences, and to facilitate common approaches to shared challenges. Discussion s focused on areas 

of military cooperation and candidly addressed differences. 

Then -Acting Secretary of Defense Patrick Shanahan met General Wei Fenghe, Minister of National 

Defense, on the sidelines of the International Institute for Strategic Studies (II SS) Shangri -La Dialogue 

in Singapore on May 31. Additionally, Secretary of Defense Mark Esper met General Wei at the annual 

Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Defense Ministers’ Meeting -Plus (ADMM -Plus) in 

Thailand in November. At both meetings , the Secretaries engaged on strategic topics, discussed 

differences, and affirmed a strong commitment to a constructive, stable, results -oriented bilateral 

relationship. 

Chief of Naval Operations Admiral John Richardson visited Beijing in January 2019. H owever, the 

PRC delayed a counterpart visit in the United States between the Chief of the PLA’s Joint Staff 

Department, General Li Zuocheng, and then -Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Dunford. 

Similarly, the PRC delayed a visit by the U.S. Ind o-Pacific Command (USINDOPACOM) 

Commander to the PRC. 

In 2019, the PRC accepted several requests for the use of the Defense Telephone Link (DTL) or 

Video Teleconference (VTC). Six high level VTCs occurred, including the first initiated by the PRC 

in May between the PLA’s Office of International Military Cooperation Deputy Director, Major 

General Huang Xueping, and Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for East Asia Mary Beth 

Morgan. The DTLs and VTCs contribute to establishing regular communication s and confidence 

building between senior defense leaders. While these DTLs allow communications with the PLA, the 

Department continues to work to build the systems necessary to communicate rapidly and effectively 

to prevent incidents from escalating into c rises. 

In August 2019, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for China (DASD) Chad Sbragia hosted a 

PRC delegation in Washington D.C. to discuss the contents of China’s recently released defense white 

paper titled China’s National Defense in the New Era. M ajor General Huang Xueping, Deputy 

Director of the Office of Interational Military Cooperation (OIMC) led the PRC delegation. The 

meeting was consistent with the Memoradum of Understanding on Notification of Major Military 

Activties Confidence Building Mea sure Mechanism to gain a better understanding of China’s national 

defense policy. The U.S. delegation included representatives from the Office of the Secretary of 

Defense, the Joint Staff, the State Department, and the National Security Council staff. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

157 

In O ctober 2019, DASD Chad Sbragia attended Beijing’s Ninth Xiangshan Forum. DASD Sbragia 

offered brief remarks on “A Future -Oriented Asia -Pacific Security Architecture,” and conducted 

official meetings Major General Huang Xueping (OIMC). 

Recurrent Exchanges . Recurring exchanges form the backbone of U.S. -China defense discussions 

each year. They serve as regularized mechanisms for dialogue at the strategic and policy levels on risk 

reduction, crisis communication, and areas for cooperation. 

In June 2019, the Mi litary Maritime Consultative Agreement (MMCA) Working Group met in 

Qingdao to improve operational safety through open communication between U.S. and PLA naval 

and air forces. In November 2019, the MMCA Working Group and MMCA Plenary convened in 

Honolulu. Major General Stephen Sklenka, Director for Strategic Planning and Policy, 

USINDOPACOM, and representatives from U.S. Pacific Fleet, U.S. Pacific Air Forces, U.S. Africa 

Command (USAFRICOM), and U.S. Coast Guard met with a PLA Navy (PLAN) and PLA Air Force 

(PLAAF) delegation led by Rear Admiral Wu Dongzhu, PLAN Deputy Chief of Staff. Both sides 

reviewed the operational safety situation over the last year and discussed implementation and 

assessment of the Rules of Behavior for Safety of Air and Maritime Enc ounters Memorandum of 

Understanding. 

The Defense Policy Coordination Talks (DPCT) are an annual dialogue, The 2019 DPCTs were 

postposed to January 2020. Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for China Chad Sbragia 

participated in the Defense Policy Coordi nation Talks in Beijing with Major General Huang Xueping, 

Deputy Director, Office for International Military Cooperation (OIMC). The U.S. delegation included 

representatives from the Joint Staff, USINDOPACOM, and the State Department. The leaders 

discussed how to reshape the U.S. -China military contacts and exchanges to achieve the goals of risk 

reduction, crisis communications, cooperation, and confidence building. 

In May 2019. Assistant Secretary of Defense for Indo -Pacific Security Affairs Randall Schriv er co -

hosted the 3rd Asia -Pacific Security Dialogue (APSD) in Washington DC with Major General Ci 

Guowei, Director, OIMC. The U.S. delegation included representatives from Joint Staff, 

USINDOPACOM, and the State Department. The leaders discussed regional s ecurity issues, the 

South China Sea, North Korea, and the enforcement of United National Security Council Resolutions. 

Functional and Academic Exchanges. Functional engagements focus on advancing risk reduction, 

understanding, and communication channels to promote deconfliction and coordination. Functional OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

158 

exchanges such as port calls are also used to enhance operational safety and exercise communications 

and navigation protocols. 

In March 2019, a U.S. Air Force Air War College delegation visited their PLA Air Force Command 

College counterparts in Beijing. In April, the U.S. National War College and China’s National Defense 

University exchanged visits, with the U.S. National War College conducting a research seminar in 

China and China’s National Defense Univ ersity operational command course “Tigers” visiting the 

United States. In May, the U.S. Marine Corps War College visited China, followed by a visit to the 

United States by PLA general officers in the strategic -level “Dragons” course from the PLA National 

Defense University, and a visit by the PLA Air Force Command College to the U.S. Air Force Air 

War College. In June, PLA Navy Command College students visited the U.S. Naval War College. In 

July, the presidents of both countries’ national defense universi ties conducted their biennial meeting, 

followed by the U.S. National Defense University CAPSTONE visit of new U.S. general and flag 

officers to China. In December 2019, the U.S. Naval War College visited the PLA Navy Command 

College as a reciprocal exchan ge event for the June visit. These visits and other academic exchanges 

during the year offered an opportunity to increase understanding of China and the Indo -Pacific 

through engagements with various echelons of the PLA. 

In November 2019, PLA and U.S. Army soldiers participated in a Disaster Management Exchange in 

Hawaii. U.S. Army Pacific Commander, General Paul LeCamera, met with Major General Xu Qiling, 

Commander of the PLA Eastern Theater Command Army. The exchange focused on HADR in a 

volcano eruption s cenario in a third country in which both armies would interact as part of a 

Multinational Coordination Center using the ASEAN standard operating procedures. 

PLANNING FOR DEFENSE CONTACTS AND EXCHAN GES IN 2020 

A list of planned engagements for 2020 is provi ded in Appendix II. Although the U.S. and China 

agreed at the January 2020 Defense Policy Consultative Talks on a series of military contact events to 

occur during 2020, the ongoing COVID -19 pandemic has necessitated delaying or cancelling events. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

159 

SPECI AL TOPIC:  THE PRC’S  2019  DEFENSE WHITE PAPER 

In July 2019, the PRC’s State Council Information Office released a new white paper on defense titled, 

China’s National Defense in the New Era . Typically published biennially, this is the PRC’s tenth defense 

whi te paper since 1998 and the first to be published since 2015, the same year the PRC began extensive 

reforms of its armed forces. The defense white papers represent authoritative statements from the 

PRC government on its defense and security policies. The P RC publishes these papers to portray itself 

as transparent and shape international and domestic perceptions in accordance with CCP -approved 

priorities. The white papers also amplify preexisting messaging, as the 2019 paper is largely consistent 

with remark s made by China’s leaders at the 19th Party Congress in 2017, which set the CCP’s 

expectations for the PLA in the “New Era.” 

In August 2019, the PLA dispatched delegations to brief the white paper to foreign audiences. PLA 

officials from the Central Milit ary Commission’s (CMC’s) Office of International Military Cooperation 

led a delegation to brief audiences at the Pentagon, National Defense University, and Center for Naval 

Analyses. 

Perceptions of the Global Security Environment . The PRC’s defense white papers can offer 

insights into how China’s leaders view global affairs. China’s National Defense in a New Era claims that 

China remains in the “period of strategic opportunity,” but describes the international security 

environment as marred by increased “s trategic competition,” the growing prospect of nuclear arms 

racing, and shifting towards greater multi -polarity. The paper primarily blames the United States for 

increasing global and regional tension, and characterizes U.S. pursuit of “absolute military s upremacy” 

as increasing international strategic competition. This characterization of the United States differs 

from the PRC’s 2015 defense white paper that vaguely referenced growing threats from “hegemonism.” 

The paper repeated the PRC’s longstanding pol icy of seeking unification with Taiwan while 

underscoring its right to use force against Taiwan if necessary, and specifically cited the Democratic 

Progressive Party of President Tsai Ing -wen as a primary source of hostility and a threat to peace, a 

first for a defense white paper. In response to its perceptions of the international security environment, 

the PRC elaborated its own vision for the international order in its concept of a “community with a 

shared future for mankind.” Although China frequently d escribes its vision for this community, the 

latest defense white paper notably draws a direct link between the PRC’s global military activities and 

the wellbeing of its community concept. 

Justification for Expanding Overseas . The CMC has tasked the PLA wit h defending the PRC’s 

overseas interests and citizens, and provides its justification in the defense white paper for the PLA’s 

expanding global footprint. The paper states that in order to address deficiencies in overseas 

operations and support, the PRC ha s continued to improve its naval forces, develop overseas logistical 

facilities, and enhance the military’s capability to complete diversified tasks. The paper also depicts the 

PLA’s presence abroad as a benefactor to the regions where the PLA operates and the international OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

160 

system as a whole, arguing that the international community is becoming more dependent on the 

PLA’s support. The PLA base in Djibouti, for example, is touted for offering medical and military 

assistance, and for providing local donations to schools. Additionally, the paper portrays the PLA as 

positively contributing to UN peacekeeping operations, counterterrorism efforts, maritime security, 

and disaster relief as a provider of “international public security goods.” Probably due to concern s

generated by the PLA’s expending presence and, the PRC’s white paper tries to assure audiences that 

the PLA acts responsibly and appropriately while defending the PRC’s interests. 

Building a National Defense Policy System . China is developing a national defense policy and 

military policy decision -making and implementation system. It is an outcome of the major reforms 

the PLA has undergone since 2015, and this system was described as “the biggest difference compared 

to past white papers.” The national defe nse policy system will provide the organization and authorities 

for the PLA to develop and implement policy. The system includes the 15 offices organized under the 

CMC staff and the recently formed theater commands. It is unclear how the Central National S ecurity 

Commission (CNSC) is involved with this system. 

Status of 2020 Milestones (Mechanization and Reform) . The PLA might be unable to meet some 

of its near -term modernization and reform milestones that it planned to achieve by 2020. Among the 

PLA’s mode rnization goals set by the CCP leadership is to “generally achieve mechanization” by 2020. 

However, the PRC’s 2019 defense white paper noted that the PLA had “yet to complete the task of 

mechanization,” suggesting it was also unlikely that the PLA would ac hieve this goal by the end of 

2020. Additionally, PLA officials have indicated that the third (and final) stage of PLA reforms would 

take place in 2021 or 2022. The PRC’s original timetable from late 2015 for the completion of the 

PLA’s reforms indicated t hat 2020 was the target for completion. References to 2021 or 2022 may 

imply the PLA is a year or two behind in completing its reforms. Both of these years are significant 

for the Party and its strategy. The Party aims for China to achieve its “moderately prosperous society” 

goal by the CCP’s centenary in 2021. The CCP will also hold its 20 th Party Congress in 2022. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

161 

SPECIAL TOPIC:  PLA’S APPROACH TOWAR D INFORMATIZATION AN D

INTELLIGENTIZATION,  INCLUDING ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE 

The People’s Liberation Arm y (PLA) sees emerging technologies as driving a shift to “intelligentized” 

warfare from today’s “informatized” way of war. PLA strategists broadly describe intelligentized 

warfare as the operationalization of artificial intelligence (AI) and its enabling t echnologies, such as 

cloud computing, big data analytics, quantum information, and unmanned systems, for military 

applications. These technologies, according to PRC leaders —including Chairman Xi Jinping —

represent a “Revolution in Military Affairs” for whic h China must undertake a whole -of -government 

approach to secure critical economic and military advantages against advanced militaries. 

China seeks to lead the shift to “intelligentized warfare” through its Military -Civil Fusion (MCF) 

Development Strategy a nd by reforming both its research and development (R&D) as well as strategy 

and doctrine organizations. In 2015, the PRC elevated MCF to a national strategy, and it continues to 

establish new organizations and promulgate policies to drive development of du al -use technologies 

and further integrate civilian and military administration. In 2017, the PLA reorganized its military 

research and education institutes to synchronize advances in emerging technologies with the 

development of new operational concepts. T he Academy of Military Science (AMS), which has 

traditionally been responsible for writing new doctrine, now oversees several PLA science and 

technology institutes. 

The PLA argues that the implementation of “intelligentized” capabilities will increase the speed of 

future combat, necessitating more rapid processing and fusing of information to support quick and 

efficient command decision making. Victory in future warfare, according to PLA strategists, will 

depend upon which side can more quickly and effectiv ely observe, orient, decide, and act in an 

increasingly dynamic operating environment. As a result, China is pursuing new technologies like AI 

to support future military capabilities, such as autonomous command and control (C2) systems, more 

sophisticated and predictive operational planning, and intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance 

(ISR) fusion. In addition, the PLA is developing more capable command information systems and 

decision aids for battlefield commanders. Future command, control, commun ications, computers, 

intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (C4ISR) systems will seek to use AI to collect, fuse, and 

transmit big data for more effective battlespace management and to generate optimal courses of action. 

PLA strategists recognize t he importance of information superiority during a conflict. The PLA has 

emphasized the need for the capabilities to target and degrade adversary command and control 

systems and future AI systems. As such, the PLA plans to employ technologies associated wit h

intelligentized warfare to support the deployment of autonomous unmanned systems and conduct 

information operations (IO). PRC weapons developers are researching new unmanned aerial, surface, 

sub -surface, and ground vehicles that will enable new operatio nal concepts and require new C2 models. 

The PLA is pursuing greater autonomy for unmanned platforms, to include swarm intelligence and OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

162 

manned -unmanned teaming capabilities, to provide more lethal kinetic that and nonkinetic strike 

options that can saturat e adversary defenses as well as more survivable and long -distance ISR 

capabilities, among other applications. The PLA also intends to improve its cyber and electronic 

warfare (EW) capabilities through AI -assisted network vulnerability analysis, countermeas ure 

identification, and electromagnetic spectrum management. 

PLA discussions of “intelligentized warfare” also acknowledge the difficulties of developing future 

technologies and implementing new capabilities. The delegation of decision -making authorities t o

lower echelons may run counter to the PLA’s traditionally hierarchical and centralized C2 structure. 

The PLA’s ability to leverage big data will depend upon its ability to obtain large quantities of high -

quality data on foreign militaries. Additionally, the complexity of future conflict probably will challenge 

the PLA to recruit, train, and retain the highly competent and technically proficient personnel 

necessary to understand and operate future “intelligentized” systems. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

163 

SPECIAL TOPIC:  EMERGING MILITA RY CAMPAIGN CONCEPTS 

The People’s Liberation Army’s (PLA) will likely need to update its existing doctrine, concepts, and 

campaigns to adapt to the long -term trends in global military affairs, meet the PRC’s evolving national 

security needs, and account fo r the significant changes in the PLA’s structures and capabilities. 

Evolving campaign concepts will aim to advance the PLA’s goal to become a fully modern and 

“informatized ” force by 2035. Going forward, PLA strategists envision further improving joint 

ope rations and shifting towards “intelligentized warfare,” defined by the application of artificial 

intelligence (AI) and other advanced technologies, driving additional campaign development. 

As PRC leaders push the PLA to operate in defense of China’s expa nding national interests, the PLA 

will develop concepts and capabilities to conduct force projection and defensive operations that 

expand China's strategic space farther from mainland China. New PLA campaign concepts also will 

attempt to integrate these ne w missions and capabilities across theater commands and in new domains, 

like cyber and space. For example, the creation of the Strategic Support Force (SSF) and the PLA’s 

growing cyber, space, and electronic warfare (EW) capabilities will require campaigns that expand 

upon PLA notions of space confrontation operations by integrating space and terrestrial activates into 

multi -domain joint operations. Future campaigns may also integrate far seas air and naval operations. 

PLA strategists also discuss the need to secure air, maritime, and information superiority at greater 

distances, which could entail campaign concepts that integrate joint forces —possibly to include forces 

deployed to overseas bases —to execute operations abroad, such as in the western Pacific a nd Indian 

Ocean. These operations will require a mature command and control (C2) organizations and processes 

for overseas operations that effectively divide responsibilities between the Central Military 

Commission (CMC), theater commands, and services. 

Wha t is a Campaign? 

The PLA has developed a series of “campaigns” that outline operational military activities to achieve 

China’s strategic objectives. These campaigns incorporate activities across the PLA for contingencies 

ranging from border defense to larg e-scale multinational war. PLA joint campaigns —those that 

feature forces of two or more services under a joint command, like a theater command —include 

offensive campaigns, such as joint firepower strike, island blockade, or island offensive operations, 

and defensive campaigns like air defense, border defense, and counter -landing operations. 

Future campaigns could also include guidance to conduct non -war military activities (NWMA) and 

operate with foreign militaries. Overseas operations, such as the PLA’s pa rticipation in peacekeeping 

operations, can help the PLA develop tactics, techniques, and procedures to inform future campaigns 

that include humanitarian assistance/disaster relief (HA/DR) and noncombatant evacuation 

operations. In addition, an increase in bilateral and multilateral engagement with foreign militaries, 

including Russia, Pakistan, and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) can improve 

the PLA’s ability to organize and manage combined operations that integrate foreign forces. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

164 

APPE NDIX I:  CHINA AND TAIWAN FORCES DATA 

The data in this year’s report is derived from a new methodology that may result in significantly different 

numbers than shown in previous reports, but does not necessarily reflect a sudden change in capability. 

Taiwa n Strait Military Balance, Ground Forces 

China  Taiwan 

Total  Eastern and Southern 

Theaters  Total 

Total Ground Force Personnel  1,0 30,000  412 ,000  88 ,000 ** 

Group Armies  13  5 3

Combined Arms Brigades  78  30 ( 6 amphibious)  N/A

Mechanized Infantry Brigades 

N/A 

3

Motorized Infantry Brigades  6

Armor Brigades  4

Air Assault/Army Aviation Brigades  15  5 2

Artillery Brigades  15  5 3

Airborne Brigades  7*  7 0

Marine Brigades  8*  4 3

Tanks  6,300  800 

Artillery Pieces  6,300  1,100 

Note : For the purposes of this document, the “Taiwan Strait Area” includes the PLA’s Eastern and 

Southern Theater Commands. 

*Although counted as ground forces for the purposes of this chart, China’s airborne brigades 

belong to the PLA Air Force (PLAAF) Airborne Corps and the marine brigades to the PLA Navy 

Marine Corps (PLANMC). 

** Counts only active -duty Army personnel .OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

165 

Taiwan Strait Military Balance, Naval Forces 

China  Taiwan 

Total  Eastern and Southern 

Theater  Total 

Aircraft Carriers  2 1 0

Cruisers  1 0 0

Des troyers  32  23  4

Frigates  49  37  22 

Corvettes  49  39  0

Tank Landing Ships/ 

Amphibious Transport Dock  37  35  14 

Medium Landing Ships  21  16  0

Diesel Attack Submarines  46  32  2

Nuclear Attack Submarines  6 2 0

Ballistic Missile Submarines  4 4 0

Coas tal Patrol (Missile)  86  68  44 

Coast Guard Ships  255*  N / A  23 

Note: In the event of a major Taiwan conflict, the PLA’s Eastern and Southern Theater Navies 

would participate in direct action against the Taiwan Navy. The Northern Theater Navy (not 

shown) would be responsible primarily for protecting the sea approaches to China, but could 

provide mission -critical assets to support the other fleets. In conflict, China may also employ 

China Coast Guard (CCG) and People’s Armed Forces Maritime Militia (PAFMM) ships to support 

military operations. 

*China’s coast guard ships belong to the China Coast Guard (CCG), which is subordinate to the 

People’s Armed Police (PAP). OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

166 

Taiwan Strait Military Balance, Air Forces 

China  Taiwan 

Total  Eastern and 

Southern The ater  Total 

Fighters  1,500 (2, 700*)  600 (750*)  400 (500 *) 

Bombers/Attack  450  250  0

Transport  400 20  30 

Special Mission Aircraft  150  100  30 

Note: This chart displays estimated totals of operational military aircraft from both PLAAF and 

PLAN Aviation . However, the PLAAF may supplement its military transports with civilian aircraft in 

a combat scenario. Note that approximately 800 of the PLAAF/PLAN Aviation’s total fighters 

are at least modern fourth -generation aircraft. 

*The totals in parentheses inc lude fighter trainers. 

China’s Rocket Force 

System  Launchers  Missiles  Estimated Range 

ICBM  100  100  >5,500km 

IRBM  200  200+  3,000 -5,500km 

MRBM  150  150+  1,000 -3,000km 

SRBM  250  600+  300 -1,000km 

GLCM  100  300+  >1,500km OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

167 

APPENDIX II:  DEFENSE CONTACTS AN D EXCHANGES 

U.S. -CHINA MILITARY -TO -MILITARY CONTACTS FOR 201 9

HIGH -LEVEL VISITS TO CHINA  Month (201 9)

Chief of Naval Operations  January 

ENGAGEMENTS 

PRC Defense White Paper Delegation in the United States  August 

Beijing’s Ninth Xiangshan Forum  October 

RECURRENT EXCHANGES 

Asia Pacific Security Dialogue in the United States  May 

Military Maritime Consultative Agreement Working Group in China and the 

Working Group and Plenary in the United States 

June / 

November 

Defense Policy Coordination Talks in Chi na  January 2020 

ACADEMIC EXCHANGES 

U.S. Air War College Delegation to China  March 

U.S. National War College Delegation to China  April 

PLA National War College Delegation to the United States  April 

PLA Air Force Command College Delegation to United Sta tes  May 

U.S. Marine Corps War College Delegation to China  May 

PLA National Defense University Delegation to United States  May 

PLA Navy Command College Delegation to the United States  June 

National Defense University Presidents Meeting  July 

U.S. Nation al Defense University CAPSTONE Delegation to China  July 

U.S. Naval War College Delegation to China  December 

FUNCTIONAL EXCHANGES 

Disaster Management Exchange in China  November OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

168 

U.S. -CHINA MILITARY -TO -MILITARY EXCHANGES PLANNED FOR  2020 

HIGH -LEVEL VISI TS TO CHINA 

U.S. Senior Defense or Military Leader to China (TBD) 

HIGH -LEVEL VISITS TO UNITED STATES 

PRC Senior Defense or Military Leader to the United States (TBD) 

PLA Navy Delegation to International Sea Symposium 

Commander, Southern Theater 

INSTI TUTIONALIZED EXCHANGES 

Defense Policy Coordination Talks (TBD) 

MMCA Plenary and Working Groups (TBD) 

Defense Consultative Talks (TBD) 

Asia -Pacific Security Dialogue (TBD) 

ACADEMIC EXCHANGES 

PRC Academy delegation to the United States (TBD) 

U.S. NDU or Academy delegation to China (TBD) 

FUNCTIONAL EXCHANGES 

Disaster Management Exchange (TBD) OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

169 

APPENDIX  III:  SELECTED PLA BILATERAL AND MULTILATERAL EXERCISES 

IN 2019 

Selected PLA Bilateral and Multilateral Exercises in 2019 

Exercise Name  Type of  Exercise  Participants 

WARRIOR VI  Counter -terrorism  Pakistan 

Joint Strike -2019  Counter -terrorism  Thailand 

Aman -2019  Multi -national naval exercise  Pakistan 

Golden Dragon -2019  Joint exercise  Cambodia 

Joint Maritime Drill -2019  Multi -national naval exercis e ASEAN 

Joint Sea -2019  Naval exercise  Russia 

Blue Commando -2019  Naval exercise  Thailand 

Khan Quest 2019  Multi -national PKO exercise  Mongolia 

Combined Aid  Medical exercise  Germany 

Exercise Cooperation  Counter -terrorism  Singapore 

Cooperation -2019  Counter -terrorism  Tajikistan 

Peace Train -2019  Humanitarian / medical 

exercise  Laos 

Falcon Strike -2019  Air exercise  Thailand 

TSENTR -2019  Multi -national joint exercise  Russia 

Sincere Partners -2019  Joint land forces training  Tanzania 

Shaheen VIII  Air ex ercise  Pakistan 

Fox Hunting -2019  Counter -terrorism  Kazakhstan 

Mosi -2019  Maritime security and trade, 

HA/DR 

Russia, South 

Africa 

Maritime Security Belt -

2019  Counter -piracy  Russia, Iran OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

170 

APPENDIX IV : CHINA’S TOP CRUDE SU PPLI ERS IN 2019 

Numbers may not equal 100, as figures have been rounded. 

China’s Top Crude  Suppliers 2019 

Country  Volume (1,000 barrels/day)  Percentage of 

Imported Crude Oil 

Saudi Arabia  1,669  16 

Russia  1,555  15 

Iraq  1,037  10 

Angola  949  9

Brazil  804  8

Oman  678  7

Kuwait  454  4

UAE  306  3

Iran  296  3

Colombia  263  3

Others  2,120  21 

Total  10,131  99 OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

171 

APPENDIX  V: ACRONYMS 

3PLA  General Staff Department’s Third Department 

4PLA  General Staff Department’s Fourth Department 

5G  fifth -generation 

A2/AD  anti -access/area -den ial 

AAM  air -to -air missile 

AEW&C  airborne early warning and control 

AGI  intelligence collection ship 

AGOS  ocean surveillance ship 

AI  artificial intelligence 

ALBM  air -launched ballistic missile 

ALCM  air -launched cruise missile 

AMS  Academy of Milit ary Science 

AOE  fast combat support ship 

AOR  replenishment oiler 

APT  Advanced Persistent Threat 

ASAT  anti -satellite 

ASBM  anti -ship ballistic missile 

ASCM  anti -ship cruise missile 

ASEAN  Association of Southeast Asian Nations 

ASM  air -to -surface mi ssile 

ASW  anti -submarine warfare 

AU  African Union 

AVIC  Aviation Industry of China 

BMD  ballistic missile defense 

BRICS  Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa 

C2  command and control 

C4I  command, control, communications, computers, and intelli gence 

C4ISR  command, control, communications, computers, intelligence, 

surveillance, and reconnaissance 

CAS  China Academy of Sciences 

CCG  China Coast Guard 

CCP  Chinese Communist Party 

CG  guided -missile cruiser 

CMC  Central Military Commission 

CNSC  Central National Security Commission 

COMAC  Commercial Aircraft Corporation of China 

DDG  guided -missile destroyer 

DoD  Department of Defense OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

172 

DRAM  dynamic random -access memory 

EEZ  exclusive economic zone 

EW  electronic warfare 

FFG  guided -missile fri gate 

FFL  corvette 

FOCAC  Forum on China -Africa Cooperation 

FYP  Five -Year Plan 

GPS  Global Positioning System 

HA/DR  humanitarian assistance/disaster relief 

IADS  integrated air defense system 

ICBM  intercontinental ballistic missile 

ICT  information and communications technology 

IO  information operations 

IP  intellectual property 

IRBM  intermediate -range ballistic missile 

ISR  intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance 

JLSF  Joint Logistic Support Force 

LACM  land -attack cruise missile 

LHA  amphib ious assault ship 

LOW  launch -on -warning 

LPD  amphibious transport dock 

MARV  maneuverable reentry vehicle 

MCF  military -civil fusion 

MIRV  multiple independently targetable reentry vehicle 

MOOTW  military operations other than war 

MPS  Ministry of Publ ic Security 

MRBM  medium -range ballistic missile 

MSS  Ministry of State Security 

NFU  No First Use 

NDU  National Defense University 

NORINCO  North Industries Corporation 

NPC  National People’s Congress 

NWMA  non -war military activities 

OBOR  One Belt , One Road 

OTH  over -the -horizon 

PAFMM  People’s Armed Forces Maritime Militia 

PAP  People’s Armed Police 

PKO  peacekeeping operations 

PLA  People’s Liberation Army 

PLAA  PLA Army OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE   

> Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China

173 

PLAAF  PLA Air Force 

PLAN  PLA Navy 

PLANMC  PLA Navy Marine Corps 

PLARF  PL A Rocket Force 

PRC  People’s Republic of China 

R&D  research and development 

RCEP  Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership 

RIMPAC  Rim of the Pacific 

S&T  science and technology 

SAM  surface -to -air missile 

SLBM  submarine -launched ballistic missile 

SL OC  sea line of communication 

SLV  space launch vehicle 

SOE  state -owned enterprise 

SOF  special operations forces 

SRBM  short -range ballistic missile 

SS  diesel -powered attack submarine 

SSBN  nuclear -powered ballistic missile submarine 

SSF  Strategic Supp ort Force 

SSN  nuclear -powered attack submarine 

SSP  air - independent -powered attack submarine 

THAAD  terminal high -altitude area defense 

TRA  Taiwan Relations Act 

UAV  unmanned aerial vehicle 

UGF  underground facility 

USAFRICOM  U.S. Africa Command 

USIN DOPACOM  U.S. Indo -Pacific Command 

USTR  U.S. Trade Representative 

UN  United Nations 

WTO  World Trade Organization 

ZTE  Zhongxing Telecommunications Company Ltd. OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 

Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 

174 OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 

Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 

175
