Title: Trump Administration Executive Order Tracker - October 2025 | JD Supra

URL Source: https://www.jdsupra.com/legalnews/trump-administration-executive-order-3789938/

Markdown Content:
Below is a tracker of healthcare-related executive orders (EOs) issued by the Trump administration, including overviews of each EO and the date each EO was signed. We will regularly update this tracker as additional EOs are published.

It is important to note that EOs, on their own, do not effectuate policies. Rather, in most cases, they put forth policy goals and call on federal agencies to examine old or institute new policies that align with those goals.

| Date Signed | Executive Order Title | Summary |
| --- | --- | --- |
| October 15, 2025 | Ensuring Continued Accountability in Federal Hiring | The Executive Order implements controls on federal hiring, with the goal of having an efficient federal workforce aligned with the administration’s priorities. Agencies must follow the Merit Hiring Plan issued by OPM in May 2025, establish Strategic Hiring Committees, and submit Annual Staffing Plans with quarterly updates to OPM and OMB. Exceptions apply for national security, public safety, and other designated roles, and the EO states it shall not adversely impact Medicare benefits. |
| September 30, 2025 | Unlocking Cures for Pediatric Cancer With Artificial Intelligence | This Executive Order directs the MAHA Commission, HHS, the Assistant to the President for Science and Technology (APST), and the Special Advisor for AI and Crypto to use artificial intelligence to improve pediatric cancer diagnosis, treatment, and prevention. Agencies shall prioritize enhancing clinical trial design, data infrastructure, and biological analysis through AI and seek ways to increase investments in pediatric cancer research—including doubling funding for the Childhood Cancer Data Initiative. The EO encourages private sector innovation and mandates integration of AI into health data systems to improve research and trial outcomes. HHS is also tasked with finalizing interoperability standards to ensure secure, privacy-compliant use of patient data in AI applications. |
| September 29, 2025 | Continuance of Certain Federal Advisory Committees | This Executive Order extends the following Department of Health and Human Services advisory committees through September 30, 2027: the Presidential Advisory Council on HIV/AIDS, the President’s Committee for People with Intellectual Disabilities, the Advisory Board on Radiation and Worker Health, and the President’s Council on Sports, Fitness, and Nutrition. |
| August 13, 2025 | Ensuring American Pharmaceutical Supply Chain Resilience by Filling the Strategic Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients Reserve | This EO directs HHS to strengthen domestic pharmaceutical supply chains by stockpiling Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (APIs) for critical medicines. Within 30 days, The Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response (ASPR) must identify approximately 26 especially critical drugs and assess available funding to acquire a 6-month supply of APIs, prioritizing domestic sources. Within 120 days, ASPR must prepare the Strategic API Reserve (SAPIR) repository to begin receiving APIs and fill it within 30 days of readiness. Within 90 days, ASPR must update the 2022 list of 86 essential medicines and develop a plan to source, store, and maintain APIs for those not covered in the critical drugs list. The plan must also include a proposal and cost estimate for opening a second SAPIR repository within one year. |
| August 7, 2025 | Improving Oversight of Federal Grantmaking | This EO aims to ensure federal funding does not go to what the administration considers “wasteful grants.” It requires each agency to designate an appointee of President Trump to be responsible for reviewing new funding opportunity announcements and discretionary grants to ensure they are consistent with agency priorities. It states specific items must include, such as review by subject matter experts and interagency coordination to determine if the funding opportunity has been addressed by another announcement. The EO lists principles for this review, including that preference be given to institutions with lower indirect cost rates, awards be given to a broad range of recipients, recipients commit to complying with Gold Standard Science, and that awards are not used to fund or promote racial preferences, denial of the sex binary, or illegal immigration. The EO directs agencies to designate appointees of President Trump to review discretionary awards on an annual basis for consistency with agency priorities, including an accountability mechanism for officials responsible for selection and granting of awards. OMB must revise the Uniform Guidance to require all discretionary grants to permit termination for convenience, including when the award no longer advances agency priorities. Within 30 days, agencies must submit a report to OMB detailing if its standard terms and conditions for discretionary awards permit termination for convenience and must revise terms and conditions of existing discretionary grants to permit such termination. |
| July 31, 2025 | President’s Council on Sports, Fitness, and Nutrition, and the Reestablishment of the Presidential Fitness Test | This EO modifies a Bush Administration EO to reestablish the Presidential Fitness Test, to be administered by HHS. It establishes the President’s Council on Sports, Fitness, and Nutrition, which will consist of 30 individuals appointed by the President and will be funded by HHS. The Council shall advise the President, including on strategies to address the growing national security threat posed by the increasing rates of childhood obesity, chronic diseases, and sedentary lifestyles. |
| July 24, 2025 | Ending Crime and Disorder on America’s Streets | This EO directs the Attorney General to collaborate with HHS to seek the reversal, if appropriate, of judicial precedents and the termination of consent decrees that impede the encouragement of civil commitment of individuals with mental illness who pose a risk to themselves or the public and who are homeless. It directs HHS to prioritize discretionary federal assistance for states and cities that enforce prohibitions against open drug use, urban camping, loitering, and squatting and that provide individuals with serious mental illness, a substance use disorder, or who are homeless with assisted outpatient treatment or move them into a treatment center. The EO also directs HHS to ensure SAMHSA discretionary grants do not fund harm reduction or safe consumption efforts; to provide technical assistance to assisted outpatient treatment programs on the civil commitment process; and ensure federal funding for Federally Qualified Health Centers and Certified Community Behavioral Health Clinics reduces homelessness. The EO also calls for the end of federal grants that support “housing first” policies. |
| July 23, 2025 | Accelerating Federal Permitting of Data Center Infrastructure | This EO directs the Secretary of Commerce and Director OSTP to launch an initiative that will provide financial support to “qualifying projects,” as defined in the EO, to support data center infrastructure. All agencies shall also provide OSTP with existing financial mechanisms to assist with these efforts. The EO revokes a January 2025 Biden-era EO, Advancing United States Leadership in Artificial Intelligence Infrastructure. The EO requires the Council on Environmental Quality to establish new categorical exclusions to cover projects funded by this initiative that do not have a significant effect on the human environment, with the goal of expediting construction. The EO directs the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to expedite permitting by modifying regulations. EPA shall also identify Brownfield Sites and Superfund Sites for use by these projects and issue guidance on such sites within 180 days. The EO directs federal agencies, such as the Department of the Interior, to identify federal land that can be authorized for data center construction. |
| July 23, 2025 | Promoting the Export of the American AI Technology Stack | This EO directs the Secretary of Commerce to establish and implement the American AI Exports Program within 90 days. The Secretary of Commerce will issue a 90-day public call for proposals to be included in the program, and, in consultation with the Secretary of State, Secretary of Defense, Secretary of Energy, and Director of OSTP, evaluate and select proposals for inclusion in the program. The EO directs the Economic Diplomacy Action Group (EDAG) to coordinate mobilization of federal financing tools for AI export packages. These tools include direct loans, loan and credit guarantees, equity investments, co-financing, political risk insurance, technical assistance, and feasibility studies. The EO also delegates authority to appoint EDAG members to the Administrator of the Small Business Administration (SBA) and the Director of OSTP. The EO specifies that the Secretary of State will be responsible for developing and executing federal strategy to promote the export of American AI technologies and standards, coordinating US participation in multilateral initiatives and country-specific partnerships for AI deployment and export promotion, supporting partner countries in fostering pro innovation regulatory, data, and infrastructure environments, analyzing market access, including barriers to trade, and coordinating with SBA’s Office of Investment and Innovation to facilitate investment in US small businesses that develop AI technologies and manufacture AI infrastructure, hardware, and systems. |
| July 23, 2025 | Preventing Woke AI in the Federal Government | This EO requires agency heads to only procure large-language models (LLMs) that abide by “unbiased AI principles,” which are truth-seeking and ideological neutrality. The EO directs the Director of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), in consultation with the Administrator for Federal Procurement Policy, the Administrator of General Services, and the Director of Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) to issue guidance implementing the requirements related to unbiased AI principles within 120 days. Each agency head must include terms in each new LLM federal contract requiring that the LLM comply with the unbiased AI principles and outlining procedure for noncompliance, revise existing contracts to include the terms outlined above, and within 90 days of OMB issuing the specified guidance, adopt procedures to ensure compliance with unbiased AI principles. |
| July 17, 2025 | Creating Schedule G in the Expected Service | This EO creates a new classification of non-career federal employees (Schedule G). These employees will engage in policymaking or policy-advocating work. The aim of the new schedule is to “enhance government efficiency and accountability.” The new schedule specifically aims to improve operations at the Department of Veterans Affairs. |
| May 23, 2025 | Restoring Gold Standard Science in America | This EO directs the Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) to issue guidance for agencies within 30 days for adopting new “gold standard” science principles, including that science is reproducible, transparent, collaborative, and without conflicts of interest. Federal agencies shall update their processes and report to OSTP within 60 days about implementation progress. Within 30 days, federal agencies shall also ensure that employees are not engaging in scientific misconduct, publicly report certain data, and communicate uncertainty. The EO states that the Biden Administration politicized science by encouraging agencies to incorporate diversity, equity, and inclusion , and it reinstates previous scientific integrity policies. The Trump Administration encourages American research organizations to adopt these standards. |
| May 12, 2025 | Delivering Most-Favored Nation Prescription Drug Pricing to American Patients | This EO instructs the U.S. Trade Representative and the Secretary of Commerce to ensure foreign countries are not engaged in practices that lead to high drug prices in the United States. Second, the EO instructs the Secretary of Health and Human Services (HHS) to facilitate direct-to-consumer purchasing programs for drug manufacturers that sell their products to Americans at the most-favored-nation price. Third, the EO provides the Secretary of HHS, in coordination with other relevant agencies, 30 days to bring prices for pharmaceutical drugs in line with comparable developed nations. If significant process toward most-favored-nation pricing is not delivered at that time, HHS at that point, in conjunction with the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, must develop rule-making to impose most-favored-nation pricing. Fourth, HHS and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) must consider certifying that the importation of certain prescription drugs from other developed countries is safe, and if such certification is made, FDA must create a waiver process to allow for the importation of prescription drugs. Fifth, a number of federal agencies, including the Federal Trade Commission, the Attorney General, and the Department of Commerce, are instructed to investigate any anti-competitive practices leading to higher prices. Finally, the FDA is instructed to review and potentially modify or revoke approvals granted for drugs, for drugs that maybe be unsafe, ineffective, or improperly marketed. |
| May 5, 2025 | Improving The Safety and Security of Biological Research | This EO directs the Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP), in consultation with HHS, to establish guidance to halt Federal funding of gain-of-function research conducted in certain countries of concern where agencies believe there to be inadequate oversight. The EO directs HHS to include new enforcement terms in every life-science research contract or grant, including a requirement that recipients do not operate or fund gain-of-function research in foreign countries, of which violation would lead to a revocation of funding and up to a 5-year ban of HHS funding. Within 180 days, OSTP shall develop and implement a strategy to limit and track gain-of-function research that occurs in the US without federal funding. OSTP shall also ensure that federal funding recipients have a mechanism to report gain-of-function research, including research funded without federal dollars. Such information shall be made public, along with research funding that has been halted pursuant to this EO. |
| May 5, 2025 | Regulatory Relief to Promote Domestic Production of Critical Medicines | This EO aims to streamline regulations and eliminate barriers to domestic pharmaceutical manufacturing to enhance the timeliness and predictability of agency reviews, making the US more competitive in producing safe and effective medicines. The FDA and EPA are tasked, within 180 days, with reviewing and updating domestic pharmaceutical manufacturing regulations to ensure efficient inspections and approvals of new and expanded manufacturing capacities and to enable US-based manufacturing. Within 90 days, the FDA must develop and advance improvements to the risk-based inspection regime of overseas manufacturing facilities involved in the supply of US medicines, funded by increased fees on foreign manufacturing facilities. The order also designates the EPA as the lead agency for coordinating environmental permits, in coordination with OMB. |
| April 24, 2025 | Strengthening Probationary Periods in the Federal Service | This EO issues a new Civil Service Rule, through the Office of Personnel Management, that will require agencies to approve a probationary employee as a tenured federal employee, instead of an automatic process at the end of a probationary period. Agencies shall consider the employee’s performance and conduct, the needs and interest of the agency, and if the employee’s continued employment would advance the agency’s goals and efficiency. The EO notes it is the responsibility of the employee to demonstrate why their continued employment would serve the public’s interest. Within 15 days of this EO, each agency shall identify employees whose probationary or trial period ends in 90 days or more. Agencies shall meet with probationary employees at least 60 days before their probationary period ends to assess if their employment shall continue, and the agency shall then shall make a decision at least 30 days before a probationary period ends and put the decision in writing. |
| April 23, 2025 | Reforming Accreditation to Strengthen Higher Education | This EO directs the Secretary of Education to deny, monitor, suspend, or terminate accreditation recognition for accrediting agencies if they impose diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) requirements as part of their accreditation standards. Additionally, it instructs the Attorney General and the Secretary of Education, in consultation with the Secretary of Health and Human Services, to discontinue DEI-related practices in medical and graduate schools. |
| April 16, 2025 | Ensuring Commercial, Cost-Effective Solution in Federal Contracts | This EO states that agencies should prioritize procurement of commercially available products and services, as opposed to non-commercial goods (such as highly specialized, Government-unique systems, custom-developed products or services, or research and development requirements where the agency has not identified a satisfactory commercial option). It directs agencies within 60 days to conduct a review of all open solicitations and notices for non-commercial products and services, consolidate them into one application, and send it, including the market research and price analysis used to justify the procurement of a non-commercial product or service, to the agency’s approval authority. The approval authority will then make recommendations to advance commercial procurement within 30 days. If an agency is proposing to solicit a non-commercial product or service, the contracting officer shall detail the specific reasons a non-commercial good is needed, and a final decision may be made with consultation from the Office of Management and Budget. |
| April 15, 2025 | Restoring Common Sense to Federal Procurement | This EO notes that the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR), which established uniform procedures for acquisitions across agencies, is an overcomplicated regulatory framework, at 2,000 pages. The EO directs agencies and the Office of Federal Public Procurement Policy, within 180 days, to amend the FAR to only include provisions required by statute or essential to sound procurement. The EO notes this will advance the goals of the January EO, Unleashing Prosperity Through Deregulation. Within 15 days, agencies with procurement authority shall designate an official to work on FAR reform and provide recommendations. Within 20 days, the Office of Management and Budget shall issue implementation guidance and propose new agency supplemental regulations and internal guidance that promote expedited and streamlined acquisitions. |
| April 15, 2025 | Lowering Drug Prices by Once Again Putting Americans First | This EO directs HHS within 60 days to propose and seek comment on revisions to the Medicare Drug Price Negotiation Program for initial price applicability in 2028. HHS should also work with Congress to address the timing disparity between small-molecule and biologic drugs, conduct a survey to determine hospital acquisition costs for outpatient drugs and propose adjustments to align Medicare reimbursement with those costs, condition health center grant funding on providing insulin and injectable epinephrine at or below the 340B acquisition cost plus a minimal administrative fee, and address payment incentives that encourage shifting of drug administration volume from physician office settings to hospital outpatient departments. The EO directs the CMS Innovation Center to develop a prescription drug payment model for high-cost Medicare-covered prescription drugs and biologicals, including those outside of the Medicare Drug Price Negotiation Program. The EO directs the FDA to accelerate the review of generics, biosimilars, and over-the-counter conversions and streamline the drug importation program under section 804 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to help states reduce costs. The EO directs the Department of Labor to propose new transparency requirements for pharmacy benefit manager compensation under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974. The EO directs HHS, the Department of Justice, the Department of Commerce, and the Federal Trade Commission to develop recommendations to “reduce anti-competitive behavior from pharmaceutical manufacturers.” |
| April 9, 2025 | Reducing Anti-Competitive Regulatory Barriers | This EO directs agencies to identify regulations that create monopolies, impose unnecessary barriers to market entry, or limit competition and recommend recission or modification. Agencies should send their findings to the Attorney General and the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) within 70 days. The EO also directs the FTC, within 10 days, to issue an RFI seeking public input on anti-competitive regulations and, within 90 days, create a list of anti-competitive regulations to be rescinded or modified. The proposed recissions or modifications could be incorporated into the Unified Regulatory Agenda. |
| March 20, 2025 | Stopping Waste, Fraud, and Abuse by Eliminating Information Silos | This EO requires agencies to ensure federal officials have access to all unclassified agency records, data, software systems, and information technology systems (including data from State programs that receive Federal funding) for purposes of eliminating waste, fraud, and abuse. The goal of the EO is to facilitate intra- and inter-agency sharing of records. The EO also requires agencies, within 30 days, to rescind or modify all agency guidance that serves as a barrier to the inter- or intra-agency sharing of unclassified information and, within 45 days, catalogue classified information policies to assess if they are unnecessarily classified. |
| March 20, 2025 | Eliminating Waste and Saving Taxpayer Dollars by Consolidating Procurement | This EO requires agencies to allow the General Services Administration (GSA) to conduct domestic procurement with respect to common goods and services for the agency. Within 90 days, GSA shall submit a comprehensive plan to OMB for the GSA to procure common goods and services. Further, within 30 days, OMB shall designate the GSA as the executive agent for all Government-wide acquisition contracts for information technology, which GSA can then defer or decline when necessary to ensure continuity of service or as otherwise appropriate. The EO directs GSA, on an ongoing basis, to rationalize Government-wide indefinite delivery contract vehicles for information technology for agencies, including as part of identifying and eliminating contract duplication, redundancy, and other inefficiencies. |
| March 18, 2025 | Achieving Efficiency Through State and Local Preparedness | This EO seeks to expand the role of states and localities in national resilience and preparedness, which will likely have impacts on drug supply chain issues and future pandemic response. The EO directs the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (APNSA), in coordination with other relevant agencies, to publish a National Resilience Strategy within 90 days. APNSA should also review critical infrastructure policies (including previous EOs on supply chain) and recommend a risk-informed approach within 180 days. APNSA shall review all national continuity policies and recommend options to modernize and streamline the current approach within 180 days. APNSA shall review the findings of the Federal Emergency Management Agency Council and all national preparedness and response policies and provide recommendations to edit policies so that they can reformulate the process and metrics for federal responsibility within 240 days. APNSA shall also create a National Risk Register within 240 days. |
| March 14, 2025 | Continuing the Reduction of the Federal Bureaucracy | This EO continues efforts to reduce the Federal government. The EO directs certain governmental entities to be eliminated to the maximum extent consistent with applicable law, including the United States Interagency Council on Homelessness, the Community Development Financial Institutions Fund, and the Minority Business Development Agency. Within 7 days of this EO, the head of each governmental entity listed shall submit a report to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) confirming compliance and explaining which functions of the entity are statutorily required. The EO also directs the OMB to reject funding requests for governmental agencies that do not comply with this order. |
| March 7, 2025 | Restoring Public Service Loan Forgiveness | This EO directs the Secretary of Education to edit the Public Service Loan Forgiveness Program to exclude organizations that engage in “child abuse, including the chemical and surgical castration or mutilation of children or the trafficking of children to so-called transgender sanctuary States for purposes of emancipation from their lawful parents.” |
| February 26, 2025 | Implementing The President’s “Department of Government Efficiency” Cost Efficiency Initiative | This EO requires agencies to build a centralized technological system to record every payment issued by the agency pursuant to each contract and grant, along with a written justification for each payment. The system must include a mechanism to pause and rapidly review any payment for which the approving employee has not submitted a written justification. Agencies, working with their DOGE team lead, shall issue guidance on the written justification requirement. The EO requires all agencies, in consultation with DOGE, to review existing contracts and grants and terminate or modify them to “promote efficiency and advance the policies of the current Administration” within 30 days. Agencies must also review contracting policies, procedures, and personnel and issue guidance on signing new contracts or modifying existing contracts to promote efficiency and the policies of the current administration. The EO also makes changes to non-essential travel justifications and credit cards, along with requiring agencies to submit information on property subject to the agency’s administration. |
| February 25, 2025 | Making America Healthy Again by Empowering Patients with Clear, Accurate, and Actionable Healthcare Pricing Information | The EO references work from the first Trump administration on healthcare price transparency, and it states that the federal government will continue to promote universal access to clear and accurate healthcare prices and will take all necessary steps to improve existing price transparency requirements, increase enforcement of price transparency requirements, and identify opportunities to further empower patients with meaningful price information, potentially including through the expansion of existing price transparency requirements. The EO directs the Departments of Treasury, Labor, and Health and Human Services to “rapidly implement and enforce” price transparency regulations within 90 days. Actions specified include: requiring the disclosure of the prices of items and services, not estimates, issuing updated guidance or proposed regulatory action ensuring pricing information is standardized and comparable across hospitals and plans, and issuing guidance or proposed regulatory action updating enforcement policies designed to ensure compliance. |
| February 19, 2025 | Ending Taxpayer Subsidization of Open Borders | This EO directs agencies to identify all federally funded programs that currently allow undocumented immigrants to obtain cash or non-cash benefits, and take action, consistent with applicable law, to align those programs with existing federal laws, including the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 (PRWORA). It directs agencies to ensure that eligibility verification systems ensure that taxpayer-funded benefits exclude ineligible immigrants. It directs DOGE to identify other sources of federal funding for undocumented individuals and recommend additional agency actions to align with this EO. |
| February 19, 2025 | Commencing the Reduction of the Federal Bureaucracy | In accordance with this EO, HHS shall terminate the Secretary’s Advisory Committee on Long COVID, and CMS shall terminate the Health Equity Advisory Committee. The EO calls for the termination of the Presidential Management Fellows program. This EO also directs non-statutory components and functions of certain foreign affairs governmental entities to be eliminated, as allowed under applicable law, and directs such entities to submit a report stating if components of their entity are statutorily-required. |
| February 19, 2025 | Ensuring Lawful Governance and Implementing the President’s “Department of Government Efficiency” Deregulatory Initiative | This EO directs agency heads to work in coordination with DOGE team leads and OMB to review all regulations subject to their jurisdiction for consistency with law and Administration policy. Within 60 days, agencies shall submit to OMB a list of certain regulations, including those that the agency believes are unconstitutional, are not authorized by statutory authority, and impose undue burdens on small businesses, among other types of regulations. It directs agencies to de-prioritize enforcement actions that enforce regulations that go beyond the powers vested by the Constitution, and ensure enforcement actions are compliant with law and Administration policy. The EO directs OMB to issue implementation guidance. |
| February 18, 2025 | Ensuring Accountability for All Agencies | This EO requires independent agencies, including the Federal Trade Commission, to submit proposed regulations to the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA) before publication in the Federal Register. The EO directs the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) to establish performance standards and management objectives for independent agencies and to review independent agency actions for consistency with the President’s priorities. The EO states that only the President and Attorney General can provide interpretations of law for the executive branch. It directs independent agencies to regularly consult with and coordinate policies and priorities with OMB, DPC, and the White House National Economic Council. |
| February 18, 2025 | Expanding Access to In Vitro Fertilization | This EO directs the Domestic Policy Council (DPC) to submit a list of policy recommendations on protecting IVF access and reducing out-of-pocket and health plan costs for IVF treatment. |
| February 14, 2025 | Keeping Education Accessible and Ending COVID-19 Vaccine Mandates in Schools | This EO directs the Secretary of Education to issue guidelines to elementary schools, local educational agencies, State educational agencies, secondary schools, and institutions of higher education regarding those entities’ legal obligations with respect to parental authority, religious freedom, disability accommodations, and equal protection under law for COVID-19 vaccine school mandates. It directs the Secretary of Education, in consultation with the Secretary of Health and Human Services, to develop a plan to end COVID-19 vaccine school mandates. The plan should also include a list of discretionary Federal grants and contracts provided to schools that are non-compliant with the guidelines issued and each agency’s process for preventing Federal funds from being provided to, and rescinding Federal funds from, entities that are non-compliant with the guidelines. |
| February 13, 2025 | Establishing the President’s Make America Healthy Again Commission | The EO states that agencies that address health must focus on reversing chronic diseases, including mental health disorders, obesity, diabetes, and other chronic diseases. The EO specifically states that all federally funded health research should be transparent and have open-source data, directs the NIH to prioritize research on why Americans are getting sick, directs all agencies to work with farmers to ensure food is healthy and affordable, and directs agencies to ensure expanded treatment options are available, including with flexible health insurance coverage. The EO establishes the President’s Make America Healthy Again Commission, which will be chaired by RFK Jr. The first mission of the Commission will be to address childhood chronic diseases, with actions including studying contributing causes, assisting the President with public education, and providing government-wide recommendations on how to address childhood chronic diseases. Within 100 days, the Commission must submit a Make Our Children Healthy Again Assessment, which should include specific items such as comparing childhood chronic diseases in the US to other countries and reporting on best practices for prevention. Within 180 days, the Commission must submit a strategy on how to restructure the government’s response to childhood chronic diseases. |
| February 11, 2025 | Implementing The President’s “Department of Government Efficiency” Workforce Optimization Initiative | This EO requires agencies to implement a workforce optimization initiative, stating each agency can hire no more than one employee for every four employees that depart and agency heads, in consultation with their DOGE team lead, must develop a hiring plan. The hiring plan requires: new career appointment hiring decisions be made in consultation with the agency’s DOGE team lead; no vacancies for career appointments be filled that the DOGE team lead deems should not be filled unless the agency head decides otherwise; DOGE team leads must provide the US DOGE Service (USDS) Administrator with a monthly hiring report. Agency heads should prepare for large-scale reductions in force (RIFs), particularly in offices that perform functions not mandated by statute and including employees working in DEI initiatives. Agency heads must submit a report identifying statutes that establish the agency, or subcomponents of the agency, as statutorily required entities. |
| January 31, 2025 | Unleashing Prosperity through Deregulation | This EO requires that whenever an agency promulgates a new rule, regulation, or guidance, it must identify at least 10 existing rules, regulations, or guidance documents to be repealed. The Director of the Office of Management and Budget will ensure standardized measurement and estimation of regulatory costs. It requires that for fiscal year 2025, the total incremental cost of all new regulations, including repealed regulations, be significantly less than zero. It is unclear what this 10-to-1 ratio means in practice. A rule, regulation, or a guidance document could be one thousand pages, or it could be one paragraph. It could represent a significant policy, or it could be a minor, technical requirement. |
| January 28, 2025 | Protecting Children from Chemical and Surgical Mutilation | This EO states that the policy of the US is to “not fund, sponsor, promote, assist, or support the so-called “transition” of a child from one sex to another.” The EO directs agencies to rescind or amend any guidance that relies on guidance from the World Professional Association for Transgender Health (WPATH). It directs HHS to publish a literature review on best practices for promoting the health of children who assert gender dysphoria. It directs agencies who provide research or education grants to medical institutions to ensure grantees are not performing any care that is prohibited under this EO. It directs HHS, TRICARE, and the federal employee health benefits program to not cover this care, and it directs HHS to take such action through vehicles such as Medicare or Medicaid conditions of participation, section 1557, or mandatory drug use reviews. It directs the Attorney General to investigate any companies that provide medications related to transition that may have long-term side effects, and urges the Attorney General to pass legislation with Congress that enacts a private right of action for children and their parents. |
| January 27, 2025 | Reinstating Service Members Discharged Under the Military’s COVID-19 Mandate | This EO reinstates service members that were discharged for refusing to comply with the COVID-19 vaccine mandate that was imposed in August 2021 and rescinded January 2023. The EO directs them to be reinstated at their former rank and receive full back pay. |
| January 24, 2025 | Enforcing the Hyde Amendment | This EO revokes two Biden-era reproductive health EOs. The EO also directs the Office of Management and Budget to issue guidance ensuring agencies comply with the Hyde Amendment, which is passed by Congress annually and prohibits federal funding for abortion. |
| January 23, 2025 | Removing Barriers to American Leadership in Artificial Intelligence | The EO directs the Assistant to the President for Science and Technology (APST), the Special Advisor for AI and Crypto, and the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (APNSA), in coordination with the heads of relevant agencies, to develop and submit to the President an action plan to achieve the policy set forth in this EO. It also directs those officials to review all policies, directives, regulations, orders, and other actions taken pursuant to the revoked Executive Order 14110 of October 30, 2023 (Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy Development and Use of Artificial Intelligence) and propose suspending, revising, or rescinding any actions inconsistent with this new EO. |
| January 23, 2025 | President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology | This EO establishes the President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST), that will be composed of no more than 24 members and will be co-chaired by the Assistant to the President for Science and Technology (APST) and the Special Advisor for AI & Crypto. The remaining members will be appointed by the President and include individuals and representatives from sectors outside of the Federal Government. The Co-Chairs may designate up to two Vice Chairs of the PCAST from among the non-Federal members of the PCAST. The PCAST will advise the President on matters involving science, technology, education, and innovation policy. Additionally, the PCAST will provide the President with scientific information that is needed to inform public policy relating to the economy, workers, national and homeland security, and other topics. The PCAST will meet regularly and solicit information from stakeholders, along with serving in specified advisory committee and panel roles. It also revokes Biden’s EO of the same name that created his PCAST. |
| January 20, 2025 | Withdrawing the US from the World Health Organization | This EO provides notice of intent to withdraw from the World Health Organization (WHO), citing mishandling of the COVID-19 pandemic and an inability to demonstrate independence from the political influence of WHO member states. It directs the State Department and Office of Management and Budget to pause transfer of funds to the WHO and recall any personnel working in any capacity at the WHO. |
