Title: CPY Document

URL Source: https://www.ftc.gov/sites/default/files/documents/commission_decision_volumes/volume-65/ftcd-vol65april-june1964pages613-721.pdf

Published Time: Fri, 04 Jun 2021 04:58:12 GMT

Markdown Content:
PLOUGH , INC. ) ET AL. 613  

> 583

Complaint 

1 t is further ordend That the hearing examiner s initial decision as      

> modified herein be , and it hereby is

, adopted as the decision of the 

Commission.      

> It is fliTther orde?' That respondents shaD

, within sixty (60) days 

after service upon them of this order , file \vith the Commission a re-

port , in writing, setting forth in detail the manner and form in which 

they have complied with the order set forth herein: 

IN THE MATTER OF 

PLOUGH , INC. , ET AL.   

> ORDER , ETC. , IN REGARD

'10 THE ALLEGED VIOLATION OF THE FEDERA     

> TRADE COMMIS8IO ACT
> Docket 8563.

Complaint , :Mar. 19 1963-DeeisifJn , Apr. 80 , 1964 

Order dismissing, in 'View of the Feb. 20 , 1964, dismissal of a similar complaint  

> in

SterlIng Drug, Inc. Docket 85' 64 )\"' I'. C. 898, complaint charging the dis-

tributor of " St. . Joseph Aspirin " and its advertising agency with representi 

falsely that " America s leading medical journal" reported that St. . Joseph 

Aspirin was the best buy in pain relief. 

COMPLAINT 

Pursuant to the provisions of the Federal Trade Commission Aet 

and by virtue of the authority vested in it by said Act , the Federal 

Trade Commission , hn.ving rea.son to believe that Plough , Inc. , a cor-

poration , and Lake- Spiro- Shurma, , Inc. , a eorporation , hereinafter     

> referred to as respondents

, havc violated the provisions of said Act 

and it ,,ppearing to the Commission that a proceding by it in respect 

thereof would be in the public interest, hereby issues its complaint stat-

ing its charges in that respect as follows: 

PARAGRAPH 1. Hespondent Plough , Inc. , is a corporation organized    

> existing and doing business under and by virtue of the laws of the

State of Delaware , with its principal offce and place of business located 

at 3022 J ,,ckson Avenue in the city of Memphis , State of Tennessee. 

Respondent Lake- Spiro-Shurman , Inc. , is a corporation organized 

existing and doing business under and by virt.ue of the la \VB of the          

> State of Tennessee , with its principal offce and place of business lo-

cated at Radio Center Building, :Vhin and Union Streets , in the City 

of Afemph1s , State of Tennessee. 

PAR. 2. Respondent Plough , Inc. , is now , and for some time last past        

> has been , enga.ged in the sale and distribution of a

preparation which 614 FEDERAL TRADE CO L\IISSION DECISIOXS 

Complaint 63 ); .'r. 

comes within the classification of drugs as the term " drug ': is defined 

in the Federal Trade COll1mission Act. 

The designation used by respondent Plough , Inc. , for said prepara-

tion , the formula thereof and direotions for use are as follows:  

> De8ignation:

St. Joseph Aspirin.  

> Pnrm1fln:

Each tablet contains five (5) grains of aspirin.  

> Direct-ions:

(Take) Olle (1) or two (2) tablets with water. May be repeated every      

> four (4) hours. If pains persist

, or are unusually severe , S physician. 

PAR. 3. Respondent Plough , Inc. , causes the said preparation ' when 

sold , to be transported from its place of business in the State of Tennes-

see to purchasers thereof located in various other States of the United 

Slates and in the District of Columbia. Respondent maintains , and at 

all times mentioned herein ha, s 11laintained , a course of trade in said     

> preparation in COlIl1nel'Ce as "

commerce " is defined in the Federal 

Trade Commission Act. The volume of business in such commcrce has 

been and is substantial. 

Hespondent Lake- Spiro- Shllrman , Inc. , is no" , and for some tinm 

Jast past has been , the advertising agency of Plough , Inc. , and now pre-  

> pares and places

, and for some time last past has prepared and placed, 

for publication , advertising maJerial , including the advertising herein-

> alter referred to

, to pronwte the sale of the said preparation. In the 

conduct of its business, at all times mentioned lmrein , respondent Lake-

Spiro-Shurman , Inc. , has been in substantial competition , in commerce       

> with other corporations firms and individuals in the advertising

business.           

> PAl. 4. In the course and conduct of their business

, respondents   

> have disseminated , and caused the c1isseminat.

ion of , certain advertise 

ments c.oncerning the preparation referred to in Paragraph Two , above 

by the United States mails and by various means in conllnerce , as " com-

)nerce " is defined in the Federal Trade Commission Act , including, but 

> not limited to

, advertisements inserted in newspapers and magazines 

and other advertising media fmd by means of television and radio con-

tinuities broadcast through stations located in various States of the 

United States "nd in the District of Columbia , and by means of other 

radio and television continuities broadcast over stations having suf-

ficient power to earry such broadcasts across state lines , for the pur-

pose of inducing, and which were likely to induce , directly or indi- 

> rectly, the purchase of St. oseph Aspirin; and have disseminated

, and 

caused the dissemination of , advertisements concerning said St. Joseph 

Aspirin by various means , including but not limited to the aforesaid 

media , for the purpose of inducing and which were likely to induce PLOrGH INC. ET AL. 615 

613 Complaint 

directJy or indirectly, the purchase of said preparation in commerce , as 

eOnllnel'ee ' is defied in the Federal Trade Commission Act. 

PAR. 5. Among ana typical , but not all-inclusive thereof , of the 

:-tatemenLs and representations contained in sR;id advertisements and 

television a.nd radio broadcasts dissemina:ted as hereinabove set forth 

are the following: 

AoIEmCA' S LEADI!\G MEDICAL JOURNAL REPORTS ST. JOSEPH 

ASPIRe, YOUR " BEST BUY" IN PAl!\ RELIEF! 

Clinical Study Explodes Claims of So-caned Extra Strength or Combination 

Drugs , the Principal Bufered Product and the High-priced Aspirin, It Proved         

> There Is No Difference of Note in the Speed

, Strength or Percentage of Relief   

> of iny

of These Products . When Compared . With St. Joseph Aspirin, It Also 

Showed the So-called Extra Strength Products Which Contain Phenacetin,     

> Caused a Significant Amount of Stomach Distress-

but St. Joseph Aspirin 'Vas as 

Gentle to the Stomach as a Plain Sugar Pil.  

> ':-':'

STOMACH l:PSET" OLADIS EXPLODED! 

Doesu t upset the stomach" 

> , "

No stomach irritation 

> , "

Gentler than aspirin 

have you been puzzled by such scare claims? The fact is, St. Joseph Aspirin was   

> shown to be as gentle to the stomach a!' a plain sugar pil, Actually, the only

prod-

ucts which caused any noticeable stomach irritation in this test were the so-called    

> extra strength" or combination drugs containing phenacetin.

'-, "' * 

(A reproduction of a newspaper advertisement containing the foregoing repre-

sentations is attached bereto marked Exhibit 1 and incorporated herein, 

Here s important news about pain relievcrs-just released by one of America           

> most. highly respected medical journals. It reports on aclinical test of five lead-

ing' pain relievers-the leading so- called extra strength combination drugs; a 

very highly advertised aspirin; the principal ImffeJ' ed pl"oduct-and St. Joseph 

Aspirin. Xow IJlO're s what this test shmn?d. It pro.ed that there is no difference      

> of note in the speed

, Cll.alitJ-' or percentage of relief of any of tllese products-

,,-

hen compared . with St. Joseph Aspirin. It also showed the so-called extra 

strength products ca used a significant amount of stomach distress-whereas 

pure St. Joseph Aspirin was as free of irritating effects as a plain sugar pil, So 

why pay more-especially for products th' at contain an added drug, phenacetin          

> that your doctor ilily not ,yant you to take. This drug, barred in one country

except on prescription , is found in most so-called extra strength combination 

dl'gs. So ,"hy risk more 01' pay more? Ask for pure St. Joseph Aspirin- clin-

ically shown to be the best buy in pain relief. Get it today, 

, . , Radio Station 'VBRO, 

Birmingham , Alabama, 

(A reproduction of the report referred to in the above-quoted "(h-er-

tisements js attached hereto marked Exhibit 2 and incorporated 

herein. 

) * 

"'Pictorial exhibit 1 is omitted in printing. 

"Pictorial exh1bit 2 is omitted in printing. 616 FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION DECISIONS  

> Complaint 65 F.

PAR. 6. Through the use of said advertisements , and others similal 

thereto not specifically set out herein , respondents have represented 

and are now representing, directly and by implication: 

(1) That a report of a clinical study of pain relievers published in 

America s leading medical journal reflected the views of tbe medical 

association under "hose auspices the said journal was published.    

> (2) That America

s leading medical journal reported that St. 

J oseph Aspirin is the " best buy " in pain relief. 

(3) That the clinical investigators who conducted the study and 

published the report in question found and reported that St. Joseph 

Aspirin causes no noticeable stomach irritation and that the said prep-

aration is as gentle to the stomach as a plain sugar pill.    

> PAR. 7. In

tmthand in fact: 

(1) The report of a clinical study referred to by respondents was 

published in The Journal of The American 1\fedical Association , Vol.   

> 182 No.

, December 29 , 1962. This said report was not a report of 

the American :Medical Association. The opinions expressed in the said 

report were solely those of the clinical investigators who conducted     

> the study reported on

, and such opinions did not represent those of the 

American Medical Association (The American Medical Association 

policy with regard to publication of articles in its Journal is set out in 

the Journal under the caption " Responsibility for Statements , as 

shown in a reproduction of page 156 of The Journal of The American 

cvledical Association , Vol. 182 No. , December 29 , 1962 , attached 

hereto marked Exhibit 3 and incorporated herein.        

> ) *
> (2) The Journal of The American Medical Association did not

state , and the clinical investigators who conducted the study published 

in said Journal did not report therein , that St. Joseph Aspirin is the 

best buy " in pain relief. 

(3) The clinical investigators did not state as a finding in their 

report that St. . J oseph Aspirin causes no noticeable stomach irritation 

or that the said preparation is as gentle to the stomach as a sugar pil. 

Therefore , the advertisements referred to in Paragraph Five were 

and are misleading in materinl respects and constituted , and now con-

stitute , "false advertisements " RS that term is defined in the Federal 

Trade Commission Act. 

PAR. 8. The dissemination by the respondents of the false advertise-

ments , as aforesaid , canstitured , and now constitutes , unfair and de-

ceptive acts and pra.ctices , in commerce , in violation of Sections 5 and  

> 1'2 of the Federal

Trade Commission Act. 

> "'Pictorial exhibit 3 is: omitted in prInting.

GEORGE :\ACY COMPANIES , INC. 617  

> 613

Syllabus  

> ORDER

GRANTIXG 1\10TION To DIS:;IlSS C01\IPLAINT 

On April 15 , 1964 , the examiner certified to the Commission a 

motion by respondents to dismiss the cOlnpla.int on the ground that 

further proceecEngs upon it would not be in the pubEc interest. The 

examiner recommends that the motion be granted , and complaint coun-

sel have stated that they do not object to the mohon. Respondents 

have accompanied their mohon with affdavits by responsible offcers 

that respondents have ceased using the particular advertisement upon 

which the complaint was based and do not intend to resume. It does 

not appear however that respondents either have abandoned or intend  

> to abandon dissemination of another advertisement which contains

almost all of the representations that were alleged in the complaint to 

be deceptive. Nevertheless the Commission has concluded that the de-   

> ceptive practices alleged herenl are substantially similar to those
> alleged in the complaint of

Sterling Dntg, Inc. Docket o. 8554 , and 

that in view of the Commission order of February 20 1964 (64 F.  

> 898 herein), dismissing the complaint in

SteTling D1'g, Inc. further 

proceedings 'herein would not be in the public interest. The Commission  

> takes note of the fact that

, in its order of June 25 1962 , it placed upon 

the suspense calendar proceedings against respondent Plough , Inc. 

and other major disseminators of analgesic products pending further 

investigation. The Commission will take such actions in these matters 

as appear to be required by the pubEc interest in the Eght of the in-

formation which is now available and which wil become available. 

Accordingly, 

It i8 ordered That respondents ' motion to dismiss the compla.int be 

and it hereby is , granted and that the complaint be , and it hereby is 

dismissed. 

Commissioner 1\faclntyre concurring only in the result.    

> IN THE IA TTER OF

GEORGE MACY COMPANIES , INC.          

> CONSENT ORDER , :KTC. , IN REGARD TO THE ALLEGED VIOLATIOX OF THE
> FEDERAL TRADE COl\Il\fISSION ACT
> Docket C-

40. ComplaInt , Apr. 30 , lDG- Decision , Apr. 30 , 19rj) 

Consent order requiring a New York City mail order dealer in books ancl other 

publications, certain of which were sold under tbe name of The Heritage 

Club , to cease representing falsely in letters to purportedly delinquent cus-

tomers that the delinquent' s name had been transmitted to a bona fide credit 

> 313-

121-- 70--618 FEDERAL THADE CO)'I:\IISSION DBCISIQXS 

Complaint 631\            

> reporting agency or would be transferred to an attorney to institute

suit       

> for collection , and that if payment ,vas not

made his credit rating would 

be adversely affected, and, by use of '; THE :"IAIL ORDER CREDIT RE-

PORTING ASSOCIATIOX , IXC. " on letterheads , that a bona fide organiza 

tion by that name had prepared and sent the letters. 

IPL. \IXT 

Pursuant to the provisions of the Feder"l Trade Commission Act 

and by virtue of the authority vested in it by said Aet , the Federal 

Trade Commission , having reason to believe that George l\iacy Com-

panies , Inc. , a corporation , hereil1fl.fter referred to as respondent , has 

violated the provisions of said Act , and it appearing to the Commis-

sion that a proceeding by it in respect thereof would be in the. public 

interest , hereby issues its compJa.int stating its charges in that respect 

as follows: 

P AHAGIL\PII 1. H.espondent Ge.orge 1Iac:y Companies , Inc. , is a eor-   

> poration organized , existing and doing busine.ss

uncleI' and by virtue 

of the j"ws of the State of New York with its prineip"l offce and place      

> of business located at 595 :Madison A venue , in the city of N e-V

York, 

State of New York. 

PAP.. 2. Respondent is now , and for some time last past ha. s been 

engaged in the advertising, offering for sale and sale or books and other 

merchandise to the general public by and tllrough the -United States 

Inrtils.  

> PAR.

3. In the course and conduct or its business , respondent now 

causes and for some time last past has caused its said books and mer-

chandise , when solel , to be shipped from its place or business and 

sources of supply in the St"te of New York to purchasers thereof lo-

cated in various other States of the United States and in the District 

> of Columbia

, and maintains , and at all times mentioned herein has 

maintained , a substantial course or trade in said books and merchan 

disc in commerce , as " commerce " is defined in the Federal Trade Com- 

> mission Act.

PAR. 4. In the course and conduct or its business , respondent offers 

for sale certain books and publications thTough the United States 

mails under the name The Heritage Club. Said books and publications 

are distributed and payment made therefor through the United States 

mails. 

For the purpose of inducing the p"yment of purportedly delinquent    

> accounts that have arisen from the aforesaid transactions

, respondent 

hits made certain statements and mpresentations in letters "nd notices 

disseminated through the United States m"ils to purportedly delin- 

> quent customers.

GEORGE l\IACY COMPAXIES , INC. 619 

617 Complaint 

Typical , but not all inclusive of said statements and representations 

are the following: 

a. On the letterhead of The Heritage Club: 

The amount of money which you mye us is lIot large! We hope you wil not let 

H crcate 11 rift in our pleasant relationship. , ;, :j 

It is not possible for us to determine whether you have been negligent , or 

\..hetller yon want to avoid paying for your books. ':. '" * If you arc a charming 

and honest person , then you \I-il be insulted if we turn your account over to 

an attorney for collection. Yet since you have not Vaid our bil, and have not 

replied to the letters we scnt you , we must turn your account over to an attorney 

if you wil not \vrite us now. 

"' '" * 

b. On the letterhead:  

> THE

!AIL ORDEH CREDIT m PORTIXG ASSOCIATION , INC. 

CREDIT REPORTS-COLLECTIONS 

NEW YORK 18 , N. 

We have been notified by one of our mcmbers, The Heritage Club, of yoU!'  

> failure to Vay 11 past-

due account of * * *   

> 'Vhile ours is a credit and collection

agency, our endeavor 1s that of mediator: 

bct'YE'f'Il you a customer with a past- due account of $ and one of anI' mem-

bers The Heritage Club. 

The action on your part of either sending a payment or an explanation now is 

neces ary to circumvent The Heritage Club from turning your account over 

> to special counsel.

IVe have been notified by the Heritage Club that in five days they wil fie will 

special counsel your debt of $ . Only your immediate remittance of this 

sum , to the Club at 595 Madison Ai' enue , 'ivil prevent ibis action. 

\R. 3. By and through the u,e of the aforesaid statements , repro" 

,cntations and practices , and others of similar import not specifically 

set out herein , respondent represents and has represented that: 

a.. The delinquent customer s na, me has been transmitted to a bona 

fide credit reporting agency. 

b. If payment is not made , the customer s general or public credit 

rating will be adversely affected. 

c. " THE :\L\IL ORDER CREDIT HEPORTIXG ASSOCIATION , INC. " is a separate 

bona fide collection and credit reporting agency located in N ew York 

City. 

d. Hespondent has turned over to said " THE MAIL ORDER CREDIT 

REPORTING ASSOOIATIOX , INC. , the delinquent account of the customer 

for collection and other purposes. 

e. If payment is not made , the delinquent customer s account will 

be trnnsferred to an outside attorney 'Ivith instructions to institute suit 

to take other Jegal steps to collect the outstanding amount due. 620 FEDERAL TRADE CQM:MISSION DECISIONS 

Decision and Order 

f. The lette-rs on the letterhead of the said " THE MAIL ORDER CREDIT 

REPORTING ASSOCIATION , IXC. have been prepared and mailed by said 

ol'ga, nization. 

PAR. 6. In truth and in fact: 

a. The delinquent customer s llame has not been transmitted to a 

bona fide credit reporting agenc.y. 

b. If payment is not made , the customer s general or public credit 

rating is not adversely affected. 

c. " THE :\IAIL ORDER CREDIT REPOnTING " \SSOCIATlOX : INC. " is not a

separate , bona fide collection agency or credit reporting agency. Saiel 

organization is a fictitious name utilized by respondent and others 

for the purpose of disseminating collection letters. 

d. Respondent has not turned over to said " THE MAIL ORDER CREDIT 

REPORTING ASSOCIATION" , INC. " the delinquent account of the customers 

for c.ollection or any other purpose. 

e. If payment is not made , the delinquent customer s account is not 

transferred to an outside attorney with instructions to institute suit 

or other legal steps to collect the oustanding amount due. 

f. The letters on the letterhead of the said " THE MAIL ORDER CREDIT 

REPORTU\G ASSOCL\TIO , IXG. " have not been prepared and mailed by 

said organization. Said letters and notice. s have been prepared and 

mailed or caused to be mailed by respondent. Replies in response to 

said letters and notices are forwarded unopened to respondent. 

Therefore , the statements and representations as set forth in Para-

graphs Four and Five hereof ,vere and a.rc false , mislead Lng and 

deceptive. 

PAR. 7. The use by respondent of the aforesaid false , misleading and 

deceptive statements : representations and practices has had , and now 

has , the capacity and tendency to mislead members of the purchasing 

public into the errOIleous and mistaken belief that said staten1ents and 

representations were and are true and into the payment of substantial 

sums of money to respolJdent by rea Oll of said erroneous and mistaken 

belief. 

PAR. 8. The aforesaid acts and practices of resPQndent as herein 

alleged , were and are aU to the prejudice and injury of the public and 

constituted , and now constitute , unfftir and deceptive acts and prac-

tices in comlnerce , in violation of Section t:i of the Federal Trade 

Commission Act. 

DEGISIOK .. I,XD ORDER 

The Commission having heretofore determined to issue its complaint 

charging the respondent named in the caption hereof with violation 

of the Federal Trade Commission Act , and the respondent having 

been served with notice of said determination and with a copy of the GEOHGE l\IACY COYIPA-'\IES , INC. 621  

> 617

Decision and Order 

complaint the Commission intended to issue , together with a. proposed 

form of order; and 

The respondent and counsel for the Commission having thereafter 

executed an agreement containing a consent order , an admission by 

respondent of all the jurisdictional facts set forth in the complaint 

to issue herein , a statement that the signing of said agreement is for 

settlement purposes only and does not constitute ' an admission by re 

spondent that the law has been viobted as set forth in sueh complaint        

> and waivers and prmrisions as required by the Commission srules;

and 

The Commission , having considered the agre.ement , hereby accepts 

same , issues its complaint in the form contemplated by said agreement 

makes the following jurisdictional findings , and enters the follmvillg 

order:  

> 1. Respondent George

1acy Companies , Inc. , is a, corporation or-

ganized , existing and doing business under and by virtue of the laws  

> of the State of

ew York , with its offce and principal place of business 

located at 59:) 1\Iadison Avenue , in the city of New York , State of New 

York 

2. The Federal Trade Commission has jurisdiction of the subject    

> matter of this proceeding and of the respondent

, and the proceeding 

is in the public interest.   

> onDER
> It is of'dered That respondent George ::Iacy Companies , Inc. , a

corporation , and its offcers , and respondent' s agents , representative.s 

and employees , directly or through any corporate or other device 

in connection with the offering for sale , sale or distribution of books   

> or other merc.handise

, in commerce , as " commerce " is define-d in the 

Federal Trade Commission Act , do forthwith cease and desist from 

representing directly or by implication that: 

1. A customer s name has been or wil be turned over to a bona 

fide credit reporting agenc.y or that a customer s general or public 

credit rating will be ad , crsely affected unless respondent estab-

lishes "Where payment is not received , that the information of 

said delinquency is referred to separate bona fide credit reporting 

agency; 

2. De.Jinquent accounts wi11 be or have been turned over to a 

bona fide , separate eol1ection age, ney or attorney for collection     

> unless respondent in fact turns snch accounts ove,

r to such agencies 

or attornev .    

> . ,
> 3. Delinquent accounts have been
> OImER CHEDIT REPOHTING ASSOCIATION

other purpose; 

turned over to " THE 1LUL  

> INC. " for collection or any

622 FEDERAL ' l'RADE COMj\JISSIO:-T DECISIOXS 

Complaint 6;'; F. 

4. ': THE ::LUL ORDER CREDIT REl' OHTIXG . 'I.sSOCIATION : I1\C. . any other fictitious name , or any trlHle name mvned in whole or in 

part by respondent or over \\hieh respondent exercises any direc-

tion or control , is an independent , bona fide collection 01' credit 

reporting agency: 

5. Notices or other communications ,,,hieh respondent has , or 

have caused to be , prepared , written or mailed , havebecn sent by 

THE :UAIL ORDER CHEDIT TIEPORnXG -'.SSOCL\TIOX , INC. , or any ol:her 

person , firnl or agency. 

> It 'is .

hwtheJ' OIylel'ed That the respondent herein shall , within sixty 

(60) days after service upon it of this order , file \yith the Commission 

3, report in writing setting forth in detail the manner and form in 

which it has complied w- ith this order.  

> Ix THE

L\Tn:R OF 

POPT LAR SCmXCE Pl-BLISIIXG CO. , IXC.   

> CONSEXT ORDER

ETC. , IX REG" \RD TO THE ALLEGED VIOL. \TIOX OF TIlE 

l"EDEIUL TR.WE CO)DIISSlOX . \CT 

Docket C' 1. Complnil1t    

> . -
> ljJl'. 3(), 1!Hi.

Deci8Jo1l , Apr, 3D , 196. 

Consent order requiring Xew York City pulJ1isher of OJ ;' l'ovulal' Science 

lonthly " anu " Outdoor Life :Magazine , aho operating the ;; Ontllool' Life 

Book Club" and the " Popular Science Lh- ing Library , to cease represent-

ing falsely ill letter to purportedly c1elinqcJ1t customers that if !1ayment 

was Dot wade the delinquent' s account would lie turned oyer to , a bona fide    

> collection agency with con:-equent injur.\ to bis

credit rating, and by use   

> of the fictitious letterhead "The ::lail Order Credit Reporting As,:uciation

Inc. , that a separate organization hall reeeived tlw accollnt fOr l'ollection 

and prepared the notice. 

CO)IPh\IXT 

Pursuant to the proyjsions of the Feclernl Trade Commission \ct 

nel by virtue of the authority ycstec1 in it by saiel Act , the Federal 

Trade Commission , haying reason to be.1eye thRt Popuhr Science 

Publishing Co. , Inc. , a corpol'Rtion , hereinafter rcferred to as respollll-

ent , has vioJated the provisio11s of sflid Act , and it appearing to the   

> Commission that a proceeding by it

in respect thereof ,,- auld be in the 

public interest : hereby issues its compbint tilt, jng its charges in that 

respect as follmvs: 

P.. \lL\GRAPH 1. R.esponclent Popular Science Publishing Co. , Inc. , is 

a corporation organized , existing and doing business under and by 

virtue. of the la\\' s of the State of Xew York with its principa.l ofIice and POPULAH SCIENCE PUB. CO, : IXC. 623  

> 622

Complaint 

place of business located at ;-335 Lexington A \yenlle in the city of ?\T ew 

York , State of No" York. 

PAIl. 2. Respondent is now and for some Lime last past has been 

engaged in the advertising, offering for sale , sale and distribution 

of publications , books and me, rchandise to the general public. Respond-

ent publishes two monthly llulgazines 

, " 

Popular Science J\fonthly and 

Outdoor Life J\Iagazine , and operates two book clubs the " Outdoor 

Life Book Club" and the " Popular Science Living Library". The 

a.foresaid publications , books and merchandise are advertjserl sold 

and payment made therefor through the united States Mails.   

> PAR. 3. In

the course and conduct of its business , respondent now 

causes and for some time last past has ciluse(l , :its said publications 

books , and merchandise "hen sold , to be shipped from its place of      

> business in the State of

Nmy York to pure-hasel's and subscribers 

thereto located in the various other States of the United States and in  

> the District of CollU11bia

, andn1aintains. an(l at an times mentioned 

herein has maintained , a substantial COl1l' e of trade in said publica-

tions , books and merchandise in commerce , as " commerce " :is defined 

in the Federal Trade Commission Act.  

> \R. 4. In the e-Ol1rse

and conduct of its business and for the pllrpose 

of inducing the payment of purportedly delinquent account.s respond-

ent has made certain statements and representations in letters and   

> ma.teria.1s sent

through the -Cnited States mails to purportedly delin-

quent customers who have pl1rehased respondenfs publications : hooks 

or merchandise. 

Typical , but not all inclusi ve of said statements and representations 

are the follo"ing: 

a. On respondenfs letterheads: 

IMPOR/l' ANT-FINAL XOTICE 

YOGR ACCOUNT IS BEIXG TURXED OYER TO A COLLECTIOX AGEXCY 

UNLESS WE HEAR FROM YOT; DBIEDIATELY       

> Dear Customer:
> In order tbat tbere C8n be no misunderstanding cOIlcerning yonI' failure to pay
> the enclosed statement

, we nre selHling yon this fillf!l letter. T)nless we bear 

from you within the next ten days , Jour account -wil be turned over to THE 

MAIL ORDER CREDIT REPOR'lTKG ASSOCIATION , IXC ., which is f! VI'O-

fessional collection agency. 

Deal' Customer: 

Your payment for the Outdoor Life Magazine subscription you ordereu i now  

> TWO MONTHS PAST DUB

and we need your HELP to straighten out ;vollr 

account. 

Otherwise, won t you please HELP us-and help keep your o\yn credit standing  

> in good shape-by sending your payment at

OIJce ill the enclosed enyelope. 624 FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION DECISIONS 

COmplaint 65 F, 

Fn.. AL 1'OTICE- This is the last letter we can send you about your unpaid 

account. 

\Ve do not like to turn over names of our subscribers to a collection agency, but 

if we do not receive rout' payment we wil have no alternative. '" '" '" 

b. On the letterhead of: 

The :\fail Order Credit Reporting Association, Inc. 

CREDIT REPORTS-SPECIAL INVESTIGATIOXS-COLLECTIOKS 

NEW YORK 18 , N, 

We lwye been notified by one of our clients, the POPULAR SCIEKCE PUB-

LISIIIl\G CO)lPA , IXCOHPORATED , of your failure to pay a long past-due 

account for a magazine subscription you ordered. 

Before we proceed further , we are giving you a final opportunity to make 

payment. Although the amount involved is small , it is our business to collect 

our clients ' delinquent accounts regardless of size. And we are organized for this 

purpose. '" *' * 

Re: OUTDOOR LIFE BOOK CLUB 

The aboYe firm , as a member of 'l' Hli. MAII, ORDER CREDIT REPORTING 

ASSOCIA' I'IO:\, IXC. , has reported to us your long past due account so that 

\ye may inform other members of their experience \vith you upon request. *' * *            

> \R. 5. By and through the use of the aforesaid state-ments

, repre-

sentations and practices , and others of simila.r import not specifically  

> set ont herein

respondent represents and has represented that: 

a. If pn,yment is not made , the delinquent customer s account is 

turned over to a. separate , bona fide collection agency. 

b. If payment is not made , the customer s general or public credit  

> rating will be adversely affected.

c. .: THEMAIL ORDER CREDIT REPORTING AGENCY INC. is a separate 

bona, fide coJlechon and credit. reporting agency located in New York 

City. 

d. Respondent has turned over to said " THE IAIL ORDER CREDIT RE-

PORTING ASSOCIATION INC. " the delinquent account of the customer 

for caneetion and other purposes. 

e. The letters and notices on ,the letterhead of the said " THE MAIL     

> ORDER CREDIT REPORTING ASSOCIATION , IXC. ," ha"

Fe been prapared and 

mailed by said organization. 

> PAl(. G. In truth and in fact:

a. If payment is not made , the delinquent customer s account is not 

t.urned oYer to a separate , bona fide collection agency. 

D. If payment is not. made , the customeT S general or public credit 

> rating is not adversely affected.

PQPVLAR SCIE::CE PUB. CO. , INC. 625 

622 Decision and Order 

e. " THE MAIL ORDER CREDIT REPORTIXG ASSOCIATIOX , INC. " is not a

separate , bona fide collection or credit reporting agency. Said organi-

zation is a name utilized by respondent and others for the purpose of 

disseminating collection letters. 

d. Respondent has not turned over to saiel .. TUEMAIL ORDER CREDIT   

> REPORTI:'W ASSOCIATlO

, INC. t the delinquent account of the customer 

for collection or any other purpose. 

e. The letters and notices on the letterhead of the said " THE IAIL 

ORDER CREDIT REPORTIXG ASSOCIATION , INC. ," have not been prepared or           

> mailed by said organization. Said letters and notices have been pre-

pared and mailed or caused to be mailed by respondent. Replies in 

response to said letters and notices are ionvarded unopened to 

respondent. 

Therefore , the statements a.nd representations as set fort, h in Para-

gra.phs Four and Five hereof were and are false , misleading and 

deceptive. 

PAn. 7. The use by respondent of the aforesaid false , misleading and   

> deceptive statements

, representa.tions and practices has had , and now 

has the capacity and tendency to mislead members of the purchasing 

public into the erroneous and mistaken belief that said statements 

Lnd re,prPBentations were and are true a.nd into the payment of sub-

stantia.l sums of money to respondent by reason of sa.id erroneous and 

mistaken belief. 

PAR. 8. The aforesaid acts and practices of respondent , as herein 

alleged , were and are all to the prejudice and injury of the public and 

constituted , and now constitute" unfair and deceptive acts a. nd prac-

tices in commerce in violat.ion of Section 5 of the Federal Trade Com.  

> mission Act.

DECISIOX AND OBDEB 

Commission having heretofore determined to issue its com-

plaint cha.rging the respondent named in the caption hereof with 

violation of the Federal Trade Commission Act , and the respondent 

having been served with notice of said determination and with a eopy 

of the complaint the Commission intended to issue , togethe.r with it 

proposed form of order; a.ncl 

The respondent and counsel for the Commission having thereafter 

executed a.n agreernent containing a consent order , an admission by 

respondent of all the jurisdictional facts set forth in the cOInpbint to 

issue herein , a statement that the signing of said agreement is for 

settlement purposes onJy and does not constitnte an admission by re-

spondent that the law has been violated as set forth in such complaint. 

and ,vaivers and provisions as reflllired by the Commission s rules; and 626 FEDERAL ' rI-lADE COMMISSION DECISIQXS 

Decision and Order G5 F. 

The Con1llissioll ) having cUllsiclere. d the agreement , hereby accepts 

same , issues its cor.1plaint in the form contemplated by saiel agreement          

> rnn.kes the follo'iYlng jurisdictiona.l findings ,and enters the followillg

order: 

1. Respondent Popular Science Publishing Co. , Inc. , is a corpora-  

> tion organized

, existing a, ncl doing business unc1e.r and by drtue of 

the hws of the State of Xew York with its principal offce and place 

of business located at 353 Lexington A venue , in the city of New' York 

State of New Yark. 

2. The Federal Trade Commission has jurisdiction of the subject    

> matter of this proceeding and of the respondent and the proceeding

is in the public interest. 

> OHDEH

It is ordered That respondent Popular Science publishing Co. , Inc.      

> acorporation , and its oficers ,and respondent's agents ,representa-

ti,ces and employees , directly or through any corporate or other device 

in connection ,-vith the offering for saJe , sale or distribution of books 

maga.zines or other merchandise , in commerce , as " commerce " is de-

fined in the Federal Trade Commission Act , do forthwith cease and 

desist fr01llrepresenting directly or by implication that:    

> 1. Delinqucnt customeT

S accounts -will be or have been turned over 

to a bona fide , separate colle.ction agency for collection unless re-

spondent in fact turns such accounts over to such an agency; 

2. A customer s name has been turned over to a bona fide credit        

> reporting agency or that acustomer sge,

neral or public credit rating 

will be adversely affected unless respondent establishes that ' where 

payment is not received , the information of said delinquency is 1'8-

> fe,

rred to a separate , bona fide credit reporting agency;    

> 3. Delinquent accounts have been or will be turned over to "

THE  

> ::r.\n.. ORDER CREDIT REPORTIXG ASSOCIATIOX

INC. 

> ,"

for collection or any 

> ot,

her purpose; 

4. " THE l.IAIL ORDER CTIEDIT REPORTING ASSOCIATIOX , INC. ': any fic-

titious name , or any trade name owned in whole or in part by respon-

dent 01' over which respondent exercises any direction or eontl'ol , is fl11 

independent , bona fide collection or credit reporting agency;  

> 6.

otices or other con1Jnunications which respondent has or has 

caused to be prepared , written or mailed , have been sent by " THE 3fAIL  

> ORDER CREDl'l' REPORTING ASSOCL\.TION

, INC. " or any other person , firm      

> or agency.
> It is fu?,thei' onle1'ed

That the respondent herein shan , within sixty  

> (e,O)

days after service npon it of this order , file with the Commission LOCIS FCRS IXC" ET AL. 627 

CUllplaint 

a report in wrjting setting forth in 

which it has complied ' with this order. 

detail the manner and fOr1n in 

Ix 'l-IE l\L TTER OF 

LO"GIS FCRS IXC. , ET AL.    

> CO::HiENT ORDER ,ETC. , IX REG"

\RD TO THE /' LLEGED VlOI ATION OF 1'    

> EDER -\L TRADE COllDlIS3IOl\ AXD THE YCR PRODUCTS LABELDW ACTS

Dooket C- /42. Complaint , A. l)1. 30, 1.96J,-Doctsion , Ap' r. 30 , 1964 

Consent order requiring retail furriers hl Hammond , Ind. , to cease violating the      

> Fur Products Labeling Ac: by

labeling, invoicing and advertising furs 

impr()perl - a" " BroadtaiL" flliling to :,110\" the truc animal name of furs on 

inyoke. , failllg ro di.-;cJose ,,.11en fur, ,; ilre n ed or 1:C'con(1-1H-lld; falsely rep-   

> n.' entjng tlwt

IH'iccs arc rt'dll(,lof1 , amI failng to keep adequate records as 

> i1 lw.

.;j. for pric'ing daim 

CO:\IPL\INT 

Pursuant to the provisions of the Fedentl Trade Commission Act 

and the Fur Products Labeling Act and by virtue of the authority  

> vested in it by sl1id Acts

, the Federal Trade Conm1ission haying rea-

son to believe that Louis Furs Inc. , a corporation , and Louis Carmen 

inc1i vic1ually and as an offccr of said corporation , hereinafter refcrred   

> to as respondents

, have yiolated the proyisions of sa.icl Acts and the 

J1uJes nnc111egllhtions promulgated under the Fur Products Labeling 

Act , and it appearing to the Commission that a proceeding by it 

respect thereof ,,,ould be in the public interest , hereby issues its 

complaint stating its charges in that respect as follows:  

> UL\GIL-\PH 1. Responclent LOllIs Ful'S Inc.

, is a corporation orga-

nized , existing and doing business uncler a, nc1 by virtue of the laws of 

the State of Indiana. 

Respondent Louis Carmen is an offcer of the corporate respondent 

and formulates , directs , and controls the acts , practices , and policies 

of the said c.orporate respondent including those hereinafter set forth. 

Respondents are retailers of fur products with their offce and      

> principal place of business located at 5258

Hohman A venue , city of 

Hammond , State of Indiana. 

m. 2. Snbsequent to the effective dat" of the Fur Prodncts Label- 

> ing

:\.ct on A-ugust D , 1D52 , respondents hnve been and arc now engaged           

> in the introduction into commerce ,and jn t.he sale

, achedising, and      

> oilel'ing for sale in ('omnlE'rcc.

al1(l in the tl'fLm.iportatioll and distl'ibu-

tiOJ1 in comme, rcc , of fnr products; and han , sold , advcrtised , oiTerec1 

for , nJe , trilllsported and (li tl'il)jted fur products which han:: been 

llliHlc in ,, holr. or in part of fu1's "I"hieh have been shipped and received 628 FEDERAL TRADE CQMMISSIOC' DECISIONS 

Complaint G5 F. 

in commerce , as the tcrms " commerce 

, " 

fur " and " fur product ' are 

defined in the Fur Products Labeling Act. 

PAn. 3. Certain of said fur products were misbranded in that they 

were falsely and deceptively labeled or otherwise falsely or deceptiwly 

identified with respect to the name or designation of tlw animal or 

animals that produced the fur from which the said fur products J"d 

been manufactured , in violation of Section 4(1) of the Fur Products 

Labeling Act. 

Among such misbranded fur products , but not limited theret.o , ,yel'C      

> fur products labeled as "

Broadtail" thereby implyiug that the furs 

contained therein were entitled to the designation "Broadtail LamV'            

> 1\hen in truth and in fact they were not entitled to such designation.
> PAR. 4. Certain of said fur products Wel'

e falsely and decepti,' ely 

invoiced by the respondent in that they ",ere not invoiced as required 

by Section 5 (b) (1) of the Fur Products Labeling Act and the RuJes 

and Regulations promulgated under such Act. 

Among such falsely and deceptively invoiced fur products , but not  

> limited thereto

, were fur products covered by invoices which failed t.o 

show the true animal name of the fur used in the fur product.           

> PAR. 5. Certain of said fur products were falsely and deceptively

in1'oiced with respect to the name or designation of the animal or ani-

mals ,thai produced the fur from which ,the said fur products had been 

manufactured in violation of Section 5(b) (2) of the Fur Products 

Labeling Aet. 

Among such falsely and deceptively invoiced fur products , but not 

> limited thereto
> , \\'

ere fur products which were invoiced as " BroadtniF 

thereby implying that the furs contained therein were entitled to the 

designation " Broadtail Lamb:' when in truth and in fact they were not 

entitled to such designations. 

PAR. 6. Certain of said fur products ,,' ere falsely and deceptively 

invoiced in violation of the Fur Products Labeling Act in that they 

were not invoiced in accordance with the Rules and Hegulations prom-

ulgated thereunder in the following respects:  

> (a) The term "

Dyed Broadtail- processed LRmb" was not set forth 

on in1'oices in the manner required hy law , in violation of Rule 10 of 

said Rules and Regulations. 

> (b) The term "

natural" was not uscd on inroices to describe fur    

> pl'ducts which were not pointed

, bleached , dyed , tip-dyed , or other-

wise artificially colored , in violation of Hule 19 (g) of said Rules and 

Regulations. 

(c) Required item numbers ,ycre not set forth on invoices , in viola-

tion of Rule 40 of said Hules ,md Regulations. LOUIS FURS INC. ) ET AL. 629  

> 627

Complaint       

> PAR. 7. Certain of said fur products were falsely anel decepti\c

ely 

advertised in violation of the Fur Products Labe1ing Act in that cer-

tain advertisemcnts int.ended to aid , promote and assist , directly or 

indirectly, in the sale and offering for sale of such fur products were 

not in accordance with the provisions of Section 5 (a) of the said Act. 

Among and included in the aJorcsaid advertisements but not limit.ed 

thereto , were advertisemcnts of respondents which appeared in issues 

of the Hammond Times , a newspaper published in the city of Ham 

mond , State of Indiana. 

Among such false and deceptive advertisements , but not limited 

thereto , were ad vertisements w hieh failed: 

1. To show the true animall1ame of the fur used in the fur product.       

> 2. To show that fur products "ere

composed of used fur , when such 

> was t.he fa.ct.

PAR. 8. By means of the aforesaid advertisements and others of 

similar import and meaning not specifically referred to herein , rc-    

> spondents falsely and deceptively advertised fur products in that

certain of said fur products wcre fa.1ely or de. ceptively identified "it.h 

respect to the name or designation of the animal or animals that pro-

duced the fur from which the said fur products had been manufac 

tured , in violation of Section 5 (a) (5) of the Fur Products Labeling 

Act. 

Among such falsely and deceptively advertised fur products , but. 

not limited thereto , were fur products advertised as " BroadtaiF' there-

by implying t.hat the furs cont.ained therein were ent.it.led to t.he des 

ignation " Broadtail Lamb" when in truth and in fact they were not 

entit.led t.o such designation. 

PAR. 9. By means of the aforesaid advertisements and ot.hers of 

similar import and meaning not specifically referred to herein re-

spondent.s falsely and deceptively advertised fur products in violation 

of Sect.ion 5(a) (5) of the Fnr Prodncts Labeling Act. in t.hat. t.he said 

advertisements represented through stat.ement.s such as " Public Sale 

of Fur Cancellations and uncalled for storage. 

': " 

A large number of 

> fur coats

, fur capes , stoles and scarfs which were partly paid in laya-

way and st.orage. On sale at 10 a. m. Tomorrow , payment. of balance 

due-Makes it yours " either direct.ly or by implicat.ion , that the prices 

of such fur products were rednced from the prices at. which t.he re 

spondents regularly and usually sold such fur products in the recent 

regular course of business and the amount of such purported reduction      

> constituted savings to the purchasers of respondents

' products , when                                  

> in fact snch fur products were not fur cancellations uncalled for or
> partly paid in layaway and storage and were not reduced in price from
> the price at \vhieh the rpspondents rcgularly and usually sold such

630 FEDERAL TRADE CO L\IISSIOX DECISIONS    

> Dcds1011 and 01'(1('1'

63 P. 

fur proaucts and savinp:s \yere not aironlecl pnr('11a8e1'S of l'esponc1('nts 

products fl. ., represented. 

PAH. 10. By means of the aforesaid acll-ertisements and others of 

similar import a.nd D1eaning not specifically referred to herein 

respondents falsely and deceptively advertised fur products in 

violation of the Fur Products Labeling . :\ct in t1Ul.,f the said fur prod-

ucts were not advertised in accordance ,..jth the Hllles and Regulations 

promulgated thereunder in the following respects: 

> (a) The term "

Dyed Broadtail-processed Lamb" was not set forth 

in the manner required , in violation of Rule 10 of the said Rules aud 

Regulations.    

> (b) The term "

natuI'nl ' was not used to describe fur products "hieh  

> were not pointed

, bleached dyed , tip- dyed , or otherwise artificially 

colored , in violation of Rule 19 (g) of the saiel nules and negulations.  

> (c) The disclosure "

second-hand" , where required , was not set forth 

in violation of nule 23 of the said Rules and ReguJations. 

(d) An parts of the iuformation required under Section 5 (a) of        

> the Fur Products LabeJing Aet and the Rules and Regulations

pro-

mulgated thereunder were not set forth in type of eqult) size and C.Oll-        

> spicnousness and in dose proximity with each other

, in vio1ation of         

> Rule 38(a) of the aforesaid Rules and Regulations.
> PAR. 11. In a.dvcrtising fur products for sale

, as aforesaid , respond-

ents made pricing c.aims and representations of the types cO\- creel by 

subsections (a), (b), (c), and (,I) of HuJe H of the Regulations U11I,,1'     

> the Fur Products Labeling Act. Respondents in

making such c1a, jms    

> and representations failed to maintain fnn and adequatr. records

clis-

c10sing the facts upon v, hich such pricing e1aims and rrpresenbtions 

were basod , in vioJation of Rule H(e) of the said nules and 

Regulations. 

PAH. 12. The ' aforesaid acts and practiees of respondent , as herein 

alleged , are in violation of the Fur Proclucts Labeling Act and the 

Rules and Regulations promulgated thereunder ancl constitute unfair 

and deceptive acts and practices and unfair methods of competition 

> in commClTC under the Federal Trade Commission Act.

DECISIOX AND ORDEn 

The Commission having heretofore determined to issue its compla.int 

charging the respondents named in the caption hereof with violation of 

> the Federal Trade Commission Act and the Fur Products Labeling

Act , and the respondents having been served with notice of said deter-

mination a, nd with a copy of the complaint the Commission intended 

to issue , together with a proposed form of order; and LOUIS l"URS INC. ! ET AL. 631       

> 627 Decisioll and Grclel'
> The respondents and counsel for the Commission having

there-

aft, er executed an agreemEmt containing a consent order , an admission 

by respondents of all the jurisdictional facts set forth in the com- 

> plaint to issue herein

a statement that the signing of said agreement 

is for settlement purposes only and does not constitute an aclmission 

by respondents that the law has been violated as set forth in such 

complaint , and waiycrs and provisions as required by the Commission 

rules; and 

The Commission , haying considered the agreement , hereby accepts 

same , issues its complaint in the form contemplated by said agreement 

makes the follml"ing jurisdictional findings , and enters the following 

order: 

1. Respondent Louis Furs Inc. , is a corporation organized , exist-

ing and doing business under and by virtue of the laws of the State 

of Indiana, with its offce and principal place of business located at 

5258 IIohman Avenue , in the city of I-Iammond State of Indiana. 

Respondent Louis Carmen is an offcer of said eorporation and his 

address is the same as that of said corporation. 

2. The Federal Trade Commission has jurisdiction of the subject      

> matter of this proceeding and of the respondents

, and the proceeding 

is 1n the public interest.  

> ORDEH
> It is oTdeTed

That respondent Louis Furs Inc. a corporation : and   

> its offcers

, and respondent Louis Carmen , illc1iyjdualJy flnd as an        

> offcer of said corporation ,and respondents

' representatives , agents 

Hnd employees , directly or through any corporate or ot, her device 

in connection with the introduction into commerce , or the sale , adver-

tising or offering for sale 1n commerce , or the transport.ation or dis-

t.ribution in commerce , of any fur product; or in connection with the 

sale , advertising, offering for sale , transportation or distribution , of 

any fur product "hich is made in whole or in part of fur which has    

> been shipped and received in commerce

, as the terms " commerce 

"fur " and "fur product" are defined in the Fur Products Labeling 

Act , do forthwith cease and desist from: 

A. Misbranding fur products by falsely or deceptively label-

> ing or othern-

jse identifying a.ny such fur product as to the name 

or designation of the ' animal or animals that produced the. fur 

contained in the fur product.     

> B. Falsely or deceptively invoicing fur products by:

1. Failing to furnish invoices to purchasers of fur products 

> shov,-

ing in "orels and figures plainly legible all the jnforma-

1"ion required to be disclosed in each of the subsectjons of Sec-

tion 5(b) (1) of the Fur Products Labeling Act. 632 FEDERAL TRADE COyD1ISSIO DECISIOKS         

> Decision and Orclel' 60 j.-'
> 2. Setting forth on invoices pert.aining to fur products

any 

false or deceptive information w'ith respect to the name or 

designation of the animal or animals that produced the fur 

contained in such fur product.. 

3. Failing to set forth the term " Dyed Broadtail- processed 

Lamb' in the manner required where an election is Inade to 

use that term instead of the words " Dyed Lamb"            

> 4. Failing to set forth the term " N atnral" as palt of the
> information required to be disclosed on invoices under the

Fur Products Labeling Aet and Rules and ltegnlations 

promulgated thereunder to describe fur products which are 

not pointed , bleached , dyed , tip-dyed or otherwise artificialJy 

colored.  

> 5. Failing to set forth on invoices the item

number or mark 

assigned to fur products. 

C. Falsely or deceptively advertising fur products through the 

use of any advertisement , representation , public announcement or 

notice \\hich is intended to aid , promote or assist , directly or in- 

> directly, in the sale

, or offering for sale of any fur product , and 

which: 

1. Fails to set forth in words and figures plainly legible 

all the information required to be disclosed by each of the         

> subsections of Section 5(a) of the Fnr Products Labeling

Act. 

2. Falsely 01' deceptively identifies any such fur product as 

to the. name or designation of the animal or animals that 

produced the fnr contained in the fur product. 

3. Fails t.o set forth the term " Dyed Broadtail-processed 

Lamb" in the manner required where an election is made 

to use that term instead of the words " Dyed Lamb"  

> 4. Fails to set forth the t.erm "

Natural" as part of the in-       

> formation required to be disclosed in advertisements under

t.he Fur Prodncts Labeling Act and the RnJes and Regula-

tions promulgated thereunder to describe fur products which 

are not pointed , bleached , dyed , tip-dyed or otherwise arti-

ficially colored. 

5. Fails to disclose that fur products contain or are com-

posed of second-hand used furs. 

6. Fails to set forth all parts of the information required    

> under Section 5 (a) of the Fur

Products Labe1ing Act and 

the Rules and Hegnlations promulgated thereunder in type 

of equal size and conspicuousness and in close proximity with 

each other. STYLE CRAFT CLOTHIXG co. 633  

> 627

Complaint  

> T.

i\fisreprescnts in any manner the saVIngs available to 

pnrchasers of respondents ' fur products. 

8. Falsely or deceptively represents in any mallner that 

pric2s of respondents ' fur products are reduced.  

> 9. HeprE'SenlS directly or by

implicat.ioll contrary to fact        

> that any snch fur products aTe fur cancellations ,uncallell

for or partly paid in layaway and storage.  

> D.

laking daims and representation of the types covered by       

> suboections (a), (b), (c) and (d)

of Rule 44 of the Rules and 

Regulat.ions promulgated uncler the Fur Products Labeling Act 

unless there arc maintained by responclents full and adequate 

records disclosing the facts upon which such claims and repre-

sentations are based.    

> It furthel' oi'dered

That the respondents herein shall 

> , -

within sixty 

(60) days after seryice upon them of this order , file with the Commis-

sion a report in writing setting forth in detail the manner and form 

in which they have complied with this order.  

> IN THE

1:ATTER OF 

STEYE MILLNER ET AL. TRADING AS 

STYLE CRAFT CLOTHING CO. 

COXSEXT ORDEH. ETC.. IN REGARD TO THE ALLJGED VIOLATION OF THE 

> I"EDERAL TlU.

DE CO)'I:rISSIOX , THE TEXTILE FIBER PROD"GCTS IDENTIFICi\- 

> TIOl'

AXD THE WOOL PROD"GCTS LABELIXG ACTS 

Docket C-74.3. Uompl. a.int , May 1.9(j' Dcci8ion , May 7. 1%4 

Consent order requiring Xew York City manufacturers of Sllit , jackets nn,1 

pants for men and boys to cease violating the Textie Fiber Products Identi-

fication Act by labeling as " 80% rayon. 20% aeetate " and " 70% rayon. 

30% acetate , clothing . which contained substantially different amounts of 

fibers than so represented , and failng to maintain llroper reconls showing            

> the fiber content of their products; to cease violating the 'VaaL Products

Labeling Act by labeling as " All Wool except ornamentation , clothing which           

> contained asubstantial quantity of non-woolen fibers; and to ceasp

violating-

hath Acts by failng to label certain of their proc1uct with required informa-

tion and in tbe required form. 

COl\IPLAINT 

Pursuant to the provisions of the, Federal Trade Commission Act 

the Textile Fiber Products Identification Act , and the '1'001 Products 

Labeling Act, and by virtue of the authority yested in it by said Acts 

813-121--70--634 FEDERAL THADE COMMISSIO DECISIO 

Complaint 65 F. 

the Federal Trade Commi ,sion hnving reason to Gel cve, that Ste\' 

:JIillner and ICiwa Karsh , indivic1ually and as copartners trading as  

> Stylecraft Clot.hing

Co. hereinafter referred to as respondents , h01\'P 

vjolated the provisions of said Acts and the Hules and Regulations 

promulgate, clllnc1cr the Textile Fiber Products Identification Acc and 

the 'V 001 Products Labeling Act , and it appearing to the Commission     

> that aproceeding by it in

respect thereof would be in the pubJic. 

interest , hereby issnes its complaint stating its charges ill that respert   

> as follo

Ys: 

> PAHAGRAPI-

I 1. Respondents Steve. JIillner and ICi\'.-a Karsh ,-ue indi-

viduals and copartners , doing business as Stylecraft Clothing Co. , \dt, 

their ofIce and principal pbce of business locat.ed at 58 Canal Street 

Xew York , New York. 

R.espondents Steve. 2v(illner and Ki"a Karsh are nO\Y and have been      

> for aconsiderable period , engaged in the, manufacture and

ale of 

suits , jacket.s and pants for inen and boys , 111:  their principal place of 

business at 58 Canol Stroet , K e,," York , X Ci'\ York. 

m. 2. Subsequent. to the eftecti,-c date of the Textile Fiber Product 

Identification Act on )farch 3 , 1960 , respondents have been and are 

DO"- engaged in the, introduction , delivery for jntrodnct1on , manufac-   

> ture for introduction

, sale , advertising, and oflering for sale , in com-

mcree , and in the transportation or cau ing to be transported in 

commerce , and in the importation into the Linited States , of textile 

fiber products; and have sold , offered for sale , advertised , doJi,-cred 

transported , and en lU ed to be transported , textile fiber products , ,,,hieh 

have been a.dvertised or ofr' cred fol' sale in commerce; and have sold  

> offered for sale

, achertised , delivered , tl'am:portec1 , and ca, llsed to be 

transported : after shipment in commerce" textile fiber products , either      

> in their original state or contained in oHler textile

fiber products , us 

tho terms " corl1nerCt :: and " textile i-iber product" arc deGned in the 

Textile Fiber Products Identification Act. 

PAR. 3. Ccrtain of said textile fibe ' products were misbranded by 

responde, nts \\'ithin t.he intent and meaning of Section 4(a) of the l' ex- 

> tiJe Fiber Products Identification

L\.ct and the Rules and Hegula.tions 

promulgated thereunder , in that they ,vere falsely and decepti,- ely 

stamped , tagged , hlbeled , invoiced , flcbcertised or othenyisc ident.ified 

to the name and amount. of the constitnent fibers conbined thErein. 

Among such textile, fiber pl'ochH'.ts were men s and boys ' clothing   

> bhelea as 8C1o/

rayon , 20%.' acctate and 70% rayon , 30% acetate 

;ylwreas ii' truth an(l in Iltct. snch clothing contained snb::tantinlJy (Ef-

ferent nmount.s of fibers than represented. 

> \I1. .

1. Certain of sajd te:dile fiber products , ,yere misbranded by  

> Tf'spondents in that they were not st.ampe.d

, tagged , labeled or other-

wise identified with the information required under Sect10n 4(b) of STYLE CRAFT CLOTHIXG co. 635  

> 633

Complaint 

the Text.ile Fiber Products Identification Act , and in the ma.nner ana 

> form prescribed by the Rules and Regulations promulgated under

said Act.          

> PAR. 5. Respondents have failed to maintain proper records 8hO\"\-

ing the fiber content of the textile fiber products manufactured by 

them , in vjolation of Sectjon 6(a) of the Texti1e Fiber Products Idcn-

tification Act and nule 39 of the Rules and Regulations promulgated 

thereunder.        

> PAR. 6. The acts and pra.ctices of respondents as set forth above \'ere

and are , in vioJation of the TextiJs Fiber Products Identification Act 

and thc Rules and Regulations promulgated thereunder and consti-

tuted , and now constitute , unfair and deceptive acts and practices and 

> unfair methods of competition

, in commerce , within the intent and 

meaning of the Federal Trade Commission Act. 

PAR. 7. Subsequent to the effective date of the ,Vaal Products Label-    

> ing Act of 1939

, respondents have manufactured for introcluction into 

commerce , introduced into commerce , sold , transported , distributed. 

clelivered for shipment , and offered for sale in COITnerce , HS " com-

merce " is defined in said Act , ,yool products as " wool producf 

> defined therein.

PAR. 8. Certain of said Twol products were misbranded by responc1-

ents within the intent and meaning of Sectjon 4 (a) (1) of said IVool 

Products Labeling Act and the Rules and Regulations prOlnulgate.c1 

thereunder in that they were falsely and dece.ptively stamped , tagged 

labeled or otherwise identified with respect to the character and 

amount of the constituent fibers contained there.in. 

Among such misbranded 'iyool products were men s and boys ' cloth-   

> ing labeled as "

AlJ 1'1001 except ornamentatiou , whereas , in truth        

> and in fact, said clothing contained a

substa.ntial quantity of nOh    

> v;ooIen fibers apart

frOll1 those of which the ornamentation was 

composed. 

PAR. 9. Certain of saiel ,yon) products were misbranded by respond-

ents in that they were not stHmpcd tagged labeled or othendse iden-

tified ",ith the information required under Section 4(a) (2) of the 

,Vaal Products Labeling Act of 1939 and in the manner and form as 

required by the Rules and Regulations promulgatecl under said Act-.        

> PAR. 10. The acts and practices of the respondents as set forth above
> in Paragraphs Seven

, Eight and Nine were and are , in violation of            

> the IVool Prodncts LabeJing Act of 1039 and the Hulcs and Hegnla-
> tions promulgated thereundm.

, and eonstitl1terl and now cons dtutf\ 

unfair and deceptive acts and p,-' actiees and unfair methods of com-

petition in commerce , within the intent. and meaning of i-he Fodera 1

Trade Commission Act. 636 FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION DECISIO 

Decision and Order ) F.   

> DECISION ASD ORDER

The Commission having heretofore determined to issue its com-    

> plaint charging the respondents

named in the caption hereof with 

violation of the Federal Trade Commission Act , the Textile Fiber 

Products Identification Act and the IY 001 Products Labeling Act and 

certain of the Rules and Regulations of the latter two Acts , and the 

respondents having been sen ed with notice of said cleternlillation and       

> with acopy of the com plaint the Corrnission intended to issue

, to-

gether with a proposed fOfln of order; and 

The respondents and counsel for the COllllnission having thereafter 

executed an agreelllent containing a consent order , aJd admission by 

respondents of all the jurisdictional facts set forth in the complaint to 

issue herein , a, statenlent that the Eiglling of saiel agrcmnent is for 

settlemcnt purposes only and does not constitute an admission by re-

spondents that the law has been violated as set forth in such complaint  

> and waivers and provisions as required by the Commission s rules;

and 

The Commission , haTing considered the agreement , hereby accepts 

same , issues its complaint in the form contmnplatecl by said agl'ee-

> l11ent

, makes the follo' wing jurisdictional findings , and enters the 

following order: 

1. Respondents Steve :Millner and IG wa. I\::aTsh are copartners         

> trading as Stylecraft Clothing Co. ,with their offce and principal

place of business 10clVted at 58 Canal Street , :Ncw York , New York 

which offce and principal place of business was formerly located at 

2 Allen Street , New York , New York. 

2. The Federal Trade Commission has jurisdiction of the subject 

matter of this proceeding and of the respondents , and the proceeding 

is in the public interest.  

> OIWEH
> It is O1'dered

That respondents Steve .Millner and Kiwa Karsh, 

individually and as coplVrtners trading as Stylecraft Clothing Co. or 

under any other trade name , and respondents ' representatives , agents 

> and employees

, directly or through any corporate , or other device , in     

> connection with the introduction

, de1ivery for introduction , sale , ad-

> vertising or offering for sale

, in comlnerce , Or in the transportation or       

> causing to be transported in commerce

, or the importation into the 

Gnited States of any textile fiber product; or in connection with the 

sale , offering for sale , advertising, delivery, transportation or causing 

to be transported , of any textile fiber procluct which has been ac!ver-

tised or offered for sale in comnlerce: or in connection with the sale STYLE CRAFT CLOTHIXG co. 637    

> 633 DecisiolJ and On1E'1"
> offering for Bale

, advertising, delivery, tn. nsportation 01' causing to be 

transported , after shipment. in commerce , of any textile fiber product 

hether in its original stat.e or contained in other textile fiber product 

as the terms " eon meTce and '; textile fiber prodl1cf' are defmed in the 

Textile Fiber Products Identifica,tion Act do fortln..ith cease and de-

sist from: 

A. Misbranchng textile fiber products by : 

1. Falsely or deceptively stamping, tagging, labeling, in-

voicing, advertising, or otherwise idcntifying such products 

as to the name and amount of constituent fibers contained 

therein. 

2. Failing to affx labels to such products showing each ele-

ment of information required to be disclosed by Section 4 (b) 

of the Textile Fiber Products Identifimtion Act. 

B. FaiJing to maintain records of fiber content of textile fiber 

products mnnufacturecl by them , as required by Section 6 (a) of 

the Textile Fiber Products Identification Act and Rule 3D of the 

Hegulations thereunuer.  

> It is fllrther o,.deTed

That respondents Steve Milner and Kiwa 

I\::arsh individual1y and as copartners trading ns Stylrcraft Clothing  

> Co.

Or under any other trnde name , and respondents ' l'eprcsent'ntives 

> agents and employees

, directly or through any (', orporrLtc ; or other 

device , in ('onnection with the introduction or manufacture for intro-

duction in commerce or the ofIcring for 2ale , sale , transportation or 

distribution in commerce , n8 " com11erce ' is defined in the "\Vo01 Prod-

ncts Labeling --let of 1939 , of men s and boys 

> ' ,,-

oolen clothing or nt, her 

wool products " as such prodncts aTe defined in -and subject to said         

> Wool Products Labeling Art of 193D ,do forthwith cease and desist

from misbranding such products by : 

1. Falsely or deceptively stamping, tagging, labeling or other-

ise ident.ifying snch products as to the character or amount. of 

the constituent fibers included therein. 

2. Failing to affx labels to such products showing each ele.ment 

of information required to be disc10sed by Section 4(a) (2) of the 

Wool Products Labeling Act of 1939. 

It i8lurtlzer onlered That the respondents herein shall , within sixty 

(60) days after service upon them of this order , file with the Commis-

sion a report in ' writing sptting forth in detail the manner and form 

in \vhic.h they have complied with this order. 638 FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSIOX DECISIONS 

Order G3 1. 

IN ' rHE IATTER OF 

SCOTT PAPER COyIP ANY    

> ORDEH ,ETC.

, IN REGARD TO THB ALLEGED YIOLATIOX OF SEC. 7 OF 'I' 

CLAYTON ACT   

> Docket 6559.

COinplaint , June 1956-Deci,sio1! , May , 196'. 

Order modifying a divestiture order of December 16, 1960 , 57 F. C. 1415, by 

prohibiting respondent from acquiring any manufacturer of silnitary va per 

products , without prior Commission approval; converting any paper-making 

equipment of anr manufacturer it might acquire, within 10 years , to the pro-    

> duction of sanitary paper prodncts

, or using any pulp mil it might acquire    

> for such lJUrpose: and dispose of , to an approved purchaser

, two rebuilt    

> sanitary paper products machines.

IODIFIED OnDEn 

Scott Paper Company, having ftecl in the -United States Court of 

Appeals foe the Third Cire-nit a petition to review and set aside the     

> order of divestiture issued herein on

December 16 , 1960 (57 F. 

1415J; and the Court all MalTh 27 , 1962 C7 S. & D. 448J, having rend-

ereel it s decision remanding the ease to the Commission for the purpose 

of taking additional evidence; and the Commission having added this 

evidence and having issued a further opinion on December 26 , 1963  

> L63 F.

C. 22tOJ; and the Conrt , by order of January 29 , 19M , J1OV-

ing reopened the case and reinstated it on the COUl'eS calendar for     

> fiing of supplement.al briefs and presentation of oral

argument; and 

the Commission and Scott Paper Company having subsequently 

agreed upon the provisions of a final order modifying the order entered       

> by the Commission all December 1G

, 1\)60; and the COl1rt on April :.3 

1964 L7 S. &D. 898J, having issued its final order enforcing said order 

as submitted by the Commission and Scott Paper Company; 

Now , the1' ef01' : it is he?'eby oTde?'ecl That the order be , and it hereby 

, modified in accordance \vith the. hmd order of t he. Court to read as 

JollO\,.s:    

> 1. Il ,is ordered.

That from the, date of the Courfs order 

rApl'i12:3 , 19( 4J Scott Paper Compa.ny (hereinafter referred to as 

('ott) shall rease and desIst from acquiring, directly 01' indirE:ctly, 

through subsidiaries or othenvise , the whoJe or any paTt of tIle 

stock , share eapital Or assets (other than products :Jold in the 

regular course of business) of any concern engaged in the manu 

facture or convert.ing and sale in the ' United States of toilet tissue 

paper , facial tissue paper , paper mlpkins , paper towels or house.-

lIolcl1\ axecl paper (hereinafter referred to as sanitary paper pl'cd-SCOTT PAPER CO. 639  

> 638

Order 

ucts) , without the prior approval of the Federal Trade Commis-

sion. For the purposes of this paragraph a subsidiary is a com-

pany owned fifty percent or more by Scott. This paragraph shall 

not apply (a) to the acquisition of stock , share capital or assets 

of any company which is already a subsidiary of Scott on the date    

> of the Court' s order; (b) to the acquisition of assets of any con-
> cern "Which are not being utilized or capable of being rebuilt for

use in the conversion or manufacture of said sanitary paper prod-  

> ucts; or (c) to the acquisition of facilities covered by pilragraphs

2 and 3 below. 

ft';s f1utheT oNlcreel TInt if within a period often (10) years 

from the date of the Court' s order Scott shall acquire the whole or       

> any part of any concern (other

than products sold in the regular 

course of business) in the United SUttes , Scott shall not thereafter 

> for a period of ten(10) years rebuild or convert any of the paper-

making equipment so acquired for the manufacture of paper to be 

used or the converting of paper to be used for the production of 

said sanitary paper products in the United States without the 

prior approval of the Federal Trade Commission.   

> 3. It ';8

f1lTthei orde-red That if within a period often (10) years 

from the date of the Court's order Scott slml1 acquire a pulp mil 

from a concern operating such mill in the United States , Scott 

shall not during such period often (10) years use any of the output 

of such pulp mill in its manufacture of said sanitary paper prod-

ucts in the United States without the prior approval of the Federal 

Trade Cornmissioll. 

4. Commencing not later than five (5) years from the date of the 

Court' s order and thereafter unt.il the expiration of seven (7)       

> years from the date of the Court"s order

, Scott shall use its best  

> efforts to sell the two rcbuilt

anital'Y papPI' product machines 

(Kos. 7 and 10) acquired from Detroit Sulphite Pulp & Paper 

Company to a purchaser approved by the Federal Trade Com-

mission who will utilize such machines for the manufacture and 

sale of sanitary paper products in the United States. At the end 

of a period of seven (7) years from the date of the Court' s order 

Scott shall discontinue utilizing any paper machines acquired 

from Detroit Sulphite Pulp & Paper Company for the manufac-

ture of sanita.ry paper products in the United States , proyjded 

however , that Scott ma.y continue to manufacture wax base stock 

with facilities so acquired and may continue to use the output of 

the pulp mill located at Detroit for any purpose. 

Comm 'issioner )(aclntyre not participating. 640 FEDERAL THADE C01\fMISSIOK DBCISIO 

Complaint H5 F. 

IN THE lIA TTER OF 

DIAXA STORES COIlPORATIOX     

> CUX. -.EXT nHDER ETC. , IN HEG"

\TID TO THE _ \LLua:D YIOL.. \.TWX OF THE 

FEnER. L TR. DE COl\DIISSIO:rT . ACT 

> Docket 0-

744. Complaint , May 1.964-Deoision , May , 1964 

Cun:,ent order requiring a Kew York Cit.y corporate openHor of numerous de-

partment stores in various States under the trade name " Great Eastern Mills 

to cease representing falsely that it manufactured the clothing and other 

merchandise it sold , by use of the word " :Mils " in its corporate or trade Dame 

> or in any otber manner.

C01\PLAI 

Pursuant to the provisions of the Federal Trade Commission Act 

and by yil'tue of the authority vested in it by said Act , the Federal 

Tra, de Commission , having reason to believe that Dia.na. Stores Cor-

poration , a corporation , hcreinafter refcrred to as respondent , has 

violated the provisions of said Act , and it appearing to the Commission 

that a proceeding by it in respect thereof would be in the public inter-

est , hereby Issne3 its complaint stating its charges in that respect as 

fol1ows:  

> P ARAGlL'.1'

H 1. Respondent Diana Storcs Corporahon is a corpora 

tion organized , existing and doing business under and by virtue of the 

lavi' s of the State of New Yark , with its principal oftce and place of     

> business locatBd at 450 Vest 41st Street

, New York 36 , New York. 

PAR. 2. Respondent is now , and for several years last past has been 

engaged in t.he operation , in various States of the -United States , of 

numerous department stores using " Great Eastern lil1s " as a trade 

name. 

Said Great Eastern :Mms stores are operated as a division of Diana 

Stores Corporation. They are self-service operations which include the 

use of shopping carts and central check-out systems. Through said 

stores respondent sells clothing and other merchandise t.o the purchas- 

> ing public

PAR. 3. In the course and conduct of it.s business , respondent now 

causes , and for some time last. past has caused , its said merchandise to  

> be shipped from its headquarters in

ew York to its several stores in 

various other States of the United States , for sale to the purchasing 

> public. In such instances shipme.

nts are made to respondent' s stores in 

States othel' than that in which such shipments have originated , and  

> respondent maintains and at all times mentioned herein has main-

DIANA STORES CORPOHATION 641  

> 640

Complaint 

tained , a substantial course of trade in said merchandise , in commerce   

> as "

eommerce is defined in the Federal Trade Commission Act. 

Respondent also causes advertisements and other promotional mate-

rial to be shipped from its place of business in the State of New York  

> to its stoTes in various other States and lnaintains a substantial

com-

mercial intercourse between its headquarters in e1V York and its            

> stores in other States consisting of the transmissi.on and receipt of
> numerous commercial documents

, reports and information. Respond-

ent s buying, merchandising and advertising departments , warehous-

ing operations and receiving inspecting, packing and shipping depart 

ments , serving all of its stores , are located at its headquarters. 

PAn. 4. In the course and conduct of its business , as aforesaid , and 

and for the pur.pose of inducing the ,purchase of its merchandise which 

had been shipped and received in commerce , as " cornmerce " is defined 

in the Federal Trade Commission Act , respondent has used the name 

Great Eastern :Mills " in advertisements of its merchandise in 

ne\vspapers having general circulation in various States of the United 

States. 

PAR. 5. Through the use of the word " mills " as part of the respond-

cnt' s rtrade name , respondent represents that it owns or operates R mill 

or factory in whic.h the clothing and other merchandise sold by it are 

manufactured. 

PAR. u. Said representation is false , misleading and deceptive. In      

> truth and in fact respondent does not own or operate the

lnill or fac- 

> tory in which

:the clothing and other merchandise sold by it are 

manufactured but buys from manufacturers and others for resale to 

the purchasing public. 

PAR. 7. There is a preference on the part of many members of the 

purchasing public to buy merchandise , inc.11ding clothing, direct from 

> factories or mills

, believing that by so doing lower pricE'-S and other 

advantages thereby accrue to them , a fact of which the Commission 

> takes offcial notice.

PAR. 8. In the conduct of its business , at all times mentioned herein 

respondent has been in substantial competition , in commerce , 1Vith 

corporations , iirms and individuals in the sale of clothing and other       

> merchandise of the same general kind and nature as that

sold by 

respondent. PAR. 9. The use by respondent of the aforesaid false , misleading and 

deceptive statements , representations and practices has had , and now 

has , the cfLpacity and tendency to mislead members of the purchasing 

public into the erroneous and mistaken belief t.hat said statements fl1d 

representations were and are true ancl into the purchase of substantial 642 FEDERAL TRADE COi\LMISSION DEClSIO 

Dedsiol1 and .order 65 F. 

> quantities of respondf',

nt' s products by reason of said erroneous and 

mistaken belief. 

PAR. 10. The aforesaid acts and practices of respondent , as herein 

alleged , were and are all to the prejudice and injury of the public and  

> of respondent'

s competitors and constituted , and now constitute , un-        

> fair methods of competition in commerce and unfair and

dec.eptive 

acts and practices in commerce in violation of Section 5 of the Federal 

Trade Commission Act. 

> DECISION AXD ORDER

The Commission having heretoforc determined to issue its com-

plaint charging the respondent ll:uuec1 in the caption hereof with -vio-

lation of the Federal , Trade Commission Act , and the. respondent hav 

ing been served with notice of said determinat.ion a, uel " with a copy of 

the complaint the Commission intended to issue , together with a pro-

posed form of order; and 

The rcspondent and counsel for the Commission having therca Iter 

executed an agreement containing a consent order , an admission by 

respondent of all the jurisdictional facts set forth in the complaint to  

> issue herein

, n .statcment that. the signing of said agreement i for 

;ettlement purposes only a.nd does not constitute an admission by re-

spondent that the law has been violated as set forth in such complaint 

a.nd waivers and provisions as required by the Commission s rules; 

and   

> The Commission

, having considered the agreement , hereby accepts 

same , issues its complaint in the form contemplated by said agree-

ment , makes the following jurisdictional findings , and enters the fol. 

lowing order: 

1. Respondent Diana Stores Corporation is a corporation organized     

> existing and doing business under and by virtue of the

la,,"s of the 

State of N ew York with its offce ancl principal place of business 

located at 450 West 41st Street in the city of New York , State of Xew 

l( ork. 

2. The Federal Trade Commission has jurisdiction of the subject    

> matter of this proceeding and of the respondent

, and the proceeding 

is in the pllblic interest.    

> OHDEn
> It 1:8 01YleTed

That respondent Diana Ston $ Corporat, io11 , a corpora-

tion , and its officers and respondent' s represent 1tives , agcnts and em-

ployees , directly or through any cOrporate or other device , in connec-

tion with t.he offering for sale , sale or distribution of clothing or any 

other merchandise in commerce , as " comn1erce " is defined in the Fed-AMERICAN FOODS , I:\TC" ET AI.., 643  

> 640

Complaint 

eral Trade Commission Act , do forthwith cease and desist from using    

> the word "11111s

" or any other word of similar import or meaning in      

> or as apart of respondent'

s corporate or trade. name or representing 

in any manner that respondent is a manufacturer of the clothing and 

other merchandise sold by it unless and until respondent owns and 

operates or directly and absolutely controls a manufactnring plant 

wherein such clothing or other merchandise is made; provided , how-

ever , that should respondent so desire Tor reasons of continuity, it may 

use the identifying phrase "formerly Great Eastern l\1:i11s ' or words             

> of similar import in its advertising for aperiod not to exceed six

months from the effective date of this order.   

> It i8

furthe?' mylered That the respondent herein shall , within sixty 

(60) days after service upon it of this order , file with the Commission 

a report in writing setting forth in detail the manner and form in 

which it has complied with this order. 

Ix THE j\1A Tl"ER 

A)1ERICAN FOODS , INC. , ET AL.     

> CONSENT ORDER ETC. , r::-r

HEGARD TO THE ALLEGED VIOLATION OF THE 

> FEDERAL TRADE CQ::B;nSSION ACT

Docket C-71,:;. OOllplaint , JIa.y 9G4-Deoision , May 1." 1964 

Consent order requiring three associated corporations witll headquarters in St. 

Paul 

> , .

Minn. , and operating in :\'Iinnesota , Iowa , and :!orth Dakota , respec. 

tiyely, to cease llilking false representations in advertising by radio in          

> cODnectioll with their sale of freezers and foods by lleans of a"

Freezer-Food 

Plan " including claims of saYings to purchasers , wholesale prices for their 

food , griarantees , assistance of " food consultants " in planning food orders, 

financing find size of operations. 

> COMPLAINT

Pursua.nt to the provisions of rhe Federal Trade Commission Act 

and by virt.ue of the authority vested in it by said Act , the Federal 

Trade Commission , having reason to believe that American Foods 

Inc. , ,1, corporation of St. P Lll1 , l\linnesota (formerly American Food 

Plant of .ilinncsota , Inc. ), American Food Plan of IOIva , Inc. , a. cor 

poration , Anlerican Foods of Korth Dakota , Inc. , a corporation , and 

"\Valter L. Lange , individually a.nd as an oificer of said corporations 

> tradjng and doing business as A.

merican Foods , Inc. , American Foods 

Americ.an Food Plan , A.lTIerican Foods Plan , Inc. , a, nd American 

Foods Service , Inc. , here.inafter reJerred to as respondents , have via. 644 FEDERAL TRADE CO)'L\nSSIO DE CISIONS 

Complaint 65 F. 

lated the pl'wisions of said Act , and it appearing to the Commission 

that a proceeding by it in respect thereof \rollld be in the public inter-

est , hereby issues its complaint , stating its charges in that respect as 

follows: 

> PARAGRA.

Pl- 1. Re'spondent American Foods , Inc. , is a corporation 

organized , existing fLnd doing business under and by virtue of the la\\' 

of the State of Minnesota , with its principal offcc and place of busi-     

> ness located at 1255 East I-lighway 36

, St. Paul , l\finnesota. , which 

corporation was formerly known as Anlcrican Fooel Plan of l\finncsota. 

Inc.      

> Respondent Ameriean Food Plan of

Iowa" Inc. , is a corporation 

organized , existing and doing business under and by virtue of the 

laws of the State of Iowa , with its principal place of business located   

> at ;:W7 University A yeUllG

, Des :Moines , Imva. 

Respondent Amcrican Foods of North Dakota , Inc. , is a corporation 

organized , existing and doing business under and by virtue of the laws 

of the State of :I orth DakotR , with its principal offce and place of  

> husiuess loc'

Rted at 7:7 20th St. :I. , Flu' , Korth Dakota. 

> Respondent "T

alter L. Lange is the chief exeeutiye ollcer of all the 

corporate respondents a, nel he formulates , directs and controls the acts 

and practices of said l' cspondents induc1ing the acts and practices        

> hereina-ftcT set forth. In addition , in his individual capacity from
> timc to time

, he has trnded and clone business as American Foods 

Tnc. , American Foods , Amcrican Food Plan , American Food Plan 

Inc. , and American Foods Service , Inc. His business address is the 

same as t.hat of the corporate re, spondents. His home address is 1282    

> Sherlmrne Avenuc

, St. Paul 4 , JIinnesota. 

PAn. 2. Respondents are now and for some time last past. , have been 

engaged in the adyertising, offering for sale. , sale and distribution of      

> freezers and foods by means of R so-

mlled Freezer-Food Plan. 

> P "

\R. 3. In the course and conduct of their business , respondents now 

cause , and for some time last past have caused , their freezers and food 

when sold , to be shipped from their places of business respectively     

> in the StRtes of Minnesota

, Iowa and Korth Dakota to purchasers 

thereof located in various other States of the Gnited States , and main-

tain , and at all times mentioned herein have maintained , a substantial 

course of trade in said freezers and food in commerce as " cOmInBrCC 

is defined in the Federal Trade Commission Act.      

> PAR. 4. In the course and conduct of their business , at all t.imes

mentioned hercin , respondents have becn in substantial-competition , in 

comm2rce wit.h corporations , firms and inchviduals in the sale of 

freezers , food and freezer- food plans.  

> PAR. 5. In the COUTse and

conduct of their business : respondents have 

diss2minated , and caused the disseminat.ion of , certain ad \' crtisements AMERICAN :FOODS , INC. , ET AL. 645  

> 643

Complaint 

concerning the said food and freezer- food plan by the United States 

mails , and by various means in commerce , as " commerce ' is defined  

> in the Federal Trade Cornmission Act

, including but not limited to 

adve.rtisements by means or circulars , brochures , and by radio broad-

casts , by stations having suffcient pmver to carry such broadcasts  

> across state 1inps

, ror the purpose or inducing, and which ,,,ere likely   

> to induce

, directly or indirectly: the purchase of food , as the term 

food" is defined in the Federal Trade Commission Act; and have 

disseminated lind ca.used the dissemination of advertiscments by var-

ious means , including those aforesaid , for the purpose of indncing, 

nnd which were likely to induce , directly or indirectly, the purchase 

of food and freezers in commerce , as " commerce " is defined in the 

Fcde.ra.l Trade Commission Act. 

PAR. o. By means of advertisements disseminated , as aforesaid and   

> by the oral statements of sales representatives , respondents have

represented , directly or by implicntion: 

1. That " food counselors " or " consultants " ,,,ill assist purchasers  

> of the aforesaid freezer-

food plan in planning t.heir food orders; 

2. Thilt the freezer or any part thereof and the food arc fully and   

> uncondit.ionally glla-ranteed uncler the contract;

3. That purchasers of the aforesaid freezer- food plan will receive 

their food requirements and a freezer for the same or Jess money that 

they have been paying for food alone;             

> 4. That purchasers can save enough on the purchase of food to pay

for the freezer; 

5. That purchasers can become a member of a freezer- food plan 

on a trial basis; 

6. That respondents sell their food at wholesale prices; 

7. That respondents are the oldest and largest food service in the 

1:fidwest serving more than 18 000 families in :Minnesota , 'Visean sin 

Iowa a.nd North Dakota; 

8. That purchasers participation in the aforesaid freezer-food plan 

will continue for a " lifetime 

> " ;

9. That respondents have established a reserve fund or posted 

bond , the benefits of which are available to purchasers as a guarantee 

of continuous service; 

10. That purchasers will realize savings in their food purchase, s of 

25 to 40% on food purchases under the aforesaid freezer- food plan;          

> 11. That installment contracts for the purchase of the aforesaid

reezer-Food Plan , freezers or food , are financed or carried by cor-

porato respondents and win not be sold or discounted to others; 

12. That sales contracts offered to purchasers for signature contain 

all the terms or conditions of sale. 646 FEDERAL TRADE CO::I lISSION DECISIOXS 

Complaint 6:: F.  

> PAR. i. In

tmth and in fact: 

1. The individuals sent to help purchasers of the aforesaid freezer-          

> :food plan in planning their food orders are not "food counselors " or

consultants . They have not had suffcient or proper training or   

> experience t.o warrant being referred to as " food counselors

': or " con-sulta, nts :' or any other llame \dTich would imply special qualifications 

in the field of home economics. 

2. The freezer or any paTt thereof and the food are not fully or 

unconditionally guaranteed under the contract. 

3. Purchaers of the aforesaid freezer-food piau do not receive a 

freezer and their food requirements for the same or less money than 

they had been I"'ying for food alone. 

.,. Purchasers of the afore::aid freezer-food plan cannot save enough 

mOlWY on the pl1rehHs of food to pay for the freezer. 

J. Purchase:' s of the aforesaid freezer- food plan will not be able to 

enter the plan on a trial basis , but they arB bound by the original pro-

vjsions of the contract. 

6. Respondents do not sell their food to purchasers of the "Joresaid 

freeze1' food plan at wholesale prices. 

7. The respondents are not the oldest or the largest foon service in 

> the :Miclwest

, moreover , respondents do not serve 1nore than 18 000 

falnilies in ::linnesota , vVisconsin , Iowa and N orih Dakota. 

8. Purchasers are not assured that they will be able to purchase food 

Trom the aforesaid freezer- food plan Tor a " lifetime 

9. Respondents have not established a reserve fund or posted a bond 

t.he benefits or proceeds of which are available to purchasers as 

guarantee or continuous service. 

10. Purchasers of the aforesaid freezer-food plan do not realize 

> savings of 25 to 40% on their food bils.

11. Respondents have soleI or discounted purchasers ' installment      

> contracts to others despite their representation to the contrary.

12. All of t.he terms and conditions of sale are not always disclosed       

> at the time of asale

, and in many instances contracts are not com-

pletely filled in at the time of a sale and wl,en later filed in and sent  

> t.0 PUl'Chil.sers

, the. terms or conditions thereoT are not the same as 

prc'iionsly agreed to hy t.he purchasers. 

Therefore , the advertisements referred to in P:ll'ftgraph Five were         

> Hnd are misleading in material respccts and constituted

, and now con-

stitute "false adyertisements " as that. term is defilled in the Federal 

Trade Commission Act , flnd the stat.ement.s flnd representations rc- 

> ferred to in Pa:' agl'aph Six IYere

, flnd nOlY are , false , misleading and 

deceptive.  

> PAlL S. The use by rcspondents of the aforesaid false

, misleading and 

deceptive state. me.nts , representaiinlls a.nd practices has l1ac1 , and no" A:\IERICA FOODS , I ":C. , ET AL. 647  

> 643

Derision ':l1l Onkr 

, t.he c.apacity and tendency to mislead members of the purchasing 

pubhc into the erroneous and misbken belief that said statements and 

representations were and are true and int.o the pnrchase of substantial  

> quantities of freezers

, food and freezer-food plans from respondents 

by reason of said BlToncons and mistaken belief. 

> P .

AR. 9. The aforesaid acts and practices of respondents , as herein 

alleged , including the disseminabon by respondents of false advertise-

ments as aforesaid 

> , -

were , and are , all to the prejudice and injnry of t.he 

public. and of respondent.s ' competitors and constituted , and now con-

stit.ute , unfair methods of competition in commerce and unfair and 

> c1ecBpt.ive acts and practices

, in conunerce within the intent and mean-

ing of the Federal Trade Commission Act , and in violation of Sections 

5 and 12 of said Act.   

> DECISIOX AXD OnDEH

The Federal Trade Commission having initiated an investigation of 

> ce,

rta.in acts and prac.tices of the respondents nRmed in the caption 

hereof , and t he respondents ha:ving been furnished thereafter with a

copy of a draft of complaint which the Bureau of Deceptive Practices 

proposed to present to the Commission for its consideration and which 

if j sued by the Commission 

> , '

would charge respondcnts with violation 

of t.he Federal Trade Commission Act; and 

The respondents and counsel for the Commission having thereafter 

C'uted an agreement containing a consent order , an admission by 

the respondents of all the jurisdictional facts set forth in the aforesaid 

dra.it, of complaint , a statement that the signing of said agreement is 

for settlement purposes only and does not constitute an admission by 

the respondents that the law has been ' Fiolatecl as alleged in snch 

complaint , a. nd waivers and provisions as require.d by the Commission    

> rules: flnd
> The Commission

, having reason to believe thflt the respondents 

han') violated the Federal Trade Commission Act. , and having deter-

mined that cOlnplaint should issue stating its charges in that respect 

he.reby issues its complaint , accepts said agreement , makes the foJlow- 

> ing jurisdictional findings

, and enters the follmving order: 

1. Respondent American Foods , Inc. , formerly known as American 

Food Plan of )1inllesota , Inc.. , is a corporation orgnnjzed : existing 

a.nd doing busjness unrle.r and by virtue of the laws of the State of 

:Minnesota , with its offce and principal place of business locH/ell at 

1263 East :Highway 36 , St. Paul , l\linnesota. 

Respondent American Food PJan of Iowa , Inc. , is a corporat.ion ol'~ 

ganized , existing and doing business under and by virtue of the laws of 

the. State of IO\va , ,yith it.s offce and principal place of Dusine, s8 located   

> at 3:37lTniversity L\.

venue , Des :Jloines lowa. 648 FEDEllAL TllADE CO:vMISSIO DECISIONS 

Decision find Orde- 6;; F. 

Hespondcnt American Foods of )forth Dakota , Inc. is a corporation 

organized , existing and doing business uncler and by virtue of the laws 

of the State of Korth Dakota , veith its principal phce of business  

> located at 737 20th Street

Fargo , Xorth Dakota. 

Respondent ' Walter L. Lange is the chief executive offcer of all of 

the corporate respondents. The business addrcss of the said 'Valter L.             

> Lange is the same as the corporate address of _meriean Foods

, Inc. 

and his home address is 1282 She-rbul'n8 Avenue , St. Paul 4 , :Minncsota. 

2. The Federal Trado Commission has jurisdiction of the subject 

matter of this proceeding and of the respondents , and the proc.eecling is 

in the pubJie interest. 

> ORDER

PAHT I   

> It is

o-rdered That respondents American Foods , Inc. , a corporation 

American Food Plan of Iowa , Inc. , a corporation, American Foods of   

> N orih Dakota , Inc.

, a corporation and their offcers , and "TaIteI' 

L. Lange individually and as an offcer of said corporations , and 

respondents ' agents , representat.ives and mnployees , directly or 

through any corporate or other device in or in connection with the  

> offering for sale

, sale or distribution of freezers , food or freezer-food 

plans , or other merchandise , in commerce as " COllllnel'c.e " is defined in  

> too Federal Trade Commission Act

, do forthwith cease and desist 

from: 

1. Representing, directly or by lmplication that:      

> (a) A "food counselor "consultant or other

fOl'mal1y        

> trained jndividual will assist purchasers of the aforesaid

Freezer-Food Plan in planning their food orders; 

(b) The freezer or any part thereof or the food are guaran-

> teed in any manner

, unless the nature and extent of the 

guarantee , and the manner :in which the guarantor win per-       

> forn1 thereunder are clearly and conspicuously disclosed in

immediate conjunction with a, ny such representat.ion; 

(c) By purchasing their Freezer-Food plan purchasers can 

purchase their food requirements and a freezer for the same 

or less money than they have been paying for food alone; 

(d) Purchasers of their freezer-food pJan can save enough 

money on the purchase of food to pay for a freezer; 

(c) Purchasers can enter the Freezer-Food Plan on a trial 

basis;   

> (f) Purchasers of a freezer-

food plan can buy their food 

from respondents at wholesale prices. AMERICAK J. OODS INC. , ET AL. 649  

> 643 Decision and Order

2. Representing that respondents arc the oldest food service in 

the Midwest. 

3. Representing that respondents are the largest food service in 

the )fidwest. 

4. Representing that purchasers a.re entitled to participate in 

the freezp,r- food plan for a " lifetime. 

5. Representing that respondents selTe any stated number of 

families unless re.spondents actually serye the number represented. 

6. Representing that respondents have established a reserve 

fund or posted a bond the benefits of which are available to pur-   

> ehasers as aguarantee to continuous service unless respondents

do in fact have such a fund or bond available and unless the said  

> fund or bond is made available

all purchasers of respondents 

product as a guarantee to continuous service. 

7. Representing, directly or by iInpJication , that purchasers 

contracts: (a) Are fina.nced or carried by corporate respondents 

and (b) wiJj not be sold or discounted to others unless respondents      

> establish in every instance
> , ,,"
> here the

re,presentation has boon 

made that the installment contract has been earried by corporate 

respondent.s and has not been sold or discounted to others 

8. l\'Iisrcprcsenting in any manner the savings realized by the 

purehasc of the freezer- food plan.  

> D.

Obtaining purcha.sers ' signatures on sa.les contrac.ts which 

contracts do not at that time c.ontain an of the tenllS or conditions 

of sale. 

r ART II   

> 1 t is lU/f'ther o7'de'

red That respondents American Foods , Inc. , a 

corporation , American Food Plan of Iowa , Inc. , a corporation , Ameri-

> ea.

n Foods of X orth Dakota , Inc. , a corporation , and their offcers , and 

\Valter L. Lange individual1y and as an offcer of said corporations 

a.nd respondents ' agents , representatives and employees , directly or 

through any corporate or other device. in or in COl1w. ction with the 

> offering for sale

, sale or distribution of any food or purchasing plan 

involving food , do forthwith cease and desist from:     

> 1. Disseminating or causing to be disseminated

, any advertise-

ment by means of the LTnited St.ftcs mails or by any means in 

commerce , as " commerce " is defined in the Federal Trade Com-

mission Act , which advertisement contains any representation or 

misrepresentation prohibited in Paragmphs 1 through 8 of Part         

> I of this order.
> 2. Disseminating or cansing the dissemination of any adver-

tisen1ent by any Inea, ns for the purpose of inducing or which is 

> 313-

121--70--650 FEDERAL THADE COll'MlSSION DECISIONS 

Complaint 63 F. 

likely to induce , directly or indirectly, the purchase of allY food 

or any purchasing pla.n involving food in commerce , as " com 

merce " is defined ill the Federal Trade Connnission Act , which ad-

vertise, ment contains any of the representations or misrepresenta-

tions prohibited in Paragra phs 1 through 8 of Part I of tIlls order. 

It w fnr-the1' ordeTed That the respondents herein shall , within sixty 

(60) days ,dter service upon them of this order , ile with the Com-

mission a report in writing setting forth in detail t.he manner and 

form in which they have complied with this order.   

> IN TIIE lVL TTER O

TRADE ADVERTISING ASSOCIATES, INC. , ET AL. 

TIUDIXG " IS TRADE 1:NIOK KEWS   

> ORDER , ETC.

, IN REGAHD TO THE ALLEGED VIOLATION OF l' J-HJ FEDERAL TRADE 

nIISSlON ACT   

> Docket 8582.

Com.plai. , June 1963- JJecisiO/I, JJ(I.I 13. J.)(J." 

Onler l'cquil' ing New York City publi1ihel'.. of a tabloid monthly neWSpalJer 

known as " Trade Union Ncws dcriving a large part of their income from  

> the sale of advertising

pace thHein to business cOllcerns to cease repre-         

> senting falsely to prospective advertisers that their said ne,yspaper was

endorsed by, or was an offcial publication of a labor union , and by a 

prominent display on the front page that tbe paper was the " Winner of 

the National TracIe Lnion Advertising Award" and "* OS * of International  

> Editorial E:\celleJlce

\wnrcl" : .'111 to cease their practice of placing adver-  

> tisements of ,arlons concern in thrir paper witlw11t authorization and

then seel;:ing to exact pHymf'llt therefor. 

Co::urL\IXT 

Pursuant to the provisions of the FcdeTal Trade Commission Act, 

and by virtue of the authority vested in it by said Act , the Federal 

Trade Commission , having reason to beJie\"e that Trade. Advertising 

\ssociates , Inc. , a corporation 

> , .

Joseph Lash and Eugene Serels , indi-

yidnally and as oflic.ers of said COl'pOl' fl1"ion , and as copartners trading 

and doing business 118 Trade"C nion News , hereinafter referred to 

as respondents , have vio1ated the proY1sions of said Act , and it ap-

pe.a.ring t.o the Commis::ion that II proceeding by it in respect thereof 

\""ould be in the pubJic inte, l'p-,t, hereby issues its complaint stating its 

charges in ihat reslJect as foJlo\\'  

> \RAGR.

I- 1. Respondent Trade Advertising I ssoc1ates , Inc. is :1-

.':orpOl'at10n organized , existing and doing business under Hnd by virtue TRADE UNIOK NEWS 651  

> 650

Complaint 

or the bws or the State or New Yark , with its principal offce and place 

or business located at 2.51 ,Vest 42nd Street , Xcw Yark City, New York. 

Respondents . J oseph Lash and Eugene Serels are individuals and 

officers of the corporat.e respondent. They formulate , direct and COll-

ir01 t.he, acts and practices of the corporate respondent , including the 

aet a.nd practices hC, l'einafter set forth. Their address is the same as  

> that or the corporate respondent. Respondents J

aseph Lash and 

Enge, Jl8 SereIs are also copaliners , trading and doing businesS' as Trade 

Union News , who. se principal offce and place of business is a, lso 10-

mtecl at 251 ,Yest 42nd Street ew York City, Kew York. 

PilE. 2. Respondents Joseph Lash and Eugene Serels , as copartners 

are now , and for some time last past have been engaged in the publica. 

tion of a tabloid.size nmvspaper known as Trade Union News. 

Respondents Trade Advertising Associates , Inc. , and Joseph Lash 

and Eugene Sere-Is , individually and as offcers of said corporation , per-

form the ad \' ertising fund-ions of Trade Union News , including the 

solic. ltfttion of ad'T ertisements appearing in said publication. 

All of the respondents cooperate Rnd aet together in carrying out the 

aets aud practices hereinafter set forth.  

> PAR. 3. The publication

Trade Union Kcws is published monthly and   

> is cm.., :;e.

d by respondents to be circulated from its point of publication    

> to subscribers and purchasers located in various other States or the

"Gnited States. 

Furt.her , responde, uts in the course and conduct of their business , en-

gage in extensive transactions involving the translnission of lettBrs,     

> advertising proofs ,checks and other business

instrument.alities and 

ext.ensive transactions by long distance telephone , all between and 

among various States of the United States , a.nd 1naintain , and at aD 

times mentioned herein hn;'ic maintained a substantial course of trade 

in said publication jn commerce , as " commerce " is defined in the Fed-

Bra1 Trade Commission Act. 

P AF.. 4. A large part of respondents income is derived from the saIe     

> of advertising space in the Trade Union cws to business concerns.

Hespondents and their duly authorized agents and representatives con 

tad.. said business concerns by telephone and other means and seek to 

ind1Jc( them to purchase advertising space in said publication. In the   

> ('01.1'5e of said so1icitations

, respondcnts and their a.gents and repre-

scnLLtlves rcpresent , and have represented , directly or by implication 

to pro pective advertisers that said public.ation is endorsed by, affliated 

,yjth oran officiaI publication of a labor union.  

> PAl'.. 5. In

truth and in fa.ct , Trade Union News is not endorse(l hy,  

> affliated

"ii-

> ))

01' an ofIcial publication of a lnbor union , or in any 652 FEDERAL TRADE CO:\L\nSSIO),T DECISIONS 

Complaint 6J F. 

manner connected with a labor union , but is independently organized 

and operated. 

Therefore , the statements and representations referred to in Para-

graph Four hereof are false , misleading and deceptive. 

PAR. 6. Prominently displayed on the front page of Trade Union  

> News a.ppca-r the

following statements: " 'Vinner of the ational Trade 

Union Advertising Award" and "" 'Vinnel' of International Editorial 

Excellence Awa.rd. 

PAR. 7. By and through the aforesaid statements and representa-

tions , respondents re.pl'esent , directly or by implication;  

> (a) That Trade Union );ews was adjudged the most

outstanding 

publication in competitive contests in ,vhich a representative number  

> of com

peting publications were considered and in which all eompeti-

tive publications were afforded an e(llUtl opportunity to compete. 

(b) That the winner of said " awards " was elected by a group of in1- 

> partial and qualified individuals.
> PAR. 8. In truth and in fact:

(a) Trade Union News has not been adjudged the most outstand-

ing publication because no competitive contests were held in which a 

TPprescntative number of compe6ng publications weTe entered , nor 

were all competitive publications afforded an equal opportunity to be 

considered. 

(b) The winner of said " awards " was not seleded by a group of    

> impartial and quaJified individumls

, but was selected by respondents   

> Trade Advertising Associates

, Inc. , Lash and Serels. 

Therefore , the statements and representations referred to in Pa.ra-

graphs Six and Seven hereof are false , misleading and deceptive.   

> PAR. 9. In the course and conduct of

their business respondents have 

also engaged in the unfair and deceptive pra.ctice of placing advertise-

ments of various concerns in their p&per without having received au-

thorization therefor and then seeking to exact payment for said ad-

vprtise, ments from said concerns.  

> PAR.

ID. In the conduct of their business , at all times mentioned here-

, respondents have been in substantial competition , in commerce   

> with corporations

, firms and individuals Jikewise engaged in the pubJi-

cation of newspapers and other periodicals and in the selling of adver-

tising to be inserted therein and particularly with the pubJishers of 

newspapers and other periodicals pubJished or endorsed by labor 

unIons. 

PAR. 11. The use by respondents of the aforesaid false , misleading 

and deceptive state, lnents , representations and practicp, s has had , and 

now has , the capacity and tendency t.o mislead prospective advertisers 

into the erroneous and mistaken belief that said statements and repre-TRADE U);IOX XE'VS 653  

> 630 Inital Decision

sentations were and are true and into the purchase of advertising space 

by reason of said erroneous and Jnistaken belief. The unfair and decep-

tive practice cngaged in by respondents of publishing unordered 01' 

unauthorized advertisements has subjected firms and individuals to 

harassment and un1awful demands for payment of non-existent debts.          

> PAR. 12. The aforesaid acts and practices of respondents

, as herein 

alJeged , were and are alJ to the prejudice and injury of the public   

> and of respondents

: competitors and eonstituted , and now constitute 

unfair methods of competition in conllnerce , and unfair and de, ceptive 

acts and practices in commerce in violation of Section 5 of the Fe.de.ral  

> Trade Commission

ct.        

> 3fT. Wiliam A. AJ'bitJnan for the Commission.
> JfT.

## N01 T,,,k Brooklyn , :N. , for respondents. 

> INITIAL DECISION" BY LOREN II. Idl.GHLIX
> , .

HIURINO EXAMINER    

> DECE:'IllER 6 , 1963
> In (Jeneral

lli8to1'Y of the Litigation 

The complaint in this proceeding charges respondents wit.h three 

types of lIDIa-ir methods of competition in commerce and unfair acts in 

commerce in violation of See;tion 5 of the Federal Trade Commission 

Act. These alleged practices set forth in three separate charges of the     

> complaint are: (1) procurement of

subscriptions of advertisements in 

respondents ' publication the " Trade union Kews " by false , mislead-

> ing, and deceptJ

ive representations to prospective advertisers that said 

pubJication is endorsed by, affJiated with , or an offcial pubJication of 

a labor union; (2) respondents ' false , misleading, and deceptive state-

ments displayed on the front page of said " Trade Union News " repre-

senting that such publication is a winner of nwtional advertising and 

international editorial awards in its field; and (3) that respondents 

place unauthorized advertisements in said publication and then seck to 

exact payment therefor from such alleged advertisers. Hcspondents 

while admitting many of the allegations of the complaint , in substance 

have denied such charges in their joint answer. The issues are not com-

plicated and the pleadings will be more specifically hereinaftr refer-

red to in connection with the part.icular findings of fact to \vh1ch they 

rebte. 

The complaint herein issued . Tnne 28 1963 , and was duly served upon 

respondents who fiod their joint answer Augnst 8 , 1963. The evidence 

in support of the complaint and respondents : eyidence in defense were 

presented at three hearings held in New York , J\-' ew York , Sept.ember 

, 13 , and 16 , 1DC3 , at the conclusion of which aU parties rested and 654 :FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSlON DECISIONS   

> Initial Decision

63 li'/f. 

the ease ,-ras c.losed for taking evidence. Proposed f1nc1ings of fact , c.on-

elusions of law and order were duly filed. And , pursuant to leave 

granted all parties , they respectively fied memoranda in opposition to 

their opponents ' proposed fidings. In this initial decision it is held 

and determined thrut the material allegations of the complaint , upon 

all three charges , have been fully sustained by the evidence , and an 

",ppropriate cease and desist order is accordingJy issued. 

The trial record is short , the testimony of 16 Commission witnesses 

and that of the two respondents being set forth in 302 pages. There 

were 43 Commission exhibits and one respondents ' exhibit received in 

evidence. It is to be noted that by l" eaSOn of the pJeadings and briefs 

there is no dispute as to many of the facts and but little dispute as to 

others. There are a number of conflicts of testimony, however , on the 

verbal statements purported to have been made by the respondents to 

va, riolls prospective advertisers in the Trade l7nion Xews , and ninst      

> naturally, wiele differences of opinion as to

the, inferences to be clr \\Yn 

from. cel'tfLin basic pyidcnee and the ultimate factual inJL rcnce2 dr 

> \'.-

-it.h respect to t.he guilt of the. respondents as charged. 

The hearing examiner has given fnn , careful and jmpnrtial consider-

ation to all the testimony, taking into consideration his observation of 

r he appcaTance , conduct and (lemeanor of each of the \vitnesses \'..10 

appeared before, him. All documents , stipulations of fact , and tho   

> facts a11eged in the compla, int which a.re admitted in

the answer also 

haye been duly considered. And aD statements , argnments , propo als 

and briefs of connsel have been closely studied in the light of all rhe 

f'yide. llce. 

All proposed findings of fad , conclusions of 1u'Y , and orders 2ub-

lllitted by the part.ies "hich are Hot incorporated h81'e1n , either ver-

bn.tim or in substance nnd effect , aTe hereby rejeetctl: Uld any pending 

> offers of evidence

, motions or objections made during the conrse of 

the proceedings not he,l' etofore expressly granted , denied , or o\-cl'ruled 

are hereby denied or 0\7 erruled. 

Upon the whole record , the hem'ing exa.mincr finds generally thu 

counsel supporting the complaint has fully su::ta lned the burden of     

> proof incumbent upon hi1n

, and has establishrd by a preponderance of 

t.he reliable , probative and sUDE:tFtntial evidence and the fail' fllc11' oll-

able inferences dra-wl1 therefrom , each and n11 the material a11egatrnns 

of the complaint to justify the findings hereinafter made 

> , '
> which -End-

ings , together -with the conclusions 01 law ap!J1icnhle thereto , fully war-

rant the order here\yith issued. The hearing eXi:uninEl' further flLds     

> generally that the evidence submitted by rcsponclen13

is insuffcient to 

est.ablish any valid defense to the material violntions of law ch:uged 

in the complaint and established by the evidence. More specific,lly, TRADE T;XIO:c NEWS 655  

> GOO Inital Decision

upon consideration of the whole record , the hearing examiner make 

the following findings: 

Undisputed and Substantially Undisputed Facts 

The following fa cts alleged in ParagTaph One of the complaint are 

a.dmitted by paragraph 3 of the answer , as well as conceded jn respond-

ents ' answering brief (p. 2), and are. therefore found to be true. 

Respondent Trade Advertising Associates, Inc., is a corporation organized, 

existing and doing business under and by virtue of the laws of the State of Kew 

York , with its pri1'1cipnJ offce and place of business located at 251 West 42nc1 

Street ew York City, ew York. 

Respondents Joseph Lash and Eugene Serels are individuals and offcers of the  

> corporate rpspondent. '"

'" 'l' beir address is the same as that of the corporate 

respondent. Respondents Joseph Lash and Eugene Serels are also copartners,         

> trading and doing ul1siness as Trade "Cnion News,

wbose principal offce and plflce 

of business is also located at 251 ,Vest 42nd Street , Kew York City, ew York. 

Respondents , however , deny in paragraph 3 of their ans\ver the othcr 

allcgations of Paragraph One of the complaint , hereinabove omiHed       

> which are that said individua1 respondents

, as corporate offcers " fol'-

111ulate , direct ltnd cont.rol the acts and practice of the corporate 

respondent , incJuc1ing " t.ho e particularly compbinecl of in this pro-

ceedin :. In the answering brief of respondents , \yhile, conccchng the 

individual ofiicer- responde, nt' s general ove1'811 control of the business 

involved , there is :11 o Epecific denial that. either Lash or SeTels 1'81'-

sonally pract.iced or rmthorized their employees to engage in the nnl nY-

ful practices charged (p. 2). The evidence of respondent Joseph Lash 

definite,ly conceded the t.ruth of respondents ' gencral overall control 

(E.. 15), and he further testified that he trains those whom responrlents 

employ in t, he art of selling ads in the respondents ' publication , the   

> Trade Union Ke\vs (R.. 3G--3D).

Hespondent Eugene Serels also te, c:ti-

fied that he likc,,- jsc trains their salesmen (R. 276-7). The methods used 

by eilch of these two respondents themselyes , in obtaining or seeking to      

> obtain ads for their publication

, \yere credibly testified to by seve.l'a1 

witnes es who 'sere soliciteel by interstate t.elephone. calls (Donglas 

Johnson , president of Shoreline ,Ya, shed Sand rmd Stolle Company of 

Madison , Connecticut (R. 187-89) and David Cohen , formerly vice 

president of Camns IVlanl1facturillg Company of New Beclford IHflssa-

chusetts , more recently manager at that place of :Miller Brothers IlldllS-

tries aho of New Bedford , jH tssach\1setts , and cUl'rentJy vice pl'e3iclent. 

of the latter cQrporation (R. 215-7)). There is further some evidencc 

from witnesses who received similar , although intl':lstate telephone 

solicitations in the State of New York from persons stated , or be1ie,' 

to have been one of the respondents (\Villiam E. Shreiber vice presi-656 FEDERAL TRADE COM:vISSIO DECISIONS   

> Initial Decision 65 j1-'

dent of Paul A. Straub and Company (H. 03 , 07-71) and David Fried-

man , president of City ,Vide Home A1,terations Co. (R. 17;))). 1;pon 

all of snch evidence it is neccssRl'ily found t.hat both of the individual 

respondents personally llsed the sales methods clulrged in the com- 

> plaint as well as training thcir salesmen to

employ such practices. As 

urged by counse.l supporting the complaint , in any event it is well     

> established that as the owners of the business involved

, respondents 

Lash and Serels are responsible for the unauthorized , as well as for 

any authorized , activities of their saleSlnen. Such respondents therefore    

> nre properly included

, both as corporate offcers and as individuals , in  

> the cease and desist order. See

l'. O. v. Standard Eduoation Society,      

> (lg37) 302 U. S. 112 , 120;

Parke 

> , ,
> 1ustin &-

Lipscornb , Inc. v. 

(C. A. 2 , Ig44) 1'2 F. 2d 437 , 440; and Standal'd lJiBtJibutor8 , Inc. 

l'. (C. A. 2 , Ig54) 211 F. 2d 7 , 13. 

It js therefore found as alleged in Paragraph 3 of the complaint 

fLlthough denied by Paragraph 3 of the answer and again denied 

respondents ' answering brie, , that respondents Lash and Serels formu-

late , direct and control the acts and practices of the corporate respond-

ent , including the particular types of acts and practices charged in the 

complaint and hereinafter more fully referred to and fonnd to be 

unlawfu1. 

The foUawing facts a11egec1 in Paragraph 2 of the complaint are 

admitted by Paragraph :2 of the answer and are therefore found to be 

true. 

Respondents Joseph Lash and Eugene Serels, as copartners , are now , and for 

some time last past baye been engaged in the publication of a tahloid size news-

paper known as Trade Lnion :\T ews. 

Respondents Trade Advertising Associates , Inc. , and . Joseph Lash and Engene 

SercJs , individually and as offcers of said corporation , perform the advertising 

functioIls of 'l' rade Union ews , including the solicitation of advertisements 

appearing in said publication. 

All of the respondents cooperate and act together in carrying out the acts and 

practices hereinafter set forth.        

> It wi11 be notecl that the respondents

' admission of the last above 

quoted sente, nee is inconsistent with their special denial of certain 

aJlegations of Paragraph One of the complaint above referred to. But 

since the evidence referred to herein so substantially sustains such alle-

gation in any event , detailed analysis of one such inconsistency of 

respondents ' ans-ncr is '."holly unnecessary. 

,Yhile naturally not alleged in the compJaint , relev nt evidence   

> received over respondents

' objections (E. 10- 13) 8ho\Y8 that imme-

diately iol1mving the selTice of the complaint upon them on . July 10 

1963 , respondents Lash and Sere.Js organized a llC:W and different cor-

poration in K C'iV , Jersey called Trade 1 nion X e'ys of K e,y J Cl'scy, Inc. 'TRADE UNION NE'VS 657   

> 650 Initial Decision

which began business on July 15 , 1963. Hespondent Lush clainle. d that 

it is also being published as a labor newspaper , its bu.siness address 

being 20 Branforcl Place , Newark , New Jersey (R. 13). The evidence 

further shows that the offccrs of this nmyly organized 1\CI', - Jersey cor-

poration , the respondent. Trade Advertising Associates , Inc. , as well 

as the respondent N e\v York corporation , are Lash as president and 

> Serels as secretary-treasurer (R. 13-

15). Also the evidence shows that              

> the only stockholders and directors of each of the two corporations
> Trade Advertising Associates

, Inc. , and this newly org:lnized one , are 

the respondents Lash and Serels and the ,,-ife of each of them , each of     

> the four holding one-

fourth of the stock in each (R. 13-15). Both cor-  

> porations arc definitely close co.rporations

, but there is no elaim or  

> proof that either of the wives took a,

ny active part in their husbands 

businesses. Serels corroborated Lash and stated that the first issue of   

> Trade Union ews of

ew Jersey had been published in September      

> 1963 and that both respondents

, together with two employees , solicited 

advertising for this new puhlication (R. 262-4). 

The following facts alleged in Paragraph 3 of the complaint are 

admitted by Pnragrn ph 2 of the ans\ver and are therefore :found to 

be true. 

The !Jnblication Trade UniCI1 News is published monthly fwd is caused by     

> respondents to be circulated from its point of puhlication to snllscribers and

purchasers located ill various other States of the United States. 

Further . respondents in the course and conduct of their business, C'Ilg" ag" e in 

extensive transactions involving the transmission of letters , advertising In. oofs     

> cbecks and other busilwss instrumentalities and extensiYE transactions by long

distance telephone, all between and among various States of the United States 

and maintain , and at all times mentioned herein have maintaiI ed a substantial 

course of trade in said publication in commerce , as " commerce " is defined in the  

> Federal Trade Commission

Act. 

TherB is substantial undisputed evidence that respondent.s chiefly    

> USB the long-

distance telephone in communicating with prospective 

purchasers of advertising in the Trade Union News and also in seeking 

subsequent ads from former advertisers. In addition to the testimony        

> of the 16 advertiser and non-advertiser witnesses

, bot.h respondents 

Lash (R. :J6- , 292-3) and Serels (R. 25:1- , 273-4) testified exten-

sively as to the use of the telephone by them and their s leSllen. It is           

> further undisputed that the United States mails were used by respond-

ents in billing and eollecting, or attempting to collect , amounts claimed 

by them to be due from persons whose ac1yertisement.s had been placed 

in such publication (R. 34-35 273-4). 

Some of the c.olTlll1unications by telephone, and by mail were made  

> whony within the State of

ew York , but seven of the ,,- itnesses called 

by the Commission testified to interstat.e communication by respond-658 FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION DECISIONS   

> Initial Decision

65 P.      

> ents with them by means of these two media

, such witnesses being 

located respectively in the several States of Connecticut (Douglas T. 

Johnson , R. 186- , ex 38: and Clarence H. Riedle , R. 199-211 , CX 

:39-42), Massachusetts (David Cohen , R. 214-9), New Jersey (Charles 

Kane , R. 113- , ex 1 , 1'. 14; lend A. E. Cooper , R. 212-4 , ex 2 , 1'. 

CX 29-A&B), Pennsylvania (George W. Frey, R. 154-62 , ex 24-28),  

> and

1aryland (Edward J. Baney, R. 225- , ex 43). And further 

not only is respondents ' use of such media admitted as being general 

throughout the TJnited States , out llumerous advert.isemcmts appearing 

in various issues of the Trade Gnion X 8\"\8 , in evic1e. nce" aTe confirming 

and convincing evidence of the widespread use of snch medlft. in IH62  

> and 1963

, as well as of the substautjal public interest involved herein 

(OX 1 48 and 49). These issues of the Trade Union l\cws 

show that each carries an average of about ten advertisements per page 

and the seven issues in evidence show ac1vertise, ments from aU states of  

> the Union except Alaska

, Hawaii , lend seveml of the sman Rocky 

:JIonntRin arca states. Since these publications occnr 12 times a year           

> a.nd contain froD1 24 to 36 pages at an advertising rate of $1 100 per

page (about one-half of each publication being advertisements), the 

gross annual income of respondents therefrom has been substantially     

> in excess of $100

000 , plus anntull subscriptions which respondents  

> were unable to

est.imate. Other allegedly substantial businesses of 

> respondents (R. 15-16), \vhich are not jnvolved in this proceeding,

have. not been considered. 

The allegations in the first part of Paragraph 4 of the complaint 

are admitted by Paragraph 4 of the answer. "Gpon such admission as      

> well as upon the foregoing evidence

, the fol1owing facts are found to 

be true.     

> Alarge part of respolHlents

' income is derived from the sale of ad,- ertising 

space in tl1e Trade union News to business concerns- Respondents nnd tbeir d1.lJ" 

authorizec1agents and representatiyes contact said business concerns by tele-

pbone and other means and seek to induce them to purchase adTel'tising space 

in said publication. .. * ..  

> PInt Cha.rge of Complaint SU8tained

,Vith respect to the first charge of the complaint that respondents 

have falsely claimed union support or connection for their publication 

a substantial nunlber of ",- .itnesses cre; c1ibly t.estified that respondents , or 

their sales representatives , either dire tl:y or by implication , had staLed 

and represented to them .fS prospective advertisers in order to induce 

and persuade them to buy advertising space in the Trade L;nion ?\T ews    

> that such publieaction was

endorsed by, affliated with , or an offdal 

publicl1tion of a Jabor union (Maurice Pigrish , R. 120-3; George IV. 

Fry, R. 155; David Friedman , R. 176; Douglas T. Johnson , R. 188 TRADE UNIO=' NE\VS 659   

> GGO Initial Decision

190.-1; Clarence II. R.iec11e R. 204-5; David Cohen , R.. 21'6-7; and   

> Edward J.

Baney, R.. 127). These solicitations included , among other 

representations , sUltements that respondents were represent.ing the 

I.a. , or labor unions generally, and could help out if the solicited 

person or his c.ompany were ever in any trouble or lutd problems with 

labor tmions. Also , such statements implied that the respondents 

might influellce the depositing of union funds int.o a savings and loan 

asso iation , and by way of oajolement , that " t.he (unionJ boys " would 

appreciate the purchase of an ad (R. 204), and even by way of implied    

> threat that "

there might be a time when you need help " (R. 176). 

HE3ponc1ents ' counsel argues that some of these statements either were 

not, p03itive or \vcrewithdraWIl , but from a fair consideration of each  

> of

ueh t.estimonies as a whole 110 other conclusion can be reached than  

> that respondents claimed io lW.

Ne union c.onncctions or authority.         

> \Vhile respondents Serels and Lash both categoricaUy and repeat~

edl)' den ied that they had evcr personal1 y rcpresented to prospective 

advert.isers , 01' that they had ever authorized their salesmen to repre-

st'n: that the Trade, 1Jnioll Ncws is endorsed by: afliliated , or associated 

with any trade union (Serels , R. 272 , 276-9; Lash , R. 285 , 237-

28D-90), considering their interest as opposed to that of the witnesses 

> \"h(,I te,

stifled to the eontn1ry, the grcat \"eight of the credihle evidence    

> 011 the. subject

strongly c.ontradicts t. hem. It is therefore found that the 

fol1oT\ingallegations of Para,graph Four of the complaint a.re fac-

tunny true alt.hough specifica, ny denied in Pa.ragrap11 .1 of the answer: 

In t.he course of said solicitations (for advertisements), re. '3pondents and their 

agents and representati,. es repre. "ent, and ba,e represented. directly or by im- 

> pliC':Jtioll

, to prospecti,e advertisers thA.t said pnblication is endorsed by, ailliated 

with or an offcial publication ofa In. bor union. 

Certain al1cgnxio:ns of Paragrnph :5 of the complaint are admitted 

jn Paragraph 5 of the answer. It is therefore found as so alleged and 

admiued " that in truth nnd in -fae!, Trade Union 1\8\""5 is not. endorsed 

by, affiliated with , or an offcial publication of , a. labor union , or in any 

marmer connectcll with a labor union , but 1::, inclependenUy organized 

and openited. 

Hesponclents , hO\Yever in Paragraph :5 of their answer , deny the 

furt.her a, nega.tion of ParagTfLph ;) of the eomphdnt which are as 

fo11ows: 

Therefore , the statements and representations '" .. '" (of re, spondents that their          

> said publication is endorsf'd by, affliated with , or an offcial puhlication of ,a

Inb01 umon) '" .. " are false , misleading and deceptive. 

It is found from the evidence that such allegations are true and cor-

rect statements of -fact , despite their denial by respondents. Suc-h C\yi-

dence i5 as follows. 660 FEDERAL TRADE CO l\nSSl0X DECISIOXS   

> Initial Decision

65 P. 

Respondent. Lash testified that he had :1cCjuirecl Trade 17nio11 News 

in 185D when it. ",nIb a dormant operatioll : although it had been pub-

lished intermittcntly for 4 years prior thereto; that. rcspondent Sere-Is 

hac! joined him as a partner f, Gout the end of 1960 (R. 16-17) ; that 

Tradeunioll i-Jews had no employees except a free- lrmce writer and 

all editor , ,y11o are. only occasionall:r employed; that the. cnrrent editor  

> at the time of hearing being one Eli )101'1'i8011

, ,\'110 is paid by t.he part-      

> nership Trade Advertising Associates (R. 14

## , Ii-IS) : that the copy 

jp, sent. t.D an outside printer ,dlO prints the paper (H. 18) ; and that 

both Lash amI Serels solicit advertising (H. 15 , 18). Lash claims in his 

testimony that this publication "is the nation s Jeacling independent 

newspaper " (R. 13). 

R.espondent Lnsh testified that, he hnc1 worked briefly, twice , for       

> the Trade l;nion Courier in 1

ewaI'k , Ne'" Jersey, the first. time as an   

> fldve.tising salesman for six or seven months in 10-1(; and the seeond

time about live months in early 1060 (R. 19) as a. manflger and sales-

man (R. 23-24), and that Serels had also been it salesman for such 

publicntion (R.. 24). Serels testified that he had been such fill adver-

t.ising salesman for the Trade Union Courier for a long period from      

> about 19'10 until 1959 (R. 251)

and that he and Losh had been asso-

ciatrd in suell ,york for one month in 1951: (R. 251-2). 

Upon this premise, counsel supporting the complaint invites atten~ 

tion to the case ,yhen:in the Trac1eCllion Courier ,\as found to have 

engaged in some. of the same type of practices chnrgecl against respond-  

> ents in the proC'eec1ing here

, fl1 F. C. 1275 (195;'), a;ffl'med in T?Ylde 

Unton COlli't". Publishing COTpomtion v. C. (C. \. 3 , 1956) 232 

F. 2cl 636. The Commissioll s c.case and desist order was e. nforced in  

> 1960 Gy the Court of

Appeals for the Third Circuit ,,-here a nnanimous 

panel imposed extremely heavy fines on an respondents but one. This 

decision:is unreported except 1n Vol. VI , Statutes and Court Decisions 

Federal Trade Commission , 750 (6 S. &D. 750). 

Counsel urges in substance that hy reason of their prior employment      

> by Trade 1Tnion Courier Publishing Corpora,

tion , respondents Lash 

and Serels nccessarily had knowledge of the unlawfulness of the same 

or simiJar types of adivities here alleged to be unlawful. The respond-

ents objpct to any such inference. There certainly is no direct proof  

> 1.11a t

respondents had knowledge of the proeerclings and decisions in 

that litigation although if materia.l it might ,yell be inferred that they 

djel know all about it. Lash and Sere.ls each appeared to t.he examiner 

during the hearings to be (1, very SlU1TP a. nd know ledgeable person. .. uHI      

> N1.ch had been \yith the Trade.

1;nioll Courier during a part of the 

timr of its sflid unlawful practices. TRADE UNION KE\VS 661   

> 650 Initial Decision
> Early in the hearings

, ,,,hile respondent Lash was testifying, he 

called attention to the presence, in the hearing room of a competitor 

whom Lash claimed had also been formerly employed hy the Trade 

Union Courier , and stated that some of the things he , Lash , was testify-

ing to might be brought back to competitors Rnd suggested the removal 

of such person from the 1'00111 (H.. j2). Such suggestion was overruled 

for good and suffcient reasons stated on the record (R. 32-33) : and 

respondents were thereafter prot, eded ,yhile testifying fronl giving 

any undue exposure to their alleged business secrets by stipulations        

> that their business was substantial (R. 28-

, 32- , 259-62). Also 

previous to thi:: , respondents ' counsel had insisted upon inviting at-       

> tention on the record to irrelevant pending 1itigation between the
> respondents and Trade "Cnion Courier as a supplement tQ his objec-

tions to any inquiry with reference to the prior employment of re-

spondent Lash by Trade Union Courier (R. 19-23). 

These circumstances while irrelevant. to the issues in this case , never-

theless indicate that there has been unplea.santness and misunderstand-

ing, culminating in litigation , between respondents and Trade 1Jnion    

> Courier; and such matters

, added to the evidence already referred to 

might well lead one to the eonc.usion that the practice, s followed by 

the respondents ,\"cre known by them to be esselltial1y similar to those 

used by Trade -Union Courier. But knowle. clge and intent arc not. essen-

tial elements in the type of proceeding nmv before the examineT for 

decision; and it is not necessary to establish or find any such actual 

knmvledge on respondents ' part. Hespollclents , however , must be held 

to notico that in the Trade Union Courier ease such types of practices 

had been held to be unlawfu1. This is pursuant to the ancient maxim 

that every man is prcsmned to kWHV the law. That case and several 

other Commission and judieial decisions arc offcially noticed as the  

> a.pplicable law. Such clecisions lUunistakably hold that it

is violative 

of the Federal Trade Commission Act for publishers to represent 

faJsely that their publication has been endorsed by labor unions or  

> orga.nizations. See

Bern8tein , d. a. A1nerican Labol' Digest , (1953)  

> 50 F.

C. 354 357-358; Emest lJlaTk High (195iJ) 56 F. C. 625 , 628 

630 633-635; Brondabmo7ce Publishe"8 , Inc. etc. et al. C. Docket 

Xo. 8546 (October 11 , 1963) (63 F. I023J, mimeograph opinion of 

the Commission affrming the initial decision of the hearing examiner         

> particularly his findings of fact 4and 5and his conclusion of

Jaw (pp. 

1026 1027 of such initial decision filed August 7 , 19(3). In the opinion 

in Ernest 111ark High , supra Comn1issioner Kern , speaking for the 

entire membership of the Commission , hid the clear pamllel between 662 FEDEHAL TRADE COJ\JMISSION DECISIONS  

> Initial Decision

65 F. 

that ease and the first charge herein , -where 

and held (56 F. C. at p. 630) :  

> inter aZi(!.

it was sta.ted 

The record discloses numerous overt efforts on the part of responclerit's agents 

to sell advertising in a labor sponsored periodical ,,,jth the idea that the adver-

tiser would thereby purchase labor s good wil , the clear implication being that 

otherwise the whiplash of labor s il wil might be incurred. * '" I/ (H. Jes!)olHI-

ent' s counsel's brief" '" '" seems to indicate tl1at one can buy friendship, iHld    

> second, that labor

s frielld hip is for sale. We prefer to believe that both of tlH'            

> conclusions are false and that responsible labor elements will reject such ar!?;n-

ments even as we do. 

The respondents nevertheless contend , in substance , that no one 

could be deceived into believing that the Tmde lenion News was 

any way c01mected with a labor union because of its masthead. This 

> consists of the capita,

lized words " Trade " and "'C' nion , in 60 point 

extra-bold-face type , bet\yeen \\, hicll is a picture. of a , globe l.portrrtyir:g" 

the \Vest ern hemisphe, re with pal'a11eJs of latitude cmd 10ngitlldf'J 

upon which the word " News " in 36 point extra-bold-face type is 

superimposed , while on the line below appears the capitalized legend 

The Nation s Leading Independent Labor Kewspaper " in 14 point 

bold- face type. As counsel supporting the complaint ably argues 

since the initial sale of achertising is always made by telephone , the 

lllRsthe.acl reveals nothing to any such prospect. And even where the 

adverti er has actually seen the publication s masthead , the language 

used 1n it would not revea.l to the average reader that such newspaper 

\Vas not connected wi:th a union or unionism generally. r,t is noted that 

the masthead used , on the editorial page omits the words " The Nation 

Leading Independent Labor Ke\Vspaper " altogether and merely says 

Dedicated in general to the. cause of Trade Unionism " (CX 1 , p. 5: 

ex 2 , 1'. 5; ex 3 , p. 2; and ex 4 , p. 2). Elsewhere in such issues there is 

no qualification whatsoever to the paper s name (eX 1 , Pl'. 2 , 11 (bot-

tom of right lmnd column), 16: ex 2 , 1'1'. 1 (bottom of right hand col-

umn), 2 16; ex 3 , pp. 1 (bottom of right hand column), 16; and 

ex 4 , Pl'. 1 (bottom of right hand column), and 16). In substance , the 

said legend " The N ation s Leading Independent Labor N e\Vspaper             

> is not an integral and indispensable part of the newspaper s name-
> alchough Hw" t;

language is employed on respondents ' letterheads , state-  

> ments of account

, and various ot, her business doc.uments l'or external 

nse (eX 5- , 11 , 15- , 21 , 24- , 30 band c , 31 (b), 32(b), 3:3 (b) and 

(c), 34 (b), (c) and (el), 36 , 38 , 39 , 41 , 43 , 45 and 46). 

The respondents have, fnrther argued in this conncobon that each  

> of their two pub1ications

, the Tmde Union :I ows published for three 

years past by the pnl'tnel'ship of such name in K el', - York and the     

> Traoe ln-ion N c\Vs of pw

ersey published since August IDG3 by the.   

> individual respondents

' new corporation , clearly tates on its mast-TRADE UNIO NEWS 663   

> 650 Initial Decision

head that it is an " Independent Labor K ewspaper " and that no one 

could be misled by the words " Trade Union " in the title into believing 

that either of such newspapers was in any way connected with a. labor 

union. But the words " trade union " mean a " union , not fl. private busi-

ness partnership or corporation for profit. The words " trade union 

and " labor union " are used interchangeably in the law as well as in 

common parlance. For example , see 87 CJS , p. 762 , Trade Unions, 

1: "A trade or labor union is a combination of workmen of the same 

trade or of allied trades for the purpose of securing by united action 

the most favorable conditions with reSpcCit to ' wages , hOllrs of labor.     

> etc. for its members.

" To the same effect , see 31 Am. Jur. 394 

Labor , 8813 , 14; and Black' s Law Dictionary, p. 1015 , Labor 

Union , and p. 1666 , Trade Union. It is not clear whether there is any      

> such thing as an "

independent bbor union :' but there certainly is no 

such thing as a private labor union. It is , of conrse , common practice      

> of 'trade unions Ito use ne" wspapel'S to present their causes to the public.

Sec 87 CJS , p. 779 , Trade Unions , note 87 and cases cited. It thel' 

fore follows that the respondents even by claiming to be an " independ-

ent labor newspaper " in the second line of the mastheads of their         

> publications could not erase the impression necessarily conveyed to

their advertisers and other readers by the vmrds " Trade Union e\Vs 

in ,the first line thereof that they were publiciJtions either endOlsed 

by, affliated with , or offcially published by a labor union.   

> Second Oharge of Oomplaint Sustained
> It is alleged in Paragraph G of the complaint that there

ppear 

(pJrominently displayed on the front page of Trade "Cnion 

News * * * the following statements: " Winner of the National Trade 

Union Advertising Award' a. nd " Vinner of International Editorial 

Excellence Award' 

In Pant-graph 6 of the answer , respondents , while in general denying 

the said allegations of Paragraph 6 of the complaint , in effect admit     

> that their said publication did display the said statements as alleged

by further pleading that such statements do not currently exist or 

appear on the front page of said publication. It i, uncontradicted in 

fact , however , that the alleged awards during the 12-month period of 

their publication in the front page masthead of the Trade Union 11 ews 

were pure fiction devised by the respondent Serels. Respondent Lash 

stra.ngely, claimed to have no knowledge of how such " awards " came   

> to be

, and referred to respondent Serels as authority for the use of 

such language in the masthead (R. 53 54). Serels freely admitted that 

he himself , together with it cOl1ple. of re. spondcnts ' editors , determined 

> that the "

Int.ernational Editorial Excellence Award" should be given 664 FEDERAL ' l'RADE COJ\DHSSIOK DECISIOXS    

> Initial Decision 6;) F.

to the paper by Serels and that no independent board existed which 

held a bona, fide contest and made such award upon a fair and unbiased 

comparison of various labor newspapers , including respondent 

Trade Fnion News. Serels testified quite cavalierly and freely 

to some extent on this subject (R. 267-71), among other things saying 

t.hat in making such " award" he had not considered comparing the         

> Trade Gnion ews with any other labor newspaper because "I felt

it was our baby. If 1 wanted to give them (sicJ a present , I would. 

I liked it. " (R. 267. ) He also """uded the publication a trophy (R. 

268) and further testified that the National Trade Union Advertising 

A ward was concei vecl and devised by him under similar circumstances  

> (R. 269-

70). Serels also testified that he had looked at a certain labor 

pa.per which claimed in its masthead to have receiycd such awards 

and had " felt ours was far superior and \ve were not invited to their 

compe.tition He decided to give a similar award to respondents 

paper. The labor paper he referred to is in the record as respondents 

exhibit 1 and is a copy of the " AFL-CIO Milwaukee Labor Press 

VoL XXII o. 10 , issue of September 12 , 1903 , earrying in its mast-  

> head the identical a ward language plagiarized erbati1n

by the re-

spondents--uite cvidcntly from an earlier issue of sa.id l\filwaukee 

paper. There is no evidence as to whether the statclnents in the mast-  

> head of respondents

' exhibit 1 are true or not , but that is immaterial.    

> The llUyarnishe.d fact remains that the respondents seems to consider

t.he purloining and use of such plagiarizec1langauge perfedly propel'           

> although Serels frankly conceded that he did not feel the

so-called 

awards had any merit or meaning, such being " just a new suit that we 

pllt on the new baby " (R. 269-70). 

The Je purely fictitious statements respecting such awards had 

appeared in about 12 issues of the Trade Fnion Xews , but after the 

filing of t.he complaint in this proceeding Lbecause ;; the Federal Trade 

Commission objected to it" J, such statement.s ' were removed from 

snhsequent issues (R. 268-71). Respondent Lash testified to the same 

effect (R. 30-31). 

Because these false cliches were thus eradicated , respondents ' coun-

sel contends that his clients voluntarily discontinued the use of such 

statements " without any order of the Federal Trade. Commission or    

> any other administrative agency

. But under llUl11crous judicial and 

Commission decisions this does not constitute a.ny defense. The prin-

ciples are too well established and the cases too numerous to warrant   

> extensive citation and quotation here. They are collated in Vo1. 3

II Trade Regulation Reporter , S 9M1.36- Pl'. 16 , 147- , 149. 

For a very recent judicjal decision citing severa) earlier cases see 

Om.ter P,' od1lcts , Inc. v. O. (C. A. 7 , Sept. 27 , 1963) 323 F. 2d 323 TRADE UNION NEWS 665       

> 650 Initial Decision
> Part III. The discontinuance or

abandonment of an unfair practice is 

not an absolute defense in any case but one which must be determed 

by the Commission in the exercise of sound discretion. Among the basc    

> elements necessary to maintain such a defense are: self-recogntion of

wrongdoing, voluntary discontinuance of unfair practices as well as 

demonstrated good faith , and the intent not to resume the same. None 

of these elements exist here. There is not a word in the record to 

indicate the slightest belief by respondents that it was wrong for them    

> to falsely represent to their subscribers ,advertisers

and the public 

generally that they had received high a wards of merit based on the 

excellence of their advertising or editorials. Their discontinuance of     

> these representations came belatedly and only after they had boon

served with the complaint herein. And certainly their almost instant 

organization of the new publication in New Jersey aftr such com-

plaint was served shows anything but a good faith desire to refrain 

from any such unfair practice in the future; but to the contrary infers 

they believed they could and would use such language again with 

impunity in the masthead or elsewhere in a new publication issued by a 

eorporation not made a respondent herein. 

It is further charged in Paragraph 7 of the complaint with respect 

to the use of such language relating to these nonexistent awards that: 

By and through the aforesaid statements and representations , respondents 

represent, directly or by implication: " "" * That Trade Union News was 

adjudged the most outstanding publication in competitive contests in which a 

representative number of competing publications were cpnsidered and in which 

all competitive publications were afforded an equal opportunity to compete.          

> .".. That the winner of said "

awards " was clected by a group of impartial and 

qualified individuals. 

Respondents , in Paragraph 7 of the answer , deny generally these 

allegations. Since the awards were admittedly absolutely false and 

self-bestowed , however , such statements and representations of re, 

spondents can have no other effect upon the reader who is not informed 

of the true facts than as their meaning and import is alleged in the 

language last above quoted. 

As alleged in Paragraph 8 of the complaint , which is only quali-

fiedly denied in Paragraph 7 of the answer , upon the evidence here-

inbefore recited it is necessarily found that " (iJn truth and in fact:      

> " . " Trade Lnion News has not been adjudged the most outstanding publi-

cation because no competitive contests were held in which a representative 

number of competing pubHcations were entered, nor were all competitive pubH:-

cations afforded an equal opportunity to be considered. 

* * .. The winner of said " awards " was not selected by a groupof; imparUa:l 

and qualified individuals, but was selected by respondents Trade Advertising   

> Associates, Inc.

Lash , and Serels. 

> 313-121--

## 70--3 666 FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION DECISIONS   

> Initial Decision

65 If' 

Thereforethe said statements and representations , so plea. dcd in the     

> second charge and admitted by respondents

, are false , misleading, and 

decep ive. 1Vllile there is no direct evidence that such false st.atements 

have actually misled any advertiser or other person , such deliberateJy  

> untrue statements

, unquestionably did have the capacity and tendency 

tomislead and deceive anyone not conversant with the true facts into 

believing respondents ' Trade Union ews was a.ctually an outstanding 

labor newspaper of recogniz cl outstandingly superior merit. TIJe 

second charge of the complaint is therefore fully sustained. No precise 

precedent has been either cited or found. This does not , howeyer , fore-     

> close afiding that respondents

' practices are unhndlll as the Fe. (kull 

Trade Commission Act was particularly framed broadly in onter to 

encompass practices found by the Commission upon sub5t l1tiHJ evi-       

> dence to be unfair , See O. Y. R. F. Keppel

Em. , Inc. (lD34)  

> S. 304

, 309-311; O. Y. St"ndard Edncntion Society pi (iZ. 

(C. GA. 2 , 1936) 86 F. 2d 692 , 695-696; and Goodman Y. C'. IC.      

> ,1957) 244 F. 2d 584

, 588-591 and cases eited. 

Third Oha.rge of Oomplaint Sustained 

It is charged in Paragraph 9 ofthecomplaint that;        

> In the course and conc1nct of their business , Tl'spondE'ut.: haye aLso eJJgflf'flJ :I

the unfair and decf'rtive practice of placing ad' ertisemcnts of varian, s C'( I'eU" :n"           

> in their paper without baYing received authorization tberefor and thell

€!:k lJg-

to exact payment for said advertisements from said concerns. 

Thjs charge , while denied in its entirety by respondents in Paraglnph       

> 1of their answer and in their testimony, is strongJy upheld

by g, ci31-

c1ant. test.imony and exhibits offered and received in support of !11e 

complaint. Nine witnesses testified c.redib1y that ads were plaeeel in 

respondents ' Trade Union Kews \\-ithout their authority, 1'iere Fnh-    

> lished therein ,and that they received bins therefor. ,VhiJe

SOJ:!Jt of        

> these witnesses refused to pay the biBs

, others did so for various Tf:a-

sons a.nd were , in substanc.e , buying their peace. The three wit.nes 

who received interstate communications with reference to the pJ3(' 

ment of ads , and subsequent requests therefor , were: Charles Ka.ne 

(R. 115); Edward . J. Baney (R. 227); and A. E. Cooper (R. 212). 

Similar testimony with reference to intrasta.te communications frorIJ 

respondents was given by six j\ ew York witnesses who were: \Vil jam    

> E. Schre;ber (R. 63-

70); .\fargaret E. "'eil (R. 77- 83); :\faurice Pig-

> rish (R. 126); .Tohn .

J. Delaney (R. 135-6) ; Irving Stache1 (R. 140-

50); David Friedman (R. 172-3); Herbert BaneI' (R. 220-2): ,md 

Harold F. lOem (R. 229-44). A nllber of these witnesses identified 

various documents in support of their statements as to respondents 

repeated requests for payment of unauthorized bills (OX 5 If)-TRADJ.J L"NION NEWS 667 

650 Initial Decisioll 

24-28 , 36 , 38 , 39 , 41 , 43 , 45-47) and several identified checks given 

respondents in payment for such purported obligations (eX 23 , 37       

> 40(a), (b) and 42(a), (b)). Such acts on

the part of respondents were 

not accideutal or only occasional. They were the follow-ups on thou-

sands of ,telephone calls. Each edition of the Trade Union N e'ys car-

ried an average of 160 or more ads. Serels wstified that respondents 

had had about eight salesmen aJ! told (R. 276), only one of which had   

> been discharged for misrepresentation (R.

281). '\Vhile unable to giv 

a definite answer as to how many calls he personally made per dny, an 

average would be more tJmn five calls per week per man (R. 283). On 

that assmnecl basis alone, the two respondents , with several salesm( 

making calls on business days throughout the year , made Jitera1Jy 

many hundreds of telephone calls annually seeking ad\" cl'tisements fOl' 

poJ1dents ' publications. 

There is abnndant precedent that the placing of advm. tising without 

::mthority and seeking t.o exact payment therefore constitute unfair 

competition and unfair pn\ctices in violation of the Federal Trade  

> COfiunission Act.

Be1Yistein d. a. American LaboT Digest , 8UP1 : 50   

> t. at. Fp. 3;,. "! (sy:hhm: (c)) ;ncl

;);i8; T/ade C-:nion Oourier Pub-

7;Sh/iig (Yo!'p. e. al. , 8U,ji?YI 01 F. 1'. t ' . at pp. 1275 (syllabus), 1287- 1290 

1293 1294 ond1299-1300 affrmed and en/m' oed 232 F. 2d 636 s"pm; 

Erne8l1laTk High , supra 56 F. C. at pp. 625-626 (syllabus), 627- 

> 628; and

B'iondabTooke P1/, bli8heT8 , Inc. et al. , supra , Doclcet No. 85.4C 

(63 F. C. 102:JJ, initial decision p. 1027 , par. 6. 

It is therefore found that the anegations of Paragmph 9 of the 

complaint are factually true and that the third charge of the com-

plaint is abundantly sustained. 

Competition Admitted by Respondents 

The alJegations of Paragraph 10 of the complaint are admitted in 

Paragraph 2 of the answer and it is therefore found that:           

> In the conduct of their business, at all times mentioned

hcn , respondl' 

have been in substantial competition , in commerce , "..th corporations , nr:l, 

and indivi(1nals likewise engaged in the publication of newspapers and otber        

> periodicals and in the sellng of adnrtising to be inserted therein and partlcn-
> larly with the publishers of newspapers and other

periodicals pUblished (lr 

endorsed by labor unions. 

It may be added that. in the. conrse of the testimony of respollocJJt 

Lash , he made reference to the exjstence of competitors as herejn~ 

before stated. 

SU1nrnary 

Paragraph 11 of the complaint is denied by respon(lents in Pal':)-

graph 1 of the answer. But from the facts hereinabove fonnd , and 668 FEDERAL TRADE COM:ISSION DECISIONS   

> Initial Decision

65 F. 

from inferences fairly and reasonably drawn therefrom , it necessarily 

follows and is therefore found that these allegations in said paragraph 

11 of the complaint are factually true. 

The use of respondents of the aforesaid false, misleading and deceptive state 

ments , representations and practices has had, and now has the capacity and 

tendency to mislead prospective advertisers into the erroneous and mistaken 

belief that said statements and representations were and are true and into the 

purchase of advertising space by reason of said erroneous and mistaken belief. 

The unfair and deceptive practice engaged in by respondents of publishing 

unordered or unauthorized advertisements has subjected firms and individuals 

to harassment and unlawful demands for payment of nonexistent debts. 

Upon all the facts hereinabove found and for the reasons hereinafter 

:stated , the hearing examiner draws the following: 

Ooncl'llBions of Lww  

> 1.

J unsdiction 

The respondents were not only duly served with process but an-

swered the complaint and the individual respondents also appeared 

at the hearings. All respondents have been represented by counsel and 

have vigorously contested the proceeding throughout , thereby com-    

> pletely sublnitt-ng their respective persons , incliyic1nal , offcial :lnd

corporate , to the jurisdiction of the Commission. 

As to the Commission s jurisdiction over the subject Inatte.r , t.he             

> evidence indicates that while avery large part of the acts and prac-

tices of the respondents took place wholJy withiu the State of X 

York , their numerous and repeated communications in interstate com-

merce by telephone and through the United States mails initiated 

carried on , and brought to fruition the acts and practices complained 

of in this proceeding in sueh commerce between their place of business 

in New York and practicalJy every other State of the United States.  

> It is

, of course , basic that violations of the Federal Trade Commission 

Act must not merely affect interstate commerce but " must be in such 

commerce A8heville Tobacco Board of Trade , Inc. et al v. 

(C. A. 4 , 1959) 263 F. 2d 502 , 507 , 508. See also Holland Furnace   

> Oompany v.

(C. A. 7 , 1959) 269 F. 2d 203 , 208 , 209 cert. den. 

(1960) 361 U. S. 932. These two comparatively recent cases both rely     

> upon the landmark case of C. v. Bunte Bros.

(1941) 312 D. S. 349.  

> Considerable evidence of what took place in

New York State was 

received in corroboration of the general type of practices respondents 

were charged with and herein found to have carded on extensively in 

interstate commerce. In addition to soliciting and obtaiuing adver- 

> tising in these various States of

the Union respondents also obtained 

advertising in Puerto Rico (eX 49 , p. 7) which for purposes of the TRADE UNIOK" NEWS 669   

> Initial Decision
> antitrut acts

may be also considered as a State (Section 48 , U. 

734 , cDnstrued in People of Puerto Rico v. Shell 00. (P. ), Limited 

et al. (1938) 302 U. S. 253 , 260. Although the record shows respond-

ents have also obtained advertising from at least three province 

of the Dominion of Canada (Ontario , ex 1 , p. 8; ex 2 , pp. 3 , 10; 

ex 4, p. 11; ex 48 , p. 6; Newfoundland , ex 2 , p. 4; and Alberta 

ex 48 , p. 5), the charges in ths proceeding are premised solely upon 

interstate commerce , and there is no special evidence relating to re-

spondents ' Canadian activities. Therefore , no fiding has been herein 

made in respect to foreign commerce or violations of the Fedcral 

Trade Commission Act with reference thereto. If pleaded , however 

the Commission would have had jurisdiction to hear and determine 

whether any such violations had occurred in foreign commerce. See    

> Branch v. O.

(C. A. 7 , 1944) 141 F. 2d 31 34-35. 

It is therefore concluded that the Federal Trade Commssion has 

jurisdiction of the subj ect matter of this proceeding and of the persons  

> of 0.11 the

respondents herein. 

2. Public Interest 

Paragraph 12 of the complaint allcges conclusions of law which 

are denied by respondents in Paragraph 1 of the answer. The first of 

these conclusions relates to the question of public interest. Respon-

dents ' counsel contends inter alia (Answering brief 

, pp: 

l0-12) that 

although there was a " huge amount of advertisements " in Trade Union 

ews , the small number of complaining persons w' ho testified arc such 

an infinitesimal percentage of the total number of advertisers " that 

there is no substantial proof of prejudice to the public. It is , of course 

impossible within reasonable limits of time and expenditures to take 

the testimony of a very large number of complaining witnesses in 

numerous places , as to which procedure , if followed, the respondents 

would be the first to complain of , and justly so. The complaining 

witnesses who testified to respondents ' practices , hereinbefore found to   

> be unlawful , came from several different states in the

nOl theastern 

part of the country and were corroborated as to the generality of such 

practices by a number of witnesses in N ew York State. Respondents 

practir.es were suffciently spread in time and space to establish that        

> they wcre habitually and generally followed by respondents.

From the facts which have been found , it is necessarily concluded 

as a matter of law that , as alleged in Paragraph 12 of the complaint 

> The acts and practices of respondents * * *

were , and are , all to the          

> prejudice and injury of the pnblic """

" There is , therefore , public 

interest in this proceeding which is specific and substantial with re-

spect to each of the three charges of the complaint. 670 FEDERAL TRADE CDMMSSION DECISIONS   

> Initial Decision

65 F. 

3. Violatwns of Federal Trad Commi88ionAat 

While respondents contend there is no evidence of any injury to 

respondents ' competitors (Answering brief , p. 12), it is , of course , well 

established that since the 1936 amendments to the Federal Trade Com-

mission Act , it is unnecessary to prove injury to competitors where 

findings of unfair practices have been made. See Parke , AWitin 

Lipscomb , Inc. v. F. , supra at 142 F. 2d 441 Cert. den. (1944) 

323 U. S. 753; and Koch et al. v. (C. A. 6 , 1953) 206 F. 2d 311 

319. Therefore , upon the findings hereinbefore made , the examiner 

necessarily concludcs that , as alleged in Paragraph 12 of tl e com-

plaint , the respondents ' said acts and practices " were and are all to the    

> prejudice and injury * . * of respondents

' competitors and consti-

tuted, and now constitute , unfair methods of competition in commerce 

and unfair and deceptive acts and practices in violation of Section 5 

of the Federal Trade Commission Act.      

> "Cpon the foregoing findings and conclusions

, which warrant a broad 

order , the following is herewith issued: 

> ORDER

1 t is orde1' That respondents Trade Advertjsing Associates , Inc. 

f1 corporation , and its offcers , and Joseph Lash and Eugene Serels 

individua1ly and as offcers of said corporation , and as copartners trad-

ing and doing business as Trade Union News , and respondents ' repre-

sent.atives , agents and employees , directly or through any corporate   

> Dr other device

, in connection with the soliciting, offering for sale or 

.sale in cOlrunerce of advertising space in the newspaper now designated 

as Trade Union Kews , or any other pubJication , whcther pubJished 

under that name , or any other name , and in connection with the oiIer-

> ing for sale

, sale or distribution of said newspaper , or any other pub-

hcation , in commerce , as !( commerce :' is defined in the Federal Trade 

Commission Act , do forthwith cease and de-sist from: 

1. Representing, directly or by implication , that said newspaper 

is endorsed by, affliated with , or an offcial publication of , or  

> otherwise connected with a labor union or trade 1iion.

2. Representing that said newspaper was the ". Winner of the 

National Trade Union Advertising Award" or " Winner of In-     

> ternational Editorial Excellence Award" , or otherwise misrep-

rcsenting that any of respondents ' publications has been presente 

with an award or distinction as a result of a competitive contest. 

3. Misrepresenting in any manner that competitive contests are 

or have been conducted by impartial and qualified individuals to          

> determine the relative quality or merits of any of respondents

publications in comparison with competing publications. ROY WEAVIG CO. , INC. , ET AL. 671 

Syllabus 

4. Placing, printing or publishing any advertisement on behalf   

> of any person

, fim , or corporation , in any of respondents ' pub-

lications without a prior order or agreement to purchase said ad-

vertisement. 

5. Sending bils , letters or notices to any person , firm , or cor-

poration , with regard to an advertisement which has been or is to 

be printed , inserted or published on behalf of said person , firm 

or corporation , or in any other manner seeking to exact payment    

> for any such advertisement

, without a bona fide order or agee-

ment to purchase said advertisemcnt. 

DECISION OF THE COJlDIISSIOX AXD OnDER 

> CO:MPLIAXCE

TO FILE REPORT OF 

This matter having been heard by the Commission upon respondents 

appe 11 from the hearing examiner s initial decision; and 

The Commission having considered the entire record , including the           

> brlefs and oral arguments of counsel for respondents and counsel sup-

porting the complaint , and having determined that the hearing exam-

iner s findings and conclusions are fully substantiated on the record 

nd ; hat the order conULincd in the iuitial decision is appropriate in 

all respects to dispose of this matter: 

It iE oTdered That respondents ' appeal be , and it hereby is , denied. 

It 'is fLt-rthe1' ordered That the hearing examiner s initial decision 

filed December 6 , ID63 , be , and it hereby is , adopted as the decision of 

theCommissioll.        

> It is fUTtl1m' o''rloTed That the respondents

, Trade Advertising As-

sociates , Inc. 

> , .

Toseph Lash and Eugene Serels , shall , within sixty (60) 

days after service upon them of this order , fie with the Commission  

> areport

, in writing, setting forth in detail the manner and form in 

which they have complied with the order to cease and desist. 

IN THE lVL..TTER OF 

ROY WEAVING COMPAKY , IKC. , ET AL.   

> CONSEKT ORDER , ETC.

, IN REGARD TO THE ALGED YIOJ-1 ATION OF THE FE-    

> ER. \L TRADE CO?DIISSION AND THE WOOL PROD'GC' S Li\.ELING ACTS

Docket C-746. Complaint , Alay 20 , 1964-Deoision , May 20 , 1961, 

Consent order requiring Brooklyn, XY. , manufacturers to cease violating the 

Wool Products Labeling Act by such practices as laheling as " 100% all 

wool" , piece goods which contfined a substantial quantity of other fi'bers, 672 FEDEI!AL TI!ADE COMMISSION DECISIONS  

> Com plain t 65 F.

and failing to show on labels the registered identification Dumber of the   

> il!lnufacturer and the true generic names of fibers

present in certain fabrics.    

> as well as the percentages thereof; and to cease violating the Federal Tr.ade
> Commission . Act by statements on invoices and shipping memoranda which

falsely represented the different fibers and quantities thereof present in 

certain fabrics. 

> COl\IPLAINT

Pursuant to the provisions of the Federal Trade Commission Act       

> and the 1V 001 Products Labeling Act of 1939

, and by virtue of the 

authority vested in it by said Acts , the Federal Trade Commission 

having reason to believe that Roy ' Weaving Company, Inc. , Perth 

Woolen Company, Inc. , and ' Weldon ' Woolens Inc. , corporations , and 

Emanuel Seideman and Bella Seideman , individually and as offcers        

> or said corporations hereinafter referred to as respondents

, have vio-

l:ted the provisions of said Acts and the Rules and Regulations pro-

mulgated under the ' W 001 Products Labeling Act of 1939 and it 

appearing to the Commission that a proceeding by it in respect thereof 

would be in the public interest , hereby issues its complaint stating its 

charges in that respect as follows:    

> PARAGUAPH 1. Respondents

Roy ' Weaving Company, Inc. , Perth 

Woolen Company, Inc. , and Weldon IVoolens Inc. , are corporations 

organized , existing and doing business under and by virtue or the 

laws of the State of New York with their principal place of business 

located at 71-07 60th Lane , Brooklyn , New York. Individual respond-

ents , Emanuel Seide-man and Bella Seideman are offcers or said cor-

porations and cooperate in formulating, directing and controlling the 

acts , policies and practices of the corporate respondents including the 

acts and practices hereafter referred to. The addresses of the individual 

respondents are the same as that of the corporate respondents. 

PAR. 2. Subsequent to the effective date of the vVool Products Label-

iug Act of 1939 and more especially since 1963 , respondents have man-

ufactured for introduction into commerce , introduced into commerce 

solc , transportd , distributed , delivered for shipment and offered for 

sale in commerce 

> , '
> as "

commerce " is defined in said Act , wnol products   

> as "

wool products " are defined therein. 

PAR. 3. Certain of said wool products were misbranded by the re-

spondents within the inttmt and meaning of Section '1 (a) (1) of the 

Wool Products Labeling Act and the Rules and Regulations promul-

> gated thereunder

, in that they were falsely and decptively labeled 

or tagged with respect to the character and amount of the constituent  

> fibe contained

therein. 

Among such misbraJlded wool products , but not limited thereto 

were certain piece goods labeled or tagged by respondents as " 100% ROY WEAVING CO. L"\ ET AL. 673  

> 671

Complaint 

all woo!" whereas in truth and in fact said products contained a sub-

st,mtia! quantity of fibers other than woo!. 

'R. 4. Certain of said woo! products were further misbranded by 

respondents in that they were not stamped , tagged or labeled as re-

quired under the provisions of Sectiou 4 (a) (2) of the Woo! Products 

Labeling Act and in the manner and form as prescribed by the Rules 

and Regulations promulgated under said Act. 

Among such misbranded wool products , but not limited thereto   

> were woo! products with labels which failed:

1. To show the name or registered identification number of the man-

ufacturer of the wool product or of a person subject to Section 3 of the      

> W001 Products Labe!ing Act with respect

to such wool product. 

2. To show the true generic names of the fibers present; and 

3. To disclose the percentage OT such fihers.        

> PAR. 5. The acts and practices of the respondents as set forth above

were , and are , in violation of the IVool Products Labeling Act of 1939   

> and the Rules and Regubtions promulgated thereunder

, and consti-

tuted , and now constitute , unfa.ir a. nd deceptive acts and practice and   

> unfair methods of competition in connnerce

, within the intent and 

meaning of the Federal Trade Commission Act. 

PAR. 6. Respondents are now , and Tor sometilne last prtst , have been 

engaged in the offering for sale , sale and distribution of products 

namely fabrics , to manufacturers. The respondents maintain , and at 

all times mentioned herein have maintained , a substantial course of      

> trade of said products in commerce.

, as " coInIerce " is defined in the 

Federal Trade Commission Act.  

> PAR. 7. Respondents in the course and conduct of their

business  

> as aforesaid

, have made statements on their invoices and shipping 

memoJ'rmda to their customers misrepresenting the character and 

amount of the constituent fibers present in such products. Among such 

misrepresentations , but not limited thereto , were statements represent-      

> ing certain fabrics to be " 30%

10hair 15% 'Vool , 45% Viscose 

10% Cotton " whereas in truth and in fact the said fabrics contained 

substantially different fibers and quantities of fibers than were 

represented. 

PAR. 8. The acts and practices set out in Paragraphs Six and Seven 

have had , and now have , the t.endency and capacity to mislead and de-    

> ceive pnrchasers OT said fabrics as to the true content thereoT and to

canee them to misbrand product.s manufactured by t.hem in which said 

> mnterials are used.

PAR. 9. The acts and pract.iees of the respondents set out in Para-    

> graphs Six and Seven were

, and are , all to the prejudice and injury of 

t.he public and of respondent.s ' competitors and constituted , and now 674 FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION DECISIONS  

> Decision and- Order 65 F.

constitute , unfair and deceptive acts and practices , in conllnerce , within 

the intent and meaning of the Federal Trade Commission Act. 

> DECISION AXD ORDER

The Commission having heretofore determined to issue its complaint 

charging the respondents named in the caption hereof with violation 

of the Federal Trade Commission Act and the Wool Products Label-    

> ing Act of 1939

, and the respondents having been served with notice 

of said determination and with a copy of the complaint the Commis-

sion intended to issue , together with a proposed form of order; and 

The respondents and counsel for the Commission having thereafter 

executed an agreement containing a consent order , an admission by 

respondents of all the jurisdictional facts sct forth in the complaint 

to issue herein , a statenlcnt that the signing of said agreement is for 

settlement purposes only and does not constitute an admission by re-

spondents that the law has been violated as set forth in such complaint 

and waivers and provisions as required by the Commission s ru1es; 

and  

> The Commission

, having considered the agreement , hereby :lccepts 

same , issues its c0111plaint in the form eontemplated by said agreement 

makes the following jurisdictional findings , and enters the following 

order:   

> 1. Respondents Roy

1Veaving Company, Inc. , Perth Woolen Com-

pany, Inc. 

> , '

Weldon 1Voolens Inc. , corporations organized , existing and 

doing business under and by virtue of the laws of the State of Xew 

York , wit.h their offce and principal place of business at 71-07 60th 

Lane , Brooklyn , in the city of l\ ew York , State of New York. 

Respondents Emanuel Seideman and Bella Seideman are offcers of 

all of the above corporations and their address is the same as that of 

said corporations. 

2. The Federal Trade Commission has jurisdiction of the subject 

matter of this proceeding and of the respondents , and the proceeding 

is in the public interest. ORDER 

It is ordered That respondents R.oy ",Veaving Company, Inc. , Perth 

Woolen Company, Inc. , and 1Veldon Woolens 'Inc. , CDrporations , and 

> their offcers

, and Emanuel Seideman and Bella Seidcman , individ-

ually and as offcers of said corporations , their agents , representatives 

> and employees

, directly or through any corporate or other device , in 

connection with the introduction or manufacture for introduction into 

commerce , or the offering for sale , sale , transportation , distribution or 

delivery for shipment in commerce , of wool fabrics or other wool prod-PACIFIC MOLASSES CO. ET AL. 675 

671 Syllabus 

nets , as " commerce " and " wool product" are defined in the Wool Prod-

ucts Labeling Act of 1939 , do forthwith cease and desist from: 

Misbranding of such products by : 

1. Falsely' or deceptively stamping, tagging, labeling or 

otherwise identifying such products as to the character or 

amount of the constituent fibers included therein.  

> 2. Failing to securely affx to

, or place on , each such prod-

uct a stamp, tag, label or other means of identification show-

ing in a clear and conspicious manner each element of 

information required to be disclosed by Section 4(a) (2) of      

> the ,Vool Prollucts Labeling Act of 1939.
> It is

f'1-lrther m'deTed That respondents Hoy \Ve, aving Comp:1ny, 

Inc.. , Perth ,Voolen Company, Inc. , and ,Veldon ,Voolclls Inc., corpol'-

ations and their offcers , and Emanuel Seideman and Bella S( itleman 

individually and as offcers of said corporations , and respondents rep-

resentatives , agents and employees , directly or through any corporate       

> or other device , in connection with the offering for sale ,FOaIe 01' distri-

bution of fabrics or other products , in commerce , as " comnwrce ' is 

defined in the Federal Trade Commission Act , do forthwith cea::e  

> and desist from misrepresenting the dmracter or

lmOllnt of c.onstitu-

ellt fibers contained in such products on invoices or shipping memo-

randa applicable thereto , or in any other manner. 

It'L., fu, ?'the'l oTdered That the respondents herein shaH , ,yithin ciixty 

(60) days after service upon them of this order , file with the Commis-    

> sion a report in writhlg setting forth in deta

11 the manner and form 

in which they have complied with this order. 

Ix THE )fATTEH OF  

> PACIFIC

lOLASSES CO",1:P "'NY ET AL.  

> ORDER

, OPINON , ETC. , IN REGARD TO THE ALLEGED VIOL.A.TION OF SEC. 2 (a) 

OF THE CLAYTON ACT   

> Docket /'4-62.

Complaint , Apr. 1959-Decision , May , 1964 

Order requiring a San Francisco importer and distributor of " offshore " and do-

mestic molasses throughout the United States , to cease discriminating in  

> price in the sale of "

blackstrap " molasses by allo"Ting its favored customer- 

> distributors a discount of

to Jr; per gallon-the latter being a redm.tion 

of nearly 10% from the published prices charged other customers-while 

sellng to nonfavored customers at the established market price without any 

discount , which difference , because of the highly competitive nature of the 

business , readily determined the loss or retention of resale customers. 676 FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION DECISIONS 

Complaint 65 F. 

COMPLAINT 

The Federal Trade Commission , having reason to believe that the 

parties respondent named in the caption hereof , and hereinafter more   

> particularly designated and described

, have violated and are now vio-  

> lating the provisions of subsection (a) of Section 2 of the Clayton

Act , as amended by the Robinson-Patman Act , approved . Tune 19 , 1036 

(U. , Title 15 , Sec. 13), hereby issues its complaint , statiug its 

charges with respect thereto as follows:   

> PAR.-'WRAPIl 1. Pacific :Molasses

Company, respondent herein , is a 

corporation organized , existing and doing business under and by virtue 

of the laws of the State of California with its principal offce and place 

of business located at 215 Market Street , San Francisco , CaJifornia. 

Respondent corporation is a wholly owned subsidiary of the United 

Molasses Company, London , England.   

> Hespondent James I. Ferguson is president , respondent F.

'V. 

Earnhardt is vice president , secretary and treasurer , and Bascom 

Doyle is branch manager of respondent corporation with their address     

> the Sfl111e as that

of the corporate respondent. Said individual respond-

ents formulate , direct and control the policies , acts and practice of 

the corporate respondent herein named.         

> PAR. 2. Respondents are principally engaged in the importation

distribution and sale of " offshore " and domestic molasses throughout 

the United States. Respondent corporation s total sales in 1055 were  

> approximately $15

600 000. 

Respondents maintain a number of st.orage terminals at various 

locations throughout the lTnited States and sell and ship said molasses 

to customers located in several of the States of the United States. Re-

spondents , in the sale of said molasses , have alt all times relevant   

> herein been

, and Hre nm" enga.ged in commerce , as " commerce ' is de-

fined in the amended Clayton Act.  

> \R. 3. In the course and conduct of their business

, the respondents 

have been and are now in substantial competition in the sale of " black-

strap " lTIolasses with other seners of such product. In lnany areas re-

spondents sell their products to two or more molasses distributors who 

are in substantial competition each with the other in the resale of said 

product. 

PAR. 4. In the course and conduct of their business in cnmmerce , the 

respondents have been and are now , in each of several trading areas 

and in particular in the Houston , Texas , area , discriminating in price  

> in the sale of "

blackstrap " molasses of like grade and quality by sell- 

> ing said product to favored

distributor-customers at significantly     

> lm,er prices than they aTe selling to non-

favored' distributor-customers PACIFIC MOLASS1C CO. ET AL. 677 

675 Initial Decision 

who are competitively engaged , each with the other , in the resale or 

said product. One or more or the sales involved in such discrimina-  

> tions have been and are now in commerce

, and said commodity has 

been and now is sold ror resale within the United States. 

Respondents have effected said discriminations between and among 

their customers in the manner and by the method hereinafter 

# described. In the eourse and conduct of their business in commerce , respond. 

ents sell " blackstrap " molasses to their ravored customers-distributors 

at the esablished market price or said product less a specified discount   

> or "",if

to Ihif or more per gallon while respondents sell their non-

favored distributor-customers at the established market price or said    

> product withont any discount whatsoever. Because or the highly com-
> petitive nature or the particular business

, 'Aif to Ihif discount per gal-

lon readily determines the loss or retention or resale customers by the    

> distributor-customers or the respondents.

PAR. 5. The effect of respondents ' discrimination in price , as above 

alleged , may be substantially to lessen , injure , destroy or prevent com- 

> petition in the line or

commerce in which respondents are engaged 

and between and among distributor-customers or the respondents. 

PAR. 6. The acts and practices or respoudents , as above alleged        

> constitute a violation or the provisions or subsection (a) or Section 2

or the Claytn Act (U. , Title 15 , Sec. 13), as amended by the 

Robinson-Patman Act , approved June 19 , 1936. 

Mr. Eugene Kaplan supporting the complaint. 

Omok , Dahlqubit , Herrington &1 Sutcliffe by Mr. Ohristopher M. 

Jenks , Mr. William D. McKee and Mr. Robert A. Keller or San 

Francisco , Calir. , and 11fT. John E. Shea. or ' Washington , D. , ror 

respondents. 

INITIAL DECISION BY J OHX LEWI , IIEARIXG EXAMIN"ER 

DECE)fBER 17 , 1962 

> Statement or Proceedings

The Federal Trade Commission issued its complaint against the 

above-named respondents on April 1 , 1959 , charging them with having 

violated the provisions or subsection (a) or Section 2 or the Clayton 

Act , as amended by the Robinson-Patman Act (15 U. S. C. , Sec. 13), by 

discriminating in price betweeen and among their customers in the 

> sale or "

bJackstrap " moJasses. After being duly served with said com-

plaint respondents appeared by counseJ and served their aus",er 678 FEDERAL TRADE CO).l nSSIOK DECISIONS   

> Initial Decision

65 F. T. 

in ,yhich they denied , in substance " the violations charged and alleged 

as afnnative defenses , that any granting of lower prices to cert.ain 

customers resulted from a good-faith meeting of competition or was 

in return for different services or functions performed by the 

customers. 

Hearings OIl the charges were held in abeyance on reqnc.'\t of com- 

> plaint. counsel

, pending the disposition of a companion proceeding 

against a cOlnpetitor of the corporate respondent. On motion of re 

spondents , a pre. hearing conference was convened in 'Vashington      

> ,on July 14 1960.

By agreement of counsel for the parties the      

> transcript of said confcrence was

made a part of the record of this 

proceeding. On motion of counsel supporting the complaint , made at 

the prchearing conference , Paragraph Four of the complaint was 

amended so as to alleged discrimination in price between and among 

so-calle, d fa,-ored customers , in addition to discrimination bet-ween 

and among favored and non- favored customers. I-Iearings were tenta-

tively scheduled to begin in November 1960 , but were delayed pending 

clisposhion of the companion case referred to above , other commit-

ments of counsel and , finally, the death of former senior counsel 

supporting the complaint. 

PurSU lllt to notice duly given , hearings for the reception of evi-

dence in support of and in opposition to the complaint were com-

menced on :May 28 , 1962 , in I-Iouston , Texas. At the outset of said 

hE',flrings respondents moved for a 15- clay continuance due to the fail-

ure. of counsel supporting thc eomplaint to furnish thcm -with a list   

> of witne

ses and of the documentary evidence to be offered , 15 days            

> prior to the hearing, as agreed to at the prehearing conference. It

appea.ring that seven of the eight ' I,itnesses proposed to be caJleel by  

> counsel

mpporting the complaint. were customers of the corporate 

respolHlcnt (the eighth being respondent Doyle), that complaint 

coun el had supplied respondents with names of five of such witnesses      

> at lea tIOUI' days prior to the l1e-

aring that the docmnent.ary evidence 

pl'opo!::ec1 to be offere(l consistec1 larg" ely of documents obtained from 

l'psponrlents ' files or data suhmitted by their counsel , t.hat respondents 

had clelryed their motion until /:he da,y of hearing at which time all 

arrangements for the hearings had been completed , and that. the JUl-

turf', of the issues and the eyide.nec to be presented ,yas such that there 

was f1 minimum possibility of snrpl'i r on the part. of res11onclents 

the undersigned denied the motion for a continunnce and ordcrecl the 

1 In ;ts original fonD, the complaint aJJeged that rrsTJOnurnts Iw. d gmnted diseol1Dts to 

('prtain " f:",orcd CI1 tomer-(1\Mribntol's " 1'bi('\1 were Dot granted to " their Don-f:"vOl'rrJ           

> distrHmtnl'-el1stomers .As amended , it alleg-erl that rCf'pondents had aiI'D dj ct"iminf!tr.rl
> In pd('e " between and ;JmODg' tbe aforesaid favored customer-

distributors by granting 

> higher discounts to some of them than arf' ::\":lnted to others

PACIFIC MOLASSES CO. ET AL. 679 

675 Jnitial Decision 

hearings to proceed. However , thisrl!1ing was made withont prejudice 

to the right of respondents to request the recall of witnesses for com-

pletion of cross-examination in the event of surprise , and to request 

a recess in the hea.rings at the dose of the case- in- chief in order to 

prepare for defense. HeRrings on the charge.s thereafter proceeded 

from May 28 to . June 1 , 1G62 , in Houston , Texas. 

At the close of the case-in-chief on:Nlay 29 , 1962 , respondents moved 

for a dismissal of the complaint based on an a11eged failure of proof 

which motion was denied by the undersigned. R.espondents were grant-

ed a recess of one day to permit them to subpoena certain witnesses in 

support of their defeme. . \fter the calling of witnesses on May 31 and 

June 1 , 1962 , respondents represented that they had been unable to 

secnTe all of the witnesses whom they had sought to subpoena during 

the brief time aUoted and requested (l, continuance ill order to complete 

the presentat.ion of their defense. Said motion was gra.nted by the 

undersigned and hearings "ere reeesserlllntil . Tuly 10 , 1962 : at which 

t.ime they were resumed in San Francisco , California , on request of 

respondents , and continued therein until July 16 , 1962 , for the recep-

tion of further evidence in opposition to the complaint. 

AU testimony taken ill this proceeding ,yas duly rec:ol'lecl and has 

been fied in the offce of the Commission. All pa.rt.ies were represented 

by counsel , pllrticipat. ed in t.he hearings , and were n, tforded full oppor-

tunity to be heard , to examine and cross-examine witnesses and to in-

troduce evidence , bearing on t.he issues. At the close or all the evidence 

and pursuant to leave granteel by the undersigned , proposed findings 

of fact , conclusions of law and an order , together with supporting 

bI'ief , 1YCre filed by complaint counsel and respondents on August 30 

1062 , and reply menlOranda were filed on Septmnber 10 UHJ2. 

Aft.er having reviewed tllE entire reeord in t.his proceeding, and t, 

proposed findings and conc1nsions 3 and the. supporting bl'jefs and 

Respondents contend that they were denied dne proct'!1S of law because of UJ(' examiner-   

> refusal to grant them a contimwJJC'e of 15 dfi S from tiJe date of tlJe initial hel\rlng. -\S

indicl\ted above, the examiner s denial of respondents ' motion reservcd to them the rig:ht 

to move to recall witnE'ssPs for further cross- examlnlltion. Respondents did not refjUest the 

J'f'call of any of the witnesses, with one eJ.ception. In the latter -instance , without Initially  

> dellonstrating surpri

e or inabilit ' tocross-pxamine the witnps;;. re J!oIJlents mOT"ed that 

cro s"examination be postponed. Said request was denier). HowenT, as indicatNl above,         

> respondents later received a continnance of 40 day;: in onler to interview

additional   

> witnesses and prepare for completion of

their defense. Respondents had ful1 opportlmlty    

> to subpoenft any of the witJJes es who had be

n called by" compJnint counsel but, with one 

exception , elected not to rIo so. TJlE record fails to estnb1ish that l'PSIJOIH1ents were in    

> finy way prejudiced, either in the cross-examination of witnes

es ai' in the prl' entl\tion    

> of their rJefense

, hecallse of the fllilure of complaint COIJDS!'J to furnish them with a list 

of witnesses and p:'hihito: 15 (Jays prior to tJJe initiallH'aring-,         

> 3 Proposed finding'S and conclusions lIot herein adopted, eithE'r in thE' form proposed
> or in SllhstflIce

, arc rejected as not supported by tJle record 01" as involving imml\tcrial 

matters. 680. FEDERAL TRADE CQ?I."\ISSION DECISIONS   

> Initial Decision 65 F.

memoranda , and based on his observation of the witnesses , the under-

signed mak s the following: 

> FIKDIXGS OF FACT

I dentity of Respondents 

1. Respondent , Pacific Molasses Company (sometimes referred to 

herein as Pacific), is a corporation organized , existing and doing busi-

ness under and by virtue of the laws of the Stat" of California , with its 

principal offce and pia"" of business located at 215 Market Street , San 

Francisco , California. Said respondent is a wholly owned subsidiary 

of United Molasses Comp,my Ltd. , of London , England. 

2. Respondent James M. Ferguson is president , respondent F. W. 

Earnhardt is a vice president and secretary-treasurer , and respondent 

Bascom Doyle is a vice president of the corporate respondent. The 

business address of respondents Ferguson and Earnllardt is the same     

> as that of the corporate respondent , and the address of respondent

Doyle is 3036 Chartres Street , New Orleans, Louisiana. Respondent 

Ferguson , as president of the corporate respondent , formulates , di-

rects and controls the policies , acts and practices of said respondent. 

The responsibilities of respondent Earnhardt as '" vice presidcnt and 

secretary- asurer relate principally to accolUlting financial and tax 

matters. Respondent Bascom Doyle is the corporate respondent' s vice 

president in charge of its Gulf Division mId , at the time of the events at 

issue , was branch manager of its New Orleans branch offce having 

supervision over sales in the Mississippi Valley area. 

Business of Pacific 

3. Respondent Pacific is principally engaged in the importation and 

purchase of molasses in bulk quantities , a.d in the distribution and sale 

throughout the "Cnited States of " offshore " and domestic molasses , in-

cluding blackstrap molasses. In the operation of its said business 

maintains a number of terminals at various locations throughout the 

United States where it stores molasses imported from abroad or pur-

chasml from domestic sour""s , and from which it sells and ships mo-    

> lasses to cnstomers located in a number of the states of

the United 

States. Its sales of molasses in 1955 amolmted to approximately 

$15 600 000. 

4. Blackstrap molasses is primarily a by-product of the production 

of raw sugar , but is also obtained from the production of refied sugar. 

Its principal uses are as an additive in making livestock feed (where 

it acts as a flavoring agent and source of energy), and as a raw ma-

> terial for the distillation of industrial alcohol. It is also used for fer-

PACIFIC MOLASSES CO. ET AL. 681 

675 Initial Decision 

mentation into yeast and vinegar , and for certain pharmaceutical 

purposes. 

5. Molasses as produced at " plantation or refinery contains some 

water , and its pecific gravity may therefore vary. If mollesses has too 

much water , the feed to which it is added wil tend to mold. For this 

reason certain standards have been set up in the industry to define the   

> water and solid

content of molasses as sold cOl1llnerciall;y. These stand-     

> ards are expressed In terms of the "

Brix " content of the molasses 

which is stated in degrees. Brix refers to the specific gravity of the 

molasses soJution and is a measure of the totaJ solid content in the bJend  

> of moJasses and water. The standard brix content of conm1ercialJy

soJd  

> bJackstrap molasses is

79. Price quotations for bJackstrap moJasses  

> are normalJy based on a

79. brix content. MoJasses containing lesser 

amounts of water and consequently more solids is referred to as havi 

a " heavier brix content" and , where desired by particular customers 

is ordinarily soJd at a higher price than standard molasses of 79. 

# brix. 6. Among the terminals operated by respondent Pacific are those at 

Honston , Texas , and N cw OrJeans , Louisiana, which are part of its 

Gulf Division and arc under the clirect supervision of respondent 

Bascom Doyle. The moJasses stored at these terminals is imported 

principalJy from the Caribbean area , including a number of the oJl- 

> shore islands and

fexico and to a lesser extent is purchased from 

plantations and sugar refineries in Louisiana. The offshore molasses-

is shipped to Pacific s terminaJs in ship cargoes , and that from Mexico 

is also shipped in rail tank cars. It is then resold , in lesser quantitiC:, to various users and distributors. 

7. The issues in this proceeding relate mainly to Pacific s pricing 

policies at its Houston , Texas terminal. Its customers at such terminal 

falJ into two principal categories: (a) users of bJackstrap molasses 

such as feed milJs and feed lot operators , and (b) distributors engaged           

> in the resaJe or redistribution of blackstrap molasses to the users

thereof. The charge of price discrimination involves only the distribu-

tor.customers of responclent Pacmc. Such customers genel'alJy pur-

chase bJackstrap molasses f. b. Pacific s Houston terminaJ , where they 

pick up the moJasses in their own trucks or that of a contract caITier 

and haul it to their own customers located in various States of the 

"Cnited States , including Texas , New Mexico , Oklahoma , Colorado 

ICansas , Nebraska , Jrissouri , and Arkansas. It is charged that respon-

dents have discriminated in price hy selling blackstrap molasses at 

discounts of%if to l/zif or more , per gaUon , to certain favored distribu-

tor-customers , and by granting higher discounts to certain of such 

customers than those granted to others. 

313-121--682 FEDERAL TRADE COM"lISSION DECISIONS   

> Initial Decision

65 F. 

Evidence Of PTice Di8c1'"imination  

> 8. Pacific

s prices to its d, istributor-customers in the sale of black- 

> stn1p molasses are based on its announced prices for molasses of

79.  

> brix content

, f. b. Houston. The price is announced to the trade and 

may change periodically in accordance with market conditions. Cus  

> tomeI'S are generally notified in writing of such price

changes. Prices 

arc announced on both a pel' gallon and a per ton basis , sales being 

made on the basis of 171 gallons per ton of molasse. A price differen-

tial of Vd a gallon is equivalent to 431 a ton; a differential of % 

gallo is equivalent to 850 a ton; and a 1 per ' gaBon difIerential is 

equivalent to $1.71 a ton. 

O. The evidence of the prices ehflrged by Pacific to its customer-      

> distributors involYes principally the year 1955

, and discloses that at    

> vaTions times during the year Pacinc charged some customers prices

beJow its quoted f. b. 1-Iouston priee. The departures from the an-

nonnced prices took three principal forms. One involved the granting 

of n fixed discount or price below the quoted Houston price. Such    

> discounts generally varied from 1j4 to \

per gallon below the IIous- 

> ton price

, but at times ran as high as 1f below the announced I-Iollston 

price. One customer consistently l'eeeived a. discount of between   

> ~~~
> and 1

from Januflry to October 1955 , while several other customers 

received intermittent discounts of between l/t to 112ft. The second form       

> of price deviation a-rose out of contracts for future delivery or

, as they 

'''ere referred to in the record 

, " 

forward booking " contracts , under 

,yhich various customers received a guaranteed ceiling price for de-

liveries made over a specified perioo. of time. UncleI' this arrangement 

the guanmtced ceiling price ,,;as periodically below Pacific s quoted 

price at the time of delivery, the amount of the differential generally   

> being bet ,,,een
> (j
> to 1

0 pel' gallon. A. third form of price deviation 

invoh-ed the granting of so-calJed " price protec.ion ' to c.ertain cus-

tomers who had prev iously made sales to their own customers on the 

basis of Pacific s lower quoted price prior toa price change. 

10. The purchases of yarious of Pacific 8 distriblltor customers , the 

prices paid by them , and t.he extent of the deviations from Pacific 

qlloted Houston prices during 1955 axe set forth in tabular form at the 

end of (his decision , as Table 1. As appears from Table 1 , the principal 

hendieiary of such price deviations 1\flS Fort \Vorth l\Jo1asses Com-

pany ( ometimes referred to herein as Fort "\Vorth). The price eon-

cessions received by Fort ,Yorth were based mainly on a letter-agrce-

ment between it and Paclfk , dated J RTIllRry 13 , 1 D55 which provided 

that in c.onsideriltion of Fort \Vorth s pnrchasing- an of its molasse 

reql1irt_ ment.s from Pacific for the. year lD55 (estimated at 30/40 000 

short tons), Pacific would supply it ,yith b1ackst.rap molasses " on the PACIFIC MOLASSES CO. ET AL. 683   

> G73 Initial Decision

basis of our preva iling New Orleans price in effect at the time of each 

delivery . I-li:s toric.ally, the New Orleans:priceis -lower than the Hous-  

> ton price. This dif!'erential is usually at least Ihi

a g-allon but , as ap-

pears from Table 1 , at times is as much as Ii per gallon (which is the 

equivalent of $1.71 a ton). On September 26 , 1955 , the arrangement   

> between Pacific and Fort VV

orth was modified and it was agreed that 

efl' ective that date , on sales made f. b. Pacific s I-Iouston terminal , the 

molasses " win be priced to you Rt per gallon below our prevailing 

I-Iouston price . This arra. ngement continued for abrief period until 

October 1 , 1 D55, following which Fort 'V orth ceased purchasing its 

blackstrap molasses from Pacific and bega. n buying from Pacific 

comp-etitor , Southwestern Sugar & iolasses Company. Forth 'V orth 

resumed purclla, ses from Pacific in 1956 , but the nature of the price 

arl'U1geme.nt does not appear from the record. 

11. As appe.arsfrom Table 1 , during the period from Jallla.ry 17 t.o 

Octobe.r 1 , In;,);'5 , the total all1011nt of the price concessions rceeived by 

Fort " Worth from Pacific was $24 487. 70. Except for half of the al1ow-

ances made on March 1 and from March 19- , 1955 (,,' hieh respon-

dents contend were granteel either as pric.e protection or pursuant to a 

forward cont.ract), substant.ially all of this amonnt was admittedly 

granted by Pacific. as disconnts from its regular 1-Iouston quoted price 

involdng eit.her the receipt by Fort 1Vorth of the be.nefit of Pacifi. 

lower New Orleans price or , at the end , a, flat 1/2 " reduction from the 

I-fouston price. 

"\Vhile , as indicated in Table 1 , some of the other customers did re-

ceive periodic price concessions , these concessions were granted for 

relat.I ely brief periods and were , "With a. few exceptions , not as largens 

hof:e received by Fort \VoIth. Thus 

> , :.

Uarco ChemicaJ Company (some-

times referred to herein as l\Ial'co) received total price c'0JCcssions of 

$7DL,)9 , of \yhich all but. 886. :n was received during the same period 

as those received by Fort 'Vorth. ' Of the total amount of the priee 

cOllce sions received by :Mnrco $54-6. 00 is accounted for by discount.s of 

, it .!allon 

> , ,,-

hieh \vel'e received dndng the peTiocl between ?\1arch 19 

and . Tuly 28 , 19;'55. The balance of the difi' ere, ntials received by :Marco 

consisted of price reductions resulting from forward-booking or pr1ce- 

> IH'

oteet.on aTl' ,lngmnents. 'Vhether such arrangements also reflect dis-

. According to respon(lf'nt ' eOJ1pntat;on raI1pearill!! in Tahle B of tbf'ir propo "r1 fine!. 

in,, \ the total anHnmt of the dbe,nmts receiv"d by Fort "' orth Wftl' $29. 1Sfl. (jS. not in-      

> eJud:ng ;cfHings clue to forward l:ontracts or price protection. T1)e total

amount of the 

di)'rl1unt. according to the cump1Jtations of complaint counsel is S24. :U6. 63. It is iwmllt,,-    

> rin) to tbf' conc111

jons rf'l1chl'd herrin which set of figures i ed since, on any b11Sis. it 

is aV!Jarl'nt that the total amount of the di counts wag substantial. 

"'1J)(' record contains price information beg;uning January L 19.'5. However. Table 1

rloe8 not J. I't1ect price information prior to Janunl' . 17. 19:;5, ;;inc\' tll:!! is the d,1te 

L)f the first purchnse by Fort Worth. The . S6. .'H sfU"ing- referred to ahove occnrred nfter  

> October 1, 1()5;J

, when purchases by Fort Worth had ('(' \,a. 684 FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION DECISIONS   

> Initial Decision

65 F. C..               

> criminatory pricing as contended by counsel supporting the complaint"
> or are nondiscriminatory as contended by respondents

, will be here-

after discussed. Despite the fact that Marco did receive price con-

cessions totaling almost $800 , the price concessions received by Fort 

W orih during a large part of the period at issue were even greater  

> ranging from

to 11 in excess of those received by Marco. Based 

on the quantity which it purchased between January 17 and October 1 

1955, Marco would have received an additional saving of $3 677. 09 if 

it had paid the same prices as Fort Worth. 

As indicated in Table 1 , C. & R Molasses Company (sometimes    

> referred to herein as C. &R), received total price reductions of $947.
> between January 17 and October 1

, 1955. Substantially all of this 

amount is accounted for by reductions resulting from forward-booking 

contracts , and did not involve the granting of discounts as such. Despite 

the savings realized by C. & R , Fort ' Worth had a price advantage of   

> between 1;:1 and 1121

during substantial portions of this period , except 

during the period from April 1 to May 2 , when C. & R had a price 

advantage of 1;:1 a gallon on 320 tons purchased by it. Based on the 

total amount of its purchases between January 17 and October 1 , 1955, 

C. & R would have received an additional $1 593. 35 in savings if it had' 

received the benefit of the discounts granted to Fort Worth.  

> Parris

lolasses & Feed Company (sometimes referred to herein as       

> Parris) is another distributor-customer which received

some price    

> concessions from Pacific. As indicated in Table 1

, the total amount of           

> the concessions rece.ived by Parris during the period at issue was

$943. 60. Approximately 400/0 of the savings realized by Parris was due 

to periodic discounts of 1;:1 per gallon , and the balance was the result of 

forward-booking contracts. Despite such savings by Parris , Fort 

Worth had a price advantage of between 1;:1 to 1121 per gallon during 

most of the period , exccpt between March 2 and April 15 when Parris 

had a price advantage of '/1 a gallon on 373 tons. Based on the quan- 

> tity which it purchased between

January 17 and October 1 , 1955 

Parris ' net price disadvantage compared to Fort ' Worth amounted to 

$484. , after making due allowance for substantial savings realized 

by Parris on forward-booking contracts. 

The only other distributor-customer to receive any price concessions 

during the period at issue was B. G. Thompson. Thompson received  

> a saving of $12.

30 based on a differential of 1/21 a gallon on the pur-

chase of 14 tons on March 1 , 1955 , which was granted as p,'ice protec- 

> tion against Pacific

s price change occurring Febmary 28 , 1955. all      

> the basis of the total

amount which Thompson purchased between PACIFIC MOLASSES CO. ET AL. 685    

> '675 Initial Decision
> January 17 and October 1

, 1955 , his net price disadvantage vis-a-vis  

> Fort Worth was $1

611. 65. 

As indicated in Table 1 , three other distributor-customers received      

> no price concessions from Pacific during the period at

issue. W. L. 

Hunt' s price disadvantage vis-a-vis Fort Worth was between lhi and  

> Ii

per gallon , and amounted to $681.66 on the total amount which he     

> purchased between July 6 and October 1

, 1955. J. C. Barnes had" 

similar price disadvantage in comparison with Fort Worth , the total 

amount thereof being $624. 53 on his purchases between January 17  

> and October 1

, 1955. Yoakum Grain & Feed Company likewise had a     

> disadvantage of hetween l/zi to Ii

a gallon compared to the prices paid    

> by Fort ,Vorth

, which amounted to $121.06 from January 15 to Sep-

> temher 12

, 1955 , on Yoakum s total purchases. 

In addition to the distributor-customers as to which there is evi-

dence of prices charged and quantities sold , as reflected in Table 1 

the record also reveals thott there were a number of other distrihutors 

to which Pacific sold molasses out of its Houston terminaL' Among 

these was Houston Molasses Company, which purchased 243 tons 

of molasses from Pacific in 1955 on none of which , according to 

credited t.estimony of its principal owner , did it receive any discount.   

> In addition

, Pacific sold to atleast eight other distrihutors during 1955 

in amounts v",rying from 347 tons to over 4 000 tons. So far",s appears 

from the record , none of these distributors received "' discount. 

Differences Resulting from Forward-Booking Contracts 

12. Complaint counsel makes no distinction between price differences 

which took the form of outright discounts from Pacifie s quoted price 

b. its Houston terminal , and those which resulted from forward-

booking contracts or price- protection arrangements. "Yhile respond-     

> ents apparently concede that some of the straight

discounts \vere 

discriminatory (albeit chiming they were l10nsubstantial in amount 

and without the required statutory effect), they contend that the other 

forms of price concession which were received by various of Pacific 

customers were made available to substantially all of them on a nondis-

criminatory basis. 

13. As already indicated , Pacific did periodicaJJy enter into so- called 

forward-booking contracts with various of its dist.ributor-customers. 

Such contracts provided for the delivery of specified quantities of               

> "Table 1is based on ex 1to 8, which were ,prepared by respondents for counsel sup-

porting the complaint aDd purport to show in detail the prices charged , the quantities   

> sold and the (lates of sales to a number of Padfic s customers. In addition , the record

contains evidence of total S1les made by Pacifc to aU its dlstributor-Cllstomers during 

1955 (RX 71 and 20). 686 FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION DECISIOKS   

> Initial Decision

65 F.   

> blackstrap molasses

'j over some future time period , which might vary 

from 30 to 90 days. Thepricillg arrangement usual1y provided for 

a specified ceilng price and , in the alternative , for the seller s regular 

quoted price on the date of shipment (referred to as the s.p. s. price), 

if lower th",n the specified ceiling price. Under such", contract the cus-

tomer could receive a price ",dvantage if Pacific s quoted price at the 

time of delivery h",d risen above the ceiling price specified in the con-

tract. Such contracts , in effect , ga ve the customer the guarantee that he 

wonld not h",ve to p"'y any more than the ceiling price specified in the 

contract even though Pacific s quoted price had risen at the time of 

delivery, while at the sa, me time giving the customer the opportunity            

> of receiving a lower price in the event Pacific squoted price had de-
> clined at the time of delivery. The contracts usu",IIy reserved to Pacific

the option of cancellng as to " any unshipped portion of this contract 

not withdrawn aecording to schedule 

14. Pacific s practice of entering into fOl'warcl~ booking contracts 

generally involved periods of contemplMed oversupply of black-     

> strap molasses whell Pacific was , in eHect

, an " anxious seller " eager          

> to enter into contracts with customers calling for substantial future

deliveries. It was its nsual practice , on such occasions , to contact its 

distributor-customers , either by telegram or telephone , advising them 

or its otTer to enter into forward-booking contracts. Thus , ror e. xample 

in January 19f,, ) it made an offer , which was subject to acceptance 

between J anual'Y 5 and February 27 , to deliver molasses through the     

> month or iVlarcJ: :tt a ceiling price or hlt peT gaJlon , r.

b. I-Iouston        

> or its price on the date of delivery if Jower. Its quoted price ,f.a.

Houston , between January 5 and February 27 \\- as 10 per gal1nn  

> (the ceiling price in the offer), but rose to 111

between February 28 

and March 18 , and to 111121 between March 19 and 1ay 2. Thus 

> , '"

eustomer who had accepted Pacific s offer would have received a price   

> advantage of "121

on deliveries between March 1 am! March 18 , and 11 

on deliveries betwcen March 19 and March 31. 

15. During ID55 Paeifie made, five general offerings to Cl1StOffeTS  

> to enter into forw'

ard-booking contracts. So rar as a.ppears from the 

record , the offers were identical as to the period each offer was in ef-

fect , the period when ddivery was to be made under it , and thc pricillg  

> forml1h1

(i. the specified celljng price or , in the altE'rn tive , the s. pJl. 

prjce if Jower). Likewise , so far as appears from t.he record , jt. "las 

the usual practice of Pac ific in maki1lg off rs fe-r fo ';n\'Td- l)ook. 

contracts to make them to all or subst, antia1ly ",11 of its distributor-

7 The QuantIties we:re usnally specified !n the contracts In app:roximate amounts, such 

as: " Forty (40) ' rank 'l' ruckloads-Approx. 20 Tons RaelJ " (eX 29). PACIFIC MOLASSES CO. ET AL. 687 

675 lni tial Decision 

customers. ' To the extent that it did so , and to the extent that it en-

t.ered. into contracts which conformed to the terms of its offers , it. is 

the opinion an d finding of the examiner that Pacific s practice in this 

regard was nondiscriminatory. However , the record does reveal that 

in at least two instance , involving forward-booking contracts with 

Parris Molasses , the contracts provided for an additional I,I discount 

from the ceiling and s. s. price which had been general1y offered. 

To the extent that the price provisions of the contracts deviated from 

the price offered to other customers , the contracts were obviously 

discriminatory. 

16. The contention of complaint counsel that Pacific entered into 

discriminatory forward-booking contracts is not based on contracts 

entered into pursuant to general offerings of the type discussed aboye 

but rather on the admitted fact that Pacific has periodical1y accepted 

bids from individual customersto enter into forward contracts at times 

when it had no general invitation ontstanding. The rccord discloses 

that Pacific does not accept such oilers as a matter of routine , but 

makt'-s its decision based on the current market situation and the 

reliability of the customer making the offer whether the customer 

has nsual1y fulfil1ed his contracts. In accepting such offers Pacific 

does not necessarily accept all the terms offered , but may negotiate 

different terms , such as price , quantity or time of delivery. 

The only example in the record of such a forward contract is one 

involving Parris Molasses , with whic.h Pacific entered into a contra.ct 

on July 27 , 1955 , for 20 tank truckloads of molasses , of approximately 

20 tons each , to be delivered between July 27 and September 30 , 1955 

at 12 per gallon. Unlike the usual forward-booking contracts preyi-

ously diseussed , the price was firm and the contract did not provide for  

> 8 The record dIscloses that telegrams containing offers to enter into forward

bookjng  

> contracts were not sent to all of Pac1fie

s distributor-customers (RX 72A-E). How('vp.r 

respondent Doyle testified that " fwJe would caJl a lot of the customers by telephone 

(R. 895). WhlIe Doyle at first suggested that the offers were Bmited to those customers 

to whom he thought he " had an opportunity to sell" (R. 895), he later claimed that he 

Rent teleg-rams or telephoned all dIstrlhutor-cu tomers concerning offers to enter intO  

> forward contracts (R. 898

, 899). Respondellt Ferguson testified that it was Pacific s polley 

to make forward offerings to " customer. or an" - potential customer , anyone that Is a 

molasses user. .. .. .. (AJa anxious scllel' s we attempt to publicize as much as pos ible 

tIle fact that we are interested in making forward contracts " (R. 9(0). While the matter     

> is not free from doubt, the examiner concludes. in the absence of substllntial counter-
> vailing evIdence , tbat the offers were

made g!'nerally ftvailable to Pacific s custom!'r::. 

P On January 17, 1955 , Pacific entered into a forward contl'llct with Parris calling for   

> a price of 10%if

per gallon or ". s. if lower. on sbipnlCnts between JaHuary 17 nnd   

> March 31

1955 (CX 29). This price conformed to the price in Pacific s general offering 

(RX (5) and was Pacific s current price at the time of the olIer (RX (4). However. on     

> February 15 ,1955

, the price provision of the contract was modifed to read,: " lOJh cents 

per gallon less J4 cent per gallon or seller s price date of shipment whichever lower less  

> 'i cent per gallon

" (RX (0). This J44 reduction was subseqnentl"' embodied in a later     

> forward contract callng for

deliveries between :March 22 to June 30 , 1955, which was   

> extended to July 31 , 1955 CRX

A). 688 FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION DECISIONS   

> Initial Decision 65 F.

payment of the seller s price on day of delivery if lower. At the time 

the contract was entered into , Pacific s quoted price was the samc as that 

provided for in the contract and it did not change during the period 

> of delivery so that

, in actuality, Parris received no price advantage. 

The record fails to establish that Pacific has entered into any sub-

stantial mUllber of such individually negotiated forward contracts or 

that it has favored any particular customer or group of customers in 

entering into such arrangements. 

Complaint counsel also cites the requirements contract of J aJlUary 13 

1955 , between Pacific and Fort ' W orth , as another cxample of a

discriminatory forward-booking contract. This contract , in the opin-

ion of the examiner , is not a forward-booking contract in the sense of 

a contract in which the buyer receives the benefit of a fixed ceiling price 

over f1 given ruture period. The price provided for in the contract  

> ith Fort 1V orth varied in accordance with changes in the

ew Or.  

> leans price. To the extent that the New Orleans price was always 1121

or more below the Houston price , Fort ' W orth received the equivalent 

of a discount from the Houston price , a matter which has been hereto-

fore fully discussed. The legality of such discOlmt must stand or fan on 

its own bottom , separate and apart from any fon-mrd-booking aspect. 

The record does disclose that Pacific made a separate forward-

booking arrangement with Fort Worth on March 4 1955 , guaranteeing 

it a price of 10'11 per gallon or Pacific s New Orleans price if lower 

on shipments made during the month of :1.arch. Since the same offer 

\Ias made to Pacific s New Orleans customers generally the contract 

is not discriminatory as a forward-booking contract. However , to the 

extent that it gave Fort ' W orth the benefit of the lower :New Orleans 

prices , which were not made available to Pacific s other I-Iol1ston CllS-

tomers , it involved a discrimination in price of the same type as that 

involved in the basic contract of January 13 , 1955 , between Pacific    

> and Fort Worth.
> Price PToteation

17. Another form of price concession given by Pacific involves the      

> periodic granting of price protection to individual

distriburtor-

customers. The instances thereof appearing in the record occ.urred dur-

ing periods when Pacific had announced a genel'al increase in its  

> q1loted price

, f.o. b. Houston. Such increases were sometimes announced  

> oy telegram

, effective immediately. ' When this occurred there might 

be some customers who had already committed themselves to resell 

molasses to one of their own customers at a price which was based on 

Pa.cific s previous price. Such customers wou1d advise Pacific of their 

predicament , and ask it to enable them to fill the outstanding order on 

the basis of its previous price. If , upon investigation , Pacific was satis-PACIFIC MOLASSES CO. ET AL. 689 

675 Initial Decision 

Hed as to the bona Hdes of the customer s c1aim , it would give him the                

> beneHt of its former price for abief period of afew days in order to

HI! existing commitments. The record fails to establish that Pacific 

favored any particular customer or group of customers in the granting    

> of periodic price protection under the circumstances described aboye.

Di.wrimination in Sale of High-Brio; Molasses 

18. Although not specifical1y al1eged in the complaint. , counsel sup-

> porting the complaint contends that respondents discriminated in

favor of Fort Worth and several other customers by sel1ing them 

molasses of high-brix cont.ent (ranging from 85. 4' to 89. 2' brix). Since 

such molasses has more solids and less water than standard 79. 5' brix 

the customer , in effect , is able to save approximately 10% in transpor-

tation costs by not paying freight on the additional water contained      

> in standard brix. The customer can add the necessary

wat.er after t.he 

molasses has been received , so as to bring the solution dmvn to 70. 

brix and then reseU it to its own customer , thereby receiving the bene-    

> tl of an approximately 10% saving in transportat.ion

cost.s. 

19. The record fails to establish that Pacific engaged in any dis-   

> crimination in price

, as such , in the sale of high- brix molasses. The 

price at which such molasses is sold to dist.ribut.or-customers by Pacific 

is based on an established formula , in which the basic price of 79. 

brix molasses is adjusted upwards in accorda11ce with the additional 

brix content of the molasses being sold. To the extent that any customer 

may have received a lower basic price (in terms of the price of stand-    

> ard brix) this would

, of course , be reflect"d in t.he price of t.he high            

> brix molasses ,but in the absence of any discrimination in the basic

price , there is no additional price advantage obhLined from the sale 

of high-brix molasses as such. 

20. . While it is true that a customer purchasing high-brix molasses   

> does achieve a saving in transportation costs

, the record fails to estab-

lish that Pacific has discriminated among the customer. ': to whom it 

sold high-brix molasses. Not every customer can use high-hrix mola ses 

since it requires certain storage facilities and other special equipment 

> to add the water

, so as to convert high-bdx molasses to 79. brix 

after it has been received by the customer. l\1any distributors do not 

have the equipment necessary for this operation and have no interest 

in purchasing it. The record is Jacking in substantial evidence that 

> Pacific failed to offer high-

brix molasses t.o auy c.ustomer who was 

equipped to use it or that it refused to sell such molasses to any Cl1S-

tomer who ,vished to buy it. 

Oompetition Among Distrib"tol'- O"8tomeT8 

21. The complaint charges that the competitive effects of respond-

ents ' discriminations extend to both the line of commerce in which 690 FEDERAL TRADE COlVMISSIO DECISIONS   

> Initial Decision

65 F. 

respondents are engaged and that in which their distributor-customers 

are engaged. IIowever , at the preheal'ing conference complaint COUll-

se.1 indicated that they were restricting their claims to the line of 

commerce of thedistributor customel's , or to the so-ca1led " secondary 

liDe of commerce. The proposed findings submitted by complaint coun-

sel claim an adverse competitive effect only in the secondary line of 

commerce. The question which is , therefore , pl'e ented is as to the 

extent to which competition exists betweE'll and among Pacific s dis-

tributor-customers. Since the complaint , as amended , charges that  

> respondents discriminated in price by granting discounts to some dis-

tributors and not to others and by granting higher discountsto some 

favored customers than to others , the matter of the existence of com-

petition among distributors involves not only a determination of 

whether competition exists between favored and nonfavored distribn-

tors but also whether it exists between a.nd among faTored distdbutoI's    

> receiving higher discounts than other fayorec1

distributors. 

> 22. As previously not-ed

, the evidence of alleged price discrimination 

among Pacific s distributor-customers invoh" es customers purchasing 

molasses from its Houston terminal and reselling such molasses to 

cllstomers 10eated in Texas and in some of the surrounding states. The 

distributor-customers concerning "hich evidence ,yas offered , pur-

> porting to show the extent of the discriminations in price and of com-

petition with other distributors , include Fort \V orih J\Iola ses , Marco 

Chemical , C. & R. Iolasses , Parris :;Uolasses , B. G. Thompson , "'V. L. 

Iunt , J. C. Barnes , Yoakum Grain , and IIonstoll J. lobsses. These c1is-

tribl1tors are an located in the East-Texas area. Fort \Vo1'th , :Marco 

Parris , and C. & R. have their headquarters in Fori.. 'tVorth. Houston 

l\iolasses and BaTnes are located in I-Iouston. Thompson has his place  

> of business in

Iadisonville , and Hunt has his in Georgetown , both 

communities being located bebveen Fort \Vorth and Houston. Yoakum 

Grain is located in Yoakum         

> , "
> which is south of Fort VV orth and east

of Houston.  

> 23. :Fort \Yorth

Iolasses , the most favored customer pricewise , sells 

and deli vers in most of Texas cast of Abilene , and in Oklahoma , Kan-

sas , Arkansas and :l\issouri. According to the credited testimony of 

its principal owner , it \raB in competition in 1955 with :Marco Chemi-

cal , Parris Mo1asses and C. & R. Molassl' s. Marco sens in sllbstantial1y        

> the same states or areas as Fort ,y orth J\foIasses , except that it does
> not sell in

fjssollri and , in addition , sells in areas of Colorado 

Xebraska and Xew Mexico where Fort ' Worth does not sell. Competi-

tion between C. & R. and Fort Worth existed mainly in Texas. C. & R. 

also sold in Colorado where Fort 'Vorth did not sell , but where Marco 

did. Parris sold both in Texas and Kansas in competition with Fort PACIFIC MOLASSES CO. ET AL. 691 

075 Initial .Decision 

W orth , C. & R. , and Marco. The credible testimony or other distribu-

tor-customers , in addition to Iarco , Parris and C. &. R. , establishl's    

> that they also competed with Fort VV

orth in 1955. Houston Molases 

Thompson , Yoakum and Hunt competed with Fort ' Worth ?folasses       

> in various parts of the East-

Texas area , while Barnes competed not. 

only in East Texas but in Kansas , Missouri and Arkansas. The record 

also estahlishes that some of the nanfavoTed customers competed with 

()thers of the favored cutomers , in addition to competing with Fort 

IV Drth . Thus , Hunt , Thompson and Barnes sold in competition with 

Ia.n;o. while IIouston l\folasses sold in competit.ion with Parris. 

24. The complaint alleges , and respondents admit in their answer  

> that Pacific "

sells its products to t". o or more distributors who were 

at all times mentioned in the complaint and now are in sllbsta, ntial 

competition with each other in the l'esf11e of molasses. " However 

respondents IlOV.. contend that " only in the East Texas area was there 

lny significant competition bet.ween Fort ,Vorth and other secondary  

> distributors (and thatJ there is no showing- that such

competition was 

intensive. " 10 Contrary to the position which respondents now urge 

despite the admission in their answer , the record does establish that 

c(1mpetition between many of Pacific s distributors was significant. 

snbstantial and , indeed , intcnsiye (assuming arguendo that a showing 

of " intensive " competition is necessary). 

Respondents argument concerning the insubstantiality of competi-

tion is based , in part , on the fact that sorne of the di: 'ibutors did not 

resell to the same customers as Fort ,Yorth , or that some of the. 

trended to concent.rate their sales efforts in cli tIercnt portions of the  

> tprritory than Fort V\T

orth. In the. opinion of the examiner the fact 

that FGrt ,Yorth and some of the other distributors did not , at any 

particular moment , happen to be se. l1ing to the same customers , or that 

portions of their business were concentrated in somewhat different  

> f', eas does not negate the existence of substantial competition. :Most of

the distributors were ready, willing and able to sell to as many cus-

turners as possible ' within the same nreas and , despite some differences  

> in areas of c011centrat.on

many of the areas in which thr.y soJd were 

located within the same general trade territories. 

o Respondents contend that Houston Molas"es cannot be considered Ii competitor of Fort 

Worth lind other secondary distributors beause it imported most of the molasses which it  

> CJJd. However , to the extent that Houf'ton bought molasses from other importers, such
> as Pacific , and resold it to ultimate users in competition with secondary

distributors. it  

> ocC'upied a dual position, and

was in competition with the secondary distributors. In fact 

Pacific Hsclf was regarded as a competitor by some of its own distributors , since it old 

to ultimate users in competition with them. Several of the distributors also refcrrect to 

Houston as being- among their competitor  

> 10 Proposed Findings, page 63.

692 FEDERAL TRADE CO:\ ISSION DECISIOKS   

> Initial Decision

65 F. 'l. 

Respondents also cite the fact that there were only about 34 dis-    

> tributors serving some 3

000 feed mills and feed lots located in Texas 

and the seven nearby states , as raising " the inference that competition 

could not have been intensive. " n In the opinion of the examiner no 

inference as to the level of intcnsity of competition in an industry can 

be drawn merely on the basis of the proportion of sel1ers to buyers in 

the industry. Additional infoTlnation , such as the geographic distribu-

tion of buyers and sellers , and the relative size and demnnd of the 

bnyers , would be necessary before an informed judgment could be 

made that competition was not intense.           

> Contrary to the position which is now being urged by re3pol1dents

in April 1953 respondent Doyle acknowledged to respondem Fel'gl1son 

that " (wJe * * * find ourselves operating in an extremely competi-

tive market. " 12 If anything, competition in the industry had bec:ome 

even more intense in 1955 than it was in 1953. ' While it is 'true thllt Doyle 

was referring to competition between Pacific and certain distributors 

,,,ho were receiving discounts from Pacific s competitor , Soutlnv8st.ern 

Sugar & l\folasses , it is cIear that his statement is also applicable to 

competition between djstributors since the latter compete with the 

primary importers , such as Pacific and SOlltlrn-estern , to the extent 

t.hat both groups sell to users of molasses. 

25. Based on the facts discussed above and from the reGord as a 

whole , it is c01lCludecl and found that there is substantial corn petition 

bet. wPA:1 and among many of Pacific s distributor~eustomers in the 

resale of blaekstrap molasses purchased from it. Sneh competition 

exists both between customers who received favorable price treat-

ment from Pacific and those who were not so favored and between 

and among customers who received differing degree:: of price 

favoritism. 

Competitvoe Effect 

26. As has previously been found , Pacific granted discounts to 

certain of its distributor-customers , while se11ng to others at its quoted 

Houston price , and granted to certain distributor-customers higher 

discounts than it granted to others among the favored distributor-

customers. The variations in price among its customers , both 

favored and nonfavored , ranged from "41 to %0 and 11. The com-        

> plaint charges that because of the highly competitive

natl1l'e of the                 

> molasses business a discount of as little as 1/10 or 11:d readily deter-
> mines the Joss or retention of resale customers "by re

pondents ' CllS-

tomeI's , and that the effcet of respondents ' price discriminations may  

> 11 Id. at page 26.
> 12 RX 21-

PACIFIC MOLASSES CO. ET AL. 693 

435 Initial Decision 

be substantially to lessen , injure , destroy or prevent competition 

between and among respondents : distribut.or-customersY 

7. While not denying, in the answer fied by them , the importance       

> of such discounts in the retention of customers

, respondents deny, in 

both their answer and their proposed findings , that any adverse com-

petitive eilect may be anticipated from the discounts which Pacific 

granted. TIle question to be cleterulined at this point , therefore , is 

whether price differentials of the order of magnitude indicated fall 

within the proscription of the statute , insofar as having the requisite           

> competitive effect. In order to resolve this question ,it is necessary

to consider whether the differentials are substantial in relation to 

prices and margins , and whether , as alleged in the complaint , they    

> readily determine the loss or retention of customers. To a considera-

tion of the::e matters the examiner no,y turns.   

> (a). Pricing Stl1wtU1'e and Profit ilargins

28. The price at which distributors sell molasses is determined 

basically by the price they pay for the molasses and the cost of deliver-

ing the molasses to the customer s place of business. l\fany of Pacific 

distributor-customers charge their customers a basic price based on 

their cost f. b. Honston , 1'Jus freight to point of destination. Some 

charge a flat price which does not break out the distributor s cost and 

the freight charges separately, but even this pricc is cssentially com-

puted on the basis of the Houston price plus freight." To the extent  

> that distributors use the cost-

plus-freight method in bi11ng their cus-

tomPTs , the.y base their cost on Pacific s price to them f. b. IIouston. 

In the case of those distributors who received a disconnt or other 

> price differential from Pacif-ic

, most passed this on t.o the customer  

> in t.he form of a 10\Ter basic price

, but some pocketed the d)fferential. 

The distT butoT s profit is generally made on the :freight charges , ex- 

> cept to the extent that EOlTe distributors do not pass on to the

eustomer 

the benefit of a lower price received from Pacific. The freight eharges 

are fairly uniform , being based on the pnbJished tarifI's of the Railroad 

Commission of TCXflS , which fixes the shipping rates for molasses 

in terms or tl1e length of the haul. 

29. To the extent t.hflt a c1iEtribntor s profit. comes out of his freight 

charges , the amount of the profit would , of eourse , depend on his 

cost of hauling the moJas5es t.o his customer s place of business. The 

> 13 -

-\5 previojHly inllicRtec1, the complaint a1so alleges injury in the primary Jiue of com-

mer"e but, ill aCC(lrl1ancf' winJ tIJe statements JJar1e b!' ('eJIllpJalnt C'ounseJ at the prehearing    

> (Jnfe enc€, tb! Claim ha been r1J'0ppeiJ.

H Amoug the rlisn-ibl\tDl' S m:ing tlJe latter llctlJol1 is Marro Chemienl. While testif 'ing  

> that his cOJlpnny ('hinged

it Iht price, rather than cost plus freig-lJt, ::larc(\ s president 

staterl that " tlJe cl1stOJ1er sits dO 11 flnd mentally caiculates this is 51) mudl over the        

> Hou ton price, you are too li!:' h or too Jow " (Ii: 50D).

694 FEDER.AL TRADE cO:\l:rrSSION DECISIOXS  

> lnitial DeC'isiol1

65 F, 

record contains conside.rablE' evidence as to the eost- per-miJe of hauJing 

molasses. Such costs varied from a low of 1()1j2 (exclusi I,-e of admin-

istrative costs and depreciation) to a high of 2i5- per mile. Since 

such costs were. Ln many insta.nees not related to any gross ret11rn 

per mile , it is 1 :IJ:' , possible to det.ermine the 11et reJurn of a numbeT 

thedistribntors. Howe\T , in the ease of t"o of the distributOl'F , fig-

ures of the gross return per mile do t1ppP;1l' in tIle reem'd , and Jt. is 

possible to make a reasonable estimate of net return. 

The most precise breakdown of costs anduct return is that inyoJv-

ing Alamo Feed :MilJs , a distributor selling in the East-Texas area. 

Alamo s figures , which were. introduced into 8\Tidence by l'eSpOndeIJts 

reveal that its costs (excll1sin , aT certain administrative costs) were 

23. ; per mile and that jt.s an rage return per mile from the f' ale    

> of ll0Jasses "as 2;.iG3f: leaving a net return of )c per 11110.

6 Based   

> on an average t.rjp of 270

miles from I-IoHston to Fort \Vort.h the 

net. return ern an an ragc trud:Joi1d of 17 tOl1.' would he $5. 5:1 ol'. ;;3 

a ton , whic.h is less t.han ;i(' a gallon. \nother set of figures in the  

> record is that or C. &, R.

folasses , which charged 25 a rnnning rnile 

above the cost of the mo1nsses : and \, hose cost of hfn 1ing Vi- as f;;:i   

> mated at 19Aif.

This "ould mean a net return of ;"). 6(' per mile, ",J) r:h 

iigure is pI"obabJy high since the estimated east of HJAIt was ed on 

all IGI of C. &: E. s trucks , only three of 1vhich hauled molass8E (;i'J(1 

on "I,hich costs \,ere somc dwt higher than on other types of tnJc1-s. 

In any eyent , based on an aycrage 270- mile trip from lIousto::l to 

Fort 'Yorth and a truekloacl of 17 tons , C. & R. s net return "lTouid be 

81;"). 1:2 of a ton , whieh is little more than 1!2f a gallon. 

gO. In addition to the evidenee of costs and return per milc dis-

cnssed abo,- , the record also conta-jns eyidence of nct profits Cl a 

per-grdlon basis. The president of 1Iarco Chemical called as a lvit-

ness by respondents , estimated his companis net profit from the saJe 

of molasses at 111:d per gallon. I-Iowever larco also ha, uls tallow 

cottonseed oils a.nd other liquids as a backha.ul in its trucks , and the 

estimated profit of 11!2 per gallon OIl molasses takes into account 

the saving in cost of having another product to backhau1. To the i?X. 

te, nt that a distributor docs not have a haekhanl business and br IJg'3 

his trucks back empty, llis net return would be lower. The testimony 

of other distributors indicates that the net profit on a gaBon of mo-     

> lasses is nearer to 1j2

or even less.   

> 1C, .\iallj() jJ1IJ'Ch'1

,-d onl \' 8'1 tUll;; fn'll l' aci1il' ill H\ );:, lnlt )j;(r1 pllrclJ;j f'!1 aimoq J 000  

> t()ll

ill, 19:14 ami 0\"('1" (, ;"OO tons in 195.                   

> '" In their proposM. finuin,!s ,respondents (at pRg-e 24) refer to AJf\mo sprofit a:2. 0::
> pl'l"

aljOD. However, it is cJpflr from the l'xJlibit (RX (0) and the tt' rilllOlIy (R. 'i42' 1tat   

> the return is on a per mile , and not OD a Del"

!lllon , ba i.". PACIFIC \IOLASSES CO. ET AL. 695 

675 Inital Decbiol1  

> (b).

Impo,tance of DiscQunts 

31. \Vhateyel" may be the precise margin of profit of distributors 

of molasses purchasing from Pac.jfic s IIouston terminal , the distribu-

tors called by both sides in this procee(Ling were almost unanim011s 

in their testimony as to the importance of discounts of 1;4 or /3f 

per gallon , in their abilit.y t.o operate at a profit and to retain or 

obtain customers. Thns , the president of AJamo Feed , called as a wit-

ness by respondent:: , testified that a discount of l/ if a gaJlon v,   

> very important : '::
> ,(bJecftuse thf(

t. represents in a small margin 

approxima.tely all that is made 011' of 1101aS3C:3 17 According to ):Iarco 

president , also calleel as responoents . 1\ itlles:3. the j' eceipt of a discount   

> of 1J2f

a gallon had enabled him to sen to cn:3tomer to "\yhom he could 

not other1\"ise sell , and he had had to Jose certain cllstomers " becan 

people were selling molasses 

.:. . 

'. so choa p "\C fe1t. we (' ould net. 

afiard to handle iC. The representatiye of Fort. ,Yorth .rola "e3 

the most favored customer and likc"\yise a ,,- itness for respundents 

left no douut as to the importallcE of 11 Ihf discount to his compnIl 

testifying that " it meant guite a bit of mone:v in terms of the YOhtlT,e 

he was handling. ,Yhen asked "\yhether ;; that is ra.ther important"" 

he stated: (; \.Jld a. wee bit more. yes 1 Beth IY. L. TIun!: and Honst .111 

JIolasses regarded 1;:_ a gallon as important , and the 1fltter s repre-

sent.at.ive iEdieated that he had had to cut his price by that amount  

> in order not to lose

ustomer:;. 

32. Tile record e tablishes that (1. discount of \ or l /Sif a gaJ1ol1 is 

not only important in the retention 01' obtaining of cnstomers , Ol,t 

even to a distributor s survival in business. Thus , it appears that t"\\o 

of the distributors which recei\' ed no disc-aunts , J. C. Barnes and 

c. & H.. :\ialas , went out of the molasses hl1 iness jn the latter part. 

of 195i-. Barnes tcstiiicd that he couldn t compete ,yith other distribu-

tors because he " couldn t meet the price :' and " just couJdn t stay jJl 

business any longer 2o C. & R.. loJasscs decided to sell its moJasses 

trucks becanse the cOlnpany was Josing money on its molasses 

operations. 

33. Respondent.s contend that there were approxirnate. ly 1fi other 

distributors serving the same gt'llend area who went out of busjl1e  

> (luring the same perjod as Barnes flnd C. ..

and that since 1 01'   

> 17 H . 754--

755. ' rhe SHmc witness answered in the atfrIl!1tin" when a ker1: " YO\) are jrd': 

R half It cent of it Is the tNilS of your net pl' ofit?" (It 055). 

> R. 510, 527.

1" R. 478. When asked whether be !Jad told Pacific Ii dl1:('(111nt (of J was import8nt to   

> hjm at the time he discussed the matter at

doing bU8iness with them , the witness stated:         

> I don trecall tellng them that. hecaU8e I

supposed they knew it was 1mportant" (R. 480i. 

a R. 134 , 139. 

21 R. 279-280. 696 FEDERAL TRADE COM.'-ISSION DECISIONS   

> Initial Decision 65 Ji'

them had received discounts (mainly from Pacific s competitior), 

Pacific s price reductions to some of its own distributors could not             

> have been afactor in the departure from business of some of

its non-

favored customers. Aside from the fact that the evidence relied upon 

by respondents to the effect that 12 of the departing distributors had 

> received discOlmts is unreliable hearsay, the bare fact that such dis-

tributors had received some discount is of litte probative value iu the 

absence of reliable evidence as to the extent and duration of the dis-

cOlmts received by them in comparison with those who survived. 

34. Respondents also point out that there are a number of other 

factors , in addition to the price of molasses , which may affect the           

> profitabilty of adistributor soperations or his ability to survive.

Among those referred to are , (a. ) whether the distributor has a back-

haul business of other commodities to help defray the cost of operat-      

> ing his trucks ,(b) whether the distributor uses a 17-ton or a 20-

ton 

truck (the use of the latter , according to respondents , resulting in a     

> saving of Ii per gallon on a trip of 916 miles from

Houston to Okla-

homa City, which is considerably longer than the distancc travelled 

by many distributors), and (c) whether the distributor uses a gasoline-

powered , or diesel- powered , truck (the of the latter , according 

to respondents , resulting in a saving of pel' gal10n on the same 

916-mile trip).          

> The fact that anonfavored customer could cut the

losses ,' esulting 

from his lack of price parity with a favored customer by building up             

> abackhaul business or by buying a20-ton truck or adiesel-

pov, cred 

one is , in the opinion of the exam. iner , irrelevant on its face. If these    

> facts have any relevance

, it is that they attest to the narrowness of       

> the margins in the molasses business

, which causes distributors to buy 

the more expensive rigs required for backhauls , or to buy laTgcl' and 

cost1ier trucks of other types , in order to defra,y their trnck opeTflting 

costs and try to save sums as minute as . 71 on a gallon of molRsses 

hauled. It is also significant that a, mong the distributors who stressed 

the importance of a discount of '4 or %i a ga1lon in the operation of  

> their business

, a number had a backhaul business or operated 20- ton 

trucks. " Despite these supposed advantages , they fouud it diffeu1t to 

compete with the favored customer or customers. 

35. Respondents ' present position , that a '4 or 1J2i- ga1lon dis-

count is not important in the compet.tive picture , ha.rdly squares with 

the statement made by respondent Doy Je to respondent Ferguson in 

April 1953 (in the letter previously referred to) that as a result of  

> 2: Among' thof!e equipped for a backhaul business were Marco, Thompson, Barnes, Yoakum,

Parris , aJJd Alamo. At least Parris and Marco bad 20-ton trucks , the Jatter even having   

> some ot' 25-ton capacity,

PACIFIC MOLASSES CO. ET AL. 697   

> 675 Initial ))edsion

Southwestern s granting of a discount to some of its distributors 

th8se firms are able to compete ",ith us " and " (wJe therefore find 

ourselves operating in an extremely competitive market" 23 If a pri-

mlll''y importer finds it diffcult to c.ompete with secondary distributors     

> becl11lse of adiscount of 1

a gallon from a basic price the same as its  

> own. it seems

self~evic1ent that secondary distributors buying from 

Paeific and not l'eceiying such a discount would be at a disadvantage 

in comp8ting ' with other distributors who received a discount. 

36. Of final significanee in determining the import.ance of discounts 

of 1;, or 1j2 a gaJlon is Pacifie s o\', n price schedule during the period     

> at issue. Its prices

, f. b. IIouston , betyrecn January 1 and October 1 

1955 , remained within the narrow range of 10 ,41 to 12 per gallon 

and those f. b. Kew Orleans rnnged from 0 to 111Ad per gallon. 

Such ehanges as occurred were general1y in multiples of :1 or 1j2 per 

gaEon , upwards or dowlnyanls. It seems evident in the light of this 

price st.rueture that sums as smaE as 1/'1( . to 1/ a guJlon were significant. 

uHl important in the industry.       

> 37. Based on the facts discussed above

, and from the record as a 

hole , it is concluded and found that discounts of 114 and are sub-

3L,:nti:ll in relation to p:::ices and margins , nnd are import.ant to dis-

t ributors selling blackstrap molasses from the Houston terminal area 

anel t.hat the effect of Pacific s granting discounts of this order of 

magnitude to certain of its distributor-customers and denying them 

to others , and of grantillg di: COll1ts of this order of magnitude to some 

> c1ist,

ributor-customers over and above discounts granted to others may  

> be substantially to lessen

, injure , destroy or prevent competjtion be-

t\veen and among Pacific s distributor- customers purchflsing blaek-

strap molasses out of its Houst.on termina1. 

Defense of llfeeting 001npetition 

8S. H.espondents contend that in gra.nting discounts to Fort. 'Vorth 

:;IoLtsses during most of 1955 , and to a few other distributor-customers 

t. periodic intervals , respondent Pacific did so in good faith in order 

to meet the equally Jaw prices of its principal competitor , South-

western Sugar & J\10lasses Company. They contend thfLt respondent 

Doyle had received reports during 1953 that South\vestern was grant~      

> ing adiscow1t of J/2

a gallon to virtually e, very trucker in the area 

that, this situation continued in IDG4 and \vas aggravated by Soutll-

,\yestern s extending the discounts t.o certain large users and by absorb- 

> ing

the 3% transportation tax , and that Pacific " begin to lose signifi-

cant, amounts of business :' and was finally compelled to reduce its prices 

to some of its eustomers , including Fort \Vorth l\:Iolasse : in order to 

meet South'\' cstern s competition.     

> J RX 21-. (See )Jng!' (;02 aml fn. 12 , S1fpn:1

31:- 12.1- - 70--698 FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION DECISro:\TS  

> Initial lkci:;ion 6;') J

;38. Reduced to its legal essentinls Pacifie s ddense is that , (a) so far      

> it ,yas awnre South"\YCstel'll sdiscount. of 1

(' a g tllon \YilS being 

granted to a11 of its distributor- cnstomcrs and \.-as t.herefore a lawful 

pl'icc\ (b) Pacific acted defensiyeJy JJY granting discounts to some of 

its existing cnstomers, nnc1 not to (lcquil' e ne'y cnstomel': : and (c) it 

me, rely met HontlJ\"'estern s eqllaJJy lOll' price ,1lc1. in some. installCPS 

e\-en granted Jesscr discounts ,yhere it ",.-as possible ,to retain a customer 

> 011 t,

hat b,lSis. It is the opinioll ,1111 fillding of tlw examiner tlHlt the 

record does not su tajn l'l' 'I)oJ1clents ' position .3ince it is by no mcans  

> c1e:ll' t1wt. P,lcilic. (a)

hnd 1'el1son to hehne j( \Yn I1cetilJg a lllld'OI'JH 

c1i::cOl!llt to (!istriblltor :)y Sontl1\H' :.1P1Tl "lv!len it elpcted to grHnt ()ne  

> (li"itributors a di's(,ollnt

(11) used (li (,0U1J1S solely on (l defensiyp h 

in orde1' lo l'.:hlin existing cllstomers and not to obta1l nC"lv customers  

> H1Hl (c) in all instances

lilnitec1 the ,lmOUllt. of its discounts to those 

gTIIJJ e.c1 by SOllth"l\"Pstern. To n COJ1 leration of the :hlctS "I.-hich form 

the basis of these finding-s the examiner 110"V tlllIE. 

JO. Pacific entered the Houston market in late 19-H) ,yith the. pu1'- 

> c1Jase of the terminal

amI storage facilities of Halston-Pul'inn Com-        

> P,lllY. Its sole. compel ;tOl' Ht that time

,'-HS 'south,vestel'll Sugar &: 

:Jlolasses Company, ,vhi('11 also operated a termin, d at IIoustoll. ).. ddi-

tiol1a1 competito1's entered the Texa .; market. in ID:33 and ID.14 yhen 

SUll(hnl .Jl01nsses COllpHny and :. U01asses Trading Company opened 

terminals at. Beamnont. al1(l Corpus Cl1risti l'C2pcctively. 

41. From late 1040 to the end of 1f.:")2 Pacific occupied ,1 relatiyely   

> minor position ill

the market . e1'- cc1 by tennimds located in the East-     

> Tex,ls area. HO"lypye1' , in late 103:?

respondent Doyle "lYf nt to work for 

Pacific as sales m8nagel' in charge of its Gulf Diyision \.-hieh included  

> llw IIo115ton

tel'minf\1. 1)oy1(' undertook nn ng' gressin: campaign to 

increase P,lcific s sales ont 01 its l-Ionst.on terminal. fIis eJI'ol'b \ypre 

lla. rked ,yith consic1enLble .snccess so that. by . Jnly H);") 3 , he ,yas ahle 

to report t.o respondent Ferguson tlwt Pacific ,.-as '; getting apPl'oxi-

mntely onp- third of the molasses lmsiness in Texnt: j ,Yhile complain-

ing to Fergnson tl1.t South\yestern ,yns cnHing prices by granting 

some distributors and brokers a. discollllt of 1J2c : a gallon Doyle : ncyer-

thelpss , ndyisec1 Fergnson that: " The outlook for Pacific. under these         

> conditions is Co prett.y ,.-ell hold onl' O"lYn ,and at the senne time C011-

t.iJllle. to pick up a small number of eUSlOmCl'S from time to tinw. --s 

bte as 1\-: oyernber 2 , 1033. DoyJe allyised Fergnson that Pacific lwc1 

acqnired fOllr ne\\- cnstomers \.-ho had preyion ly been buying from 

Sonth"lcstern.  

> -i:?

p to abont the middle of HL"i-- p;U'!Jlc engaged ma.inly in direct 

"iel1ing' to 1l1timate users of nlOlasSe:: , sneh as feed mills and feecllOls. 

> L HX 12-
> -\.

:" HX 2: PACIFIC MOLASSES CO. ET AL. 699 

675 Initial Dpci h)ll       

> In addition to its terminal in HOllSron.it also had Hsales

oilee in IIo1. 

ton ,1ncl employed sen ral salesmen to contact customers and potelltia1 

custOlnel'S. J-Im'- e\" el' , Pacific aJso soJd to a fe,y distrilmtol'- cnsiomers 

t.he principal one being AJamo Proc1ncts CompallY located ill ;:;11J 

\.ntonio and sel'ying an aren in southeast-Texas ,\"hicb Pac.ific -felt 

could be better selTell by n distributor l'ather than on a direct bn 

p to flbollt. the mic1cl1e of J :);-! PJciilc sold to both ultimate 1F(' l':'   

> and distributors on the basis of its

HOl1. 'JtOll quoted price , ,yitholl( :UI)' 

discount. J-Im.-en:l' , 111 the spring of H\)-J it began to gi\-e its U8e1'-

cnstomcrs to ,\"hom it ,Y::S sening on 11 c1eliyerccl b11si \ n:(111ctions from 

its freight charges e(Iui'ialent to ;/ (: n gallon. It n1so granted AbJl10     

> n. disc.ount of 1/1

: a g:dloll from the f.o. l). -Houston price. Dnl'inp. the 

summer of 10, ')-4 Pacinc. clo ed it . 1-f011Slon nlcs oihce :llJ1 began to    

> concentrate on ellillg to c1;s(l'ilmtol's

l'ilt.hel' than to ultimate users. 

The principal c1i,'3trilmtor- cnstomer acquired IJY I) acific. ,yas FOit 

,VOlth :\lolasses , ,yhich bec:l11c it!" CllS1'nller il1 , Janu:\ry If!:');') , PaC'ific 

snIes to distribnrors iJHTeased Jrom fJpproxill:1teJy :.OJ)OC) tons in JD;3;j   

> to 2D.

000 in H);\! :111(1 :,)4 OOO in 10tJ. ). ::Icst of the illC'eaSe in 19:35 \\flS 

nccOlmtE'(l fen' by 5:11p:3 to Fort ,'T mth. \,.hich :1J101lntecl1u appl'oxi-

lnatcJy 22 7(50 tOllS. 

4:-3. The record fails to SllSt;lill l'csp(111c1eni: ' position th:lt in grant-

ing CliSe0I111ts to some (listrilmtor-cllstolleJ's Pacific nCled ill the goO(l 

fflith beJief that. its competitol' SOllth'H stel'n ,yas gra1lting discounts       

> to all of its dist.l'ibut-or-customer:3. T1J8 rE'col'l cloes disclose that

ill 

the middle. of HI;');i PacifiC hlld l'eceiyed information to the cfl' eci that 

some of SOl1tlnn stern s lRrgcr distrilmtol'- cll8'- omer including par-

ticllJa1'1y Fort \Vorth j\Jolnsses illHl Gl';lYPS ::lolasses Company (an-

other clistl'ibnt- ol' !oC'ateclill ForI' 1\T mth). \'"el't' l'c('civjng c1 c1i COl!lI,   

> of l/Z(.

a gal1onY' It ,d80 appears that ill Febrnary 1D:3-: Pacific. had 

reason to helie\' e this di.scOll11t ,yas being- extended to ollJe1' ;; ecOJ1(1nl':v 

aistributol"s T c1n(1 that by j- he elld of ::fnrcll 19;'), ) it uspeeted tl1fli, 

Sonth\yestcrn \yas :' gi,'ing all independent tl'llc.kel's a di2c011lt of 112(: 

per f2,l llon s IImyen:,l' , by )1;13" HLj-f Pacific. hflcl recein?(11lJformatioIJ 

iJlc1icntlng th lt SOlltlnn 2tel'n lwcl changed to a (pwntity c1ir:count-

system , uncleI' \yhich the customer l'f'ceiyedno discount if he ordered  

> less than Jour Joncls

:l \'" eek Lmt l'f'reiyecl a C1iSC0l11t of 111 

> (:

a g' rt1Jon on  

> orders of foul' 108.c1.00

: and H discount of Jh0 a galJoll on Ii\-e loads or 

Jnore. \Yhen advised of t. his system by respondent Doyle : respondent 

Fl'l'g'nscn l'epJieel on ( J llne 2. ID;)J: . :r) 

, r x 21- , RS 22-

"' l:X 24 

- nx :2;)-

HX 30. 

"onx :32, 700 FEDERAL TRADE CO::I:YIISSION DE, CISIOXS   

> Initial Decision

65 F. 

This system of discount, in our opinion , is actually in violation of the Robinson-

Patman Act unless Kaplan ISouthwcsternJ can show that a saving is made to   

> warrant the discount,

ndwe doubt it that is possible. (Emphasis supplied. 

"'''hile there is some reference in the correspondence between Doy Ie 

and Ferguson during July and A l1gust 1954 , to Southwcstern s giving  

> :d

it gallon discount " to independent truckers and to larger ac-

counts ,:n it is by no means clear that they understood South' western 

had abandoned the quantity discount system and was then giving a 

discount to all distributor-customers. 

H. ' With the exception of A1amo Products , Pacific did not grant 

HUY discounts to its clistriulltor-CllstOluers until January 1955 , whe, 

it JlJtde its contract \.-ith Fort. ,Yorth :JIohtsses to sell to it at the New 

Orleans price. Despite the granting of disconnts by Southwestern 

Pacific was admittedly able to maintain its market position " (uJntil    

> latC', 1054-" 32

,Vhile respondents contend that Pacific s market position 

t11el'eafter deteriorated , thus impelling it to grant discounts to Fort 

'V o1'r.h H nd to others , the examiner is not satisfed from the re, cord that 

this is so. There is no substa, ntia.l evidence in the record of a, ny dete-  

> rioration of Pacific smarket position in late 1954. Pacific introduced

no fignres of it.s over- all sales during the period, fl1d the record dis- 

> closes that its sales to distributors increased by over

\OOO tons from  

> 1D53

to J 954. On February 9 , 1955 , at a time when the arrangement with          

> Fort ,Yorth had hardly begun to dlOW any results

, respondent Doyle 

advised his company's president that he was of '; the opinion that we 

haY8 a nice volwne at Houston 

45. From a carefu1 reading of the correspondence between Doy1e 

and Ferguson and from their testimony as a whole , the exa, m1nel' is    

> convinced that the granting of discounts to Fort '

Worth and a few 

othe.r distributors was not due to any significant decline in Pacific 

sales , but to the conviction that its interests \\-ould be better served 

by concentrating more on sales to distributors and less on direct sales 

to users. Undoubted1y the fact that Southwestern had been granting            

> discounts to some of the major distributors had played apart in

this        

> decision since it had placed these distributors in abetter position to

compete with Pacific in sales to ultimate users. Howevel' SoutJnvest-

ern had also purportedly cut its prices to some of its user-customers. 

This combination of factors had caused Pacific to cut its frejght 

cllfrge to some of its larger eustomers and presnmably resulted jn 

some nalTO\\- illg of its profit margins. Up to that time it had been 

reluctant to give any discounts to distributors because it did not wish 

to see their grmnh encourage.d as an intermediary between the large  

> '1 RX 34-

, RX 35. 

'He pond('uts ' PrOjJ03u1 Fiudiugs , page 46  

> goRX 3i-

PACIFIC J.'lOLASSES CO. ET AL. 701 

675 Initial Decisioll 

importers and the users of molasses. "' By the end of 1954 and early 

1955 Pacifc had come to the realization that the truck distributo," 

were there to stay and that it would serve its intere, sts to do business 

with them. 

46. In entering into business relations with Fort Worth Molasses 

Pacific ' did not do so as a defensive measure to keep from losing a

cust.omer , but to gain a customer a.nd enhance its market position. 

There is no record basis for the contention , advanced in respondent's 

findings (page 48), that " at no time did Pacific gain new customers  

> as a result of selective price reductious

. It is true that Fort 'Vorth 

had purchased some molasses from one of Pacific s terminals on the 

> vVest Coast in the early 1940'

s. However , Fort vVorth had never been 

a customer of Pacific s Houston terminal from tbe time operations 

there YVcrB commenced in late 1949 until Ja.nuary 1955. In fact , Fort 

Worth was actually a competitor of Pacific s in selling to molasses 

users. Pacific recognized Fort 1Vorth as being Southwestern s cns-

tomer , and began to make overtures to Fort \V orth in the latter part of 

1954 to do business with it. These efforts culminated in the Janllary 

1955 cantraet. 

47. In oft'eing Fort 'Vorth a discount not only did Pacific not do 

so for the purpose 01 retaining a customer , but it, gave Fort Tforth a 

better price arrangement than the latter then had with Southwestern   

> in order to induce Fort vYorCh to

change suppJiers. As the testimony of 

Fort Tr orth: s president indicates , he told respondent Ferguson in   

> anuary 190;5

Olat "if he could se11 me on the same basis that I was     

> IJuying it Chom SOllthwesternl I ,,"ould be glad

to buy some from 

him At that time Fort ,Vorth , to Ferguson s knowledge , was get- 

> ting a discount of

a gallon from Southwestern, Ferguson conceded 

in his testimony that " it was obvious to us that a half cent was the 

figure we ,youJd have to meet" ,3 Despite this , Ferguson offered Fort 

IV orth not a half cent. cljscount from the Houston price , but the lower 

N CTi' OrJeans price , whid1 was never less than \ a gaBon belo't 

Iouston an(1 for substantjal periods " was 1 and more below HOll:;ron. 

The reason for this more favorable arrangement was that Ferguson 

wanted to do more than merely have Fort ,'T arth buy ;; some of its 

moJasses from Pacjfic , as the tesbmony of the Fort \Vorth represent.a-

tive indicates. Ferguson sought to offer t.he Fort "\Vorth official a better 

3. On March 30 , 1954 , Doyle had IH!visf'1 Ferguson (RX 25-TI) : " YOUI' COIDmen in re-     

> gards to taking oDC,--balf cent off the freight rate is certainly

for better than givi11(j I):ic- halj 

cent to these tn/ckers r/1d encouraging their lj. owth and rlc' uelapment'. (Empbasis 

suppJied. 

35 As Doyle advised l'crguson on February 9, 1955 , referring to the Fort Worth market: 

The independent truckers lH\n almost all tbjs business aud aI!' becoming more im;),'rtunt    

> factors in the TesRS market aJl the time "(RX 37-

A).  

> 3G R. 469.
> 37 R. 972.

:j During the time the contract between Pacific and Fort Worth was in effect the maxlmum 

differential was 1 . However , later in the year it inCl'ea8ed to 1 and finally to 2 702 FEDERAL RADE Co:nnSSION DECISIONS 

lniti:11 Decision G5 F. 

arrangement than he -was then getting from Sout.hwestern in order t.o 

tie Fort "T o1'th to a '; long- tenn contrllcf '0 Ferguson accordingly 

point.ecl ont to him ':: ':: ':: the adnlltage of the - OrJeans price 

-:8. Respondents contend th lt. in granting Fort \Yul'h t.he benefit of 

the XCIY Ol'c'ims price PaciIie ',I" as re, aJly giving the latter the eqniva-

lent of a J, a gallon discount ilJce the " l1orl1fJF c1ifi' cl'cntial lJchfeen 

he rTonston ancl XC\y Orleans terminals \vas 1:2C H gal1cJl. Contrary   

> to J'esponc1ellh

contention , 7' a gallon was t.bcmhu mwn diiIerential     

> IJPt\yeen the l\YO cities

, and lJOth PilCiflc and Fort. ,Vol'th \Yere fully   

> n"\vftl'e, th,lt

the Jatter stood to obtain e\" e11 greater djscounts by paying 

tho :.c"\1' OrJ(:!111S price. The quid pro qllO Jor this more fayorable aT- 

> l'llgemE'nt, W,lS Fort IYol'th'

,3 agl'ee1l1l'nt to sign a long- term require-

ments COllT,tr' t. It 1lay be noted tilat in Septemlwr 1030 \dWll Pacific 

snpplies lWCallll short and it: \y(\ ilppal'ent- 1y !lOt. as r1nxions to cont.nne     

> the Fort. Trorth alTflllgrment il3 it formerly lwcl

been. it had no t.rouble 

in finding :lppl'Oprjate, Jangu,l!:' r to ;;w('ificalJ i' fIX l' ort IYol'th. s r1is-

connt ;' at per gal10n helmy our pl'c,,' ailing Houston pl'ice  

> :1D. It. is

ignifi('ant that in granting F' ort IYOl'tll a disCOlllt , which 

nt timet! \\",lS ()- el' a gallon. P,)(. jfic- did so despih' indications in 

the J'ecord that it \yas able to mainLlin its po ition hy keeping iff; price   

> ithin V;c

of Sonthwestl'rn 3. ' rhus. on :\JaJ'ch 80 , 10. '1-1 , in adyising; 

Fpl'g' ut:on th:1.1: .south,,\ estern W!lS granting ;; inlh pl' JHlellt trucker. s a 

(li collnt or cent per galloll : Doyle sL1ted: '; IYe hayc found that 'yc 

can eflectiyely seJ1 again t Sonth\\- esterll Hnd their l'l'l1ckpl's if '''e Hrc 

no more than ) per gallon highel' The, rea ()n for this \\ asthat 

PHeific had cOll"incecl some clistrihutors and 11SC1'S that its Inolasscs 

\",\ 

of a lr'.re nniform brix ('on tent than South\yestc' , and that 

the loading sC1Ticps at its terminal "'-ere better. 1n line with this , Pacific  

> ha(l limited its discounts to

\.lalIO l roclnct:s in H):'-J to 1 lqc-; a g:lIlon 

a.nd those to jlarco and Parris in 1033 to 1 ;:J( 1 a ga110n. SignificantJy: 

these "'- ere all existing cllstOllJerS of Paeific and the granting of dis-

counts to theIl '''lIS in line with Pa('ific s prof(' sed policy of offering 

cli c()mts to meet SOllthlYestel'l S competition '; ollly in the instances 

of onl' eSUlb1ished ('ustomers Yet in the ease of .Fort IVorth , Pacific 

not, only exceeded its normal VI r1iscol1nt , 1mt, gaye its lle'y customer 

> il .

'3omc\\hat bette, r proposition than it '\"as get.ting from Sonth\yestern. 

The reason for this obyiously "as Fort IVorth\:; sllbstfllti:d volume 

and the fact tlllt. it \yas ,yilIing to sig-n a JOllg- tenn l'equirements 

contract.  

> '!s Ferl!1I

on tf' tifieu (R. 973): " lYe '\ert' adHlitterJl ' tryillg: to rr1Jnge a. IOllS'- term 

rnntract with Fort ' Worth l\Io1asses Cr)Ilp 1TY. i111(1 we werf' tl' \'ng to p!'e ent Fort 'Yortll 

with the tJt t ptl ihle offer:nc- that In' c' ould 11:11;(" 

973. 

l RX 66- 

> !2RX 2G-

RX 24. PACIFIC :\IOLASSES CO. ET AL. 703 

675 Initiol Deci i()Jl 

\o, Based on the i'act"s c1isenssec1 aboyc , and from the l:('cord a

,,,hol('. : it, is concluded and found t.hat l'e:-pollclent P,lcific. has failed to     

> C':cuhlj.sh tJlat the, grillt.ing of

discounts by it ,yas limited to cil'cum- 

> tim(,(\3

yrhcre it 'ya ; acting in good fait)l to meet the C(IUally 10,\ pl'il' Pi: 

f ;l eompetitor. On the contrary, the rccm.d establi :hes that at J('n   

> in thE' case of Fort ,Vorth

lohl::ses respondent nctcd in other than it 

lldl' lls1\'e Tnanncr and exceeded the discounts being granteel by its   

> pri:lCipal cOlnpctitoI'

, South',yestern Sugnl' 8: :JIolns::ps Company. 

Fu. ncti()ual Dl .\C()II'iit.  

> 0.

\.s a TUIther defense , respondents contend that t.he faTored  

> eUi3t01lers of Paciiic

performed " distinctly different services or func-

tions ' than did nonfavol'ed customers , and tl1e.refore " had inherentJy 

higher costs " tlmn 1l0nfayored customers not performing such func  

> tions 01' .services. It

points out in this connection that both Fort 'Y orth 

)Iolasses aml 2\larco ChemicaJ had stoJ'age facilities which enabled        

> them to store large quantities of molasses

, thereby relieving Pacific 

Jin1ite(1 storage capac.ity in I-louston. Also eitec1 is thc fact that these 

cOlllJimies employed salesmen thus , presumably, reJicying Pacific of 

tIlE, lipces:;ity for putting additional sa les effort in-the field. 

;')1. The legal suIlciency of t:llese fads a.s a defense to the granting  

> of (ij",cOlmt-

s ,,-i11 be hel'rnftel' chs(,lls.sec1. J--O\H' , it may be noted at 

rhi lJOiut that the gI'autiJl ( of the discounts to t.H SC customers ,,-as 

no ' .YelY relateel to , 01' conditioned on , any speci"ll flllletlons or services   

> rendered by thern. C. & n. l\lolasses and l-Iollslon

rolasses both had 

3tol'nge j' ncilities , anc1 yet, no special (li 

> ('.

ollnt \\a:; granted to thell, 

::1a.1(,o receivec1 (t. discount Jor 0111y a brief perio(l altllOugh it. was   

> cnp:-:ble of

performing, (lnd did pel'fOl'1L the same storage of molasses   

> cllll'Ing t.he entire time that jt ,

bought from IJ acific. It is clear from the 

(,()lltract bet.ween Pacific and Fort. 'Vorth that the latter received the      

> benefit of a special price not beCa113e of any storage or sales services
> 10 be rendered for Pacifjc

, but becanse it a.greed to buy its total reqnire-

mt-nts of nlObsses from Pacific.. J t is concluded and found that the 

l''   

> (:'
> Ol'cl fajls Lo

estabJish that tIle discounts grant.ed by Pacific to ccrtain  

> of its distributor-

customers were granteel in contemplat.ion of any 

spe. cial services or fllnctionsperIormed by tJW111 01' because of any 

special cost incuned by them on behalf of Pacific. 

CUX(,Ll-.sIOX 

> I. The c.omplaint. alJeges

: the answer admits , and the reeorcl estab-

Ij, she. , that respondent Pacific :Jlolasses Company is ( l1gagec1 in the 

importation , distribution and sale of " offshore " molasses throughout 

the T3nited States. and that jts sales are substantial. The record a.lso 

establishes that it imports and sells substanbal quant.ities of blackst.rap 

molasses from its Houston , Texas terminal to customers ,rho are 10-704 FEDERAL TRADE CO 1MISSIOX DECISIONS   

> Initial Decision

65 F. 

c"'ted in various other States of the L:nited States or who transpurt such 

molasses to various other States of the United States. It is , accordingly, 

conc1uded in accordance with the foregoing and with the admissions 

of respondents , that respundent Pacific Molasses Company, both gen-

erally and at its Houston , Tex. terminal , is engaged in cmnmerce 

within the meaning of ,the Clayton Act. 

2. The record estabEshes that the rcspondentPacific :\Iolasses Com-

pany, at its Houston , Tex. terminal , has charged different prices to 

different purchasers of blackstrap molasses of Eke grade and quality, 

and that one or more of such purchases involved sales or shipments 

across State Enes. It is , accordingly, concluded that respondent Pacifc 

)Iolasses Company, in the course of commerce , has discriminated in 

price hetween different pUlchasers of blackstrap molasses of like grade 

and quality, and that one or morc . of the purchases involved in such 

discriminations was in conllnerce.    

> Respondents concede that under FTC v.

AnheuseT-Busch 363 U. 

536 , a difference in price ordinarily constitutes a discrimination in 

price. However , they seek to add a gloss to the holding of the L1 nheuse,.- 

> Busch

case vie that the differences in price must involve " reasonably 

contemporaneous " transactions in order to constitute a discrimination. 

esponrlents cite , in tllis connection , the holding in Atalantcr Y. FTC 

258 F. 2d 365 (2 Cir. , 1958), that " the time intenal is a determining 

factor " in determining whether the granting of the advertising al-

lov'lances there involved "Was discriminatory, in violation of Section      

> 2(d) of the Clayton Act.

Respondents contend that in the instant case 

(mJany of the sales at a discount were not contemporaneous with 

sales at the published Houston price and hence , cannot he considered 

> discriminatory. "

In the opinion of the examiner there is no requirement that sales at  

> different prices D1Ust be "

contemporaneous " in order to constitute a 

discrimination. 80 long as the sales aTe not so remote in time as to sug-

gest that the prices were determined by different market conditions the  

> differences in

price must be considered discriminatory. Depending on 

the industry, sales separated by days , weeks or even months may be 

considered discriminatory, unless it is established by the party arguing         

> to the contrary that such differences in price were the result of different

market conditions. In the inst.ant case t.he record establishes that 

respondent Pacific )10lasses Company s quoted IIouston price re-

mained stable for periods as long as several weeks and even several 

months. 44 An customers buying from it during any such period \vere 

entitled to equality of price treatment , and ,those not receiving s11ch 

treatment were being discriminated against , within the meaning of              

> '- The price from larch 19 to lay 2,1955 , remained stationftq at 11 % a gallon.
> From August 2to November 19 , 1955, the pr;c' f' was unchanged at 12

PACIFIC MOLASSES CO. ET AL. 705   

> 67G Initial Decision

the Robinson-Patman Act. In any event , while respondents contend 

that " many " of the sales at different prices were not " contemporane-

ous , they apparently concede that many were. The record contains 

numerous instances of sales at different 'prices being made on the same               

> day or within amatter of afew days of one another. Certainly even
> under respondents ' definition

, assuming arguendo there is such a 

requirement in the law , such sales would be deemed to be " reasonably 

contemporaneous 

:3. In most instances the differences in price between and among 

customers were the result of the granting of a specmc discount or price 

below respondent Pacific :\olasses Company s quoted price at its 

Houston terminal. Such differences in .price were clearly discrimina-

tDlY. However , as heretofore found , in some instances such differences 

resulted from forward-booking contracts involvig future deliveries, 

or from the granting of price protection for brief periods following a   

> price change.
> Insofar as forward-booking contracts are concerned

, the reord 

establishes the respondent Pacific lYlo1asses Company periodically 

ma.kes general offerings to its customers to e, nter into such contracts 

on specified terms. So far as appears from the record such offers are     

> extended to all customers. On occasion

, the corporate respondent ac-

cepts bids from individual customers to entBr in contracts for future 

deliveries , other than pursuant to general offerings made by it. The 

rc"ord fails to establish that said respondent has tended to favor any 

particular customer or group of customers in periodically accepting 

such bids. It also appears from the record that said respondent has         

> granted price protection to individual customers , so as to

permit them   

> to fill a

contract for the resale of molasses based on said respondent' 

lower price .prior to a price change. The record fails to establish that 

the corporate respondent has tended to favor any particular customer 

or group of customers in the granting of price protection. 

Counsel supporting complaint makes no contention as to the i11egaliLy 

or forward-booking contracts entered into by the cOl'lporate respondent 

pursuant to general offers made to customers. Counsel does , however 

question the legality of forward contracts made pursuant to a bid    

> reived from an

individual customer , apparently contending if such 

an offer is accepted the respondent must offer other cllstomers an 

opportunity to ent.er into similar contracts. The examiner notes : in this 

connection , that in the Corn P1"OdUCt8 Refining Co. case , 34 F. C. 850 

877, the Commission specifically exempted from its order prohibiting   

> discriminations in price

, sales "for future delivery -which do not in-

volve such discriminations in price at the time of aetualsale. : It is also 706 FEDERAL TRADE CO:Yl:-lISSlON DECISIONS   

> Initial Decision

63 F.T. 

noted that the draftsman of the bill whic.h became the Hobinson-

Patma.n Act statec1, " (oJn the CJue.stiol1 of futures , that the bjJ1 

would not prohibit a ::wJe to '; a purchaser of futures 

:': , 

> : * in )Jtty: at

one .price , for delivery in Decernber , when the prjce of the market in 

December for spot. purchases ,yonlc1 be different:: and, further , that  

> the bill does not

ireet tIle- relntionship be.hn nfllture and spot:' pUl'-

chase, s (becauseJ (tJhey are different. things and fl1' based on market 

conditions at different , times or relat.ing to different times. It-would         

> require the equal treatment. of future buyers of the same gooch:

: bu:dng 

at the same time and in the samc future. 

> ') .

So far as flppeal'S from the record in the instant case , c1istribuloj' 

purchasing pursuant to general ofIers to sellon a. fOl'Yal'c1 ba 

ceivecl equal tl''a.tment , except fOl'one distributor ",-hose contract "Y:1S  

> amended to add n

cliScOlmt. In the, case of fOl'warc1eontraets Jjl)t 

llHule .pursuant to gellPnJ oli' erings , it is the, opinion of the exami1wr that there is no disC"irninat.ion ill\' olved merely lJecause the se.llrx h 

not oftered similar c.ontl'acts to its otb r customer , in tl1e absence of 

substantiitl p"iclencl' ("drich cloes not. appear in this record) that tl:r 

sel m' lJfS tended to fnyOl' a Pfll'ticuJar cnstomer or gronp of (', ustomers   

> in Hcc.

epting such offers 01' has turned c10\"'1l simiJar bids from otl1f'l' 

> CU:

St01TtC'1S mach: at or about the samC time as the one accepted. 

Cornplajnt conn el has fl(1vallCccl no separatE contention with fespect  

> to tho cOl'porntc respondent.'

spractice of granting price protecti.Oll but 

prcsnmably conten(l as in the case, of fonyarcl contracts , that 811('h 

arrangements are (liscriminatory nn1e tacle with ,111 (listri' bulors. The. 

examiner finds himself in disagn' C'ment ",-ith this contention. So fal' as 

appears fromt.he record , price, Pl' otection is ftl' Hlltec1 only "..here tbe 

cl1stomer lUts dcmonstrnted t.hat. he hGcl alre cly committed hinEl'lf lO  

> resell the lIlClTh81\c1i;;,

e at a ImYE'T price bflsec1 on t.Ile corporate rl' r)(n(t-

ent"s price )')rio1' to a. price ehange. To reqnire said respondent to per~   

> Llit ct

1er (' llstomel':- , "dlO h ld m,1(le no sncll c0l1J.mitn1ellts , lO purcll:   

> ilL Jornwl' price

"'-Dull1 be to giyc sneh customers the equi,'alent of    

> it price fI(b

ant 

\g. 

e. In lln ' eH'nt the corpol'aj' e, rcspondent's pmc11ce 

of granting price. protection to inc11\'idnal CtE(OHWrS c1oe , not- inyohE' 

amonJlt , of such :l.hsLl!ltialit . a to Jw n' 111)- i'i ::n11iicr\nt eJTcct (\)1 

comp titin rpbtimis. 211lce it OC('ln' s Olll por:Hlj('nlIY nnc1 COY' Pi,    

> C:UH::' nacle for on1- (l (by

or two ' f()1Jov--i1 !?' i1 pricl' challge. Fllthel'-

1:101T. niP 1':'('01'1 biJ" to E'stnbJish thnt. re :pcndcJ)t has tencle(l to Linn' 

- pa-rticlllfll' c,lst-onwr or gTC1lp oJ (' -tonH-fS in tne periodic gnl1tii1g 

> of prjce protectioD.

L The chfi'erentlals i1\ price  

> 1w

:('rir\1infltOl' )C :. :tr gcrl from 

> ,,'

hich hflYE' heretofore bee1\ j' 01m(l to   

> 1/1 ( to 1(' per

):n11on. The, 1'econ1 e!:Tf1h-

"!iNl1. iilUS Bef()1"e JJ()1U!f Committee on JW!iciaTlJ 01, Bils to Amend Clayton Act 74th 

Cong., 1st Sess. 24 and 36 (1935). PACIFIC lvl0LASSES CO. ET AL. 707 

675 Inital Decisioll 

lishes the existence of substantial competition between favored and 

nonfa;yorecl cnstomers , and betwee.n an(l a.mong cust-orners receiving 

more favorable price treatment than others. It has also been fonnd 

that profit margins of distributors of blackstrap molasses are very 

narrow and generally are around lh per gaJlon or even less. It has 

1ikc\yise been found that price differentials of as little as 1;4 or per 

gaJlon are. important to distributors of blackstrap molasses , and sub-

stantia, l1y a, iTect t.heil' ability to compete and even their ability to sur-

viye ill Imsiness. It is , acconlingly, concluded that the discriminations 

here found to haTe occurred fan Y'. ithin the Pl. oscriptioll of thesta.t.llte 

insofar as having the requisite competitive effect , since. the record     

> clearly estab1is11cs that the eflect of such

discriminations may be snh- 

> stantially to lessen

, injure , destroy or prevent competition \"ith CllS-

tomer, :: receiving the benefit of sllch discriminations. 

This conc1u:3ion is inevitable in the light of the Commission s hold-

ings , based on the Supreme, Court.' s decision in FTC illOl,tun 8(171 

Co. ;:r':4 T S. 37 (1048) tha.t " in price discrimination cases involving 

> c.ompet.tion be-

ti'\reen buyers , the requisite injury to such competition 

llft ' be inferrcd from a sho\ying that the seller charged one purchaser 

a. higher price for like goods t.han he had charged one or more of the 

pUl'(h lser s competitors and that the amount of this discrimination ,'1(15 

substantial. 

> : -

!o There is abnnclant evidence in the record for eonclllcl-          

> ing t.hat the ,1l10nnt. of tlle c1iscrimilHltions heJ'e involvecl "\yas

substan-

tial Thjs is cleaT from tllB findings pre, yioLlsly macle thnt profit mar-

gins in the industry are snml1 flnc1 t.hat price (1iffercntials of as little  

> as

or lid a gallon are important, : in thn, t j-hey significantly ailed 

a clistl'ibu1:or s ability to retain 01' ga., in cl1stOlners , to operate at a profit 

and p.yen to slu' \,i\ e, in business. 

Respondents contend that there has 1wen no shO\\"ing 01 cempetit ive  

> injury, wit.hin

tIlE:: meaning of the 11ol'ton Salt case becnuc.E' it hac. not 

been established that. the differentials in price are fOllbstft1tial ;' "\vit.h ref-

ereJlte to the, l11mbC'r of pnrchases 11a, (1c from Pncific compare(l to the 

nU1nb81' made from othel's !' Respondenfs argnment does not prop-  

> erly reilce!. the holcling of the .110don Salt

cast'. The C011rt's referenc8 

to substantiality was in t.erms of the amount of c1ifierentl:11 not in tenjJ 

of tlw tot-flT amount of the plll'chEses. Thus , the COl1rt st,1ted (at pag(' 

50) that. in a (',LSt' inyolying competitiOJl het\YE'Cll cm. tomers of the 'Lm8 

seller the statutory iest. is met by a. showing that 1.he se11er sells g()ods    

> to some cns10Hlers LlbsL1JljiaJly ChCOj!(F

than t.hey seJJ like' good,) to 

the c01npetitors of these customers " remphnsis suppliec1J. The COllrt    

> 'GAmer/.O(!i! Oil Comprlil!. Docket SlS

, J11lP 2i . 19G2 (GO F. C. 1iSGJ: so.e illso uiteti   

> Biscuit Co.

at Amcricu Docket 7817, June 2S. 1fH,2 LCD F. C. 1893J: l'd F(!lte!J PoGl. :infJ 

ASMciation Docket 7225, :\la:r 10 , 1962 rHO P C. 113. 11 ; and Thc BonlCli, C()1I1)(IlU    

> Docl;:et 7129, .InD. :::0. 18G3 (G2 P C. 1:-;01.

Respondent' s Proposed Findings , page 24 70S (fEDERAL THADE COMMISSION DECISIOXS  

> Inital Decision

65 P. 

specifically overruled an argument as to the lack of probability of an 

adverse competitive effect based on the fact that the amounts involved 

in t.he sales to Donfavored customers were " very small in comparison 

with the total volume of its (the seller s J business " and that the item 

involved in the discrimination was " a smaIl item :' in the customers 

businesses , the Court staHng (at page 49) : 

Congress intended to protect a merchant from cOllpDtitive injury attributable 

to discriminatory prices  

> '" " *

whether the parUcular ffoods consUl-nted a major  

> 01' mino?' p01.tion of his stook (Emphasis supplied.
> In any event

, the record here establishes that the discriminations in-   

> volved were substanHal

, not only in terms of the differentials in price 

but in terms of the total amounts of the purchases of both the favored 

customer and many of the nonfavorcc1 customers. 

Respondents further contend that no finding of competiHve injury 

can be made because the record does not e. stablish " the requisitB in-

tensive competition between favored and nonfavored customers . Re-

spondents ' contention in this respect is lacking in merit. In the first 

place. , there is no requirement under the 11forton Salt case that compe-

tition between customers must be "intensive . It is suffcient , in the 

opinion of the examiner that there is substantial competition between 

thern. It n1ay be noted , in this eonnection , that in the recent Tri- T1 alley 

> ca.

se the existence of competition between favored and noniavored 

customers in the resale or the goods involved in the discrimination was  

> he.ld to be unnecessary. In the earlier case of

Corn Products Refining   

> Co. v.

FTC 324 U. S. 726 (1945), there was no competition between 

purchasers in the resale of the products sold by respondent , since the 

product was used as an ingredient or another product manufacturoo by    

> the customers. In

that case the Court also held that it was unnecessary 

that the differential in price be reflected in the price at which the goods      

> were resld by the favored customers

, thus suggesting that intensive 

competition in the resale of the products need not be shown.   

> In any event

, even assuming arguendo that there must be a showing     

> that cOlnpetition in the resale of blackstrap molasses is

"intensi ve 

or " keen " (as respondents also refer to it), the record contains abun-       

> dant evidence of the existence of such

c01npetition. As has already 

been found. many of the distributors sell in the same gcneral area to the 

same class ' or cl sses of customers. They are in keen competition not  

> only with one another , but with the primary importers such as

re- 

> spondent Pacific

folasses Company and Southwestern Sugar & 

Molasses Company, both of which sen to feec1miJs and feed lot oper-

ators flS well as to c1istrib1Jtors. As previously found , the corporate rc-

spondent itself , ante litem motam acknowledged that it was operating 

"in nIl extremely competitive market" in the sa-Ie of moJasses in com PACIFIC MOLASSES CO. ET AL. 709  

> 675

Illitial Decision 

petition with fayored distributors. It seems scJf evident tlmt non-

favored distributors would find themselves in even greater diffculty 

in operating such a market. 

Fina11y respondents contend that there has been no showing that any 

of the distributors were injured , and that if a few did suffer any Joss 

of business or profits , it was due to factors other than their failure 

to receive discounts. Respondents ' arguent presupposes !:at a show-     

> ing of the prescribed competitive

effect requires evidence of actual     

> injury to competition. This

, howeyer , is unnecessary. As the Supreme 

Court has pointed out: " The statute is designed to rcach such discrim-

inations 'in their incipiency ' befOIe the harm to competition is effected. 

rt is euough that they ' m"y ' have the prescribed effect. Com Prodvct, 

> Refining Co.
> y.

FTO , supra at 738. The effect of price discriminations 

in any particular case must bc looked at prospectively, in terms of what 

is reasonably to be anticipated , given a price differential of a certain 

size and certain margins and competitive relationships in the industry. 

The fact that other factors may lesse the blow of the differentials 

or that other factors may have played a part in business mortalities 

are immaterial where , as here , the evidence establishes that the discrim-     

> inations are reasonably calculated to

## playa significant role in the 

ability of competitors to compete with the favored customer or cus-

tomers. The conclusion here reached , it should be noted , that thc stat-

> utory test has been met

, is not bascd on any minimal prima facie   

> showing undcr the M oTton Salt

doctrinc. Aside from evidence as to  

> the substantiality of the discounts

, there is abundant evidence in the 

rewI'd to show that such discriminations are bound to have an adverse 

competitive effect. 

5. Respondent has failed to sustain the burden of establishing that 

its discrilnillations in price arnong its distributor-customers were             

> granted in good faith to meet the equally low price of acompetitor

within the meaning of Section 2 (b) of the Clayton Act. The es-

sence of the defense under Section 2(b) is tllat " wherever a lawful 

lower price of ' ft competitor threatens to deprive a seHer of a custome.r  

> the se1Jer

, to retain the customer . may in good faith meet that lower 

price. Standard Oil Co. v. FTO 340 U. S. 231 242 (1951). The pre-

requisites of establishing? Section 2(b) defense thus are , (1) that the 

seller acted in the good faith he1ief that the lower price of the com-

pctitor which is being met is " lawful" , (2) that the discount is 

granted defensive,ly in orde.r to " reta.in ' a customer , and not aggres-             

> sively to gain new business ,and (3) that. the loweT price being af-

forded by thc seller is granted to meet its competitors ' equally low 

pncf'" 

Insofa.r as the first requirement 1S concerned , the record fails to 

establish t.hat , 8.t the time responcleld.. Pacific :Molasses Company began 710 FEDERAL THADE COMMISf3ION DECISIOXS   

> Initial Decision

65 F. 

to grant discounts to Fort 'Yol'th ::Uobsses Company, its compet.itor  

> Soutln",estern Suga.r &

ioJasses Company Wt S then uniformly grant-

ing the same discounts t.o its distributors. The record indicates that 

shortly prior thereto Southwest.ern "';as granting quantity dis-counts  

> up to

a gallon to some distribut.ors and that the corporate 1'13-

sponclent s president hac! expressed doubt that the price' differentiaJs 

could be cost justified. Thus , sa.id respondent has failed to meet the 

burden of proving, at least in the case of the discounts granted to Fort   

> 'V orth

lo1asses , that it was acting in the good faith belief it was meet-

ing the lawful price of its c.ompetitor. Secondly, the roc-ord establishes 

taht , at least in the ease of FOl't 'Yorth J\Iolasses , the most fayored 

cllstomer , the discount.s \"ere granted to obta.in a ne\,- customer , inso-

far as the corporate l'esponclcnfs HOllst.on terminal is conecrned. 

Respondents suggest that in vie" w of the Circuit Court' s decision in 

8U' 118hine Bi.scuit Co. v. FT(: 3UE) F. 2d LIS (7 Cir. , 1902' ), it is unneces-

sary t.o establish that the L-n' ored customer is an existing customer. 

l-1owe,-e1' , in addition to the Supreme Court's holdillg to the contrary   

> in the Standard Oil

case q'jn'a. the Second Circuit ill tI/lidw'rl J/Ot01'  

> P1'odllcts. Inc.

FTC 26, ) F. 2cl (rrl , Gii cod. dCli. :151 lLS. S2G  

> (1D3D),

hns Jikewise held thnt " it is wen setted that a lo\\ered price 

is within Section 2(b) : : '" onl:v if it. is w.;ecl c1efensjyely to hold ('n5-

tamers rat.her than to g,lin new ones". 

In any event , even if the distinction bet", een oJd and ne, \\ customers 

is ignored , it, is still necessary to establish that the sl'l1er grant.ing 

of a discrinlinatol'Y price is a purely defcnsin: moyc. As the iUlthol'it.y     

> whose views are reHected in the Su118hine Biscuit case. 11a,

5 expre.ssed    

> it: " Ii * * a Section 2(b) justification hould be w' ceptaule

it Ui. mli8tically 1Jwin-

toins or restorcs the seller s market share, illg some accounts wbile gaining 

others. .:' * . . Basically, if a seller s lower price to Ileet com!)tition is gen.. 

> uincly a, de!ensi'

ue reaction the incidental securing of ne\v customers or re- 

> gaining of lost accounts

hould not be disqualified l1Hll2l' SedIon 2(b). (Empl1a, 

> sis supplied.

The record here fails t.o establish , :It least in the case 01 the dis-

counts granted to Fort \V orth J\folasses hnt. respondent Pncific :,10-

lasses Company \\'as acting mereJy to maintain or rest. ore its market 

share , or that its act.ions were genuineJy a clefensin reaction to the 

diseOlmts being granted to Fort 'Vort.h :\lolasses by its then snpplier 

Sontll'yc.stern Sugn, r &. l\folasses Company. As has here.tofore been 

fOlmd t.he record does not disclose any deterioration oi' respondent's 

1na, rket. position prjor to the granting of the discount (0 Fort. 'Y011h 

l\loJasses. The granting of the cliscOlUlt was paTt of:l polie.y decision by        

> H Rowe Price Discrimination Un()er the Robinson-Patman Act (18(,2), page 247.

PACIFIC ::.fOLASSES CO. ET AI,. 711 

675 Initial Dpcifioll  

> rl'.

spondent Pac.ific :Molasses CompHny to extell(l Lts business among 

distributors. r rhis ,yas not clue primcHoi!y to the fact dIat SOlltll\ycst-

erll hadgrHllted a, discount to Fort ,\"orrh J\lolasses , bllt was a result  

> of t.he compe.tition which the, respOlH1ent

was meeting from the prices 

being charged to user-customers by both distributors and by Sonth-

\vestern Sugar &. J\Iolnsses itse1f. Despite the fact that the eorporate re-

spondent had a.dmittedly been able to l' et-ain 01' obtain customers by  

> granting a, discount of only

it. granted Fort. ,Vorth a discount in  

> exc.ess of the 1f20 discollnt the, latter ,yas then

getting from South-

western , and tied it to a long-term exclusiyc contract. This can hardly      

> be called agenuinely clefem iYe reactioll. 1:3y its action the cOI'

porate 

respondent did not merely muil1tain (Jr restore its market share , hut  

> almost doubled its sales to distl'ibutol'2o

ot only ,,,as the l' espollden(s 

a.ction not purely defc1Isin:" but it did mOre, than merely ;' meet an 

equally low price " of its compe.titor , and thus it failed La meet the t.hird 

requirement of it Se' ction (b)def(,llse.      

> 6. As has heretofore been foul1d

respondents have failed to estab-

Esh that the discounts which Pacinc. :Jlo1a, sses Company granted to 

certa, in cnst01rJl'l'S ,,:ere giyen in return for the perfol'l1utnce of certa.jn 

> functions or sen-

ices by such customers :for its account. However , C\- 

> a.ssuming tlInt, some of

:l1ch discOlmts ,yere granteJ for this pllrpo::e 

t.he fact that di (,0l1lts are of a functionulllutul'e js not. recognized as 

a, defense to fL charge of price c11scrinlination under Section :2 (a) of the 

Clayton Act. Discrimilwtionsin price which 'fall ,,-ithin the proscrip.   

> tion 'of

Section :2(a), and which h lYe the, proscribed competitive 

efiect , can be justifie-d only if they fall withiJl the purview of the Sec-      

> tion 2(b) defense. The laUer section

(loes not include functional c1is-

eOllllts vvithin its scope.. To the. extent that a, se.llcr grants functional 

discounts , he does so at his 0\\'11 risk if the belleflcjar y of snch c1is. 

counts eompetes TIith ot.her customers not so favored , unless the seller     

> can justify such disconnts under Section

:2(b) or grnnts them on pro-

porti onal1y equaL-tcrlls , ,yithin thcmeflning- of Section 2(d) or the   

> C1llyton Act. Geneml Foods Corp..

:12 F, C. ,D8 (1056); IJbwller Co. 

Dockct,514 

> , .

January 12 , 1D62 r60 F. C. 120j.  

> 7. It

is concluded that the Federa1 Trade Commission has juris-     

> diction of the subject matter of this proceeding

and of the respond-

ents , and that the discriminations in price by respondent Pacific:\lo-

Ja.sses Cornpa, ny, as hereinabove :found , ('onslitut( , a, vio1ation or tho 

provisions of subsection (a) of Section :2 of t1w Clayton Act 

rtmended by the :Robinson - Patnm. n Act. 

THE HE)IEDY 

1. 'I\vo questions hrt,- e been raised with respe, ct to the scope of the 

Drder ,,-hich should be issued in this proceeding. The first is whether 712 FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION DECISIOKS   

> Initial Decision 65 F. T.C.

the order should include respondents Ferguson , Earnhardt and Day Ie 

in their individual capacities. The second is whether the provision of   

> the order prohibiting price discrimination should be the usual broad
> provision prohibiting all discriminations by respondent in the second-

a.ry line of commerce , or "\yhethf'T it should prohibit discrimination 

only alnong distributors purchasing from the corporate respondeufs 

Houston terminal. To a consideration of these two questions the ex-

aminer now turns.           

> 2. 1Vhi1e complaint counsel has proposed to include the three

indi-    

> vidual respondents in the OrdeT

j he has advanced no reasons , either 

in his proposed findings or in his reply memorandum , why they should 

be so included. Respondents contend that in the event any cease and 

desist order is issued the threc individual respondents should not be 

included. In the case of the respondent Earnhardt , there is not even   

> a. smnb1ance of justification for including him since he had no eon-

nection with t.he events at issue. ,Vith respect to respondents Ferguson 

and Doyle , the record does disclose that they played a prominent    

> role in the events

, Doyle as adviser :luc1 Ferguson as the man who 

made the ultimate decisions. I-Iowever , in all instances t.hey acted 

within their sphere as offcers or employees of the corporate respond-

ent. No reason has been advanced as to why the order should extend 

to them in their individual capacities. The corporate resondent is 

wholly owned subsidiary of United Molasses Company, which is a 

pubJicly held corporation. Respondent Ferguson hag only a smal 

stock interest in the parent campa-ny. The record contains no evidence 

indicative of any possibility of evasion of the order by the corporate 

respondent , so .8 to require that the individual respondents be held. 

Accordingly, the order to be issued in this case win exclude the other 

t.hree respondents in their individual ca pacities. 

3. . With respect to the scope of the provision prohibiting price dis-

erimination , complaint counsel contends that a broad order should be           

> issued despite the fact that the evidence of price diserimination is

largely limited to the Houston terminal , since price discrimination by 

t.he corporate respondent cannot otherwise be effectively terminate. 

Conversely, respondents argue that since the evidence of discriminv.. 

tion involved only the Houston terminal the order should be so limited.   

> . In the opinion of the examiner it

is not necessary, in order to 

justify a broad order , to offer evidence of price discrimination in more 

than one area. Once evidence of a violation of Section 2 (a) has been 

adduced , the burden is on the party asserting that the order should be     

> 1imited to adduce evidence to justify such a

1imitation. The record 

in this proceeding does not contain any evidence from which it can        

> be inferred that conditions at the corporate respondent'

s other ter-

# mi are so materia1Jy different from those at Houston , as to justify PACIFIC :MOLASSES CO. Er r AL. 713   

> 675 Initial lJed.'ion

excluding its other operations from the order. The examiner is not 

unmindful of the fact that the order , issued pursuant to consent agree-

ment , against the corporat.e respondent' s competitor , Southwestern 

Sugar & j\Iolasses Company, is operative on a terminal-by-terminal 

basis. However , the facts there before the examiner and the Com-           

> mission indicated that there was no substantial competition between
> that respondent' sterminals. In the instant case the record indicates

that some competition does exist betv.,reen or a. mong the Houston , X ew  

> Orleans and El Paso terminals

, and is silent as to whether it exists 

in the case of approximately ten other terminals. Accordingly, it is 

the opinion of the examiner , that the order to be issued should broadly     

> prohibit price discrimination a.mong competing customers , as is cus-

tomary in Commission proceedings. To the extent that there is no 

substa.ntial competition bet\veen and a. mong customers of different 

tBrmmals this would , of course , permit the corporate respondent to 

maintain a differential among the terminals involved. 

> ORDER

It is ordered That respondent Pacific Molasses Company, a corpora-

tion , its offcers , representatjyes , agents and employees , directly or 

through any corporate or other device , in or in connection with the 

> offering for sale

, sale or distribution of blackstrap molasses in com-

merce as " commerce " is defined in the Clayton Act , as amended , do  

> forthwith cease and

## desi frm: 

Discriminating, directly or indirectly, in the price of blackstrap        

> molasses by se11ing said product to any

purchaser at a net price 

which is higher than the net price charged any other purchaser of 

blackstrap molasses of 1ike gTade and qua1ity who , in fact , com-     

> petes in the resale and distribution of said respondent'

s black-

> strap molasses as such with the purchasers paying the higher

price , or who competes in the resale and distribution of said 

respondent' s blackstra p molasses as an ingredient of other prod-

ucts with the purchaser paying the higher price. 

The term " net price " as used in this order inc1udes rebates , a11ow-

ances , commissions , discounts , terms , and conditions of sale and de-

1ivery, or other forms of direct or indirect price reductions , by whieh 

> net prices are effecte.

It i8 further ordered That the complaint be , and the same hereby is 

dismissed as to James M. Ferguson , F. 'V. Earnhardt and Bascom 

Doyle in their individua.l capacities , and is dismissed a s to that portion 

of Paragraph Five as .l1eges a competitive effect in the line of com-

merce in w hioh respondents are engaged. 

.. Docket 7463, order adopting Initial decision issued September 12, 1962 I61 F. C. 525). 

313-121--70-6 Ti\Br,  lJIJj"I'/cnr'  cs fm/l  11011810/1 (/1IIIlI:11 lI/'/el: 1"(':(  il!('l /;y Padjie  ..' r/18frllw!.ol"- r:lIslolIl'  S mul Fo' rl Il'ol'h'  s PI  'il:!: IHlr!llnl!l(Jc oller  Ot1UT 

> lrilmlo/'s
> HOI1  trm
> (Ill () t( ( \
> pnt:c
> doJlarciftr)l1
> Fort Worth
> TiJn(  1)0rioll- !V.  Fort
> Worti1'
> !nVOICC
> J)rite
> Difference
> frOJl
> Hon  tOJJ
> pnce
> 1'otlllsav-
> Jllgs ov(
> Houston
> price
> Tonlnl!'e
> bought
> $17  Jan. 17 to Feb. 27  $17.  $0.  1:15.  7V:J.
> - -
> 117  171  205.  352
> 17.  H25.  5n9.
> 921.93
> 17.
> \)"
> 1.71  242  125,
> 'IS.  , (J  9. 0  721.  (;5
> ---
> fWL75
> 17. 0:";  81;  \J44.  :mtH4
> 18.  I:n.  !)(1.\J;
> lR81  1.71  514.  710.
> 310.  (;6  8(j  \)88.  84!J. !i8
> !;(;8.79
> IKHI Fcb.  2Bto -'hr
> UL Ij!i J\J:  . 19 to J\' L!y '
> IS- 81 :\1  lY 3 to JlliE
> I!). Wi JUlie 2!) to July
> 20.  52  July  21  to  Oct.
> 52 Oct. 2 to ).T OV.
> 21.:17 Nov. 23 to Dcc.
> 22.  2:'1 DC(:  8toJ)cc.
> 2:J.  08 Dec.  :Wtl) De(:
> TotalforJall.  17- Dec  696.  487.  70-
> 1 $17.  10 price efYeetiv(' 011 !lTar. 1 only.
> 2 $18.  81 prke )wg;:n on A pr. 1.
> 3 $l!l.if; plkp W:lS  eIT(  dive  hetween  Julv  26
> WOlt1I  S 1a  r, purchase Wi\S mflchl Od. 1  and July 2!J , Sept. 26 and Oct. 1. Fort
> IHar.1-
> 5 1\'I:tr.  1B.
> BJulv 21.  28.
> 1 Jllly 28-Nov. 22.
> :\1arco
> l'IVoic(
> price
> DifTerellce
> froll
> Houston
> price
> Prke dis-
> advantage
> versl1S
> :FortWortil
> MarcoChcJIical
> TOlll!age
> hought
> Total sa\'- Total di
> Ilg  over adv,lllbge
> Houston  versus
> pri\:c  Fort Worth
> $17.  NOlle  $0.  0O!.  Nonc  $857.
> 417.  \)5  $0,  18G.  $159.  I5H. 518.  NOlw  8(;  81. 0  NOlle  211.(,1;
> :JUO.\J3
> - -
> 19.  $0.  425.  $178.  ,,4  . 79
> IH,  4:\  4:1  5!;3.  237.
> I!). 21  1;1  225.  91.
> u2().  1:\  1.28  H1.7  35. 120.
> ).'
> one  1.71  051.1  ;.one
> :!O,j2  NOlle  13!1.  NOlle
> 20.  5:.
> $().
> (;7.  $57.
> 21.37  NOIIC  272.  NOlle
> 22.  2:1  NOlle  :j;J(i2  NOllc
> $0.  85- 3:J.  $28. 23.  NOlle  318.  Nonc
> - --
> U80.  $7\J1.59
> 104.
> 7!J7.
> 901.\J6
> G770.
> 2:J7.
> \111.7,; 'rABLl':  Lhff(r('ncl.s  jroll,  11lHl:,lon  1J1i()(((f Pl"ice n:cein;i/ U!I l'aciji,  ;':, di:.lri!nd(jl"-cli,sl(!IuJ8 and Forl IFarth'  :,  price  (Uli:antagc  uver  Diher
> di8lrilmlors- Con Un tleu
> Houston
> Quoted
> p1'ce,
> (\ollarsftoll
> rime !!t'J'io(!- l\J.:!i
> SI7.  .lall. 17 to Feb. 27-
> 11\.81 F(;1J.'!8toMllr.18-
> HL(,u  \'lar.L  jtoJ\I"y
> 18.  81 M,.y:1tuJllue2!L-
> l'J.  GG June:m to .Tuly
> (). 5  July  I to Oct.
> ::O.  52 Od. 2to 1\'  0'1. :!2-
> :n  Nov.  23  to  Dec.
> 2. 23 lkl: 8 to Dec. l!L-
> 2;\.  08 Dce 20 to Dcc.
> 1'oUll
> Dee
> ! ?I' Jar.  l!I.  :H.
> Apr. !- YJay 2.
> 10 I,ast. purc!1lsP Oct. 7.
> & R.
> &H.'s lJiJlr.  rcIIGe  Prke (lis  1'otals:w- 1'ot,11 dis- T'  anis
> I)lVOlCe  IlOIl  r.tlV,\\1L. 1t'Y Tonl!a!!r. inf's 0\"'1"  advantage  invoice
> pnce  Houston  versus  hought  Houston  verSllS  pricc
> pncc  1"ort\\or111  pnc(  FortWorth
> :j17.  \J5  None
> 17.  W86
> 18.
> i18.
> '18.
> 18.
> lR.  None
> 1!J. G(j  None
> m6B  O. 81\ O. .  None
> 1021).  ;;2  None
> $0.  8:'  84Z4
> 19-
> 2H3.
> 247-
> 320.
> 7B.
> 324. 133.
> 57.
> 313.
> 6iJ.
> 704
> r-'  onc  S71G.  $17.  9;,
> 17.
> $HiSl  l!j.  17.
> 121.73  121.
> ---
> 138.  138.
> 310.  93  106.  4.7  1117.
> 109.  \J8  137.  19.
> 72G.  31.2G
> 32.  90 :12.  18.
> Nonc  279.
> ----
> 312.
> ===
> 1\0111)  113.  19.
> $19.  4.8. HI)  19.
> None  '295. !i7  '20.
> 344.
> NOllo  20.  ;,2
> 21.37
> 22. 23.
> $947.  50:!.35.
> II l\lllr. l!J- Apr. 15.
> \2 Allr. Hi-:,fay 2.
> DiHcrenee
> from
> HOI1  ton
> vuee
> Nonc
> 1:l
> 1.28
> 1.28
> None
> None
> Nonc
> Nono
> !-one
> Parris
> Pric  dis-
> l:dvautuf'c Tonnage
> versus  J)(ughl
> For1.WoJ'th
> O. 85
> +,4.2
> 181.
> 223.
> 209.
> 107
> Hti.
> 'lot  ll sav-
> Ings over
> H()!1  ton
> plice
> NO\l'
> $93.
> 267.
> f,-14
> 36.  113 3\12.
> Total di,
> advantago
> versug
> FOl't\\'urllJ
> SI;j(i.74
> \16.
> 252. 87.
> 7U.
> :\7.
> 33.
> 4:-\
> - .
> 218.
> 741.0
> 93.
> 29.
> 52.
> 23!)
> 110.(19
> NOll!
> 154.
> fi8.
> 51. 17.
> $\J43.  fiD
> NOll!'
> NUIH\
> l\OI\C
> NUl1c
> \13.
> 22.
> 1D6.  U\\
> 2:!8.  4fi
> 4.84.
> gi. AJILB J.  D(gfor/:nccs from IIouston quoted  price received by I'  acijic  s d1'.tributor-customcrs and Fort lV01th'  s price advantage over other
> distributors- Continued
> 1l0llston
> qnntc(l
> pncc
> (\:llbrsfton
> 'limepl\riod- 1955
> I 7. !)5  .Tan. l7 to Feb.
> 18.  81 Feb.  28to.\br.
> f16 Mar.19toMay2--
> 18.81 May3toJu1\o28--
> 111-(;6 Junc 2!) t.o.Tuly 20
> 20.  52 .Tuly21 to Oct. L-
> 2 Od. 2 to Nov. 22
> ,,--_  --_--
> 21.37 Nov. 2.1 to Dee. 7
> '?2  23 Dcc.  8toDce.
> '?:
> ()8 Dec. 20 to Dec. 31-
> Total
> Dec.
> n. G. Thompson  W. L.  Hunt
> .-.  ---
> 'lhomp- Difference Price dis- Totalsav- '1'  ota1 dis- Hunt'  Difference  Pricedis- Totalsav- Totaldis-
> son  from  advantagl3 Tonnage  ingsover  arlvant.a.r;e  invoice  from  advantage  Tonnage ings over  advantage
> invoicf!  Houston vcrsus Fort bought  Houston versus Fort  price  Houston  vnrSllS Fort bought  Houston  vcrsllsFort
> price  price  Worth  price  Worth  prirA\  Worth  price  Worth
> $17.  None  $0.  279.  Nouo  $2.17.  (13)
> ------------
> -.----_u- -----u_-
> - - -
> 17.  $0.  14.  $12.  12.  (L3)
> ---- ---- -------------- - --- ----- ---------
> H!.81  None  140.  .:one  121.  09_
> -----.--..- ------- -------
> 133.
> None  308.  None  262.  (10)
> ------- ------- ---
> None  ;134.  None  287.  (13)
> Noue  52.  None  44.  6.1  $HI  None  $0.  100.  None  $136.
> Nonn  1.71  378.  None  646.  20.  Nonn  1.71  311J!J  Nonc  045.
> None --
> --- .- ----
> 148.  None - -
> ---.-----
> 20.  None
> ------
> 275.  None
> None u  _--un  26.  None - (L3)
> ----------
> Konc - 67.  None - None ,--_  13.  r-T onc
> $0.  85- 13.  $11.48- (13)
> None - 39.  None  no.
> 802  $23.  . Ull. f,s  --un.  768.  6--- u--- 681.
> 17-
> J!J.
> 18.
> mli2
> m52
> 21.
> n23
> n23
> IJ No s:ll  to IIq.nt during period. TABLJ  l.-- IJijffr"nr;es fmm 1l0ll.;/or/ quoted p'  rir:e recel:ved by Pacific  s (h"strirJ1tor- CU8lonwrs  au,l  Fort TVorlh'  s price advantage over olhr.r
> distributors.  Collt.inu(-d
> ---
> O. Barnes  Yoakum Houston
> - - - -- - - ---- - - - -----
> quoted  1'imr. period - l!j  Barnes  1)JIYerence  Prier. dis- l'otBJsav- Total dis- Yoakum Differenco  Price dis- 'Iotalsav- 'rota1 dis-price,  invoice  from  advantage  Tonnage  ings over  advant  invoice  from  Mlvantage  Tonnage  ings over adyantage donars/ton  price  Houston  versus Fort bought  H ol1ston vcnms Fort  price  Houston versus Fort bought  Houston versus :I!ort price  Worth  price  Worth  price  Worth  prlr.s  Worth
> - -
> Jan  . 17 to Feb. 2L $17.  $17.  None  $0.  61.7  None  $43.  $17.  None  $0.  53.  NOl1o  $45.
> 18.  Fel1  28toMar.  18--
> ----
> 18.  I\one  31.8  NOlie  27.  n______
> ---- --- -----.--- --- -------.- ---- ---- ----.
> 19.  Mar  . HI to Jllay2  19.  None  95.  None  81.51  19.  None  17.  None  14. 18.  May:1to Juuc21L- 18.  None  8t,  !.i . 8  NOlie  IB.'i  (H)
> 19.  June 29 to Jllly20- 19.  None  95.  None  81.51  (II)
> 20.  .'2  July 21 to Oct. L- 20.  None  125.  None  214,  94.  20.  None  1.71  35.  one  60. 20.  .'2  Oct.2toNov.  20.  None.  287.  None - 20.  None - 35.  None -2137  Nov.  2:! to  Dec. 7  21.37  None  96.  NOne  21.37  NOne --- 17.  None 22.  Dec.  8toDec  m_- 22.  None  63.  None  22.  None  17.  None
> -...--
> :tl.  JJec.  20toDec.  23.  None  75.  None  (Ii)
> --- ----
> TotaJ for Jan. 17-
> Dec.  3L-
> _---
> -- 1 139.  624.  117.4  121.06
> H K(J salBS made to  Yoakum during period,;

718 FEDERAL TRADE COllnUSSIO DECISIO 

Opinion 65 F. 

QpIXION OF THE CO::DIISSIOX 

:MAY 21 : 1964 

By Drxox C01nrnissioner: 

The hCfu.ing examjner fonnd that respondent Pacific. 3Iolasses Com-

pany, in the sale of its "blackstrap " molasses in Texas ;111(1 adjoining" 

States : has c1isc, riminated in favor of certain of its customeTS and 

against certain others in violation or Section 2(0,) or the amended 

Clayton Act , 15 U. C. 13; that respondent s largest a, ncl most favored 

custOlnel' reeeiyed price concessions totaling some 824 487. 70 during 

the first nine months or 1955; that these concessions rangeel from /2c 

per gallon up to 1 per gallon , the latter being a reduction of nearly 

10% from the published prices eharged other customers; that. among' 

Prt ciJic s othe.r cllstomers some receiycc1 eon cessions of per gallo!i 

(roughly 5% off the list price), others 'l11t (some off the. list 

price), and others no concessions at all; that the business of reselling 

molasses is highly competitive , with total net profit margins ranging 

arouncl ; thnt , in a market where net profits are only V::(; per gallo11. 

price discriminations that put other customers at compet1t.n' (1:sn(1-

vantnges ranging frorn 'l11 to 1e pcr gallon are plainly inj1!rious to 

competition; and that these price discriminations "\yere not , as ('011-

tended by respondents , made in good faith to meet compet.itors ' pl'ice!3. 

The record ful1y supports these and the examiner ot. lwl' essent.ial 

findings.  

> 1\'

01' (10 ,,- ee any denial of due process in the hearing eX;1.mllleT 

failllre t.o follO"y a pre-trinl order requiring counsel snpporting the 

complaint to gi'i 8 respondents a list of his ,yitnesses ancI exhibits 15 

days in ac1nllCP of the. he. aring. Pre-trial orders of this nature , bring 

cre.tionaTY "\i ith the hcarjllg exaTniner jn the, first, pla('e :1l(1 snb ifcl 

to rnoc1ification b ,' the heflxing examiner himself at the hearing (Rl 

SBC. 3. 8: Iiule 16 , Federal Rules of Civil Procedure; Sate, " Feder,11 

Pre- Trial Practice: A Stuc1y of )Io(1iiicatiO'n nnd S,n1(' tjon :' ;')1 

Geol'getmyn La,,- . Tonrnnl 309 (\Yinter 1D63)), cannot he ai(1 to u.11e1' 

constiJutiol1nl '; l'ights. ,Yhile it. is to be repTctiecl thilt the ordei' \\,1'3        

> not folJO\yec1 in this case there "\YHS nO' bflc1 faith

inyoJn)(l Uhe hearing 

exnminer and complain!, counsel inndyel'tently oyerlookcc1 the 0l'1i'1' 

and \\ere not reminded of its existenc.e. until arrangement2 for rIle 

hearing ,yere alrcfl(ly wHl('l' \ f1Y) fl1Hl thl'J'' ,'-n 110 pl' e:i1.!(lir' c: ;\: ' 't' 

sponc1ents: they ,yere gi,, en express permission to l'l'cnH ,"'ny of (". Ul-

pla.int cOllnsers ,yitnessl's in the presentation of jheir O'Yll (',lSl' ,;j;:h  

> the right to cross-

examine them as adverse witnesse . Rules. Set:. 

(e), nnd were further given a 4. dny c.ontinnanee during t.he. pl'c,cen-     

> tation of their own case for additional investigation and prepa.ration.

PACIFIC MOLASSES CO. ET AL. 719 

675 Opinion 

,Vhatever " surprise respondents may haye experienced on the first         

> cIa.y of the hea.ring, it is clear that their right t.o

present a full aDcl  

> complete defense ,yasin no way prejudiced.

Giant Food : Inc. Y. Fed-

emll'r' ode Oommiss' l:on 3gg F. gel 977 983-984 (D. C. Cir. 1963) ; E. B.   

> ;11"Um' &: CO. Y.

Fedeml l'mde Commission 14g F. gel 511 , 519 (6th 

Cir. 1944). l-nder these circnmsta.nces , nothing bnt dehy ,yould be 

ac.complished by a, remane1. 

The hea6ng examiner correctly dismissed the complaint as to aIle 

of the corporate o:1cials in his individual capacity. The duties of F. 'V. 

Earnha.rdt a. vice president and sccretnry-treasurer of the corporate 

responllenL relate primarily to accounting, financial and tax matters; 

he. neither aut.horizedllor participated in the unlawful acts in question. 

But James J\f. Ferguson , president of respondent. Pacific ?\Jolasses 

testified that he personally ordered the discriminatory pricing, And 

BascoD'l Doyle , nO\v vice lwesiclent in charge of respondent Paciiic 

Gn1f Di\ ision , formerly manager of its :K ew Orleans branch offce  

> a.nd in charge of I-Iouston sales

, testified thflt he executed thosE', orders  

> for the lliscriminatory pricing. The Clayton

, like the Sherman 

Act , should be c.ontrued " in its common-sense meaning to apply to all 

oiEcers who ha.ve a responsiblo share in the proscribed transact:(J l/' 

illeluding the ofiice.r ,\ho authorizcs , orde'' or helps 7Nyrpet?'ate the 

crime rcgardless of whether he is acting in a reprc entative capaci-

ty. United Sinles v. iVise 370 FS. 405 409 416 (19G2) (emphasis  

> added). See also

C01'O , h1C. Dkt. 8'146 (.Tnly ,1, 1963) rG llG4J,  

> at p. 1204:

F;' cd;11 eyel'Jnc. Dkt. n,lg ( larch g9 , HJ(3) fG3 F. C. 11, 

at pp. 71 , 7:2. l,Vhilp professional 1li11flgers owning litt Je or no st.ock 

jn t.heir corporations are generally nnlikely or 11nnole to eVH(le an 

order hy e1issohing t.he. corporation and llsing its a ::t'ts to creal::' 

anot-l1er , tl1ey not. infrc(l1wntly resign from their posts to take com-

parable posit.ons in other compHllie3 in t.11e smne inch15h' y, and SOllC-

tilnes resigll to start new cOlnplmjes oj' tllfi:r myn in tlwt. ::mne jnr111 

IVe ::ee 110 reason \yhy t1Jes( . t,yO corporate offcers , haying once b\:en 

found - p:niHy of deliberate and purposeful price discl'iminntion th,1t 

erionsly injured ot.hers ill the industry, shC!11c1 be le-ft "free to and exeeute the saHle kind of un1nwfnl orders on behalf of ;ome other 

> lnolasses compll11Y.

The exceptions filed by l'esponc1ent Pacific I\lolasses Company are 

denit'cl and the initial decision , modified to conform to the vjc,yS 

pressed in this opinion , will be adopted as thc decision of the Com-

m1S81011. 

Commissioner Elman dissented , and Commissioner Reilly did not 

participate :for the reason t.hat he did not heal' ond argument. 720 FEDERAL TRADE CO:-L'1ISSION DECISIONS   

> Final Order 65 F.

FINAL ORDER 

This matter having been heard by the Commission upon exceptions   

> to the initial decision filed by

respondent Pacific Molasses Company, 

upon the Commission s order placing the case on its docket for review 

as to the individual rcspondents , and upon briefs and oral arguments 

in support of and in opposition to the initial decison; and the Com-    

> mission having ruled on said exceptions

, and having determined that 

> the order to cease and desist contained in said initial decision should

be supplemented and modified to conform with the views expressed 

in the accompanying opinion:   

> It is

ordered That the order contained in the initial decision be , and 

it hereby is , modified to read as follows:   

> It i8

ordered That respondents Pacific Molasses Company, a 

corporation , its offcers , representatives , agents and employees, and    

> Tames M. Ferguson and Bascom Doyle

, individually and as off-

cers of Pacific Molasses Company, directly or through any cor-           

> porate or other device ,in or in connection with the offering Tor

sale , sale or distribution of blackstrap molasses in commerce , as 

commerce " is defied in the Clayton Act , as amended , do forth-

with cease and desist from: 

Discriminating, directly or indirectly, in the price of blac.k-

strap molasses by selling said product to any purchaser at a 

net price which is higher than the net price charged any other     

> purchaser of blackstrap molasses of

like, grade and quality 

who , in faet , competes in the resale and dist.ribution 01 said 

respondents ' blackstrap molasses as such with the purchasers 

paying the higher price , or who competes in the resalp. and   

> distribution of

sa.id respondents ' blackstra.p ' molasses as an 

ingredient of other products with the purchaser paying the 

higher price. 

The teTff " net price " as used in this order includes rebates 

:allowances , commissions , discounts , terms , and conditions of sale 

and delivery, 01' other forms of direct or indirect price reductions 

by which net prices are effected.         

> I t is further ordered That the complaint be

, and the same here-by is , dismissed as to F. W. Earnhardt in his individual capacity, 

and is dismissed as to that portion of Paragraph Five as a11eges 

a competitive effect in the line of commerce in which respondents 

are engaged. 

It is further ordered That respondent Pacific Molasses Company 

'exceptions to t. he initial decisiou be , and they hereby are , denied , and 

thrut the hearing examiner s initial decision , as modified and supple-COLXTHY TWEEDS : IXC. , ET AL. 721  

> 675 )':1odified Order to Cease and Desist

mented by this order , be , and it hereby is , adopted as the decision of 

the Commission.   

> It is

further ordered That respondents shall , within sixty (60) days 

after service upon them of this order , fie with the Commission a re-

port , in writing, setting forth in detail the manner and form in which 

they have complied with said order. 

Commissioner Elman dissenting, and Commissioner Reilly not           

> participating for the reason that he did not hear oral argument.

IN TilE J\UTT 

COUNTRY TWEEDS, INC. , ET AL.        

> ORDER ,ETC. , IN REGARD TO THE ALLEGED VIOLATIQX OF THE FEDERAL
> TRADE co nIISSION ACT
> Docket 8085.

Complaint , A' ng. 24, 196fJ-Decision , May , 1964 

Order modifying an order of Kovember 29, 1962, 61 F. C. 1250, pursuant to a

decision of U. S. Court of .Appeals, Second Circuit, 326 F. 2d 144 (7 S. &D. 835), 

by eliminating from said order paragraph 4 which IJl'ohibited respondent 

from misrepresenting " in any manner " the quality of its cashmere. 

),IODIFIED OHDER TO CEASE AND DESIST 

Respondents having filed in the United States Court of Appeals for 

the Second Circu1t their petit10n to review and set aside the order to 

cease and desist issued herein on November 29 , 1962; and the court 

having rendered its decision on January 3 , 1964 , and having entered 

its final decree on J nuuary 28 , 1964-, modifying, and as modified , affnn-

ing and enforcing said order to cease and desist; and the time fol' filjng 

a petition for certiorari having expired and no such petition having 

been filed; 

Now , therefoTe , it is hereby onlered That the aforesaid order to 

cease and desist be , and it, hereby is , modified in accorda, nce "ith the 

said final decree of the Court of Appeals to read as follo,,s:     

> It is ordered That n'spondents , Country Tyreeds

, Inc. , a cor 

poration , and its offcers , and Marcus Weisman , individually a, 

as an offcer of said corporation , and respondents ' agents , repre-

sentatives and employees , directly or through fin)' corporate or  

> other device

, in connection with the offering for sale , sale or dis- 

> tribution of ladies

' cashmere eoats or any other merchandise , com- 

> posed of fabrics of any kind

, or products made therefrom , in'
