Title: World Bank Document

URL Source: https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/099092424171525114/pdf/P176634156a0060001846d1ed7491edcbbd.pdf

Published Time: 2024-09-25T06:01:28.000Z

Markdown Content:
# Attachment 3: Drones for Good 

Use cases for drone technology in development activities in Latin America 

1

> Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Authorized

Phase I Phase II Phase III 

The first phase consists of an assessment of drone ecosystems in the region along with international best experiences and a thorough market analysis for drone services in the whole LAC region as well as in selected international benchmark countries. 

Attachment 1: Drones General Assessment in Latin America and the Caribbean 

The report gives an overview of the current state and maturity level of drone ecosystems in the LAC region as well as evaluates the adoption level of key drone use cases. Additionally, it showcases an analysis of global regulatory and UTM trends, international UAS ecosystem benchmarks from 5 countries (USA, Switzerland, Poland, Spain and Rwanda), and a detailed look into selected LAC countries. 

Attachment 2: Drones Services Market Potential in the LAC Region 

The report presents a market analysis, calculating the current and forecasted market potential for drone services in different industries until 2026 per country. The report showcases the job creation potential of the UAS commercial service industry, as well as the number of commercial and recreational drones forecasted until 2026. 

The second phase is focused on use cases for drone technology in development activities in the LAC region along with the business models and strategic drone development initiatives that were created as a result of an in-depth analysis of global best practices and local requirements. 

Attachment 3: Drones for Good* 

The report showcases the analysis of the potential of the adoption of drone technologies for development. The broad study covers 14 use cases, including the SDGs impacted, relevant social and environmental challenges that drones can solve, and proposed pilot projects. Furthermore, adoption enablers and barriers along with business models are described in detail. 

Attachment 4: Drone Ecosystem Development Initiatives 

The report covers the identification of key initiatives that are necessary to ensure the expansion and consolidation of the drone ecosystem for the next five years in order to unlock the potential of the lower skies in the LAC region. Two illustrative development roadmaps for early stage and intermediate/advanced drone ecosystems are provided. 

The third phase is based on a deep-dive into Guatemala, Brazil (Tocantins State), and Haiti as some prevalent case-studies of the LAC region. In addition to country reports, snapshots and executive summaries of reports from Phases I and II were developed. 

The current state and future prospects of drones for development in Guatemala 

The current state and future prospects of drones for development in Haiti 

Drones for development: the current state and future prospects of UAS for sustainable and green growth in Brazil 

# Project context 

> 2

*Delivery date of Attachment 3: August 2022 The World Bank Group and the Global Infrastructure Facility (GIF) have engaged PwC Drone Powered Solutions - Global Centre of Excellence in Drone Technology to study the drone ecosystem in the Latin American and Caribbean region. The study covers 35 selected countries and aims to provide recommendations on practical steps that can be taken to unlock the potential of widespread drone adoption and to scale up operations across different sectors as a way to bring innovation, development, and solutions to complex social and environmental problems. Through understanding the need for developing sustainable business models for drone operations, the insights from the study aim to unlock opportunities for countries to improve economic growth, innovation, and spread technology across the LAC region. The study is comprised of 3 phases that resulted in 4 distinctive reports, and 3 country-specific studies along with topic-related snapshots. The study combined comprehensive desk research of primary and secondary sources with over 45 in-depth interviews with key local and international stakeholders, as well as insight from several workshops and working sessions with relevant players for particular countries and sub-regions. Acknowledgements 

This report was prepared by PwC Drone Powered Solutions - Global Centre of Excellence in Drone Technology in its advisory capacity to the World Bank Group and the Global Infrastructure Facility (GIF). 

> 3

This report was prepared by a team led by: 

• Agnieszka Gajewska, Partner, Global Government & Public Services Leader • Aleksander Buczkowski, Director, PwC Drone Powered Solutions • Maria Sanchez Arrieta, Senior Advisor and International Development Specialist, PwC Drone Powered Solutions 

The team is grateful for the support and contributions provided by: 

• Konrad Górski, Manager, PwC Drone Powered Solutions • Agnieszka Lisonek, Senior Consultant, PwC Drone Powered Solutions • Anhelina Kamenska, Senior Consultant, PwC Drone Powered Solutions • Marta Khemich, Consultant, PwC Drone Powered Solutions 

The team consulted as well with World Bank Group colleagues, valuable data inputs and support for the report were provided by the following World Bank and GIF staff: 

• Charles E. Schlumberger, Lead Air Transport Specialist • Carlos Murgui Maties, Transport Specialist • Fabian Hinojosa, Senior Transport Specialist • Carlos Bellas Lamas, Senior Transport Specialist • Javier Montero Vivas, GIF, Research Analyst • João Reye Sabino, GIF, Senior Infrastructure Finance Specialist 

Thanks to: 

• GIF for financing this analytical work that will support the development of the drone industry in the LAC region and potentially opening up future scope for more private capital mobilization in these innovative sectors. Always at the forefront of innovation, their trust in the World Bank team and the consultants made this effort possible. 4

Data availability 

The research outcomes were based on information publicly available on the internet and interviews, workshops and working sessions with stakeholders. Business models as well as indicators of each use case relevance relies on the data that was collected and accessible at the period of time when the research was conducted. The information was taken from the best available sources at the time, PwC cannot guarantee its full comprehensiveness and additional analysis may be required. 

Pilot projects 

Scenarios of pilot projects provided in the report are illustrative and based on the information, costs and technology available at the time when these pilot scenarios were developed. The actual cost range could depend on the geography of the operation, number of participant, technology partners, length of the project and stakeholders involved. 

Drone ecosystem development 

Considering the nature of the fast growing drone technology development and transformative changes that have occurred during recent years, some drone ecosystem elements in the LAC region as well as international examples could have changed since 2022 when the analysis was performed. 

Use of pictures 

The majority of picture credits belongs to Shutterstock.com. In the specific cases where pictures from other sources were utilised in the report, the appropriate references were provided. 

Use of the report 

This Report has been prepared by PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) in its capacity as advisor to The World Bank Transport Group and the Global Infrastructure Facility. Some information, statements, statistics, material, and commentary (together the “Information”) in this Report have been prepared by PwC from publicly available material and from discussions held with a range of stakeholders. PwC has relied upon the accuracy, currency and completeness of the Information provided by the stakeholders and takes no responsibility for the accuracy, reliability or correctness of the Information and acknowledges that changes in circumstances after the time of publication may impact on the accuracy of the Information. The Information may change without notice and PwC is not in any way liable for the accuracy of any information used or relied upon by a third party. Furthermore, PwC has not independently validated or verified the Information provided to it for the purpose of the Report and the content of this Report does not in any way constitute an audit or assurance of any of the Information contained herein. PwC has provided advice solely for the benefit of The World Bank Group, the Global Infrastructure Facility and disclaims all liability and responsibility (including arising from its negligence) to any other parties for any loss, damage, cost, or expense incurred or arising out of any person using or relying upon the Information. 

Data sources 

All the data and information utilised was obtained from publicly available sources and interviews with stakeholders. PwC has not sought to establish the reliability of those sources or verified the information provided. Accordingly, no representation or warranty of any kind is given by PwC to any person (except to the World Bank under the Contract) as to the accuracy or completeness of the data presented in the Report. 

Data timeliness 

The Report is based on comprehensive research conducted in 2022. Data sources from international development institutions, national statistics and other relevant resources from previous years and 2022 inclusive were used to describe political and socioeconomic factors of the LAC countries to generate the most accurate findings about the potential of drone technology use cases in development activities. 

# Disclaimers Table of contents 

47 5.1 Healthcare 5.2 Agriculture 5.3 Humanitarian aid 5.4 Disaster management 5.5 Urban planning and monitoring 5.6 Road infrastructure maintenance 5.7 Road traffic monitoring 5.8 Remote internet access 5.9 Restoration and reforestation 5.10 Endangered species monitoring 5.11 Wildfires 5.12 Mosquitoes borne disease spread reduction 5.13 Environmental pollution monitoring 5.14 Waste management and landfill monitoring 58 70 81 92 104 116 128 140 151 173 162 185 196 

6 Appendix 208 

1 Glossary and acronyms 6

3 Introduction 17 

4 Use cases snapshots 31 

5 Development use cases 46 

2 Executive Summary 15 

> 5

# Glossary and acronyms 

Shortcut/concept Definition 

4G/5G Fourth Generation/Fifth Generation The stages of broadband mobile communication that supersede 3G. 4G network capacity is 100 Mbps, while 5G bandwidth peak speed is as high as 20 Gbps. 

AASHTO American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials A standards setting body which publishes specifications, test protocols, and guidelines that are used in highway design and construction throughout the United States. 

AI Artificial Intelligence AI is the ability of a digital computer or computer-controlled robot to perform tasks commonly associated with intelligent beings. 

ANSP Air Navigation Service Provider Is a public or a private legal entity providing Air Navigation Services. It manages air traffic on behalf of a company, region or country. 

APA American Planning Association The American Planning Association's main function is to serve as a forum for the exchange of ideas between people who work in the field of urban planning. 

AQI Air Quality Index Index for reporting air quality. The higher the AQI value, the greater the level of air pollution and the greater the health concern. 

AUVSI Association for Unmanned Vehicle Systems International The world's largest nonprofit organisation dedicated to the advancement of uncrewed systems and robotics, represents corporations and professionals involved in industry, government and academia. 

BOT Build-Operate-Transfer Form of project delivery method, usually for large-scale infrastructure projects, wherein a private entity receives a concession from the public sector to finance, design, construct, own, and operate a facility stated in the concession contract. 

BVLOS Beyond Visual Line of Sight An operation in which the remote pilot or UAS observer does not maintain visual contact with the UAS in the conduct of flight (due to surrounding obstacles or significant distance between pilot and drone). 

C4ADS Centre for Advanced Defense Studies A nonprofit research organisation that provides data-driven analysis and evidence-based reporting on global conflict and transnational security issues. 

> 6

# Glossary and acronyms 

Shortcut/concept Definition 

CAA Civil Aviation Authority Government authority responsible for regulatory related to civil aviation (including UAS). 

CAF Development Bank of Latin America A development bank that has a mission of stimulating sustainable development and regional integration by financing projects in the public and private sectors in Latin America. 

CAGR Compound Annual Growth Rate Annualised average rate of growth between two given years, assuming growth takes place at an exponentially compounded rate. 

CAPEX Capital Expenditures Funds used by a company to acquire, upgrade, and maintain physical assets such as property, plants, buildings, technology, or equipment. 

CDB Caribbean Development Bank Financial institution that helps Caribbean nations finance social and economic programmes in its member countries. 

CDC Centres for Disease Control and Prevention The national public health agency of the US. Its main goal is the protection of public health and safety through the control and prevention of disease, injury, and disability in the US and worldwide. 

CEAAL Council of Adult Education in Latin America The network that acts and accompanies processes of education, social, political, cultural and economic transformation of LAC societies. 

CEPAL United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean ECLAC, UNECLAC or in Spanish and Portuguese CEPAL, is a United Nations regional commission to encourage economic cooperation. 

CO Carbon monoxide Gas, which pollution occurs primarily from emissions produced by fossil fuel–powered engines, including motor vehicles and non-road engines and vehicles (such as construction equipment and boats). 

CONAP National Council of Protected Areas The government agency that has as its mission the conservation and the sustainable use of the biological diversity and protected areas of Guatemala. 

> 7

# Glossary and acronyms 

Shortcut/concept Definition 

COW Cells-on-wings A new technology aimed at providing wireless coverage during natural disasters and big events. The device is a cell site situated on a drone engineered to beam wireless LTE coverage across an area of up to 40 square miles. 

DSM Digital Surface Model DSMs represent the Earth's surface and all objects on it. 

DTM Digital Terrain Model DTMs represent the elevation data of the terrain. 

ECLAC United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean ECLAC, UNECLAC or in Spanish and Portuguese CEPAL, is a United Nations regional commission to encourage economic cooperation. 

ECPA The Energy and Climate Partnership of the Americas A platform that comprises initiatives focusing on energy efficiency, renewable energy, cleaner and more efficient use of fossil fuels, energy infrastructure, energy poverty, sustainable forests and land use, and climate change adaptation. 

ENGO Environmental non-governmental organization International NGO with a goal to ensure the ability of the Earth to nurture life in all its diversity. 

EVLOS Extended Visual Line of Sight An operation in principle similar to standard VLOS, but an additional observer (or a few) are engaged to support the pilot in drone observation, maintaining direct communication and enabling longer and safe flights. 

FAA Federal Aviation Authority The largest transportation agency of the U.S. government and regulates all aspects of civil aviation in the country. 

FAO Food and Agriculture Organization A specialised agency of the United Nations that leads international efforts to defeat hunger and improve nutrition and food security. Its Latin motto, fiat panis, translates to "let there be bread". 

FSO Free Space Optics FSO communication Is an optical communication technology that uses light propagating in free space to wirelessly transmit data for telecommunications or computer networking. 

> 8

# Glossary and acronyms 

Shortcut/concept Definition 

GDPR General Data Protection Regulation A regulation in EU law on data protection and privacy in the European Union and the European Economic Area. 

GHG Greenhouse Gas Those gases in the atmosphere that have an influence on the earth's energy balance. They cause the so-called greenhouse effect. 

GIS Geographic Information System All the tools and software solutions related to creation, maintenance, storage and visualisation of any kind of digital spatial data (visual data, vector data, tables of attributes etc.) 

GNSS Global Navigation Satellite System A system that uses satellites to provide autonomous geospatial positioning. It allows small electronic receivers to determine their location to high precision using time signals transmitted along a line of sight by radio from satellites. 

GPR Ground Penetrating Radar An instrument that detects electromagnetic contrasts in the soil and contains a transmitting antenna and a receiving antenna which allow it to send and detect electromagnetic waves at given frequencies. 

ICA Infrastructure Corporation of America Provides highway asset maintenance services. 

ICAO International Civil Aviation Organization ICAO is a specialised UN funded agency in charge of international air navigation and development of air transport, ensuring safely growth globally. 

ICAO U-AID 

ICAO UAS for Humanitarian Aid and Emergency Response The framework that includes scheduled and unscheduled medical deliveries or provide emergency response to victims of natural or man-made disasters. 

IDB Inter-American Development Bank An institution that provides the largest source of development financing for Latin America and the Caribbean. 

IFRC International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies A worldwide humanitarian aid organisation that reaches 160 million people each year. It acts before, during and after disasters and health emergencies to meet the needs and improve the lives of vulnerable people. 

> 9

# Glossary and acronyms 

Shortcut/concept Definition 

IICA Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture The specialised agency for agriculture of the Inter-American System that supports the efforts of Member States to achieve agricultural development and rural well-being. 

IMU Inertial Measurement Unit An electronic device that typically is used to manoeuvre aircraft (an attitude and heading reference system), including unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), among many others, and spacecraft, including satellites and landers. 

IR Infrared A radiation-sensitive optoelectronic component. IR sensors are widely used in motion detectors, which are used in building services to switch on lamps or in alarm systems to detect unwelcome guests. 

IUCN International Union for Conservation of Nature An international organisation working in the field of nature conservation and sustainable use of natural resources. It is involved in data gathering and analysis, research, field projects, advocacy and education. 

LAC Latin America and the Caribbean Region An English-language acronym referring to the Caribbean and Latin American region. The term LAC covers an extensive region, extending from The Bahamas and Mexico to Argentina and Chile, and for this study it is utilised to describe the 35 countries included in the analysis. 

LAWG Latin America Working Group One of the United States' longest-standing coalitions dedicated to foreign policy. LAWG and its sister organisation, LAWGEF, work with over 60 major religious, humanitarian, grassroots and policy organisations to influence decision makers in the halls of power for human rights, peace, and social, economic, and environmental justice. LAWGEF Latin America Working Group education Fund 

LiDAR Light detection and Ranging A method for determining ranges by targeting an object or a surface with a laser and measuring the time for the reflected light to return to the receiver. 

LTE Long-Term Evolution A standard for wireless broadband communication for mobile devices and data terminals, based on the GSM/EDGE and UMTS/HSPA standards. It improves on those standards' capacity and speed by using a different radio interface and core network improvements. 

> 10

# Glossary and acronyms 

Shortcut/concept Definition 

MOCA Monitoring traffic Congestion in Africa The collection and analysis of urban traffic data at high resolution using a swarm of drones to understand the dynamics at play. 

NASA The National Aeronautics and Space Administration An independent agency of the U.S. federal government responsible for the civil space programme, aeronautics research, and space research. 

NDB New Development Bank A multilateral development bank (MDB) established by Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa (BRICS) with the objective of financing infrastructure and sustainable development projects in BRICS and other emerging economies and developing countries. 

NDR Network Disaster Recovery Provides guidelines for restoring network services and normal operations following a disaster. 

NDVI Normalized Difference Vegetation Index An index that describes the difference between visible and near-infrared reflectance of vegetation cover and can be used to estimate the density of green on an area of land. 

NGO Non-governmental Organization An organisation that generally is formed independent from government. They are typically nonprofit entities, and many of them are active in humanitarianism or the social sciences. 

NH3 Ammonia A compound of nitrogen and hydrogen which is a by-product of agriculture and industry. 

NO2 Nitrogen dioxide Forms when fossil fuels such as coal, oil, gas or diesel are burned at high temperatures. 

OCHA United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs Coordinates the global emergency response to save lives and protect people in humanitarian crises. 

OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development An intergovernmental economic organisation with 38 member countries, founded in 1961 to stimulate economic progress and world trade. 

> 11

# Glossary and acronyms 

Shortcut/concept Definition 

OPEX Operating Expenses An expense a business incurs through its normal business operations. 

PADF Pan American Development Foundation A non-governmental and non-political organisation created in 1962 by the Organization of American States, the public sector and the private sector to focus on issues of pressing concern in the Western Hemisphere. 

PM2.5/ PM10 Particulate Matter 2.5/ Particulate Matter 10 A mixture of many chemical species. PM2.5 comes from emissions from combustion of gasoline, oil, diesel fuel or wood, whereas PM10 also includes dust from construction sites, landfills and agriculture, wildfires and brush/waste burning, industrial sources, wind-blown dust from open lands, pollen and fragments of bacteria. 

PPK Post-processing kinematics Positioning process in which signals received from a mobile receiving device store location data can be adjusted using corrections from a reference station after data has been collected. 

R&D Research & Development The set of innovative activities undertaken by corporations or governments in developing new services or products and improving existing ones. 

RGB Red Green Blue True colour composite uses visible light bands red, green and blue in the corresponding red, green and blue colour channels, resulting in a natural coloured result, that is a good representation of the Earth as humans would see it naturally. 

ROI Return on Investment A ratio between net income and investment. 

RTK Real-time kinematic The application of surveying to correct for common errors in current satellite navigation systems. 

SDG Sustainable Development Goal A collection of 17 interlinked global goals designed to be a blueprint to achieve a better and more sustainable future for all. 

SELA Latin American and Caribbean Economic System An organisation founded in 1975 to promote economic cooperation and social development between Latin American and the Caribbean countries. 

SME Small and Medium-sized Enterprise Non-subsidiary, independent firm which employ fewer than 250 people. 

> 12

# Glossary and acronyms 

Shortcut/concept Definition 

SO2 Sulfur dioxide A gaseous air pollutant composed of sulfur and oxygen. SO2 forms when sulfur-containing fuel such as coal, oil, or diesel is burned. 

SSD Solid-State Drive A type of storage device used in computers. 

UAS Unmanned Aerial System Unmanned aircraft and the equipment to control it remotely. 

UAV Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Aircraft operating or designed to operate autonomously or to be piloted remotely without a pilot on board. 

UBIV Under Bridge Inspection Vehicles Vehicle dedicated to perform underbridge inspections and maintenance. 

UN WFP United Nations World Food programme It is the world's largest humanitarian organisation focused on hunger and food security, and the largest provider of school meals. 

UNDAC United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination Part of the international emergency response system for sudden-onset emergencies. It is designed to help the United Nations and governments of disaster-affected countries during the first phase of a sudden-onset emergency. 

UNDP United Nations Development programme A United Nations organisation tasked with helping countries eliminate poverty and achieve sustainable economic growth and human development. 

UNDRR United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction Brings governments, partners and communities together to reduce disaster risk and losses and to ensure a safer, sustainable future. 

UNEP United Nations Environment programme Provide leadership and encourage partnership in caring for the environment by inspiring, informing, and enabling nations and peoples to improve their quality of life without compromising that of future generations. 

UNICEF United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund Agency of the United Nations responsible for providing humanitarian and developmental aid to children worldwide. 

> 13

# Glossary and acronyms 

Shortcut/concept Definition 

UPDWG UAV for Payload Delivery Working Group A global community of stakeholders interested in the development, advancement and application of drones for use in public health and supply chain systems. 

USAID United States Agency for International Development An independent agency of the U.S. federal government that is primarily responsible for administering civilian foreign aid and development assistance. 

UTM Unmanned Traffic Management Air traffic management ecosystem under development for autonomously controlled operations of UAS governmental institutions (e.g. the FAA, NASA, other federal partner agencies in the US) and industry. 

VHF/UHF Very high frequency/Ultra high frequency UHF can range from low band (378-512 MHz) to high band (764-870 MHz) while VHF ranges from low band (49-108 MHz) to high band (169-216 MHz). 

VLOS Visual Line of Sight An operation in which the remote pilot or UAS observer maintains direct unaided visual contact with the UAS. 

VTOL Vertical Take-off and Landing An aircraft is one that can hover, take off and land vertically without relying on a runway. 

WDS Waste Disposal Site A place where ashes, garbage, refuse, domestic waste, industrial waste, municipal refuse, and sewage is disposed of or dumped. 

WHO World Health Organization A specialised agency of the United Nations responsible for international public health. 

WMP World Mosquito programme A not-for-profit group of companies owned by Monash University that works to protect the global community from mosquito-borne diseases such as dengue, Zika, yellow fever and chikungunya. 

WWF World Wide Fund An international non-governmental organisation founded in 1961 that works in the field of wilderness preservation and the reduction of human impact on the environment. 

> 14

# 2

# Executive Summary Executive Summary 

> Source: PwC analysis

The Latin American and the Caribbean region is rich in culture and biodiversity, and includes some of the most rapidly-developing economies in the world, and yet experiences some of the highest rates of inequality in the world. This report identifies critical sectors and areas where the use of drone technology can substantially support to address important social and environmental challenges faced by countries in the region. These issues are associated with the geographical location, rapid urban sprawling, isolation and lack of development in rural areas. At the same time, there are important demographic differences and diversification in economic advancement between countries, combined with rapid and unequal regional, national and local transformations. In this context looking for long-lasting and innovative solutions is becoming increasingly important, where drones can take a critical role. Hence, to unlock regional potential and ensure proper wellbeing of its citizens, 14 development drone use cases were identified for the region: healthcare, agriculture, humanitarian aid, disaster management, urban planning and monitoring, road infrastructure maintenance, restoration and reforestation, road traffic and safety monitoring, remote internet access, endangered species monitoring, wildfires, fighting with mosquito-borne diseases, environmental pollution monitoring, waste management and landfill monitoring. The broad analysis of the drone applications for each of the use cases results in detailed description and deep understanding of the potential and requirements for the implementation of drone technology in development activities. Multiple aspects were taken into consideration such as maturity of the drone applications, benefits that drones can bring to the region or expected outcomes and impact of their use. The report identifies enabling factors, both technological and regulatory of the drone solution implementation and lists the adoption enablers and barriers. Removing barriers to drone adoption requires commitment from public and private sectors, the support of NGOs and international financial organisations, along with awareness and participation from civil society and communities. That is why, for each use case, the list of relevant stakeholders is proposed. Several potential business models for drone deployment in the LCR region are suggested, dependent on requirements like scale and frequency of operations, and various possible sources of funding. Finally, to facilitate introduction and scale-up of the use of drones in the region, an exemplary plan for drone pilot project implementation and a “success story” from the region is presented. 

> 16

# 3

# Introduction The LAC region is vast and complex, with multiple interrelated human, environmental and infrastructural challenges that, in part, can be tackled with technological introduction 

> Source: PwC analysis; Urbanet; Regional Assessment Report on Disaster Risk in Latin America and the Caribbean; Libertun de Duren NR; López & Mulero-Pázmány (2019); CEPAL

Widespread infrastructure problems 

90% of the LAC region is classified as rural, 

with 18% of the total population—around 120 million people—residing in rural areas, with limited or unreliable access to essential services such as road infrastructure when in 2015, just under 18% of the total road network was paved. At the same time, several cities in the LAC region are undergoing rapid and unplanned urbanisation , with 40% of Bolivia, for instance, living in informal settlements. Many places experience regular interruptions to water, electricity and gas—Bogotá in Colombia experienced such interruptions over 1,000 times a month between 2002 and 2017. Furthermore, 32% of the population of the LAC region effectively has no access to the internet. 

Transportation network challenges across the region 

LAC is a region with many contrasts; characterised both by large areas difficult to reach through different transportation means , while other parts of the region are highly 

congested urban centres . Travel by road is generally difficult in many countries, as roads are poorly maintained , damaged by natural disasters, or subject to adverse weather conditions . In some locations, due to conflict or criminal activity travel can be dangerous as well, or lead to blockades and diversions. 

Key challenges Drone technology Stakeholders Business models 

From the emerging major power of Brazil with its population of 200 million people to the small island nation of Grenada; from relatively well-developed and wealthy Chile to a fragile nation as Haiti, the LAC region is anything but homogenous. It is rich in culture and biodiversity, and includes some of the most rapidly-developing economies in the world, and yet Latin America and the Caribbean experiences some of the highest rates of inequality in the world. Addressing the social and environmental challenges facing the region—many of them the result of geography—is key to unlocking its potential and ensuring proper wellbeing development for its citizens. 

> 18

# Healthcare, humanitarian and environmental issues are some of the most pressing challenges that can be solved with the support of technology across the LAC region 

> Source: PwC analysis; “Our Path Forward” The Nature Conservancy Report

The LAC region is highly exposed and vulnerable to natural disasters, and countries present different preparedness levels 

This is a region highly prone to extreme weather events and other natural disasters, such as earthquakes, hurricanes, floods, tsunamis, and droughts. Each of these has a huge impact on lives and society: not only do they create devastating 

humanitarian crises , but they also wreak havoc on infrastructure , and can reduce physical and digital connectivity , leaving some remote or rural communities completely cut off from vital services. All this has an exacerbating effect on pre-existing issues, such as poverty, undernutrition, poor access to healthcare, isolated areas and limited access and affordability to main goods and services. 

Many countries throughout the region experience serious issues related to healthcare 

Timely access to healthcare and preventive solutions are a major concern in the region, especially for those remote areas far from medical facilities with poor transport links, or areas with high exposure to specific diseases and contamination. 

Mosquito-borne disease plagues several of the countries in the region - due to geography, with Venezuela, Guyana, Haiti, and Brazil suffering from particularly high rates of malaria or Zika, for example. Additionally, poor waste management practices are creating yet more risks to public health due to exposure to contamination, water pollution and related challenges. 

The LAC region faces complex environmental and social challenges associated with it 

The LAC region has one of the richest and most diverse ecosystems in the world, playing host to around 40% of the world’s species and 23% of its forests, acting as one of the best bulwarks against GHG-driven climate change and biodiversity loss—but these are all at threat. Unpredictable 

wildfires and illegal logging are increasing, devastating huge swathes of the Amazon. Meanwhile, poor waste management leads to polluted air, soil, and water, while poaching , and other human activities are driving already-endangered species to the brink of extinction. Furthermore, many countries in the region rely heavily on agriculture, both to feed their own populations & export, and as the main source of employment, but climate change is leading to 

decreased yields and incremental food insecurity. 

Key challenges Drone technology Stakeholders Business models 

> 19

# The introduction of Drones as a key tool can have a ripple effect on solving some of the most pressing social, humanitarian and environmental challenges in the LAC region 

> Source: PwC analysis, Zipline

Countries and institutions across the LAC region are looking for cost-effective and efficient solutions to address these challenges, and UAS are an ideal technology, in terms of speed of response, versatility, and the ability to provide aerial data to help solve complex problems. They are a scalable solution for many of the logistical, social, and environmental challenges faced by the region, with huge potential for further development and implementation. Drones can help by giving concrete-data driven perspectives, by providing rich aerial data in several sectors 

In urban planning , UAS are playing a critical role in monitoring the growth of unplanned settlements, helping to provide information on current and future needs for infrastructure, utilities and services. In traffic management and road maintenance , they can provide real-time data on congestion and the condition of road infrastructure (largely relevant to the more urbanised countries in the study). In disaster prevention and management, drones help by capturing aerial imagery for the creation of accurate elevation models and slope maps to better assess damages, locate survivors, or facilitate making more resilient investments —which is particularly relevant for Caribbean countries prone to hurricanes, etc. Drone data is increasingly being used for environmental monitoring of areas of ecological importance (like the Mangroves in Panama or the Caribbean coral reefs) and can provide a wide range of biodiversity metrics. They can also be utilised in waste management to ensure compliance and measure landfill. 

Drones can provide supplies or services where there is no access for terrestrial vehicles, or in other situations where human presence is difficult or inappropriate 

One of the most powerful examples of this is in 

delivery of medical goods and supplies. UAS have been utilised for the delivery of blood, medicines, vaccines, tests and samples, to/from remote locations and unserved areas in multiple countries around the world. There is also the potential for them to deliver medical devices, like defibrillators, reducing emergency response time—a project by Zipline in Africa demonstrated that drones could cut delivery time of medical supplies in Rwanda by up to 8 times. The same model can be used to distribute food, aid and emergency supplies to refugees, climate migrants, or other difficult-to-reach and food-insecure areas. The use of drones has even been piloted in 

providing remote internet access in areas of poor connectivity, seen following disasters in Puerto Rico. 

Key challenges Drone technology Stakeholders Business models  

> Source: Forbes, 2019 1
> 20

# Drones can address many of these challenges by going where humans and manned vehicles cannot reach the last mile providing goods, supplies and the data needed 

> Source: PwC analysis; WWF; IAEA

Drones also permit remote observation where human access is not easy or feasible 

One such use case is in endangered species monitoring , where discreet observation from the sky allows wildlife to be monitored with minimal disturbance—tracking the health of Amazon pink river dolphins, for example . Another is in post-disaster management , where they provide aerial images of areas which are unsafe or inaccessible due to flooding or landslides, for example. Across multiple sectors, 

worker safety can be improved with the use of drones, keeping them away from dangerous environments or other hazards (for example in waste management, urban monitoring or humanitarian aid). 

Another benefit of drones is the fact they can be deployed incredibly rapidly. This is vital in disaster response where response time can be the difference between life and death. Speed of deployment is also key in combating wildfires, where drones can help in identifying and extinguishing fires. 

Drones have the potential to increase efficiency and cost-effectiveness across several sectors 

For example, in precision agriculture , UAS applications include monitoring crop growth using vegetation analysis, crop spraying, seeding, pest and disease detection, and more (targeted pesticide spraying was shown to reduce costs by over 80% on one avocado farm). They also aid reforestation efforts by distributing seeds with far greater efficiency than conventional methods (up to 25 times faster according to some firms). Finally, in the fight against mosquito-borne disease, drones are able to release sterile mosquitoes at the rate of 50,000 mosquitos per flight, covering 20 hectares in just 10 minutes. 

Key challenges Drone technology Stakeholders Business models 

> 21

Main social and humanitarian use cases Healthcare and medical goods delivery Agriculture applications Humanitarian aid Disaster management Urban planning and monitoring Road traffic and safety monitoring Road infrastructure maintenance Remote internet access 

# Although the deployment of UAVs programmes can support directly and indirectly the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals in the LAC region… 

Source: PwC analysis 

Impact of the Drone Use Cases on Sustainable Development Goals Achievement 

Type of impact: Indirect Direct 

Main environmental use cases Endanger species monitoring Environmental pollution monitoring Restoration and reforestation Waste management and landfill monitoring Wildfires Mosquitoes borne disease spread reduction 

Key challenges Drone technology Stakeholders Business models 

22 … the relevance and impact of different drone use cases for social, humanitarian and environmental purposed varies across countries in the region 

Source: PwC analysis 

Level of Relevance of Particular Drone Use Cases per Country* 

> Antigua & Barbuda Aruba Belize Chile Ecuador Honduras Argentina Barbados Cayman Islands Dominican Republic Haiti Paraguay Bahamas Brazil Dominica Guyana Panama St. Martin Bolivia Costa Rica Guatemala Nicaragua St. Lucia Trinidad and Tobago Colombia Grenada Mexico St. Kitts & Nevis Suriname El Salvador Jamaica Peru St. Vincent and the Grenadines Uruguay Venezuela

Healthcare and medical goods delivery Agriculture applications Humanitarian aid Disaster management Urban planning and utilities monitoring Road traffic and safety monitoring Road infrastructure maintenance Remote internet access Endangered species monitoring Environmental pollution monitoring Restoration and reforestation Waste management and landfill monitoring Wildfires Mosquitoes borne disease spread reduction 

- Not relevant - Moderately relevant - Very relevant - No data available** 

*Country selection methodology in the appendix; **For some countries there was not data available in the selected indicators to fully assess the relevance of the use case 

Key challenges Drone technology Stakeholders Business models 

23 From a technical perspective, the UAS solutions available globally and in the LAC region have reached high technology readiness levels 

> Source: PwC analysis

Today’s drones can carry a variety of different payloads 

Cameras can be used for conventional photography as well as capturing wavelengths outside the visible spectrum ; for example, to locate humans within buildings (for disaster response) or animals under tree cover (in endangered species monitoring), or to analyse vegetation (in precision agriculture). 

Other sensors can be used for the detection of gas or other chemicals (of use in environmental monitoring). They can also carry secure and climate-controlled delivery systems , for uses including spraying water (on wildfires) or pesticides (in agriculture), releasing sterile mosquitoes, or delivering medical supplies. 

Various options for powering the drone 

Drones can be powered by battery (providing ease-of-use but limited flight time), gasoline (long flight times but noisy and heavy), hydrogen cells ,or can even be tethered to the ground for permanent stationary monitoring of traffic hotpots. 

The adoption of drones to solve complex social and environmental problems is gaining momentum around the world as well as across Latin America and the Caribbean. UAS technology, once reserved for defence purposes, has in recent years increasingly been adopted by governments, the private sector, and NGOs, and has growing potential to compete effectively with traditional alternatives in many sectors. The technology is being utilised in logistics, health, agriculture, humanitarian aid, disaster response, mapping infrastructure & utilities, climate & environmental protection, and more. There is a vast array of commercially available and affordable drones and drone services 

Platforms of different sizes, speeds, weights and endurances: Fixed-wing drones , structurally similar to a traditional aircraft, are able to cover long distances but require large landing areas. Multirotors have shorter flight times and are therefore only suitable for smaller areas, but can hover, giving great versatility. 

VTOL drones combine elements of both, taking off vertically but flying long distances. 

Key challenges Drone technology Stakeholders Business models 

> 24

# Across the region there are notable differences when it comes to the maturity of drone use cases implemented 

> Source: PwC analysis

Globally, there is evidence of the established use of drones for most of the applications mentioned in the study, but in many cases, LAC countries have a lower level of maturity. There is significant potential to scale up their use of drones for social, humanitarian and environmental purposes. There is notable inequality in the levels of maturity across the LAC region. 

While some countries in the region show low adoption of UAS, in other such as Argentina, Brazil, and Mexico there is an incremental adoption and use of the technology. In Argentina, drones are being used to monitor road traffic and endangered species, and landfill; in Brazil they have been used for sterile mosquito release, tracking river dolphins, rainforest restoration, and mapping favelas in São Paulo; in 

Mexico they have provided air quality monitoring, damage assessment following an earthquake, and wildfire management. 

The highest levels of adoption, not just in the LAC region but globally, can be found in the agriculture sector —notably in Guatemala, Brazil, Argentina and El Salvador. 

Drones are being deployed for various environmental purposes in parts of the LAC region but are yet to achieve their full potential. 

These include environmental pollution monitoring (seen in Brazil, Mexico, Peru, Argentina, and Chile), deforestation monitoring 

(in Panama, Brazil, and Costa Rica) and 

endangered species monitoring (in Brazil, Argentina, Mexico, and Belize). Finally, there are a few use cases which are being piloted elsewhere but for which there is only limited evidence of use across the LAC region (i.e., the applications are only being explored on a small scale or in very few countries). These include 

humanitarian food and aid distribution, waste management and landfill monitoring, remote 

internet , and road traffic monitoring (which has been piloted in Haiti, for example). 

Several other use cases are well-established around the world, but the LAC region lags behind. 

These include urban planning (where only Argentina, Peru and Mexico have evidence of use), 

road infrastructure monitoring (seen mainly in Brazil, Argentina, and Uruguay) and managing wildfires (used in Brazil, Mexico, and Belize). 

Furthermore, there are some use cases which show great potential but are still only at an emergent stage globally. Notable among these is 

medical delivery , which is gradually evolving from small-scale pilot projects to a feasible solution (proven by full scale deployments e.g. in Africa). Drone applications in disaster mitigation and recovery and in the fight against mosquito-borne disease are also still emerging use cases but can be seen in several countries across the LAC region. 

Key challenges Drone technology Stakeholders Business models 

> 25

# There is a large number of UAS social and environmental use cases and the LAC region presents different levels of maturity compared to the global outlook 

Source: PwC analysis based on use cases, literature reviews, secondary sources and interviews *the level of maturity assigned was based on whether there is an evidence in one or more countries that have achieved full potential of use, and it does not mean that there is the same level of development in each country 

SOCIAL AND HUMANITARIAN PROBLEMS* Use case Healthcare and medical goods delivery Agriculture Humanitarian aid Disaster management Road traffic monitoring Urban planning and monitoring Road infrastructure maintenance Remote Internet access Location World LAC World LAC World LAC World LAC World LAC World LAC World LAC World LAC 

Level of use case development 2 2 3 3 3 1 3 1 2-1 1

mature use case 

ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS* Use case Endanger species monitoring Environmental pollution monitoring Restoration and reforestation Waste management and landfill monitoring Mosquitoes Borne Disease Spread Reduction Wildfires Location World LAC World LAC World LAC World LAC World LAC World LAC 

Level of use case development 3 2 2 3 3 3 1 3 1 2-1 1

testing & piloting stage limited or no evidence 

Key challenges Drone technology Stakeholders Business models 

26 Barriers related to operations 

Noteworthy, it is fundamental that the necessary technology for drones deployment needs to be available in the countries where operations will be deployed. This includes the drone hardware itself and relevant payload equipment ,and in many cases also the software that will be needed to analyse the vast quantity of aerial data drones provide. 

Another critical factor is having a well-established regulatory environment conducive to drone operations. Most countries have national laws regulating UAS , but where they do not exist, ICAO regulatory framework may be adopted. This is especially relevant in humanitarian use cases like disaster response, healthcare, and mosquitoes borne disease spread reduction. Most use cases above require BVLOS operations , while some also involve flights over people or restricted areas , so laws will need to accommodate this. 

Other barriers to drone use include limited financial support, a lack of interest or understanding about its potential from governmental bodies, complicated requirements of pilot licensing and certification, cumbersome bureaucracy, and concerns from the public about drones being a threat to safety or privacy. 

# A mature technological and regulatory environment is essential to facilitate the use of drones in the LAC region 

> Source: PwC analysis

Drone solutions have huge potential to tackle complex social and humanitarian problems in the LAC region but for this to be possible, barriers to operation need to be removed and incentives need to be offered. 

Key challenges Drone technology Stakeholders Business models 

> 27

# Enabling the adoption of drones in the LAC region will require the involvement of five key groups of stakeholders 

> Source: PwC analysis

Removing barriers to drone adoption will require commitment from the public and private sectors, the support of NGOs and international financial organisations, along with awareness and participation from civil society and communities. Five key groups of stakeholders 

1. Governments and public sector organisations have three key responsibilities: they need to facilitate the regulatory environment , provide financing and subsidies and beyond this they also need to commit to incorporating innovative technological solutions within their programmes. 2. The private sector also has a vital role to play in drone applications. Private companies develop and provide the 

hardware (drones, cameras, sensors, etc.), software and expertise required to implement drone solutions. 3. International financial organisations and other investors will need to provide funding for pilots and drone projects through loans, investment, and other forms of financial support. They may also help indirectly by funding drone initiatives and research and development projects. 4. NGOs and international development organisations can support implementation through specific skills, knowledge and resources. Drone experts like Flying Labs will be relevant across all applications, while sector specific organisations will be relevant in offering expertise and knowledge for each use case. 5. Finally, buy-in from end users and society at large needs to be secured. Listening to end users’ requirements and feedback is vital in optimising drone applications. It is essential that the public are at ease with the use of drones in their communities, hence educational and training programmes for the local population should be implemented, to help inform them about the benefits of UAS .

Key challenges Drone technology Stakeholders Business models 

> 28

# There are several potential business models for drone deployment in the LAC region, dependent on requirements like scale and frequency of operations, and various possible sources of funding 

> Source: PwC analysis

The operating model for drone applications is either ‘in-house’ or outsourced 

The operating model for drone applications is usually either ‘in-house’, where operations are conducted using an institution’s internal capacity, or outsourced, where responsibility is given to a third-party drone service provider. In-house models can potentially offer greater flexibility and faster response time, but will require significant investment in terms of technology, staff, and other capabilities, with associated financial risk. Outsourcing drastically reduces these initial costs and risks, as well as simplifying issues of compliance and permits, but can lead to inflexibility and a lack of agility. 

Collaborative economy model 

Other, less common operating models embrace the sharing economy and the idea of ‘collaborative consumption’. In a co-operative or community-run drone project, a community (for example, a group of farmers) might purchase a drone, sharing the cost of the equipment and its maintenance, giving them all access to the technology. Alternatively, ‘ drone sharing’ can connect individual end-users and drone owners, potentially using an online platform to create connections within the drone community. These models are usually appropriate only for small-scale, local projects. 

Build-operate-transfer model 

Therefore, where a third party takes responsibility for operations, they may do so under a 

build-operate-transfer (BOT) model: Generally, this model is used in public sector organisations, where a third-party company or consultant is responsible for establishing and running the organisation, building the team etc., and gradually transfers the knowledge in house over time. When the public sector organisation has gained enough experience and has the appropriate staff to manage operations itself, the consultant withdraws. 

Key challenges Drone technology Stakeholders Business models 

> 29

# The choice of business model will also vary depending on scope, regularity and the financial implications of such projects 

> Source: PwC analysis

The choice of model is likely to depend on a number of factors defining the nature of the project, including scale and regularity. 

For instance, operations may be planned on a local, regional, or nationwide scale, while deployment may be ad-hoc (in response to emergencies like natural disasters and wildfires), regular (for cyclical monitoring of urban planning or wildlife), or permanent (e.g., agricultural monitoring or long-term medical delivery system). 

Drone projects are funded in a variety of different ways. 

Funding might come directly from central or local 

government, such as a sector-specific ministry like the Ministry for Agriculture or Transport, where relevant. There may be support from investors ,relevant NGOs, or local communities themselves 

(for small projects). Finally, there are also some potential alternative sources of funding . This might include the private sector —for example, a drone service provider looking to raise its profile or prove its product’s effectiveness by offering its services for free or at discount, or other stakeholders in the value chain who might benefit indirectly from the project—for instance, it might prove cost-effective for an agricultural inputs firm to contribute to the cost of drone spraying services. 

Key challenges Drone technology Stakeholders Business models 

> 30

# 4

# Use cases snapshots 

The following section contains: 

• A one-page summary of each development use case of drone technology Essential medical good transportation by drones is gaining momentum globally, and it has great potential to positively impact healthcare supplies delivery and reduce healthcare inequalities for remote areas in the LAC region 

> Source: PwC analysis

Healthcare Delivery 

Key outcomes 

Improved healthcare delivery, emergency response, access to medicine, reduce healthcare inequality between rural and urban areas, 

Adoption enablers 

Affordable access to funds, UAS regulations for BVLOS & airspace corridors. 

Financing 

Government, development institutions, potentially co financed by the pharmaceutical industry. 

Countries where most relevant: 

Antigua & Barbuda, Barbados, Belize, Ecuador, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, St. Kitts & Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and Grenadines, Trinidad and Tobago. 

Justification on selected countries for pilot projects: the selection was based considering the 

healthcare delivery needs in rural areas, utilising data from Global Health Index and % of rural population. 

Maturity SDGs directly impacted SDGs in directly impacted 

Key challenge 

Timely healthcare and essential 

medical supplies provision is a challenge for people living in these 

remote locations or any areas that are poorly connected to healthcare facilitie s. According to the OECD, before the pandemic, around 25% of the LAC region population did not have access to essential healthcare. 

The role of drone technologies 

Multiple pilot projects were conducted in the region and globally and several countries formally implemented drone delivery as part of the healthcare system. World LAC 

> 32

SDGs in directly impacted 

Countries where most relevant: 

Bahamas, Belize, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Guatemala, Honduras, Paraguay, Peru, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago, Uruguay. 

Justification on selected countries for pilot projects: Applying excessive amounts of fertilizer leads to the release of harmful greenhouse gases into the atmosphere and the eutrophication of waterways. Standard amount of fertilizer input is 100 kg/ha. Countries where intensity is higher than this value were selected as the most relevant for pilot project. 

Key challenge 

The agriculture sector uses over 

one-third of the region’s land area ,generates nearly 50% of its greenhouse gas emissions , and utilises around three-quarters of its freshwater resources . Moreover, it provides the main source of income and wellbeing to most of the population. Climate change is leading to decreased crop yields and food insecurity. 

# Accelerating the introduction of UAS in agriculture for smart farming, can support further development in the most important economic sector in the LAC region 

> Source: PwC analysis

Agriculture 

SDGs directly impacted 

The role of drone technologies 

Data captured by drones enable farmers to generate digital maps with vegetation indexes required for precision agriculture. Additionally drones are used as a vehicle to perform crop spraying ,especially in challenging terrain conditions reducing the use of fertilisers and enhancing the precision for water usage. 

Key outcomes 

Improved agricultural productivity and access to crop health information leading to increased 

food security and agricultural growth, reduced financial impact from extreme weather events. Adoption enablers 

Affordable drone cargo solutions and relevant software, Acceptance from local communities for the wide use of drone technologies. 

Financing 

Government, Development institutions. 

Maturity World LAC 

> 33

The role of drone technologies 

Drones can carry basic food, sanitary items, and health aid ,where other means of transportation cannot reach safely and timely. Drones allow to gather large scale mapping and video data of an affected area to provide fast situational awareness. 

Key challenge 

The number of people in need of humanitarian assistance in the LAC region nearly tripled over the last three years. Across the region, more than 287 million people ( 46% of the population ) are now in poverty or extreme poverty . The pandemic’s effects have had a significant impact on the region in terms of poverty rate, displacement, food insecurity, and violence. Countries where most relevant: Antigua & Barbuda, Belize, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago. 

Justification on selected countries for pilot projects: The most relevant countries for pilot projects were selected based on the World Risk Index which present the risk of disaster in consequence of extreme natural events. The threshold for the low level of risk is 5, so all countries that gain index value higher than 5 are included in the pilot project. 

# Drones are a reliable and timely solution to distribute food and aid relief during critical situations to areas difficult to reach, showing the potential to expand its utilisation in the LAC region for humanitarian and emergency responses 

> Source: PwC analysis

Humanitarian Aid 

SDGs directly impacted SDGs indirectly impacted 

Key outcomes Improved response to disaster events, decreased mortality, improved living conditions, reduced harmful effects on population’s health including long term impacts, reduced negative impact on environment. 

Adoption enablers 

Wide technology availability and Low entry barriers, Financing pilot projects and Acceleration programmes for first aid delivery. 

Financing 

Government, Financial institutions. 

Maturity World LAC 

> 34

Countries where most relevant: Antigua & Barbuda, Argentina, Bahamas, Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Paraguay, Peru, St. Kitts & Nevis, St. Lucia 

Justification on selected countries for pilot projects: The most impactful disasters that continue to haunt the LAC region are floods. Therefore, countries that are most feasible for pilot project were chosen based on the number of people affected by floods according to UN OCHA report . Overall, there are 17 countries that could gain the most from the pilot initiative. 

# As LAC is the second most exposed region to natural disasters globally, there is a need for quick, effective and timely solutions that can support governments and agencies in disaster response, mitigation, assessment and preparedness initiatives 

> Source: PwC analysis

Disaster Management 

SDGs directly impacted SDGs in directly impacted 

Key outcomes Strengthened resilience and adaptive capacity to natural disasters, reduced threats to rescuers and civilian population, decreased negative effects on the health of the population during and after disasters. 

Adoption enablers Availability of skilled technicians to operate drones, availability of hardware in places of high disaster vulnerability. 

Financing 

Government, potentially financed by public and private equity funds. 

Key challenge 

Many countries in the LAC region are especially vulnerable to natural disasters including floods, hurricanes, earthquakes droughts, landslides, extreme temperatures, wildfires, and more. 

Natural disasters in Latin America and the Caribbean push between 

150,000 and 2.1 million people annually into extreme poverty. The role of drone technologies 

Drones give disaster response teams the ability to survey large-scale or inaccessible disaster zones in a safe, immediate and efficient manner. Drones reduce the time required to locate victims and is more cost effective and safer option than sending in rescue helicopters in the first instance. 

Maturity World LAC 

> 35

SDGs in directly impacted 

Countries where most relevant: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El. Salvador, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Venezuela. 

Justification on selected countries for pilot projects: For the justification of countries relevant for pilot project, the percentage of urban population living in slums in 2018 was selected. Countries with minimum values (up to 6%) and those that lack data were omitted. Overall there are 20 countries in the LAC region where performing pilot project is feasible. 

# UAVs can provide accurate data to support and manage urban planning and utilities monitoring in a timely and cost-effective manner, giving policy-makers and planners relevant data for informed decision making 

> Source: PwC analysis

Urban Planning and Monitoring 

SDGs directly impacted 

Key outcomes 

Improved urban planning processes, increased safety of employees in the construction and utility sectors , improved access to affordable water , energy and sanitation and reduced wastage of resources and negative effect on environment. 

Financing 

Government, potentially funded by public and private investment funds. 

Key challenge 

Many cities in the LAC region face the challenge of rapid informal urban growth , which prevents them from providing basic services to their citizens and ensuring sustainable urban development. Currently, 82% of its population lives in cities , with 17% of its urban population concentrated in six megacities, which have more than 10 million inhabitants apiece. 

The role of drone technologies 

Drones are mainly used for: asset management, capital project monitoring, surveying & mapping, informal settlement monitoring, or cadastral information gathering Drones allow capturing high-resolution data quickly and easily providing city services with visual data that can be frequency re-visited allowing high situational awareness. 

Maturity World LAC 

Adoption enablers 

Affordable and accessible funds, governmental programmes supporting innovation, UAS regulations that enable BVLOS. 

> 36

SDGs in directly impacted 

Countries where most relevant: Antigua & Barbuda, Argentina, Aruba, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Cayman Islands, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El. Salvador, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, St. Kitts & Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname, Uruguay, Venezuela. 

Justification on selected countries for pilot projects: For justification of countries selection the 

density of paved roads (km/sq.km) were chosen. 

# Using drones in road infrastructure maintenance in the LAC region can increase road safety and decrease the number of accidents 

> Source: PwC analysis

Road Infrastructure Maintenance 

SDGs directly impacted 

Key outcomes 

Cyclical road infrastructure monitoring using drones may lead to significant optimisation of maintenance works planning , and a reduction of costs . Technology helps to improve road infrastructure quality and safety due to real-time monitoring. 

Adoption enablers 

Road infrastructure maintenance programmes in place, willingness and budget of public agencies to invest in technology solutions. 

Financing 

Government, Development Institutions. 

Key challenge 

In the region, over 60% of the roads are unpaved limiting the economic potential and connectivity of LAC countries. Road accidents related to road infrastructure are some of the biggest challenges in the region, with social, economic and environmental impacts. 

The role of drone technologies 

The technology allows to safely capture and inventory survey-grade data for roads and engineering objects (e.g. bridges). Collected and processed data allow for precise measurements during 

cyclical road and infrastructure inspections or construction site monitoring. 

Maturity World LAC 

> 37

The role of drone technologies 

Using drone technology to monitor road traffic is an increasingly popular alternative to traditional methods. Drones allow to capture video over roads and by analysing the data providing traffic flow and volume information effectively, especially in areas where using fixed sensors or human observations is not possible. 

SDGs in directly impacted 

Countries where most relevant: Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El. Salvador, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, St. Lucia, Suriname, Uruguay, Venezuela. 

Justification on selected countries for pilot projects: Currently in the LAC region, insufficient and unsafe road infrastructure results in nearly 130 000 death and six million injuries per year. Therefore, the most feasible countries for this pilot project were selected based on the mortality caused by road traffic injury data. 

# In highly congested cities in the LAC region drones could be complementary to traditional road monitoring systems, increasing road safety and decreasing traffic congestion 

> Source: PwC analysis

Road Traffic Monitoring 

SDGs directly impacted 

Key outcomes 

Improved cost- and labour-efficiency and safety, reduced urban congestion and traffic jam duration, increased road safety. 

Adoption enablers 

Affordable and accessible funds for drone deployment programmes, R&D projects to pilot and showcase the use of the technology. 

Financing 

Government, Financial Institutions. 

Key challenge 

With the growth in average income, the region has experienced an increased motorization rate. The average annual growth in the region was 4.7% between 2005 and 2015, reaching 201 vehicles per 1000 inhabitants in 2015. Increasing traffic congestion cause significant economic losses (3-6% of the regional GDP). Road safety is also a major concern. 

Maturity World LAC 

> 38

SDGs in directly impacted 

Countries where most relevant: Argentina, Bahamas, Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El. Salvador, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago, Uruguay, Venezuela. 

Justification on selected countries for pilot projects: Currently, only the 4G and 5G broadband coverage is considered as high-quality, reliable internet. Therefore, countries for pilot project were selected based on the proportion of population covered by at least a 4G mobile network (%) . Overall, 22 countries were selected. 

# In many parts of the LAC region, drone internet platforms can be an important substitute for the costly land broadband infrastructure 

> Source: PwC analysis

Remote Internet Access 

SDGs directly impacted 

Key outcomes Improved internet access in regions which are underserved or affected by disasters, improved access to and quality of education in rural areas, meaning better opportunities for more children. 

Adoption enablers 

Lower costs for putting up internet drone platform than for building a network, improvements in energy-carrying capacities. 

Financing 

Government, Financial institutions. 

Maturity World LAC 

Key challenge 

Latin America and the Caribbean have the highest technology inequality in the world. Nearly 224 million people 

(32% of the region’s population) have no access to the internet at the minimum necessary quality standard. 

The role of drone technologies Remote access to the internet by drone acting as a cellular tower is becoming an increasingly relevant alternative to traditional connectivity. Drone internet platforms can be used in the event of natural disasters or other emergencies, as well as in rural areas to increase access to knowledge and educational resources. 

> 39

SDGs in directly impacted 

N/A 

Countries where most relevant: Antigua & Barbuda, Argentina, Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, El. Salvador, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago, Venezuela. 

Justification on selected countries for pilot projects: Countries feasible for pilot project were selected based on the annual forest area net change rate for 2020. Countries that experienced negative rate change are considered as the most relevant. 

# Drones are being increasingly used in forest monitoring and restoration by spreading seeds above both tropical and mangrove forests – habitats of enormous biodiversity 

> Source: PwC analysis

Restoration and Reforestation 

SDGs directly impacted 

Key outcomes Increased number of trees planted in inaccessible and dangerous terrain, decreased number of flood events , increased aerial habitat for millions of species. 

Adoption enablers 

Time-effective, labour-effective, and cost-effective solution, awareness from local communities about the technology. 

Financing 

Government, Development institutions. 

Key challenge 

The LAC region has the world’s largest area of tropical forest, currently threatened by many risks associated with socio-economic changes, such as urbanisation, agriculture, and beef production. Between 2010 and 2020, South America lost an average of 2.6 M ha of forest per year , and this rate appears to be increasing. 

The role of drone technologies Drones are able to perform 3D mapping to provide digital terrain models as well as detection of tree cover and deforestation events. Dedicated drone hardware is also 

used to plant tree seeds effectively. 

Maturity World LAC 

> 40

Key challenge 

In Latin America the reduction of wildlife populations is critical, 

reaching on average above 90% ,mainly due to human activity. Only 17% of the areas in the region are protected in terms of biodiversity 

and 33% of these protected areas are not connected to each other, which disrupts the lives and well-being of endangered animals. 

Countries where most relevant: Argentina, Bahamas, Belize, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El. Salvador, Grenada, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Peru, St. Kitts & Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Trinidad and Tobago, Uruguay, Venezuela. 

Justification on selected countries for pilot projects: To justify countries selection for pilot project, the Red List Index was chosen. This index shows trends in overall extinction risk for species. The index has values between 0 (almost extinct) and 1 (the least concern). Countries that scored below 0.85 are considered the most relevant for pilot project. 

# Animal tracking and monitoring is essential for wildlife conservation purposes such as movement patterns, identifying poaching incidents or tracking the number of species 

> Source: PwC analysis

Endangered Species Monitoring 

SDGs directly impacted SDGs in directly impacted 

N/A 

Key outcomes 

Decreased level of degradation of natural habitats , halting the loss of biodiversity , decreased number of illegal animal trafficking incidents , more comprehensive tracking of population and demographic changes of wild animals. 

Adoption enablers 

Conviction that drones constitute a technological advance to complement insufficient staff, access to qualified IT. 

Financing 

Government, International financial institutions. 

The role of drone technologies 

Drones offer an effective way to monitor wildlife habitats and document the movement of wild animals. 

Devices equipped with thermal cameras can detect species difficult to perceive with traditional methods . Drones have the potential to both improve and automate data collection for wildlife monitoring. 

Maturity World LAC 

> 41

Countries where most relevant: Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica, Ecuador, El. Salvador, Guyana, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Suriname, Uruguay, Venezuela. 

Justification on selected countries for pilot projects: Roughly half of the countries were picked as feasible for pilot project. The selection was made based on the 2019 values of burned area against average from the 2009-2019 period. 

# Drones provide real-time information about the wildfires, estimating their potential movements which can save time, minimize losses and help to target firefighters efforts 

> Source: PwC analysis

Wildfires 

SDGs directly impacted SDGs in directly impacted 

Key outcomes 

Increased safety of firefighters and communities in and around affected areas, improved identification of where a fire will spread, through tracking and mapping fire patterns, decreased area affected by wildfires. 

Adoption enablers 

Governments actively integrating technology into control of manmade and natural disasters, available funding. 

Financing 

Government, International financial institutions. 

Key challenge 

The LAC region suffers an increasing amount of deforestation through wildfires and logging, mainly driven by commercial agriculture. In Brazil occurred approximately 184,081 reported wildfires outbreaks in 2021, and in Bolivia over 34,000 

such events were registered. 

The role of drone technologies 

Drones give a bird’s eye view of the terrain and help firefighters to detect fires and determine the direction of spreading . Devices may be equipped with thermal cameras, which allows identification of hot spots and locating people who may be trapped. 

Maturity World LAC 

> 42

Key challenge 

According to WHO mosquitoes kill more than 725,000 people worldwide every year by transmitting diseases such as malaria, dengue fever, yellow fever, encephalitis and Zika .The biggest incidence in the LAC region can be found in Guyana and Venezuela, with 34 and 33 cases respectively per 1,000 at-risk population in 2019. 

Countries where most relevant: Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Guyana, Haiti, Nicaragua, Peru, Suriname, Venezuela. 

Justification on selected countries for pilot projects: The most suitable index for the justification of selected countries is malaria incidence rate (per 1 000 population at risk) for 2019 . Overall, 11 countries were selected for pilot project, however there is no available data for as many as 15 countries. The biggest number of incidents occurred in Colombia, Haiti and Venezuela. 

# Drones are becoming increasingly popular in the fight against mosquito-borne disease spreading, being able to control the insect population during single flight 

> Source: PwC analysis

Mosquitoes Borne Disease Spread Reduction 

SDGs directly impacted SDGs in directly impacted 

Key outcomes Reduced mortality level , reduced costs of healthcare, improved health conditions for local communities and improved healthcare services. 

Adoption enablers 

Affordable drone cargo solutions and software present on the local market, financing of special programmes for drone deployment. 

Financing 

Government, Development Financial Institutions. 

The role of drone technologies 

There are three main methods of combating mosquito-borne diseases using drones: Releasing sterilised male to mate with females to cause decline of insect population over time, 

spreading Aquatain, a liquid, which prevent mosquito larvaes from breathing atmospheric oxygen, releasing mosquitoes that carry 

bacteria which reduces ability to transform .

Maturity World LAC 

> 43

Countries where most relevant: Antigua & Barbuda, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El. Salvador, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Peru, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago, Venezuela. 

Justification on selected countries for pilot projects: In the LAC region, especially in urban areas, the major issue is associated with constantly decreasing air quality. That is why countries that were selected as feasible for pilot project are chosen based on the annual mean concentration of fine particulate matter (PM2.5) in μg/m3 for 2016 .

# Environmental pollution monitoring is essential to keep track of level of air, water and soil pollution and adjust mitigation strategies 

> Source: PwC analysis

Environmental pollution monitoring 

SDGs directly impacted SDGs in directly impacted 

Key outcomes Decreased time for air/soil/water pollution monitoring , increased knowledge about real-time air contamination in urban or industrial areas, decreased amount of disease connected to toxic substances in the water, air or soil. 

Adoption enablers 

Sufficient funds from international and local funding institutions to enable research opportunities. 

Financing 

Government, International financial institutions. 

Key challenge 

The LAC region struggles with multiple environmental issues. The major of them are associated with air, land and water pollution . More than 100 million people (7% of the population) live in areas susceptible to air pollution. Moreover, 1/3 of the LAC region’s water is polluted, and more than 68% of the soil is affected by erosion. 

The role of drone technologies 

Drones are used for various environmental monitoring purposes , such as carrying air quality sensors, gathering water samples, multispectral and hyperspectral sensors for soil pollution assessment. The data can be processed and overlaid with other geospatial data sources. 

Maturity World LAC 

> 44

Key challenge 

Waste management today remains one of the main sustainability challenges in the LAC region, where 

over 40 million people lack access to waste collection . A third of all waste generated in cities across the LAC region ends up in hazardous open dumps or in the open environment, threatening the lives and health of many people and species. 

Countries where most relevant: Belize, Bolivia, Cayman Islands, Costa Rica, Ecuador, El. Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru. 

Justification on selected countries for pilot projects: Proper waste collection and management are the backbone public service for every community, keeping society protected from harmful pollution. For the pilot project, countries where share of the population covered by waste collection and transport services is lowest were selected. Overall, there are 14 countries that should introduce more efficient waste management practices. However, for many nations, the data is not available, so it may be assumed that this number is larger. 

# Drones can help improve waste management systems by quickly and efficiently generating data that will support local and regional authorities in decision making processes 

> Source: PwC analysis

Waste Management and Monitoring 

SDGs directly impacted SDGs in directly impacted 

Key outcomes 

Improved landfill operations, reduced waste and environmental impact , improved safety of employees, decreased land, water and groundwater pollution. 

Adoption enablers 

Government programmes supporting innovation within the waste management, wide availability of dedicated software platforms. 

Financing 

Government, Development institutions. 

The role of drone technologies 

Drones are used for detailed 

topographic mapping of a landfill, the volume of disposed waste , and how close the facility is to capacity. Moreover, drone aerial imagery has proved helpful in assessing the types of waste and the location of liquid waste disposal and identifying potential pathways for the migration of pollutants into water. 

Maturity World LAC 

> 45

# 5

# Development use cases 

The following section contains: 

• Detailed description of each selected development use case of drone technology 5.1 

# Healthcare Development use case Challenge: Access to medical supplies in remote areas Rural areas in the LAC region represent around 90% of the region's total surface and are inhabited by over 18% of the population . Just considering 20 countries in Latin America, the rural population reached over 120 million people in 2020 , with 3.8 million in the anglophone Caribbean area (31% of the total population). Difficult geography and poor transportation infrastructure make vast areas of this region difficult to access. Timely access to healthcare and essential medical supplies is a challenge for people living in remote locations or any areas that are poorly connected to healthcare facilities. The high inequalities across the region in access to healthcare, sanitation, education, and electricity, combined with climate (e.g. heavy rain), geography, and infrastructure challenges, means innovative solutions for guaranteeing timely healthcare and medical goods deliveries for rural and remote areas are of high relevance. Governments, NGOs, and other stakeholders have implemented a number of solutions, such as rural clinics, operational deployment by small aeroplane or helicopter, and distribution by motorcycle and car. According to the OECD, despite efforts by governments, before the pandemic, around 25% of the LAC region’s population did not have access to essential healthcare, and an even higher number had problems accessing essential medical supplies. Both elements directly impact the government's role in ensuring universal healthcare access. Therefore, with the advancement in technologies worldwide, a critical emphasis has been put on the adoption of digital and innovative solutions, such as telemedicine, and drone delivery of blood, medicines, and essential medical goods—as well as transporting diagnostic tests and samples from/to laboratories—to decrease the gap in healthcare access between rural and urban areas. 

# Drone technology can solve significant problems for medical personnel and local communities, such as difficulty in accessing remote areas, long delivery times, supply availability, limited delivery service coverage, and lack of road infrastructure 

> Source: PwC analysis; WB, 2020; FAO, 2021; ECLAC, 2021; OECD, 2021; Ruano, Rodríguez, Rossi, 2021

Description of Challenge for Healthcare Sector across the Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) Region 

The healthcare sector is of vital importance, impacting the quality of life of the entire population and closely linked to the development level of a country. Access to comprehensive, quality healthcare services is important for promoting and maintaining health, preventing and managing disease, reducing unnecessary disability and premature death, and achieving health equity for everyone. Enabling the transportation of medical goods is essential for the proper functioning of the healthcare system and, as such, can be considered a form of critical infrastructure. 

> 48

Overview of drone healthcare delivery 

Drones are considered a viable option for addressing the delivery challenges and infrastructural inadequacies related to the 

transportation of medical goods . They deliver medical supplies, blood, vaccines or diagnostic samples, amongst other items. Additionally, drones can transport emergency equipment such as automated external defibrillators (AEDs) to reduce emergency response time. The solution is especially relevant for areas with poor transportation infrastructure, remote areas or challenging geography (e.g. islands, mountains) with limited alternative transportation options. Moreover, there is potential for drone usage in 

dense urban areas where air transport can save time in emergency situations. The use of drones opens new possibilities, not only from the perspective of a transportation means but also in terms of supply chain logistics. It may enable the entire supply chain system to switch from relying on predicted demands (PUSH) to a model based on actual, just-in-time needs (PULL). 

# In the LAC region, drone applications in healthcare started more than ten years ago through specific demonstrations, but so far there has been no large-scale deployment of medical delivery, and its full potential has not been unlocked 

> Source: PwC analysis; USAID Global Health Supply Chain programme; GH Supply Chain

Maturity 

Medical drone delivery has been widely tested around the world for over a decade. Although currently there are only isolated examples of large-scale implementation (e.g. Zipline in Rwanda, and its expansion to Ghana and Nigeria), the Covid-19 pandemic has significantly accelerated the healthcare sector’s willingness to innovate, and a significant number of complex pilot projects have been launched since 2020. Although in the LAC region there are not large-scale projects as yet as in Africa with national coverage, diverse healthcare delivery projects at a different scale have been taking place since early 2010s, and currently there are cases of permanent implementation in Brazil. • Worldwide, at least 50 medical delivery projects have been organised, at various levels of advancement, in recent years 

• More than 15 are in ongoing status, with many more planned for deployment 

• At least 5 programmes were conducted on Hispaniola island and in the northern part of South America • Most of the operations were conducted under BVLOS conditions, and at distances between 10–100 km 

> 49

Benefits from the Use of Drones for Medical Delivery 

# Benefits connected to drone applications go beyond direct influence on healthcare, also positively impacting resource optimisation and the entire domestic economy 

> Source: PwC analysis

• The fastest method for reaching hospitals, medical labs, health facilities, and pharmacies, especially in congested or remote areas and in regions with poor road infrastructure or transit obstruction due to natural disasters, adverse weather conditions, or safety issues • Medical goods delivery for remote communities with no access to all-season roads, in a reasonable time and at relatively affordable price relative to the impact on health • Traditional complex transportation chains (e.g. delivery between small islands, requiring land-sea-land journey) can be replaced with 

direct drone delivery 

• Higher safety for delivery personnel , with reduced exposure to adverse environmental conditions or criminal activity • Potential cost savings for large scale projects , as covering a substantial number of facilities and providing a significant number of flights will result in cost reduction compared to single delivery 

• Financial savings due to lower wastage or reduced storage and inventory costs • Access to better healthcare should result in more productive workforces , with potential to improve the domestic economy • The development of the internal drone services market • Local workforce involvement , and new direction for the commercial implementation of drone technology 

> 50

Zipline’s impact over a 5-year period , from October 2016 (with the first successful blood delivery in Rwanda) to October 2021: 

• 210,000 commercial deliveries across five countries 

• 1,900+ healthcare facilities served 

• 25 million people reached 

• 4.5 million doses of medical products delivered • 200+ different medical supplies delivered 

• 14.9 million miles flown autonomously • Delivering 75% of Rwanda’s blood supply outside of its capital 

• Delivery time reduced by up to 8 times in some regions 

• Maternal mortality reduction from 875 in 2018 to 776 in 2020* 

• Lowering blood wastage in Rwanda from 7% to almost 0% in 2018 

• Saving more than $1 million annually due to wastage reduction • Improved healthcare delivery , particularly supporting access and quality in remote areas • Improved access to medicines , blood, vaccines, and treatments • Improved emergency response procedures, backed by more efficient reaction scenarios 

• Reduced wastage of medical resources due to expiry or loss of cold-chain 

• Reduced loss of blood due to expiration dates in blood banks • Improved diagnostic services due to increased access to timely test samples and results 

• Improved access to information about disease outbreaks, and trends in demand for supplies, etc. 

• Decreased discrepancy in speed/access to medicines and treatments between remote areas and main metropolitan areas • Improved monitoring, management and treatment of maternal care , children’s nutrition, and communicable and non-communicable diseases in remote areas 

• Increased capacity of rural clinics in preventative medicine 

Expected Outcomes / Impact of Drone Usage 

# Essential medical goods transportation by drone has great potential to positively impact healthcare supplies delivery and reduce healthcare inequalities for remote areas in the LAC region 

Source: PwC analysis; Zipline 

SDGs impacted 

Indirectly: Directly: 

* Zipline delivery service is one of the factors, but not the only one Source: Scale Flyt, 2020 3Source: Forbes, 2019 251 Regulatory requirements 

• Regulatory environment enabling BVLOS 

(Beyond Visual Line of Sight) operations, or waivers from BVLOS operations (as in most cases, operations will be performed at a greater distance than the pilot’s line of sight) 

• ICAO U-AID guidance could be followed if no relevant national drone regulations are established • Some medical goods may be classified as hazardous goods in a given country, which may require additional risk assessment and operational procedures before appropriate permissions are granted • In countries with a well-established and digitised drone ecosystem, where Unmanned Traffic Management is available, it is possible to establish segregated airspace corridors, information about which is published to other airspace users to mitigate safety risks 

# To support full-scale drone usage in healthcare in the LAC region, technology adoption must be facilitated through technological environment, regulatory frameworks, and incentives 

> Source: PwC analysis

Enabling Factors for Healthcare and Medical Goods Delivery Technology environment Drone hardware: • Fixed-wing drone platforms for deliveries over a longer distance ( above 25 km )

• Multirotor drone platforms for deliveries on short routes ( below 25 km )

• VTOL drone platforms for deliveries on longer distances ( above 25 km ) in difficult terrain without sufficient space for landing or the existence of special UAS landing infrastructure 

Drone payload: • Container with active or passive cooling system for medical goods that require low-temperature storage 

• Highly durable and crack-resistant case to prevent contamination in case of UAV failure 

• Tethered solution or parachute deployment for deliveries in difficult terrain or without sufficient ground infrastructure or clearance for landing 

Software: 

• Relevant software solutions for each drone technology provider to ensure seamless drone control and safe operations (depending on the drone provider, simultaneous operations in multiple locations are technically possible, as well as multi-destination flights for a single mission) • At later stages in deployment, software solutions/applications for placing and managing delivery orders and storage 

> 52

# The key adoption barriers for further drone deployment in the healthcare sector are related to bottlenecks in legislative framework, lack of funding and innovation, and limited stakeholder awareness of the technology’s potential impact 

> Source: PwC analysis

Adoption enablers: • Affordable and accessible funds (government, development institutions, innovation hubs, accelerators) 

• Governmental programmes supporting innovations within the healthcare industry 

• UAS regulations that enable BVLOS operations (or at least individual permissions/waivers for cyclical drone delivery operations) • Civil Aviation Authorities enabling airspace corridors • Affordable drone cargo solutions and relevant software ,available on the local market 

• Local communities’ acceptance of the wide use of drone technologies 

Adoption Enablers & Barriers for Use of Drone Technology in the Healthcare Sector Adoption barriers: • Lacking or limited financing of the drone projects 

• High cost of operational deployment of drones 

• Bureaucratic processes making it difficult to get flight permissions and authorisations 

• Limited technology adoption and low digitalisation rates 

• Limited awareness and knowledge about successfully 

deployed drone projects • Limited awareness of potential, or openness to change ,

from healthcare stakeholders • Public concerns related to the safety and privacy of drone operations at scale 

> 53

Stakeholders category Key stakeholders and potential partners Role of stakeholders Government & public sector 

• Ministry of Health • Ministry of Transportation • Civil Aviation Authorities • Public Hospitals • Rural clinics • National and local agencies of medicine • Blood banks Ways in which public sector entities and authorities can support the operation of drones in the sector: • Facilitate communication among institutions related to permits and operations • Coordinate and oversee necessary investment for an effective pilot project and full implementation • Facilitate regulatory frameworks, investment incentives, permits, exemptions, and airspace controls • Enhance institutional knowledge about the relevance of drones in the sector • Ensure appropriate training for different key groups such as medical, governmental personnel, CAA and other relevant actors • Integrate, measure, and monitor the pilots and expansion of the UAVs solution, to ensure scalability and proper technology usage 

Companies & private sector 

• Private Hospitals • Pharmaceutical industry • Drone operators • Drone associated services The private sector plays a key role in the pilot project, and in further rollout of drone solutions for healthcare. Stakeholders include leading providers of services for public and private healthcare, including blood distribution, medical test and sample distribution (drop-off and pick-up in remote areas), and vaccines. Additionally, the private sector will be responsible for technology development, cost efficiency of the solutions, and providing drone delivery services to public sector clients in the most cost-effective ratio possible. 

Investors and international financial institutions 

• World Bank • Inter-American Development Bank • Caribbean Investment Facility The initial investments and scalability of the operations are subjected to budgetary constraints. Therefore, loans and support from Development Financial Institutions are crucial in mitigating the risk of investment, as well as helping governments make the best investments for a successful pilot project, rollout, and further implementation of innovative solutions in the healthcare space. 

NGOs / civil society & international organisations 

• Flying labs • WeRobotics • Asociación de drones • UNICEF • UNDP • UPDWG NGOs and civil society organisations are important in increasing awareness and acceptance of drone usage among the population, and especially in developing further understanding of the benefits associated with the use of drones for medical goods delivery. Additionally, in remote locations, the collaboration and upskilling of the population around drone usage (i.e. how to receive and send back medicines, test samples, and blood) can be crucial to ensure proper delivery and management of the drones’ payload. NGOs, community leaders, and other key relevant actors from civil society can ensure that local populations feel safe and have no concerns about security and privacy while drones are flying in their area. 

End users / civil society 

• Citizens • Local communities The key role of civil society is to provide feedback on the services and products they use to help companies improve them. Additionally, if there is a demand for certain services or products, citizens can report it to the business, to help meet the needs of end-users. 

# The successful full-scale deployment of drones in the healthcare sector requires the active involvement and cooperation of several groups of stakeholders, including public and private sectors, along with civil society organisations and end users 

Source: PwC analysis 

Partners Environment for the Use of Drones in Healthcare and Medical Goods Delivery* 

*The list of stakeholders is not exhaustive and may differ by country/region/town where healthcare and medical goods delivery solutions are implemented. Therefore, mapping relevant stakeholders prior to any design and implementation is advised. 54 Two alternative business models are proposed; if combined into one holistic approach, they could ensure the speed and geographical coverage necessary to improve healthcare outcomes on a national scale 

Business Models for Medical Drone Delivery 

• Medical drone delivery is typically deployed in three scenarios: 

- emergency response in case of events such as disaster support when other means of transportation are not available 

- target support to provide continuous support to isolated communities - large-scale deployment covering the multiple healthcare points over the entire country or region 

• Currently drone delivery is typically operated by a contracted private company to deliver end-to-end services . The government engages providers for multiple years with contracts sometimes valued at several million dollars • The operations could be gradually transferred to public institutions 

in a given country • As medical delivery is considered a critical infrastructure it is typically 

financed by the government , often initially supported by development institutions 

• The delivery could be co-financed by the pharmaceutical sector ,which could use some of the capacity of the drone transportation system to deliver medicines to pharmacies 

Scale Operating model Financing Inhouse 

Operated using internal capabilities of an institution 

3rd party 

Operated using external specialised service provider 

Community/cooperative 

Operated jointly by a community group 

Build-Operate-Transfer 

Operated by 3rd party and gradually transferred to inhouse 

Local or central government Development institutions Public-private partnership Alternative funding 

Financed by other players of the value chain 

NGO and/or donors Private funding 

Financed by a private sponsors or companies 

Shared economy 

Financed by the community 

On demand 

Ad-hoc or emergency use 

Cyclical 

Regular use when required e.g. based on seasons 

Permanent 

Continuously in operations 

Localised 

Single or number of target areas 

Region/province 

Large scale, regional or cross regional deployment 

Country wide 

Large scale over the entire country 

Frequency 

High relevance Moderate relevance Low relevance 55 Countries where most relevant: Antigua & Barbuda, Barbados, Belize, Ecuador, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, St. Kitts & Nevis,St. Lucia, St. Vincent and Grenadines, Trinidad and Tobago The aim of the pilot project is to evaluate the technology and operations , and aims at full operational deployment after the end of the pilot. Such pilots typically begin with a local model and can be further expanded. The project should be planned in phases, where the initial phase offers an 

educational opportunity for critical stakeholders , and the second phase focuses on the 

expansion of the scope and complexity of the operations. Once Phase I is successfully conducted, Phase II can begin, eventually leading to full scale deployment. The overall timeline for deployment is envisioned at 3-5 years. 

# An effective pilot project for medical goods delivery by drone should be gradually deployed, but with the aim of large-scale testing and an option for full implementation 

Source: PwC analysis; 

Exemplary Pilot Project Scenario Phase I – Operation in safe environment 

Requirements: 

• Permission from and coordination with CAA (Civil Aviation Authority) and ANSP (Air Navigation Service Provider) • Permission from healthcare authorities • Trained drone pilots (1 week*) • Trained medical stuff • Full, completed documentation for the project, including business case calculation • Community awareness & engagement to guarantee local support, including local leaders and key stakeholders, along with an information dissemination campaign 

Operational scenario: 

• One-way and two-way delivery between two or more selected medical points and a single central hub • Operationally safe environment (e.g. no complex terrain and weather conditions, no conflict zones) • Number of fights/deliveries: at least 100 (over 4–8 weeks) • Payload: 1–2 kg • Distance: 5–25 km (BVLOS) 

Hardware: 

• 2–4 drone units (multirotor or VTOL) • Battery packs enabling at least 10 flights per day per drone • Spare parts 

Phase II – Operation in complex environment*** 

Requirements: 

• Permission from and coordination with CAA and ANSP • Permission from health authorities • Trained drone pilots (1-4 weeks*) • Trained medical stuff • Full, completed documentation for the project, including business case calculation • Community awareness & engagement to guarantee local support, including local leaders and key stakeholders, along with an information dissemination campaign 

Operational scenario: 

• More complex operational scenario, e.g. with multiple waypoints, including coordinating delivery to three or more medical points from one or more drone hubs • Operationally more complex environment (e.g. flights above difficult terrain and within challenging weather conditions) • Payload: 1–2 kg • Number of fights/deliveries: at least 200 (over 8–16 weeks) • Distance: 5–60 km (VTOL) 

Hardware: 

• 4–10 drone units (multirotor or VTOL) • Battery packs/fuel enabling at least 10 flights per day per drone • Spare parts 

Expected budget of the pilot project**: USD 180k-505k Expected budget of the pilot project**: USD 280k-785k 

*Additional time required for training pilots with previous experience; ** The cost range depends on the geography, number of participant, technology partners, length of the project and stakeholders involved; **The phases that a pilot project can cover will vary depending on the reality on the ground, level of engagement, technology available, other enabling factors along with the main purpose of the pilot. 56 A pilot project conducted in the Dominican Republic proves the utility of drones in healthcare delivery, providing concrete measured evidence of impact in remote areas 

> Source: PwC analysis; Werobotics

Country: Dominican Republic Year: 2019 Number of flights: 101 Number of routes: 2 Lengths of routes: ~10.3 km Total distance covered: 994 km Total weight of medicines delivered: 21.25 kg 

Case Study: Pilot Project in Dominican Republic Cargo drones were used for medicine deliveries in rural areas of the Dominican Republic 

In 2019, WeRobotics and Flying Labs conducted a drone delivery pilot project in the Dominican Republic. The project was funded by Pfizer and focused on using affordable, locally repairable and locally owned cargo drones to deliver essential medicines to remote health facilities . Dominican Republic Flying Labs is a local knowledge hub that focuses on the use of drones, robotics, data, and AI for positive social change, and WeRobotics is a non-profit organisation that uses drones for humanitarian purposes. Local communities in the remote mountains of the Dominican Republic do not have regular access to healthcare services. The challenge here is the cost of local transportation and a limited number of local transportation options, rather than scarcity of proper infrastructure. When local clinics run out of medicines, or when they cannot test patient samples locally, patients have to travel to the hospital in person. Even if the patient can afford it, getting to the hospital may require a full day of travel. Taking a full day away from paid work or family responsibilities is often not an option. Some patients are too frail to travel on the back of motorbikes on bumpy and windy roads. In many cases, local medical staff have to organise transportation of samples or medical goods using their personal transportation resources, as there is no other option for helping patients. Flying Labs pilots trained by WeRobotics carried out six weeks of consecutive deliveries in the province of San Juan de la Maguana between June and July 2019. A total of 101 autonomous flights were carried out from Bohechio Hospital to two separate health facilities, traveling a total of 994 kilometres . Of the 51 outbound flights, 40 carried medicines totalling 21.25 kilos. The altitude difference between the two locations was 784 meters. During the project, flights were conducted under various weather conditions and operational scenarios, and all of the deliveries were successful, with no major incidents reported. The analysis of the results of the pilot project showed that the cost of delivery was approximately $0.40 per km for 5 flights per day with drones, compared to $0.43 per km for land transport (a 7% cost savings per km). Further cost savings may be achieved if the number of flights per day increases from 5 to 8, resulting in 23% cost savings per km (($0.33/km drone vs. $0.43/km land). With 26 flights per day, cost per km decreases further to $0.25/km by drone, which represents a cost saving of 42%. 

> 57

# 5.2 

# Agriculture Development use case Challenge: Climate change is leading to decreased crop yields and food insecurity 

From 2008–2018, in the LAC region, 29 billion US dollars were lost as a result of declines in crop and livestock production in the aftermath of disasters. Drought and flood have been established as the two greatest culprits of agricultural production loss. In the coming years, due to climate change and global warming, agricultural economies in the LAC region will face increasing challenges, including rising temperatures, changing rainfall patterns ,and a greater frequency and intensity of extreme weather events , severely impacting crop yields and food security. According to an Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) report, most regions within Latin America and the Caribbean will just meet, or fall below, the critical food supply/demand ratio. Production inefficiencies, the use of pesticides, and climate change are negatively impacting agricultural outputs and adding environmental and health threats to countries. Climate models project an average 1-4 degree (Celsius) increase in maximum temperatures, and a 30% decrease in rainfall by 2050 . This will only worsen the yields of crops which are already exposed to increasingly frequent and prolonged drought events. In eastern and central Guatemala, southern Honduras, eastern El Salvador, and parts of Nicaragua, yield reductions of 50-75% have been reported, along with a decrease in productivity levels. As a result, more than 2.2 million people in these countries are food insecure, with more than 1.4 million in need of food assistance. The LAC region is faced with the challenge of producing enough food to feed a growing population, while keeping its place as key net food exporter, conserving its natural resources and ecosystem, and adapting to climate change. The sector’s ability to adapt to climate impacts will be crucial to its survival. Therefore, looking into innovations that can support the protection of the region’s environmental wealth and biodiversity while paying attention to food quality and international safety standards is highly relevant. 

# Drones can help farmers and farming communities deal with problems such as lacking or limited crop information, inefficient use of resources, low operational efficiency, or decreased crop quality and yield due to land or external stress factors 

> Source: PwC analysis; WB; FAO; IDB; UN OCHA

Description of Challenges for Agriculture Sector across Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) Region 

The sector is the backbone of the economy and critical to livelihoods in several countries in the LAC region. The area produces 12% of the global food supply and about 1 6% of exports , accounting for 5–18% of the GDP in 20 countries in the LAC region . The contribution is even higher when the entire supply chains are integrated into the calculations. As one of the world’s largest net food exporters, the productivity of agriculture and agri-food systems in the LAC region have significant influence on global food availability and prices. However, the sector poses several challenges: It uses over one-third of the region’s land area, generates nearly 50% of its greenhouse gas emissions , and utilises around three-quarters of its freshwater resources. Moving towards efficient and smart agriculture is key for the sustainability of the industry and region. 

> 59

Overview of drone use cases in agriculture 

Drones are becoming an inseparable element of precision farming, helping agriculture professionals lead the way with sustainable farming practices while protecting production and increasing profitability. Farmers deploy drones for mapping, crop fertilisation, seeding, soil quality analysis and harvest estimation. 

Advanced sensors allow farmers to generate digital maps , showing insights impossible to see with the naked eye. This use case is primarily related to precise, cyclical mapping of vegetation health, soil moisture, and fertilising requirements, with multispectral cameras being used to generate a map of vegetation indexes such as NDVI (Normalized difference vegetation index). When adequately interpreted over time, autonomous farming equipment can use such maps to target specific plants with fertilizers, for example. Drones enable the real-time and precise analysis of overall soil health: soil quality, nutrient management, and dead soil zones . These factors influence farm productivity, and up-to-date data supports farmers in determining the most effective patterns for planting and managing crops. Moreover, drones are used as a vehicle to perform crop spraying, especially in challenging terrain conditions. Drones can increase spray speed fivefold compared to other types of machinery. The advanced systems enable the volume of fertilizer applied to be optimised for the benefit of the natural environment. In many cases, drones can also reduce the exposure of humans to chemicals. Based on drone data, AI-augmented software can evaluate an approximate yield, e.g. amount of fruit. Based on this information, farmers can make logistic decisions and optimize field management. Finally, drones can be used for disaster (e.g. flood) prediction, to warn farmers of potential threats. 

# Drones can provide growers with fast and accurate crop information, increasing competitiveness and income. Timely data allows proper planning and prevention, ensuring healthy crops and good yields, therefore helping to secure food availability and positively impacting global food prices 

> Source: PwC analysis

Maturity 

Since the birth of precision farming in the mid-90s, drones have become an integral part of agriculture development. Nowadays, the agriculture sector around the globe actively deploys drone technologies. Agriculture is one of the main drivers of the adoption of UAS technologies in the LAC region, and the sector is one of the most advanced in its use of drones. LAC countries have been early adopters of agriculture drones, with Guatemala starting commercial drone operations in 2012. The technology is especially well-established in crop spraying, where it has been present for at least a decade in Guatemala, Brazil and Argentina . However, more advanced usage of the technology and the application of precision agriculture-related data analytics is mainly focused in Brazil .

> 60

Benefits from the Use of Drones for Agriculture 

# The benefits of using drones go beyond the direct influence on agriculture (including crop quality and yields), also positively impacting farmers’ incomes, neighbouring communities, regional environmental sustainability, and domestic labour market 

Source: PwC analysis 

• Availability of up-to-date, high accuracy, and cyclical data can help growers respond instantly and make the r ight farm management decisions , leading to improved crop yields • Improved access to crop health information can also enable the rural micro-insurance industry to reduce the financial impact of extreme weather events such as drought, floods, rain and low temperature events, improving the stability of farmers’ livelihoods • Analytical algorithms enable accurate farm data analysis, such as detection of diseases and pests , the control of which improves crop quality and limits the potential impact of the disease/pest to specific areas • Significantly improved time efficiency compared to traditional methods of spraying, crop disease detection, field mapping, etc., especially on large farms • Targeted drone spraying (i.e. for affected areas), ensuring the efficiency of inputs such as water* and fertilizer, leading to cost savings 

• Reduced pollution (due to more precise application of chemicals and reduced need for heavy equipment), including a reduction in the potential exposure of neighbouring communities, ecosystems, and water reservoirs to contamination 

• Increased use of drone technology has an economic effect on the development of the internal drone services and technology market 

* while using water fertilizer, liquid pesticides 61 SDGs impacted Measured impact of agricultural applications based on existing case studies: 

• More than US$26,000 saved on seeds and chemicals for 440 hectare farmland due to more precise planning of crop production. Multispectral drone imagery allowed for identification of areas that cannot be cultivated and accurate assessment of areas requiring sowing • A wheat crop over 125 acres was losing 10% of the yield as a result of waterlogging. Sixteen zones comprising 9.33 acres (7.3% of the total farmland) were identified as waterlogged from drone multispectral imagery, allowing the client for reasonable financial savings—and significant time savings compared to the traditional method of waterlogging detection 

• Pesticide application on an avocado farm cost $70 per ha, amounting to around $1,500 per treatment over the farm’s 21.4 ha area. Analysis of the client’s avocado plant health using drone multispectral imagery and AI-augmented analysis showed that only 16.9% of the farm required pesticide treatment . The client restricted its application, resulting in $1,244 ( 83% reduction ) savings per pesticide application. Due to early identification of infestation, the yield was increased, and around 80% less soil and water was polluted through precision spraying • UAV systems allow for the sowing of 1 ha in less than 5 minutes 

• Spraying drones use 10 litres of water per hectare , compared to an average of 250 litres per hectare using tractors 

• Improved agricultural productivity 

• Improved access to crop health information leading to increased food security and agricultural growth • Improved crop quality and crop yields • Reduced financial impact from extreme weather events , improved stability of farmers’ livelihoods • Improved efficiency of inputs such as water and fertilizer • Improved environmental sustainability of agricultural operations 

• Reduced poverty due to better yields and quality of agricultural outputs, leading to better prices 

• Reduced potential threats to employees while applying fertilizers and other chemicals • Increased employment opportunities within agricultural services 

# The growth of precise agriculture and drones has great potential to positively impact crop yields and quality, food security, environmental sustainability, and financial stability, improving the lives of farmers and local communities in the LAC region 

> Source: PwC analysis; Agremo; WeRobotics; FutureFarming

Indirectly: Directly: 

Expected Outcomes / Impact of Drone Usage 

> 62

Regulatory requirements 

• The majority of operations for agricultural purposes may be conducted in VLOS or EVLOS flight mode (although larger farms could benefit from BVLOS operations). Flights are associated with low operational risk, due to low altitude and absence of third party infrastructure, people or obstacles • Spraying operations may require additional procedures for permission to carry pesticides, herbicides, etc • Flying platforms and spraying payload should have a declaration of compliance for chemicals, and meet the requirements of agricultural law established for chemical plant treatment from airplanes. In some cases, drone pilots could be additionally trained for operations carrying dangerous goods • In some cases, if aerial spraying is to be performed, it may be a requirement to inform the local community and public organisations located in the vicinity a few days in advance • In some countries, operations like aerial field spraying are regulated with additional legal provisions, even if the law does not directly address UAS (e.g. FAA Part 137 Agricultural Aircraft Operations in the US) 

# To support drone use for precise agriculture in the LAC region, technological adoption must be facilitated, through technology environment, regulatory frameworks, and incentives 

> Source: PwC analysis

Technology environment Drone hardware: • Fixed wing, VTOL, or multicopter drones for mapping and photogrammetry surveying • Dedicated multicopter drone platforms for crop spraying 

Drone payload: 

• Mapping and surveying: 

- RGB cameras for photogrammetry operations 

- Multispectral sensors for crop health monitoring • Spraying and seeding: - Tank with spray nozzles for spraying purposes 

- Seed feeder for sowing operations 

Software: • Photogrammetry data processing software 

• Dedicated GIS software for data visualisation, overlay and analytics (e.g. NDVI and other vegetation indexes, disease detection, irrigation and ground moisture assessment) 

Enabling Factors for Drone Applications in Agriculture 

> 63

# Key adoption barriers for drone usage for precise agriculture relate to the cost of hardware and software, a lack of innovation within the industry, and limited stakeholder awareness of the technology’s potential impact 

> Source: PwC analysis

Adoption enablers: • Affordable drone cargo solutions and relevant software 

available on the local market 

• Acceptance from local communities for the wide use of drone technologies 

• Decreasing cost of drone services 

• Wide availability of dedicated software platforms capable of analysing and visualising drone data • Building awareness among farmers • Simplifying drone deployment roadmap for agriculture applications 

• Financing special programmes for drone deployment for small farms in rural areas 

Drone Technology Adoption Enablers and Barriers within the Agriculture Industry Adoption barriers: • Cost of the drone service and/or relevant hardware and software (in developing economies, a single drone user typically cannot afford the cost of drone hardware/software or services) 

• Lack of technology awareness, knowledge , and educational possibilities in agricultural sector • Absence of the adequate regulatory framework for agriculture operations 

• Limited application of advanced solutions among service providers, and therefore limited possibilities for agricultural players to benefit from the technology’s full potential 

• Limited access to modern farming technologies for small farms 

• Privacy concerns of local communities 

> 64

Stakeholders category Key stakeholders and potential partners Role of stakeholders Government & public sector 

• Ministry of Agriculture • Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (names vary depending on countries, e.g. Chile: SAG) • Civil Aviation Authorities • Ministry of Economy (entities that support cooperatives, seed-capital, innovation capital) • Ministries focused on local and rural development Government and the public sector could support the agriculture industry by: • Facilitating regulatory frameworks, investment incentives, and permits • Enhancing institutional knowledge and capacity about the relevance of drones in the sector, ensuring the appropriate training to the relevant stakeholders • Establishing and developing modern business productive alliances between agricultural growers, exporters/agro-industrial buyers and financial/technical services providers • Promoting the development and adoption of new climate-smart and nutrition-sensitive agricultural practices that would achieve sustained increases in productivity while ensuring adequate management of natural resources and reduced vulnerability to climate change • Support small farmers and cooperatives to access and adopt smart agriculture practices, including the utilisation of drones and other technologies through seed-capital, demonstrations, pilot projects and subsidies 

Companies & private sector 

• Agriculture companies • Agricultural input companies • Crop consultants and advisors • Drone operators • Associated drone services providers Companies and the private sector play a key role in the adoption and further development of drone services and technology for agriculture. Their openness to experiment leads to the improvement of current technology, approach and application, and the development of new technologies and services. 

Investors and international financial institutions 

• World Bank • Inter-American Development Bank • Acumen Fund International development institutions could help governments promote technology within the industry through programmes supporting technological innovations in agriculture. Farmers may be keen to increase their efficiency and profitability but some cannot afford drone services, so loans are crucial to unlock the technology's potential. Investors and financial institutions could significantly increase drone application by supporting investment in agtech drone companies, developing drone dedicated loan programmes, providing affordable loans, and sponsoring drone events to spread knowledge and raise awareness. 

# To support drone adoption and development, strong partnerships are crucial; facilitating demonstrations and pilot projects, raising awareness, and increasing access to the technology for small farms and cooperatives… 

Source: PwC analysis 

Partner Environment for Agriculture Application of Drones* (1/2) 

*The list of stakeholders is not exhaustive and it may differ per country/region/town where agriculture drone solutions are implemented. Therefore, a stakeholders mapping prior to any design and implementation is advised. 65 Stakeholders category Key stakeholders and potential partners Role of stakeholders NGOs / civil society & international organisations 

• Flying labs / WeRobotics • Asociacion de drones • UNICEF • UNDP • UN WFP • FAO • Local agricultural growers and exporters associations • World Health Organization • Environmental Organizations The key role of NGOs and civil society organisations is to raise awareness and acceptance of drone usage among the population, especially to develop a further understanding of the benefits associated with the use of drones for agriculture. The role of drone associations is to spread knowledge among farmers about the use of the technology, and support with drone adoption and deployment. Drone associations are able to organise the appropriate training for the relevant stakeholders, including on-field training with all necessary equipment. For individual farmers in rural areas, it could be costly to hire drone specialists or buy relevant equipment, so NGOs could provide them with the hardware needed, or help with the organisation of a shared economy model, incorporating cooperatives and small farmers’ associations. 

End users / civil society 

• Farmers (small, medium and large enterprises) • Local communities • Local cooperatives The key role of civil society is to provide feedback on the services and products they use, to help companies improve them. If there is a demand for certain services or products, citizens can raise that need, enabling providers to meet the demands of end-users. 

# …NGOs and civil society organisations can assist this by actively cooperating with local communities and rural farmers to introduce new technologies and support deployment 

Source: PwC analysis 

Partner Environment for Agriculture Application of Drones* (2/2) 

*The list of stakeholders is not exhaustive and it may differ per country/region/town where agriculture drone solutions are implemented. Therefore, a stakeholders mapping prior to any design and implementation is advised. 66 Different business models (where finance comes from government, agricultural input distributors, or farmers cooperatives) can ensure that all farmers, regardless of business size, are able to access drone services 

Business Models for Drones in Agriculture 

• One model takes a top-down approach with public-private partnership . Government identifies areas and individual rural communities that need help improving the efficiency of their activities, and launches a relevant drone programme. Drone companies apply for a programme, and selected service providers start the collaboration with local stakeholders • Another potential model includes bottom up approach, where individual 

farmers from communities in close proximity form cooperatives . With combined resources, they jointly purchase relevant hardware and software or professional services, thus sharing the cost • Another model assumes the receipt of alternative funding for drone services, from organisations or companies further along the value chain that benefit from increased agricultural output and productivity. In this model, farmers will get drone services for free or at a significantly reduced cost • Organisations producing and distributing agricultural resources (fertilizers, seeds, pesticides, agricultural equipment, etc.) may pay for and use the data generated by the service provider to demonstrate the need for their products • Companies selling fertilizers could simultaneously provide drone spraying services free of charge (or at a small fee), as fertilizers will be used in a more efficient way. At a large scale, such activity will reduce costs 

Scale Operating model Financing Inhouse 

Operated using internal capabilities of an institution 

3rd party 

Operated using external specialised service provider 

Community/cooperative 

Operated jointly by a community group 

Build-Operate-Transfer 

Operated by 3rd party and gradually transferred to inhouse 

Local or central government Development institutions Public-private partnership Alternative funding 

Financed by other players of the value chain 

NGO and/or donors Private funding 

Financed by a private sponsors or companies 

Shared economy 

Financed by the community 

On demand 

Ad-hoc or emergency use 

Cyclical 

Regular use when required e.g. based on seasons 

Permanent 

Continuously in operations 

Localised 

Single or number of target areas 

Region/province 

Large scale, regional or cross regional deployment 

Country wide 

Large scale over the entire country 

Frequency 

High relevance Moderate relevance Low relevance 67 Countries where most relevant: Bahamas, Belize, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Guatemala, Honduras, Paraguay, Peru, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago, Uruguay Agriculture pilot projects focus on building awareness and knowledge among local communities and providing examples that could be directly transferred and used by other farmers. The pilot aims to demonstrate the long-term benefits of drone technology, to individual farmers , small and medium agriculture companies, and cooperatives .A hired drone service company possessing all required equipment is responsible for the delivery of both phases of the project. During project realisation, there is no need to purchase any hardware or software. 

# An effective drone pilot project for precision farming should start with an educational phase (providing knowledge about the technology), followed by an operational phase with the eventual objective of deployment in the field 

Source: PwC analysis; 

Exemplary Pilot Project Scenario Phase I – Access to training, education and knowledge transfer 

Requirements: 

• Project financing from government or other financing institution • One drone unit per 5–10 participants • One software license participant • Experienced instructors with extensive practical experience in the use of drone technologies in agriculture • Training facility 

Purpose: 

• Provide training, education and knowledge transfer to a selected group of farmers / cooperative to build awareness about how drones and other digital technologies can increase yield, optimize input management, etc. • The training could be supported by a grant for the purchase of drone hardware and software • Number of people within the project should be 15-100 depending on the geography • Length: 1-3 weeks 

Phase II – Operational use of drone technology** 

Requirements: 

• Project financing from government or other financing institution • On-site support by experienced professionals who are able to correctly interpret drone data combined with other data sources and provide clear prescription for farmers • Additional support with fertilizers and/or other resources required to complement the technology • Effective selection method to identify the right partners and participants of the programme 

Purpose: 

• Enable farmers to realize the long-term benefits of using the drones, prove the value of the technology, and disseminate the results with the community • 10–20 farmers (or a cooperative) selected as participants 

Focus: 

• Drone service providers conduct cyclical mapping and/or spraying services for selected farmers at the relevant frequency (1–3 weeks depending on vegetation cycle) and provide end-to-end data interpretation support during entire growing cycle (at least 3–6 months) • Farmers observe long-term benefits related to the use of the drones • Benefits are disseminated and visible to other community members 

Expected budget of the pilot project*: 285k-1,280k USD Expected budget of the pilot project*: 104k-215k USD 

Focus: 

• The pilot should consider the following elements: basic theory, drone regulations, drone operations, risk and safety, software and data interpretation, pilot certification • Depending on the geography, the focus can be either or both of drone mapping and drone spraying activities 

* The cost range depends on the geography, number of participants, technology partners, length of the project, and stakeholders involved; **The phases that a pilot project can cover will vary depending on the reality on the ground, level of engagement, technology available, and other enabling factors, along with the main purpose of the pilot. 68 Benefits of drones for farmers from El Salvador 

There are 300,000 small farming families in El Salvador, whose crops (and therefore livelihoods and diets) are at the mercy of pests and extreme weather events . These are issues they have in common with many other farming communities worldwide: There are 30,000 types of weed, 10,000 varieties of insect, and 3,000 different fungal pathogens that threaten food crops around the world. For a subsistence farmer, the threat is even more profound. Most obviously, a precarious financial situation reduces their purchasing ability, but in addition, they face limited access to technology, information, markets and services. A farmer in El Salvador with just three hectares of land will earn less than $130 per month, and a pest outbreak could potentially reduce a family to destitution in a single season. Farmers are always looking for ways to gain the upper hand in this battle—and drone technology has the potential to address the inequality of information and access, to help farmers protect their crops, improve yields , and thereby achieve greater profitability. Chemicals have for many years been vital in helping farmers protect harvests and livelihoods, and estimates suggest that up to 60% of global crops are saved each year with the use of pesticides. In developing countries, they often rely on backpack sprayers for the application of pesticides. Drones can provide application up to 50 times faster than a typical backpack sprayer, reducing time spent on spraying—and even more significantly, reducing human exposure to chemicals. Drones can use as little as 10% of the water compared to backpack sprayers, helping farmers conserve vital resources (particularly relevant in drought-prone areas). The greater accuracy provided by drones also ensures less waste, and less danger of unintended environmental impact through runoff. Effective crop protection fundamentally depends on farmers knowing how to treat their plants (and when), as well as being able to afford and accurately apply the treatment. Drones help to identify pest threats more effectively than manual / human surveillance. Early warning of pest activity gives farmers a head start, and a chance to save more of their crops. With the use of data, drones are also able to deliver targeted chemical treatment, at the optimum place and time to protect crops. This reduces the cost of treatment, as well as offering the potential for higher yields. This doesn’t just affect farmers’ incomes, but results in increased food security in many developing countries—for example El Salvador, where 9% of the population is currently undernourished. 

# Drones have helped farmers in El Salvador address a lack of information, and enabled them to protect crops, improve yields and productivity, and achieve greater profitability 

> Source: PwC analysis; BASF & CropLife joint publication at Devex

Case Study: Drone Use for Agriculture in El Salvador 

> 69

# 5.3 

# Humanitarian aid Development use case Challenge: The number of people in need of humanitarian aid is increasing 

The number of people in need of humanitarian assistance in the LAC region nearly tripled over the last three years. Per the Global Humanitarian Overview 2022, Latin America and the Caribbean has experienced a significant increase in the number of people in need since 2018, climbing from 9.6 million people to 26.4 million in 2021 .This increase is due, in part, to the rising frequency and intensity of sudden-onset disasters and recurrent climate shocks, the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, and challenging socioeconomic conditions: food insecurity, limited access to health care, and a record volume of population movement, including people from Haiti, Cuba and Venezuela. 

Impacts of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic are devastating, and recovery from the pandemic has been challenging. Despite comprising only 8.4 per cent of the global population, Latin America and the Caribbean has been the world’s hardest-hit region, with 18.5 per cent of all global COVID-19 cases and 30.3 per cent of all deaths. 

Less than half of the region’s population is fully vaccinated, with unequal vaccine access hampering vaccination efforts, and countries facing logistic challenges and other obstacles to securing vaccine supplies. This particularly affects marginalised groups such as rural communities and indigenous people, who already experience long-standing disadvantages in receiving adequate health coverage. Latin America and the Caribbean is one of the world’s most economically unequal regions, and the second-most disaster-prone region globally. Every year, natural disasters affect the livelihoods of millions of people. In many cases they leave affected people with no access to basic supplies such as water, food, clothes and medicines .The pandemic’s effects have had a significant impact on the region in terms of poverty, displacement, food insecurity, and violence. 

Humanitarian aid is vital in reducing the impact of such crises on communities , helping recovery and improving preparedness for future emergencies. Across the region, more than 287 million people 

(46 per cent of the population) are now in poverty or extreme poverty. It is highly likely that the international humanitarian community will be operating in a post-pandemic Latin America and Caribbean for years to come. 

# Drone technology can provide significant support to humanitarian organisations and local communities with fast, reliable and safe delivery of aid to people in need, regardless of their location 

> Source: PwC analysis; UN OCHA

Description of Challenges for Humanitarian Aid Sector across Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) Region 

> 71

# Drones are becoming a reliable tool for immediate aid delivery in hard-to-reach areas, but still have low adoption rates in Latin America and the Caribbean region, despite many ongoing humanitarian missions 

> Source: PwC analysis, UNICEF: UN OCHA

Overview of drones in humanitarian aid 

Drone technology has the potential to support communities in humanitarian emergencies in a fast and effective manner. Due to the unpredictability and high impact of the events on human life, infrastructure, and connectivity, humanitarian response time is critical. Food delivery and aid assistance, along with rescue operations over land, are difficult and sometimes impossible due to logistic/transit issues. Thus, the best alternative is to provide people with essential healthcare, food, and aid supplies in-situ until connectivity is restored and large-scale rescue operations can be conducted without risking lives. In some circumstances, UAS technology is the only financially and logistically possible solution. Even though drones cannot replace the conventional humanitarian method of aid transportation—considering the volume of cargo carried by trucks and helicopters—they can bolster responses, adding a complementary tool when all other means are impossible. Drones are a quick way to carry food, water and the most necessary healthcare and sanitary items , in the fastest manner possible, without endangering lives. UAS can be especially useful in the Caribbean region and other disaster-prone areas, w hich frequently deal with devastating hurricanes and/or earthquakes. Besides aid deliveries, other drone uses in the humanitarian space are mapping aimed at identifying the number of people in need and their location; and other data collection that can be used to assess the extent of the destruction and economic impact—and thus the amount of support required. Such data allows a humanitarian organisation to develop an effective reaction strategy and help as many people as possible. Drones equipped with infrared thermal imaging cameras can detect humans even at night, so become increasingly involved in search and rescue operations. Rescue drones are designed to provide cost-effective, real-time data and imaging, day or night, in challenging conditions and without risk to rescuers. 

Maturity 

Drones are rapidly emerging as an irreplaceable tool to provide situational awareness for emergency response .More advanced uses, such as first aid delivery, are still at the early stage of implementation in Latin America and the Caribbean. Drones were first used in Haiti after the 2010 earthquake, for humanitarian mapping and aid delivery. Since then, they have been used many times for disaster relief activities. In Chile, drones were used to deliver 

coronavirus vaccines to the elderly who were socially isolated to prevent them contracting the virus. There are a few drone humanitarian organisations active in the region, including UAVitors and APD Humanitario. 

> 72

• In cases where traditional types of aircraft cannot fly safely , due to challenging topography for example, drones can carry basic food, sanitary items, and health aid 

• Drones allow for quick deployment operations and delivery of food, water, and the most necessary items to save lives and serve immediate health needs • Drones can deliver first aid supplies and other essentials directly to people in need at the accident location , without requiring additional logistics • With their monitoring capacity and manoeuvrability, drones are a safe way for rescuers to conduct search and rescue without endangering more individuals • Drones allow large-scale assessment of an affected region, or targeted assessment of remote and difficult-to-reach areas, in a timely manner • Besides cargo delivery, drones can monitor traditional logistics convoys in real-time 

• With capability for real-time monitoring and information transmission, drones can identify and track displaced populations , their movements, and temporary settlements 

Benefits from the Use of Drones for Humanitarian Purposes 

# Drones can be used for humanitarian purposes, improving organisations’ capacity to respond and operate in hard-to-reach areas, dangerous terrains and changing circumstances, with low infrastructure requirements 

> Source: PwC analysis
> 73

Measured impact of humanitarian drone aid: 

• A study conducted in 2020 by leading UAS manufacturer DJI identified at least 824 cases where drones were used to save people from life-threatening situations 

• Drones have found missing people, brought supplies to trapped survivors, and peered through smoke and darkness to find unconscious victims • ‘Last-mile delivery’ humanitarian organisation Wingsforaid developed a drone system capable of transporting tons of food, blankets, medicines and other life-saving commodities each day, within a radius of 250 km . The patented self-landing cardboard boxes are designed with built-in vertical retardant that absorbs impact on landing. Thanks to this construction, the box can safely land in the upright position when dropped from 50-500 m. One box can hold 70 litres in volume or 20 kg of weight , without requiring a parachute 

• Improved response to disaster events , and increased ability to serve populations in the most vulnerable locations 

• Decreased mortality as a result of starvation and limited (or non-existent) access to food, medicine and water 

• Reduced harmful effects on population’s health, including long-term impacts of severe malnutrition , the consequences of which may affect society as a whole (e.g. in terms of work capacity) 

• Improved living conditions due to timely access to emergency supplies 

• Reduced negative impact on the environment through reduced carbon emissions from car/truck/helicopter use 

• Improved identification of the exact geographical location of people in need ,instantly transmitted to headquarters for deployment of rescue operations and aid 

• Increased speed of evaluation of economic impact • Improved capacity to assess humanitarian needs , supporting the allocation of aid 

• Perform search and rescue actions 

• Optimised supply chain and increased humanitarian sector efficiency due to last-mile drone deliveries 

Expected Outcomes / Impact of Drone Usage 

# Humanitarian organisations could use drones to deliver first aid and other supplies to people in need following disaster events, improving response time, thereby saving lives and livelihoods 

> Source: PwC analysis; DJI; Wingsforaid; FSD

SDGs impacted 

Indirectly: Directly: 

> 74

Technological environment Drone humanitarian aid delivery Drone hardware: 

• Fixed-wing drone platforms for deliveries over a longer distance ( above 25 km )• Multirotor drone platforms for heavier deliveries on short routes ( below 25 km )• VTOL drone platforms for deliveries on longer distances ( above 25 km ) in areas with limited landing space 

Drone payload: 

• Container with active or passive cooling system • Highly durable and crack-resistant case to prevent contamination in contingencies • Tethered solution or parachute deployment for deliveries without landing 

Software: 

• Relevant software solutions for drone deployment to ensure seamless drone control and safety during operations • At later stage, solutions/applications for managing drone fleet and logistics 

Regulatory requirements 

Flights should meet the requirements for BVLOS operations , as in most cases flights are performed at a greater distance than the pilot’s line of sight. 

ICAO U-AID guidance should be followed if no national regulations on this matter are established. 

ICAO U-AID 

ICAO U-AID guidance, introduced in 2019, stands for UAS for Humanitarian Aid and Emergency Response, and was launched as a resource for states to enable humanitarian aid and emergency response operations using UAS, with an expedited review process for urgent operations. The guidance reduces the complexity of submissions, and the time taken to grant permissions by local CAA, in cases of drone operations for humanitarian purposes. This allows greater use of UAVs for humanitarian aid—where response times are often critical—while maintaining all the necessary security measures. 

# To support and facilitate the adoption of drones for humanitarian use in the LAC region, providing the technology environment, proper regulatory frameworks and incentives is key 

> Source: PwC analysis

Enabling Factors for Drones Application in Humanitarian Aid Drone mapping and situational awareness Drone hardware: • Fixed-wing drone platforms for operations covering larger areas 

• Multirotor drone platforms for operations in urban or any areas with a need for deeper investigation of terrain and structures 

• VTOL drone platforms for versatility of operations combining the advantages of the above platforms 

Drone payload: • Vision sensors (RGB, IR, multispectral) , for obtaining detailed, multi-level information from the area of focus 

• LiDAR and GPR sensors for the capture of high accuracy data even in areas of dense vegetation or low light, or to acquire information from beneath a surface or other obstruction 

• Gas detectors for quick analysis and assessment of air quality over a large area 

Software: 

• Photogrammetry processing and geospatial analytics to produce comprehensive material for decision making processes • Video analytics and object recognition with AI-augmented technology to achieve better efficiency with critical spot oversight reduction 

> 75

# Key adoption barriers to humanitarian drone usage relate to limited awareness of their potential for this type of operation, and the difficulty of experimenting with new technologies when lives are at stake 

> Source: PwC analysis

Adoption enablers: • Wide availability and low entry barrier in terms of cost and skills needed to access and use drone technology 

• Advancements in technology , enabling heavier and more advanced payloads, and safe long-distance operations 

• Financing pilot project and acceleration programmes for first aid deliveries 

• Accessibility of innovation hubs for developing and testing new drone solutions • Establishing clear guidelines for the use of drones in the humanitarian sector • Possibility to create humanitarian air corridors for the emergency use of drones in people in need 

• Knowledge sharing, and increasing awareness among international development institutions, NGOs, civil society, governments, and communities 

Drone Technology Adoption Enablers & Barriers for Humanitarian Aid Use Adoption barriers: 

• Lack of appropriate regulations • Lack of digital systems and infrastructure to enable safe integration of drones into the airspace on a large scale 

• Perception that humanitarian drones in conflict environment may be used for improper purposes • Limited adoption, and lack of digital maturity in emergency response teams, preventing the effective use of drone-collected data in practice 

• Privacy concerns from local communities • Limited ability to use drones in active conflict zones • Fears that drones may replace humanitarians , and that the consequent lack of interpersonal communication will lead to reduction in the quality of aid provided 

• Lack of enabling environment to encourage investment and innovation 

> 76

Stakeholders category Key stakeholders and potential partners Role of stakeholders Government & public sector 

• National and regional emergency management departments such as ONEMI Chile (names will vary by country) • Sectoral ministries (health, development) • Civil Aviation Authorities Governments can support the use of drones in aid distribution by facilitating the regulatory framework and the development of drone technology, for example rolling out a remote identification system for drones. These institutions should also facilitate investment incentives, provide permits, enhance institutional capacity and knowledge about the relevance of drones in the sector, and ensure the appropriate training to the relevant stakeholders (including aid workers, aid coordinators, emergency respondents, and others). 

Companies & private sector 

• Safety & Security companies • Drone operators • Drone associated services Drone companies, especially drone manufacturers, need to assure the end user that the drones they buy are secure, and can’t easily be compromised. Companies at an early stage of services development can provide their technology on a pro-bono basis to facilitate the testing of their prototypes and to improve the technology according to differing local requirements. 

Investors and international financial institutions 

• World Bank • Inter-American Development Bank • Development bank of Latin America The initial investments and scalability of the operations are subject to budgetary constraints. Therefore, loans and support from Development Financial Institutions are crucial to re-risk the investments, and to help governments provide adequate funding for a successful pilot, roll-out, and further implementation of innovative solutions in humanitarian first aid response. 

NGOs / civil society & international organisations 

• Flying Labs • WeRobotics • UNICEF • OCHA • UNDAC Aid workers that usually work for NGOs or international organisations can use drones to speed-up the gathering of real-time data on complex situations and collect additional information that allows informed decisions. Non-governmental organisations should actively address and resolve issues around the public perception of drones, to build and maintain public trust in the technology and its usage—by introducing a UAV Code of Conduct, for example. 

End users / civil society 

• Citizens • Local communities • Aid workers / humanitarian organisations Humanitarian organisations should cooperate with service providers, or establish partnerships with other non-profit actors or local communities that have an active field capacity for drone deployment—for example, agencies from other fields (such as geology, forestry and construction) with drone capacities that can easily be adapted for humanitarian missions. 

# The successful adoption of drones for humanitarian operations requires the active involvement and cooperation of public and private sector stakeholders, along with civil society organisations and end users 

Source: PwC analysis 

Partner Environment for Drones Application in Humanitarian Aid* 

• USAID • IFRC • WHO • UPDWG 

*The list of stakeholders is not exhaustive and it may differ per country/region/town where humanitarian drone solutions are implemented. Therefore, a stakeholders mapping prior to any design and implementation is advised 77 There are several possible business models, depending on availability of funds, duration of a humanitarian mission, key stakeholders, and willingness to develop the technology 

Business Models for the Deployment of Drone Technology for Humanitarian Aid 

• Drone technologies are typically deployed by humanitarian organisations and emergency response agencies 

• In most cases relevant organisations use in-house drone operations ,who are trained to effectively support the aim activities • Humanitarian aid activities are also supported by external drone service providers and other volunteers 

• The cost of drone services may be a substantial barrier to using drones in disaster management so some private companies may deliver drone services for free , considering social responsibility aspects • Finance comes from government funds, crowdfunding or other donors 

Scale Operating model Financing Inhouse 

Operated using internal capabilities of an institution 

3rd party 

Operated using external specialised service provider 

Community/cooperative 

Operated jointly by a community group 

Build-Operate-Transfer 

Operated by 3rd party and gradually transferred to inhouse 

Local or central government Development institutions Public-private partnership Alternative funding 

Financed by other players of the value chain 

NGO and/or donors Private funding 

Financed by a private sponsors or companies 

Shared economy 

Financed by the community 

On demand 

Ad-hoc or emergency use 

Cyclical 

Regular use when required e.g. based on seasons 

Permanent 

Continuously in operations 

Localised 

Single or number of target areas 

Region/province 

Large scale, regional or cross regional deployment 

Country wide 

Large scale over the entire country 

Frequency 

High relevance Moderate relevance Low relevance 78 Countries where most relevant: Antigua & Barbuda, Belize, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Suriname, Uruguay, Trinidad and Tobago The aim of the pilot project is to support humanitarian missions . As drones are perfect tools for quick response actions, piloting activities typically start with 

mapping and can be further expanded into other applications. The project should be divided into phases. The initial phase offers an evaluation and assessment of damages .The second phase focuses on 

setting up humanitarian corridors for aid delivery. Once Phase I is successfully conducted, Phase II can be prepared and then begin to deliver humanitarian cargo. 

# An effective drone pilot project for humanitarian aid must start with a mapping of post-disaster areas, followed by establishment of humanitarian corridors and aid delivery 

> Source: PwC analysis;

Exemplary Pilot Project Scenario Phase I - Mapping of post-disaster area 

Requirements: 

• Project financing from government or other sources • On-site support by mapping professionals who can rapidly plan missions, process data and provide actionable results • Strict operating procedures • Coordination of flights with CAA and rapid response services to ensure safe drone operations 

Purpose: 

• To evaluate the magnitude of post-disaster damages • Additional objective is to quickly evaluate infrastructure devastation in order to establish a search and rescue plan 

Phase II - Setting humanitarian corridors and aid delivery** 

Requirements: 

• Project financing from government or other sources • Strict cooperation between government, engineers and private sector to ensure success, plus outreach to local communities • Network of operational sites (HUBs) for expanded project range • System to manage the whole network including weather monitoring at ground stations, and route optimisation to avoid risk factors 

Purpose: 

• To set a logistics channel for distribution of light cargo to help in the critical post-disaster period • Deliver five key provisions to supply survivors: water and food in light packaging, essential medicines and equipment, LED lamps, and radios for fast communication in remote areas 

Hardware: 

• Multicopters and VTOLs capable of quick delivery • Infrastructure for frequent operations (battery charging, maintenance, flight management) • Cargo management facilities 

Expected budget of the pilot project*: 144-600k USD Expected budget of the pilot project*: 43-125k USD 

Hardware: 

• High endurance fixed-wing drones to perform rapid mapping and provide reliable data for large areas • High-res visible light cameras for high-quality images and/or video • Relevant landing/take-off spots to secure safe flights (depending on requirements)  

> * The cost range depends on the geography, number of participant, technology partners, length of the project and stakeholders involved; **The phases that a pilot project can cover will vary depending on the reality on the ground, level of engagement, technology available, other enabling factors along with the main purpose of the pilot. 79

The Government of Malawi and UNICEF launched a 5000 km 2 air corridor to test the humanitarian use of drones 

In 2017, the Government of Malawi and UNICEF launched the first African air corridor, centred on Kasungu Aerodrome, to provide a controlled platform for the private sector, universities, and other stakeholders to explore how drones can be used in humanitarian actions that can benefit the most marginalised and remote communities. The corridor had a 40 km radius, an area of over 5000 km2, and allowed for BVLOS operations. It was tested in three areas: 1. Imagery: generating and analysing aerial images for development, and during humanitarian crises such as floods or earthquakes to assess the magnitude of population affected by consequent emergencies (e.g. mudslides) 2. Connectivity: exploring possibilities for UAVs to extend Wi-Fi or cell phone signal across difficult terrain, mainly in emergency situations 3. Transport: delivery of small, low-weight supplies, such as emergency medical supplies, vaccines, and samples for laboratory diagnosis (including HIV testing) In addition, a Belgian UTM provider, Unifly, set up their UTM system to support UNICEF’s corridor, to ensure safe testing. During the first test, drones transported blood samples from a small local community located 17 km from the aerodrome to the nearby medical centre. This fully autonomous operation took 16 minutes and covered a distance of 19 km .The drone corridor also served as a knowledge centre to introduce drone technology to local communities. All companies that applied their solutions in the corridor were required to spend time training and working with local students, engineers, and entrepreneurs to share their expert skills and ideas. It was expected that this knowledge and experience sharing would be able to develop a local workforce that can pilot, service, and utilise humanitarian drone technology at the highest level. 

# In 2017, UNICEF and the Government of Malawi launched an air corridor to test, document, and implement the use of drones for humanitarian actions 

> Source: PwC analysis; UNICEF, Unifly

Case Study: Humanitarian Drone Corridor Launched in Malawi 

> 80

# 5.4 

# Disaster management Development use case Challenge: Frequent natural disasters make the region vulnerable 

According to the World Bank, natural disasters in Latin America and the Caribbean push between 150,000 and 2.1 million people annually into extreme poverty. Estimates for 2030 show even higher impacts on poverty, livelihoods and critical sectors of the economy. The World Risk Index (2020) shows that over 50% of LAC countries are ranked high or very high for natural disaster occurrence, and are currently presenting high or very high levels of vulnerability to these hazards—including susceptibility, adaptability, and ability to cope with these events. Hence, risk mitigation and planning activities, to ensure that countries are well-equipped to deal with these challenges, are critical in guaranteeing the safety and livelihoods of millions in the LAC region. Between 2000 and 2019 alone, 152 million people in the region have been severely affected by a total of 1,205 disasters . Earthquakes, floods, and storms are the natural events associated with the highest levels of deaths, affected populations, and economic losses. Floods are the most common disaster in the LAC region, with 548 floods occurring since 2000. Despite the relatively low death toll directly associated with floods, they have affected almost 41 million people and caused around US$26 billion in total damages. Floods are one of the costliest natural disasters because of the damage caused—from impact on physical and environmental assets (including human belongings and shelter, ecological systems and production across economic sectors) to health-related issues and human deaths. New methodologies and innovative technologies are required to complement the traditional approach to improve disaster management efficiency. It is necessary to build an adequate system that incorporates telecommunication capabilities, remote sensing, and spatial and temporal oriented databases to store the vast amount of data. 

# Drone technology can significantly support governments and local communities in disaster management; helping with mitigation planning, emergency response to natural disasters, aid delivery, and post-disaster assessment and reconstruction 

> Source: PwC analysis; ECLAC; UN OCHA

Description of Challenges Connected to Disaster Management across Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) Region 

Latin America and the Caribbean is the second-most disaster prone region in the world. Countries in the LAC region are vulnerable to floods, tropical storms and hurricanes, earthquakes and tsunamis, droughts, landslides, extreme temperatures, volcanic events, wildfires , and more. All natural disasters disrupt and endanger the normal functionality of communities, sometimes having extremely serious consequences on people, property, economies, and the environment. Poor disaster management and/or planning—for example bad levee systems, insufficient shelters, lack of education & training, or any other shortcomings in preparation—can potentially worsen the outcomes of a disaster. 

> 82

# Drones can help to reduce the devastating effects of natural disasters by supporting responsible agencies in each stage of disaster management: mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery 

> Source: PwC analysis

Overview of drone disaster management Disaster mitigation and preparedness: Key pre-disaster use cases include mitigation-related vulnerability assessments and risk modelling. Drones can map and monitor the topography and surface features of areas susceptible to and impacted by fires, storms, landslides, earthquakes, or floods. High-resolution drone imagery allows the creation of orthophotos and 3D models, which are further used for risk modelling of such disasters. 

Disaster response: The combination of drones and satellite technology—especially during cloud coverage—can support rapid response and damage assessment efforts in an effective and timely manner, along with providing data collection and analysis. During floods and earthquakes, drones equipped with thermal imaging cameras, noise sensing, binary sensing, and vibration sensing can help spot people in need of support or evacuation, and identify the best evacuation routes, in real-time. 

Disaster recovery: Drones can support post-disaster assessments. Satellite and drone images, combined with advanced statistical models, allow comprehensive and detailed analysis of damage and loss, especially in difficult-to-reach areas. UAVs technology can support the development of post-disaster basemap allowing to identify critical challenges. Disaster recovery involves rebuilding areas that were affected. Drones can assist in the safe inspection of infrastructure so repairs can be made more effectively than with traditional inspection methods. Created orthophotos and 3D models allow reconstructing of damaged infrastructure. Further, drones are used to monitor the progress of aid relief and recovery efforts, including construction progress. Such data could be used in issuing relief funds and help process insurance claims faster. 

Maturity 

Disaster management is an important driver of the adoption of UAS technologies in the LAC region due to the high number of natural disasters occurring annually in the region. In 2012, drones began to be used in Haiti for post-earthquake damage assessment. From this point onwards, many countries—including the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Chile, Brazil, and Colombia—have adapted the technology for risk management and mitigation, and disaster response and recovery. Many regional and international organisations—plus associations like DroneDeploy—educate and train public safety personnel on how to use unmanned aviation technology and related systems for emergency operations. 

> 83

• Drones give disaster response teams the ability to survey large-scale or inaccessible disaster zones in a safe, immediate and efficient manner • Drones reduce the time required to locate victims and the time required for subsequent intervention, by a) searching a large area in a short period of time, and b) providing critical information to rescuers about the optimal route for search and rescue operations • Drones are a more cost effective and safer option than sending in rescue helicopters in the first instance • In emergencies, locally available drones have the potential to acquire visuals in a more timely manner than satellites and manned aircraft 

• Drones are highly deployable and, in some cases, represent the only realistic or affordable means of collecting aerial imagery • Offering high-resolution outputs, drone imagery can be used in conjunction with satellite imagery and in some instances may be superior for spatial analysis, especially during periods of heavy cloud cover (as is often the case after hurricanes) • Drone images give the public a sense of the size and scale of a disaster and are therefore frequently used by NGOs in their PR and communication strategies 

Benefits of the Use of Drones for Disaster Management 

# During disasters, drones can be far more effective than traditional methods for data collection, search and rescue, and aid delivery—and in some cases are the only reliable source of information 

> Source: PwC analysis
> 84

SDGs impacted 

Indirectly: Directly: 

• Strengthened resilience and adaptive capacity to natural disasters 

• Reduced threats to rescuers and civilian population • Decreased negative effects on the health of the population 

during and after disasters 

• Decreased operational risk to development workers, local residents, and infrastructure 

• Decreased mortality due to comprehensive aerial analysis leading to better preparation for natural disasters • Improved situation awareness and assessment of disaster’s effects • Decreased response time • Reduced destructive impact on infrastructure , thanks to better preventative measures 

• Decreased time needed for damage assessment due to the ability to quickly map affected areas • Increased efficiency of resource allocation for disaster response and recovery 

Expected Outcomes / Impact of Drone Usage 

# The use of drone technology in disaster management could speed up response, reduce unnecessary risks, decrease the negative effect on population health, and strengthen overall resilience and adaptive capacity to natural disasters 

> Source: PwC analysis; AOPA; WFP blog on Medium; Picterra

Measured impact of the use of drones in disaster management in Dominica 

After devastating hurricanes hit Dominica in September 2017, drones were deployed to support the local community. • Drone pilots from the University of Maryland UAS Test Site joined a team assembled by Canadian relief organisation Global Medic to create high-resolution digital maps of the devastated island, and analyse the disaster’s impact 

• Challenge : 90% of the power grid remained out of service, which decreased the availability of electricity and therefore brought difficulties in charging drone batteries and performing drone data processing • The volunteers pre-identified 59 affected locations and mapped over 5,700 acres over two weeks 

• Obtained drone data was analysed using machine-learning models trained for damage assessment. The data helped to detect 106 damaged rooftops .The whole detecting process took only about 30 minutes with one person overseeing the work. Overall, compared to traditional methods, the entire process was estimated to be 100 times faster and 5 times cheaper 

• Traditionally, satellite data is used for disaster assessment. However, due to the frequent cloud cover in the region, plus the much higher resolution of 

drone-acquired imagery , drones are a more feasible, faster and more effective way to create digital maps of affected areas 

> 85

Regulatory requirements 

• The responsible authorities should follow the ICAO U-AID guidelines in order to perform the Operation Risk Assessment and establish an appropriate Risk Mitigation Strategy 

Other requirements 

• Clear requirements regarding data and procedures should be defined by appropriate agencies 

# To support and facilitate the adoption of drones for disaster management, providing the technology environment, proper regulatory frameworks, and incentives is key 

> Source: PwC analysis

Technological environment Drone hardware: 

• Fixed-wing drones for large-scale mapping of a larger area • Multicopter drones mapping smaller areas, but with possibilities for real-time visual assessment of video feed and oblique imagery • VTOL for mapping, photogrammetry and long-distance deliveries over difficult terrain 

Drone payload: 

• RGB cameras for photogrammetry, live broadcasting, and monitoring operations (incl. zoom cameras) • Thermal cameras to identify humans during search & rescue operations • LiDAR for mapping • Loudspeaker to transmit messages to civilian population • Lighting on drone for better in-air visibility at night 

Software: 

• Photogrammetry data-processing software • Dedicated GIS software for data visualisation, overlay, and analytics (e.g. 3D visualisation) 

Enabling Factors for the Application of Drones in Disaster Management 

> 86

Adoption barriers: • Absence of the adequate regulatory framework for emergency operations 

• Lack of enabling environment to encourage investment and innovation 

• Lack of activities that could ensure safe operations and effective risk management (including official training, drone registration, third-party insurance, mission authorisation etc.) 

• Low technological maturity in relevant countries regarding the use of drone technology 

• Limited awareness of drone potential amongst governmental agencies responsible for disaster management 

# The key barriers to UAS adoption in disaster management relate to limited awareness of the technology’s potential, absence of adequate disaster management plans, and low technological maturity in disaster-prone countries 

> Source: PwC analysis

Adoption enablers: • Availability of skilled technicians 

(especially in the field of disaster risk management) to deploy, operate and maintain drones 

• Availability of hardware in places of high disaster vulnerability • Established disaster management plans , anticipating the use of drone technology 

• Regulatory framework providing for emergency drone deployment 

• Wide availability and low entry barrier in terms of cost and skills needed to access and use drone technology 

• Advancements in the technology enabling more advanced and safer long-distance operations 

• Accessibility of innovation hubs to develop and test new drone solutions 

Enablers & Barriers for the Adoption of Drone Technology in Disaster Management 

> 87

Stakeholders category Key stakeholders and potential partners Role of stakeholders 

Government & public sector 

• Ministry for emergency management (names vary by country, e.g. Mexico: Protección Civil) • ONEMI; SHOA; CONRED, etc • Civil Aviation Authorities Government and public sector should adjust regulatory framework to drone disaster management requirements by providing up-to-date regulatory information. Responsible authorities should create adequate disaster management plans, anticipating the use of drone technology for preparedness, monitoring, response, and recovery. Moreover, public sector has to actively promote effective disaster management through drones by organising educational activities, and spread awareness across the population and key actors involved in disaster planning. 

Companies & private sector 

• Safety & security companies • Drone operators • Associated drone services Companies and the private sector play a key role in the adoption and further development of drone services and technology for disaster management activities. Their willingness to constantly improve and develop drone technology meets the increasing demand for new solutions in disaster management applications. 

Investors and international financial institutions 

• World Bank • Inter-American Development Bank • Development Bank of Latin America In response to the increasing number of humanitarian disasters, both private and public equity funds should invest in the development of innovative technologies to better assess disaster risks, develop strategies to mitigate their aftermath and, in the event of a disaster, take steps to monitor and assess damages. However, with the rising number of cases, public donors struggle to meet this demand. Therefore, private donors—individuals, trusts and foundations, and private companies—are a critical source to fill the gap. 

NGOs / civil society & international organisations 

• Flying labs • WeRobotics • OCHA • UNDAC Non-governmental organisations, especially humanitarian ones, should actively promote the safe, coordinated and effective use of UAVs for data collection and cargo delivery in a wide range of humanitarian settings. They can also promote community engagement, educate governmental officials responsible for disaster management and UAV operators, and raise awareness about humanitarian drone usage among civil society to reduce the perception of drones as a solely military technology. 

End users / civil society 

• Citizens • Local communities Civil society plays a critical role in disaster preparedness, monitoring, response, and recovery, as local knowledge and civic and disaster education are crucial for immediate actions, population protection, and decreasing the risk to life in manmade and natural disasters. 

# The successful full-scale implementation of drone technology in disaster management requires the partnership of public and private sector stakeholders, along with civil society organisations and end users 

Source: PwC analysis 

• USAID • IFRC • UNDRR 

Partner Environment for Drones Application in Disaster Management* 

*The list of stakeholders is not exhaustive and it may differ per country/region/town where disaster management drone solutions are implemented. Therefore, a stakeholders mapping prior to any design and implementation is advised. 88 There are several possible business models, depending on available budget, government willingness to implement drones in disaster response, and drone companies’ capabilities 

Business Models for the Deployment of Drone Technology for Disaster Management 

• The use of drones for disaster management is typically deployed in emergencies where flexibility and speed are relevant. However, all parties involved should be trained and have well-prepared responsibilities as part of their preparedness response • As the first responders, relevant agencies should train i n-house drone operators to build internal capabilities in terms of hardware, and software to be deployed in emergency situations. Such activities are typically funded by the government, NGOs or other private companies • In emergency situations, many volunteers would often like to contribute with their drone equipment, skills and time. To make the most value out of it and integrate it safely with other activities, relevant s tandard operating procedures and training programmes should be deployed before the actual disaster. Such programmes can be funded by development institutions, NGOs, other donors and sponsors in cooperation with the relevant governmental authorities • The cost of drone services may be a substantial barrier to using drones in disaster management, therefore some private companies may deliver drone services for free, considering social responsibility aspects 

Scale Operating model Financing Inhouse 

Operated using internal capabilities of an institution 

3rd party 

Operated using external specialised service provider 

Community/cooperative 

Operated jointly by a community group 

Build-Operate-Transfer 

Operated by 3rd party and gradually transferred to inhouse 

Local or central government Development institutions Public-private partnership Alternative funding 

Financed by other players of the value chain 

NGO and/or donors Private funding 

Financed by a private sponsors or companies 

Shared economy 

Financed by the community 

On demand 

Ad-hoc or emergency use 

Cyclical 

Regular use when required e.g. based on seasons 

Permanent 

Continuously in operations 

Localised 

Single or number of target areas 

Region/province 

Large scale, regional or cross regional deployment 

Country wide 

Large scale over the entire country 

Frequency 

High relevance Moderate relevance Low relevance 89 Countries where most relevant: Antigua & Barbuda, Argentina, Bahamas, Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Paraguay, Peru, St. Kitts and Nevis This pilot is intended to provide governments with a reliable instrument to prevent emergencies and improve the assessment of areas that are vulnerable to disasters. Officials targeted include those in Disaster Management Authorities, Ministries of Environment etc. The pilot aims to demonstrate the capability of drone technology to support the creation of a disaster preparedness programme .The project should be divided into phases. The initial phase offers a mapping process. The second phase focuses on analysis of collected data and creation of disaster risk maps. 

# An ideal drone pilot project for disaster management should start by mapping the vulnerable area, then analyse the data to assess risks and create a preparedness plan 

> Source: PwC analysis;

Exemplary Pilot Project Scenario* Phase I - Mapping the area vulnerable to disaster 

Requirements: 

• Project financing from government or other financing institution • On-site support by mapping professionals able to rapidly plan missions and monitor their progress • Strict operating procedures and coordination of flights with CAA and quick response services to assure safe operations • Relevant pilot area (min several km 2)

Purpose: 

• Present the value of drone data & mapping for disaster management • Train public agencies in the use of drone technology to generate information for the analysis of areas that may be exposed to natural disasters 

Phase II - Preparation of data for disaster preparedness programme 

Requirements: 

• Project financing from government or other • On-site support by mapping professionals able to process the data and provide actionable results • On-site support by professionals able to correctly interpret maps combined with other data sources and provide clear disaster risk maps • Clear procedures and instructions for map creation and risk assessment 

Purpose: 

• Demonstrate data analytics possibilities offered by modern software packages and data integration capabilities of other software solutions • Demonstrate drone imagery processing to 2D maps and 3D models • Train participants in the creation of risk heat maps and anomaly detection 

Software: 

• A variety of software able to process the images into maps, such as Pix4D, DroneDeploy or OpenDroneMapper 

Expected budget of the pilot project**: 62-141k USD Expected budget of the pilot project**: 28-68k USD 

Hardware: 

• High endurance fixed-wing drones for rapid mapping, providing reliable data for large areas • High-res visible light cameras and/or thermal cameras to provide quality imagery or video broadcast • Relevant landing/take-off locations (depending on requirements)  

> *A similar pilot could take place after a disaster: Phase I - Mapping the affected area, Phase II - Preparation of data for disaster response (damage assessment); **The cost range depends on the geography, number of participant, technology partners, length of the project and stakeholders involved. 90

Drone technology used for damage assessment after the 2017 earthquake in Mexico 

In 2017, during the catastrophic earthquake of magnitude 7.1 that hit Mexico City, more than 200 people died, 44 buildings collapsed, and almost 40% of the city lost power. With such vast destruction, emergency response teams, NGOs, construction companies, and urban planners needed a system that would allow them to respond quickly, process large amounts of information and help develop the recovery plan. The biggest issue during this whole process was to assess over 500 square miles of urban landscape. DroneSky, a Mexican drone mapping company active in the construction sector, realised that with drone technology they were capable to help Mexico City to quickly inspect the damage. From previous experience, the company knew that drone mapping, besides creating an immediate record of destruction, could also help analyse the data in a meaningful way. 

Disaster response: Initially, drones helped to inspect the scale of the damage, giving a superior view compared to assessing the destruction from the ground. Just two days after the earthquake, DroneSky had used a DJI Phantom 4 to map the entire Xochimilco district, one of the hardest hit and most marginalised areas in the city. In eight flights, they created a map of the whole 98.6-acre neighbourhood. Moreover, they created individual maps of specific buildings that had suffered the most damage. 

Disaster recovery: DroneSky used DroneDeploy’s cloud-based drone mapping platform to create orthomosaic maps, elevation models, and 3D-point clouds that easily integrate with 3D-modelling software. Besides sharing their maps with NGOs, urban planners, and anyone else who might benefit from them, DroneSky mobilised a group of architecture students. Aiming to create a plan for the complete regeneration of public space in the district, students formed the Rebuilding Mexico Group. Using the drone-generated maps and 3D surface models as a baseline, the group had intentions to redesign eight major buildings which had been destroyed. According to the co-founders of DroneSky, this recovery project represented a new way of responding to natural disasters, not only in terms of new, innovative technology, but also new ways of thinking, reacting, and helping communities after a crisis. 

# After the 2017 earthquake in Mexico City, drones were deployed as part of the disaster response, and the data they collected was used for damage estimation as well as to create maps and 3D models supporting further reconstruction of the city 

> Source: PwC analysis; DroneDeploy's Blog

Case Study: Emergency Response Project in Mexico 

> 91

# 5.5 

# Urban planning and monitoring Development use case Challenge: Overpopulation and informal settlements are growing 

Many cities in the LAC region face the challenge of rapid informal urban growth , which prevents them from providing basic services to their citizens and ensuring sustainable urban development. For example, in Bolivia, 40% of the population lives in informal housing . Added to this, according to a sample of 124 jurisdictions, informality has been increasing between 2010 and 2020 in 80% of cities, (while 20% have shown a slight decrease or no change). There is a similar situation in Peru, where about 33% of the entire population lives in slums .In the city of Bogotá, Colombia, damage and interruptions to essential services such as drinking water, sanitation, electricity, gas, and telecommunications occur more frequently than natural hazards. Between 2002 and 2017, these interruptions occurred roughly 1,100 times per month. The reasons causing the most interruptions were lack of modernisation of older districts, the large population influx, and deterioration due to a lack of maintenance. Studies by the Inter-American Development Bank showed that in Latin America 94% of the urban housing deficit is associated with inadequate living conditions in informal settlements, such as lack of access to water and sanitation facilities, insufficient living space, poor housing durability, and insecure tenure. In addition, new urban settlements are constantly being built; buildings are erected quickly, without any thought of urban planning, introducing general chaos and potential danger. Comprehensive urban planning is vital, not simply for the sake of appearance, but most importantly for the safety and functionality that a well-planned city provides. 

# Using drone technology for urban planning can quickly identify informal settlements, and improve living conditions by providing better management and monitoring of rapid urban growth 

> Source: PwC analysis; WB, UNDRR; Urbanet; IDB

Description of Challenges for Urban Planning and Monitoring across Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) Region 

The LAC region has one of the fastest unplanned urbanisation rates. Currently, 82% of its population lives in cities , with 17% of its urban population concentrated in six megacities, which have more than 10 million inhabitants apiece. The growing rate of urbanisation and increased population density in cities in the LAC region can lead to risks, especially when urbanisation is rapid, poorly planned, and occurring in a context of widespread poverty. Poorly planned urban areas are vulnerable to the consequences of natural disasters and prone to quick erosion. Destruction or damage to infrastructure can lead to water scarcity or contamination. Other difficulties that follow poor urban planning are associated with inaccessibility to energy, gas, and heat. The lack of access to safe housing with adequate provision for utilities, sanitation, health care, and education affects the capacity of urban residents to recover and thrive, and therefore decreases economic growth. 

> 93

Maturity 

In the developing world and rapidly urbanising areas, drones are quickly becoming an essential tool for urban data collection, aerial survey, 3D visualisation or situational design. Latin America’s pioneering use of drones to enrich and improve land policy and management is echoing across the globe. The first city in the LAC region to use drones for urban planning and monitoring was Buenos Aires. The municipality deployed drones for data capturing to transform one of the most poorly-developed districts. Ecuador demonstrated how drone-enhanced cadastres can promote resilience. The city of Portoviejo has been using drones to enforce rules against unpermitted occupation of public spaces. Drones provide key information for various municipalities (including Manaus in Brazil, Mexico’s Cancún , São Paulo , and many 

Peruvian cities ), aiding a better understanding of the informal growth patterns in certain areas of the cities, and improving urban management and urban development. 

Overview of drone urban planning and monitoring 

Modern sustainability goals force authorities to approach urban planning and expansion with limited resources. This requires advanced, data-driven decision-making, due to the increased population density in cities. The aforementioned expansion of urban areas requires massive data collection for planning purposes. Doing this by traditional land-surveying methods is highly cost-ineffective. Precise data collection by aircraft and satellite is an important tool in large-scale urban infrastructure planning (which translates to massive aerial development of cities, the rise of skyscrapers, and increasingly complicated utilities management). However, for smaller-scale mapping activities, drones are the optimal solution and can reshape the future of urban planning and monitoring. The solution lies in the technical capacity of drones: multispectral, small-format, high-resolution aerial cameras, usually equipped with space scanners such as LiDAR, which can map out the complex urban environment easily and quickly. Drones in urban planning and monitoring are mainly used for: asset management, capital project monitoring, surveying & mapping, informal settlement monitoring, or cadastral information gathering . Because drones can fly at very low altitudes, they can produce fine-grained images of 1 cm resolution or better, enabling the production of precise 2D orthomosaics or 3D models of streets or properties, and generating statistics on the occupation of dwellings, infrastructure, and public spaces. With this more accurate picture of residential development, agencies and stakeholders are in a better position to transition informal settlers toward formal property ownership and participation in urban planning processes, and accelerate the process of generating an accurate cadastre system. 

# Drones revolutionize data collection and mapping in urban planning: Images and large amounts of highly accurate data captured from UAS provide urban designers and planners with important information for and during the urban planning process 

> Source: PwC analysis
> 94

Benefits from the Use of Drones in Urban Planning and Monitoring: 

# For urban planning and monitoring purposes, drones can be much more efficient than traditional methods for gathering large amounts of data in a cost- and labour-effective manner in a relatively short time 

> Source: PwC analysis

• With the help of drones, city planners can collect large amounts of essential data in a short period of time 

• Drones are able to provide visual data that can be re-visited and provides more in-depth detail , which can simplify planning and improve the planning and design process in general • Drone technology allows for the collection of highly accurate data that can be used to update the existing territorial cadastre system, to better plan and manage urban growth and spatial distribution 

• Planners can use drone data to quickly and more accurately manage the growth of cities , define strategies for urban financing, and better manage informal settlements • Because drones can fly at low altitudes and capture high-quality images, they are a highly useful tool for legitimising informal settlement , by providing accurate details on numbers of plots and the families occupying them, for example, to formalize ownership and grant housing rights • Drones can carry a wide variety of sensors to allow the generation of topography, orthomosaic maps, and 3D models to help in the design of better housing that is more resilient to natural disasters 

> 95

SDGs impacted 

# The use of drone technology in urban planning and monitoring could result in an improved urban planning process, improved access to sanitation and utilities, and reduced monitoring costs 

> Source: PwC analysis; ZGRS; Wingtra; Reset

Indirectly: Directly: 

• Improved urban planning processes 

• Increased safety of employees in the construction and utility sectors • Increased efficiency of inspection and monitoring tasks 

• Improved access to affordable water, energy and sanitation 

• Decreased risk of power outages and other disruptions • Reduced wastage of resources and negative effect on environment 

• Guaranteed complete overview of the urban situation • Reduced costs of utilities monitoring • Reduced time needed to map and analyse large areas , by combining drone technology with other Geographic Information System (GIS) applications 

• Reduced percentage of population exposed to disasters due to poor urban planning and informal settlements 

• Reduced discrepancies in information and mapping needed for property titles and insurance, and for proper deployment of public resources to guarantee access to utilities and services 

Expected Outcomes / Impact of Drone Usage Measured impact 

• Settlement planning: The Physical Planning Department of Ghana conducted a pilot project that focused on land use mapping with the use of drones. The project involved mapping a total area of 

770 acres—or more than 300 hectares 

• Urban survey: Agenda Digital (drone-based data analysis and inspection company) and Wingtra cooperated with municipality of Cancún in Mexico to update the outdated cadastral information. During the 6-week project, the team was able to fly on a total of 19 days due to difficult weather conditions. However, they managed to capture all required data during these flights. On average, they performed 6 flights a day, mapping an area of 400 ha (4 km 2)per flight , covering the entire area of ~450 km 2 over the 19 days 

• Monitoring informal settlement growth: In 2020, the Peruvian Agency for the Formalization of Informal Property started using drones to update the Peruvian urban cadastre. The aim of this project was to provide urban services in informal neighbourhood and improve urban planning for sustainability and inclusivity. The project will take almost 10 years and it is estimated that 4.8 million people from 22 municipalities will benefit 

> 96

Regulatory requirements 

• Clear regulations regarding flying over people and above private properties • Clear regulations regarding BVLOS and EVLOS operations • Country-wide regulations and permissions for recording and collecting data (GDPR: General Data Protection Regulation) 

Other requirements 

• Operational Risk Assessment (e.g., possibility of collisions with other UAVs) should be provided to obtain approval • Drone pilot should obtain third party insurance before an operation 

# To support and facilitate the adoption of drones for urban planning and monitoring in in the LAC region, providing the technology environment, proper regulatory frameworks, and incentives is key 

> Source: PwC analysis

Technology environment Drone hardware: 

• Multirotors or VTOLs for smaller sites, buildings, or aggregated infrastructure inspections • Fixed-wing highly aerodynamic drones to cover wider areas 

Drone payload: 

• LiDAR for 3D modelling • RGB or multispectral cameras for photogrammetry, live broadcasting and monitoring operations (incl. zoom cameras) • Thermal cameras to identify urban overheating, leaking windows etc. 

Software: 

• Photogrammetry data-processing software • Dedicated GIS software for data visualisation, overlay, and analytics (e.g. 3D visualisation) 

Other equipment: 

• Lighting on drone for better in-air visibility 

Enabling Factors for Drone Application in Urban Planning and Monitoring 

> 97

# Key barriers to the adoption of drones for urban planning and monitoring relate to cost, limited supporting technology, limited awareness of the potential, and privacy concerns from the wider population 

> Source: PwC analysis

Adoption enablers: • Affordable and accessible funds (government, development institutions, innovation hubs, accelerators) 

• Governmental programmes supporting innovation within urban planning management and utilities monitoring 

• UAS regulations that enable BVLOS operations (or at least individual permissions/waivers for cyclical drone delivery operations) 

• Local communities’ acceptance of the wide use of drone technologies 

• Practical knowledge about (and examples of) the use of drone data by urban planning offices and other institutions 

Enablers & Barriers for the Adoption of Drone Technology within Urban Planning and Monitoring Adoption barriers: 

• Limited willingness and lack of incentives to invest in future technology pilots and adoption by the public sector and decision makers 

• Cost of the technology —both hardware and software 

• Limited adoption of drone and geospatial technologies • Limited awareness and knowledge of innovative technologies from public sector and decision makers 

• Safety and privacy concerns from citizens 

• Lack of relevant regulations 

• Lack of access to appropriate third-party insurance 

> 98

Stakeholders category Key stakeholders and potential partners Role of stakeholders 

Government & public sector 

• Ministry of Housing and Urban Planning / Ministry of Lands, Housing & Urban Development / Ministry of Infrastructure & Public Utilities / Ministry of Public Utilities / • Civil Aviation Authorities Primarily, the government can improve its services and data collection methods by utilising UAVs for urban planning and monitoring, especially in vulnerable areas, informal settlements and major/large cities. The government and public sector can also facilitate cooperation among institutions, to: • Expedite the issue of permits and launch of operations • Determine proper regulatory frameworks • Provide the necessary training for governmental personnel and other relevant stakeholders • Disseminate knowledge among local communities about the relevance of drones, generating better acceptance of the technology’s introduction for urban planning 

Companies & private sector 

• Construction companies • Utility companies • Drone operators • Associated drone services • Sensor providers Management and staff of construction companies must be open to constant improvement and innovation, acquiring new competencies in order to stay competitive in the market. Drone manufacturers, and providers of sensors and systems need to ensure the highest quality and accuracy in their products. They also have to be aware of the requirements and demands regarding the use of drones in urban planning and monitoring. 

Investors and international financial institutions 

• World Bank • Inter-American Development Bank • Development Bank of Latin America In order to implement innovative technologies, both public and private investment funds will play a key role in facilitating the necessary levels of investment for technology introduction, development, and further prototyping. For example, a funding programme might be an opportunity for architecture and engineering companies looking to branch into drone technologies. Co-financing should cover the technology itself, and possibly also assist in expanding knowledge or employing qualified staff. 

# Increasing the use of drones in urban planning management and monitoring requires the active involvement and cooperation of government and public sector, private sector (including tech companies), and financial organisations… 

Source: PwC analysis 

Partner Environment for Drones Application in Urban Planning and Monitoring* (1/2) 

*The list of stakeholders is not exhaustive and it may differ per country/region/town where urban planning solutions are implemented. Therefore, a stakeholders mapping prior to any design and implementation is advised. 99 Stakeholders category Key stakeholders and potential partners Role of stakeholders 

NGOs / civil society & international organisations 

• Local community leaders • AUVSI • APA • UNDP • IDB Cities Laboratory • CEPAL • ECPA 

Civil society organisations and local communities have a role to play in increasing knowledge and awareness of drone usage in urban planning and monitoring. Acceptance may lead to further understanding of the benefits associated with this technology. Community leaders and other key actors can educate the local population, regulators, and the media on the benefits and safety of gathering data (including images) in this way, as well as the technology behind it. 

End users / civil society 

• Citizens • Local communities • Civil society / community associations End users should have a proactive attitude towards the presence of drones in urban environments. The key role of the end user is to provide feedback on operations so that companies, organisations and municipalities are able to constantly improve them. Citizens and local communities (of informal settlements, for example) should cooperate with authorities to achieve more sustainable land use, and to tackle problems like insufficient provision of basic services. Finally, citizens themselves can fly drones, take photos of a situation or issue, and share the results with authorities. 

# …and also needs strong cooperation, acceptance, and understanding of the benefits from civil society, international organisations, NGOs and end users of UAVs 

Source: PwC analysis 

Partner Environment for Drones Application in Urban Planning and Monitoring* (2/2) 

*The list of stakeholders is not exhaustive and it may differ per country/region/town where urban planning solutions are implemented. Therefore, a stakeholders mapping prior to any design and implementation is advised. 100 Business models for drone applications in urban planning and monitoring should take into account the local government structure, operational possibilities and crucial needs 

Business Models for Drones in Urban Planning and Monitoring 

• Urban planning units are typically part of local government and therefore any purchases are performed according to public procurement principles. • In a typical scenario, such services are delivered by commercial service providers based on precise requirements and specifications from relevant agencies. Such an agency must have internal capabilities to order and use the output data effectively. • In some cases, urban planning units may have specific needs (including frequent operations or large areas requiring periodic coverage) where it is desirable to develop in-house competencies in drone operations and data analytics for time- and cost-effectiveness. • Another potential operating model is related with Build-Operate-Transfer (BOT) when the local government units or relevant agencies are not well equipped to start immediately with the technology implementation, and would rather take that process and integration gradually over time. • Such activities are typically funded by local or central government 

Scale Operating model Financing Inhouse 

Operated using internal capabilities of an institution 

3rd party 

Operated using external specialised service provider 

Community/cooperative 

Operated jointly by a community group 

Build-Operate-Transfer 

Operated by 3rd party and gradually transferred to inhouse 

Local or central government Development institutions Public-private partnership Alternative funding 

Financed by other players of the value chain 

NGO and/or donors Private funding 

Financed by a private sponsors or companies 

Shared economy 

Financed by the community 

On demand 

Ad-hoc or emergency use 

Cyclical 

Regular use when required e.g. based on seasons 

Permanent 

Continuously in operations 

Localised 

Single or number of target areas 

Region/province 

Large scale, regional or cross regional deployment 

Country wide 

Large scale over the entire country 

Frequency 

High relevance Moderate relevance Low relevance 101 Countries where most relevant: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Uruguay, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Venezuela As the very first step of drone solutions implementation, there should be a mapping campaign of the whole city or selected areas depending on the current situation and understanding of city characteristics by the appropriate stakeholders. 

High-resolution drone maps 

serve not only as detailed documentation, but also as actionable geospatial data to be used for multiple purposes related to city management and planning. The second phase focuses on more advanced applications, providing oblique imagery to generate detailed 3D models of selected areas, showing building facades and city infrastructure. 

# Pilot projects for urban planning and monitoring should focus on well-planned mapping, providing reliable inspection imagery to fulfil the needs of local authorities 

Source: PwC analysis 

Exemplary Pilot Project Scenario Phase I - high resolution drone mapping of a city or focus districts 

Requirements: 

• Financing from local government or development support organisations • Drone mapping professionals able to rapidly plan and execute drone flights • Strict operating procedures and coordination of flights with CAA and other services to assure safe and legal drone operations • Pilot area relevant for urban planners or city development units 

Purpose: 

• Provide up-to-date high-res drone imagery to be turned into actionable geospatial mapping products for city planning units, as well as stakeholders responsible for city infrastructure, public transportation, utilities or vegetation management 

Phase II - 3D modelling a city for planning and maintenance** 

Requirements: 

• Financing from local government or development support organisations • Experienced 3D city modelling professionals with proven procedures for planning efficient and safe operations in dense city environment • Proven data processing and analytical skills in ‘digital twin’ generation • Strict operating procedures and coordination of flights with CAA and other services to ensure safe and legal operations 

Purpose: 

• Provide high-quality 3D models (‘digital twins’) of a city or a city quarter, as reliable and measurable documentation of buildings, city infrastructure, vegetation, utilities, or other technical structures crucial for inspection, maintenance and planning works 

Hardware: 

• Fixed-wing or multirotor drones with high endurance capability and advanced flight-planning software optimised for 3D modelling • Set of high-res cameras capturing images at multiple angles at once • Optional: LiDAR to provide better quality of object shape 

Expected budget of the pilot project*: 117-381k USD Expected budget of the pilot project*: 37-110k USD 

Hardware: 

• Fixed-wing drones with long range flight capabilities; high accuracy GNSS positioning system onboard; advanced flight planning software to precisely adjust and fit flight paths to a city’s characteristics • High-res, full-frame camera for mapping 

* The cost range depends on the geography, number of participants, technology partners, length of the project and stakeholders involved; **The phases that a pilot project can cover will vary depending on the reality on the ground, level of engagement, technology available, and other enabling factors, along with the main purpose of the pilot. 102 Drones were found to be very useful in mapping Brazilian favelas, where data was used to design transitional housing to improve living conditions for the most impoverished people 

> Source: PwC analysis; DroneDeploy

Drone mapping of the impoverished settlements to increase the wellbeing of local communities 

Techo, a nonprofit organisation geared at tackling extreme poverty, partnered with software provider DroneDeploy to provide volunteer services across the whole of Latin America, including as many as 20 communities in São Paulo alone. Since 2019, this ongoing partnership has been providing visibility to the urban poor that live in these settlements. By using drones, they can better assess the number of families living in impoverished settlements and adequately map and pinpoint the risk areas associated with these areas. To build a fair, integrated, and poverty-free society, the project focused on two main challenges: 1) Constructing transitional housing for families who lack a proper home and have no access to basic services, such as clean water, electricity, and sewerage. To provide services to these communities, it was necessary to obtain information on how many people are living across these settlements by mapping and counting the total number of families. In one São Paulo community, for example, the municipality estimated that 250 families were living in the area. As it turned out, after drone deployment, there were actually more than 520 families—double the original assessment. More accurate data about the number of families in urgent need impacts people’s wellbeing, beyond basic sanitation infrastructure. Acquiring such demographic data is also crucial to enable schools to provide enough classes for all the children in these communities. 2) Drone data also enabled the identification of families living in risk areas . In São Paulo, many homes in low-income settlements are at risk of flooding or land erosion. These risks aren’t always quantifiable without the use of drone technology. The quality of the drone images allowed the number of shacks in these communities to be counted, as well as mapping their perimeter. By creating orthomosaics composed of aerial photos of the informal communities, the data was brought into a geographic information system (GIS) and boundaries around individual homes were created. By working with high-resolution raster and vector data, the mapping team in São Paulo could accurately measure which shacks were at higher risk of flood or erosion. In May 2019, a mapping campaign in a community located in the eastern part of the city identified 118 families living in areas exposed to geological risk. From there, the municipality was able to initiate a plan to relocate these families to safer locations, by building quality transitional homes. 

Case study: Designing Transitional Housing in Favelas in São Paulo 

> 103

# 5.6 

# Road infrastructure maintenance Development use case Challenge: The quality of road infrastructure, and road safety 

Provision of sufficient transport services is a major challenge for most of the LAC region, for two reasons. First, due to the extremely high population density in major cities and the uneven distribution of the population in rural areas, it is difficult to design a dense, affordable road network. Second, even though the region’s high urbanisation rate (80%) and relatively high income call for sophisticated urban transport systems, Latin America’s paved roads are similar in density and quality to those in Africa. The region is characterised by a combination of large areas of inaccessibility and congestion challenges, particularly in cities and megacities. Inadequate urban public transportation limits residents’ access to jobs, schools, and health services, hindering both productivity and equity. In fact, the average travel time to and from work in the LAC region is 77 minutes, whereas in advanced economies it takes just 65 minutes, despite longer travel distances. Therefore, the region’s infrastructure can be considered to be of rather low quality. Proper transportation brings many opportunities and opens doors for competitive global trade. Besides urban transport, the biggest need in the region is for country-wide roads, railways, and ports, to speed exports as well as transporting workers from rural areas. When it comes to safety, the rate of fatalities from traffic accidents in the region decrease insignificantly from 19.36 to 17.40 deaths per 100,000 people between 2010 and 2019, adecrease of only 10%. This fatality rate is almost twice the level observed in high income countries. The social cost of these fatalities is estimated to range between 1.1% and 2.9% of GDP. Therefore, sharply reducing the number of road traffic injuries and deaths in the LAC region would enable substantial increases in economic growth and national income, while leading simultaneously to clear welfare gains. 

# Quality and climate resilience of road infrastructure, and associated road safety, are some of the major challenges for the LAC region, with consequences for urban public transportation, export capabilities, and road fatalities 

> Source: PwC analysis; WB; IDB, IEEP, WEF: Martinez et al; the Economist

Description of Challenges for Road Infrastructure Maintenance across Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) Region 

placeholder for some images of drone in healthcare 

Road accidents due to issues with maintenance, unpaved roads, road signs, and other factors related to road infrastructure are some of the biggest challenges in the LAC, with significant social, economic and environmental impacts. Another crucial factor is related to road infrastructure climate resilience as natural disasters can have critical impact on connectivity, enabling infrastructure and logistics. In the region, over 67% of the roads are unpaved (compared with 46% in emerging economies in Asia, and 17% in Europe), limiting the economic potential of LAC countries. According to WHO, 1.3 mln people worldwide are killed and 50 mln are injured on roads yearly. Up to 90% of the deaths and injuries from traffic accidents are in low- and middle-income countries. The costs of this (direct and indirect) are over US$65 billion a year, exceeding by far the development aid received by those countries. 

> 105

Overview of drone-based road infrastructure maintenance 

Around the world, drones are being widely used in the public infrastructure sector, at every stage: from design and planning, through the construction phase, to asset management and damage assessment. Cyclical road infrastructure monitoring using drones may lead to significant optimisation of maintenance works planning, reduction of costs related to inspections, preventive maintenance, and better understanding and preparedness for resilience to natural hazards .The drone applications for road infrastructure monitoring and maintenance are multiple, including road and time-sensitive land surveys, precise mapping, maintenance and asset inspection, post-project documentation, highways infrastructure maintenance, bridge inspection, pavement condition, road distress and vulnerability to disasters analysis and monitoring. The precision of drone images even allows the detection of different road/pavement defects, such as ruts, potholes, edge failures, ravelling, delamination, cracks, bleeding, corrugations or shoving. The precise visual data, content, and measurements provided by drones are obtained and analysed with the aid of LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging) sensors and Artificial Intelligence (AI) technology. Drone data can be processed into many different deliverables (e.g. bare terrain models) for road surroundings mapping. Drone imagery is used to create orthophotomaps that portray accuracy and detail, while the technology can also be utilised to create 3D visual representation of real assets ( digital twins ). High resolution inspection photos can be also delivered to support remote and precise objects’ examination. 

# Drones represent a fast and cost-effective solution for monitoring and inspections of road infrastructure on a large scale, with little to no impact on road traffic flow and people 

> Source: PwC analysis; insideunnamedsystems.com

Maturity 

The technology for data collection in difficult to reach spots (such as bridge inspections) is fully mature. Images and video captured by drones are subsequently viewed by human inspectors. The adoption of a drone-based approach for inspections across the LAC region is still limited, however, technology has been validated and is already in use in countries such as Uruguay, Brazil, Argentina and to some extent in Guatemala. Road condition monitoring is less mature as a solution, although it has been successfully used by several road agencies across the globe. In the LAC region this use has not yet been widely validated. 

Drone data analytics for preventive maintenance and climate resilience 

Drone data can be captured and used in an organised cyclical manner in order to inspect road infrastructure towards potential damages and issues (e.g. construction cracking due to land movements), in post disaster technical shape inspections as well as during construction and re-construction works to verify results quality. 

> 106

Benefits from the Use of Drones in Road Infrastructure Maintenance: 

# There are many benefits of using UAV in road infrastructure maintenance, including improved safety of inspections, as well as ease of use and high efficiency 

> Source: PwC analysis

• The technology allows human involvement to be minimised in difficult-to-reach and dangerous places , which decreases potential risk of injuries and accidents • Drones allow the effective collection of high-resolution visual and engineering-grade data 

• Drones can carry a wide variety of payloads , such as high-resolution digital cameras, thermal cameras, or LiDAR, which allow the collection of data for different purposes, such as precise measurements during cyclical road inspections or construction site monitoring 

• Drone technology is also effective during the road construction phase for cyclical measurements of earthworks and, following integration with CAD/BIM data, measuring adherence to construction designs and adherence to planned work schedule 

• Drones are able to gather data not only about the road surface but also the road surroundings or entire areas (such as cities), which provides a much wider perspective and could also be used by other public institutions • Drone technology has been successfully used by a large number of road maintenance agencies across the globe, so the technology is 

fully validated in practice 

• Drone data can be natively integrated with Geographic Information Systems, allowing easy use of the data by large number of users (as opposed to complex engineering data) 

> 107

SDGs impacted 

• Improved road infrastructure climate resilience and safety due to preventive and post disaster inspections 

• Improved road infrastructure quality and safety due to frequent monitoring • Reduced CO2 footprint • Increased efficiency of inspections due to more accurate measurement of hard-to-reach areas / construction elements • Increased savings due to lower service costs • Improved Geographic Information Systems data coverage • Increased road network sustainability • Decreased waiting time for emergency services 

• Increased access to currently unavailable (or limited) goods and services 

• Increased safety of workers on construction sites • Increased employment opportunities 

• Reduced number of fatalities and injuries due to traffic accidents and poor road maintenance 

Expected Outcomes / Impact from Drone Use in Road Infrastructure Maintenance 

# In the long run, the benefits of using drone technology in road infrastructure construction planning, maintenance, and mapping can also positively impact other areas, such as growth of foreign capital and the national economy 

> Source: PwC analysis; Flyability S.A.; Minnesota Department of Transportation - Collins Engineers, Inc.; WB

Indirectly: Directly: 

Measured impact: 

Inspections via drones are a time- and cost-saving solution, and increase the climate resilience of road infrastructure. In 2019, the World Bank Group published the study called “Improving Climate Resilience of Federal Road Newtork in Brazil” during which drones were partially used for establishing the geohazard risk mitigation methodologies for roads. The small drones were used as a low-cost alternative for topographic characterization, slope control and disaster prevention of the transport infrastructure. The results obtained indicate an excellent cost-benefit ratio of the use of drones, given the low investment, fast processing time of data, and the reduction of the team required for it analysis , as well as extremely consistent results for planning, monitoring, and maintenance of road works. Also, in 2019, the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) found that drones could reduce the cost of bridge inspections by 75% ,bringing down the cost for each inspection by $14,600 . Most of the cost savings come in the form of reduced need for traffic control (which can cost from $500-2500 per day) and access equipment (Under Bridge Inspection Vehicles or UBIVs cost up to $1,000,000 to purchase and carry rental costs of $2,000-3,500 per day with an operator, man lifts, and rope access). Inspection-specific drones, equipped with appropriate imaging devices for basic surveys, start from around $1,000, for more advanced inspections, with the addition of payload and batteries, the cost starts from around $20,000. 

> 108

Regulatory requirements 

• Operations related to road surface mapping could involve flying extended distances along the road network, which is most effective under BVLOS flights • Country-wide regulations or official technical instructions on road maintenance • Country-wide regulations and permissions for recording and collecting data (GDPR: General Data Protection Regulation) • Regulations regarding flying over people 

Other requirements 

• Every drone pilot should obtain third party insurance before performing an operation 

# Facilitating a wide implementation of drones in road infrastructure maintenance projects and programmes requires an adequate technology environment as well as enabling regulatory and legal requirements 

> Source: PwC analysis

Technology environment Drone hardware: 

• Multirotor drones for inspection • VTOL hybrid and fixed-wing drones equipped with RTK/PPK positioning technology for the mapping of large-scale linear areas 

Drone payload: 

• High-resolution cameras for inspections and photogrammetry • Gimbal with angle range allowing camera to be pointed up • Lighting on drone for better in-air visibility in poor light conditions 

Software: 

• Photogrammetry data processing software • Dedicated GIS software for data visualisation, overlay, and analytics (e.g., 3D visualisation) • AI software for data analytics • Image-blurring technology to combat privacy issues 

Enabling Factors for Road Infrastructure Industry 

> 109

# …while other enablers and barriers to the expansion of drone use relate to digitalisation, cost, incentives, and awareness of the positive impact of UAV technology in the sector 

> Source: PwC analysis

Adoption enablers: • Road infrastructure maintenance programmes in place 

• Willingness and budget of relevant public agencies to invest in innovative and disruptive technology solutions 

• Relatively high levels of digital maturity in relevant public agencies regarding the use of relevant technologies (e.g., GIS) • UAS regulations enabling BVLOS operations 

• Demonstrations and pilot projects to show public stakeholders the value added by drone technology 

Drone Technology Adoption Enablers & Barriers within the Road Infrastructure Maintenance Adoption barriers: • Cost of drone services and/or relevant equipment and software (for a developing country, without co-financing) 

• Limited technology adoption and digitalisation rate • Limited awareness and knowledge of innovative technologies 

• Limited incentives to change existing processes and look for more innovative methodologies and solutions 

• Safety and privacy concerns from local communities • Public concerns regarding the automation of services ,reducing human input and potentially leading to a reduction in employment opportunities 

> 110

Stakeholders category Key stakeholders and potential partners Role of stakeholders 

Government & public sector 

• Ministry of Transportation • Ministry of Infrastructure • Ministry of Industry, Trade and Services • Ministry of Science and Technology • Civil Aviation Authorities • Municipalities • Regional and local infrastructure agencies, e.g., Vialidad (Chile); Agencia Nacional de Tránsito y Seguridad Vial (Guatemala) Government and public sector can support drone use in road infrastructure in several ways: • Support collaboration among institutions related to the facilitation of permits and operations • Include the technology in current road maintenance programmes • Attract, obtain and coordinate investments • Facilitate adoption of the technology through the establishment of proper regulatory frameworks, including around the use of UAVs • Provide the necessary training among governmental personnel and other relevant stakeholders for the use and adoption of the technology in road maintenance • Contribute to the dissemination of knowledge about the relevance of drones, both in the road infrastructure sector and among local communities 

Companies & private sector 

• Construction companies • Drone operators • Associated drone services • Sensor providers • Navigation developers / providers All companies included in the project should be aware of the bigger picture and long-term benefits. Communication between all stakeholders and the operation is crucial. Drone manufacturers, and providers of sensors and systems need to ensure their products are of the highest quality and accuracy. Management and staff of construction companies must be open to constant improvement and innovation, acquiring new competencies in order to stay competitive in the market. 

Investors and international financial institutions 

• World Bank • Inter-American Development Bank • Development Bank of Latin America In order to implement innovative technologies, both public and private investments will play a key role. Launching a funding programme may be an opportunity for architecture and engineering companies looking to develop into drone technologies. Co-financing should cover the technology itself, and possibly also the expansion of knowledge and employing qualified staff. 

# The implementation of drone technology in road infrastructure maintenance requires the cooperation of national and local actors from the public and private sector, plus financial organisations… 

Source: PwC analysis 

Partner Environment for Drone Applications in Road Infrastructure Maintenance* (1/2) 

*The list of stakeholders is not exhaustive and may differ according to country/region/town where road infrastructure maintenance drone solutions are implemented. Therefore, a stakeholder mapping is advised prior to any design and implementation. 111 Stakeholders category Key stakeholders and potential partners Role of stakeholders 

NGOs / civil society & international organisations 

• Droneresponders • AUVSI • UNDP • ICA • GlobalABC • CEPAL 

NGOs are important for increasing knowledge and awareness of drone usage in road infrastructure construction, maintenance and mapping, leading to greater acceptance from wider society. This may lead to further understanding of the benefits associated with this technology, such as improved area mapping, safer roads, increased density of the road network, access to currently unavailable or hardly available goods, shorter waiting time for emergency services, further impact on transport and investments in the region, growing tourism, etc. International organisations can also educate local populations, regulators, and the media on the benefits and safety of collecting data (including images) by drone, and the technology behind it. 

End users / civil society 

• Citizens • Local communities • Local community leaders 

Citizens and local communities should clearly articulate their needs around access to safe, sustainable road infrastructure. These stakeholders are critical actors in helping countries, banks, and investors advance and improve the use of drone technology in road maintenance and monitoring, by ensuring that projects meet demand and are performed in the right way. Civil society can engage with international organisations and NGOs to reflect on what works and what does not, and to help deliver the appropriate road infrastructure maintenance. 

# …while the support and involvement of NGOs, civil society and end users is also key 

> Source: PwC analysis

Partner Environment for Drone applications in Road Infrastructure Maintenance* (2/2)  

> *The list of stakeholders is not exhaustive and may differ according to country/region/town where road infrastructure maintenance drone solutions are implemented. Therefore, a stakeholder mapping is advised prior to any design and implementation. 112

# Depending on the end user’s strategy and capabilities, drones may be implemented in road maintenance using one of two recommended business models: hiring commercial providers, or developing in-house capabilities 

Business Models for Drone Use in Road Infrastructure Maintenance 

• In a typical scenario, drone operations related to road infrastructure maintenance are provided to relevant agencies by specialised service providers , e.g., road maintenance or surveying companies • Some public transportation or road infrastructure institutions have a 

mandate to invest in technology and skills internally, and therefore develop in-house capabilities to effectively use drone hardware and software • Such a model is typically built over several years, gradually growing from an isolated pilot project to a large set of organisational capabilities . In-house operations offer higher flexibility in the use of drone technology whenever required. However, the model has constraints related to upgrading the equipment through the public procurement process • Relevant road data are typically gathered when in selected areas in related to planned capital projects e.g. road construction • Drone services are provided in line with local public procurement practices , which include public tenders, framework contracts, or direct contracting, amongst other methods 

Scale Operating model Financing Inhouse 

Operated using internal capabilities of an institution 

3rd party 

Operated using external specialised service provider 

Community/cooperative 

Operated jointly by a community group 

Build-Operate-Transfer 

Operated by 3rd party and gradually transferred to inhouse 

Local or central government Development institutions Public-private partnership Alternative funding 

Financed by other players of the value chain 

NGO and/or donors Private funding 

Financed by a private sponsors or companies 

Shared economy 

Financed by the community 

On demand 

Ad-hoc or emergency use 

Cyclical 

Regular use when required e.g. based on seasons 

Permanent 

Continuously in operations 

Localised 

Single or number of target areas 

Region/province 

Large scale, regional or cross regional deployment 

Country wide 

Large scale over the entire country 

Frequency 

High relevance Moderate relevance Low relevance 113 The aim of the pilot in road infrastructure maintenance is to 

prove drones’ relevance and effectiveness in data collection, provision of analytical reports and a ctionable conclusions for authorities. 

The pilot project should focus on presenting the practical use of drones in infrastructure monitoring for climate resilience purposes. This can cover preventive inspections of a given infrastructure subset (bridges, roads, terrain and surroundings) or post-disaster areas analysis towards potential dangerous issues. A phased approach helps to gradually build experience and adopt technology across stakeholders. 

Countries where most relevant: Antigua & Barbuda, Argentina, Bahamas, Belize, Brazil, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Suriname, St.Kitts & Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and Grenadines, Uruguay, Venezuela 

# An impactful pilot project should start with drone inspections of a few selected road infrastructure elements, to build familiarity with the technology and showcase its potential, followed by a phase covering a wider scope of operations 

Source: PwC analysis 

Exemplary Pilot Project Scenario Phase I - perform drone inspection for a few road objects 

Requirements: 

• Substantial involvement of 

local road authorities, governments or agencies, with willingness to introduce new technologies to operations • Road maintenance specialists to preselect suitable objects for pilot • Drone specialists/advisors with experience of implementing technology projects in the sector • Software to showcase digital visual inspection efficiency and cooperation capabilities 

Purpose: 

• Collect high quality drone imagery for inspection of road infrastructure objects (e.g. bridges) during 1–2 days of flights • Generate drone maps, 3D models and image datasets for visual inspection • Educate, share knowledge and analytical insights with relevant stakeholders and 

services responsible for road network climate resilience support 

Phase II - large scale drone inspections over a small city/region** 

Requirements: 

• Drone service provider with proven experience in road sector mapping projects • Frequent and periodic drone operations setup with focus on safety and local regulations 

• Potential BVLOS waivers ,cooperation with Civil Aviation Authority • Cooperation and involvement of different road authority units to deploy drones into different areas of road infrastructure maintenance • Diversified infrastructure selection to test multiple scenarios 

Purpose: 

• Deploy drones at scale, over a limited area, as a standard tool for road maintenance over 3–6 months period • Collect drone data for road infrastructure maintenance (e.g. inspections, maintenance planning, work surveillance, as-is documentation) • Prove scalability and time/cost efficiency of drone solutions • Engage drones in post disaster validation of road infrastructure technical shape 

Hardware: 

• Fixed-wing or multicopter with high accuracy GNSS location system • Optional LiDAR, depending on scenarios and expected outputs 

Expected budget of the pilot project*: 133-348k USD Expected budget of the pilot project*: 62-135k USD 

Hardware: 

• Multicopter with high accuracy GNSS location system, great manoeuvring capacity and high-res camera (>20 MPix, zoom preferable) • Optional LiDAR, depending on scenarios and expected outputs 

* The cost range depends on the geography, number of participant, technology partners, length of the project and stakeholders involved; **The phases that a pilot project can cover will vary depending on the reality on the ground, level of engagement, technology available, other enabling factors along with the main purpose of the pilot. 114 Drone inspection of an airstrip reveals the real cause of pavement damage 

The Caribbean Island of Sint Eustatius was hit by two major hurricanes, Irma and Maria, during the high-intensity season of 2017. It caused major destruction on the island’s natural life and infrastructure, including to the local airport. The airport’s airstrip is located at the edge of a coastal cliff, which was severely eroded during the storm. This caused significant risk to the safety of air operations and had adverse consequences for the island’s entire population—as, in the absence of a large marine port, the airport has been the main means of transportation to and from the island for both people and cargo. In 2018, Dutch company GeoInspect performed a drone survey and inspection of the damage to the airstrip and the structure of the cliff. The project started by obtaining the permissions to operate a drone over the airport, which required coordination with the local authorities as well as close cooperation with the airport tower. The project involved performing a photogrammetry survey as well as high-accuracy LiDAR scanning. The detailed 3D point cloud allowed GeoInspect to safely map and analyse the otherwise inaccessible gullies of the cliff. Data analysis revealed that the damage had been caused by rainwater running back down the side of the hills and flowing toward the sea, rather than heavy waves crashing against the coastline as initially presumed. Armed with this information, a local engineering company planned to canalize the runoff, by creating a new system of culverts and canals to enable the rainwater to flow in a different direction, away from the airstrip and cliffs. The analysis allowed key decisions to be made, preventing further erosion and damage on the infrastructure, and helping to guarantee the safety and continued operation of the airport. Additionally, the data gathered from the survey could be used in the future as a baseline for further analysis of the erosion of the cliff. Future survey data can be overlayed on top of the original 3D point cloud and analysed with a high level of accuracy. 

# Thanks to the use of drone technology, local engineers from St. Eustatius learned the real cause of airstrip pavement deterioration and were able to apply preventive actions 

> Source: PwC analysis; insideunnamedsystems.com

Case Study: Airstrip Inspection in Oranjestad on the Caribbean Island of St. Eustatius  

> Source: Google Earth, 2022 4115

# 5.7 

# Road traffic monitoring Development use case Drones may bring many benefits in road traffic and safety monitoring, including valuable insights for traffic congestion management and increased road safety 

> Source: PwC analysis; PTV Group

Challenge: Major cities in the LAC region face significant economic and social losses every year due to ever-increasing traffic congestion 

With the growth in average income in LAC countries, the region has also experienced an increased motorization rate (number of vehicles per 100 inhabitants). The average annual growth 

in the region between 2005 and 2015 was 4.7%, reaching 201 vehicles per 1000 inhabitants in 2015 . It is estimated that by 2030, the motorization rate will increase by almost 40%, reaching 276 vehicles per 1000 inhabitants. Major capital cities such as Bogotá, Lima, Mexico City, Rio de Janeiro and São Paulo already feature on the list of the most congested cities in the world. Without appropriate adaptation measures, the increasing motorization rate can translate into reduced road safety. More vehicles, insufficient and unsafe road infrastructure, and new highways that are built without substantial road safety considerations currently result in nearly 130,000 deaths and six million injuries per year. Aside from the human cost, each country in the LAC region also suffers the economic burden of road traffic injuries, costing regional economies between 3-6% of GDP. The excessive number of vehicles circulating on a road also result in driving at a lower speed, generating traffic congestion. This also causes drivers to use more fuel, emitting more polluting gases that directly impact air pollution. Furthermore, traffic congestion has associated social impacts, such as decreased productivity, reduced income generation capacity, and increased inequality. Observing the impact on opportunity and productivity due to traffic congestion in 2019 shows that Sao Paulo, with 21.8 million inhabitants, lost 700 million productive hours due to congestion, and Mexico City (with 21.6m inhabitants) lost 650 million hours. Even San Salvador, the city with the smallest number of inhabitants among those measured (1.1m), recorded 37 million lost hours in 2019. 

Description of Challenge for Road Traffic Monitoring across Latin America and the Caribbean 

For urban planners analysing traffic flow, road capacity, and drivers’ behaviour to create strategies to reduce urban congestion and improve road safety is crucial. It will improve journey times, reduce fuel consumption and CO2 emissions , and reduce the environmental and social problems affecting urban areas. Congestion is a major challenge for local governments and for the inhabitants of Latin American cities, several of which feature among the most congested in international rankings. Although the use of drones for traffic flow, volume, and safety monitoring is not widely adopted, it has been proven to address specific needs and to gather and deliver required data quickly—e.g., analysing traffic flow at specific intersections. It is especially relevant for highly congested cities such as São Paulo, Mexico City, Buenos Aires, Bogotá, Lima, Rio de Janeiro, and Santiago. 

> 117

# Despite LAC having some of the most congested cities in the world, drones have not been widely adopted for road traffic and safety monitoring and their potential is not fully unlocked 

> Source: PwC analysis

Drones can be considered a complementary technology to traditional road traffic and safety monitoring methods. The low cost and lack of required fixed physical infrastructure make them a cost and time-effective method of data acquisition. UAVs might be used in: 

1. Safety monitoring: The ability of a UAV to capture aerial imagery provides much better and more regularly-acquired information. Drones can be deployed on the accident-prone routes increasing safety of drivers and non-car road user such as cyclists or pedestrians. In addition, drones can assist in identifying reckless behaviour on the roads such as exceeding the speed limit, non-compliance with road signs, or using mobile phones while diving. 

2. Traffic volume: Drones can be used as a complementary tool to traditional road sensors, to capture traffic footage that will subsequently be analysed by machine learning–enabled software to gain more knowledge about car density or the distribution of speed over a predefined stretch. 

3. Intersection and roundabouts studies: UAVs are well-suited for capturing video footage to provide information on delays experienced by drivers at an intersection and analysis of traffic stream at roundabouts and their performance in case of heavy traffic. 

4. Accident 3D mapping: Drones can be used to improve the process of crash investigation, by capturing data with sub-centimetre accuracy that can later be used to create full 3D car crash reconstruction with millions of data points. 

Maturity 

Even though drone road traffic and safety monitoring services are still limited, there are some examples of this use case in action. Most of these are from Europe and the United States, however, in 2021, the MOnitoring traffic Congestion in Africa project (MOCA) was started, using a swarm of drones to collect and analyse urban traffic data. In the LAC region, the evidence from the use of drones in road traffic monitoring comes from Argentina, Haiti, and Colombia. The technology itself will most likely not substitute traditional traffic sensor solutions such as cameras or induction loops it analog measurements however it can provide valuable information in area where other solutions are not available. 

Description of Drone Use Cases in Road Traffic Monitoring 

> 118

Benefits of Drone Usage in Road Traffic Monitoring 

# Using drones in road traffic and safety monitoring can be more cost-effective and labour-efficient than traditional methods, and can also provide better evidence in accident investigation 

> Source: PwC analysis

• UAV use for traffic and safety monitoring may be a more cost-efficient alternative to traditional methods , as drones can gather detailed data over large areas while requiring less human intervention • Drones equipped with different kinds of sensors—HD cameras and thermal cameras, for example—can monitor road traffic during day and night 

• Drones can be deployed quickly to provide situational awareness in various circumstances, within a few minutes • Monitoring traffic from above is more successful than from the ground, as more can be seen and a drone can be piloted over long distances 

• When used with a tether, drones can remain in the air monitoring the traffic 24 hours a day 

• Performing road accident surveillance with the use of drones can reduce police highway closures from around 6-8 hours down to a total of just two hours • Surveying roads by drones is less-time consumin g than traditional field surveying with ground scanners (1 hour to survey an area of 3 square miles, compared to 5 days by traditional methods) • The accuracy of the information obtained by drones is higher than that collected by traditional methods, which increases safety for road users 

> 119

SDGs impacted 

Measured impact of drone use in road traffic monitoring • Potential applications of UAVs for urban roundabout flow analysis: A study conducted in France by Bramini et al. (2020) compared the traffic flow measurements obtained by drones with those acquired by conventional monitoring masts at a key roundabout. Vehicles were also counted manually, and this number acted as a control group to compare errors in measurement (relative error). During the 2-hour experiment, the drones registered a total of 761 vehicles appearing on the roundabout, masts registered 797, and manual total was 789. The difference in measurement using the two methods is relatively small, and it is worth noting that drones were more accurate than the conventional masts. 

• Lane change analysis in Denmark: The Danish Road Directorate established a pilot project in which the emergency lane is replaced with a parallel traffic lane, which drivers should consider an extended entrance/exit road. This means that road users who enter the motorway should leave the parallel lane at the beginning of the stretch unless they plan to use the next exit. To evaluate whether drivers were using the parallel lane as intended, COWI, the Danish consulting engineering company, used a drone to monitor traffic on a section of the motorway. On the captured footage, it is possible to register whether drivers leave the parallel lane after entering the motorway or whether they stay on it. The recordings were taken from a height of 65 meters and covered roughly 500 meters of motorway .• Increased aerial coverage, leading to greater cost- and labour-efficiency • Improved traffic flow • Reduced urban congestion and traffic jam duration 

• Increased road safety 

• Increased speed of accident detection and response • Reduced fuel consumption • Reduced emission of vehicle pollutants like nitrogen dioxide, carbon monoxide, hydrocarbons, benzene, and formaldehyde • Decreased probability of heat island occurrence • Increased visibility due to a lower level of pollutants 

Expected Outcomes / Impact of Drone Usage 

# The use of drone technology in road traffic and safety monitoring could lead to improved traffic flow and reduced traffic jams, resulting in lower fuel consumption and air pollution 

> Source: PwC analysis

Indirectly: Directly: 

> 120

Regulatory requirements 

• Country-wide regulations and permissions for recording and collecting data (General Data Protection Regulation or GDPR) • Regulations regarding flying over people • Regulations that allow EVLOS and BVLOS operation • Additional risk assessment might be required to obtain approval regarding drone operations in urban environments, and over vehicles and/or people • Additional drone certification or airworthiness might be required for dedicated drone solutions 

Other requirements 

• Tethered solutions could be implemented to avoid frequent battery changes 

# The adoption of drones for road traffic and safety monitoring can be supported and facilitated through the provision of technology environment, proper regulatory frameworks and incentives 

> Source: PwC analysis

Technological environment Drone hardware: 

• Multirotors (for stable image capturing and easy vertical take-off and landing) • VTOL hybrid drones combining rotors with fixed-wings (for large-scale mapping of linear areas) • Long-endurance drones with hovering capability 

Drone payload: 

• High-resolution cameras to capture video feed (e.g., for traffic flow and volume analysis), as well as image data for mapping and 3D analysis (e.g., accident analysis) • Night-vision/thermal cameras for analysis of movement at night 

Software: 

• Dedicated software solution for the analysis of traffic volume and flow based on video feed • Photogrammetry software for 3D mapping and modelling • Image-blurring software to disguise licence plates and human faces, required for privacy protection 

Enabling Factors for Drones Application in Road Traffic Monitoring 

> 121

# The key adoption barriers for drone technology in road traffic and safety monitoring are related to limited technology adoption and digitalisation rate, safety and privacy concerns of city dwellers and the costs of drone services 

> Source: PwC analysis

Adoption enablers: • Affordable and accessible funds for special drone deployment programmes 

• Acceptance from local communities for wider drone usage • R&D projects from universities, research institutes and companies to pilot and showcase the use of the technology 

• Digital maturity of public agencies responsible for road traffic management to test and implement innovative solutions • Ability of relevant public agencies to effectively use obtained data for decision-making • Updated regulations that enable EVLOS and BVLOS operations Drone Technology Adoption Enablers & Barriers within the Road Traffic and Monitoring Adoption barriers: • Cost of drone services and/or relevant equipment and software 

• Limited awareness and knowledge of innovative technologies 

• Limited willingness to change or adopt new technology 

• Safety and privacy concerns within local communities 

• Restrictive regulations , prohibiting drone operations close to urban areas 

• Limited understanding among authorities about the potential of drones in road traffic monitoring 

> 122

Stakeholders category Key stakeholders and potential partners Role of stakeholders Government & public sector 

• Ministry of Transportation • Ministry of Infrastructure • Ministry of Science and Technology • Civil Aviation Authorities • Public Safety Institutions • Local and regional bodies for road traffic and maintenance (VIALIDAD in Chile; Provias Descentralizado in Peru; etc.) Government and public sector can support drone usage in several ways, including: • Facilitating collaboration among institutions with regard to permits and operations • Seeking and coordinating investment • Conducting competitions for tender among contractors • Determining proper regulatory frameworks • Providing necessary training • Disseminating knowledge in local communities about the relevance and benefits of drones Additionally, government can introduce UAV solutions into current road traffic monitoring programmes in major cities in the region, where most systems are currently based on camera surveillance in coordination with helicopters or other aerial solutions. Central government can promote the integration of UAVs as an additional, accurate, cost-effective technology to improve road traffic monitoring. 

Companies & private sector 

• Drone operators • Associated drone services • Sensor providers • Navigation developers / providers • Software providers Drone manufacturers, as well as sensor and systems providers, need to ensure their products are of the highest quality and accuracy. Management and staff of construction companies must be open to constant improvement and innovation, acquiring new competencies in order to stay competitive in the market. SaaS companies must develop AI-powered software to detect and analyse vehicles on video feeds. 

Investors and international financial institutions 

• WB • IDB • CAF In order to implement innovative technologies, both public and private investments play a key role. Co-financing should cover the technology itself, but also the possibility of expanding knowledge or employing qualified staff, and making further technological developments. 

# The successful full-scale deployment of drones in road traffic and safety monitoring requires the active involvement and cooperation of various groups of stakeholders, including public sector, private sector, and financial institutions… 

Source: PwC analysis *The list of stakeholders is not exhaustive and it may differ per country/region/town where road traffic monitoring solutions are implemented. Therefore, a stakeholders mapping prior to any design and implementation is advised. 

Partners Environment for Drones Application in Road Traffic Monitoring 

123 Stakeholders category Key stakeholders and potential partners Role of stakeholders NGOs / international organisations 

• Local community leaders • AUVSI • UNDP • ICA • GlobalABC • CEPAL NGOs can educate local populations, regulators, authorities and the media as to the benefits that will come from the use of drone data in road traffic monitoring. Non-profit international and national organisations can also organise workshops and training for drones operators, to teach them about the safety and privacy aspects of flying over people and in BVLOS and EVLOS conditions. 

End users/ Civil society 

• Citizens • Local community leaders Civil society organisations and local communities are important in increasing knowledge and awareness of drone use in traffic monitoring. Acceptance from citizens is linked with greater understanding of the benefits associated with this technology, such as improved area mapping, safer roads, shorter waiting time for emergency services, further impact on transport, and investments in the area. 

# …while NGOs, civil society organisations, and end users all have a role to play in ensuring drone implementation is a success 

Source: PwC analysis 

Partners Environment for Drones Application in Road Traffic and Monitoring 

*The list of stakeholders is not exhaustive and it may differ per country/region/town where road traffic monitoring solutions are implemented. Therefore, a stakeholders mapping prior to any design and implementation is advised. 124 The business model for this use case will vary depending on the specifics of planned deployment; from small-scale activities to larger projects realised by public authorities and services with the support of relevant commercial partners 

Business Models for Drones in Road Traffic Monitoring 

• Drone technology will not substitute traditional data gathering methods for traffic monitoring, however it can be a useful tool complementing other use cases for emergency cases, or when other solutions are less cost-effective or are not suitable/available • Long-term observation of road environment may require access to specialised drone solutions e.g. tethered drones, which are not widely available on the market and might require purchase by a service provider for a specific contract or purchase by a public institution 

• One of the potential models is Build-Operate-Transfer where 3rd party service provider or a consultant is hired to build capabilities within the public agency and is gradually transferring the operations to the client • The use case is typically financed by central or local governments 

• In emerging economies the road traffic monitoring projects are often financed, or co-financed by financial development institutions as a part of the larger transportation programmes Scale Operating model Financing Inhouse 

Operated using internal capabilities of an institution 

3rd party 

Operated using external specialised service provider 

Community/cooperative 

Operated jointly by a community group 

Build-Operate-Transfer 

Operated by 3rd party and gradually transferred to inhouse 

Local or central government Development institutions Public-private partnership Alternative funding 

Financed by other players of the value chain 

NGO and/or donors Private funding 

Financed by a private sponsors or companies 

Shared economy 

Financed by the community 

On demand 

Ad-hoc or emergency use 

Cyclical 

Regular use when required e.g. based on seasons 

Permanent 

Continuously in operations 

Localised 

Single or number of target areas 

Region/province 

Large scale, regional or cross regional deployment 

Country wide 

Large scale over the entire country 

Frequency 

High relevance Moderate relevance Low relevance 125 Countries where most relevant: Argentina, Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, St.Lucia, Suriname, Uruguay, Venezuela The main goal of a pilot project is to prove the relevance and effectiveness of currently available drones and software solutions in road traffic monitoring, in order to make road travel safer and more efficient, for pedestrians, drivers, and the logistics sector. The pilot should also aim to educate relevant stakeholders and local communities on the value and efficiency of the technology. The outcomes should bring a new quality to road traffic monitoring, with a greater understanding of its specifics depending on the time of day, type of infrastructure or typical road users’ behaviours. 

# Pilot projects in road traffic and safety monitoring can focus on solving congestion challenges for local community stakeholders—including individuals, businesses, and authorities 

Source: PwC analysis; 

Exemplary Pilot Project Scenario I. Phase I - Congested or dangerous road segment monitoring 

Requirements: 

• Local authorities to pre-select locations which require deeper investigation of road infrastructure due to traffic jams or safety concerns • Requirements of road users (pedestrians, individuals, businesses, logistics operators) should be analysed • Analytical teams and road traffic management software should be used for qualitative assessment 

Purpose: 

• Capture real-time drone data for traffic flow over selected infrastructure at different times and days of the week • Understand traffic structure, user behaviour and infrastructure use • Find improvement points 

II. Phase II - Multiple locations monitoring for traffic analytics 

Requirements: 

• Select specific types of infrastructure or relevant areas of a city (or cities) to analyse common problems, e.g., daily congestion • Close cooperation of authorities in order to oversee project and support technical teams with relevant requirements (e.g., data analysis) • Define actionable results and outcomes in order to support remediation deployment (e.g., changes in traffic organisation) 

Purpose: 

• Monitor traffic flow in selected circumstances (e.g., morning / evening traffic jams on major arteries) over specific type of infrastructure at multiple locations • Capture reliable data using road user counting, type detection (car/truck/bus/pedestrian) and typical behaviour tracking (lane changing, road crossing efficiency etc.) 

Hardware: 

• Long-endurance drones with hovering capability (tethered solutions possible) • Cameras with live image analytics capability and road user detection (AI and computer vision algorithms onboard or in external software) 

Expected budget of the pilot project*: 93-278k USD Expected budget of the pilot project*: 34-96k USD Hardware and software: 

• Long-endurance drones with hovering capability (considering tethered solutions to avoid frequent battery changes) • High-res cameras for photo capturing and video recording with optical focus for better quality • Data analysis software 

* The cost range depends on the geography, number of participant, technology partners, length of the project and stakeholders involved; **The phases that a pilot project can cover will vary depending on the reality on the ground, level of engagement, technology available, other enabling factors along with the main purpose of the pilot. 126 Drone data has improved overall traffic situation, bringing greater safety, efficiency, and comfort to Medellin city in Colombia Challenge 

Medellin, as the second most populated city in Colombia, is also one of the country’s most important urban economic areas. Economic growth 

increases the demand for vehicles and motorcycles , which in Medellin has resulted in traffic congestion . To deal with the problem, Medellin authorities turned to advanced technology to monitor traffic and provide the information needed to manage and distribute traffic flow. Existing transportation monitoring and control centres are located in two separate locations, without the means to share traffic information or respond to conditions in a coordinated manner. In order to overcome challenges connected to traffic flow monitoring, a single, integrated traffic control centre was needed for Medellin's five-part highway system. The city used drones to acquire first-hand knowledge and understanding of the current status of Medellin’s transportation system . This data and the resulting analysis were shared in great detail with officials and related personnel in charge of transportation in Medellin. Drone data underpinned the development of design specifications for a new system for processing and providing traffic information. In the first year of the project, a new Integrated Traffic Information Centre (CITRA) was established, and Medellin also implemented the necessary highway infrastructure for traffic information collection (VDS: Vehicle Detection System) and display (VMS: Variable Message Sign), for vehicles entering the city centre from the north and south. Now in its second year, the project plan calls for the provision of integrated traffic information for even more highway users, through various channels (i.e., homepages, applications, and VMS), with the introduction of additional on-site equipment (VDS, VMS), and by upgrading the CITRA system. 

Benefits 

Medellin City is now able to monitor traffic information from each existing centre through the Integrated Traffic Information Centre (CITRA) ,and to synthesize traffic information through the newly installed central and on-site systems. The solution has enabled the collection and analysis of drone data on traffic, not only to manage current congestion, but also to inform future transportation policies. 

# Medellin city created an integrated traffic monitoring system based on data provided by drones. The system covered traffic flow of each of the five city highway systems. 

> Source: PwC analysis; STraffic

Case Study: Traffic Flow Analysis in Colombia 

> 127

# 5.8 

# Remote internet access Development use case Challenge: Lack of high-quality internet connection 

Latin America and the Caribbean have the highest technology inequality in the world . According to a joint report by the Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture (IICA), the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) and Microsoft, nearly 224 million people (32% of the LAC region population) have no access to the internet at the minimum necessary quality standard. According to IDB, US$ 68.5 billion would be needed to overcome this digital gap: 59% of this amount should be used to improve connectivity in cities and 41% should go to rural areas, where public investments tend to be the main financing source. To meet this demand, more public-private partnerships are required. To achieve equal access to the internet across the region, both affordable prices and high-quality infrastructure are essential. There is a wide gap between individual LAC countries in terms of quality of service. Chile and Uruguay are the two countries best placed in terms of connectivity—although only 15% of connections have speeds greater than 15 Mbps (megabits per second). At the other end of the spectrum, Bolivia has one of the region's lowest connectivity rates, mainly due to experiencing the highest prices. Remote internet access is also of vital importance to LAC countries due to the large number of natural disasters that occur in the region every year. During these events, the whole infrastructure in affected areas is often completely destroyed, including power lines, severely hampering search and rescue operations. By providing remote internet access, this obstacle can be overcome, increasing people’s chances of survival. 

# Drones can be a viable solution for providing quick and reliable internet coverage in many LAC countries, decreasing the technological gap, improving equal access to services and business, and helping during disasters 

> Source: PwC analysis

Description of Challenges in Remote Internet Access across Latin America and the Caribbean 

While connectivity is improving in many parts of the world, about 49% of people are still without reliable mobile broadband coverage. Currently, mobile networks have been designed to address the demands of modern urban areas, but the high cost of spectrum licenses makes the ROI in remote areas unattractive to mobile operators. Quality of service is another challenge, as mobile networks are designed to operate in cells within less than 10 km reach, with very poor performance over larger distances. Therefore, it is important to remember that although internet connectivity itself is crucial, it should also be of sufficient quality to provide different types of public services (educational, medical, etc.). It must also function during natural disasters when connectivity is often lost due to the destruction of power lines. Improving and investing in connectivity improves countries’ economic growth. There is a thread of evidence that shows a positive correlation between the maturity of broadband connectivity infrastructure and Gross Domestic Product. Using drone platforms to bring low-cost, high-quality broadband can be a good solution for unserved or underserved parts of the world. 

> 129

# Drones can provide internet or boost signal in rural areas, bringing equal access to proper education, and supporting communities following natural disasters where permanent cell towers have been destroyed 

> Source: PwC analysis

Description of drone use cases in remote internet access Lack of proper access to good quality internet is an issue that is difficult to overcome without proper technological facilities. Therefore, 

remote access by drone is becoming increasingly popular. Drone internet platforms can be used in the event of natural disasters or pandemics, and in rural areas to increase educational capacity or productivity. When the terrestrial infrastructure is compromised during a natural disaster, first responders can quickly begin to use UAV internet platforms instead, as the system can be set up on an ad hoc basis. Users can also move platforms around to see where the service works best. Connectivity is vital in the case of search and rescue operations, where good internet coverage increases the chances of survival for affected people. In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, getting emergency messages to people can be essential to ensure they know how to stay safe. It is impossible to do this if there are rural connectivity problems. These can be overcome by high altitude platform systems that can hover in the air for months at a time. The social aspect of drone internet coverage is also highly important. Internet access can bring multiple benefits to society, increasing educational opportunities, facilitating access to job opportunities, and driving greater productivity. 

Maturity 

So far, two ideas have been developed to enable drones to stay in the air for a significant length of time. The first is based on a 

power cord tethered to a power source on the ground . The second requires the generation of energy through solar panels attached to a drone . These ideas are not yet fully tested or ready to scale up. Large technology companies like Facebook or Google have made attempts to bring internet connectivity by drones to areas where it was lacking. However, the projects were quickly abandoned due to technical difficulties and lack of finance. Currently, the HAPSMobile, a joint venture between SoftBank and AeroVironment, is working on a solar-powered drone called HAWK30, capable of staying in the air for 6 months at a time, providing coverage for a radius of about 124 miles (200 km). The joint venture has signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with Smart Africa. Under the MoU, feasibility and demand studies will be conducted in 5 African countries: Djibouti, Egypt, Kenya, Morocco, and Rwanda. Although a few companies are trying to develop the technology required for drone provision of remote internet access, the idea is still new, and there is no evidence of drone usage for this purpose in the LAC region. 

> 130

Benefits of Drone Usage in Remote Internet Access 

# Using drones to extend internet coverage may be highly beneficial for rural, remote areas in terms of education, e-medicine, economic growth, and natural disaster response & management 

> Source: PwC analysis

• Improving and investing in connectivity will unlock countries’ economic growth • Farmers can access wide knowledge platforms & databases through the internet, and use these resources to optimize their production, minimising costs and maximising profit • Entrepreneurs can use the internet to sell goods not just to the local community but to the whole country, region, or world, bringing more money into their economy 

• Schoolchildren and students that cannot afford textbooks are able to access the global online knowledge compendium 

• Reliable internet coverage improves the provision of e-medicine and healthcare services by, for example, increasing the number of telemedicine programmes and facilitating online communication between patients and medical personnel • Drone internet platforms are extremely beneficial in disaster relief :• The absence of internet coverage often makes it impossible to reach potential survivors, but the platforms can help in better coordination of search and rescue operations 

• They allow survivors to connect with families and rescue teams 

• They help authorities to better coordinate disaster mitigation plans 

• Drones that can fly for constantly for weeks and even months give authorities time to recover infrastructure losses 

• Drones are not static, and can therefore be moved from place to place according to need and signal strength 

> 131

• Improved internet access in regions which are underserved or affected by disasters 

• Improved access to and quality of education in rural areas, meaning better opportunities for more children • Increased efficiency of production processes and public and private services , generating employment , improving productivity and the quality of products and services 

• Increased possibilities for knowledge transfer and participation in global culture • Improved and accelerated access to reliable healthcare services • Enhanced market potential by connecting remote users 

• Decreased technology and connectivity gap between rural and urban areas 

Expected Outcomes / Impact of Drone Usage in Remote Internet Access 

# Reliable internet access provided by drones has great potential to reduce educational and other inequalities, and can help regions hit by natural disasters or epidemics 

> Source: PwC analysis

SDGs impacted 

Indirectly: Directly: 

Measured impact: 

• In the UK, the Stratospheric Platform designed by Cambridge Consultants proposes the deployment of drones that beam a 5G signal, to deliver high-speed internet to wide areas. According to the designers, 60 drones would be able to cover the whole of the UK (242,495 km²) providing users with download speeds of about 100Mbps—allowing them to download a typical four-gigabyte movie in under six minutes 

• During the Ebola outbreak in Liberia between 2013 and 2016, WHO workers travelled from village to village to educate citizens on how to protect themselves and take charge of the outbreak response. At that time, broadband coverage in Liberia was inadequate, making the exercise difficult for community workers. This led the Liberian government deploying fiber broadband around Monrovia to mitigate the risks of future outbreaks. Through this deployment, hospitals and schools have become successfully connected to the Internet. However, it took approximately two years to connect 100+ access sites; i n retrospect, High Altitude Platform System (HAPS) drones would have been able to connect these areas in a matter of weeks 

> 132

Regulatory requirements 

• Operations would be conducted autonomously due to their duration, and would therefore require special permission and establishment of a fly zone for permanent airspace presence • Additional risk analyses should be provided to obtain approval regarding the possibility of equipment failure, with potential associated risks for third parties 

Other requirements 

• Wireless technologies must primarily include microwave, millimetre wave and free space optics (FSO) • Each of these have limitations: microwave has relatively low capacity, while millimetre wave and FSO can be affected by weather (in case of hovering multirotor drones) • The network must therefore combine wireless technologies that can compensate for each other's shortcoming without interfering with each other's signal, and the signals must be treated as equals • Drones must remain in flight for days, weeks, and sometimes even months at a time, which requires too much energy for battery power alone to be sufficient, and drones must therefore be served by a power cord tethered to a power source on the ground • Drones like HAPS should provide broadband with minimal ground network infrastructure, thereby opening the door for lower-cost and faster deployment of internet access 

# To facilitate the use of drones in providing reliable internet connection to the LAC region, specific technological and regulatory requirements need to be met… 

> Source: PwC analysis

Technological environment Drone hardware: 

• Fixed-wing drone able to fly in the stratosphere for months on end • High-altitude constructions • Strong signal transmitter able to cover a large area • Multirotor that can hover above ground for extended periods of time 

Drone payload: 

• 4G/5G router to provide internet access wherever needed 

Other equipment: 

• Motor that can keep spinning, so drone can stay in the air for long periods • ethered multirotor solutions where drones are deployed in quick response action, achieved either through a standalone drone or with a mobile setup (on a pick-up truck or other vehicle) 

Enabling Factors for Drones Application in Remote Internet Access 

> 133

Adoption barriers: • Complicated wireless infrastructure that must be immune to heavy weather conditions in order to reduce the incidence of signal loss 

• Negative attitude of society towards drone usage 

• Extremely complex challenge to set up a system of internet provision by drone 

• Complicated national regulations • Cost-inefficiency to build and test the prototype and subsequently scale up the technology 

# …while proper funding, partnerships between tech companies and accelerators, and local community support can act as enablers, speeding up the adoption process 

> Source: PwC analysis

Drone Technology Adoption Enablers & Barriers within the Road Infrastructure Maintenance Adoption enablers: • Lower costs for putting up internet drone platform than for building a network of cell phone towers 

• Positive attitude from local communities who want to be connected to the global web 

• Improvements in energy-carrying capacities and solutions 

• Private-public funding in broadband drone services • Regional or international partnerships between tech companies and accelerators 

> 134

Stakeholders category Key stakeholders and potential partners Role of stakeholders Government & public sector 

• Ministry of Education • Ministry of Digitisation • Civil Aviation Authorities • Ministry of Finance • Investment Authorities, revenue and costumes 

Government and ministries should take actions to overcome the rural connectivity gaps. This requires both coherent public policies and private sector participation. Local governments should provide sizable investments in drone infrastructure or respective initiatives. Additionally, public bodies and authorities must generate new mechanisms and regulations to drive private sector investments. 

Companies & private sector 

• Drone operators • Drone associated services • Civil Aviation Authorities • Mobile operators 

Private companies such as small scale telecommunication providers should partner with technological institutions, universities, schools, and decisions makers regarding natural disasters, to fund and become involved in connectivity development projects, establishing private-public partnerships. Furthermore, local tech companies should be encouraged to develop ideas for how to bring internet coverage by drone to rural regions. 

Investors and international financial institutions 

• WB • IDB • CAF • NDB • CDB 

Financial institutions such as the WB or IDB should provide technical assistance to create national and regional frameworks enabling private and public-private investments in broadband services. They can also design investment-ready projects that will achieve availability and affordability goals. In terms of policy and regulatory reforms, IFIs should support governments, companies, and other stakeholders to stimulate private investments. These institutions ought to also allocate loans and grants to provide broadband to unserved regions. 

# Successful full-scale deployment of drones for internet access requires the active involvement and cooperation of several groups of stakeholders, including public and private sectors… 

Source: PwC analysis 

Partners Environment for Drones Application in Remote Internet Access* (1/2) 

*The list of stakeholders is not exhaustive and it may differ per country/region/town where remote internet access solutions are implemented. Therefore, a stakeholders mapping prior to any design and implementation is advised. 135 Stakeholders category Key Stakeholders and potential partners Role of stakeholders NGOs / civil society / international organisations 

• CEAAL • LAWG • LAWGEF • PADF 

Promoting connectivity in rural areas is a good way to increase economic and social development, and facilitate search and rescue operations after natural disasters when power lines are destroyed. This could be very relevant to the work of many NGOs and international organisations. 

End users/ civil society 

• Citizens • Local communities • Schools • Farmers • Rescue teams 

End users and civil society should cooperate with local authorities, NGOs, and international organisations in order to address their need to be connected to the global network. Exerting pressure on local authorities increases the chances of obtaining appropriate subsidies and funding for the region—and, consequently, of having access to reliable internet coverage, for economic, development, and disaster relief purposes. 

# …while NGOs, international organisations, civil society organisations and end users all have a role to play 

Source: PwC analysis 

Partners Environment for Drones Application in Remote Internet Access* (2/2) 

*The list of stakeholders is not exhaustive and it may differ per country/region/town where remote internet access solutions are implemented. Therefore, a stakeholders mapping prior to any design and implementation is advised. 136 Deployment of flying network cells can happen as part of commercial engagements with selected technology partners, or become a capability of relevant rapid response services 

Business Models for Drones in Remote Internet Access 

• In a typical scenario, drone operations related to remote internet access are provided by telecom operators or their subsidiaries or technology partners, specialised in the provision of such services and equipped with customised hardware • Such technology could be used in emergency situations in case of natural disasters etc. It could be also used in the case of other network coverage shutdowns • This solution could be financed by the government in the case of emergency situations or by private telecommunications companies to maintain their operations and mission • In some cases specific projects could be sponsored by NGO or companies as part of the development support initiatives and technology showcasing to expand connectivity in rural areas where other solutions are unavailable or these are unreliable 

Scale Operating model Financing Inhouse 

Operated using internal capabilities of an institution 

3rd party 

Operated using external specialised service provider 

Community/cooperative 

Operated jointly by a community group 

Build-Operate-Transfer 

Operated by 3rd party and gradually transferred to inhouse 

Local or central government Development institutions Public-private partnership Alternative funding 

Financed by other players of the value chain 

NGO and/or donors Private funding 

Financed by a private sponsors or companies 

Shared economy 

Financed by the community 

On demand 

Ad-hoc or emergency use 

Cyclical 

Regular use when required e.g. based on seasons 

Permanent 

Continuously in operations 

Localised 

Single or number of target areas 

Region/province 

Large scale, regional or cross regional deployment 

Country wide 

Large scale over the entire country 

Frequency 

High relevance Moderate relevance Low relevance 137 Countries where most relevant: Argentina, Bahamas, Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Jamaica, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Saint Vincent and Grenadines, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago, Uruguay, Venezuela Pilot projects should prove drones as efficient tools to provide or restore mobile or satellite network coverage in any area, including remote areas as well as populated ones. Depending on the scenarios most suitable for a given country or region, a pilot could either test natural disaster response, or provide mobile solutions for locations with possible network or electricity shortages. 

# Pilot projects for remote internet access and connectivity restoration by drone must prove technological maturity, even in harsh conditions and high mobility environments 

Source: PwC analysis; 

Exemplary Pilot Project Scenario for Internet Provision in a Disaster Setting I. Phase I - Showcase mobile connectivity capacity in the field 

Requirements: 

• Cooperation of local/national telecommunication authorities, quick responders, and technology providers • Selection of an area vulnerable to natural disasters or network shutdowns • Prepare detailed scenarios and verification methods to prove efficiency • Provide mobile network for several hours, performing data transfer and connectivity tests 

Purpose: 

• Prove effectiveness of drone connectivity in selected areas • Simulate coverage restoration / rapid response, in case of network shutdown / natural disasters • Validate the tool as a significant support for quick response 

II. Phase II - Coverage over larger area using advanced solutions 

Requirements: 

• Advanced technology provider capable of large-scale deployment • Selection of challenging terrain with natural and artificial obstacles making connectivity harder during natural disaster response • Authorities to roll out a long-term project for connectivity restoration and provision • Academic and R&D units involved in technology development and commercialisation 

Purpose: 

• Deploy and test connectivity provision over a larger area for extended period (a few days) • Validate efficiency for higher network capacity (number of users) over large area (a few villages) • Validate advanced drone solutions (e.g., partly solar powered) • Prepare roadmaps for future deployments 

Hardware: 

• Drone solution capable of connectivity provision over a large area: long range fixed-wing flying at high altitude or several multicopter drones acting as cellular network 

Expected budget of the pilot project*: 166-446k USD Expected budget of the pilot project* 76-186k USD: Hardware: 

• Multirotor drones with tethered solutions to provide maximum flight time, suitable for harsh weather • Customised network deployment units from telecom operators (cells, antennas, receivers etc.), meeting local connectivity standards • Sturdy transportation cases to provide maximum mobility 

* The cost range depends on the geography, number of participant, technology partners, length of the project and stakeholders involved; **The phases that a pilot project can cover will vary depending on the reality on the ground, level of engagement, technology available, other enabling factors along with the main purpose of the pilot. 138 In September 2017, the island of Puerto Rico was struck by back-to-back disasters. When hurricane Maria (a powerful Category 4 storm that also impacted several islands in the Caribbean) passed directly overhead, Puerto Rico’s telecommunications network suffered a near-total breakdown. The few remaining operational cell towers were quickly overwhelmed, as residents desperately tried to contact the outside world. Fortunately, American telecommunication company AT&T quickly came up with a solution: an unmanned helicopter called Flying COW (Cell on Wings); a cell site on a drone. It is designed to beam LTE coverage from the sky to customers on the ground, including during natural disasters. The Flying COW carries a small cell and antennas. It is connected to the ground by a thin tether. The tether between the drone and the ground provides a highly secure data connection via fiber and also supplies power to the drone. The Flying COW then uses satellites to transport texts, calls, and data. The helicopter spans 7.5 feet in diameter, can hover at up to 400 feet above the ground , and can stay in the air for an extended period, providing wireless connectivity to people in an up-to-40-square-mile area. Flying COW played an important role for the national Network Disaster Recovery (NDR) team. They were able to transport, deploy, and move it quickly to accommodate rapidly changing conditions during an emergency. For example, at the direction of first responders, it followed firefighters battling a quickly moving wildfire line, keeping them connected while they fought blazes. In addition, the drone was able to fly and provide coverage in challenging weather and other conditions, from high winds to heavy smoke. Exploring the capabilities of this technology to temporarily restore connectivity in the wake of Hurricane Maria’s devastation is helping stakeholders assess how first responders can use the drone, and others like it, in the future. 

Case Study: Flying COW for the Hurricane Disaster Relief in Puerto Rico 

# After the devastating hurricane Maria in Puerto Rico, AT&T used their unmanned helicopter “Flying COW” to provide internet coverage to the regions hit by the disaster 

> Source: PwC analysis; Google Earth
> 139

# 5.9 

# Restoration and reforestation Development use case UAV technology can support monitoring, restoration and reforestation efforts in the forestry sector, helping to protect a key resource for biodiversity & wildlife, which also represents a source of employment & job generation for millions in the region 

> Source: PwC analysis; FAO; Mitchell Aide et al. (2012); WeRobotics; IDB

Challenge: Deforestation leads to the loss of biodiversity and contributes to GHG emissions 

The LAC region has the world’s largest area of tropical forest, currently threatened by many drivers associated with socio-economic changes, such as urbanisation, agriculture, and beef production. According to FAO, between 2010 and 2020, South America lost an average of 2.6 M ha of forest per year , and this rate appears to be increasing. Between 2018 and 2019 alone, the rate of tree cover loss in the LAC region increased by 2.8%. The Amazon forest, once an enormous carbon sink, has now become a carbon source that emits around a billion tons of carbon dioxide per year, mainly due to forest fires that are illegally set to clear land for beef and soy production. These activities negatively impact local tribes that depend on the rainforest for growing and gathering food, hunting, and fishing. In the case of the LAC region, it is crucial not only to restore land forests such as the Amazon jungle, but also the underestimated mangrove forests, which are one of the world's most endangered and critical ecosystems. Mangrove forests provide coastal protection from storm surges, maintain climate, control floods, stabilize the coastline, boost fish stocks and, last but not least, store five times more carbon in their soil by surface area than tropical forests. Extensive deforestation in the LAC region reflects complex political, social, and economic realities. Therefore, governments and local authorities should introduce comprehensive strategies to address key drivers of deforestation and ways of halting this activity—for example, by establishing frameworks and initiatives that focus on restoration and reforestation technologies. 

Description of Challenges for Restoration and Reforestation across Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) Region 

Forests are some of the world’s largest natural carbon sinks, and the ecosystems are an important home for wildlife as well as serving as biodiversity hotspots. Forests are among the most important resources in the LAC region, accounting for roughly a third of the world’s forest surface. Around 50% is considered tropical forest. Nearly 15% of the world’s mangroves can be found between North and South America, mostly within the Caribbean. Latin America and the Caribbean are also responsible for the largest losses in forest area (4.5 M ha in the 1990s and 2.2 M ha between 2010–2015). The consequences of large-scale deforestation from wildfires, droughts, and floods are further exacerbated by climate change which worsen prospects of forests recovery and decrease the chances of identifying illegal logging activities. It is predicted that climate change, coupled with continued regional deforestation and fire, will trigger a self-reinforcing downward spiral that results in the loss of up to 60% of the Amazon Basin’s forest by 2050. 

> 141

# Drones have proved an efficient substitute for traditional methods of restoration and reforestation, halving costs and accelerating the pace of reforestation by at least 10 times 

> Source: PwC analysis; Forbes; Inhabitatl Wired; DroneDJ

Overview of drone reforestation and restoration activities 

Planting trees is one of effective ways to combat climate change and global warming. Industrial scale reforestation will contribute to carbon dioxide sequestration, aid in the formation of new habitats, decrease decertified areas, and regulate the regional groundwater table—which influences the wellbeing of vegetation and is the source of drinking water. However, reforestation and restoring a damaged ecosystem with traditional methods is difficult and time-consuming. Consequently, it is crucial to explore new methods and innovative technologies that aim to scale up reforestation initiatives. Drones can be used in many different activities in reforestation and restoration, and each activity might be performed with a different kind of drone technology: 

• Mapping with lightweight LiDAR-equipped drones : the initial phase of a reforestation project is to perform mapping and surveying of the region to be seeded, to assess the hydrology, slope, soil conditions and underlying geology to calculate the best areas for planting or replanting, producing a route map of a planting grid that the seeding will follow 

• A drone or swarm of drones can be deployed to plant the seeds : heavy-lift drones can carry a substantial payload of pre-primed, encapsulated seeds 

• Aftercare with spraying drones : drones can disperse herbicides to kill competing weeds and grasses that might overgrow the developing tree seedling, or deliver liquid fertiliser to boost the young trees’ growth and establishment 

• Rate of growth monitoring by drones equipped with camera : The germination success rate can be measured with drones equipped with RGB, multispectral cameras and LiDAR, with measurements performed cyclically every season or year Using drones for reforestation is not only safe, cost-effective, fast, and environmentally friendly, but can also be performed in unsafe or inaccessible areas. 

Maturity 

To date, drones have found a variety of applications in the reforestation sector around the globe. However, it will take the next couple of years for the progress and success of the operations to be validated. Although this technology has made considerable progress recently (with several success stories being reported by independent entities from China, Canada or Spain), reforestation activities using drones have yet to be scaled up in the LAC region. So far, countries including Panama, Brazil, and Costa Rica have performed pilot projects. Brazil was probably the first country to start research and development work for the use of drones in reforestation purposes and has been using it since at least 2016. 

> 142

Benefits from the Use of Drones for Reforestation and Restoration 

# The use of drone technology for reforestation efforts accelerates the aerial seeding process, at the same time increasing seed survival rate, even in very remote regions 

> Source: PwC analysis

• Drones can perform aerial seeding faster than traditional methods 

• Drones are able to perform a 3D scan of the terrain, thanks to which operators can analyse terrain data and determine the best locations to plant seeds for the optimal survival rate • Each seed vessel attached to drones can contain a combination of seeds (optimal for the location), fertilizer, and a ghost pepper to deter squirrels, mice, and other rodents • Drones are able to access harsh terrain inaccessible to humans and enable a much faster response time: 

• In areas recently affected by forest fires, planting tree seeds quickly is crucial in preventing tall shrubs from taking over the area • Fast response time is also critical in mitigating the consequences of landscape-level disturbances such as damage to watersheds or state-shift, including desertification • Drones speed up the process of reforestation and therefore eliminate the long-term negative consequences of soil drying ou t, also increasing the biodiversity of the region • Industrial scale reforestation performed by drones can more quickly regulate the water table compared to manual reforestation, so the region is less prone to drought events, including meteorological, agricultural and hydrological droughts • Drones can significantly increase the number of trees planted , which decreases the risk of desertification 

> 143

Reforestation and restoration case studies measured impact: 

Although companies that specialize in drone forest restoration report a range of outcomes from projects (due to a variety of conditions and external factors), each case has proved that drones are critical in global reforestation efforts. • AirSeed Technologies, a company from Australia, has a goal to plant 100 M trees of various species (mainly endemic) by 2024, to restore primary habitats. The system can plant up to 12 different species in one flight . Traditional planting methods allow for planting of around 800 seedlings per day (with a large amount of manual labour involved), whereas a drone is able to plant 40,000 seeds in an eight-hour shift . Additionally, one pilot can fly a swarm of up to 5 drones. Overall, the AirSeed Technologies techniques enable lands to be restored 25 times faster and 80% cheaper than with traditional planting. • Dendra Systems from the UK is planning to plant one million mangrove trees over 250 ha. The company’s drone technology is able to cover up to 60 ha per day and carries 700 kg of daily payload with 50 different species at a time. Their operations are 11 times faster and 3 times cheaper than traditional methods of remediation. 

• Increased number of trees planted in inaccessible and dangerous terrain , for example on steep slopes, and in post-wildfire areas 

• Decreased number of flood events • Increased aerial habitat for millions of species which have an opportunity to thrive 

• Decreased temperature amplitudes : adding trees allows the forest to expand its canopy, which blocks the sun’s rays during the day and holds in heat at night 

• Decreased runoff of topsoil due to the increased number of roots in the ground, preserving soil fertility 

• Preservation of water cycle through absorption of moisture through the leaves and roots (the natural storage system of rainwater), slowing down the aridity of the atmosphere 

Expected Outcomes / Impact of Drone Usage 

# The use of drone technology in reforestation and restoration could result in more trees being planted in hard-to-reach areas, enhancing the natural habitats for millions of species, while decreasing temperature amplitude and runoff of topsoil 

> Source: PwC analysis; WWF; Edition; WeRobotics

SDGs impacted 

Indirectly: Directly: 

> 144

Regulatory requirements 

• BVLOS waivers: most operations cover a vast area which will involve BVLOS flights • Special authorisation to fly drones up to 25 kg (if needed) • Depending on location, permissions from relevant authorities—if flights occur in protected areas, natural parks etc. 

Other requirements 

• Drones must be equipped with systems that meet technological requirements to optimize reforestation processes; these systems need to be fed up with up-to-date data, such as information on topography, vegetation cover, type and quality of soil • A comprehensive approach to seed technology, including a thorough understanding of species-specific biological traits, such as seed morphology, dormancy requirements, and viability, in addition to site-specific biotic and abiotic conditions • To avoid predation of seeds, camouflaging agents, masking agents, and/or a physical barrier to the seed coating must be incorporated • If necessary, seeding operations should be conducted with the cooperation of indigenous communities 

# To support and facilitate the adoption of drones for reforestation and restoration in the LAC region, providing the right technology environment, proper regulatory frameworks, and incentives is key 

> Source: PwC analysis

Technology environment Drone hardware: 

• Fixed-wing and VTOL drones for mapping and photogrammetry • Multicopter drones for seed planting and spraying 

Drone payload: 

• RGB cameras for mapping and photogrammetry • LiDAR for mapping under the tree canopy • Multispectral camera for vegetation health assessment • Spraying payload • Tree-planting payload 

Software: 

• Drone data processing software for mapping • Dedicated GIS software for data visualisation, overlay, and analytics (e.g., 3D visualisation) • Dedicated software to operate and plan drone routes for tree planting and spraying 

Enabling Factors for Drone Usage in Reforestation and Restoration 

> 145

# Key adoption barriers to the use of drones in reforestation and restoration relate to a lack of comprehensive regulations, local community concerns, and a lack of awareness about the importance of natural habitat restoration and the impacts of climate change 

> Source: PwC analysis

Adoption enablers: • Time-effective, labour-effective, and cost-effective solution 

• Awareness from local communities about the technology 

• Training and education provided for local people 

• Increased awareness about the importance of biodiversity 

(disseminated by ecological activists) 

• Funds provided by financial institutions or public and private bodies 

• Digital maturity enabling end user to extract and interpret all drone-gathered information 

Adoption Enablers & Barriers for the Use of Drone Technology within Reforestation and Restoration Adoption barriers: • Limited availability of seeds to scale up drone seeding operations 

• Lack of up-to-date regulations , especially regarding BVLOS operations 

• Concerns of local communities regarding their safety and privacy 

• Lack of awareness, training and education among stakeholders, including local communities, public bodies, and private sectors (e.g., planting companies) 

• Negative socio-economic perspective regarding the loss of potential agricultural land in the area to be reforested 

> 146

Stakeholders category Key stakeholders and potential partners Role of stakeholders Government & public sector 

• Ministry of Environment • Civil Aviation Authorities • Forest departments; conservation offices, e.g., CONAF (Chile) Governments and the public sector are the key policy drivers and decision makers. These stakeholders facilitate regulatory framework and investing incentives, and are responsible for preparing land use plans and defining the best species for reforestation in order to preserve the ecosystems and ecological equilibrium in the country. Additionally, governments and key agencies can include drone usage in their development plans and sectoral policies for environmental protection, restoration, and climate change mitigation efforts. 

Companies & private sector 

• Drone operators • Associated drone services • Manufacturers • Reforestation/planting companies Companies and the private sector play an important role in providing tools for planting trees and restoring the natural ecosystem. They contribute ideas on how to implement drone reforestation technology in the region and collect detailed information on tree performance. These stakeholders have to partner with foundations, VC firms, and the public sector to develop plans for the incorporation of drones in the planting process. They can also improve seed collection strategies, seed enablement technology, and the sustainability and biodegradability of the seed pod packages used. 

Investors and international financial institutions 

• World Bank • Inter-American Development Bank • Development Bank of Latin America • World Wide Fund for Nature Investors and international financial institutions should propagate and fund initiatives that aim to adopt drone technology in restoration and reforestation efforts, especially investing in the research and development sector to adapt current market solutions to local needs and realities, and also to start developing other technologies that can improve the efficiency and scale of reforestation projects. 

NGOs / civil society & international organisations 

• United Nations • WorldView International Foundation • FAO • Flying Labs • Environmental activists NGOs, civil societies, and activists should consistently aim to actively engage local communities through interactive participation or self-mobilisation and by providing training and education. Organisations such as Flying Labs are vital in providing technical support for drone reforestation efforts among local communities. 

End users / civil society 

• Citizens • Local / indigenous communities • Landowners To ensure successful outcomes for reforestation efforts, it is necessary to include local communities, since they have the most to gain from the project. If their needs are heard and taken into consideration and they are aware of the project’s objectives and expected outcomes, they are more likely to support and help to deliver it, by bringing labour for forest protection, land preparation, planting, and maintenance. This can provide an opportunity to diversify local employment, thus improving livelihoods. 

# For large-scale reforestation projects, the engagement and active participation of multiple stakeholders is required in order to meet goals including biodiversity conservation, watershed protection, and carbon sequestration 

Source: PwC analysis 

Partner Environment for the Use of Drones in Reforestation and Restoration* 

*The list of stakeholders is not exhaustive and may differ by country/region/town where reforestation and restoration drone solutions are implemented. Therefore, mapping relevant stakeholders prior to any design and implementation is advised. 147 Restoration and reforestation activities are typically a part of larger initiatives and policies financed by governments in partnership with development institutions 

Business Models for Restoration and Reforestation 

• Restoration and reforestation activities are typically related to larger regional policies and activities and as such the use of drone technologies is provided over selected larger areas in a well-planned and coordinated manner 

• Reforestation requires time to test new approaches , assess their effectiveness, and apply changes, so there is a need for a long-term strategy with clear responsibilities and milestones for each agency/government unit • Such operations require specialised equipment custom-built by hardware manufacturers or researchers . The hardware can be operated both by a service provider (which is often the same as the hardware manufacturer) or inhouse by a relevant agency after providing extensive training to employees • Central or local governments typically provide the funding in partnership with development institutions . Alternative financing for drone use in reforestation may come from NGOs, charities or crowdfunding campaigns. It may also be provided by industrial stakeholders from sectors such as timber production as part of its mitigation requirements to obtain environmental approvals or others 

Scale Operating model Financing Inhouse 

Operated using internal capabilities of an institution 

3rd party 

Operated using external specialised service provider 

Community/cooperative 

Operated jointly by a community group 

Build-Operate-Transfer 

Operated by 3rd party and gradually transferred to inhouse 

Local or central government Development institutions Public-private partnership Alternative funding 

Financed by other players of the value chain 

NGO and/or donors Private funding 

Financed by a private sponsors or companies 

Shared economy 

Financed by the community 

On demand 

Ad-hoc or emergency use 

Cyclical 

Regular use when required e.g. based on seasons 

Permanent 

Continuously in operations 

Localised 

Single or number of target areas 

Region/province 

Large scale, regional or cross regional deployment 

Country wide 

Large scale over the entire country 

Frequency 

High relevance Moderate relevance Low relevance 148 Countries where most relevant: Antigua & Barbuda, Argentina, Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, El Salvador, Ecuador, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago, Venezuela The pilot project aims to prove the relevance and effectiveness of drone technology in restoration and reforestation, to mitigate the consequences of vast deforestation incidents, and to speed up the process of forest restoration. The pilot should also aim to educate relevant stakeholders and local communities on the value and safety of the technology. The outcome should prove drones’ 

effectiveness in both situation awareness-building and as a disruptive planting tool .

# The ultimate goal of a pilot project is to demonstrate and prove the applicability and efficiency of drones in combating deforestation and desertification 

> Source: PwC analysis;

Exemplary Pilot Project Scenario Phase I - As-is mapping and planting design 

Requirements: 

• Area (or areas) of 10–50 ha, selected in consultation with specialists and authorities, considering factors such the as-is state, accessibility, terrain specifics, and tree species to be planted • Collaboration of drone service providers, local environmental authorities, CAA, foresters, academics, entrepreneurs involved in forestry 

Purpose: 

• Organise collaborative workshops and training sessions on drone applications in forestry and reforestation, involving people relevant to reforestation management • Drone mapping of a preselected area to document the as-is state and prepare to the next phase with support of environmental, forestry, and other specialists 

Phase II - Planting trees with drones** 

Requirements: 

• Chosen area & specialists' feedback will determine seeds to be used • Based on initial mapping, a GIS system should be used to determine tree location & planting patterns • Dedicated software to plan drone mission (using the above data) • Periodical drone mapping in order to evaluate success rate of the project • Specialists to track processes such as seed germination and growth for up to 2 years after planting 

Purpose: 

• Pave the way for the drone planting technology to be applied at scale • Perform tree planting campaign in collaboration with relevant specialist to prove current state of the technology • Initiate long-term initiative of fighting deforestation with the use of innovative technologies with the collaboration of academics and business 

Hardware: 

• Drones with tree planting payloads in predefined locations • Optional low-cost drone to provide quick mapping services 

Expected budget of the pilot project*: 162-420k USD Expected budget of the pilot project*: 82-213k USD 

Hardware: 

• Fixed-wing drone for quick mapping missions of large natural areas (a few km 2)• High-accuracy positioning system  

> * The cost range depends on the geography, number of participant, technology partners, length of the project and stakeholders involved; **The phases that a pilot project can cover will vary depending on the reality on the ground, level of engagement, technology available, other enabling factors along with the main purpose of the pilot. 149

Mangrove forest restoration in Panama 

Panama Flying Labs, WeRobotics, Release Labs, and Beta Earth carried out a technical demonstration in Panama using specially adapted drones to restore ecosystems in two communities in the central provinces . Flying Labs were responsible for flying drones, logistics, permits, and bringing together key stakeholders. ReleaseLabs worked on the technical development of the release systems, while WeRobotics coordinated the overall project. Drones developed by Release Labs can carry more than 750 seed balls per load and currently distribute them over one hectare in less than five minutes. The test proved that the drone and release system could load, store, and release the fresh mangrove propagules, with a good percentage of dropped propagules penetrating the soil after being released from 2–3 meters altitude. The system proved to be more efficient than planting mangroves by hand. 

Reforestation project in Brazil 

Brazil, having the world's second largest forest area, has pledged to end and reverse deforestation by 2030. To do this, it has needed to look for innovative new technologies that are more efficient than traditional hand-seedling. Therefore, the country has begun a project that attempts reforestation using XAG agriculture drones—a multifunction UAV equipped with a seed spreader. This drone seeding application is part of the Arboreto Project, carried out by the Federal University of Paraná, Brazil’s oldest university. It is hoped that the project will pave the way for drone technology to be leveraged in large-scale reforestation. During the pilot project, the operator had to enter multiple parameters—such as waypoints, flight speed, and spray volume—into a mobile app. Following that, the different seed species, sorted into a smart container onboard the drones, were spread along the target lines. The project proved that fully autonomous drones can significantly improve reforestation work , especially in remote terrains. 

# Reforestation and restoration activities by drones are becoming more common in the LAC region, with Panama recently carrying out a project to replant mangrove forests, and Brazil focused on the Amazon rainforest 

> Source: PwC analysis; Werobotics; DroneDJ

Case Studies: Reforestation Projects in Panama and Brazil 

> 150

# 5.10 

# Endangered species monitoring Development use case Challenge: Decrease the number of endangered species and provide them with the habitat to thrive 

Global wildlife populations have declined at an alarming rate, close to 70% since 1970. In Latin America the reduction is even more critical, reaching on average above 90% , mainly due to human activity. These recorded falls are from more than 20,000 species of mammals, birds, amphibians, reptiles and fish in the region. Despite this, the LAC region is still rich in biodiversity, as it accounts for 24% of terrestrial and 19% of marine ecoregions—however, only 17% of these areas are protected. Furthermore, 33% of these protected areas are not connected to each other, which disrupts the lives and well-being of endangered animals. Under this situation, animals live in areas that function as conservation islands, blocking ecological flow, migration patterns and the interactions that guarantee the health of species. These conditions could lead to the loss of local populations of species and possible ecosystem collapse. Moreover, according to C4ADS report, the LAC region holds over 40% of the world’s biodiversity, and that is the reason why the region is a home to many of the most violent trafficking organisations in the world. Between 2010 and 2020, Brazil, Mexico and Colombia experienced the highest number of wildlife trafficking instances in the LAC region. In Mexico, seizures account for 38% of all incidents. Therefore, tracking and monitoring of wildlife is extremely important in order to assess the health of a species and implement conservation ideas when a species become endangered, due to, for example, trafficking exploitation. 

# Drones are key to supporting the monitoring & protection of endangered species in the LAC region, home to over 40% of global biodiversity and the area most affected by illegal trafficking 

> Source: PwC analysis; FAO; Mitchell Aide et al. (2012); WeRobotics

Overview of Endangered Species Monitoring in Latin America and the Caribbean 

Currently, one million animal and plant species, out of a total estimate of 8 million, risk extinction, many within decades. This decline in biodiversity has serious implications for social development. The loss of ecosystem services has negative effects on food security, water supply, livelihoods, and the output of many economic sectors. For example, 75% of food crops rely, at least in part, on animal pollination, with US$235 billion to US$577 billion of annual crop output directly attributable to animal pollination. Monitoring and preventing this decline is therefore vital. Endangered species monitoring also helps in identifying snaring and poaching incidents that pose a big threat to the wellbeing of many species. It can also bring insights about animals themselves—movement patterns, human impact, habitat utilisation or population demographics. Drones offer a safe and secure way to monitor wildlife habitats and document the movement of wild animals. Conservationists can use the technology to more effectively and safely monitor and protect wildlife, including predicting, locating, tracking and catching suspected poachers. 

> 152

# In the LAC region, drones are a great substitute for traditional methods of endangered species monitoring, providing an easy-to-scale, cost-effective and non-invasive solution 

> Source: PwC analysis; Forbes; Inhabitatl Wired; DroneDJ; DroneDeploy

Overview of the endangered species monitoring drone sector 

Drone technology has the potential to play an important role in wildlife environmental monitoring and conservation. They have been widely adopted by ecologists for data collection since they can gather data quickly over large areas. The financial entry barrier to build or purchase drone platforms that can be used for wildlife conservation or monitoring is fairly low, which makes drones accessible and affordable for many research teams in developing countries. These drones can fly fully autonomous missions to obtain high-resolution images and videos. Currently, most drone systems record data on internal storage, which is then downloaded for manual visual inspection once the drone has landed. Drone-derived data is more accurate and more precise than the traditional data collection methods, and can facilitate more informed and proactive conservation efforts. The adaptability, cost-efficiency, non-invasive nature and flexibility of drones and associated technology can support initiatives on wildlife conservation and monitoring, enhancing biodiversity. In 2017, in Brazil, drones were deployed to count pink dolphins in the Amazon—one of two dolphin species that live in the river. Meanwhile, the highly vulnerable species of Antillean manatee, which suffers high rates of mortality from vessel collision, is monitored through the coasts of Belize and Mexico. The most recent evidence from the use of drones in the LAC region for endangered species monitoring comes from Argentina, where conservationists use drones to monitor endangered Chaco Eagles, whilst also calculating the rate of disturbance from drone presence. Finally, in the Chilean high Andes, drones are used to observe endangered flamingos. With a detailed map of an animal’s movement patterns and habitat, researchers can easily monitor small changes in (and boost) endangered species’ populations year-to-year. 

Maturity 

Drones are increasingly being adopted to gather data about endangered species , their habitats and migration patterns. The technology is widely deployed in places where endangered animals are threatened by land use change and illegal poaching (for example in many African countries) or by climate change related issues (like wildfires in Australia). There are also many examples of the use of drones for this purpose in the LAC region. Countries like Brazil, Argentina, Belize and Mexico that have relatively low values on the Red List Index (an indicator of the changing state of global biodiversity) have already implemented the use of drones for endangered species monitoring. 

> 153

Benefits from the Use of Drones for Endangered Species Monitoring and Wildlife Conservation 

# There are several benefits of using drones to monitor & protect endangered animals, including time-effectiveness, safety, and acceleration of the decision-making process 

> Source: PwC analysis

• Drone technology for wildlife monitoring is cost-effective, efficient and can be performed in hard-to-reach areas 

• Many animals are elusive or nocturnal by nature and are therefore difficult to detect and monitor effectively by traditional methods, but 

drones equipped with thermal cameras can circumvent problems with animal detection • Drones have the potential to both improve and automate data collection for wildlife monitoring and therefore speed up the decision-making process 

• Drones can provide more precise data at a lower cost with minimal impact on wildlife 

• Drones can quickly and safely identify groups of poachers and direct the efforts of law enforcement on the ground • Drones can provide the scientific community with more confidence in animal population estimate s from which better management decisions can be made • The superior precision of animal counts from drone images increases statistical power to aid in detecting population trends 

> 154

• Decreased level of degradation of natural habitats , halting the loss of biodiversity, protecting threatened species and preventing extinction 

• Increased understanding of the demographics 

and population of species • Monitoring an increased area in a shorter time 

• Decreased number of illegal animal trafficking incidents 

• More comprehensive tracking of population and demographic changes of wild animals due to freeways and busy roads • Increased detection of marine litter activities 

• Increased documentation of illegal logging and mining which threaten the wellbeing of many endangered species 

• Expanded coverage of protected areas , as established in the Aichi Target 11 • Reduction of the required number of observers needed to guarantee an exhaustive count of animals population Expected Outcomes / Impact from Drone Usage 

# There are multiple expected positive outcomes from drone use in the sector, including a reduction in poaching, decreased degradation of natural habitats, and increased understanding of animal demographics 

> Source: PwC analysis

SDGs impacted 

Indirectly: Directly: 

Measured impact from endangered species monitoring case studies: 

• The Hodgson et al. (2018) study reveals that counts of birds in drone-derived imagery were better than those made by wildlife observers on the ground. The drone approach was more precise and more accurate , giving results between 43% and 95% better than ground counts. (The variation was due to how many pixels represented each bird, which in turn is related to the height at which the drone was flown and the resolution of the camera) • Since 2017, the Science and Engineering Faculty at Queensland University of Technology (QUT) has been developing drones and AI solutions for wildlife surveillance with the main aim of detecting koalas that live in gum trees. It was proved that a normal observer can spot around 20% of koalas whereas an expert looking from the ground will find about 70%.The use of high-resolution thermal cameras carried by a drone, combined with machine learning, achieved even better results, with 86% of koalas spotted. The developed methodology of QUT covers 40 ha, captures thermal imagery in several hours , with just 2 hours needed to process the data . This solution proved to be more time-efficient and cost-effective , giving greatly reduced errors 

compared to the traditional, human monitoring • The study conducted by Gallego and Sarasola (2021) concluded that drone monitoring of eagle nests took on average 6 minutes , whereas traditional monitoring took 17 minutes. Hence, drone monitoring was on average 2.8 times faster , for different tree heights ranging from 3m to 18 

> 155

Regulatory requirements 

• Most operations will cover a vast area which involves BVLOS flights • Minimal risk for people and infrastructure due to the mostly undeveloped and unsettled area of operations • May require a special permit from CAA and other authorities to fly in protected areas 

Other requirements 

• In order to minimize the impact of the drone’s presence on animals, the operations must be conducted at a sufficient distance and altitude 

# To support and facilitate the use of drone technology in endangered species monitoring in the LAC region, it is vital to provide the proper technology environment, regulatory frameworks, and incentives 

> Source: PwC analysis

Technology environment Drone hardware: 

• Multicopter for easy operation in dense, forestry environment • Fixed-wing or VTOL drones for operation over long distances 

Drone payload: 

• Infrared or thermal sensors to spot animals in difficult-to-reach areas and at night • Acoustic sensors to monitor the noise levels of the drones and record animals’ sounds 

Software: 

• For the optimisation of efforts, a machine-learning based software system should be used to analyse data 

Other equipment: 

• High-performance units that are capable of flying for a long period of time on a single battery • Aircraft system capable of automated deployment 

Enabling Factors for Endangered Species Monitoring 

> 156

# To fully enable drone solutions in endangered species monitoring it is necessary to increase awareness, providing training and education for local people, and showcase drone effectiveness 

> Source: PwC analysis

Enablers & Barriers to Drone Technology Adoption within Endangered Species Monitoring Adoption enablers: • Providing training and education for local people and relevant institutions and agencies • Conviction from relevant stakeholders that drones constitute a technological advance to complement insufficient staff and resourcing, especially in anti-poaching activities 

• Access to qualified IT staff and adequate IT infrastructure to be able to utilise image data captured by drones or related technologies 

• Decreasing prices or high performance drone platforms enabling high endurance operations 

• Acceptance by local communities e.g. ecological activists to spread awareness among local communities about drone technology and its impact on the environment 

Adoption barriers: • Disturbances/effects of drones on wild animals (e.g. noise) 

• Overly restrictive and indiscriminate regulatory framework (limitation for BVLOS operations) • Massive amount of data requiring advanced methods to derive accurate and meaningful information, which represents a technological barrier 

• Insufficient investments in long-endurance , fixed-wing and hybrid drones capable of covering large areas designed for animal monitoring • Suspicion among society that drones are a threat to privacy • The technology is currently mostly available for relatively easy-to-spot species in open environments 

> 157

Stakeholders category Key stakeholders and potential partners Role of stakeholders Government & public sector 

• CAA • Ministry of Environment • Governments (national, regional, local) • National, regional and local park managers 

Government and the public sector could support the wildlife monitoring industry by: 

• Facilitating regulatory frameworks, investment incentives, and permits • Enhancing institutional capacity and knowledge regarding the relevance of drones in the sector • Ensuring the appropriate training for the relevant stakeholders in supporting biodiversity protection 

Moreover, the public sector is responsible for strategies in managing protected areas and, based on drone data, establishing guidelines for conservation actions. 

Companies & private sector 

• AI companies • Drone operators • Associated drone services companies 

In the LAC region, 14.4% of protected areas are privately owned, therefore the private sector has to actively engage in setting conservation strategies. AI companies should cooperate with associated drone services companies to establish new solutions and utilise machine learning technology to detect and classify animals and man-made objects indicative of poaching (cars, fires etc.). Suppliers should provide support, training and companion software to end users. 

Investors and international financial institutions 

• WB • IDB • CAF 

Investors and international financial institutions should propagate and fund initiatives that aim to encourage the adoption of drone technology in wildlife monitoring efforts. Institutions should provide funding to pilot projects to trial the use of drones, sensor technologies and deployment techniques, also funding long-endurance drones that can cover large areas in one flight. 

NGOs / civil society & international organisations 

• UNEP • IUCN • ENGO • WWF 

The role of NGOs and international organisations is to introduce conservation initiatives, participate in project funding by financial institutes, spread awareness about using drones in endangered species monitoring, and organise training and workshops for end users. 

End users / civil society 

• Citizens • Local communities • Researchers 

End users—scientists, researchers and conservationists, for example—should take part in the training and education of how to use drones in endangered species monitoring, both in performing operations and the associated analysis. 

# The successful full-scale deployment of drones in endangered species monitoring requires the active involvement and cooperation of several groups of stakeholders, including public and private sectors, along with civil society organisations and end users 

Source: PwC analysis; Di Sacco et al. (2021) 

Partner Environment for Endangered Species Monitoring Sector 

*The list of stakeholders is not exhaustive and may differ according to country/region/town where drones are implemented for endangered species monitoring. Therefore, stakeholder mapping is advised prior to any design and implementation. 158 There are various potential options for deployment, operating model and finance for endangered species monitoring, depending on the scale of the projects 

Business Models for Endangered Species Monitoring 

• Drone could be used in ad-hoc way in emergency situations or to gather situational awareness in the field over selected areas of interest that needs to be monitored. The technology could be deployed at a larger scale, or over a large protected area such as a national park • In a typical scenario relevant employees of public institutions could be trained and utilise the technology in house . This use case requires specific local knowledge about life patterns of the relevant animals to be monitored • Under a Build Operate Transfer model an agency or organisation responsible for wildlife protection could involve third party consultancy or service provider to help establish relevant competencies ; however, with the aim of taking over operations at some point in time • For example: public environmental agencies (like US NOAA) support endangered species monitoring operations by funding conservation projects 

• NGOs such as WeRobotics obtain funds, mainly from private donors and partners . Funds are invested in local projects, creating opportunity around the use of drones for positive social impact • Development Institutions can establish Conservation Trust Funds to support protected areas and endangered species by funding monitoring equipment, provide training, and community participation programmes, and/or organising scientific research and biodiversity monitoring 

Scale Operating model Financing Inhouse 

Operated using internal capabilities of an institution 

3rd party 

Operated using external specialised service provider 

Community/cooperative 

Operated jointly by a community group 

Build-Operate-Transfer 

Operated by 3rd party and gradually transferred to inhouse 

Local or central government Development institutions Public-private partnership Alternative funding 

Financed by other players of the value chain 

NGO and/or donors Private funding 

Financed by a private sponsors or companies 

Shared economy 

Financed by the community 

On demand 

Ad-hoc or emergency use 

Cyclical 

Regular use when required e.g. based on seasons 

Permanent 

Continuously in operations 

Localised 

Single or number of target areas 

Region/province 

Large scale, regional or cross regional deployment 

Country wide 

Large scale over the entire country 

Frequency 

High relevance Moderate relevance Low relevance 159 Countries where most relevant: Argentina, Bahamas, Belize, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Grenada, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Peru, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and Grenadines, Trinidad and Tobago, Uruguay, Venezuela The aim of the pilot project is to present to the relevant stakeholders the advantages and the level of support of drones use in wildlife monitoring. It requires the involvement of environmental scientists to compare drones with other methods of gathering data. Objective of the study is detecting species and 

counting the number of animals living in an area of interest , as well as studying their behavioural patterns (including impact and animal response to the use of drone technology). 

# A pilot project for endangered species monitoring should aim to prove the advantages of the technology and the level of support that drones can provide to wildlife monitoring 

Source: PwC analysis; 

Ideal Pilot Project Scenario Monitor endangered species behaviour 

Requirements: 

• In the trial flight area, animals should be able to move freely • General assumptions on speed & altitude: 7-15 km/h at 60 m AGL ; 20-35 km/h at 180 m AGL • Speed and altitude must be chosen based on animal response to drone presence at different altitudes and speeds (volume will increase with operational speed) 

Purpose: 

• Record physiological and behavioural response of the animals to drone presence • Choose optimal operational speed and altitude to achieve balance between detecting animals and minimising disturbance 

Expected budget of the pilot project*: 101-390k USD 

Hardware: 

• Quadcopter equipped with optical and thermal sensors • Appropriate ground control station (mobile or stationary) • Possibility of live video streaming, preferably to a device visible for the operator as well as additional staff (e.g. scientists or other specialists) 

Wildlife monitoring should be performed in accordance with the Wildlife Photography Ethics: 

• The usual behaviour of wildlife target should be known in advance of flight • Take off at least 300m from wildlife to avoid detection • Minimum distance of 30m between quadcopter and wildlife target (or highest object) 

Objectives: 

• Record whether there is physiological and behavioural response from animals to drone presence • Choose optimal operational variables (speed and altitude) in order to achieve balance between efficient detection and minimised disturbance • Define non-technical aspects of performance such as: time of day, weather conditions, specifics of area (forest, open spaces) • Define appropriate camera and sensor configuration based on tests (e.g. specific resolution of photos/videos, thermal cameras) • These factors will differ significantly depending on flight altitude and the specifics of the animals 

* The cost range depends on the geography, number of participant, technology partners, length of the project and stakeholders involved; **The phases that a pilot project can cover will vary depending on the reality on the ground, level of engagement, technology available, other enabling factors along with the main purpose of the pilot. 160 Drones were used in Brazil to monitor highly vulnerable species of pink Amazon river dolphins; the technology proved to be very effective, but it was agreed that a higher resolution camera should be used during the next operation 

> Source: PwC analysis; WWF

Researchers used drones to count pink river dolphins in Amazon river in Brazil 

In November 2016, a group of researchers used drones to find and monitor the Amazon river dolphins , also known as the pink river dolphin or boto. Although these animals are relatively abundant, they are considered to be a highly vulnerable species due to dams that fragment and threaten certain populations, and due to other threats such as contamination of rivers and lakes. The team surveyed river dolphins along 80km of the Juruá River, Brazil. Two drones were deployed from a boat, travelling at a constant speed, at an altitude of around 20m, 50m from the side of the boat, monitoring a 100m stretch parallel to the river margin. Video was continually recorded using a camera positioned at 35° to the water surface. All of these variables were specifically chosen to achieve a drone perspective similar to a human observer. To ensure that the impact on wildlife would be minimal, researchers followed operational protocols and best practices for drone flight operation. A trial flight in an area with high population density enabled them to secure the number of observations necessary to assess detectability and to evaluate the possible impacts of drones on animal behaviour. Simultaneously, three observers were looking for dolphins. For each sighting, observers reported group size, the presence of calves, sighting angle relative to the trackline, and estimated distances from the boat and river margin. It was discovered that on-board observers made 119 observations in total, with 76 of these confirmed by drone footage. Researchers believe that the difference in the number of observations was the result of drone camera resolution and the distance at which the dolphins were detected. Therefore, the use of a higher resolution camera could decrease the difference in number of observations. Eventually, the aerial survey provided higher accuracy in counting individuals during the detection of groups. The images captured by UAVs confirmed identifications and facilitated correlation between species and use of habitats with a high degree of precision. The use of drones also reduced the bias caused by responsive movement. 

Case Study: Monitoring of Pink River Dolphins in Brazil 

Country: Brazil Year: 2016 Altitude: 20 m Number of drones: 2 Number of flights: 41 Flight duration: 10 min each flight Total distance covered: 80 km 

> 161

# 5.11 

# Wildfires Development use case Challenge: Prevent the occurrences of disastrous wildfire events 

The LAC region contains approximately 57% of the world’s remaining primary forest —storing an estimated 104 gigatons of carbon, hosting 40-50% of the world's biodiversity and home to one third of all plant species. According to data in 2021, the highest number of wildfires occurred in Brazil, with approximately 

184,081 reported outbreaks over a total area of 274,000 square kilometres (3% of the entire country). This is followed by Bolivia, which registered over 34,000 events. Despite government efforts, wildfires in this region continue to be a concern. Countries like Argentina, Paraguay, Venezuela, Colombia, Peru and Chile are facing a large number of wildfire events that cause sore eyes, breathing difficulties, and burn wildlife alive. In Paraguay, fires have been seen in at least five protected forested areas. Many regions of immense ecological and historical importance were consumed by flames. The magnitude of these fires is often so large that fires become uncontrollable, completely overwhelming authorities and even firefighters. From the beginning of 2022, the LAC region has been experiencing heatwaves, and the resulting dry conditions across northern Argentina and Paraguay have resulted in record wildfires in the region, with much higher than average emissions. These human- and naturally-driven disastrous events are constantly increasing the number of people forced to abandon their homes, increasing the magnitude of climate migration. 

# Clearing land for crops, cattle grazing and timber, combined with extreme droughts and decreased precipitation, makes the LAC region extremely vulnerable to wildfires 

> Source: PwC analysis; IADB; Statista; LatinaRepublic

Description of Challenges for Wildfire Monitoring and Prevention across Latin America and the Caribbean 

The LAC region suffers an increasing amount of deforestation through illegal wildfires, mainly driven by commercial agriculture. According to LatinaRepublic, 88% of agricultural conversion in the region has been carried out in violation of national laws and regulations. 

Climate change and global warming, influencing precipitation, only further exacerbate both the intensity and number of wildfire events. In consequence, an enormous amount of wildlife and vital biomass is lost, while greenhouse gasses are also released into the atmosphere in huge volumes. Therefore, tracking and monitoring of illegal and natural wildfires by drones is essential to identify fire hotspots and mitigate the consequences of these events, quickly and efficiently. 

> 163

# Drones are being used more frequently to fight wildfires in the LAC region, by releasing liquid cargo, aiding in backburning to deprive wildfires of fuel, and identifying hotspots 

> Source: PwC analysis

Overview of the wildfire monitoring drone sector 

Drones are gradually becoming an integral part in the fight against wildfires across the world. They are particularly crucial for forest fires that tend to get out of control, putting firefighters at risk. Drones give a bird’s eye view of the terrain and help firefighters determine where the fire is moving next , helping in decision making about where crews should go and who should be evacuated. Drones may be equipped with thermal cameras, which allows identification of hot spots and locating people who may be trapped, even in areas of thick smoke. Heavy lift payload drones, being complementary technology for helicopters and airplanes, can hover directly above the specific burning area and release their liquid cargo as a mist . A mist is good at fighting fire as it cools the area by evaporation and blocks the transfer of heat to anything flammable nearby. The latest technology allows deployment of an autonomous swarm of drones , potentially able to create a constant barrage of liquid, acting like man-made rain. Drones have also been deployed to battle wildfires by setting up controlled small fires in ‘back burning’ to deprive a wildfire of fuel as it progresses. Large, long-duration fixed-wing drones equipped with multispectral scanners (bands ranging from visible to thermal infrared) for autonomous collection of image data can provide the enhanced wildfire images and near real-time (5-10 min) intelligence to support forest wildfire management. Drones enable fast mapping for post-incident recovery , helping decision-makers come up with disaster relief plans. For the residents of burned areas, this may bring invaluable information on property damage to assess insurance claims more quickly. Since many wildfires result from illegal activities, high-resolution images captured by drones might be used to detect and report these activities to the authorities. This approach is much more efficient and safe, as traversing dense jungle is hard on foot. Drones also enable monitoring over a much wider area , while avoiding dangerous confrontations with loggers and land-grabbers. 

Maturity 

The first evidence of the use of drones for fire control purposes comes from Guatemala in 2015 when the National Council of Protected Areas (Conap) announced that drones would be used to monitor the country’s green areas. In 2017, DroneSAR, the Chilean NGO consisting of volunteer drone operators, partnered with forestry and fire brigades to use drones in the country for the first time during the devastating wildfires. Today, drones are increasingly being used in many countries across the LAC region—for example in Belize, Mexico and Brazil, where management institutions and forest departments are being trained not only in the use of drones but also in the processing and analysis of captured images. 

> 164

Benefits from the Use of Drones for Wildfire Monitoring and Prevention 

# Drones are highly beneficial for wildfire search and rescue activities, aiding observation, mitigating the risk of further spread, and support during the actual rescue missions 

> Source: PwC analysis

• Drones can provide real-time video feed to emergency workers and fire fighters, improving situational awareness as well as locating 

wildfire hotspots and firebreak breaches • Drones can provide mapping, image and video documentation of fires and their aftermath • Drones help in detecting human activities that may have caused the wildfires • Sensors installed on drones can locate trapped people and rescue crews, even through dense smoke or at night • Drone solutions are cheaper and quicker than the use of helicopters; they can also fly lower, providing higher resolution information 

• Based on drone data, authorities can predict with higher accuracy the occurrence of potential future wildfires 

• Drones can be equipped with infrared cameras, as well as sensors for wind direction and other weather variables that affect how wildfires spread • Drones can quickly identify escape routes 

• Drones can help establish firebreaks to keep wildfires from spreading, for example being used to ignite managed fires to burn out the vegetation fuel to control fire expansion 

> 165

• Increased safety of firefighters and communities in and around affected areas • Improved identification of where a fire will spread, through tracking and mapping fire patterns • Decreased number of illegal activities associated with timbering and land clearing • Decreased area affected by wildfires • Improved communication between firefighters on the front line of wildfires with a drone operation centre • Improved effectiveness of preventing and controlling the spread of wildfires • Increased understanding of wildfire geometrical measurements, including position of the fire front, rate of spread, and maximum height of flames • Improved capacity for search and rescue missions during a wildfire (both people & animals) 

Expected Outcomes / Impact from Drone Usage 

# Drones can have an extremely positive influence on fighting wildfires, increasing safety of firefighters, helping to control the spread, and therefore decreasing the area affected 

> Source: PwC analysis

Wildfires case studies measured impact: 

• According to the study published by Bushnaq et al. (2021), satellite data allows the detection of a forest fire once the burning area reaches an average size of 19 km2, whereas drones, in cooperation with IoT, can detect fires that are just 2.5 km2 in size with greater than 99% accuracy . The study areas covered 400 km2 and was patrolled by 18 drones. For smaller fires (covering 0.5 km2) the approach yields a 69% accuracy .• The US Fish and Wildlife Service agency predict that using drones instead of a manned aircraft to detect frequently occurring wildfires in the region of Great Dismal Swamp National Wildlife Refuge will significantly decrease surveying costs, as well as improving early detection of nascent fires, potentially saving 

millions of dollars in firefighting costs 

SDGs impacted 

Indirectly: Directly: 

> 166

# To support and facilitate the adoption of drones for wildfire monitoring, it is important to provide the right technology environment, regulatory frameworks, and incentives 

> Source: PwC analysis

Technology environment Drone hardware: 

• Multicopter for easy operation in dense, forestry environment, preferably heat and wind resistant platforms • Fixed-wing or VTOL drones to operate over long distances 

Drone payload: 

• Thermal sensors for wildfire detection and monitoring in difficult-to-reach areas and at night • Ignition payload 

Software: 

• For the optimisation of efforts, a machine-learning based software system should be used to analyse data, aiding in quicker detection of hotspots 

Other equipment: 

• High-performance units that are capable of flying for extended periods of time on a single battery • Aircraft system capable of automated deployment • To extend communication between drone operation centre and emergency responders, a drone-based radio repeater solution is recommended 

Enabling Factors for Wildfire Monitoring Regulatory requirements 

• Flights conducted above forested and mostly unsettled areas should meet simplified requirements for UAS activities • BVLOS operations should include streamlined risk assessment 

Other requirements 

• Sometimes, the signal sent from a drone operation centre to an emergency response centre may be affected by topography, buildings or dense forests; therefore, it is recommended that drones are equipped with high frequency (VHF/UHF) radio bands to increase the range • In the future operators could control swarms of drones to increase the efficiency of operations 

> 167

# To enable drone solutions in wildfire monitoring it is essential to spread awareness, provide training, educate local people, and regulate BVLOS autonomous operations 

> Source: PwC analysis

Adoption enablers: • Training and education for local communities, firefighters and other stakeholders • Appropriate air traffic management system that enables safe missions for manned and unmanned aircraft 

• Societal awareness about the usefulness of drone technology 

• Available funding to purchase technology and train relevant agencies • Governments actively integrating technology into their plans and efforts for the prevention, monitoring and control of manmade and natural disasters • Public programmes focused on improving firefighters safety 

and wildfires prevention 

Adoption Enablers & Barriers for the Use of Drone technology within Wildfire Monitoring Adoption barriers: • Regulatory constraints related to BVLOS operations, drone swarm piloting, and flying in no-fly zones 

• Lack of awareness from fire fighters and limited training possibilities 

• Insufficient funding for the importation of technologically advanced equipment or hardware specifically designed for wildfire prevention • Risks related to the use of manned and unmanned aircrafts in parallel, which could lead to accidents • Limited technological capabilities to enable autonomous operations 

> 168

Stakeholder category Key Stakeholders and potential partners Role of stakeholders Government & public sector 

• Fire departments • Wildlife and national management park offices • Governments (national, regional and local) • CAA Governments and their various departments play a significant role in the prevention, management, monitoring and control of wildfires and the protection of the biodiversity of countries. Therefore, the authorities should be the main promoter for the adoption of drones and other technology that improves disaster response. Hence, fire departments, in cooperation with governments, could sign agreements with drone operators which will allow the fire response teams to use operators’ services and drone equipment during search and rescue and fire suppression missions. 

Companies & private sector 

• Tech startups • Drone operators • Drone associated services Companies and the private sector could more effectively communicate their latest innovative drone technologies for wildfire prevention and monitoring. They should continue to improve their practices and trial new technologies, to deliver a more effective planned burning programme, for example. Additionally, cooperation programmes and further technological developments between the private and public sector can be promoted to expand the development of innovative solutions to protect communities and the environment from wildfire—or at least limit their impact. 

Investors and international financial institutions 

• WB • IDB • CAF Investors and international financial organisations can provide funds to facilitate and encourage investments and innovation around building or updating anti-wildfire drone monitoring systems that can spot blazes from the sky and immediately inform firefighters. 

NGOs / civil society & international organisations 

• Volunteer drone operators NGOs and civil society professionals can provide hands-on training and education for search and rescue teams and fire brigades, helping them to establish their own drone programmes. Moreover, NGOs and civil society should establish hotlines for better cooperation with fire departments and for creating situational awareness. Finally, volunteer drone operators should offer their emergency response services and support fire departments from the sky by providing thermal imaging or live video feeds. 

End users / civil society 

• Citizens • Local communities Local communities and end users are relevant, as they provide input on the drone system and associated software so drone companies can develop new features to increase the effectiveness of the technology. 

# The successful full-scale deployment of drones in wildfire monitoring requires the active involvement and cooperation of several groups of stakeholders, including public and private sectors, along with civil society organisations and end users 

Source: PwC analysis; Di Sacco et al. (2021) 

Partner Environment for Wildfire Monitoring Sector 

*The list of stakeholders is not exhaustive and may differ according to country/region/town where wildfires solutions are implemented. Therefore, stakeholders mapping is advised prior to any design and implementation. 169 There are several potential business models for the use of drone in wildfire use cases; the specifics of deployment, operation and funding depend on the scale, area and magnitude of the fire 

Business Models for Wildfire Monitoring 

• The use of drone technologies in wildfire monitoring and prevention requires a close cooperation with other firefighting activities, as this use case is typically considered to be deployed in house rather than using drone service providers • Implementation of drone technology in activities of fire brigades must be preceded by extensive training in the use of the technology and coordination with other field activities , therefore in a typical model that the technology is firstly used by specific fire brigade units which are early adopters and gradually scaled to other interested units • The typical scenario entails public financing - depending on the country and region - as it is any equipment used by professional or volunteer fire departments. Therefore, it can be centrally or locally funded 

• Despite the traditional funding from governments, it could be also 

sponsored by NGOs supporting immediate relief and long-term recovery for communities following a wildfire as well as other activities such as search and rescue or the mapping and surveying of burned areas 

Scale Operating model Financing Inhouse 

Operated using internal capabilities of an institution 

3rd party 

Operated using external specialised service provider 

Community/cooperative 

Operated jointly by a community group 

Build-Operate-Transfer 

Operated by 3rd party and gradually transferred to inhouse 

Local or central government Development institutions Public-private partnership Alternative funding 

Financed by other players of the value chain 

NGO and/or donors Private funding 

Financed by a private sponsors or companies 

Shared economy 

Financed by the community 

On demand 

Ad-hoc or emergency use 

Cyclical 

Regular use when required e.g. based on seasons 

Permanent 

Continuously in operations 

Localised 

Single or number of target areas 

Region/province 

Large scale, regional or cross regional deployment 

Country wide 

Large scale over the entire country 

Frequency 

High relevance Moderate relevance Low relevance 170 Countries where most relevant: Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guyana, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Suriname, Uruguay, Venezuela This pilot project is intended to provide fire fighters with state-of-the-art training on how to use drones during wildfires events. The pilot aims to demonstrate the capability of drone technology to support wildfire mitigation and response efforts and increase the real-time awareness of fire behaviour using optical sensors. 

The project should be divided into phases. The initial phase offers practical training in a safe environment. The second phase provides larger scale training in the field with several drone units. 

# To minimize the risk to firefighters during wildfires, a new fire mitigation solution must be properly tested in a controlled environment before large-scale implementation 

Source: PwC analysis; 

Ideal Pilot Project Scenario I. Phase I - Practical training in a safe environment 

Requirements: 

• Small area to perform Proof-of-Concept drone operation for fire fighting • Collaboration of drone training providers and/or drone NGOs with fire brigades • Cooperation with CAA and/or transportation authorities to establish initial guidelines for SOPs 

Purpose: 

• Give practical training on how to use drones in wildfire fighting operations in a safe, controlled environment • During this phase the initial Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) will be created 

II. Phase II - Large-scale training in the field 

Requirements: 

• Large area to perform wildfire fighting drone operations in a controlled burning environment • Cooperation with CAA, transportation ministries and fire brigades to establish safety protocols for combined operations of manned and unmanned aircraft 

Purpose: 

• Development of Standard Operating Procedures and safety protocols for combined operations of manned and unmanned aviation • Assessment of operational feasibility and value from the use of integrated manned-unmanned aircraft system 

Hardware: 

• Fixed-wing drones for operations over large areas (a few km2) • Thermal and visible sensors • Manned systems like airplanes and helicopters 

Expected budget of the pilot project*: 94–440 USD Expected budget of the pilot project*: 52–232 USD 

Hardware: 

• High-resolution visible light cameras and/or thermal cameras to provide quality imagery or video broadcast • Quadcopter for small areas 

* The cost range depends on geography, number of participants, technology partners, length of the project and stakeholders involved; **The phases that a pilot project can cover will vary depending on the reality on the ground, level of engagement, technology available, and other enabling factors along with the main purpose of the pilot. 171 Chilean NGO DroneSAR partnered with fire brigades to combat a destructive wildfire that was spreading uncontrollably, using thermal cameras to enable night time operation 

> Source: PwC analysis; DJI

Chilean fire brigade used drones to fight destructive fires 

In 2017, Chile experienced destructive forest fire incidents when almost 600,000 hectares of land were burned ,including the properties of thousands of people. Although many fire departments were working simultaneously, the fire started to spread uncontrollably. DroneSAR, the first Chilean NGO to consist of volunteer drone operators, partnered with the forestry and fire department, deploying more than 25 operators. Fire departments were able to collect valuable information, which enabled them to make safer decisions and reduce any risk to themselves and their teams. Crucially, drones allowed them to continue operations at night, with the fire brigade relying on thermal imaging technology to continue wildfire control. They were not restricted by visibility limitations and were therefore able to control the situation more quickly. Thermal cameras also allowed them to prioritize hotspots, minimising the damage to civilians and the ecosystem. The data gathered from drone operations was subsequently used to generate photogrammetric surveys, to obtain critical information about the topography of the region, providing fire crews with additional information that had previously been very limited. The use of drones turned out to be invaluable. Fire brigades were able to forensically analyse fires in various regions, which helped them determine where and how fires were started, how they were spreading, and what was the best way to contain them. Besides the positive outcome of drone use in combating these specific wildfires, the general perception of drones improved dramatically following the incident, as more people began to realize how beneficial UAS technology could be during emergencies. Consequently, DroneSAR Chile expanded significantly, and their expertise has been called upon subsequently by various public safety agencies. 

Case Study: Wildfires in Chile 

> 172

# 5.12 

# Mosquitoes borne disease spread reduction Development use case Drones can be highly valuable in fighting the spread of mosquito-borne disease, decreasing the possibility of exposure to diseases such as malaria, Zika or dengue fever 

> Source: PwC analysis; WHO

Challenge: Mosquito-borne diseases threaten the population in the LAC region 

Due to its geographical location, the LAC region is highly vulnerable to mosquito-borne disease outbursts. Malaria, dengue fever and Zika are present with varying degrees of incidence. Malaria is the disease that poses the biggest threat to people. Although countries like Argentina, Belize, Costa Rica, El Salvador and Paraguay have put great efforts into reducing new cases of malaria, to the point where it has been nearly or completely eradicated, there are still countries with high rates of the disease. The biggest incidence in the region can be found in Guyana and Venezuela, with 34 and 33 cases respectively per 1,000 at-risk population in 2019. Moreover, Venezuela also shows the largest number of estimated malaria deaths (with 456 people dying of the disease), followed by Haiti, Guyana and Brazil (with 81, 33 and 30 deaths, respectively). Dengue also remains a public health problem in the LAC region despite the efforts of countries to stop and mitigate it. The incidence of dengue in the region is heterogeneous, and particularly high in Nicaragua, with 934 cases per 100,000 population in 2018, followed by Belize (with 564) and Paraguay (469). Finally, Zika disease is very high in Panama, with 66 cases per 100,000 people in 2018. Belize, Guatemala and Bolivia follow with 33, 16 and 13 cases per 100,000 people. These diseases create economic inequalities for affected communities, which lack adequate prevention methods and modern sanitation and infrastructure. It should be the government's priority to ensure good quality healthcare to protect people from these transmittable infections. Outbreak preparedness and control is crucial for a proper prevention and response, for which countries should develop their capacities and resources. For instance, the use of insecticide-treated nets and indoor residual spraying with insecticides are important preventive measures for at-risk populations to avoid mosquito bites. 

Description of Challenges for Mosquitoes Borne Disease Spread Reduction across Latin America and the Caribbean 

Mosquitoes kill more than 725,000 people every year by transmitting diseases such as 

malaria, dengue fever, yellow fever, encephalitis and Zika . The most deadly of these, malaria, also poses a real threat to crop production, exacerbating the already serious problem of malnutrition. It has been estimated that harvests may be up to 60% lower in malaria-prone areas , due to a poor state of health which influences overall productivity levels. Since the beginning of the century when, in 2004, mosquito-borne diseases killed almost a million people, the world has started to combat malaria and the efforts have been bringing positive outcomes. The widespread adoption of bed nets and indoor pesticide spraying in malaria hotspots has helped prevent mosquitoes from biting and spreading disease. However, unfortunately mosquitoes have become resistant to insecticides. Therefore today, technology, innovation and collective efforts are essential in controlling the spread of malaria. 

> 174

# Drones can increase the efficiency and precision of the Sterile Insect Technique, Larval Source Management, and Wolbachia methods, yielding improved results 

> Source: PwC analysis; WeRobotics

Overview of drone use in mosquitoes borne disease spread reduction 

So far, at least three different methods of combating mosquito-borne diseases using drones have been developed. Although all these methods were created with a mind to a conventional approach, drones have paved the way for large-scale and cost-efficient usage. 1) Drone-assisted Sterile Insect Technique (SIT): Sterilised male mosquitoes are released by drones to mate with females. As these do not produce any offspring, the insect population declines over time. The technique requires the uniform release of large numbers of insects in good condition over a given area. Drones appeared to be very labour- and time-effective for this technique. 2) Drone-assisted Larval Source Management (LCM): Drones are used to spread Aquatain, a biodegradable, non-toxic, silicone-based liquid. When poured on a body of water such as an irrigated rice paddy, the liquid will spread across the surface where it forms a thin film. When mosquito larvae swim to the surface to breathe, they encounter the Aquatain layer, which serves as a barrier and prevents them from breathing atmospheric oxygen; within two days all larvae die. 3) Drone-assisted Wolbachia method: In this method, drones are used to release mosquitoes that carry Wolbachia bacteria which reduces their ability to transmit dengue, chikungunya or Zika between people, helping to provide communities with long-term protection from these harmful viruses. 

Maturity 

While the practice of using drones to assist in combating malaria is still new, and while optimal practices and workflows are still being established, there is very promising evidence that drones can play a major role in upscaling the battle against malaria. One of the first uses of drones for this sector, not just in Latin America but also globally, comes from Brazil and Mexico and dates back to 2017. The WeRobotics organisation modified a DJI Matrice 600 drone to integrate a sterile mosquito release mechanism. Currently, the drone technology is mature enough from a technical point of view to perform the SIT application at large scale. 

> 175

Benefits from the Use of Drones for Mosquitoes Borne Disease Spread Reduction 

# Drone technology is the most efficient way to combat mosquito-borne diseases, due to its cost-effectiveness, labour-efficiency, and ability to reach rural and remote areas 

> Source: PwC analysis

• Drone usage is a highly efficient method for accurate distribution of larvicides or sterilised male mosquitos • Drones are a cost-effective and time-saving solution , especially in remote areas, and in difficult-to-reach natural habitats for insects, where the transportation network often does not exist or is underdeveloped • By using drones, people are protected from exposure to the insects’ natural habitat , as operators can remain in safe area as opposed to being in a wheeled vehicle or, worse, on foot • Drones provide a means of releasing sterile mosquitoes over large areas due to their ability to travel long distances in short periods of time • The use of drones for the release of sterile mosquitoes leads to important improvements in aerial coverage and savings in operational costs due to a requirement for fewer release sites and field staff 

> 176

• Reduced mortality level: mosquito-borne diseases kill 725,000–1,000,000 people annually 

• Reduced costs of healthcare: diseases transmitted by mosquitoes cause a significant cost burden for governments 

• Improved health conditions for local communities 

• Better financial condition of the population: even where health services are covered by insurance, medicines often have to be purchased by patients 

• Improved labour-efficiency due to less frequent occurrences of disease 

• Higher economic growth: healthier communities have better productivity levels 

• Improved quality of healthcare services Expected Outcomes / Impact from Drone Usage 

# Using drones to tackle mosquito-borne diseases reduces mortality level, and improves quality of life for the population generally in terms of health and economic benefits 

> Source: PwC analysis

SDGs impacted 

Indirectly: Directly: 

Measured impact from case studies in the use of drones in reducing the spread of mosquito-borne disease: 

• In Brazil, a drone-based solution was tested to suppress the spread of mosquito-borne diseases. 50,000 sterile mosquitoes were released per flight with an average coverage of over 20 hectares per 10 minutes of flight. The same job done from the ground would require two hours and twice the amount of human resources. Results also showed that costs were halved using this method, compared to traditional techniques 

• In Fiji, the World Mosquito programme also used a drone system to release mosquitos. A specially created mechanism could store up to 160,000 mosquitos . The drone covered an area of 10 km2 in a few hours, while release by car over the same area requires several days, and can only be conducted when roads are passable 

> 177

Regulatory requirements 

• Regulatory environment enabling BVLOS (Beyond Visual Line of Sight) operations, or waivers for BVLOS operations (as in most cases, operations will be performed at a greater distance than the pilot’s line of sight) • ICAO U-AID guidance could be followed if no relevant national drone regulations are established • Spraying operations may require additional procedures, e.g., to carry pesticides, herbicides, etc. • Flying platforms and spraying payload should have the declaration of compliance for chemicals and meet the requirements of agricultural law established for chemical plant treatment from airplanes • In some cases drone pilots could be additionally trained for operations involving dangerous goods carrying • In some cases it may be necessary to inform the local community and public organisations located in the nearest vicinity a few days in advance if spraying from above is to be performed • In some countries, operations like aerial field spraying are regulated with additional legal provisions, even though the law does not directly address UAS (e.g. FAA Part 137 Agricultural Aircraft Operations in the US) 

# To support and facilitate drone adoption for reducing the spread of mosquito-borne diseases in the LAC region, it is important to provide the technology environment along with proper regulatory frameworks and incentives 

> Source: PwC analysis

Technology environment Drone hardware: 

• Multicopters are the most suitable and tested solution, due to the dimensions of a mosquito-carrying container and the necessary lift capacity for liquid larvicides 

Drone payload: 

• Container with active or passive cooling system for insects that can survive only in appropriate temperatures • Durable and resistant container with remote release system 

Software: 

• Software platform could be required to manager larger scale logistics and planning of the drone operations 

Enabling Factors for the Use of Drones in Mosquitoes Borne Disease Spread Reduction 

> 178

# The key adoption barriers to drone usage in combating mosquito-borne disease are related to limited awareness of drone potential, limited funding for projects, and complicated drone regulations 

> Source: PwC analysis

Adoption enablers: • Affordable drone cargo solutions and relevant software present on the local market 

• Acceptance of local communities for the wide use of drone technologies 

• Decreasing the cost of drone services 

• Building awareness among communities 

• Simplifying drone deployment roadmap for mosquito-borne disease applications 

• Financing of special programmes for drone deployment in rural areas 

Enablers & Barriers for the Adoption of Drones for Mosquitoes Borne Disease Spread Reduction Adoption barriers: • Communities’ concerns about the safety of spreading mosquitos and pesticides • No updated regulatory framework which makes obtaining flight authorisation complicated • Insufficient funding for pilot projects and large-scale deployment 

• Insufficient awareness about the technology, solution and educational possibilities 

> 179

Stakeholders category Key Stakeholders and potential partners Role of stakeholders Government & public sector 

• Ministry of Health • Ministry of Transportation • Civil Aviation Authorities • Public Hospitals • Rural clinics • National and local agencies of medicine • Blood banks Government can facilitate the use of drones by adopting their use in prevention campaigns for reducing the spread of mosquito-borne disease, especially in critical months of the year, where the control of these mosquitoes is crucial to ensure people’s health. They can also help by introducing appropriate regulations that establish technical and operational requirements, provisions for drone operations, and personnel (minimum requirements and operator training), including both pilots and drone companies/organisations. Additionally, governments and local authorities can establish programmes for the development, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of mosquito-borne disease control interventions. They can also ensure the coordination of stakeholders at all levels of the healthcare system. 

Companies & private sector 

• Private Hospitals • Pharmaceutical industry • Drone operators • Drone associated services The private sector plays a key role in the pilot project, and in further rollout of drone solutions for reducing the spread of mosquito-borne diseases. Stakeholders include leading providers of services for delivering malaria medicines to remote areas, mapping and building 2D & 3D models of flood-prone terrain, identifying potential breeding sites, remotely detecting and monitoring mosquito larvae count, and deploying larvicidal agents. Additionally, the private sector will be responsible for technology development, cost-efficiency of solutions, and providing drone training. 

Investors and international financial institutions 

• WB • IDB • CAF The initial investments and scalability of the operations are subjected to budgetary constraints. Therefore, loans and support from Development Financial Institutions are crucial in mitigating the risk of investment, as well as helping governments make the best investments for a successful pilot project, rollout, and further implementation of innovative solutions for reducing the spread of mosquito-borne diseases. 

# The successful adoption of drones in combating mosquito-borne disease requires the involvement and cooperation of several groups of stakeholders, including public and private sector and investors… 

Source: PwC analysis 

Partner Environment for Mosquitoes Borne Disease Spread Reduction (1/2) 

*The list of stakeholders is not exhaustive and it may differ per country/region/town where mosquitoes borne disease spread reduction solutions are implemented. Therefore, a stakeholders mapping prior to any design and implementation is advised. 180 Stakeholders category Key Stakeholders and potential partners Role of stakeholders NGOs / civil society & international organisations 

• Flying Labs • FAO • WeRobotics • WHO • WMP • RTI International NGOs like Flying Labs can provide vital support in navigating the logistical hurdles to bringing drone-assisted projects to life. Moreover, their role should be to provide training and education to the professional drone operators on how to efficiently use spraying and release drones, but also to provide education, awareness, communication, and engagement with regard to local communities. By establishing partnerships between development/health organisations and drone organisations such as WeRobotics, they can develop a drone-based mosquito release mechanism for use in applications such as the Sterile Insect Technique. 

End users / civil society 

• Citizens • Local communities The key role of civil society is to provide feedback on the services and products they use to help companies improve them. Additionally, if there is a demand for certain services or products, citizens can report it to the business, to help meet the needs of end-users. 

# …while NGOs, civil society organisations and end users also have roles to play in facilitating the deployment of drones in the sector 

Source: PwC analysis *The list of stakeholders is not exhaustive and it may differ per country/region/town where mosquitoes borne disease spread reduction solutions are implemented. Therefore, a stakeholders mapping prior to any design and implementation is advised. 

Partner Environment for Mosquitoes Borne Disease Spread Reduction (2/2) 

181 Business models for drone operations in reducing mosquito-borne disease will involve national or local government in partnership with international or local service providers, often with funding from development institutions 

Business Models for Drone Use in Mosquitoes Borne Disease Spread Reduction 

• Drones or drone payload used for spraying are typically developed by startups, NGOs or universities. The business model could be based on 

hardware and training provision to relevant agencies or on providing 

the spraying service by 3rd party companies • Spraying operations could be a spin-off from agriculture drone service providers, which are already providing services in the LAC region. It could be also performed by affected communities • The scale of the operations would be typically ad-hoc based on disease outbreak locations or cyclically on the top of preselected high-risk areas 

• Financing comes from NGO, central or local government, or development institutions as part of Sustainable Development Goals strategy • The operations could be also financed by other players on the market which are affected by the spread of the disease and could benefit from improving the health situation in selected areas 

Scale Operating model Financing Inhouse 

Operated using internal capabilities of an institution 

3rd party 

Operated using external specialised service provider 

Community/cooperative 

Operated jointly by a community group 

Build-Operate-Transfer 

Operated by 3rd party and gradually transferred to inhouse 

Local or central government Development institutions Public-private partnership Alternative funding 

Financed by other players of the value chain 

NGO and/or donors Private funding 

Financed by a private sponsors or companies 

Shared economy 

Financed by the community 

On demand 

Ad-hoc or emergency use 

Cyclical 

Regular use when required e.g. based on seasons 

Permanent 

Continuously in operations 

Localised 

Single or number of target areas 

Region/province 

Large scale, regional or cross regional deployment 

Country wide 

Large scale over the entire country 

Frequency 

High relevance Moderate relevance Low relevance 182 Countries where most relevant: Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Guyana, Haiti, Nicaragua, Peru, Suriname, Venezuela The aim of this pilot project is to familiarize the relevant local organisation—that which protects the community from 

mosquito-borne diseases—with the drone-assisted Sterile Insect Technique. 

Before the project, it is necessary to select the right location, preferably where mosquito-borne disease currently occurs, select the right technology (drones equipped with containers) and conduct drone training for the local community to raise awareness of the possibilities and the positive impact of the drone method. In the long-term, the population of mosquitoes will decline over time. 

# A pilot project for the use of drones in reducing the spread of mosquito-borne disease should provide training and knowledge transfer to local organisations 

Source: PwC analysis; 

Ideal Pilot Project Scenario Drone-assisted Sterile Insect Technique (SIT) 

General Requirements: 

• Project financing from government or other financing institutions • Experienced instructors with extensive practical experience in the use of drone technologies • Selected location should be known as a mosquito breeding site 

Technical requirements: 

• Container where sterilised male mosquitoes are stored should be temperature-controlled • The insects should not be compacted too densely within the container 

Purpose: 

• Provide training, education and knowledge transfer to organisations of how to utilise drones in the fight against mosquito-borne disease • Map the areas of standing water and aquatic vegetation where mosquitoes can easily breed and prepare route/plan for the operation • Disperse the sterile mosquitoes at the breeding site • Prove the feasibility of technology in the region by analysing the number of mosquitoes after one month 

Expected budget of the pilot project*: 87–255k USD 

Hardware: 

• Multirotor for small areas or fixed-wing drone for larger areas, equipped with visible and near-infrared sensors for identification of water bodies • High precision GPS • Dedicated container to keep and spread sterile mosquitoes 

* The cost range depends on geography, number of participants, technology partners, length of the project and stakeholders involved; **The phases that a pilot project can cover will vary depending on the reality on the ground, level of engagement, technology available, and other enabling factors along with the main purpose of the pilot. 183 Drones are becoming an extremely important tool in fighting the spread of mosquito-borne disease across LAC countries 

> Source: PwC analysis; Bouyer et al. (2020); RTI

Sterile mosquito release using drones in Brazil 

In Brazil, in March 2018, a field trial was conducted to evaluate the feasibility of releasing sterile mosquitoes with a drone-based solution . Over 200,000 sterile insects were ejected using a specially designed mechanism attached to the drone. Although operations were performed for only 3 days, the results were promising. After the comparison between the treated and reference area, it was possible to observe a 50% increase in unviable eggs. A new method of sterile mosquito spread indicates significant potential to reduce disease outbreaks in remote and hard-to-reach locations, where traditional techniques would not be possible to implement or are ineffective. Another important finding is cost reduction and time efficiency, where there was a positive impact even in locations with well-developed road infrastructure. 

Research on Zika disease across Latin America 

According to WHO, around 3–4 million people across the Americas were infected by the Zika virus (ZIKV) in 2017. The RTI International, the non-profit research institute committed to improving human life conditions and well-being, self-funded a number of projects in Latin America dedicated to learning more about Zika infection. The research recognised how critical it is to gain a greater understanding of the health effects and treatment options in order to help equip world leaders with the information needed to enact policies and practices to address the virus. They found out that vector control, which attempts to limit or eradicate insects that transmit diseases, is a critical prevention strategy for Zika. In Guatemala, they funded studies to conduct drone surveillance for Aedes aegypti mosquito breeding sites, creating risk communication materials, and performing adult cohort follow up and biorepository. Furthermore, RTI International evaluated the costs of ZIKV prevention and control, conducting follow up of infants with microcephaly birth defects in Brazil, and examining potential aerosol transmission of the virus. Finally, the team supported the CDC (Centre for Disease Control and Prevention) in the development of a communication campaign in response to the Zika outbreak. The first phase of the project will be conducted in Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands, and American Samoa, while a second phase will be conducted in the Caribbean and Latin America, in coordination with the Pan American Health Organisation. 

Case Study: Combating Mosquito-borne Disease across Latin America 

> 184

# 5.13 

# Environmental pollution monitoring Development use case Challenge: Air, water and soil pollution pose a big threat for the population in the LAC region 

The LAC region struggles with multiple environmental issues due to climate change and human-induced stresses. Most of them are associated with air, land or water pollution. 

Air pollution is a major issue, creating serious health risks and ranking in the top three leading causes of death in the region. Air quality has mostly declined in cities due to urban development and growing industrialisation. Today, more than 100 million people (7% of the population) in the region live in areas susceptible to air pollution levels exceeding WHO guidelines. When it comes to water pollution , the biggest issues lie in the poor sewer systems and extensive polluting of marine ecosystems with plastic and other human waste. Currently, 1/3 of the LAC region water is polluted due to a lack of sewage treatment. According to the World Water Quality Assessment, it is estimated that 25 million people in rural areas throughout the region are in contact with polluted surface water originating from urban areas. In Brazil alone, water is of ‘poor’ or ‘terrible’ quality in 40% of rivers, creeks and lakes, leaving 77 million people without access to safe water. 

Marine pollution , in the form of plastic, sewage or chemicals, poses a risk to fisheries and tourism, on which many countries’ economies depend. Tourism accounts for 15.2% of GDP in the Caribbean, and over 50% in some countries like Grenada. Coral reefs—of huge value for biodiversity and with great appeal for the tourism industry—are being degraded by marine litter. The amount of plastic found on Caribbean beaches reaches 2,014 items of litter per kilometre (compared to an average of 573 worldwide). With regard to soil pollution , in 2016 more than 68% of the soil in the LAC region was affected by erosion: 100 million ha of land have been degraded due to deforestation and 70 million have been overgrazed. Without a long-term solution, desertification and land degradation will affect food supply, lead to increased migration, and threaten the stability of many nations and regions. For example, in Bolivia, 77% of the population live in degraded areas. In Argentina, Mexico and Paraguay, over 50% of the territory suffers problems linked to degradation or desertification. Finally, in Brazil, desertification affects 18% of the territory, influencing crops such as maize and beans. 

# Drones can provide high quality data on air, water and soil pollution in the LAC region, facilitating development of efficient and effective strategies for environmental protection 

> Source: PwC analysis; UNEP WorldWaterForum; WorldWaterCounci; WBl; ReliefWeb

Description of Challenges for the Environmental Sector across Latin America and the Caribbean 

With the world facing the threat of climate change, environmental pollution monitoring is of utmost importance. The proper assessment of environmental conditions and trends is beneficial for wildlife and a healthy environment is critical to public health and the sustainability of societies. According to the UN, there is an increasing need to develop and implement large-scale monitoring policies that aim to counteract the current level of air, land, and water pollution. This necessitates going beyond the current technological approach and adopting more advanced systems that guarantee continuous and pervasive environmental monitoring. 

> 186

# Drones are increasingly being used in the LAC region for environmental pollution monitoring, bringing insightful data about desertification, toxic substances in water or concentration of greenhouse gases (GHGs) 

> Source: PwC analysis; MDPI; Intelligent Living; EFE; Seedstars

Overview of drone use in the environmental pollution monitoring sector 

Drones are used for a variety of environmental monitoring purposes, such as assessing air, water or soil pollution, carrying different kinds of sensors and equipment. 

Air pollution : the amount of aerosols and pollutants in the air varies significantly at different elevations. Therefore, drones can bring significantly better data on air pollutants and their pattern of spread compared to ground-based sensor stations. Equipped with dedicated gas sensors, they can be deployed to trace GHGs and other pollutants (e.g. PM2.5, PM10, CO) at different altitudes with high spatial and temporal resolution. Based on drone data, the fine-grained air quality index (AQI) can also be mapped. 

Soil pollution : drones equipped with multispectral and hyperspectral sensors generate data that, when appropriately processed, can bring information about soil contamination (usually with infrared and shortwave-infrared bands). 

Water pollution : drones mounted with hyperspectral sensors can capture characteristics of water surface reflectance, and can therefore detect suspended solids, particulate matter and biological or chemical toxic agents. Thermal sensors can detect plastic debris that are threatening aquatic wildlife such as coral reefs and species that thrive in the fragile ecosystem. Underwater drones, when deployed within the top 9 meters of water where the majority of microplastic can be found, can help in determining where microplastics are most likely to occur, which better informs prevention strategies. 

Maturity 

The amount of evidence of the use of drones for environmental pollution monitoring from every region in the world suggests that the adoption of the technology is at a fairly high level. Also, in the case of marine areas, aquatic drones are becoming more and more popular. They allow researchers to gain insights about water contamination at different depths, especially regarding microplastics. In the LAC region, adoption of the technology also seems to be fairly widespread. The evidence comes from countries like Peru (where drones are used to measure GHG concentration in remote areas of the Peruvian Andes and in Lima), Mexico (measuring pollutants and monitoring coral reefs), Brazil (monitoring of soil contamination and the water toxicity level in the Tiete River), Argentina (aquatic drones monitoring water pollution), and Chile (monitoring land changes like desertification). 

> 187

Benefits from the Use of Drones for Environmental Pollution Monitoring 

# Drones bring multiple benefits in environmental pollution monitoring, including very accurate, high-resolution data, captured in a cost- and labour-effective manner 

> Source: PwC analysis

• Data from drones can deliver improved scientific measurements of pollution data compared to traditional observations • Drones can deliver geospatial data of a higher resolution and accuracy , and at a lower cost compared to other surveying technologies, including satellite or airborne remote sensing platforms 

• Pollution maps and other visualisations derived from drone data are usually easier for non-experts to interpret and understand, so they can directly influence and inform policy change • Drones can be deployed quickly to gather data in real time to support emergency operations • Drones can assist park managers and local communities in monitoring and protecting their areas by documenting activities such as 

illegal logging and mining, soil erosion or water depletion 

• Drone-based data can be collected more frequently, daily or even multiple times a day, or at specific times of day—for example, within intertidal coastal zones, the timing of data acquisition is crucial, due to the presence of water during the tidal cycle 

> 188

• Increased knowledge about real-time air contamination in urban or industrial areas 

• Decreased time for air/soil/water pollution monitoring 

which speeds up the decision-making process about mitigation measures 

• Decreased level of contamination of water, air or soil 

• Decreased amount of disease connected to toxic substances in the water, air or soil 

• Decreased risk of urban heat island occurrence 

• Increased altitude range at which pollutants can be measured 

• Decreased costs for performing aerial environmental monitoring 

Expected Outcomes / Impacts from Drone Usage 

# The use of drone technology in environmental pollution monitoring positively impacts our understanding of water, air and soil quality by increasing the accuracy of the data, allowing for the introduction of appropriate mitigation measures 

> Source: PwC analysis; OSPAR; Aquatechtrade

SDGs impacted 

Indirectly: Directly: 

Measured impact of environmental pollution monitoring case studies: 

• In New Zealand, the city of Auckland started using drones to collect water quality data as a part of the city’s ‘Safeswim’ initiative. The drone collects samples at various intervals up to 1km offshore by lowering a sample bag into the water. It is estimated that this method can save 30% in operating costs, improve the accuracy of water quality prediction, and reduce the manpower needed to physically go out and collect samples. • In Poland, the regular burning of lamps and candles around religious holidays contributes to high levels of ‘Particulate Matter’ (PM) air pollution . Until recently, ground-level monitoring has been used to assess PM levels, but the sensors are costly and distribution is not comprehensive, so drones were proposed as an alternative. UAVs were equipped with low-cost, lightweight gas sensor systems , and measurements were taken at various altitudes over a municipal cemetery of around 2600 m2. The average sampling time for the UAV-based measurement is 15s , while the ground-level meteorological station gives 

15-min averages, which is a significant time advantage. 

> 189

# To support and facilitate the adoption of drone technology for environmental pollution monitoring in the LAC region, it is important to provide the proper technology environment, regulatory frameworks, and incentives 

> Source: PwC analysis

Technology environment Drone hardware: 

• Multicopter to operate over smaller areas supporting BVLOS operations • Fixed-wing or VTOL drones to operate over long distances • Drone payload: • Gas sensor to trace GHGs and other pollutants • Thermal and IR sensor to analyse land surface temperature • Multispectral and hyperspectral sensors for in-depth analyses • Software: • Dedicated GIS software for data visualisation, overlay, and analytics 

Enabling Factors for the Use of Drones in Environmental Pollution Monitoring Regulatory requirements 

• Most operations cover a vast area which will include BVLOS flights • Sometimes special permits may be required from relevant authorities to fly over protected areas or over people 

Other requirements 

• Operational Risk Assessment should be provided in order to obtain mission approval from relevant authorities 

> 190

# Key barriers to the adoption of drones for environmental pollution monitoring relate to limited funds for developing new drone technologies, strict regulations, privacy concerns, and a lack of awareness about the benefits of the technology 

> Source: PwC analysis

Adoption enablers: • Sufficient funds from international and local funding institutions to enable research opportunities and adoption of drone technology 

• Wide availability and low entry barrier in terms of cost and skills needed to access and use drone technology 

• Access to Research and Development institutions for developing and testing new drone solutions 

• Knowledge sharing, and increasing awareness among international development institutions, NGOs, civil society, governments, and communities 

• Acceptance from local communities for the wide use of drone technologies 

Enablers & Barriers to the Adoption of Drone Technology in Environmental Pollution Monitoring Adoption barriers: 

• Concern from the public that drones can cause potential hazards to people and property • Strictly regulated or restricted use of drones, e.g. limited possibilities to perform BVLOS operations • Lack of sufficient technological capabilities and low level of digitisation in relevant institutions • Privacy concerns from society • Limited willingness from the public sector and decision makers to invest in and adopt innovative technology pilots • Lack of incentives for the above 

• Limited awareness and knowledge of innovative technologies from public sector and decision makers 

> 191

Stakeholder category Key stakeholders and potential partners Role of stakeholders Government & public sector 

• CAA • Ministry of Environment • Governments • Park managers 

Government and public sector can support the environmental pollution monitoring industry by: 

• Facilitating regulatory frameworks, investment incentives and drone operation permits • Enhancing institutional capacity and knowledge about the relevance of drones in the sector • Ensuring the areas that require constant monitoring and protection based on drone data establish guides for conservation actions 

Companies & private sector 

• Drone operators • Associated drone services • Manufacturers • Sensor providers 

The private sector could actively engage in setting conservation strategies by delivering the newest technologies; for example, the optimal sensors to obtain the best data. Drone manufacturers could work together with environmentalists and scientists to build drones that will be best suited for environmental monitoring whilst not disturbing the ecosystem. Suppliers could provide support, training and companion software to end users. 

Investors and international financial institutions 

• WB • IDB • CAF 

Investors and international financial institutions could propagate and fund initiatives that aim to adopt drone technology in environmental pollution monitoring. Institutions could provide funding for pilot projects to trial the use of drones, sensor technologies and deployment techniques, as well as funding long-endurance drones to cover larger areas during a single flight. 

NGOs / civil society & international organisations 

• International Union for Conservation of Nature • UNEP • IUCN • ENGO • WWF 

The role of NGOs (ENGOs) and international organisations is to introduce conservation and environmental monitoring initiatives, participate in project funding by financial institutes, spread awareness about the use of drones in environmental pollution monitoring, and organise training and workshops for end users. 

End users / civil society 

• Citizens • Local communities • Conservationists 

End users—for example, scientists, researchers and conservationists—could take part in the training and education of how to use drones in environmental pollution monitoring, in terms of how to perform operations and the associated analysis. 

# The full-scale deployment of drones in the environmental pollution monitoring sector requires the active involvement and cooperation of several groups of stakeholders, including public and private sectors, along with civil society organisations and end users 

Source: PwC analysis; Di Sacco et al. (2021) 

Partner Environment for Drone Use in Environmental Pollution Monitoring* *

*The list of stakeholders is not exhaustive and may differ according to country/region/town where environmental pollution monitoring solutions are implemented. Therefore, stakeholder mapping is advised prior to any design and implementation. 192 The most suitable business model for drone use in the sector should be selected based on scale of operation, operating model and source of financing 

Business Models for Drone Use in Environmental Pollution Monitoring 

• Drones could be deployed on a regional scale, or over a large protected area such as a national park, with larger drone units deployed to monitor larger areas • Areas that require high attention (e.g., highly polluted areas) should be monitored on a cyclical basis with high frequency • In a typical scenario, operations should be performed by agencies or organisations responsible for environmental protection or municipalities responsible for decreasing the level of pollutants • Sizable number of field employees could be trained and equipped with drones to gather data • Agency or organisation responsible for environmental protection or municipalities responsible for decreasing the level of pollutants could involve a third-party consultancy or service provider to help establish relevant competencies ; however, with the aim to take over operations at some point • Drone programmes for environmental protection could be financed by relevant public environmental agencies, development institutions or NGOs 

Scale Operating model Financing Inhouse 

Operated using internal capabilities of an institution 

3rd party 

Operated using external specialised service provider 

Community/cooperative 

Operated jointly by a community group 

Build-Operate-Transfer 

Operated by 3rd party and gradually transferred to inhouse 

Local or central government Development institutions Public-private partnership Alternative funding 

Financed by other players of the value chain 

NGO and/or donors Private funding 

Financed by a private sponsors or companies 

Shared economy 

Financed by the community 

On demand 

Ad-hoc or emergency use 

Cyclical 

Regular use when required e.g. based on seasons 

Permanent 

Continuously in operations 

Localised 

Single or number of target areas 

Region/province 

Large scale, regional or cross regional deployment 

Country wide 

Large scale over the entire country 

Frequency 

High relevance Moderate relevance Low relevance 193 Countries where most relevant: Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Peru, Suriname, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and Grenadines, Trinidad and Tobago, Venezuela The objective of this pilot project is to implement and scale-up drone technology for 

air quality monitoring and assessing the amount of pollutants .The pilot project consists of two phases. The first focuses on small-scale multirotor deployment. The second aims to deploy a fleet of drones operating over a larger area. Additionally, this phase aims to lay the foundations for operational deployment of an autonomous swarm of drones. It will have particularly important applications in 

highly polluted urban areas 

where air quality monitoring is crucial for people’s health. 

# An effective pilot project for drones in environmental monitoring should be gradually deployed, with an aim of deploying an autonomous swarm of drones for regular monitoring of air quality, especially in highly polluted urban areas 

Source: PwC analysis; 

Ideal Pilot Project Scenario I. Phase I – Small-scale operation with single drones 

Requirements: 

• Densely populated urban residential area • Permission from and coordination with CAA (Civil Aviation Authority) and ANSP (Air Navigation Service Provider) • Trained drone operator • Community awareness and involvement is crucial in operations performed in residential areas • Project financing from municipality 

Purpose: 

• Perform air quality monitoring on selected site • Assess amount and kind of pollutants • Prove the feasibility of technology • Establish framework for assessment of results • Prepare to deploy swarm of drones on a larger scale 

II. Phase II – Large-scale operation with fleet of drones 

Requirements: 

• Fleet of drones to cover a much wider area • Densely populated urban residential area • Permission from / coordination with Civil Aviation Authority & Air Navigation Service Provider (ANSP) • Multiple trained drone operators • Community awareness and involvement is crucial for operations in residential areas • Project financing from municipality 

Purpose: 

• More complex operational scenario performed with a fleet of drones • Prepare operational protocols for deploying autonomous swarm of drones at specific location • Stimulate the creation of UTM system for integration of drone swarm 

Hardware: 

• Fixed-wing drones to cover large distance • Air quality transmitter • Drones need to be able to send data in real-time to the associated software 

Expected budget of the pilot project*: 295–970 USD Expected budget of the pilot project*: 106–295 USD 

Hardware: 

• Multirotor equipped with air quality transmitter • Drone needs to be able to send data in real-time to the associated software 

* The cost range depends on geography, number of participants, technology partners, length of the project and stakeholders involved; **The phases that a pilot project can cover will vary depending on the reality on the ground, level of engagement, technology available, and other enabling factors, along with the main purpose of the pilot. 194 A Mexican research group deployed drones to perform state-of-the-art air quality monitoring using a multi-sensor system mounted to the UAV 

> Source: PwC analysis; NCBI

Researchers in Mexico use drones to monitor air quality in real-time 

Mexico has some particular areas that suffer from serious environmental problems. The city of Torreón, located in the Lagunera region of Coahuila state, was ranked as the fourth highest among the 248 most contaminated regions in the world in terms of ammonia concentration. The main sources of this contamination are the metallurgical industry, the fertilizer industry, and the dairy industry—including both livestock and forage crops. Although ammonia is not usually considered by official standards due to its small presence in natural conditions, when combined with other acidic contaminants, such as sulfur dioxide (SO2) and nitrogen oxides (NOx), ammonia (NH3) becomes ammonium (NH4+), which has a high diffusion range, extending several hundred kilometres (between 100 and 1000km) from its point of origin. A group of researchers proposed a smart multi-sensor drone system to monitor air quality at the La Laguna Technological Institute monitoring site near Torreón city. The measurements were performed at different altitudes: ground, 10m, 30m, 50m or 100m. The multi-sensor system used to trace pollutants was placed on a support structure mounted on the drone, and the concentrations of SO2, NH3, CO, NO2, PM10, and PM2.5 were monitored. Every 6 seconds, 168 to 250 samples were acquired. Following data collection, the data was compared with data obtained from international air quality measurement systems. The values provided by the proposed drone system correspond to real-time measurements at specific locations, whereas the data reports from the international databases are based on a 24-hour average. The drone measurement system, using low-cost sensors, proved to be a very useful alternative to complement the data obtained by (or missing from) other methods of measuring air quality pollutants. Real-time data, when acquired continuously, can help government agencies, health ministries, and policymakers to take proactive immediate, mid-, and long-term actions. These might include preventive closure of schools or parks when the air pollution levels are extremely high, introduction of restrictions on the number of cars circulating, or temporary closure of industries that are polluting above the legal levels authorised by the authorities. And in the mid-to-long term, it will inform the introduction of further local air quality regulations in order to prevent risks to the population in the region. 

Case Study: Air Pollution Monitoring in Mexico 

Country: Mexico Year: 2021 Altitude: 10m, 30m, 50m, and 100m Number of drones: 1 Number of flights: 4 Flight duration: 16-25 min Number of samples acquired: 168 to 250, every 6 seconds 

> 195

# 5.14 

# Waste management and landfill monitoring Development use case Drone technology can support the LAC region in overcoming challenges associated with poor waste management and landfill monitoring, which can lead to benefits for the environment and public health 

> Source: PwC analysis; UNEP, 2018

Challenge: Poor waste management systems decrease people’s well-being and lead to environmental pollution 

According to a United Nations Environment programme (UNEP) report, waste management today remains one of the main sustainability challenges in the LAC region, where up to 40 million people lack access to waste collection . The increasing rate of urbanisation is further exacerbating the situation. A third of all waste generated in cities across the LAC region ends up in highly hazardous open dumps or in the open environment, threatening the lives and health of many people and species. In 2014, 541,000 tons of waste per day were produced in LAC 

municipalities, and the number is constantly increasing. It is predicted that by 2050, the waste generated by the region will jump to 761,000 tons daily . These dumps are often deliberately burned to reduce their volume, and are also subject to spontaneous combustion, polluting water, soil and air. Special waste streams—like hazardous waste, hospital waste, construction and demolition waste, food waste and electrical equipment waste—are sometimes not even inventoried and characterised. They frequently end up in dumpsites, with risky and improper handling processes. For these reasons, it is necessary to introduce efficient waste management solutions that eliminate open dumpsites and accelerate the transition towards a circular economy. The systematic collection, processing and analysis of data is therefore essential to support governments and local authorities in decision-making processes and in the evaluation and improvement of waste management systems. 

Description of Challenges for the Waste Management and Landfill Monitoring Sector across Latin America and the Caribbean 

One of the targets of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) is to ensure sustainable waste services. Every year, the world generates over 2 billion tons of municipal solid waste and this is projected to increase by 70% by 2050, reaching 3.4 billion tons. Proper waste collection and management are essential public services for every community, necessary for the protection of public health and the environment. Poor waste management services leave urban inhabitants suffering from poor living conditions—especially in the most vulnerable and poorest neighbourhoods and slums. For example, a lack of proper waste management can lead to the blockage of storm water and sewage systems, waterlogging, and consequential flooding. It is not just urban waste management services that are crucial for thriving societies; proper management of landfill and dumpsites are equally important. However, managing waste by traditional methods can be challenging and often dangerous. 

> 197

# There is limited evidence of the use of drones in waste management and landfill monitoring; however, more and more countries in the LAC region are transitioning to digital methods which could benefit from the use of drone technology 

> Source: PwC analysis; Earth5r.org; IOP Publishing; Benito Roggio Ambiental & SCS Engineers; Universidade Federal Fluminense

Overview of drone use in the waste management and landfill monitoring sector 

Drones have redefined traditional landfill surveying and inspections methods, introducing a more efficient and cost-effective solution to waste management and landfill monitoring. There are several ways to use drones’ potential in this area: Drones are used for detailed topographic mapping to determine the area of landfill, the volume of disposed waste, and how close the facility is to capacity. Moreover, drone aerial imagery has proved useful in assessing the types of waste and the location of liquid waste disposal, and identifying potential pathways for the migration of pollutants into water . To assess the latter, it is necessary to identify ‘negative landforms’ on drone imagery, such as ravines, geological faults and surface cracks, abandoned drainage systems etc. Many applications require the use of advanced sensors, like air laser scanners, thermal imaging cameras, multispectral cameras, or gas detectors. These applications include 

calculation of the amount of stored waste, identification of the source of landfill gas emissions , locating shallow and deep hotspots, and monitoring of separate technological processes at landfill, like storage, compaction and intermediate isolation of waste. The outputs that can be generated with the use of drone technology which are beneficial to waste management and landfill monitoring include: geo-referenced 2D orthomosaics, 3D point clouds, Digital Terrain Models, 3D CAD drawings, and more. Drones help governments to combat illegal industrial waste by offering fast and convenient ways of checking companies’ disposal techniques, so authorities are able to reduce illegal dumping efficiently. 

Maturity 

The first aerial monitoring of landfill sites was conducted in the US in the 1970s when the Waste Disposal Site programme was launched. Today, drones are increasingly being used in waste management and landfill monitoring in many parts of the world, including Europe and Asia. Evidence of the use of drones for waste management purposes is scarce in the LAC region. However, a few countries have already introduced the technology. For example, Buenos Aires municipality mapped one of their biggest dumpsites with the use of drones. Chile has used drones to determine the location and characteristics of illegal urban dumpsites, while Brazil has deployed drones to assess the volume of biogas emissions from solid waste. 

> 198

Benefits from the Use of Drones in Waste Management and Landfill Monitoring 

# Drones have a number of benefits in waste management and landfill monitoring, increasing worker safety, bringing more accurate data, and helping to enforce litter laws 

> Source: PwC analysis

• Drones offer improved surveillance possibilities: they can be deployed to identify activity related to illegal dumping in public areas, helping authorities to enforce litter laws • Drones help governments in combating illegal industrial waste by offering fast and convenient ways of checking companies’ disposal techniques, enabling authorities to reduce illegal dumping efficiently • Drones equipped with thermal sensors can perform thermal heat detection to predict subsurface landfill fires • Using drones increases the safety of workers , who will have reduced exposure to harmful chemicals and biological substances, moving vehicles, improperly secured material bales, and respiratory and air-borne diseases • Drone data can be used for volumetric surveys of landfill sites , giving site managers and municipal authorities up-to-date information about how landfill capacity is being utilised • Drones capture images with greater frequency and higher resolution than by traditional methods, yielding improved accuracy, quicker access to data, enhanced safety, and reduced costs; this data, generated quickly and efficiently, will support landfill managers in their decision-making processes • Landfill managers can gain a comprehensive overview of landfill topography more quickly and accurately with the use of drones than by ground inspections 

> 199

• Improved landfill operations • Reduced waste and environmental impact 

• Improved safety of employees 

• Decreased land, water and groundwater pollution • Increased accuracy of in-depth examination of landfills; for example, gauging the configuration of the landfill body and the steepness (and hence the stability) of the slopes, assessing the presence of insulating coating, and identifying the possibility of fire or any issues with the mass integrity (cracks, subsidence, etc.) 

• Reduced risk of contamination from harmful waste debris and toxic materials 

• Improved cost-efficiency of landfill inspection • More effective assessment of the fulfilment of construction and planning requirements for landfill sites (associated with the presence of certain structures and engineering systems) 

• Increased accuracy when assessing the environmental impact of dumpsites 

Expected Outcomes / Impacts from Drone Usage 

# Using drones for waste management and landfill monitoring is more cost-efficient and less time-consuming than surveying by traditional methods, improving landfill operations and increasing the accuracy of deliverables 

> Source: PwC analysis; MDPI; SCS Engineers

SDGs impacted 

Indirectly: Directly: 

Measured impact: 

• In 2013, the company SCS performed drone measurements of the Norte III Landfill, an almost 250 ha landfill in Buenos Aires. When compared with traditional methods, the results from drone measurements were found to be considerably superior. Drones were able to generate 7115 measurements points per ha , whereas terrestrial land surveying equipment such as a ‘total station’ (TA) generated only 18 points per ha. A TA would take 2 days per ha to carry out the survey and 3D-modelling, whereas a drone would only take 2 hours to produce a similar end product . There was also a cost benefit: the costs of the operation are $125 per ha with TA measurement and only $20 per ha with drone measurements. 

> 200

Regulatory requirements 

• Operations will mainly be performed under VLOS conditions and within restricted access sites, therefore flights will be low risk and should be possible under standard operational regulations • The drone operator should obtain third-party insurance • For operations in BVLOS or EVLOS, special permits will need to be obtained 

# To support and facilitate the use of drone technology for waste management and landfill monitoring in the LAC region, it is important to provide the proper technology environment and regulatory frameworks… 

> Source: PwC analysis

Technology environment Drone hardware: 

• Multirotors for smaller sites • Fixed-wing or VTOL drones to cover wider areas 

Drone payload: 

• RGB or multispectral cameras for photogrammetry, live broadcasting and monitoring operations (incl. zoom cameras) • Thermal and infrared sensors to identify potential methane emissions • LiDAR for 3D modelling and more accurate spatial measurements of terrain and dumpsites 

Software: 

• Photogrammetry data-processing software • Dedicated GIS software for data visualisation, overlay, and analytics (e.g. 3D visualisation) • Thermal data visualisation software 

Enabling Factors for the Use of Drones in Waste Management and Landfill Monitoring 

> 201

# …and to enable drone adoption, governments and other organisations should provide incentives, encourage investment, raise awareness and increase technological capacity 

> Source: PwC analysis

Adoption enablers: 

• Government programmes supporting innovation within the waste management and landfill monitoring sector • Wide availability of dedicated software platforms capable of analysing and visualising drone data 

• Wide availability of drone services 

• Low entry barrier in terms of cost and skills needed to access and use drone technology 

• Advancements in the technology , enabling more advanced and safer long-distance operations, as well as advanced data processing 

• Favourable UAS regulations 

Enablers & Barriers for the Adoption of Drone Technology within Waste Management and Landfill Monitoring Adoption barriers: • Lack of technology awareness, knowledge , and educational possibilities • Absence of the adequate regulatory framework for drone operations 

• Privacy concerns from local communities 

• Lack of enabling environment to encourage investment and innovation 

• Limited incentives to change existing processes and look for more innovative methodologies and solutions • Massive amount of data, requiring advanced methods to derive accurate and meaningful information , which represents a technological barrier 

> 202

Stakeholders category Key Stakeholders and potential partners Role of stakeholders Government & public sector 

• CAA • Governments • Municipalities • Ministries of Infrastructure • Ministries of Utilities Primarily, the government can improve its services and data collection methods by utilising UAVs for waste management and landfill monitoring, especially in nearby urban areas. The government and public sector can also facilitate cooperation among institutions, to: • Expedite the issue of permits and launch of operations • Determine proper regulatory frameworks • Provide the necessary training for governmental personnel and other relevant stakeholders • Disseminate knowledge among local communities about the relevance of drones, generating better acceptance of the technology’s introduction for waste management and landfill monitoring 

Companies & private sector 

• Waste management companies • Drone operators • Associated drone services • Sensor providers Management and staff of waste management companies must be open to constant improvement and innovation, acquiring new competencies in order to stay competitive in the market. Drone manufacturers and providers of sensors and systems need to ensure the highest quality and accuracy in their products. They also have to be aware of the specific requirements and demands regarding the use of drones in waste management and landfill monitoring. 

Investors and international financial institutions 

• World Bank • Inter-American Development Bank • Development Bank of Latin America In order to implement innovative technologies, both public and private investment funds will play a key role in facilitating the necessary levels of investment for technology introduction, development, and further prototyping. Co-financing should cover the technology itself, and possibly also assist in expanding knowledge or employing qualified staff. 

# Increasing drone use in waste management and landfill monitoring requires the active involvement of government, public sector, private sector, and financial organisations… 

Source: PwC analysis; Di Sacco et al. (2021) 

Partner Environment for Waste Management and Landfill Monitoring* (1/2) 

*The list of stakeholders is not exhaustive and it may differ per country/region/town where waste management and landfills monitoring solutions are implemented. Therefore, a stakeholders mapping prior to any design and implementation is advised. 203 Stakeholders category Key Stakeholders and potential partners Role of stakeholders NGOs / civil society & international organisations 

• Drone responders • AUVSI • UNDP • CEPAL • Community leaders Civil society organisations and local communities have a role to play in increasing knowledge and awareness of drone usage in waste management and landfill monitoring. Acceptance may lead to further understanding of the benefits associated with this technology. Community leaders and other key actors can educate workers within the waste sector on the benefits and safety of gathering data (including images) in this way, as well as the technology behind it. 

End users / civil society 

• Citizens • Local communities • Civil society / community associations End users should have a proactive attitude towards the presence of drones in waste management and landfill monitoring sector. The key role of the end user is to provide information on their needs and operations, so that companies, organisations and municipalities are able to deliver appropriate hardware and software. Citizens and local communities should cooperate with authorities to tackle problems like illegal dumpsites or over-exploited landfills, as well as working to achieve more sustainable land use in the first place. 

# …and also needs strong cooperation from civil society, international organisations, NGOs; while end users need to be made aware of the benefits of drones 

Source: PwC analysis; Di Sacco et al. (2021) 

Partner Environment for Waste Management and Landfill Monitoring* (2/2) 

*The list of stakeholders is not exhaustive and it may differ per country/region/town where waste management and landfills monitoring solutions are implemented. Therefore, a stakeholders mapping prior to any design and implementation is advised. 204 The business model established for drone applications in waste management and landfill monitoring should take into account the specific operational requirements in each of the countries or towns of operation 

Business Models for Drone Use in Waste Management and Landfill Monitoring Scale Operating model Financing Inhouse 

Operated using internal capabilities of an institution 

3rd party 

Operated using external specialised service provider 

Community/cooperative 

Operated jointly by a community group 

Build-Operate-Transfer 

Operated by 3rd party and gradually transferred to inhouse 

Local or central government Development institutions Public-private partnership Alternative funding 

Financed by other players of the value chain 

NGO and/or donors Private funding 

Financed by a private sponsors or companies 

Shared economy 

Financed by the community 

On demand 

Ad-hoc or emergency use 

Cyclical 

Regular use when required e.g. based on seasons 

Permanent 

Continuously in operations 

Localised 

Single or number of target areas 

Region/province 

Large scale, regional or cross regional deployment 

Country wide 

Large scale over the entire country 

Frequency • Landfill monitoring with the use of drones could be deployed ad-hoc for emergency or surveillance scenario. However, it could potentially bring the most value if deployed as a cyclical data collection method for selected landfill sites across provinces or the entire country • Traditional, fairly simple tasks such as thermal inspections or small-scale volumetric mapping which require relatively basic drone equipment can be performed using in-house resources • More advanced and complex tasks that require large-scale and complex drone operations would typically involve the use third-party drone service providers • Relevant institution must have capabilities to use the output provided by drone contractors • Depending on the region, waste management and landfill activities may be performed by public or private organisations, which determines how digitalisation programmes should be financed 

• Alternative funding may be possible in the implementation of digital solutions; for example, where large organisations responsible for massive waste could co-fund the deployment of drone technology High relevance Moderate relevance Low relevance 205 Countries where most relevant: Belize, Bolivia, Caribbean, Costa Rica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru 

Pilot project is divided into two phases. First, a small demonstration of drone technology on a selected landfill area. This step aims to test the specific use case; e.g., to provide topographic mapping and general situational awareness. Once the initial feasibility is completed, the second phase could involve mapping the entire landfill’s topography ,associated data derivatives (DSM, contours, volume of stockpiles) and more advanced analytics like methane emissions. Following the pilot project, a Waste Management Strategy and Operating Procedures should be introduced. 

# A pilot project for waste management and landfill monitoring should first prove the feasibility of drone technology and then deliver large-scale operation over entire landfill 

Source: PwC analysis; 

Exemplary Pilot Project Scenario I. Phase I - Map selected area within the landfill 

Requirements: 

• Permit to perform operation issued by the CAA • Commercial drone service providers to perform operation • The phase could last for 1–2 weeks • The data for the initial business case could be as follows: orthomosaic, DSM, Plan view (contours), volume of stockpiles 

Purpose: 

• Prove the feasibility of drone technology for waste management and landfill monitoring • Map selected area, generate thermal maps • Process, analyse, visualize, and validate the data 

II. Phase II - Full operational scenario 

Requirements: 

• Permit to perform operation issued by CAA • Commercial drone service providers to perform operation • Several weeks for precise mapping • Local authorities involved in pilot to work on WMS • Full business case; to include data from phase I, plus: assessment of type of waste, location of liquid waste disposal, potential migration pathways of pollutants, gas emissions, and amount of stored waste 

Purpose: 

• Map entire landfill area and provide advanced analytics using the data • Establish operating procedures along with the list of analytics to be delivered in the report • Introduce Waste Management Strategy (WMS) 

Hardware: 

• Fixed-wing drones equipped with multispectral cameras for more advanced data analytics • Multirotor drones equipped with LiDAR for topographic mapping and inspections • High accuracy GNSS positioning system 

Expected budget of the pilot project*: 185–458 USD Expected budget of the pilot project*: 70–186 USD 

Hardware: 

• Multirotor equipped with visible sensors to provide the general overview of the site and LiDAR for topographic mapping • Fixed-wing drone for mapping of large areas • High accuracy GNSS positioning system onboard 

* The cost range depends on geography, number of participants, technology partners, length of the project and stakeholders involved; **The phases that a pilot project can cover will vary depending on the reality on the ground, level of engagement, technology available, and other enabling factors, along with the main purpose of the pilot. 206 In Argentina, drones were used to perform highly-detailed topographic surveying and mapping of one of the largest landfills in the LAC region: Nortes III Landfill 

> Source: PwC analysis; WWF

The use of drone technology in one of the largest landfill sites in South America—Nortes III Landfill 

BRa, an Argentinian company providing waste management and recovery services, incorporated FlySense eBee drone technology to monitor waste treatment and disposal at one of the largest landfill sites in South America. Nortes III Landfill operates 24 hours a day, seven days a week, has an operation tonnage of over 16,000 tons a day, and a footprint of almost 250 ha. The case study focuses on one module of the landfill covering an area of 200 ha. The incorporation of the drone equipment allowed for 

precise, high-quality 3D topographic surveys, giving the ability to obtain models with a resolution of up to 3cm . Drone operations provided a number of deliverables, including ortho-corrected photography mosaics, Digital Elevation Models (DEM), Plan view (contours), detail overview of polygons, and stockpile volumes. The case study proved that drones can be highly beneficial in topographic surveying of landfill. The cost of operating a drone for collecting topographic surface data points was less than a sixth of the traditional method ($20 / ha vs. $125 / ha) and the time taken by drone technology to produce 3D modelling was at least 12 times faster than the traditional (total station) method—according to the research, a total station would take 2 days/ha to carry out the survey and 3D modelling, whereas a drone took only 2 hours to produce a similar end product. 

Case Study: Mapping Landfill in Argentina 

Country: Argentina Year: 2013 Area covered: 2 km2 Total number of ground control points: 2 million Average distance between measurement points: 0.2m Estimated area of polygons: 0.04m2 

> 207

# 6

# Appendix Countries for each pilot project were chosen based on different criteria 

> Source: PwC analysis

Relevancy threshold Low Medium High 

Healthcare and medical goods delivery Healthcare delivery needs in rural areas <5 5-13 >13 

Agriculture applications Fertilizers use intensity (kg/ha) <100 100-200 >200 

Humanitarian aid WorldRisk Index 2021 as a result of exposure and vulnerability to natural disasters <6 6-15 >15 

Disaster management Number of people affected by floods, as floods are the most common disaster in the LAC region (UN OCHA) [mln] <0.9 0.9-3 >3 

Urban planning and monitoring The percentage of urban population living in slums <10 10-30 >30 

Road traffic and safety monitoring Mortality caused by road traffic injury (per 100 000 population) for 2019 <10 10-30 >30 

Road infrastructure maintenance The Road quality indicator for 2019 published by the World Economic Forum, when 1 is undeveloped road infrastructure and 7 is extensive and efficient by international standards >5 3.5-5 <3,5 

Remote internet access Proportion of population covered by at least a 4G mobile network (%) >95 70-95 <70 

Endangered species monitoring Red List Index <0.7 0.7-0.85 >0.85 

Environmental Pollution Monitoring Annual mean concentration of fine particulate matter (PM2.5) in μg/m3 for 2016 <15 15-25 >25 

Restoration and reforestation Annual forest area net change rate (%) 2020 >0 -0.3-0 <-0.3 

Waste management and landfill monitoring Share of the population covered by waste collection and transport services >95 80-95 <80 

Wildfires Annual values change of burned areas against average for 2019 <0 0-35 >35 

Mosquitoes-borne disease spread reduction Malaria incidence rate (per 1,000 population at risk) <0.05 0.05-10 >10 

• The table below present the methodology used to measure level of use cases’ relevancy for each country in LCR. • The relevancy threshold was divided into three categories: low, medium and high. • The thresholds were identified based on the values’ distribution for each use case across the countries. • The distribution and representation of relevancy are available on page 23 

Methodology used to measure level of use cases’ relevancy for LCR 

> 209

# … the relevance and impact of different drone use cases for social, humanitarian and environmental purposed varies across countries in the region 

Source: PwC analysis; CEPAL; WEE 

Data used for the relevance measurements 

> Antigua & Barbuda Aruba Belize Chile Ecuador Honduras Argentina Barbados Cayman Islands Dominican Republic Haiti Paraguay Bahamas Brazil Dominica Guyana Panama St. Martin Bolivia Costa Rica Guatemala Nicaragua St. Lucia Trinidad and Tobago Colombia Grenada Mexico St. Kitts & Nevis Suriname El Salvador Jamaica Peru St. Vincent and the Grenadines Uruguay Venezuela

Healthcare and medical goods delivery 23 4 n/a 5 24 16 9 7 n/a 7 10 8 8 6 18 11 17 14 23 13 11 14 11 15 17 15 12 22 28 n/a 16 12 17 2 2Agriculture applications 8,2 61,6 n/a 232 47,6 339 6,2 260 n/a 277 110,7 269 198 139,9 155 48,6 n/a 133 55,4 n/a 100 43,4 97,6 48,7 39,4 111,5 89,3 4,4 64 n/a n/a 116,9 174 171 98,4 Humanitarian aid 27 4 n/a 4 1 8 5 5 n/a 11 7 17 27 11 9 15 1 20 22 15 11 12 6 14 8 4 7 n/a 5 n/a 1 7 9 13 n/a Disaster management 0 1,4 n/a 0 n/a 0 3 7,4 n/a 0 10,1 n/a 0 3 n/a n/a n/a 1 n/a 0 0,9 0 3,5 n/a n/a 1,2 4,5 0 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Urban planning and utilities monitoring n/a 14,7 n/a n/a n/a 5 48,5 16,3 n/a 9 28 4 n/a 15 20 22,5 6 31 31 66 39 57 16 42 22 17 33 n/a 11 n/a n/a 6 5,5 n/a 44 Road traffic monitoring 0 14 n/a 8 8 23 21 16 n/a 15 15 15 11 65 20 21 8 23 22 19 16 15 13 17 14 22 14 n/a 30 n/a 7 15 9 15 39 Road infrastructure maintenance n/a 3,6 n/a n/a 3.2 n/a 3.5 3 n/a 5.2 3.4 3 n/a 4.7 4.9 4.2 n/a 2.4 n/a 2.1 4.1 3.9 4.5 4.2 4.5 2.6 3.2 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 3.7 3.7 2.6 Remote internet access 100 91,1 n/a 95 99,6 70 95 88,7 n/a 95 98 93,8 n/a 95,3 83 87,6 n/a 100 97,1 30 67,8 95 90,7 42 49 99,7 100 n/a n/a n/a 90 85 75 82,5 65 Endangered species monitoring 0,88 0,84 0,95 0,69 0,89 0,77 0,88 0,89 0,81 0,75 0,73 0,81 0,66 0,73 0,67 0,8 0,68 0,71 0,87 0,71 0,74 0,66 0,67 0,81 0,72 0,95 0,72 0,73 0,8 0,99 0,75 0,98 0,8 0,85 0,82 Environmental Pollution Monitoring 21 13 n/a 17 25 21 26 12 n/a 24 18 19 20 16 20 29 23 30 23 18 25 15 23 22 15 12 30 10 23 n/a 23 26 23 10 20 Restoration and reforestation -0,78 -0,56 0 0 0 -0,85 -0,43 -0,3 0 0,85 -0,28 0,56 0 0,34 -0,41 -0,74 0 -0,54 -0,06 -0,85 -0,33 0,67 -0,19 -2,04 -0,27 -1,93 -0,23 0 0 0 0 -0,07 -0,18 1,61 -0,27 Waste management and landfill monitoring n/a 99,8 n/a n/a n/a 85,2 80 95,9 n/a 97,8 99 90,4 n/a 97 84,1 78,8 n/a 77,7 0 n/a 64,4 62 93,2 92,3 84,9 57 84 n/a 100 n/a n/a n/a 100 98,2 100 Wildfires n/a -0,28 n/a n/a n/a 0,32 0,67 0,11 n/a -0,14 -0,07 0,15 n/a n/a 0,64 0,45 n/a -0,07 0,17 n/a 0,2 n/a 0,29 0,14 0,93 0,29 0,29 n/a n/a n/a n/a 0,78 n/a 0,08 0,38 Mosquitoes Borne Disease Spread Reduction n/a 0 n/a n/a n/a 0 2,42 4,15 n/a n/a 10,7 0,05 n/a 1 3,56 0 n/a 0,18 33,7 3,2 0,05 n/a 0,22 5,85 0,38 0 3,58 n/a n/a n/a n/a 1,1 n/a n/a 32,7 210 List of Development financial institutions in Latin America and Caribbean (LAC) (1/2) 

Source: PwC analysis 

Institution name Description World Bank (WB) 

World Bank consists of five institutions: the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), the International Development Association (IDA), the International Finance Corporation (IFC), the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA), the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID). They share a commitment to reducing poverty, increasing shared prosperity, and promoting sustainable development. During last 5 years, World Bank approved 345 projects in Latin America. Prioritised sectors are Social Protection (56), Public Administration - Agriculture, Fishing & Forestry (36), Public Administration - Health (35). 

Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) 

Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) works to improve lives in Latin America and the Caribbean. Through financial and technical support for countries working to reduce poverty and inequality, help improve health and education, and advance infrastructure. The IDB prioritises social inclusion and equality; productivity and innovation; and regional economic integration in its development work across Latin America and the Caribbean. During last 5 years, IDB approved 503 projects in Latin America. Prioritised sectors are Reform/Modernisation of the State (113); Social Investment (70); Financial Markets (48). 

Development Bank of Latin America (CAF) 

Development Bank of Latin America (CAF) promotes a sustainable development model through credit, non-refundable resources, and support in the technical and financial structuring of projects in the public and private sectors in Latin America. CAF promotes access to basic services to promote the quality of life of vulnerable populations. CAF supports the modernisation of the State in favour of transparency, accountability, and efficiency of public administration. During last 5 years, CAF approved 18 projects in Latin America. 

Caribbean Investment Facility (CIF) 

Caribbean Investment Facility (CIF) is one of the European Union’s regional blending facilities, aimed at contributing to economic development and growth, regional integration, poverty reduction and environmental protection through the mobilisation of resources for strategic economic infrastructure projects and for support to the private sector. CIF is financing projects in key sectors that are essential for the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), such as renewable energy, water and wastewater systems, sustainable transport, environment, information and communication technology, health, education and other social services. During last 5 years, CIF approved 18 projects in Latin America. Their priority sectors are Sustainable energy (7), Water supply & sanitation (3), Health (2), Reconstruction relief & rehabilitation (2). 

The Pan American Development Foundation (PADF) 

The Pan American Development Foundation (PADF) works across Latin America and the Caribbean to make this region stronger — more healthy, peaceful, just, inclusive, resilient, and sustainable for current and future generations. PADF have served the most vulnerable communities, investing resources throughout the hemisphere. PADF partner with and enable civil society, governments, and the private sector for the greater good of the region. Their priorities are Addressing the Needs of Vulnerable Populations, Promoting Sustainable Livelihoods, Advancing Rights and Justice. 

211 List of Development financial institutions in Latin America and Caribbean (LAC) (2/2) 

Source: PwC analysis 

Institution name Description The Latin America Investment Facility (LAIF) 

The purpose of LAIF is to help Latin American countries finance projects in key sectors that are essential for the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals, such as energy, environment, water, transport, social services, and support to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). LAIF funds projects mainly in the following sectors: Water supply & sanitation; Transport; Sustainable energy; Urban development; Rural development; Waste management; Reconstruction relief & rehabilitation; Education; Sustainable agriculture; Support to SMEs; General environmental protection. LAIF took a part in 13 projects in Latin America. 

The Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI) 

CABEI is a regional financial institution that focuses on development in Central America. CABEI promotes economic integration and a balanced economy and social development in Central America. CABEI aims to create employment and improve the well-being and quality of life of the citizens of Central America. LAIF and CABEI have worked together across Latin America and the Caribbean since 2010, developing projects in the following sectors: energy; transport; agriculture, forestry, fishing; and industry. 

The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) 

OECD is an international organisation that works to build better policies for better lives. For over 20 years, the OECD has been working closely with countries in Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) to facilitate policy dialogue and the dissemination of good practices in areas such as investment, education, inclusiveness, competition, good governance, anti-corruption, and fiscal policy. OECD members strengthened co-operation with the region through the creation of an OECD LAC Regional programme (LACRP). The LACRP focuses on three key areas of the region's reform agenda: productivity, social inclusion and governance. 

The Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC or CEPAL) 

ECLAC - is one of the five regional commissions of the United Nations. It was founded with the purpose of contributing to the economic development of Latin America, coordinating actions directed towards this end, and reinforcing economic ties among countries and with other nations of the world. The promotion of the region's social development was later included among its primary objectives. Their priority sectors are Economic Development, Social Development, Natural Resources, Sustainable Development and Human Settlements. 

The Latin American Integration Association (ALADI) 

ALADI is an intergovernmental organisation that promotes the expansion of the integration of the region, in order to ensure its economic and social development, and has as its objective end the establishment of a common market. The development of the integration process developed within the framework of the ALADI aims at promoting the harmonious and balanced socio-economic development of the region, and its long-term objective is the gradual and progressive establishment of a Latin-American single market. 

212 Endnotes 

1. [Zipline drone delivering medical cargo]. 2019. https://www.forbes.com/sites/sebastienroblin/2019/10/22/will-blood-bearing-delivery-drones--transf orm-disaster-relief-and-battlefield-medicine/?sh=24531a62523e. 2. [Zipline drone delivering medical cargo]. 2019. https://www.forbes.com/sites/sebastienroblin/2019/10/22/will-blood-bearing-delivery-drones--transf orm-disaster-relief-and-battlefield-medicine/?sh=24531a62523e. 3. [Delivery of health and wellness products]. 2020. https://www.scaleflyt.com/news/the-future-of-drone-delivery-in-discussion-with-zipline. 4. [Oranjestad, the Caribbean Island of Sint Eustatius]. 2022. https://earth.google.com/. 

> 213

214 

© 2024 The World Bank 1818 H Street NW, Washington DC 20433 Telephone: 202-473-1000; Internet: www.worldbank.org Some rights reserved This work is a product of The World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the 

governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy, completeness, or currency of the data included in this work and does not assume responsibility for any errors, omissions, or discrepancies in the 

information, or liability with respect to the use of or failure to use the information, methods, processes, or conclusions set forth. The boundaries, colors, denominations, links/footnotes and other information shown in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank 

concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries. The citation of works authored by others does not mean the World Bank endorses the views expressed by those authors or the content of their works. Nothing herein shall constitute or be construed or considered to be a limitation upon or waiver of the privileges and immunities of The World Bank, all of which are specifically reserved. 

Rights and Permissions 

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given. 

Attribution —Please cite the work as follows: “World Bank. 2024. Drones for Development, Attachment 3: 

Drones for Good , Use cases for drone technology in development activities in Latin America © World Bank.”
