Title: Thieves steal eight objects from Louvre in daring daytime heist

URL Source: https://www.france24.com/en/france/20251019-louvre-robbery-shuts-down-world-renowned-museum-for-a-day-french-culture-minister-says

Published Time: 2025-10-19T09:21:55+00:00

Markdown Content:
Robbers wielding power tools broke into the Louvre on Sunday and made off with priceless jewels from the world-renowned museum, taking just seven minutes for the broad-daylight heist, sources and officials said.

"A robbery took place this morning at the opening of the Louvre Museum,"French Culture Minister Rachida Dati on Sunday wrote on X. The Louvre said it was closing for the day "for exceptional reasons".

The thieves made off with eight priceless objects, with a ninth that they tried to steal recovered at the scene, Paris Prosecutor Laure Beccuau said.

They did not target or steal the world-famous Regent diamond, which is housed in the same gallery the thieves hit, Beccuau said on BFM TV. Sotheby's estimates the Regent is worth over $60 million.

French authorities are hunting the four man "strike team", Paris's chief prosecutor Laure Beccuau, told BFMTV television.

To display this content from YouTube, you must enable advertisement tracking and audience measurement.

One of your browser extensions seems to be blocking the video player from loading. To watch this content, you may need to disable it on this site.

How did burglars pull off 'the theft of the decade' in 7 minutes at the Louvre?REUTERS - Gonzalo Fuentes

15:52

There were no injuries reported. Dati said she was at the museum and investigations were underway.

"We saw some footage: they don't target people, they enter calmly in four minutes, smash display cases, take their loot, and leave. No violence, very professional," she said on TF1.

French President Emmanuel Macron promised that the thieves who raided the Louvre in Paris Sunday morning would be caught and the items they stole recovered.

"Everything is being done, everywhere, to achieve this, under the leadership of the Paris prosecutor's office," he said in a statement on social media.

Macron promises the Louvre thieves will be caught©

French Interior Minister Laurent Nuñez said the thieves used a crane that was positioned on a truck to enter the building. They stole jewels of “priceless value”.

It was “manifestly a team that had done scouting”, he said, adding that the panes were cut “with a disc cutter”.

The interior ministry specified the location as the Apollo Gallery.

Daring heist at the Louvre Museum in Paris

To display this content from YouTube, you must enable advertisement tracking and audience measurement.

One of your browser extensions seems to be blocking the video player from loading. To watch this content, you may need to disable it on this site.

© France 24

04:11

What jewels did the Louvre thieves steal?
-----------------------------------------

The Culture Ministry said eight pieces were stolen.

These included the tiara, necklace and an earring, part of a pair, from the jewellery set of Queen Marie-Amélie and Queen Hortense.

An emerald necklace and a pair of emerald earrings from the Marie-Louise set were also stolen, as was the brooch known as the reliquary brooch, the tiara of Empress Eugénie as well as the large bodice knot (brooch).

Visitors admire the diamond crown of King Louis XV, center, and Empress Marie-Louise's necklace, right, Tuesday November 23, 2004 in the Apollo gallery of the Louvre museum.© Remy de la Mauviniere, AP

One piece of jewellery had been recovered outside the museum, apparently dropped as they made their escape.

French authorities confirmed they found the 19th-century crown that once belonged to Empress Eugénie, the wife of Napoleon III. The crown features golden eagles and is covered in 1,354 diamonds and 56 emeralds, according to the museum's website.

What is the Apollo Gallery?
---------------------------

In 1661, after a fire broke out at the Louvre, Louis XIV entrusted architect Louis Le Vau to create a gallery reflecting his new emblem, the sun. Le Vau modelled the space on Apollo, the Greek god of the sun.

The resulting hall, an ornate space of gold leaf and paintings, would be the model for the Palace of Versailles' world-famous Hall of Mirrors, finished 20 years later after Louis XIV left Paris for Versailles.

Visitors evacuated
------------------

Police sealed off the museum and evacuated visitors. New arrivals were turned away and nearby streets were closed, according to the interior ministry.

A police source said the robbers had drawn up on a scooter armed with angle grinders and used the hoist— an extendible ladder used to move furniture— to reach the room they were targeting.

The brazen robbery happened just 800 metres from Paris police headquarters.

Louvre museum authorities could not immediately be reached for comment, according to French media reports.

But the Louvre confirmed that the museum was closed Sunday due to “exceptional reasons”, in a post on X.

To display this content from X (Twitter), you must enable advertisement tracking and audience measurement.

According to the French daily newspaper, Le Parisien, the criminals entered the sprawling building from the facade facing the Seine River, where construction work is underway.

After breaking the windows, they reportedly stole "nine pieces from the jewellery collection of Napoleon and the Empress", said the report.

Echoes other recent break-ins
-----------------------------

The theft, which occurred less than half an hour after doors opened, echoes other recent museum raids.

Daylight robberies during public hours are rare. Pulling one off inside the Louvre — with visitors present — ranks among Europe’s most audacious since Dresden’s Green Vault museum in 2019, where thieves smashed vitrines and carried off diamond-studded royal jewels worth hundreds of millions of euros.

Last month, criminals used an angle grinder to break into Paris's Natural History Museum, making off with gold samples worth €600,000.

In November last year, four thieves stole snuffboxes and other precious artefacts from the Cognacq-Jay museum in Paris, breaking into a display case with axes and baseball bats.

French President Emmanuel Macron in January pledged the Louvre would be "redesigned, restored and enlarged" after its director voiced alarm about dire conditions inside.

He said at the time he hoped that the works could help increase the annual number of visitors to 12 million.

A police van patrols in the courtyard of the closed Louvre museum after a robbery Sunday, October 19, 2025 in Paris.© Thibault Camus, AP

In 2017, burglars at Berlin’s Bode Museum stole a 100-kilogram solid-gold coin. In 2010, a lone intruder slipped into Paris’s Museum of Modern Art and escaped with five paintings, including a Picasso.

The robbery is likely to raise awkward questions about security at the museum, where officials had already sounded the alarm about the lack of investment at a world-famous site that welcomed 8.7 million visitors in 2024.

The Louvre has a long history of thefts and attempted robberies. The most famous was in 1911, when the Mona Lisa vanished from its frame, stolen by Vincenzo Peruggia, a former worker who hid inside the museum and walked out with the painting under his coat. It was recovered two years later in Florence– an episode that helped make Leonardo da Vinci’s portrait the world’s best-known artwork.

Home to more than 33,000 works spanning antiquities, sculpture and painting– from Mesopotamia, Egypt and the classical world to European masters– the Louvre’s star attractions include the Mona Lisa, the Venus de Milo and the Winged Victory of Samothrace. The Galerie d’Apollon displays a selection of the French Crown Jewels.

The museum can draw up to 30,000 visitors a day.

_(FRANCE 24 with AFP and AP)_
