Title: 

URL Source: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/GOVPUB-Y4_IN8_18-PURL-gpo129303/pdf/GOVPUB-Y4_IN8_18-PURL-gpo129303.pdf

Published Time: Fri, 27 Jun 2025 15:47:39 GMT

Markdown Content:
THE TRUMP -UKRAINE 

# IMPEACHMENT INQUIRY REPORT 

# Report of the  House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence ,

# Pursuant to H. Res. 660 in Consultation with the 

# House  Committee on Oversight and Ref orm  and the 

# House  Committee on  Foreign Affair s

# December 2019 2

# House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence 

Rep. Adam B. Schiff (CA ), Chair man 

Rep. Jim Himes (CT) 

Rep. Terri Sewell (AL) 

Rep. Andr é Carson (IN) 

Rep . Jackie Speier (CA) 

Rep . Mike Quigley (IL) 

Rep . Eric Swalwell (CA) 

Rep . Joaquin Castro (TX) 

Rep . Denny Heck (WA) 

Rep . Peter Welch (VT) 

Rep . Sean Patrick Maloney (NY) 

Rep . Devin Nunes (CA) , Ranking Member 

Rep . Mike Con away (TX) 

Rep . Michael Turner (OH) 

Rep . Brad Wenstrup (OH) 

Rep . Chris Stewart (UT) 

Rep . Elise Stefanik (NY) 

Rep . Will Hurd (TX) 

Rep . John Ratcliffe (TX) 

Rep. Jim Jordan (OH) 

Rep . Val Demings (FL) 

Rep . Raja Krishnamoorthi (IL) 

Majority Staff 

Timothy S. Bergreen , Staff Director 

Daniel S. Goldman, Director of Investigations 

Maher Bitar, General Counsel 

Rheanne Wirkkala, Deputy Director of Investigations 

Patrick M. Bo land, Communications Directo r

Impeachment Inquiry Investigative Staff 

William M. Evans 

Patrick Fallon 

Sean A. Misko 

Nic olas A. Mitchell 

Daniel S. Noble 

Diana Y. Pilipenko 

Ariana N. Rowberry 

Carly A. Blake, Deputy Staff Director 

William Wu, Budget and Policy Director 

Wells C. Bennett, Deputy General Counsel 

Oversight Staff 

Linda D. Cohen 

Thomas Eager 

Abigail C. Grace 

Kelsey M. Lax 

Amanda A. Rogers Thorpe 

Lucian D. Sikorskyj 

Conrad Stosz 

Kathy L. Suber 

Aaron A. Thurman 

Raffaela L. Wakeman 

Non -Partisan Security and Information Technology Staff 

Kristin Jepson Kim berlee Kerr Claudio Grajeda 3

# House  Committee on Oversight and Reform 

Rep. Carolyn B. Maloney ( NY) , Chair woman 

Rep. Elijah E. Cummings (MD), Chair man 

Rep . Eleanor Holmes Norton (DC) 

Rep . Wm. Lacy Clay (MO) 

Rep . Stephen Lynch (MA) 

Rep . Jim Cooper (TN) 

Rep . Gerald E. Connolly (VA) 

Rep . Raja Krishnamoorthi (IL) 

Rep . Jamie Raskin (MD) 

Rep . Harley Rouda (CA) 

Rep . Debbie Wasserman Schultz (FL) 

Rep . John Sarbanes (MD) 

Rep . Peter Welch (VT) 

Rep . Jack ie Speier (CA) 

Rep . Robin Kelly (IL) 

Rep . Mark De Saulnier (CA) 

Rep . Brenda Lawrence (IL) 

Rep . Stacey Plaskett (VI) 

Rep. Ro Khanna (CA) 

Rep . Jimmy Gomez (CA) 

Rep . Alexandria Ocasio -Cortez (NY) 

Rep. Ayanna Pressley (MA) 

Rep . Rashida Tlaib (MI) 

Rep . Jim Jordan (OH), Ranking Member 

Rep . Paul Gosar (AZ) 

Rep . Thomas Massie (KY) 

Rep . Virginia Foxx (NC) 

Rep . Mark Meadows (NC) 

Rep . Jody Hice (GA) 

Rep . Glenn Grothman (WI) 

Rep . James Comer (KY) 

Rep . Michael Cloud (TX) 

Rep. Bob Gibbs (OH) 

Rep . Clay Higgins (LA) 

Rep . Ralph Norman (SC) 

Rep . Chip Roy (TX) 

Rep . Carol Miller (WV) 

Rep . Mark Green (TN) 

Rep . Kelly Armstrong (ND) 

Rep . Greg Steube (FL) 

Rep . Fred Keller (PA) 

Majority Staff 

Dave Rapallo, Staff Director 

Susanne Sachsman Grooms, Deputy Staff Director & Chief Counsel 

Peter Kenny, Chief Investigative Counsel 

Krista A. Boyd, General Counsel 

Janet H. Kim, Chief Counsel for Investigations 

Russell Anello, Chief Oversight Counsel 

Aryele Bradford, Communications D irector 

Investigative Staff 

S. Tori Anderson 

Aaron D. Blacksberg 

Chioma Chukwu 

Cassie Fields 

Greta Gao 

Mi chael Gordon 

Jessica L. Heller 

Gina Kim 

Jason Powell 

Dan Rebnord 

Ricardo Brandon Rios 

Erinn L. Sauer, Detailee 

Amish A. Shah 

Laura Waters 4

Operations and Press Team 

Zac hary Barger , Intern 

Jamitress Bowden 

Kristen Charley , Intern 

Kenyatta Collins 

James Darlson , Intern 

Emma Dulaney 

Evan Elizabeth Freeman , Intern 

Christophe Godshall, Intern 

Brandon Jacobs 

Elisa LaNier 

Kellie Larkin 

Olivia Letts , Intern 

Anna Rose Marx , Intern 

Courtney Miller 

Noah Steimel , Intern 

Travis Stoller , Intern 

Amy Stratton 

Laura Trevisani, Intern 

Josh ua Zucker 5

# House  Committee on  Foreign Affairs 

Rep. Eliot L. Engel (NY) , Chair man 

Rep . Brad Sherman (CA) 

Rep . Gregory Meeks (NY) 

Rep . Albio Sires (NJ) 

Rep . Gerald Connolly (VA) 

Rep . Theodore Deutch (FL) 

Rep . Karen Bass (CA) 

Rep . William Keating (MA) 

Rep . David Cicilline (RI) 

Rep . Ami Bera (CA) 

Rep . Joaquin Castro (TX) 

Rep . Dina Titus (NV) 

Rep . Adriano Espaillat (NY) 

Rep . Ted Lieu (CA) 

Rep . Susan Wild (PA) 

Rep . Dean Phillips (MN) 

Rep . Ilhan Omar (MN) 

Rep . Colin Allred (TX) 

Rep . Andy Levin (MI) 

Rep . Abigail Spanberger (VA) 

Rep . Chrissy Houlahan (PA) 

Rep . Tom Malinowski (NJ) 

Rep . David Trone (MD) 

Rep . Jim Costa (CA) 

Rep . Michael McCaul (TX) Ranking Member 

Rep. Christopher Smith (NJ) 

Rep. Steve Chabot (OH) 

Rep. Joe Wilson (SC) 

Rep. Scott Perry (PA) 

Rep. Ted Yoho (FL) 

Rep. Adam Kinzinger (IL) 

Rep. Lee Zeldin (NY) 

Rep. James Sensenbrenner (WI) 

Rep. Ann Wagner (MO) 

Rep. Brian Mast (FL) 

Rep. Francis Rooney (FL) 

Rep. Brian Fitzpatrick (PA) 

Rep. John Curtis (UT) 

Rep. Ken Buck (CO) 

Rep . Ron Wright (TX) 

Rep. Guy Reschenthaler (PA) 

Rep. Tim Burchett (TN) 

Rep. Greg Pence (IN) 

Rep. Steve Watkins (KS) 

Rep. Michael Guest (MS) 

Rep . Juan Vargas (CA) 

Rep . Vi cen te Gonzalez (CA) 

Majority Staff 

Jason Steinbaum, Staff Director 

Doug Campbell, Deputy Staff Director 

Laura Carey, Senior Professional Staff Member, State Department Oversight 

Tim Mulvey, Communications Director 

Jacqueline Ramos, Senior Professional Staff Member, Europe and Russia 

Operations a nd Press Staff 

Evan Bursey 

Jacqueline Colvett 

Rachel Levitan 6

## TABLE OF CONTENTS 

PREFACE  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 7

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 12 

KEY FINDINGS OF FACT ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 34 

SECTION I. THE PRESIDENT’S MISC ONDUCT ................................ ............................... 37 

1. The President Forced Out the U.S. Ambassador to Ukraine ................................ ........... 38 

2. The President Put Giuliani and the Three Amigos in Charge of Ukraine Issues ............ 51 

3. The President Froze Military Assistance to Ukraine ................................ ....................... 67 

4. The President’s Meeting with the Ukrainian President Was Conditioned on An 

Announcement of Investigations ................................ ................................ ..................... 83 

5. The President Asked the Ukrainian President to Interfere in the 2020 U.S. Election by 

Investigating the Bidens and 2016 Election Interference ................................ ................ 98 

6. The President Wanted Ukraine to Announce the Investigations Publicly .................... 114 

7. The President’s Conditioning of Military Assistance and a White House Meeting on 

Announcement of Investigations Raised Alarm ................................ ............................ 126 

8. The President’s Scheme Was Exposed ................................ ................................ .......... 140 

SECTION II. THE PRE SIDENT’S OBSTRUCTION OF THE HOUSE OF 

REPRESENTATIVES’ IMP EACHMENT INQUIRY ................................ .......................... 202 

1. Constitutional Authority for Congressional Oversight and Impeachment .................... 203 

2. The President’s Categorical Refusal to Comply ................................ ........................... 208 

3. The President’s Refusal to Produce Any and All Subpoenaed Documents .................. 217 

4. The President’s Refusal to Allow Top Aides to Testify ................................ ................ 231 

5. The President’s Unsuccessful At tempts to Block Key Witnesses ................................ .245 

6. The President’s Intimidation of Witnesses ................................ ................................ .... 257 

APPENDIX A: KEY PEO PLE AND ENTITIES ................................ ................................ .. 293 

APPENDIX B: ABBREVI ATIONS AND COMMON TE RMS ................................ ........... 299 7

PREFACE 

This report reflects the evidence gathered thus far by the House Permanent Select 

Committee on Intelligence, in coordination with the Committee on Oversight and Reform and 

the Committee on Foreign Affairs, as part of the House of Representatives’ impeachme nt inquiry 

into Donald J. Trump, the 45th President of the United States. 

The report is the culmination of an investigation that began in September 2019 and 

intensified over the past three months as new revelations and evidence of the President’s 

miscond uct towards Ukraine emerged. The Committees pursued the truth vigorously, but fairly, 

ensuring the full participation of both parties throughout the probe. 

Sustained by the tireless work of more than three dozen dedicated staff across the three 

Committ ees, we issued dozens of subpoenas for documents and testimony and took more than 

100 hours of deposition testimony from 17 witnesses. To provide the American people the 

opportunity to learn and evaluate the facts themselves, the Intelligence Committee he ld seven 

public hearings with 12 witnesses —including three requested by the Republican Minority —that 

totaled more than 30 hours. 

At the outset, I want to recognize my late friend and colleague Elijah E. Cummings, 

whose grace and commitment to justice served as our North Star throughout this investigation. I 

would also like to thank my colleagues Eliot L. Engel and Carolyn B. Malone y, chairs 

respectively of the Foreign Affairs and Oversight and Reform Committees, as well as the 

Members of those Committees, many of whom provided invaluable contributions. Members of 

the Intelligence Committee, as well, worked selflessly and collaborat ively throughout this 

investigation. Finally, I am grateful to Speaker Nancy Pelosi for the trust she placed in our 

Committees to conduct this work and for her wise counsel throughout. 

I also want to thank the dedicated professional staff of the Intellig ence Committee , who 

worked ceaselessly and with remarkable poise and ability. My deepest gratitude goes to Daniel 

Goldman, Rheanne Wirkkala, Maher Bitar, Timothy Bergreen, Patrick Boland, Daniel Noble, 

Nicolas Mitchell, Sean Misko, Patrick Fallon, Diana P ilipenko, William Evans, Ariana 

Rowberry, Wells Bennett, and William Wu. Additional Intelligence Committee staff members 

also assured that the important oversight work of the Committee continued , even as we were 

required to take on the additional responsi bility of conducting a key part of the House 

impeachment inquiry. Finally, I would like to thank the devoted and outstanding staff of the 

Committee on Oversight and Reform, including but not limited to Dave Rapallo, Susanne 

Sachsman Grooms, Peter Kenny, K rista Boyd, and Janet Kim, as well as Laura Carey from the 

Committee on Foreign Affairs. 

* * * 

In his farewell address, President George Washington warned of a moment when 

“cunning, ambitious , and unprincipled men will be enabled to subvert the power of the people 

and to usurp for themselves the reins of government, destroying afterwards the very engines 

which have lifted them to unjust dominion.” 8

The Framers of the Constitution well understood that an individual could one day occupy 

the Office of the Pr esiden t who would place his personal or political interests above those of the 

nation. Having just won hard -fought independence from a King with unbridled authority, they 

were attuned to the dangers of an executive who lacked fealty to the law and the Con stitution. 

In response, the Framers adopted a tool used by the British Parliament for several 

hundred years to constrain the Crown —the power of impeachment. Unlike in Britain, where 

impeachment was typically reserved for inferior officers but not the Ki ng himself, impeachment 

in our untested democracy was specifically intended to serve as the ultimate form of 

accountability for a duly -elected President. Rather than a mechanism to overturn an election, 

impeachment was explicitly contemplated as a remedy of last resort for a president who fails to 

faithfully execute his oath of office “to preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the 

United States.” 

Accordingly, the Constitution confers the power to impeach the president on Congress, 

stating that t he president shall be removed from office upon conviction for “Treason, Bribery, or 

other high Crimes and Misdemeanors.” While the Constitutional standard for removal from 

office is justly a high one, it is nonetheless an essential check and balance on th e authority of the 

occupant of the Office of the Presiden t, particularly when that occupant represents a continuing 

threat to our fundamental democratic norms, values , and laws. 

Alexander Hamilton explained that impeachment was not designed to cover only criminal 

violations, but also crimes against the American people. “The subjects of its jurisdiction,” 

Hamilton wrote, “are those offenses which proceed from the misconduct of public men, or, in 

other words, from the abuse or violation of some public trust . They are of a nature which may 

with peculiar propriety be denominated political, as they relate chiefly to injuries done 

immediately to the society itself.” 

Similarly, future Associate Justice of the United States Supreme Court James Wilson, a 

delegate from Pennsylvania at the Constitutional Convention, distinguished impeachable 

offenses from those that reside “within the sphere of ordinary jurisprudence.” As he noted, 

“impeachments are confined to political characters, to political crimes and misdemea nors, and to 

political punishments.” 

* * * 

As this report details, the impeachment inquiry has found that President Trump ,

personally and acting through agents within and outside of the U.S. government, solicited the 

interference of a foreign government, Ukraine, to benefit his reelection . In furtherance of this 

scheme, President Trump conditioned official acts on a public announcement by the new 

Ukrainian President , Volodymyr Zelensky, of politically -motivated i nvestigations, including one 

into President Trump’s domestic political opponent. In pressuring President Zelensky to carry 

out his demand, President Trump withheld a White House meeting desperately sought by the 

Ukrainian President , and critical U.S. mili tary assistance to fight Russian aggression in eastern 

Ukraine .9

The President engaged in this course of conduct for the benefit of his own presidential 

reelection, to harm the election prospects of a political rival, and to influence our nation’s 

upcomi ng presidential election to his advantage. In doing so, the President placed his own 

personal and political interests above the national interests of the United States, sought to 

undermine the integrity of the U.S. presidential election process, and endan gered U.S. national 

security. 

At the center of this investigation is the memorandum prepared following President 

Trump’s July 25 , 2019, phone call with Ukraine’s President , which the White House declassified 

and released under significant public pressure. The call record alone is stark evidence of 

misconduct; a demonstration of the President’s prioritization of his personal political benefit over 

the national interest. In response to President Zelensky’s appreciation for vital U.S. military 

assistance, w hich President Trump froze without explanation, President Trump asked for “a 

favor though”: two specific investigations designed to assist his reelection efforts. 

Our investigation determined that this telephone call was neither the start nor the end of 

President Trump’s efforts to bend U.S. foreign policy for his personal gain. Rather , it was a 

dramatic crescendo within a months -long campaign driven by President Trump in which senior 

U.S. officials, including the Vice President, the Secretary of State, the Acting Chief of Staff, the 

Secretary of Energy, and others were either knowledgeable of or active participants in an effort 

to extract from a foreign nation the personal political benefits sought by the President. 

The investigation revealed the nature and extent of the President’s misconduct ,

notwithstanding an unprecedented campaign of obstruction by the President and his 

Administration to prevent the Committees from obtaining documentary evidence and testimony. 

A dozen witnesses followed President Trump’s orders , def ying voluntary requests and lawful 

subpoenas , and refus ing to testify . The White House, Department of State , Department of 

Defense, Office of Management and Budget, and Department of Energy refused to produce a 

single document in response to our subpoenas. 

Ultimately, this sw eeping effort to stonewall the House of Representatives ’ “sole Power 

of Impeachment” under the Constitution failed because witnesses courageously came forward 

and testified in response to lawful process. The report that follows was only possible because o f

their sense of duty and devotion to their country and its Constitution. 

Nevertheless, there remain unanswered questions , and our investigation must continue ,

even as we transmit our report to the Judiciary Committee. Given the proximate threat of furt her 

presidential attempts to solicit foreign interference in our next election, we cannot wait to make a

referral until our efforts to obtain additional testimony and documents wind their way through 

the courts. The evidence of the President’s misconduct is overwhelming, and so too is the 

evidence of his obstruction of Congress. Indeed, it would be hard to imagine a stronger or more 

complete case of obstruction than that demonstrated by the President since the inquiry began. 

The damage the President has done to our relationship with a key strategic partner will be 

remedied over time, and Ukraine continues to enjoy strong bipartisan support in Congress. But 

the damage to our system of checks and balances, and to the balance of power within our three 10 

bran ches of government , will be long -lasting and potentially irrevocable if the President’s ability 

to stonewall Congress goes unchecked. Any future President will feel empowered to resist an 

investigation into their own wrongdoing, malfeasance , or corruption , and the result will be a 

nation at far greater risk of all three. 

* * * 

The decision to move forward with an impeachment inquiry is not one we took lightly. 

Under the best of circumstances, impeachment is a wrenching process for the nation. I resiste d

calls to undertake an impeachment investigation for many months on that basis, notwithstanding 

the existence of presidential misconduct that I believed to be deeply unethical and damaging to 

our democracy. The alarming events and actions detailed in thi s report, however, left us with no 

choice but to proceed. 

In making the decision to move forward, we were struck by the fact that the President’s 

misconduct was not an isolated occurrence, nor was it the product of a naïve president. Instead, 

the efforts to involve Ukraine in our 2020 presidential election were undertaken by a President 

who himself was elected in 2016 with the benefit of an unprecedented and sweeping campaign of 

election interference undertaken by Russia in his favor, and which the Presid ent welcomed and 

utilized. 

Having witnessed the degree to which interference by a foreign power in 2016 harmed 

our democracy, President Trump cannot credibly claim ignorance to its pernicious effects. Even 

more pointedly, the President’s July call with Ukrainian President Zelensky, in which he 

solicited an investigation to damage his most feared 2020 opponent, came the day after Special 

Counsel Robert Mueller testified to Congress about Russia’s efforts to damage his 2016 

opponent and his urgent warning of the dangers of further foreign interference in the next 

election. With this backdrop, the solicitation of new foreign intervention was the act of a 

president unbound, not one chastened by experience. It was the act of a president who viewed 

himself as unaccountable and determined to use his vast official powers to secure his reelection. 

This repeated and pervasive threat to our democratic electoral process added urgency to 

our work. On October 3, 2019, even as our Committee was engaged in this inqui ry, President 

Trump publicly declared anew that other countries should open investigations into his chief 

political rival, saying, “China should start an investigation into the Bidens,” and that “President 

Zelensky, if it were me, I would recommend that th ey start an investigation into the Bidens.” 

When a reporter asked the President what he hoped Ukraine’s President would do following the 

July 25 call, President Trump, seeking to dispel any doubt as to his continuing intention, 

responded: “Well, I would t hink that, if they were honest about it, they’d start a major 

investigation into the Bidens. It’s a very simple answer.” 

By doubling down on his misconduct and declaring that his July 25 call with President 

Zelensky was “perfect,” President Trump has sho wn a continued willingness to use the power of 

his office to seek foreign intervention in our next election. His Acting Chief of Staff, Mick 

Mulvaney, in the course of admitting that the President had linked security assistance to Ukraine 

to the announcem ent of one of his desired investigations, told the American people to “get over 11 

it.” In these statements and actions, the President became the author of his own impeachment 

inquiry. The question presented by the set of facts enumerated in this report may be as simple as 

that posed by the President and his chief of staff’s brazenness: is the remedy of impeachment 

warranted for a president who would use the power of his office to coerce foreign interference in 

a U.S. election, or is that now a mere perk of the office that Americans must simply “get over”? 

* * * 

Those watching the impeachment hearings might have been struck by how little 

discrepancy there was between the witnesses called by the Majority and Minority. Indeed, most 

of the facts presented i n the pages that follow are uncontested. The broad outlines as well as 

many of the details of the President’s scheme have been presented by the witnesses with 

remarkable consistency. There will always be some variation in the testimony of multiple people 

witnessing the same events, but few of the differences here go to the heart of the matter. And so, 

it may have been all the more surprising to the public to see very disparate reactions to the 

testimony by the Members of Congress from each party. 

If t here was one ill the Founding Founders feared as much as that of an unfit president, it 

may have been that of excessive factionalism. Although the Framers viewed parties as 

necessary, they also endeavored to structure the new government in such a way as t o minimize 

the “violence of faction.” As George Washington warn ed in his farewell address, “ the common 

and continual mischiefs of the spirit of party are sufficient to make it the interest and duty of a 

wise people to discourage and restrain it.” 

Today, we may be witnessing a collision between the power of a remedy meant to curb 

presidential misconduct and the power of faction determined to defend against the use of that 

remedy on a president of the same party. But perhaps even more corrosive to o ur democratic 

system of governance, the President and his allies are making a comprehensive attack on the very 

idea of fact and truth. How can a democracy survive without acceptance of a common set of 

experiences? 

America remains the beacon of democracy and opportunity for freedom -loving people 

around the world. From their homes and their jail cells, from their public squares and their 

refugee camps, from their waking hours until their last breath, individuals fighting human rights 

abuses, jou rnalists uncovering and exposing corruption , persecuted minorities struggling to 

survive and preserve their faith, and countless others around the globe just hoping for a better life 

look to America. What we do will determine what they see, and whether Am erica remains a 

nation committed to the rule of law. 

As Benjamin Franklin departed the Constitutional Convention, he was asked , “what have 

we got? A Republic or a Monarchy?” He responded simply: “A Republic, if you can keep it.” 

Adam B. S chiff 

Chairman, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence 12 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

The impeachment inquiry into Donald J. Trump, the 45th President of the United States, 

uncovered a months -long effort by President Trump to use the powers of his office t o solicit 

foreign interference on his behalf in the 2020 election. As described in th is executiv e summary 

and the report that follows, President Trump’s scheme subverted U.S. foreign policy toward 

Ukraine and undermined our national security in favor of t wo politically motivated investigations 

that would help his presidential reelection campaign. The President demanded that the newly -

elected Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelensky, publicly announce investigations into a 

political rival that he apparently feared the most, former Vice President Joe Biden, and into a 

discredited theory that it was Ukraine, not Russia, that interfered in the 2016 presidential 

election. To compel the Ukrainian President to do his political bidding, President Trump 

conditioned two official acts on the public announcement of the investigations: a coveted White 

House visit and critical U.S. military assistance Ukraine needed to fight its Russian adversary. 

During a July 25, 2019, call between President Trump and President Zelen sky, President 

Zelensky expressed gratitude for U.S. military assistance. President Trump immediately 

responded by asking President Zelensky to “do us a favor though” and openly pressed for 

Ukraine to investigate former Vice President Biden and the 2016 c onspiracy theory. In turn, 

President Zelensky assured President Trump that he would pursue the investigation and 

reiterated his interest in the White House meeting. Although President Trump’s scheme 

intentionally bypassed many career personnel, it was un dertaken with the knowledge and 

approval of senior Administration officials, including the President’s Acting Chief of Staff Mick 

Mulvaney, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, and Secretary of Energy Rick Perry. In fact, at a 

press conference weeks after publ ic revelations about the scheme, Mr. Mulvaney publicly 

acknowledged that the President directly tied the hold on military aid to his desire to get Ukraine 

to conduct a political investigation, telling Americans to “get over it.” 

President Trump and his senior officials may see nothing wrong with using the power of 

the Office of the President to pressure a foreign country to help the President’s reelection 

campaign. Indeed, President Trump continues to encourage Ukraine and other foreign countries 

to engage in the same kind of election interference today. However, the Founding Fathers 

pr escribed a remedy for a chief executive who places his personal interests above those of the 

country: impeachment. Accordingly, as part of the House of Representati ves’ impeachment 

inquiry, the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, in coordination with the Committees 

on Oversight and Reform and Foreign Affairs, were compelled to undertake a serious, sober, and 

expeditious investigation into whether the Presiden t’s misconduct warrants that remedy. 

In response, President Trump engaged in an unprecedented campaign of obstruction of 

this impeachment inquiry. Nevertheless, due in large measure to patriotic and courageous public 

servants who provided the Committees with direct evidence of the President’s actions, the 

Committees uncovered significant misconduct on the part of the President of the United States. 

As required under House Resolution 660, the Intelligence Committee, in consultation with the 

Committees on Oversight and Reform and Foreign Affairs, has prepared this report to detail the 

evidence uncovered to date, which will now be transmitted to the Judiciary Committee for its 

consideration. 13 

SECTION I —THE PRESIDENT’S MISCONDUCT 

The President Conditioned a White House Meeting and Military Aid to Ukraine on a 

Public Announcement of Investigations Beneficial to his Reelection Campaign 

The President’s Request for a Political Favor 

On the morning of July 25, 2019, President Donald Trump settled in to the White House 

Executive Residence to join a telephone call with President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine. It 

had been more than three months since President Zelensky, a political neophyte, had been swept 

into office in a landslide victory on a platform of ro oting out corruption and ending the war 

between his country and Russia. The day of his election, April 21, President Zelensky spoke 

briefly with President Trump, who had called to congratulate him and invite him to a visit at the 

White House. As of July 25, no White House meeting had materialized. 

As is typical for telephone calls with other heads of state, staff members from the 

National Security Council (NSC) convened in the White House Situation Room to listen to the 

call and take notes, which would later be compiled into a memorandum that would constitute the 

U.S. government’s official record of the call. NSC staff had prepared a standard package of 

talking points for the President based on official U.S. policy. The talking points included 

recommen dations to encourage President Zelensky to continue to promote anti -corruption 

reforms in Ukraine, a pillar of American foreign policy in the country as far back as its 

independence in the 1990s when Ukraine first rid itself of Kremlin control. 

This cal l would deviate significantly from that script. Shortly before he was patched 

through to President Zelensky, President Trump spoke with Gordon Sondland, who had donated 

$1 million to President Trump’s 2016 presidential inauguration and whom the President had 

appointed as the United States Ambassador to the European Union. Ambassador Sondland had 

helped lay the groundwork for a very different kind of call between the two Presidents. 

Ambassador Sondland had relayed a message to President Zelensky six days earlier that 

“assurances to run a fully transparent investigation” and “turn over every stone” were necessary 

in his call with President Trump. Ambassador Sondland understood these phrases to refer to two 

investigations politically beneficial to the Presi dent’s reelection campaign: one into former Vice 

President Joe Biden and a Ukrainian gas company called Burisma, on which his son sat on the 

board, and the other into a discredited conspiracy theory alleging that Ukraine, not Russia, 

interfered in the 201 6 U.S. election. The allegations about Vice President Biden were without 

evidence, and the U.S. Intelligence Community had unanimously determined that Russia, not 

Ukraine, interfered in the 2016 election to help the candidacy of Donald Trump. Despite the 

falsehoods, Ambassador Sondland would make it clear to Ukrainian officials that the public 

announcement of these investigations was a prerequisite for the coveted White House meeting 

with President Trump, an effort that would help the President’s reelecti on campaign. 

The White House meeting was not the only official act that President Trump conditioned 

on the announcement of these investigations. Several weeks before his phone call with President 

Zelensky, President Trump ordered a hold on nearly $400 mi llion of congressionally -14 

appropriated security assistance to Ukraine that provided Kyiv essential support as it sought to 

repel Russian forces that were occupying Crimea and inflicting casualties in the eastern region of 

the country. The President’s decis ion to freeze the aid, made without explanation, sent shock 

waves through the Department of Defense (DOD), the Department of State, and the NSC, which 

uniformly supported providing this assistance to our strategic partner. Although the suspension 

of aid had not been made public by the day of the call between the two Presidents, officials at the 

Ukrainian embassy in Washington had already asked American officials about the status of the 

vital military assistance. 

At the outset of the conversation on July 25, President Zelensky thanked President Trump 

for the “great support in the area of defense” provided by the United States to date. He then 

indicated that Ukraine would soon be prepared to purchase additional Javelin anti -tank missiles 

from the United St ates as part of this defense cooperation. President Trump immediately 

responded with his own request: “I would like you to do us a favor though,” which was “to find 

out what happened” with alleged Ukrainian interference in the 2016 election. 

President Trump then asked President Zelensky “to look into” former Vice President 

Biden’s role in encouraging Ukraine to remove a prosecutor widely viewed by the United States 

and numerous European partners to be corrupt. In so doing, President Trump gave currenc y to a 

baseless allegation that Vice President Biden wanted to remove the corrupt prosecutor because 

he was investigating Burisma, a company on whose board the Vice President’s son sat at the 

time. 

Over the course of the roughly thirty -minute call, Pre sident Trump repeated these false 

allegations and pressed the Ukrainian President to consult with his personal attorney, Rudy 

Giuliani, who had been publicly advocating for months for Ukraine to initiate these specific 

investigations. President Zelensky p romised that he would “work on the investigation of the 

case.” Later in the call, he thanked President Trump for his invitation to join him at the White 

House, following up immediately with a comment that, “[o]n the other hand,” he would “ensure” 

that Ukr aine pursued “the investigation” that President Trump had requested. 

During the call, President Trump also disparaged Marie Yovanovitch, the former U.S. 

ambassador to Ukraine, who championed anti -corruption reforms in the country, and whom 

President Trump had unceremoniously removed months earlier following a smear campaign 

waged against her by Mr. Giuliani and others. President Trump claimed that she was “bad news” 

and was “going to go through some things.” He praised the current prosecutor at the time, who 

was widely viewed as corrupt and who helped initiate the smear campaign against her, calling 

him “very good” and “very fair.” 

Hearing the call as it transpired, several White House staff members became alarmed. 

Far from giving the “full -throated en dorsement of the Ukraine reform agenda” that had been 

hoped for, the President instead demanded a political investigation into an American —the 

presidential candidate he evidently feared most, Joe Biden. 

Lieutenant Colonel Alexander Vindman, an NSC staff member responsible for Ukraine 

policy who listened to the call, immediately reported his concerns to NSC lawyers. His 15 

supervisor, NSC Senior Director for Europe and Russia Timothy Morrison, also reported the call 

to the lawyers, worrying that the call wo uld be “damaging” if leaked publicly. In response, the 

lawyers placed the memorandum summarizing the call onto a highly classified server, 

significantly limiting access to the materials. 

The call record would not remain hidden forever. On September 25, 2019, facing 

immense public pressure to reveal the contents of the call and following the announcement the 

previous day of a formal impeachment inquiry in the House of Representatives into President 

Trump’s actions toward Ukraine, the White House publi cly released the memorandum of the 

July 25 call. 

The record of the call would help explain for those involved in Ukraine policy in the U.S. 

government, the Congress, and the public why President Trump, his personal attorney, Mr. 

Giuliani, his hand -picked appointees in charge of Ukraine issues, and variou s senior 

Administration officials would go to great lengths to withhold a coveted White House meeting 

and critical military aid from Ukraine at a time when it served as a bulwark against Russian 

aggression in Europe. 

The answer was as simple as it was i nimical to our national security and election 

integrity: the President was withholding officials acts while soliciting something of value to his 

reelection campaign —an investigation into his political rival. 

The story of that scheme follows. 

* * * 

The President Removed Anti -Corruption Champion Ambassador Yovanovitch 

On April 24, 2019, President Donald Trump abruptly called back to Washington the 

United States Ambassador to Ukraine, Marie “Masha” Yovanovitch, after a ruthless smear 

campaign was waged ag ainst her. She was known throughout Ukraine and among her peers for 

aggressively advocating for anti -corruption reforms consistent with U.S. foreign policy and only 

recently had been asked to extend her stay in Ukraine. Her effectiveness in anti -corrupti on 

efforts earned her enemies in Kyiv and in Washington. As Deputy Assistant Secretary of State 

George Kent testified in praising Ambassador Yovanovitch: “You can’t promote principled 

anticorruption action without pissing off corrupt people.” 

Beginnin g on March 20, The Hill newspaper published several op -eds attacking 

Ambassador Yovanovitch and former Vice President Joe Biden, relying on information from a 

Ukrainian prosecutor, Yuriy Lutsenko, who was widely viewed to be corrupt. Mr. Lutsenko had 

serv ed as the chief prosecutor in Ukraine under the then -incumbent president who lost to 

Volodymyr Zelensky in April 2019. Although he would later recant many of his allegations, Mr. 

Lutsenko falsely accused Ambassador Yovanovitch of speaking negatively about President 

Trump and giving Mr. Lutsenko a “do -not -pr osecute list.” 16 

The attacks against Ambassador Yovanovitch were amplified by prominent, close allies 

of President Trump, including Mr. Giuliani and his associates, Sean Hannity, and Donald Trump 

Jr. President Trump tweeted the smears himself just a mont h before he recalled the Ambassador 

from Ukraine. In the face of attacks driven by Mr. Lutsenko and the President’s allies, 

Ambassador Yovanovitch and other senior State Department officials asked Secretary of State 

Mike Pompeo to issue a statement of sup port for her and for the U.S. Embassy in Ukraine. The 

Secretary declined, fearing that President Trump might publicly undermine those efforts, 

possibly through a tweet. 

Following a ceremony in which she presented an award of courage to the family of a 

yo ung female anti -corruption activist killed in Ukraine for her work, Ambassador Yovanovitch 

received an urgent call from the State Department regarding her “security,” and imploring her to 

take the first plane back to Washington. When she arrived , she was informed that she had done 

nothing wrong, but that the President had lost confidence in her. She was told to leave her post 

as soon as possible. 

In her place, the President would designate three new agents to spearhead Ukraine policy, 

political appointee s far more willing to engage in an improper “domestic political errand” than 

an ambassador known for her efforts to fight corruption. 

The President’s Hand -Picked Agents Beg an the Scheme 

Just three days before Ambassador Yovanovitch’s abrupt recall to Was hington, President 

Trump had his first telephone call with President -elect Zelensky. During that conversation, 

President Trump congratulated the Ukrainian leader on his victory, complimented him on his 

country’s Miss Universe Pageant contestants, and invi ted him to visit the White House. A White 

House meeting would help demonstrate the United States’ strong support for Ukraine as it fought 

a hot war with Russia and attempted to negotiate an end to the conflict with Russian President 

Vladimir Putin, as wel l as to bolster President -elect Zelensky’s standing with his own people as 

he sought to deliver on his promised anti -corruption agenda. Although the White House ’s public 

summary of the call included some discussion of a commitment to “root out corruption, ”

President Trump did not mention corruption at all. 

Shortly after the conversation, President Trump asked Vice President Mike Pence to 

attend President Zelensky’s inauguration. Vice President Pence confirmed directly to President 

Zelensky his intention to attend during a phone conversation on April 23, and Vice President 

Pence’s staff and the U.S. Embassy in Kyiv began preparations for the trip. 

At the same time, President Trump’s personal attorney, Mr. Giuliani, intensified his 

campaign to pressure U kraine’s newly -elected President to initiate investigations into Joe Biden, 

who had officially entered the race for the Democratic nomination on April 25, and the baseless 

conspiracy theory about Ukrainian interference in the 2016 election. On May 9, the New York 

Times published an article in which Mr. Giuliani declared that he intended to travel to Ukraine 

on behalf of his client, President Trump, in order to meddle in an investigation. After public 

backlash, Mr. Giuliani canceled the trip, blaming “some bad people” around President Zelensky. 

Days later, President Trump rescinded the plans for Vice President Pence to attend President 17 

Zelensky’s inauguration, which had not yet been scheduled. The staff member planning the trip 

was not provided an explana tion for the about -face, but staff in the U.S. Embassy in Kyiv were 

disappointed that President Zelensky would not receive a “high level” show of support from the 

United States. 

In Vice President Pence’s stead, Secretary of Energy Rick Perry led the American 

delegation to the Ukrainian President’s inauguration. Ambassador Sondland, Special 

Representative for Ukraine Negotiations Ambassador Kurt Volker, and Lt. Col. Vindman also 

attended. In comments that would foreshadow troubling events to come, Lt. Col. Vindman 

warned President Zelensky to stay out of U.S. domestic politics to avoid jeopardiz ing the 

bipartisan support Ukraine enjoyed in Congress. 

The delegation returned to the United States impressed with President Zelensky, 

especially his focus on anti -corruption reforms. Ambassador Sondland quickly organized a 

meeting with President Trump in the Oval Office on May 23, attended by most of the other 

members of the delegation. The three political appointees, who would describe themselves as 

the “Three Amigos,” relayed their positive impression of President Zelensky to President Trump 

and encouraged him to schedule the Oval Office meeting he promised in his April 21 phone call 

with the new leader. 

President Trump reacted poorly to the suggestion, claiming that Ukraine “tried to take me 

down” in 2016. In order to schedule a White House visit for President Zelensky, President 

Trump told the delegation that they would have to “t alk to Rudy.” Ambassador Sondland 

testified that he understood the President’s instruction to be a directive to work with Mr. Giuliani 

if they hoped to advance relations with Ukraine. President Trump directed the three senior U.S. 

government officials to assist Mr. Giuliani’s efforts, which, it would soon become clear, were 

exclusively for the benefit of the President’s reelection campaign. 

As the Three Amigos were given responsibility over the U.S. government’s Ukraine 

portfolio, Bill Taylor, a former Ambassador to Ukraine, was considering whether to come out of 

retirement to accept a request to succeed Ambassador Yovanovitch in Kyiv. As of May 26, 

Ambassador Taylor was “still struggling with the decision,” and, in particular, whether anyone 

can “hope to succeed with the Giuliani -Biden issue swirling.” After receiving assurances from 

Secretary Pompeo that U.S. policy toward Ukraine would not change, Ambassador Taylor 

accepted the position and arrived in Kyiv on June 17. Ambassador Taylor would quickl y come 

to observe an “irregular channel” led by Mr. Giuliani that, over time, began to undermine the 

official channel of diplomatic relations with Ukraine. Mr. Giuliani would prove to be, as the 

President’s National Security Advisor Ambassador John Bolton would tell a colleague, a “hand 

grenade that was going to blow everyone up. ”

The President Froze Vital Military Assistance 

For fiscal year 2019, Congress appropriated and authorized $391 million in security 

assistance to Ukraine: $250 million in funds administered by DOD and $141 million in funds 

administered by the State Department. On June 18, DOD issued a press release announcing its 

intention to provide $250 million in taxpayer -funded security assistance to Ukraine following the 18 

certification that all legitimate conditions on the aid, including anti -corruption reforms, had been 

met. Shortly after this announcement, however, both the Office of Management and Budget 

(OMB) and DOD received inquiries from the President related to the funds. At that ti me, and 

throughout the next few months, support for Ukraine security assistance was overwhelming and 

unanimous among all of the relevant agencies and within Congress. 

By July 3, OMB blocked a Congressional notification which would have clear ed the way 

for the release of $141 million in State Department security assistance funds. By July 12, 

President Trump had placed a hold on all military support funding for Ukraine. On July 18, 

OMB announced the hold to all of the relevant agencies and indi cated that it was directed by the 

President. No other reason was provided. 

During a series of policy meetings involving increasingly senior officials, the uniform 

and consistent position of all policymaking agencies supported the release of funding. U kraine 

experts at DOD, the State Department, and the NSC argued that it was in the national security 

interest of the United States to continue to support Ukraine. As Mr. Morrison testified, “The 

United States aids Ukraine and her people so that they can f ight Russia over there, and we don’t 

have to fight Russia here.” 

Agency officials also expressed concerns about the legality of President Trump’s 

direction to withhold assistance to Ukraine that Congress had already appropriated for this 

express purpose . Two OMB career officials, including one of its legal counsel s, would resign, in 

part, over concerns regarding the hold. 

By July 25, the date of President Trump’s call with President Zelensky, DOD was also 

receiving inquiries from Ukrainian officials ab out the status of the security assistance. 

Nevertheless, President Trump continued to withhold the funding to Ukraine without 

explanation , against the interests of U.S. national security , and over the objections of these career 

experts. 

The President Conditioned a White House Meeting on Investigations 

By the time Ukrainian officials were first learning about an issue with the anticipated 

military assistance, the President’s hand -picked representatives to Ukraine had already informed 

their U krainian counterparts that President Zelensky’s coveted White House meeting would only 

happen after Ukraine committed to pursuing the two political investigations that President Trump 

and Mr. Giuliani demanded. 

Ambassador Sondland was unequivocal in describing this conditionality, testifying, “I 

know that members of this committee frequently frame these complicated issues in the form of a 

simple question: Was there a quid pro quo? As I testified previously with regard to the 

requested White House call and the White House meeting, the answer is yes.” Ambassadors 

Sondland and Volker worked to obtain the necessary assurance from President Zelensky that he 

would personally commit to initiate the investigations in o rder to secure both. 19 

On July 2, in Toronto, Canada, Ambassador Volker conveyed the message directly to 

President Zelensky, specifically referencing the “Giuliani factor” in President Zelensky’s 

engagement with the United States. For his part, Mr. Giulian i made clear to Ambassadors 

Sondland and Volker, who were directly communicati ng with the Ukrainians, that a White 

House meeting would not occur until Ukraine announced its pursuit of the two political 

investigations . After observing Mr. Giuliani’s role i n the ouster of a U.S. Ambassador and 

learning of his influence with the President, Ukrainian officials soon understood that “the key for 

many things is Rudi [sic] .” 

On July 10, Ambassador Bolton hosted a meeting in the White House with two senior 

Ukrain ian officials , several American officials, including Ambassadors Sondland and Volker, 

Secretary Perry, Dr. Fiona Hill, Senior Director for Europe and Russia at the NSC, and Lt. Col. 

Vindman. As had become customary each time Ukrainian officials met with t heir American 

counterparts, the Ukrainians asked about the long -delayed White House meeting. Ambassador 

Bolton demurred, but Ambassador Sondland spoke up, revealing that he had worked out an 

arrangement with Acting Chief of Staff Mick Mulvaney to schedule the White House visit after 

Ukraine initiated the “investigations.” Ambassador Bolton “stiffened” and quickly ended the 

meeting. 

Undaunted, Ambassador Sondland ushered many of the attendees to the Ward Room 

downstairs to continue their discussion. In the second meeting, Ambassador Sondland explained 

that he had an agreement with Mr. Mulvaney that the White House visit would come only after 

Ukraine announced the Burisma/Biden and 2016 Ukraine election interference investigations. At 

this second meetin g, both Lt. Col. Vindman and Dr. Hill objected to intertwining a “domestic 

political errand” with official foreign policy, and they indicated that a White House meeting 

would have to go through proper channels. 

Following these discussions, Dr. Hill repo rted back to Ambassador Bolton, who told her 

to “go and tell [the NSC Legal Advisor] that I am not part of whatever drug deal Sondland and 

Mulvaney are cooking up on this .” Both Dr. Hill and Lt. Col. Vindman separately reported the 

incident to the NSC Leg al Advisor. 

The President’s Agents Pursued a “Drug Deal” 

Over the next two weeks, Ambassadors Sondland and Volker worked closely with Mr. 

Giuliani and senior Ukrainian and American officials to arrange a telephone call between 

President Trump and Presi dent Zelensky and to ensure that the Ukrainian President explicitly 

promised to undertake the political investigations required by President Trump to schedule the 

White House meeting. As Ambassador Sondland would later testify: “Mr. Giuliani was 

expressi ng the desires of the President of the United States, and we knew these investigations 

were important to the President.” 

On July 19, Ambassador Volker had breakfast with Mr. Giuliani and his associate, Lev 

Parnas, at the Trump Hotel in Washington , D.C . M r. Parnas would subsequently be indicted for 

campaign finance violations as part of an investigation that remains ongoing. During the 

conversation, Ambassador Volker stressed his belief that the attacks being leveled publicly 20 

against Vice President Biden related to Ukraine were false and that the former Vice President 

was “a person of integrity.” He counseled Mr. Giuliani that the Ukrainian prosecutor pushing 

the false narrative, Mr. Lutsenko, was promoting “a self -serving narrative to preserve himself in 

power.” Mr. Giuliani agreed, but his promotion of Mr. Lutsenko’s false accusations for the 

benefit of President Trump did not cease. Ambassador Volker also offered to help arrange an in -

person meeting between Mr. Giuliani and Andriy Yermak, one of Presi dent Zelensky’s most 

trusted advisors, which would later take place in Madrid, Spain in early August. 

After the breakfast meeting at the Trump Hotel , Ambassador Volker reported back to 

Ambassador s Sondland and Taylor about his conversation with Mr. Giuliani, writing in a text 

message that, “Most impt [sic] is for Zelensky to say that he will help investigation —and address 

any specific personnel issues —if there are any,” likely referencing President Zelensky’s decision 

to remove Mr. Lutsenko as prosecutor general, a decision with which Mr. Giuliani disagreed. 

The same day, Ambassador Sondland spoke with President Zelensky and recommended that the 

Ukrainian leader tell President Trump that he “will l eave no stone unturned” regarding the 

political investigations during the upcoming presidential phone call. 

Ambassador Sondland emailed several top Administration officials, including Secretary 

of State Pompeo, Acting Chief of Staff Mulvaney, and Secret ary Perry, stating that President 

Zelensky confirmed that he would “assure” President Trump that “he intends to run a fully 

transparent investigation and will ‘turn over every stone.’” According to Ambassador Sondland, 

he was referring in the email to the Burisma/Biden and 2016 election interference investigations. 

Secretary Perry and Mr. Mulvaney responded affirmatively that the call would soon take place, 

and Ambassador Sondland testified later that “everyone was in the loop” on plans to condition 

the Wh ite House meeting on the announcement of political investigations beneficial to President 

Trump. The arrangement troubled the Ukrainian President, who “did not want to be used as a 

pawn in a U.S. reelection campaign.” 

The President Pressed President Ze lensky to Do a Political Favor 

On the morning of July 25, Ambassador Volker sent a text message to President 

Zelensky’s top aide, Mr. Yermak, less than 30 minutes before the presidential call. He stated: 

“Heard from White House —assuming President Z conv inces trump he will investigate / ‘get to 

the bottom of what happened’ in 2016, we will nail down date for visit to Washington. Good 

luck!” Shortly before the call, Ambassador Sondland spoke directly with President Trump. 

President Zelensky followed th is advice during his conversation with President Trump. 

President Zelensky assured that he would pursue the investigations that President Trump had 

discussed —into the Bidens and 2016 election interference —and, in turn, pressed for the White 

House meeting that remained outstanding. 

The following day, Ambassadors Volker, Sondland, and Taylor met with President 

Zelensky in Kyiv. The Ukrainian President told them that President Trump had mentioned 

“sensitive issues” three times during the previous day’s ph one call. Following the meeting with 

the Ukrainian leader, Ambassador Sondland had a private, one -on -one conversation with Mr. 

Yermak in which they discussed “the issue of investigations.” He then retired to lunch at an 21 

outdoor restaurant terrace with St ate Department aides where he called President Trump directly 

from his cellphone. The White House confirmed that the conversation lasted five minutes. 

At the outset of the call, President Trump asked Ambassador Sondland whether President 

Zelensky “was going to do the investigation” that President Trump had raised with President 

Zelensky the day before. Ambassador Sondland stated that President Zelensky was “going to do 

it” and “would do anything you ask him to.” According to David Holmes, the State Department 

aide sitting closest to Ambassador Sondland and who overheard the President’s voice on the 

phone, Ambassador Sondland and President Trump spoke on ly about the investigation in their 

discussion about Ukraine. The President made no mention of other major issues of importance 

in Ukraine, including President Zelensky’s aggressive anti -corruption reforms and the ongoing 

war it was fighting against Russi an-led forces in eastern Ukraine. 

After hanging up the phone, Ambassador Sondland explained to Mr. Holmes that 

President Trump “did not give a shit about Ukraine.” Rather, the President cared only about “big 

stuff” that benefitted him personally, like “t he Biden investigation that Mr. Giuliani was 

pitching,” and that President Trump had pushed for in his July 25 call with the Ukrainian leader. 

Ambassador Sondland did not recall referencing Biden specifically, but he did not dispute Mr. 

Holmes’ recollecti on of the call with the President or Ambassador Sondland’s subsequent 

discussion with Mr. Holmes. 

The President’s Representatives Ratcheted up Pressure on the Ukrainian President 

In the weeks following the July 25 call, the President’s hand -picked repre sentatives 

increased the President’s pressure campaign on Ukrainian government officials —in person, over 

the phone, and by text message —to secure a public announcement of the investigations 

beneficial to President Trump’s reelection campaign. 

In discuss ions with Ukrainian officials, Ambassador Sondland understood that President 

Trump did not require that Ukraine conduct investigations as a prerequisite for the White House 

meeting so much as publicly announce the investigations —making clear that the goal was not 

the investigations, but the political benefit Trump would derive from their announcement and the 

cloud they might put over a political opponent. 

On August 2, President Zelensky’s advisor, Mr. Yermak, traveled to Madrid to meet Mr. 

Giuliani in pe rson. There, they agreed that Ukraine would issue a public statement, and they 

discussed potential dates for a White House meeting. A few days later, Ambassador Volker told 

Mr. Giuliani that it “would be good” if Mr. Giuliani would report to “the boss,” President Trump, 

about “the results” of his Madrid discussion so that President Trump would finally agree to a 

White House visit by President Zelensky. 

On August 9, Ambassador Volker and Mr. Giuliani spoke twice by phone, and 

Ambassador Sondland spoke twi ce to the White House for a total of about 20 minutes. In a text 

message to Ambassador Volker later that day, Ambassador Sondland wrote, “I think potus [sic] 

really wants the deliverable,” which Ambassador Sondland acknowledged was the public 22 

statement an nouncing the two political investigations sought by President Trump and Mr. 

Giuliani. 

The following day, Ambassador Sondland briefed State Department Counselor Ulrich 

Brechbuhl, a top advisor to Secretary Pompeo, on these discussions about President Zelen sky 

issuing a statement that would include an announcement of the two political investigations. 

Ambassador Sondland also emailed Secretary Pompeo directly, copying the State Department’s 

executive secretary and Mr. Brechbuhl, to inform them about the agre ement for President 

Zelensky to give the press conference. He expected to see a draft of the statement, which would 

be “delivered for our review in a day or two.” Ambassador Sondland noted his hope that the 

draft statement would “make the boss happy enou gh to authorize an invitation.” 

On August 12, Mr. Yermak sent the proposed statement to Ambassador Volker, but it 

lacked specific reference s to the two investigations politically beneficial to President Trump’s 

reelection campaign. The following mornin g, Ambassadors Sondland and Volker spoke with 

Mr. Giuliani, who made clear that if the statement “doesn’t say Burisma and 2016, it’s not 

credible.” Ambassador Volker revised the statement following this direction to include those 

references and returned i t to the Ukrainian President ’s aide. 

Mr. Yermak balked at getting drawn into U.S. politics and asked Ambassador Volker 

whether the United States had inquired about investigations through any appropriate Department 

of Justice channels. The answer was no , and several witnesses testified that a request to a 

foreign country to investigate a U.S. citizen “for political reasons” goes “against everything” the 

United States sought to promote in eastern Europe, specifically the rule of law. Ambassador 

Volker ev entually agreed with Mr. Yermak that the announcement of the Biden/Burisma and 

2016 elections investigations would “look like it would play into our domestic politics,” so the 

statement was temporar il y “shelved.” 

Nevertheless, Ambassador Sondland, in ac cordance with President Trump’s wishes, 

continue d to pursue the statement into early September 2019. 

Ukrainians Inquired about the President’s Hold on Security Assistance 

Once President Trump placed security assistance on hold in July, “it was inevitable that it 

was eventually going to come out.” On July 25, DOD officials learned that diplomats at the 

Ukrainian Embassy in Washington had made multiple overtures to DOD and the State 

Department “asking about security assistance.” Separately, two different contacts at the 

Ukrainian Embassy approached Ambassador Volker’s special advisor , Catherine Croft , to ask 

her in confidence about the hold. Ms. Croft was surprised at the effectiveness of their 

“diplomatic tradecraft,” noting t hat they “found out very early on” that the United States was 

withholding critical military aid to Ukraine. By mid -August, before the freeze on aid became 

public, Lt. Col. Vindman had also received inquiries from an official at the Ukrainian Embassy. 

The hold remained in place throughout August against the unanimous judgment of 

American officials focused on Ukraine policy. Without an explanation for the hold, which ran 

contrary to the recommendation of all relevant agencies, and with President Trump a lready 23 

conditioning a White House visit on the announcement of the political investigations, it became 

increasingly apparent to multiple witnesses that the military aid was also being withheld in 

exchange for the announcement of those. As both Ambassador Sondland and Mr. Holmes would 

later testify , it became as clear as “two plus two equals four.” 

On August 22, Ambassador Sondland emailed Secretary Pompeo again, recommending a 

plan for a potential meeting between President Trump and President Zelensky in Warsaw, Poland 

on September 1. Ambassador Sondland noted that President Zelensky should “look him in the 

eye” and tell President Trump that once new prosecutorial officials were in place in Ukraine, 

“Zelensky should be able to move forward publicly and w ith confidence on those issues of 

importance to Potus and the U.S.” Ambassador Sondland testified that this was a reference to 

the political investigations that President Trump discussed on the July 25 call, that Secretary 

Pompeo had listened to. Ambassa dor Sondland hoped this would “break the logjam” —the hold 

on critical security assistance to Ukraine. Secretary Pompeo replied three minutes later: “Yes.” 

The President’s Security Assistance Hold Became Public 

On August 28, Politico published a story revealing President Trump’s weeks -long hold 

on U.S. military assistance to Ukraine. Senior Ukrainian officials expressed grave concern, 

deeply worried about the practical impact on their efforts to fight Russian aggression , but also 

about the public messa ge it sent to the Russian government, which would almost certainly seek 

to exploit any real or perceived crack in U.S. resolve toward Ukraine. 

On August 29, at the urging of National Security Advisor Bolton, Ambassador Taylor 

wrote a first -person cab le to Secretary Pompeo. This was the only first -person cable the 

Ambassador had ever sent in his decades of government service. He explained the “folly” of 

withholding security assistance to Ukraine as it fought a hot war against Russia on its borders. 

He wrote that he “could not and would not defend such a policy.” Ambassador Taylor stated that 

Secretary Pompeo may have carried the cable with him to a meeting at the White House. 

The same day that Ambassador Taylor sent his cable, President Trump can celled his 

planned trip to Warsaw for a World War II commemoration event, where he was scheduled to 

meet with President Zelensky. Vice President Pence traveled in his place. Ambassador 

Sondland also traveled to Warsaw and, at a pre -briefing discussion wi th the Vice President 

before he met President Zelensky, Ambassador Sondland raised the issue of the hold on security 

assistance. He told Vice President Pence that he was concerned that the security assistance “had 

become tied to the issue of investigation s” and that “everything is being held up until these 

statements get made.” Vice President Pence nodded in response, apparently expressing neither 

surprise nor dismay at the linkage between the two. 

At the meeting, President Zelensky expressed concern th at even an appearance of 

wavering support from the United States for Ukraine could embolden Russia. Vice President 

Pence reiterated U.S. support for Ukraine , but could not promise that the hold would be lifted. 

Vice President Pence said he would relay hi s support for lifting the hold to President Trump so a 

decision could be made on security assistance as soon as possible. Vice President Pence spoke 

with President Trump that evening, but the hold was not lifted. 24 

Following this meeting, Ambassador Sondl and pulled aside President Zelensky’s advisor, 

Mr. Yermak, to explain that the hold on security assistance was conditioned on the public 

announcement of the Burisma/Biden and the 2016 election interference investigations. After 

learning of the conversatio n, Ambassador Taylor texted Ambassador Sondland: “Are we now 

saying that security assistance and WH meeting are conditioned on investigations?” 

The two then spoke by phone. Ambassador Sondland explained that he had previously 

made a “mistake” in telli ng Ukrainian officials that only the White House meeting was 

conditioned on a public announcement of the political investigations beneficial to President 

Trump . H e clarified that “everything” —the White House meeting and hundreds of millions of 

dollars of security assistance to Ukraine —was now conditioned on the announcement. President 

Trump wanted President Zelensky in a “public box,” which Ambassador Taylor understood to 

mean that President Trump required that President Zelensky make a public announcemen t about 

the investigations and that a private commitment would not do. 

On September 7, President Trump and Ambassador Sondland spoke. Ambassador 

Sondland stated to his colleagues that the President said , “there was no quid pro quo,” but that 

President Zelensky would be required to announce the investigations in order for the hold on 

security assistance to be lifted, “and he should want to do it.” Ambassador Sondland passed on a 

similar message directly to President Zelensky and Mr. Yermak that, “although this was not a 

quid pro quo, if President Zelensky did not clear things up in public, we would be at a 

stalemate,” referring to the hold on security assistance. Arrangements were made for the 

Ukrainian President to make a public statement during an interview on CNN. 

After speaking with Ambassador Sondland, Ambassador Taylor texted Ambassadors 

Sondland and Volker: “As I said on the phone, I think it’s crazy to withhold security assistance 

for help with a political campaign.” Notwithstand ing his long -held understanding that the White 

House meeting was conditioned on the public announcement of two political investigations 

desired by President Trump —and not broader anti -corruption concerns —Ambassador Sondland 

responded hours later: 

Bill, I believe you are incorrect about President Trump’s intentions. The President has 

been crystal clear: no quid pro quo’s of any kind. The President is trying to evaluate 

whether Ukraine is truly going to adopt the transparency and reforms that President 

Zelensky promised during his campaign. I suggest we stop the back and forth by text. If 

you still have concerns, I recommend you give Lisa Kenna or [Secretary Pompeo] a call 

to discuss with them directly. Thanks. 

Ambassador Sondland’s subsequent testim ony revealed this text to be a false 

exculpatory —an untruthful statement that can later be used to conceal incriminating 

information. In his public testimony, Ambassador Sondland testified that the President’s 

direction to withhold a presidential telephon e call and a White House meeting for President 

Zelensky were both quid pro quos designed to pressure Ukraine to announce the 

investigations. He also testified that he developed a clear understanding that the military aid was 

also conditioned on the invest igations, that it was as simple as 2+2=4. Sondland confirmed that 25 

his clear understanding was unchanged after speaking with President Trump, which he then 

communicated to the Ukrainians —President Zelensky had to publicly announce the two 

investigations if he wanted to get the meeting or the military aid. 

In Ambassador Sondland’s testimony, he was not clear on whether he had one 

conversation with the President in which the subject of a quid pro quo came up, or two, or on 

precisely which date the conversation took place during the period of September 6 through 9. In 

one version of the conversation which Ambassador Sondland suggested may have taken place on 

September 9, he claimed that the President answered an open question about what he wanted 

fr om Ukraine with an immediate denial —“no quid pro quo.” In another, he admitted that the 

President told him that President Zelensky should go to a mic rophone and announce the 

investigations , and that he should want to do so —effectively confirming a quid pr o quo. 

Both Ambassador Taylor and Mr. Morrison, relying on their contemporaneous notes, 

testified that the call between Ambassador Sondland and President Trump occurred on 

September 7, which is further confirmed by Ambassador Sondland’s own text message on 

September 8 in which he wrote that he had “multiple convos” with President Zelensky and 

President Trump. A call on September 9, which would have occurred in the middle of the night, 

is at odds with the weight of the evidence and not backed up by any r ecords the White House 

was willing to provide Ambassador Sondland. Regardless of the date, Ambassador Sondland did 

not contest telling both Mr. Morrison and Ambassador Taylor of a conversation he had with the 

President in which the President reaffirmed Am bassador Sondland’s understanding of the quid 

pro quo for the military aid. 

As Ambassador Sondland acknowledged bluntly in his conversation with Mr. Holmes, 

President Trump’s sole interest with respect to Ukraine was the “big stuff” that benefited him 

pe rsonally, such as the investigations into former Vice President Biden , and not President 

Zelensky’s promises of transparency and reform. 

The President’s Scheme Unraveled 

By early September, President Zelensky was ready to make a public announcement of the 

two investigations to secure a White House meeting and the military assistance his country 

desperately needed. He proceeded to book an interview on CNN during which he c ould make 

such an announcement, but other events soon intervene d.

On September 9, the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, the Committees 

on Oversight and Reform , and the Committee on Foreign Affairs announced an investigation into 

the scheme by President Trump and his personal attorney, Mr. Giuliani “to improperly pressure 

the Ukrainian government to assist the President’s bid for reelection.” The Committees sent 

document production and preservation requests to the White House and the State Department 

related to th e investigation . NSC staff members believed this investigation might have had “ the 

effect of releasing the hold” on Ukraine military assistance because it would have been 

“potentially politically challenging” to “justify that hold. ”26 

Later that day, the Inspector General of the Intelligence Community (ICIG) sent a letter 

to Chairman Schiff and Ranking Member Nunes notify ing the Committee that a whistleblower 

had filed a complaint on August 12 that the ICIG had determined to be both an “urgent concern” 

and “credible.” Nevertheless, the Acting Director of National Intelligence (DNI) took the 

unprecedented step of withholding the complaint from the Congressional Intelligence 

Committees, in coordination with the White House and the Dep artment of Justice. 

The White House had been aware of the whistleblower complaint for several weeks , and 

press reports indicate that the President was briefed on it in late August . T he ICIG’s notification 

to Congress of the complaint’s existenc e, and t he announcement of a separate investigation into 

the same subject matter, telegraphe d to the White House that attempts to condition the security 

assistance on the announcement of the political investigations beneficial to President Trump —

and efforts to cov er up that misconduct —would not last. 

On September 11, in the face of growing public and Congressional scrutiny, President 

Trump lifted the hold on security assistance to Ukraine. As with the implementation of the hold, 

no clear reason was given. By t he time the President ordered the release of security assistance to 

Ukraine, DOD was unable to spend approximately 14 percent of the funds appropriated by 

Congress for Fiscal Year 2019. Congress had to pass a new law to extend the funding in order to 

ensu re the full amount could be used by Ukraine to defend itself. 

Even after the hold was lifted, President Zelensky still intended to sit for an interview 

with CNN in order to announce the investigations —indeed, he still wanted the White House 

meeting. At the urging of Ambassador Taylor, President Zelensky cancelled the CNN interview 

on September 18 or 19 . The White House meeting, however, still has not occurred. 

The President’s Chief of Staff Confirmed Aid was Conditioned on Investigations 

The conditio ning of military aid to Ukraine on the investigations sought by the President 

was as clear to Ambassador Sondland as “two plus two equals four .” In fact, the President’s own 

Acting Chief of Staff, someone who meets with him daily, admitted that he had dis cussed 

security assistance with the President and that his decision to withhold it was directly tied to his 

desire to get Ukraine to conduct a political investigation. 

On October 17, at a press briefing in the White House, Acting Chief of Staff Mick 

Mulva ney confirmed that President Trump withheld the essential military aid for Ukraine as 

leverage to pressure Ukraine to investigate the conspiracy theory that Ukraine had interfered in 

the 2016 U.S. election. As Dr. Hill made clear in her testimony, t his fa lse narrative has been 

promoted by President Putin to deflect away from Russia’s systemic interference in our election 

and to drive a wedge between the United States and a key partner. 

According to Mr. Mulvaney, President Trump “[a]bsolutely” mentioned “corruption 

related to the DNC server” in connection with the security assistance during his July 25 call . Mr. 

Mulvaney also stated that the server was part of “why we held up the money.” After a reporter 

attempted to clarify this explicit ackn owledgement of a quid pro quo, Mr. Mulvaney replied: 27 

“We do that all the time with foreign policy.” He added, “I have news for everybody: get over 

it. There is going to be political influence in foreign policy.” 

Ambassador Taylor testified that in h is decades of military and diplomatic service, he had 

never seen another example of foreign aid conditioned on the personal or political interests of the 

President. Rather, “we condition assistance on issues that will improve our foreign policy, serve 

our foreign policy, ensure that taxpayers’ money is well -spent,” not specific investigations 

designed to benefit the political interests of the President of the United States. 

In contrast, President Trump does not appear to believe there is any such limitation on his 

power to use White House meetings, military aid or other official acts to procure foreign help in 

his reelection. When asked by a reporter on October 3 what he had hoped Presi dent Zelensky 

would do following their July 25 call, President Trump responded: “Well, I would think that, if 

they were honest about it, they’d start a major investigation into the Bidens. It’s a very simple 

answer.” 28 

SECTION II —THE PRESIDENT’S OBSTR UCTION OF THE 

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES’ IMPEACHMENT INQUIRY 

The President Obstructed the Impeachment Inquiry by Instructing 

Witnesses and Agencies to Ignore Subpoenas for Documents and Testimony 

An Unprecedented Effort to Obstruct an Impeachment Inquiry 

Donald Trump is the first President in the history of the United States to seek to 

completely obstruct an impeachment inquiry undertaken by the House of Representatives under 

Article I of the Constitution, which vests the House with the “sole Power of Im peachment.” He 

has publicly and repeatedly rejected the authority of Congress to conduct oversight of his actions 

and has directly challenged the authority of the House to conduct an impeachment inquiry into 

his actions regarding Ukraine. 

President Trump ordered federal agencies and officials to disregard all voluntary requests 

for documents and defy all duly authorized subpoenas for records. He also directed all federal 

officials in the Executive Branch not to testify —even when compelled. 

No other Pr esident has flouted the Constitution and power of Congress to conduct 

oversight to this extent. No President has claimed for himself the right to deny the House’s 

authority to conduct an impeachment proceeding, control the scope of a power exclusively 

ves ted in the House, and forbid any and all cooperation from the Executive Branch. Even 

President Richard Nixon —who obstructed Congress by refusing to turn over key evidence —

accepted the authority of Congress to conduct an impeachment inquiry and permitted h is aides 

and advisors to produce documents and testify to Congressional committees. 

Despite President Trump’s unprecedented and categorical commands, the House gathered 

overwhelming evidence of his misconduct from courageous individuals who were willing to 

follow the law, comply with duly authorized subpoenas, and tell the truth. In response, the 

President engaged in a brazen effort to publicly attack and intimidate these witnesses. 

If left unanswered, President Trump’s ongoing effort to thwart Congres s’ impeachment 

power risks doing grave harm to the institution of Congress, the balance of power between our 

branches of government, and the Constitutional order that the President and every Member of 

Congress have sworn to protect and defend. 

Constitutio nal Authority for Congressional Oversight and Impeachment 

The House’s Constitutional and legal authority to conduct an impeachment inquiry is 

clear, as is the duty of the President to cooperate with the House’s exercise of this authority. 

Article I of the U.S. Constitution gives the House of Representatives the “sole Power of 

Impeachment.” The Framers intended the impeachment power to be an essential check on a 

President who might engage in corruption or abuse of power. Congress is empowered to conduct 

oversight and investigations to carry out its authorities under Article I. Because the 29 

impeachment power is a core component of the nation’s Constitutional system of checks and 

balances, Congress’ investigative authority is at its zenith during an impeachment inquiry. 

The Supreme Court has made clear that Con gress’ authority to investigate includes the 

authority to compel the production of information by issuing subpoenas, a power the House has 

delegated to its committees pursuant to its Constitutional authority to “determine the Rules of its 

Proceedings.” 

Congress has also enacted statutes to support its power to investigate and oversee the 

Executive Branch. These laws impose criminal and other penalties on those who fail to comply 

with inquiries from Congress or block others from doing so, and they refle ct the broader 

Constitutional requirement to cooperate with Congressional investigations. 

Unlike President Trump, past Presidents who were the subject of impeachment 

inquiries —including Presidents Andrew Johnson, Richard Nixon, and Bill Clinton —recogniz ed 

and, to varying degrees, complied with information requests and subpoenas. 

President Nixon, for example, agreed to let his staff testify voluntarily in the Senate 

Watergate investigation, stating: “All members of the White House Staff will appear v oluntarily 

when requested by the committee. They will testify under oath, and they will answer fully all 

proper questions.” President Nixon also produced documents in response to the House’s 

subpoenas as part of its impeachment inquiry, including more than 30 transcripts of White House 

recordings and notes from meetings with the President. When President Nixon withheld tape 

recordings and produced heavily edited and inaccurate records, the House Judiciary Committee 

approved an article of impeachment fo r obstruction. 

The President’s Categorical Refusal to Comply 

Even before the House of Representatives launched its investigation regarding Ukraine, 

President Trump rejected the authority of Congress to investigate his actions, proclaiming, 

“We’re figh ting all the subpoenas,” and “I have an Article II, where I have the right to do 

whatever I want as president.” 

When the Intelligence, Oversight and Reform, and Foreign Affairs Committees began 

reviewing the President’s actions as part of the House’s impe achment inquiry, the President 

repeatedly challenged the legitimacy of the investigation in word and deed. His rhetorical 

attacks appeared intended not only to dispute reports of his misconduct, but to persuade the 

American people that the House lacks aut hority to investigate the President. 

On September 26, President Trump argued that Congress should not be “allowed” to 

impeach him under the Constitution and that there “should be a way of stopping it —maybe 

legally, through the courts.” A common theme o f his defiance has been his claims that Congress 

is acting in an unprecedented way and using unprecedented rules. However, the House has been 

following the same investigative rules that Republicans championed when they were in control. 30 

On October 8, Whit e House Counsel Pat Cipollone sent a letter to House Speaker Nancy 

Pelosi and the Chairmen of the investigating Committees confirming that President Trump 

directed his entire Administration not to cooperate with the House’s impeachment inquiry. Mr. 

Cipoll one wrote: “President Trump cannot permit his Administration to participate in this 

partisan inquiry under these circumstances.” 

Mr. Cipollone’s letter advanced remarkably politicized arguments and legal theories 

unsupported by the Constitution, judici al precedent, and more than 200 years of history. If 

allowed to stand, the President’s defiance, as justified by Mr. Cipollone, would represent an 

existential threat to the nation’s Constitutional system of checks and balances, separation of 

powers, and r ule of law. 

The President’s Refusal to Produce Any and All Subpoenaed Documents 

Following President Trump’s categorical order, not a single document has been produced 

by the White House, the Office of the Vice President, the Office of Management and Budget, the 

Department of State, the Department of Defense, or the Department of Energ y in response to 71 

specific, individualized requests or demands for records in their possession, custody, or control. 

These subpoenas remain in full force and effect. These agencies and offices also blocked many 

current and former officials from produci ng records directly to the Committees. 

Certain witnesses defied the President’s sweeping, categorical, and baseless order and 

identified the substance of key documents. For example, Ambassador Gordon Sondland attached 

ten exhibits to his written hearin g testimony reflecting reproductions of certain communications 

with high -level Administration officials, including Acting White House Chief of Staff Mick 

Mulvaney, former National Security Advisor John Bolton, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, and 

Secretary of Energy Rick Perry. Other witnesses identified numerous additional documents that 

the President and various agencies are withholding that are directly relevant to the impeachment 

inquiry. 

Like the White House, the Department of State refused to produce a single document in 

response to its subpoena, even though there is no legal basis for the Department’s actions. In 

fact, on November 22, the Department was forced to produce 99 pages of emails, letters, notes, 

timelines, and news articles to a non -parti san, nonprofit ethics watchdog organization pursuant to 

a court order in a lawsuit filed under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA). Although limited 

in scope, this production affirms that the Department is withholding responsive documents from 

Congress without any valid legal basis. 

The President’s Refusal to Allow Top Aides to Testify 

No other President in history has issued an order categorically directing the entire 

Executive Branch not to testify before Congress, including in the context of an impe achment 

inquiry. President Trump issued just such an order. 

As reflected in Mr. Cipollone’s letter, President Trump directed government witnesses to 

violate their legal obligations and defy House subpoenas —regardless of their offices or 31 

positions. Pre sident Trump even extended his order to former officials no longer employed by 

the federal government. This Administration -wide effort to prevent all witnesses from providing 

testimony was coordinated and comprehensive. 

At President Trump’s direction, tw elve current or former Administration officials refused 

to testify as part of the House’s impeachment inquiry, ten of whom did so in defiance of duly 

authorized subpoenas: 

• Mick Mulvaney, Acting White House Chief of Staff 

• Robert B. Blair, Assistant to th e President and Senior Advisor to the Chief of Staff 

• Ambassador John Bolton, Former National Security Advisor 

• John A. Eisenberg, Deputy Counsel to the President for National Security Affairs and 

Legal Advisor , National Security Council 

• Michael Ellis, Senio r Associate Counsel to the President and Deputy Legal Advisor ,

National Security Council 

• Preston Wells Griffith, Senior Director for International Energy and Environment, 

National Security Council 

• Dr. Charles M. Kupperman, Former Deputy Assistant to the Pr esident for National 

Security Affairs, National Security Council 

• Russell T. Vought, Acting Director, Office of Management and Budget 

• Michael Duffey, Associate Director for National Security Programs, Office of 

Management and Budget 

• Brian McCormack, Associa te Director for Natural Resources, Energy, and Science, 

Office of Management and Budget 

• T. Ulrich Brechbuhl, Counselor, Department of State 

• Secretary Rick Perry, Department of Energy 

These witnesses were warned that their refusal to testify “shall constitute evidence that 

may be used against you in a contempt proceeding” and “may be used as an adverse inference 

against you and the President.” 

The President’s Unsuccessful Attempts to Block Other Key Witnesses 

Despite President Trump’s orders that no Executive Branch employees should cooperate 

with the House’s impeachment inquiry, multiple key officials complied with duly authorized 

subpoenas and provided critical testimony at deposit ions and public hearings. These officials not 

only served their nation honorably, but they fulfilled their oath to support and defend the 

Constitution of the United States. 

In addition to the President’s broad orders seeking to prohibit all Executive Br anch 

employees from testifying, many of these witnesses were personally directed by senior political 

appointees not to cooperate with the House’s impeachment inquiry. These directives frequently 

cited or enclosed copies of Mr. Cipollone’s October 8 letter conveying the President’s order not 

to comply. 32 

For example, the State Department, relying on President Trump’s order, attempted to 

block Ambassador Marie Yovanovitch from testifying, but she fulfilled her legal obligations by 

appearing at a deposition on October 11 and a hearing on November 15. More than a dozen 

current and former officials followed her courageous example by testifying at depositions and 

public hearings over the course of the last two months. The testimony from these witnesses 

produced overwhelming and clear evidence of President Trump’s misconduct, which is described 

in detail in the first section of this report. 

The President’s Intimidation of Witnesses 

President Trump publicly attacked and intimidated witnesses who came forward to 

comply with duly authorized subpoenas and testify about his misconduct, raising grave concerns 

about potential violations of criminal laws intended to protect witnesses appearing before 

Congressional proceedings. For example, the President attacked: 

• Amba ssador Marie Yovanovitch, who served the United States honorably for decades as 

a U.S. diplomat and anti -corruption advocate in posts around the world under six 

different Presidents; 

• Ambassador Bill Taylor, who graduated at the top of his class at West Po int, served as an 

infantry commander in Vietnam, and earned a Bronze Star and an Air Medal with a V 

device for valor; 

• Lieutenant Colonel Alexander Vindman, an active -duty Army officer for more than 20 

years who earned a Purple Heart for wounds he sustaine d in an improvised explosive 

device attack in Iraq, as well as the Combat Infantryman Badge; and 

• Jennifer Williams, who is Vice President Mike Pence’s top advisor on Europe and Russia 

and has a distinguished record of public service under the Bush, Obama, and Trump 

Administrations. 

The President engaged in this effort to intimidate these public serv ants to prevent them 

from cooperating with Congress’ impeachment inquiry. He issued threats, openly discussed 

possible retaliation, made insinuations about their character and patriotism, and subjected them 

to mockery and derision —when they deserved the o pposite . The President’s attacks were 

broadcast to millions of Americans —including witnesses’ families, friends, and coworkers. 

It is a federal crime to intimidate or seek to intimidate any witness appearing before 

Congress. This prohibition applies to anyone who knowingly “uses intimidation, threatens, or 

corruptly persuades” another person in order to “influence, delay, or prevent the testimony of any 

person in an official proceeding.” Violations of this law can carry a criminal sentence of up to 

20 years in prison. 

In addition to his relentless attacks on witnesses who testified in connection with the 

House’s impeachment inquiry, the President also repeatedly threatened and attacked a member 

of the Intelligence Community who fi led an anonymous whistleblower complaint raising a n33 

“urgent concern” that “appeared credible” regarding the President’s conduct. The whistleblower 

filed the complaint confidentially with the Inspector General of the Intelligence Community, as 

authorized b y the relevant whistleblower law. Federal law prohibits the Inspector General from 

revealing the whistleblower’s identity. Federal law also protects the whistleblower from 

retaliation. 

In more than 100 public statements about the whistleblower over a pe riod of just two 

months, the President publicly questioned the whistleblower’s motives, disputed the accuracy of 

the whistleblower’s account, and encouraged others to reveal the whistleblower’s identity. Most 

chillingly, the President issued a threat agai nst the whistleblower and those who provided 

information to the whistleblower regarding the President’s misconduct, suggesting that they 

could face the death penalty for treason. 

The President’s campaign of intimidation risks discouraging witnesses from coming 

forward voluntarily, complying with mandatory subpoenas for documents and testimony, and 

disclosing potentially incriminating evidence in this inquiry and future Congressional 

investigations. 34 

KEY FINDINGS OF FACT 

Based on witness testimony and evidence collected during the impeachment inquiry, the 

Intelligence Committee has found that: 

I. Donald J. Trump, the 45th President of the United States —acting personally and through 

his agents within and outside of the U.S. government —solicited the inte rference of a 

foreign government, Ukraine, in the 2020 U.S. presidential election. The President 

engaged in this course of conduct for the benefit of his reelection, to harm the election 

prospects of a political opponent, and to influence our nation’s upc oming presidential 

election to his advantage. In so doing, the President placed his personal political interests 

above the national interests of the United States, sought to undermine the integrity of the 

U.S. presidential election process, and endangered U.S. national security. 

II. In furtherance of this scheme, President Trump —directly and acting through his agents 

within and outside the U.S. government —sought to pressure and induce Ukraine’s 

newly -elected president, Volodymyr Zelensky, to publicly anno unce unfounded 

investigations that would benefit President Trump’s personal political interests and 

reelection effort. To advance his personal political objectives, President Trump 

encouraged the President of Ukraine to work with his personal attorney, Ru dy Giuliani .

III. As part of this scheme, President Trump, acting in his official capacity and using his 

position of public trust, personally and directly requested from the President of Ukraine 

that the government of Ukraine publicly announce investigations into (1) the Pr esident’s 

political opponent, former Vice President Joseph R. Biden, Jr. and his son, Hunter Biden, 

and (2) a baseless theory promoted by Russia alleging that Ukraine —rather than 

Russia —interfered in the 2016 U.S. election. These investigations were inten ded to harm 

a potential political opponent of President Trump and benefit the President’s domestic 

political standing. 

IV. President Trump ordered the suspension of $391 million in vital military assistance 

urgently needed by Ukraine, a strategic partne r, to resist Russian aggression. Because the 

aid was appropriated by Congress, on a bipartisan basis, and signed into law by the 

President, its expenditure was required by law. Acting directly and through his 

subordinates within the U.S. government, the President withheld from Ukraine this 

military assistance without any legitimate foreign policy, national security, or anti -

corruption justification. The President did so despite the longstanding bipartisan support 

of Congress, uniform support across feder al departments and agencies for the provision 

to Ukraine of the military assistance, and his obligations under the Impoundment Control 

Act. 

V. President Trump used the power of the Office of the President and exercised his authority 

over the Executive Bra nch, including his control of the instruments of the federal 

government, to apply increasing pressure on the President of Ukraine and the Ukrainian 

government to announce the politically -motivated investigations desired by President 

Trump. Specifically, t o advance and promote his scheme, the President withheld official 35 

acts of value to Ukraine and conditioned their fulfillment on actions by Ukraine that 

would benefit his personal political interests: 

A. President Trump —acting through agents within and o utside the U.S. 

government —conditioned a head of state meeting at the White House, which the 

President of Ukraine desperately sought to demonstrate continued United States 

support for Ukraine in the face of Russian aggression , on Ukraine publicly 

announcin g the investigations that President Trump believed would aid his 

reelection campaign. 

B. To increase leverage over the President of Ukraine, President Trump, acting 

through his agents and subordinates, conditioned release of the vital military 

assistance he had suspended to Ukraine on the President of Ukraine’s public 

announcement of the investigations that President Trump sought. 

C. President Trump’s closest subordinates and advisors within the Executive Branch, 

including Acting Chief of Staff Mick Mulva ney, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, 

Secretary of Energy J. Richard Perry, and other senior White House and 

Executive Branch officials had knowledge of, in some cases facilitated and 

furthered the President’s scheme, and withheld information about the scheme 

from the Congress and the American public .

VI. In directing and orchestrating this scheme to advance his personal political interests, 

President Trump did not implement, promote, or advance U.S. anti -corruption policies. 

In fact, the President s ought to pressure and induce the government of Ukraine to 

announce politically -motivated investigations lacking legitimate predication that the U.S. 

government otherwise discourages and opposes as a matter of policy in that country and 

around the world. I n so doing, the President undermined U.S. policy supporting anti -

corruption reform and the rule of law in Ukraine, and undermined U.S. national security. 

VII. By withholding vital military assistance and diplomatic support from a strategic foreign 

partne r government engaged in an ongoing military conflict illegally instigated by Russia, 

President Trump compromised national security to advance his personal political 

interests. 

VIII. Faced with the revelation of his actions, President Trump publicly and r epeatedly 

persisted in urging foreign governments, including Ukraine and China, to investigate his 

political opponent. This continued solicitation of foreign interference in a U.S. election 

presents a clear and present danger that the President will conti nue to use the power of his 

office for his personal political gain. 

IX. Using the power of the Office of the President, and exercising his authority over the 

Executive Branch, President Trump ordered and implemented a campaign to conceal his 

conduct from the public and frustrate and obstruct the House of Representatives’ 

impeachment inquiry by: 36 

A. refusing to produce to the impeachment inquiry’s investigating Committees 

information and records in the possession of the White House, in defiance of a 

lawful subpoena; 

B. directing Executive Branch agencies to defy lawful subpoenas and withhold the 

production of all documents and records from the investigating Committees; 

C. directing current and former Executive Branch officials not to cooperate with the 

Committees, incl uding in defiance of lawful subpoenas for testimony; and 

D. intimidating, threatening, and tampering with prospective and actual witnesses in 

the impeachment inquiry in an effort to prevent, delay , or influence the testimony 

of those witnesses. 

In so d oing, and despite the fact that the Constitution vests in the House of 

Representatives the “sole Power of Impeachment,” the President sought to arrogate to 

himself the right to determine the propriety, scope, and nature of an impeachment inquiry 

into his o wn misconduct, and the right to deny any and all information to the Congress in 

the conduct of its constitutional responsibilities. 37 

SECTION I .

THE PRESIDENT’S MISCONDUCT 38 

1. The President Forced Out the U.S. Ambassador to Ukraine 

The President forced out the United States Ambassador to Ukraine, Marie Yovanovitch, 

following a baseless smear campaign promoted by President Trump ’s personal attorney, 

Rudy Giuliani, and others. The campaign publicized conspiracy theories that benefited the 

President’s personal political interests and undermined official U.S. policy , some of which 

the President raised during his July 25 call with t he President of Ukraine .

Overview 

On April 24, 2019, President Donald J. Trump abruptly recalled the U.S. Ambassador to 

Ukraine, Marie Yovanovitch. Ambassador Yovanovitch, an award -winning 33 -year veteran 

Foreign Service officer, aggressively advocat ed for anti -corruption reforms in Ukraine consistent 

with U.S. foreign policy . President Trump forced her out following a baseless smear campaign 

promoted by his personal attorney , Rudy Giuliani, associates of Mr. Giuliani, and corrupt 

Ukrainians .

Ambassador Yovanovitch was told by the State Department that President Trump had 

lost confidence in her, but she was never provided a substantive justification for her removal. 

Her ouster set the stage for other U.S. officials appointed by President Trump to work in 

cooperation with Mr. Giuliani to advance a scheme in support of the President’s reelection .

Mr. Giuliani and his associates promot ed false conspiracy theories about Ukraine 

colluding with Democrats to interfere in the 2016 U.S. election. Th is false claim was promoted 

by Russian President Vladimir Putin in February 2017 —less than a month after the unanimous 

U.S. Intelligence Community assessment that Russia alone was responsible for a covert influence 

campaign aimed at helping President Trump during the 2016 election . Mr. Giuliani also made 

discredited public allegations about former Vice President Joe Biden and his son, Hunter, in an 

apparent effort to hurt President Trump’s political rival in the 2020 presidential election. Mr. 

Giuliani’s associates, with their own ties to President Trump, also worked to enter into 

arrangements with current and former corrupt Ukrainian officials to promote these false 

allegations —the same unfounded allegations President Trump requested that Ukraine investig ate 

on his July 25 call with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky. 

President Trump amplified these baseless allegations by tweeting them just a month 

before he recalled Ambassador Yovanovitch. Despite requests from Ambassador Yovanovitch 

and other sen ior State Department officials, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo refused to issue a 

statement of support for the Ambassador or the U.S. Embassy in Ukraine for fear of being 

undermined by a tweet by President Trump .

The removal of Ambassador Yovanovitch left a vacuum in the leadership of the U.S. 

Embassy in Ukraine at an important time. A new president had just been elected on an anti -

corruption platform, and the country was in a period of transition as it continued to defend itself 

against Russia -led military aggression in the east. 39 

Anti -Corruption Ceremony Interrupted to Recall Anti -Corruption Ambassador 

Ambassador Yovanovitch represented the United States of America as the U.S. 

Ambassador to Ukraine from 2016 to 2019. She is a non -partisan career public servant, first 

selected for the American Foreign Service in 1986. President George W. Bush named her as his 

Ambassador twice, to the Kyrgyz Republic and Armenia, and President Barack Obama 

nominated her for the posting in Kyiv. 1

On the evening of April 24, Ambassador Yovanovitch approached a podium in front of 

gold drapes at the U.S. Ambassador’s residence in Ukraine’s capital city . She was hosting an 

event to present an award of courage to the fa ther of Kate ryna Handziuk, who was brutally 

murdered by people who opposed her efforts to expose and root out public corruption in 

Ukraine . In 2018, attackers threw sulfuric acid at Ms. Handziuk, burning more than 30 percent 

of her body. After months of suffering an d nearly a dozen surgeries, she died at the age of 33. 2

Her attackers have still not been held to account. 3

Ambassador Yovanovitch began her speech by noting that Ms. Handziuk “was a woman 

of courage who committed herself to speaking out against wrongd oing .” She lamented how Ms. 

Handziuk had “paid the ultimate price for her fearlessness in fighting against corruption and for 

her determined efforts to build a democratic Ukraine.” She pledged that the United States would 

“continue to stand with those en gaged in the fight for a democratic Ukraine free of corruption, 

where people are held accountable” and commended Ukrainians who “have demonstrated to the 

world that they are willing to fight for a better system.” 4

Ambassador Yovanovitch concluded her rema rks by holding Ms. Handziuk’s story up as 

an inspiration to the many Ukrainians striving to chart a new course for their country in the face 

of Russian interference and aggression :

I think we can all see what a remarkable woman Kateryna Handziuk was, but she 

continues to inspire all of us to fight for justice. She was a courageous woman, who 

wanted to make Ukraine a better place. And she is continuing to do so. And I’ll just 

leave you with one thought that was expressed in Washington at the ceremony —tha t

courage is contagious. I think we saw that on the Maidan in 2014, we see that on the 

front lines every day in the Donbas, we see it in the work that Kateryna Handziuk did 

here in Ukraine. And we see it in the work of all of you —day in, day out —fighting for 

Ukraine and the future of Ukraine. 5

Ambassador Yovanovitch’s evening was interrupted a round 10 :00 p.m. by a telephone 

call from the State Department’s headquarters in Washington, D.C. 

Director General of the Foreign Service and Director of Human Resources Ambassador 

Carol Perez warned that the Department’s leaders had “great concern” and “were worried” about 

her. Ambassador Yovanovitch testified that it is “hard to know how to react to something like 

that.” Ambassador Perez said she did not know what the concerns were but pledged she would 

“try to find out more” and would try to call back “by midnight.” 640 

Finally, at 1 :00 a.m. in Kyiv , Ambassador Perez called again: The “concerns” were from 

“up the street” at the White House. Ambassador Perez said that Ambassador Yovanovitch 

needed to “come home immediately, get on the next plane to the U.S.” She warned that there 

were concerns about Ambassador Yovanovitch’s “security. ” When Ambassador Yovanovitch 

asked if Ambassador Perez was referring to her physical safety, Ambassador Perez relayed that 

she “hadn’t gotten that impression that it was a physical security issue,” but that Ambassador 

Yovanovitch “needed to come home rig ht away.” 7

Ambassador Yovanovitch asked Ambassador Perez specifically whether this order had 

anything to do with President Trump’s personal attorney, Rudy Giuliani, who had been making 

unfounded allegations against her in the media. Ambassador Perez sa id she “didn’t know.” 8

Ambassador Yovanovitch argued that this order to return to Washington, D.C. was “extremely 

irregular ” and that no one had provided her a reason. 9 In the end, however, Ambassador 

Yovanovitch swiftly returned to Washington .10 

Rudy Gi uliani , on Behalf of President Trump, Led a Smear Campaign 

to Oust Ambassador Yovanovitch 

Ambassador Yovanovitch’s recall followed a concerted smear campaign by Mr. Giuliani 

and his associates , promoted by President Trump . The campaign was largely directed by Rudy 

Giuliani , President Trump’s personal attorney since early 2018 .11 A cast of supporting 

characters , which include d corrupt Ukrainian prosecutors, now -indicted middlemen, 

conservative media pundits , and attorneys close to President Trump , as sisted Mr. Giuliani .

Among those associates were two U.S. citizens, Lev Parnas and Igor Fruman. Mr. Parnas and 

Mr. Fruman were Florida -based businessmen who were represented by Mr. Giuliani “in 

connection with their personal and business affairs” and who also “assisted Mr. Giuliani in 

connection with his representation of President Trump.” 12 Both Mr. Parnas and Mr. Fruman 

were criminally indicted in the Southern District of New York in October and face charges of 

conspiring to violate the federal ban on f oreign donations and contributions in connection with 

federal and state elections. 13 Dr. Fiona Hill, former Deputy Assistant to the President and Senior 

Director for Europe and Russia n Affairs, National Security Council (NSC), learned from her 

colleagues t hat “these guys were notorious in Florida and that they were bad news.” 14 

The campaign was also propelled by individuals in Ukraine, including two prosecutors 

general. Yuriy Lutsenko served as the Prosecutor General of Ukraine under former Ukrainian 

Pres ident Petro Poroshenko —the incumbent who lost to President Zelensky in April 2019 —and 

previously was the head of President Poroshenko’s faction in the Ukrainian parliament. 15 Viktor 

Shokin was Mr. Lutsenko’s predecessor and was removed from office in 2016. 16 Mr. Shokin has 

been described as “a typical Ukraine prosecutor who lived a lifestyle far in excess of his 

government salary, who never prosecuted anybody known for having committed a crime, ” and 

“covered up crimes that were known to have been committed. ”17 

In late 2018, Ukrainian officials informed Ambassador Yovanovitch about Mr. Giuliani’s 

and Mr. Lutsenko’s plans to target her. They told her that Mr. Lutsenko “was in communication 

with Mayor Giuliani” and that “they were going to, you know, do thin gs, including to me.” 18 41 

Soon thereafter, Ambassador Yovanovitch learned that “there had been a number of meetings” 

between Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Lutsenko, who was looking to “hurt” her “in the U.S.” 19 

The allegations against Ambassador Yovanovitch, which later surfaced publicly, 

concerned false claims that she had provided a “ do -not -prosecute list ” to Mr. Lutsenko and made 

disparaging comments about President Trump. 20 

Ambassador Yovanovitch inferred that Mr. Lutsenko was spreading “falsehoods” about 

her because she was “effective at helping Ukrainians who wanted reform, Ukrainians who 

wanted to fight against corruption, and … that was not in his interest.” 21 Anti -corrup tion reform 

was not in Mr. Lutsenko’s interest because he himself was known to be corrupt. 22 David 

Holmes, Counselor for Political Affairs at the U.S. Embassy in Kyiv, Ukraine, explained th at: 

In mid -March 2019, an Embassy colleague learned from a Ukraini an contact that Mr. 

Lutsenko had complained that Ambassador Yovanovitch had, quote, unquote, destroyed 

him, with her refusal to support him until he followed through with his reform 

commitments and ceased using his position for personal gain. 23 

Deputy Assistant Secretary of State George Kent similarly summarized Mr. Lutsenko’s 

smear campaign against Ambassador Yovanovitch , which was facilitated by Mr. Giuliani and his 

associates, as motivated by revenge :

Over the course of 2018 and 2019, I becam e increasingly aware of an effort by Rudy 

Giuliani and others, including his associates Lev Parnas and Igor Fruman, to run a 

campaign to smear Ambassador Yovanovitch and other officials at the U.S. Embassy in 

Kyiv. The chief agitators on the Ukrainian sid e of this effort were some of those same 

corrupt former prosecutors I had encountered, particularly Yuriy Lutsenko and Viktor 

Shokin. They were now peddling false information in order to extract revenge against 

those who had exposed their misconduct, incl uding U.S. diplomats, Ukrainian 

anticorruption officials, and reform -minded civil society groups in Ukraine. 24 

Mr. Kent succinctly summarized , “ [y] ou can’t promote principled anti -corruption efforts 

without pissing off corrupt people.” 25 By doing her job , Ambassador Yovanovitch drew Mr. 

Lutsenko’s ire. 

In late 2018 and early 2019, Mr. Lutsenko also risked losing his job as Prosecutor 

General and possible criminal investigation, if then -candidate Volodymyr Zelensky won the 

presidency. Special Representat ive for Ukraine Negotiations, Ambassador Kurt Volker, 

explained: 

As is often the case in Ukraine, a change in power would mean change in prosecutorial 

powers as well, and there have been efforts in the past at prosecuting the previous 

government. I thin k Mr. Lutsenko, in my estimation, and I said this to Mayor Giuliani 

when I met with him, was interested in preserving his own position. He wanted to avoid 

being fired by a new government in order to prevent prosecution of himself, possible 

prosecution of himself. 26 42 

Officials in Ukraine have also speculated that Mr. Lutsenko cultivated his relationship 

with Mr. Giuliani in an effort to hold on to his position. 27 Ambassador Yovanovitch described 

Mr. Lutsenko as an “opportunist” who “will ally h imself, sometimes simultaneously … with 

whatever political or economic forces he believes will suit his interests best at the time.” 28 

Mr. Lutsenko promoted debunked conspiracy theories that had gained traction with 

President Trump and Mr. Giuliani. Tho se debunked conspiracy theor ies alleged that the 

Ukrainian government —not Russia —was behind the hack of the Democratic National 

Committee (DNC) server in 2016, and that former Vice President Biden had petitioned for the 

removal of Mr. Shokin to prevent an investigation into Burisma Holdings , a Ukrainian energy 

company for which Vice President Biden’s son, Hunter, served as a board member. 

Both conspiracy theories served the personal political interests of President Trump 

because they would help him in hi s campaign for reelection in 2020. The first would serve to 

undercut Special Counsel Robert Mueller’s investigation, which was still underway when Mr. 

Giuliani began his activities in Ukraine and was denounced as a “witch hunt” by the President 

and his su pporters. 29 The second would serve to damage Democratic presidential candidate Vice 

President Biden. 

These conspiracies lacked any basis in fact. The Intelligence Community, the Senate 

Select Committee on Intelligence , both the Majority and Minority of t he House Permanent Select 

Committee on Intelligence, and the investigation undertaken by Special Counsel Robert Mueller 

concluded that Russia was responsible for interfering in the 2016 election. 30 President Trump’s 

former Homeland Security Advisor, Tom Bo ssert, said that the idea of Ukraine hacking the DNC 

server was “not only a conspiracy theory, it is completely debunked.” 31 

Russia has pushed the false theory that Ukraine was involved in the 2016 election to 

distract from its own involvement. 32 Mr. Holmes testified that it was to President Putin’s 

advantage to promote the theory of Ukrainian interference in the 2016 U.S. elections for several 

reasons: 

First of all, to deflect from the allegations of Russian interference. Second of all, to drive 

a wedge between the United States and Ukraine which Russia wants to essentially get 

back into its sphere of influence. Thirdly, to besmirch Ukraine and its political 

leadership, [and] to degrade and erode support for Ukraine from other ke y partners in 

Europe and elsewhere. 33 

The allegations that Vice President Biden inappropriately pressured the Ukrainians to 

remove Mr. Shokin also are without merit. Mr. Shokin was widely considered to be ineffective 

and corrupt. 34 When he urged the Ukrai nian government to remove Mr. Shokin, Vice President 

Biden was advocating for anti -corruption reform and pursuing official U.S. policy. 35 Moreover, 

Mr. Shokin’s removal was supported by other countries, the International Monetary Fund, and 

the World Bank, and was “ widely understood internationally to be the right policy .” 36 In May 

2019, even Mr. Lutsenko himself admitted that there was no credible evidence of wrongdoing by 

Hunter Biden or Vice President Biden. 37 43 

Nevertheless, Mr. Giuliani engaged with both Mr. Lutsenko and Mr. Shokin regarding 

these baseless allegations. According to documents provided to the State Department Office of 

Inspector General, i n January 23, 2019, Mr. Giuliani, Mr. Parnas, and Mr. Frum an participated in 

a conference call with Mr. Shokin. According to notes of the call, Mr. Shokin made allegations 

about Vice President Biden and Burisma . Mr. Shokin also claimed that Ambassador 

Yovanovitch had improperly denied him a U.S. visa and that s he was close to Vice President 

Biden. 38 

Mr. Giuliani separately met with Mr. Lutsenko in New York. 39 Over the course of two 

days, on January 25 and 26, Mr. Giuliani, Mr. Lutsenko, Mr. Parnas, and Mr. Fruman, reportedly 

discussed whether Ambassador Yovanovi tch was “loyal to President Trump,” as well as 

investigations into Burisma and the Bidens. 40 For his part, Mr. Lutsenko later said he 

“understood very well” that Mr. Giuliani wanted Mr. Lutsenko to investigate former Vice 

President Biden and his son, Hunte r. “I have 23 years in politics,” Lutsenko said. “I knew. … 

I’m a political animal.” 41 

Mr. Giuliani later publicly acknowledged that he was seeking information from 

Ukrainians on behalf of his client, President Trump. On October 23, Mr. Giuliani tweete d

“everything I did was to discover evidence to defend my client against false charges.” 42 Then, in 

a series of tweets on October 30, Mr. Giuliani stated: 

All of the information I obtained came from interviews conducted as … private defense 

counsel to POT US, to defend him against false allegations. I began obtaining this 

information while Mueller was still investigating his witch hunt and a full 5 months 

before Biden even announced his run for Pres. 43 

President Trump and Mr. Giuliani’s efforts to investig ate alleged Ukrainian interference 

in the 2016 U.S. election and Vice President Biden negatively impacted the U.S. Embassy in 

Kyiv. Mr. Holmes testified: 

Beginning in March 2019, the situation at the Embassy and in Ukraine changed 

dramatically. Specific ally, the three priorities of security, economy, and justice and our 

support for Ukrainian democratic resistance to Russian aggression became overshadowed 

by a political agenda promoted by former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani and a 

cadre of officials o perating with a direct channel to the White House. 44 

U.S. national interests in Ukraine were undermined and subordinated to the personal, political 

interests of President Trump. 

The Smear Campaign Accelerated in Late March 2019 

The smear campaign entered a more public phase in the United States in late March 2019 

with the publication of a series of opinion pieces in The Hill .

On March 20, 2019, John Solomon penned an opinion piece quoting a false claim by Mr. 

Lutsenko that Amba ssador Yovanovitch had given him a do -not -prosecute list. 45 Mr. Lutsenko 44 

later retracted the claim. 46 Mr. Solomon’s work also included false alleg ations that Ambassador 

Yovanovitch had “made disparaging statements about President Trump.” 47 Ambassador 

Yovan ovitch called this allegation “fictitious ,” and the State Department issued a statement 

describing the allegations as a “fabrication.” 48 

The Committees uncovered evidence of close ties and frequent contacts between Mr. 

Solomon and Mr. Parnas , who was assis ting Mr. Giuliani in connection with his representation 

of the President . Phone records show that in the 48 hours before publication of The Hill opinion 

piece, Mr. Parnas spoke with Mr. Solomon at least six times. 49 In addition, The Hill piece cited a 

letter dated May 9, 2018, from Rep resentative Pete Sessions (R -Texas) to Secretary Pompeo, in 

which Rep. Sessions accused Ambassador Yovanovitch of speaking “privately and re peatedly 

about her disdain for the current administration.” 50 A federal criminal indictment alleges that in 

or about May 2018, Mr. Parnas sought a congressman’s assistance to remove Ambassador 

Yovanovitch, at the request of one or more Ukrainian government officials. 51 

On March 20, 2019, the day The Hill opinion piece was published, Mr. Parnas again 

spoke with Mr. Solomon for 11 minutes. 52 Shortly after that phone call, President Trump 

promoted Mr. Solomon’s article in a tweet. 53 

Following President Tru mp’s tweet, the public attacks against Ambassador Yovanovitch 

were further amplified on social media and were merged with the conspiracy theories regarding 

both Ukrainian interference in the 2016 U.S. election and the Bidens. On March 22, 2019, Mr. 

Giulia ni tweeted : “Hillary, Kerry, and Biden people colluding with Ukrainian operatives to make 

money and affect 2016 election.” He also gave an interview to Fox News in which he raised 

Hunter Biden and called for an investigation. 54 Then, on March 24, Donald Trump Jr. ca lled 

Ambassador Yovanovitch a “joker” on Twitter and called for her removal. 55 

This campaign reverberated in Ukraine. Mr. Kent testified that “starting in mid -March” 

Mr. Giuliani was “almost unmissable” during this “campaign of slander” against Ambassad or 

Yovanovitch. 56 According to Mr. Kent, Mr. Lutsenko’s press spokeswoman retweeted Donald 

Trump, Jr.’s tweet attacking the Ambassador. 57 

Concerns About President Trump Kept State Department from Issuing Statement of Support 

At the end of March, as this smear campaign intensified, Ambassador Yovanovitch sent 

Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs David Hale an email identifying her concerns with 

the false allegations about her and asking for a strong statement of support from the State 

Department. She explained that, otherwise, “it makes it hard to be a credible ambassador in a 

country.” 58 Ambassador Hale had been briefed on the smears in a series of emails from Mr. 

Kent. 59 Ambassador Hale agreed that the allegations were without merit. 60 

Ambassad or Yovanovitch was told that State Department officials were concerned that if 

they issued a public statement supporting her , “it could be undermined” by “[t]he President.” 61 

Ambassador Hale explained that a statement of support “would only fuel further negative 

reaction” and that “ it might even provoke a public reaction from the President himself about the 45 

Ambassador.” 62 In short, State Department officials were concerned “that the rug would be 

pulled out from underneath the State Department.” 63 

Ambassador Yovanovitch turned to the U.S. Ambassador to the European Union, Gordon 

Sondland , for advice. According to Ambassador Yovanovitch, Ambassador Sondland suggested 

that, in response to the smear campaign, she make a public statement in support of President 

Trump. She said Ambassador Sondland told her, “you need to go big or go home” and “tweet 

out there that you support the President, and that all these are lies and everything else.” 64 

Ambassador Yovanovitch said she felt that this “was advice tha t I did not see how I could 

implement in my role as an Ambassador, and as a Foreign Service officer.” 65 

Ultimately, Secretary Pompeo refused to issue a public statement of support for 

Ambassador Yovanovitch . At the same time Secretary Pompeo was refusin g to issue a 

statement, he was communicating with one of the individuals involved in the smear campaign 

against her. State Department records show that Secretary Pompeo spoke to Mr. Giuliani on 

March 26 and 28 , not long after Mr. Solomon’s first article i n The Hill .66 

The Smear Campaign was a Coordinated Effort by Mr. Giuliani, His Associates, 

and One or More Individuals at the White House 

In April, Mr. Solomon continued to publish opinion pieces about Ambassador 

Yovanovitch and other conspiracy theories being pursued by Mr. Giuliani on behalf of President 

Trump. Mr. Solomon was not working alone. As further described below, there was a 

coordinated effort by associates of President Trump to push these false narratives publicly, as 

evi denced by public statements, phone records, and contractual agreements. 

On April 1, Mr. Solomon published an opinion piece in The Hill alleging that Vice 

President Biden had inappropriately petitioned for the removal of Mr. Shokin to protect his son, 

Hunter. 67 The opinion piece was entitled, “ Joe Biden ’s 2020 Ukrainian Nightmare: A Closed 

Probe is Revived .” Many of the allegations in t he piece were based on information provided by 

Mr. Lutsenko. The following day, Donald Trump, Jr. retweeted the article. 68 

Phone records obtained by the Committees show frequent communication between key 

players during this phase of the scheme. Between April 1 and April 7, Mr. Parnas exchanged 

approximately 16 calls with Mr. Giuliani (longest duration approximately seven minutes) and 

approximately 10 calls with Mr. Solomon (longest duration approximately nine minutes). 69 

On April 7, Mr. Solomon follow ed up with another opinion piece. The piece accused 

Ambassador Yovanovitch of preventing the issuance of U.S. visas for Ukrainian officials who 

wished to travel to the United States to provide purported evidence of wrongdoing by “American 

Democrats and th eir allies in Kiev.” 70 One of those Ukrainian officials allegedly denied a visa 

was Ko nstiantyn Kulyk , a deputy to Mr. Lutes en ko. Mr. Kulyk participated in a “wide -ranging 

interview” with Mr. Solomon and was extensively quoted. 71 

These Ukrainian officials claimed to have evidence of wrongdoing about Vice President 

Biden’s efforts in 2015 to remove Mr. Shokin, Hunter Biden’s role as a Burisma board member, 46 

Ukrainian interference in the 2016 U.S. election in favor of Hillary Clinton, and the 

misappropriation and transfer of Ukrainian funds abroad. 72 The opinion piece also made clear 

that Mr. Giuliani was pursuing these very same theories o n behalf of the President: 

More recently, President Trump’s private attorney Rudy Giuliani —former mayor and 

former U.S. attorney in New York City —learned about some of the allegations while, on 

behalf of the Trump legal team, he looked into Ukrainian involvement in the 2016 

election. 

According to Mr. Solomon’s piece, Mr. Lutsenko was reported to have sufficient evidence, 

“particularly involving Biden, his family and money spirited out of Ukraine —to warrant a 

meeting with U.S. Attorney General William Barr.” 73 

On the same day that Mr. Solomon published these allegations, Mr. Giuliani appeared on 

Fox News . Mr. Giuliani d iscussed how he learned about alleged Ukrainian interference in the 

2016 U.S. elections and the Bidens’ purported misconduct in Ukraine: 

Let me tell you my interest in that. I got information about three or four months ago that 

a lot of the explanations for how this whole phony investigation started will be in the 

Ukraine, that there were a group of people in the Ukraine that were working to help 

Hillary Clinton and were colluding really —[LAUGHTER ]—with the Clinton campaign. 

And it stems around the ambassador and the embassy, being used for political purposes. 

So I began getting some people that were coming forward and telling me about that. And 

then all of a sudden, they revealed the story about Burisma and Biden ’s son … [V ice 

President Biden] bragged about pressuring Ukraine ’s president to firing [sic] a top 

prosecutor who was being criticized on a whole bunch of areas but was conducting 

investigation of this gas company which Hunter Biden served as a director. 74 

The next d ay, April 8, Mr. Giuliani tweeted about Mr. Solomon’s opinion piece. 75 

Over the course of the four days following the April 7 article, phone records show 

contacts between Mr. Giuliani, Mr. Parnas, Rep resentative Devin Nunes, and Mr. Solomon. 

Specifically, Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Parnas were in contact with one another, as well as with Mr. 

Solomon. 76 Phone records also show contacts on April 10 between Mr. Giuliani and Rep. 

Nunes, consisting of three short calls in rapid succession, followed by a text message, and ending 

with a nearly three minute call. 77 Later that same day , Mr. Parnas and Mr. Solomon had a four 

minute, 39 second call. 78 

Victoria Toensing , a lawyer who , along with her partner Joseph diGenova, once briefly 

represented President Trump in connection with Special Counsel Robert Mueller’s 

investigation, 79 also was in phone contact with Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Parnas at the beginning of 

April. 80 

Beginning in mid -April, Ms. Toensing signed retainer agreements between diGenova & 

Toensing LLP and Mr. Lutsenko, Mr. Kulyk, and Mr. Shokin —all of whom feature in Mr. 

Sol omon’s opinion pieces. 81 In these retainer agreements, the firm agreed to represent Mr. 47 

Lutsenko and Mr. Kulyk in meetings with U.S. officials regarding alleged “evidence” of 

Ukrainian interference in the 2016 U.S. elections, and to represent Mr. Shokin “fo r the purpose 

of collecting evidence regarding his March 2016 firing as Prosecutor General of Ukraine and the 

role of Vice President Biden in such firing, and presenting such evidence to U.S. and foreign 

authorities.” 82 On July 25, President Trump would pe rsonally press President Zelensky to 

investigate these very same matters. 

On April 23, Mr. Parnas had a call with Mr. Solomon, and multiple phone contacts with 

Mr. Giuliani. 83 On that same day, Mr. Giuliani had a series of short phone calls (ranging from 11 

to 18 seconds) with a phone number associated with the White House, followed shortly 

thereafter by an eight minute, 28 second call with an unidentified number that called him. 84 

Approximately half an hour later, Mr. Giuliani had a 48 second call with a phone number 

associated with Ambassador John Bolton, National Security Advisor to the President. 85 

That same day, Mr. Giuliani tweeted: 

Hillary is correct the report is the end of the beginning for the second time...NO 

COLLUSION. Now Ukraine is inves tigating Hillary campaign and DNC conspiracy 

with foreign operatives including Ukrainian and others to affect 2016 election. And 

there’s no Comey to fix the result. 86 

The next day, on the morning of April 24, Mr. Giuliani appeared on Fox and Friends ,

lamb asting the Mueller investigation. Mr. Giuliani also promoted the false conspiracy theories 

about Ukraine and Vice President Biden: 

And I ask you to keep your eye on Ukraine , because in Ukraine, a lot of the dirty work 

was done in digging up the informati on. American officials were used, Ukrainian 

officials were used. That’s like collusion with the Ukrainians. And, or actually in this 

case, conspiracy with the Ukrainians. I think you’d get some interesting information 

about Joe Biden from Ukraine. Abo ut his son, Hunter Biden. About a company he was 

on the board of for years, which may be one of the most crooked companies in Ukraine. 

… And Biden bragged about the fact that he got the prosecutor general fired. The 

prosecutor general was investigating his son and then the investigation went south. 87 

Later that day, Mr. Giuliani had three phone calls with a number associated with OMB, and eight 

calls with a White House number. 88 One of the calls with the White House was four minutes, 53 

seconds, and anot her was three minutes, 15 seconds. 

Later that evening, the State Department phoned Ambassador Yovanovitch and abruptly 

called her home because of “concerns” from “up the street” at the White House. 89 

Ambassador Yovanovitch Was Informed That the President “Lost Confidence” in Her 

When Ambassador Yovanovitch returned to the United States at the end of April , Deputy 

Secretary of State John Sullivan informed her that she had “done nothing wrong,” but “there had 

been a concerted campaign” against her and that President Trump had “lost confidence” in her 48 

leadership .90 He also told her that “the President no longer wished me to serve as Ambassador to 

Ukraine, and th at, in fact, the President had been pushing for my removal since the prior 

summer.” 91 Ambassador Philip T. Reeker, Acting Assistant Secretary of State for the Bureau of 

European and Eurasian Affairs, offered a similar assessment. He explained to Ambassado r

Yovanovitch that Secretary Pompeo had tried to “protect” her, but “was no longer able to do 

that.” 92 

Counselor of the Department of State T. Ulrich Brechbuhl, who had been handling 

Ambassador Yovanovitch’s recall, refused to meet with her .93 

Ambassad or Yovanovitch’s final day as U.S. Ambassador to Ukraine was May 20, 2019 .

This was the same day as President Zelensky’s inauguration , which was attended by Secretary of 

Energy Rick Perry, Ambassador Sondland, and Ambassador Volker. 94 Rather than joining the 

official delegation at the inaugural festivities, she finished packing her personal belongings and 

boarded an airplane for her final flight home. Three days later, President Trump met in the Oval 

Office with his hand -picked delegation and gave them th e “directive ” to “ talk with Rudy 

[Giuliani]” about Ukraine. 95 

The President Provided No Rationale for the Recall of Ambassador Yovanovitch 

Ambassador Yovanovitch testified that she was never provided a justification for why 

President Trump recalled her .96 Only two months earlier, in early March 2019, Ambassador 

Yovanovitch had been asked by Ambassador Hale to extend her assignment as Ambassador to 

Ukraine until 2020 .97 

Ambassador Hale testified that Ambassador Yovanovitch was “an exceptional officer 

doing exceptional work at a very critical embassy in Kyiv.” 98 He added, “I believe that she 

should’ve been able to stay at post and continue to do the outstanding work that she was 

doing.” 99 

During her more than three -decade ca reer, Ambassador Yovanovitch received a number 

of awards , including: the Presidential Distinguished Service Award, the Secretary’s Diplomacy 

in Human Rights Award, the Senior Foreign Service Performance Award six times, and the State 

Department’s Superior Honor Award five times. 100 

Career foreign service officer Ambassador P. Michael McKinley, former Senior Advisor 

to Secretary Pompeo, testified that Ambassador Yovanovitch’s reputation was “excellent, 

serious, committed.” 101 Ambassador Reeker described her as an “[o]utstanding diplomat ,” “very 

precise, very —very professional, ” “ an excellent mentor, ” and “ a good leader.” 102 

Ambassador Yovanovitch Strongly Advocated for the U.S. Policy to Combat Corruption 

Throughout the course of her career, and while posted to Kyiv, Ambassador Yovanovitch 

was a champion of the United States’ longstanding priority of combatting corruption. 49 

Mr. Kent described U.S. foreign policy in Ukraine as encompassing the priorities of 

“promoting the rule of law, energy independence, de fense sector reform, and the ability to stand 

up to Russia.” 103 Ambassador Yovanovitch testified that it “was —and remains —a top U.S. 

priority to help Ukraine fight corruption” because corruption makes Ukraine more “vulnerable to 

Russia.” 104 Additionally, she testified that an honest and accountable Ukrainian leadership 

makes a U.S. -Ukrainian partnership more reliable and more valuable to the United States. 105 

Mr. Holmes testified that Ambassador Yovanovitch was successful in implementing anti -

corruption reform s in Ukraine by achieving, for example, “the hard -fought passage of a law 

establishing an independent court to try corruption cases.” 106 Mr. Holmes said Ambassador 

Yovanovitch was “[a]s good as anyone known for ” combatting corruption .107 Th e reform s

achieve d by Ambassador Yovanovitch helped reduce the problem faced by many post -Soviet 

countries of selective corruption prosecutions to target political opponents. 108 

There was a broad consensus that Ambassador Yovanovitch was successful in helping 

Ukraine combat pervasive and endemic corruption .

President’s Authority Does Not Explain Removal of Yovanovitch 

While ambassadors serve at the pleasure of the president, the manner and circumstances 

of Ambassador Yovanovitch’s removal were unusual and raise questions of motive .109 

Ambassador Yovanovitch queried “why it was necessary to smear my reputation 

falsely .”110 She found it difficult to comprehend how individuals “who apparently felt stymied 

by our efforts to promote stated U.S. policy against corruption” were “able to successfully 

conduct a campaign of disinformation against a sitting ambassador using unofficial back 

channels.” 111 

Dr. Hill similarly testified that while the President has the authority to remove an 

ambassador, she was concerned “about the circumstances in which [Ambassador Yovanovitch’s] 

reputation had been maligned, repeatedly, on television and in all kinds of exchanges.” Dr. Hill 

“felt that that was completely unnecessary.” 112 

Recall of Yovanovitch Threatened U.S. -Ukraine Policy 

The smear campaign questioning Ambassador Yovanovitch’s loyalty undermined U.S. 

diplomatic efforts in Ukraine, a key U.S. partner and a bulwark against Russia’s expansion into 

Europe. As Ambassador Yovanovitch explained :

Ukrainians were wondering whether I was going to be leaving, whether we really 

represented the President, U.S. policy, et cetera. And so I think it was —you know, it 

really kind of cut the groun d out from underneath us. 113 

Summarizing the cumulative impact of the attacks, she emphasized : “If our chief representative 

is kneecapped it limits our effectiveness to safeguard the vital national security interests of the 

United States.” 114 50 

President Trump’s recall of Ambassador Yovanovitch left the U.S. Embassy in Ukraine 

without an ambassador at a time of electoral change in Ukraine and when the Embassy was also 

without a deputy chief of mission. Mr. Kent explained: 

During the late spring and summer of 2019, I became alarmed as those efforts bore fruit. 

They led to the outer [ ou ster] of Ambassador Yovanovitch and hampered U.S. efforts to 

establish rapport with the new Zelensky administration in Ukraine. 115 

…

One of the unfortunate element s of the timing was that we were also undergoing a 

transition in my old job as deputy chief of mission. The person who replaced me had 

already been moved early to be our DCM and Charge in Sweden, and so we had a 

temporary acting deputy chief of mission. So that left the embassy not only without —the 

early withdraw al of Ambassador Yovanovitch left us not only without an Ambassador 

but without somebody who had been selected to be deputy chief of mission. 116 

It was not until late May that Secretary Pompeo aske d Ambassador Bill Taylor , who had 

previously served as Ambassador to Ukraine, to return to Kyiv as Chargé d’Affaires to lead the 

embassy while it awaited a confirmed Ambassador. Ambassador Taylor did not arrive in Kyiv 

until June 17 , more than a month aft er Ambassador Yovanovitch officially left Kyiv. 117 His 

mission to carry out U.S. objectives there would prove challenging in the face of ongoing efforts 

by Mr. Giuliani and others —at the direction of the President —to secure investigations demanded 

by the Pr esident to help his reelection. 51 

2. The President Put Giuliani and the Three Amigos in Charge of Ukraine Issues 

After President Trump recalled Ambassador Yovanovitch, his personal agent, Rudy 

Giuliani, intensified the President’s campaign to pressure Ukraine’s newly -elected president 

to interfere in the 2020 U.S. election. President Trump directed his own political appointees 

to coordinate with Mr. Giuliani on Ukraine, while National Security Council officials 

expressed alarm over the efforts to pursue a “domestic political errand” for the political 

benefit of the President. Officials at the highest levels of the W hite House and Trump 

Administration were aware of the President’s scheme. 

Overview 

On April 21, 2019, the day that Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky was elected as 

president of Ukraine, President Trump called to congratulate him. After a positiv e call —in 

which Mr. Zelensky complimented President Trump and requested that President Trump attend 

his inauguration —President Trump instructed Vice President Mike Pence to lead the U.S. 

delegation to the inauguration. However, on May 13 —before the inaugu ration date was even 

set —President Trump instructed Vice President Pence not to attend. 

Rudy Giuliani also announced a plan to visit Ukraine in mid -May 2019 —not on official 

U.S. government business, but instead to pursue on behalf of his client, Preside nt Trump, the 

debunked conspiracy theories about alleged Ukrainian interference in the 2016 election and 

discredited claims about the Bidens. After public scrutiny in response to his announced visit, 

Mr. Giuliani cancelled his trip and alleged that Presid ent -elect Zelensky was surrounded by 

“enemies of the President.” 

Secretary of Energy Rick Perry, Ambassador to the European Union Gordon Sondland, 

and Ambassador Kurt Volker, Special Representative for Ukraine Negotiations, ultimately led 

the U.S. delega tion to President Zelensky’s inauguration. Upon returning to Washington, D.C., 

the three U.S. officials —who dubbed themselves the “Three Amigos” —debriefed the President 

in the Oval Office and encouraged him to engage with President Zelensky. Instead of a ccepting 

their advice, President Trump complained that Ukraine is “a terrible place, all corrupt, terrible 

people,” and asserted that Ukraine “tried to take me down in 2016.” The President instructed the 

“Three Amigos” to “talk to Rudy” and coordinate wit h him on Ukraine matters. They followed 

the President’s orders. 

Dr. Fiona Hill, Deputy Assistant to the President and Senior Director for Europe and 

Russian Affairs at the National Security Council, would later observe that Ambassador Sondland 

“was bein g involved in a domestic political errand, and we [the NSC staff] were being involved 

in national security foreign policy, and those two things had just diverged.” 52 

A Political Newcomer Won Ukraine’s Presidential Election on an Anti -Corruption Platform 

On April 21, popular comedian and television actor , Volodymyr Zelensky , won a 

landslide victory in Ukraine’s presidential election, earning the support of 73 percent of voters 

and unseating the incumbent Petro Poroshenko. Mr. Zelensky, who had no prior p olitical 

experience, told voters a week before his victory : “I’m not a politician. I’m just a simple person 

who came to break the system.” 118 Five years earlier, in late 2013, Ukrainians had gathered in 

Kyiv and rallied against the corrupt government of fo rmer President Viktor Yanukovych, 

eventually forcing him to flee to the safety of Vladimir Putin’s Russia. Mr. Zelensky’s victory in 

April 2019 reaffirmed the Ukrainian people’s strong desire to overcome an entrenched system of 

corruption and pursue close r partnership with the West. 119 

Following the election results, at 4:29 p.m. Eastern Time, President Trump was 

connected by telephone to President -elect Zelensky and congratulated him “on a job well done 

… a fantastic election.” He declared, “I have no do ubt you will be a fantastic president.” 120 

According to a call record released publicly by the White House, President Trump did not 

openly express doubts about the newly -elected leader. 121 And contrary to a public readout of the 

call originally issued by the White House, President Trump did not mention corruption in 

Ukraine, despite the NSC staff preparing talking points on that topic. 122 Indeed, “corruption” 

was not mentioned once during the April 21 conversation, according to the official call record. 123 

In the call, President -elect Zelensky lauded President Trump as “a great example” and 

invited him to visit Ukraine for his upcoming inauguration —a gesture that President Trump 

called “very nice.” 124 President Trump told Mr. Zelensky: 

I’ll look into that, and well —give us the date and, at a very minimum, we’ll have a great 

representative. Or more than one from the United States will be with you on that great 

day. So, we will have somebody, at a minimum, at a very, very high level, and they will 

be with yo u. 125 

Mr. Zelensky persisted. “Words cannot describe our country,” he went on , “so it would 

be best for you to see it yourself. So, if you can come, that would be great. So again, I invite 

you to come.” 126 President Trump responded, “Well, I agree with yo u about your country and I 

look forward to it.” 127 In a nod to his past experience working with Ukraine as a businessman, 

President Trump added, “When I owned Miss Universe … Ukraine was always very well 

represented.” 128 

President Trump then invited Mr. Zele nsky to the White House to meet, saying: “When 

you’re settled in and ready, I’d like to invite you to the White House. We’ll have a lot of things 

to talk about, but we’re with you all the way.” Mr. Zelensky promptly accepted the President’s 

invitation, a dding that the “whole team and I are looking forward to that visit.” 129 

Mr. Zelensky then reiterated his interest in President Trump attending his inauguration, 

saying, “it will be absolutely fantastic if you could come and be with us.” President Trump 53 

promised to let the Ukrainian leader know “very soon” and added that he would see Mr. 

Zelensky “very soon, regardless.” 130 

Shortly after the April 21 call, Jennifer Williams, Special Advisor to the Vice President 

for Europe and Russia, learned that President Trump asked Vice President Pence to attend Mr. 

Zelensky’s inauguration. 131 Ms. Williams testified that in a separate phone call between Vice 

President Pence and President -elect Zelensky two days later, “the Vice President accepted that 

invitation from President Zelensky, and looked forward to being able to attend … if the dates 

worked out.” 132 Ms. Williams and her colleagues began planning for the Vice President’s trip to 

Kyiv. 133 

Rudy Giuliani and his Associates Coordinated Efforts to Secure and Pro mote the 

Investigations with Ukrainian President Zelensky 

As previously explained in Chapter 1, Mr. Giuliani, acting on behalf of President Trump, 

had for months engaged corrupt current and former Ukrainian officials, including Ukrainian 

Prosecutor Genera l Yuriy Lutsenko. The April election of Mr. Zelensky, however, raised the 

possibility that Mr. Lutsenko might lose his job as Prosecutor General once Mr. Zelensky took 

power. 

In the immediate aftermath of President -elect Zelensky’s election, Mr. Giul iani continued 

publicly to project confidence that Ukraine would deliver on investigations related to the Bidens. 

On April 24 —before Ambassador Yovanovitch received calls abruptly summoning her back to 

Washington —Mr. Giuliani stated in an interview on Fox and Friends that viewers should, 

[K]eep your eye on Ukraine… I think you’d get some interesting information about Joe 

Biden from Ukraine. About his son, Hunter Biden. About a company he was on the 

board of for years, which may be one of the most crooke d companies in Ukraine. 134 

Behind the scenes, however, Mr. Giuliani was taking steps to engage the new Ukrainian 

leader and his aides. 

The day before, on April 23, the same day that Vice President Pence confirmed his plans 

to attend President -elect Zelensky’s inauguration, Mr. Giuliani dispatched his own delegation —

consisting of Lev Parnas and Igor Fruman —to meet with Ihor Kolomoisky, a w ealthy Ukrainian 

with ties to President -elect Zelensky. Instead of going to Kyiv, they booked tickets to Israel, 

where they met with Mr. Kolomoisky. 135 Mr. Kolomoisky owned Ukraine’s largest bank until 

2016, when Ukrainian authorities nationalized the fail ing financial institution. Although he 

denied allegations of committing any crimes, Mr. Kolomoisky subsequently left Ukraine for 

Israel, where he remained until President Zelensky assumed power. 136 

Mr. Kolomoisky confirmed to The New York Times that he me t with Mr. Parnas and Mr. 

Fruman in late April 2019. He claimed they sought his assistance in facilitating a meeting 

between Mr. Giuliani and President -elect Zelensky, and he told them, “you’ve ended up in the 

wrong place,” and declined to arrange the req uested meeting. 137 54 

Mr. Giuliani was not deterred. 

During the time surrounding Ambassador Yovan ovitch’s recall , Mr. Giuliani and Mr. 

Parnas connected over a flurry of calls around a planned trip to Ukraine by Mr. Giuliani , which 

he would eventually canc el after growing public scrutiny. As previously described in Chapter 1, 

call records obtained by the Committees show a series of contacts on April 23 and 24 between 

Mr. Giuliani, the White House, Mr. Parnas, and John Solomon, among others. 138 

On April 25 , 2019, former Vice President Biden publicly announced his campaign for the 

Democratic nomination for President of the United States and launched his effort to unseat 

President Trump in the 2020 election. 139 

That evening, Mr. Solomon published a new opini on piece in The Hill entitled, “How the 

Obama White House Engaged Ukraine to Give Russia Collusion Narrative an Early Boost.” Like 

Mr. Solomon’s previous work, this April 25 piece repeated unsubstantiated conspiracy theories 

about alleged Ukrainian interfe rence in the 2016 U.S. presidential election. 140 

Meanwhile, in Kyiv, David Holmes, Counselor for Political Affairs at U.S. Embassy 

Kyiv, learned on April 25 that Mr. Giuliani had reached out to Mr. Zelensky’s campaign chair, 

Ivan Bakanov, seeking a chann el to the newly -elected leader. Mr. Bakanov told Mr. Holmes 

“that he had been contacted by, quote, someone named Giuliani, who said he was an advisor to 

the Vice President, unquote.” 141 Mr. Holmes clarified that Mr. Bakanov was “speaking in 

Russian” and th at he did not “know what he [Bakanov] meant” by his reference to the Vice 

President, “but that’s what he [Bakanov] said.” 142 Regardless of Mr. Bakanov’s apparent 

confusion as to who Mr. Giuliani represented, Mr. Holmes explained that by this point in time, 

Ukrainian officials seemed to think that Mr. Giuliani “was a significant person in terms of 

managing their relationship with the United States.” 143 

At 7:14 p.m. E astern Time on April 25, Mr. Giuliani once again received a call from an 

unknown “ -1” number, which lasted four minutes and 40 seconds. 144 Minutes later, Mr. Giuliani 

held a brief 36 second call with Sean Hannity, a Fox News opinion host. 145 

On the night of April 25, President Trump called into Mr. Hannity’s prime time Fox 

News show. In response to a question about Mr. Solomon’s recent publication, President Trump 

said: 

It sounds like big stuff. It sounds very interesting with Ukraine. I just spoke to the new 

president a little while ago, two days ago, and congratulated him on an incredible race. 

Incredible run. A big surprise victory. That’s 75 percent of the vote. But that sounds 

like big, big stuff. I’m not surprised. 146 

As Mr. Hol mes later learned on July 26 from Ambassador Sondland, President Trump 

did not care about Ukraine, he cared about this “big stuff” —such as the investigation into Vice 

President Biden. 147 55 

In the same Fox News interview, Mr. Hannity asked President Trump whet her America 

needed to see the purported evidence possessed by the unnamed Ukrainians noted in Mr. 

Solomon’s piece. The President replied, invoking Attorney General William P. Barr: 

Well, I think we do. And, frankly, we have a great new attorney general who has done an 

unbelievable job in a very short period of time. And he is very smart and tough and I 

would certainly defer to him. I would imagine he would want to see this. People have 

been saying this whole —the concept of Ukraine, they have been talk ing about it actually 

for a long time. You know that, and I would certainly defer to the attorney general. And 

we’ll see what he says about it. He calls them straight. That’s one thing I can tell you. 148 

Ukraine’s current Prosecutor General Ruslan Ryaboshapka, who assumed his new 

position in late August 2019, told The Financial Times in late November 2019 that Attorney 

General Barr had made no contact regarding a potential investigation into allegations of 

wrongdoing by former Vice President Biden. 149 In an apparent reference to President Trump’s 

demand for Ukrainian interference in U.S. elections, Mr. Ryaboshapka stated: “ It’s critically 

important for the west not to pull us into some conflicts between the ir ruling elites, but to 

continue to support so that we can cross the point of no return.” 150 

President Trump Promoted False Information About Former Vice President Joe Biden 

In early May, Mr. Giuliani continued his outreach to President -elect Zelensky and 

promoted the need for Ukrainian investigations into former Vice President Biden that served 

President Trump’s political needs. 

On May 2, at 6:21 a.m. Eastern Time , President Trump retweeted a link to an article in 

The New York Times, which assessed tha t Mr. Giuliani’s efforts underscored “the Trump 

campaign’s concern about the electoral threat from the former vice president’s presidential 

campaign” and noted that “Mr. Giuliani’s involvement raises questions about whether Mr. 

Trump is endorsing an effort to push a foreign government to proceed with a case that could hurt 

a political opponent at home.” 151 

Later that evening, in an interview with Fox News at the White House, President Trump 

referenced the false allegations about the firing of a corrupt for mer Ukrainian prosecutor, Viktor 

Shokin, that Mr. Giuliani had been promoting. He was asked, “Should the former vice president 

explain himself on his feeling in Ukraine and whether there was a conflict … with his son’s 

business interests?” 152 President Tru mp replied: 

I’m hearing it’s a major scandal, major problem. Very bad things happened, and we’ll 

see what that is. They even have him on tape, talking about it. They have Joe Biden on 

tape talking about the prosecutor. And I’ve seen that tape. A l ot of people are talking 

about that tape, but that’s up to them. They have to solve that problem. 153 

“The tape” President Trump referenced in his interview was a publicly available video of 

former Vice President Biden speaking in January 2018 at an event h osted by the Council on 

Foreign Relations (CFR), a nonpartisan think -tank focused on foreign policy matters. During an 56 

interview with the CFR president, Vice President Biden detailed how the United States —

consistent with the policy of its European allies and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) —

withheld $1 billion in loan guarantee s until the Ukrainian government acceded to uniform 

American and international demands to fire the corrupt prosecutor. 154 

By late 2015, Ukrainians were agitating for Mr. Shokin’s removal, and in March 2016, 

Ukraine’s parliament voted to dismiss the prosecutor general. 155 Multiple witnesses testified that 

Mr. Shokin’s dismissal in 2016 made it more —not less —likely that Ukrainian authorities might 

investigate any allegations or wrongdoing at Burisma or other allegedly corrupt companies. 156 

Nonetheless, President Trump and his supporters sought to perpetuate the false narrative that Mr. 

Shokin should not have been removed from office and that Vice President Biden had acted 

corrupt ly in carrying out U.S. policy. 

Rudy Giuliani Was “Meddling in an Investigation” on Behalf of President Trump 

On May 7, 2019, Christopher Wray, the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, 

testified before the U.S. Senate Appropriations Subcomm ittee on Commerce, Justice, Science, 

and Related Agencies regarding foreign interference in U.S. elections: 

My view is that, if any public official or member of any campaign is contacted by any 

nation -state or anybody acting on behalf of a nation -state ab out influencing or interfering 

with our election, then that is something that the FBI would want to know about. 157 

Mr. Giuliani nonetheless pressed forward with his plan to personally convey to President -

elect Zelensky, on behalf of his client President Trump, the importance of opening investigations 

that would assist President Trump’s reelection campaign. 

On the morning of May 8, Mr. Giuliani called the White House Switchboard and 

connected for six minutes and 26 seconds with someone at the White House. 158 That same day, 

Mr. Giuliani also connected with Mr. Solomon for almost six minutes, with Mr. Parnas, and with 

Derek Harvey, a member of Representative Nunes’ staff on the Intelligence Committee. 159 

During a meeting that same day, Ukraine Minister of Interior Arsen Avakov disclosed to 

Deputy Assistant Secretary of State George Kent that Mr. Parnas and Mr. Fruman would soon 

visit Kyiv “and that they were coming with their associate, the Mayor Giuliani.” 160 Minister 

Avakov confided to Mr. Kent that “Ma yor Giuliani had reached out to him and invited him to 

come and meet the group of them in Florida” in February 2019. 161 Although he declined that 

offer, Minister Avakov indicated that he intended to accept their new invitation to meet in 

Kyiv. 162 

The next da y, on May 9, The New York Times publicized Mr. Giuliani’s plan to visit 

Ukraine. 163 Mr. Giuliani confirmed that he planned to meet with President Zelensky and press 

the Ukrainians to pursue investigations that President Trump promoted only days earlier on Fox 

News .164 The New York Times described Mr. Giuliani’s planned trip as: 57 

[P]art of a monthslong effort by the former New York mayor and a small group of Trump 

allies working to build interest in the Ukrainian inquiries. Their motivation is 

to…undermine th e case against Paul Manafort, Mr. Trump’s imprisoned former 

campaign chairman; and potentially to damage Mr. Biden, the early front -runner for the 

2020 Democratic presidential nomination. 165 

Mr. Giuliani claimed, “We’re not meddling in an election, we’re meddling in an investigation, 

which we have a right to do.” 166 

Only a few days after Director Wray’s public comments about foreign interference in 

U.S. elections, Mr. Giuliani acknowledged that “[s]omebody could say it’s improper” to pressure 

Ukraine to o pen investigations that would benefit President Trump. But, Mr. Giuliani argued: 

[T]his isn’t foreign policy —I’m asking them to do an investigation that they’re doing 

already, and that other people are telling them to stop. And I’m going to give them 

reasons why they shouldn’t stop it because that information will be very, very helpful to 

my client, and may turn out to be helpful to my government. 167 

Mr. Giuliani’s “client” was President Trump, as Mr. Giuliani repeatedly stated publicly. 

According to Mr. Giuliani, the President fully supported putting pressure on Ukraine to open 

investigations that would benefit his 2020 reelection campaign. 168 Mr. Giuliani emphasized that 

President Trump “ basically knows what I’m doing, sure, as his lawyer.” 169 Undersco ring his 

commitment to pressuring Ukraine until it opened the investigations President Trump promoted 

on Fox News , Mr. Giuliani told The Washington Post that he would “make sure that nothing 

scuttles the investigation that I want.” 170 

On May 9, following p ublic revelation of his trip by the New York Times , Mr. Giuliani 

connected in quick succession with Mr. Solomon and then Mr. Parnas for several minutes at a 

time. 171 Mr. Giuliani then made brief connections with the White House Switchboard and 

Situation Room several times, before connecting at 1:43 p.m. Eastern Time with someone at the 

White House for over four minutes. 172 He connected, separately, thereafter with Mr. Parnas 

several times in the afternoon and into the evening. 173 

That evening, Mr. Giuliani tweeted: 

If you doubt there is media bias and corruption then when Democrats conspiring with 

Ukrainian officials comes out remember much of the press, except for Fox, the Hill, and 

NYT, has suppressed it. If it involved @realDonaldTrump or his son it would have been 

front page news for weeks. 174 

Shortly thereafter, on the night of May 9, he made an appearance on Fox News and 

reiterated that his trip to Ukraine was intended to further the President’s personal and political 

interests by pressuring the Ukrainian government to investigate the Bidens: 58 

It’s a big story. It’s a dramatic story. And I guarantee you, Joe Biden will not get to 

election day without thi s being investigated, not because I want to see him investigated. 

This is collateral to what I was doing. 175 

The next morning, on May 10, amidst the press coverage of his trip, Mr. Giuliani 

tweeted: 

Explain to me why Biden shouldn’t be investigated if his son got millions from a Russian 

loving crooked Ukrainian oligarch while He was VP and point man for Ukraine. 

Ukrainians are investigating and your fellow Dems are interfering. Election is 17 months 

away. Let’s answer it now 176 

He then ha d another flurry of calls with Mr. Parnas. Shortly after 2 :00 p.m., Eastern 

Time, Mr. Giuliani also spoke with Ambassador Volker on the phone. 177 Ambassador Volker 

had learned that Mr. Giuliani intended to travel to Ukraine “to pursue these allegations tha t

Lutsenko had made, and he was going to investigate these things” —specifically, the debunked 

story that Vice President Biden had improperly pressured Ukraine to fire a corrupt prosecutor 

general, as well as the Russian -backed conspiracy that the Ukrainian s interfered in the 2016 U.S. 

election. 178 Ambassador Volker testified that he had a simple warning for Mr. Giuliani: 

Prosecutor General Lutsenko “is not credible. Don’t listen to what he is saying.” 179 Call records 

obtained by the Committees reveal that th eir call lasted more than 30 minutes. 180 

Call records also show that around midday on May 10, Mr. Giuliani began trading 

aborted calls with Kashyap “Kash” Patel, an official at the National Security Council who 

previously served on Ranking Member Devin Nu nes’ staff on the Intelligence Committee. Mr. 

Patel successfully connected with Mr. Giuliani less than an hour after Mr. Giuliani’s call with 

Ambassador Volker. Beginning at 3:23 p.m., Eastern Time, Mr. Patel and Mr. Giuliani spoke for 

over 25 minutes. 181 Five minutes after Mr. Patel and Mr. Giuliani disconnected, an unidentified 

“-1” number connected with Mr. Giuliani for over 17 minutes. 182 Shortly thereafter, Mr. Giuliani 

spoke with Mr. Parnas for approximately 12 minutes. 183 

That same afternoon, Presi dent Trump conducted a 15 -minute long phone interview with 

Politico . In response to a question about Mr. Giuliani’s upcoming visit to Kyiv, the President 

replied, “I have not spoken to him at any great length, but I will … I will speak to him about it 

bef ore he leaves.” 184 

Recently , when asked what Mr. Giuliani was doing in Ukraine on his behalf, the 

President responded: “Well, you have to ask that to Rudy, but Rudy, I don’t, I don’t even know. 

I know he was going to go to Ukraine, and I think he canceled a trip.” 185 Prior to that, on 

Oc tober 2, the President publicly stated; “And just so you know, we’ve been investigating, on a 

personal basis —through Rudy and others, lawyers —corruption in the 2016 election.” 186 On 

October 4, the President publicly stated: “If we feel there’s corruption, like I feel there was in 

the 2016 campaign —there was tremendous corruption against me —if we feel there’s corruption, 

we have a right to go to a foreign country.” 187 59 

By the evening of May 10, Mr. Giuliani appeared to have concerns about the incoming 

Ukraini an president. He appeared on Fox News and announced, “I’m not going to go” to 

Ukraine “because I think I’m walking into a group of people that are enemies of the 

President.” 188 In a text message to Politico , Mr. Giuliani alleged the original offer for a me eting 

with Mr. Zelensky was a “set up” orchestrated by “several vocal critics” of President Trump who 

were advising President -elect Zelensky. 189 Mr. Giuliani declared that President -elect Zelensky 

“is in [the] hands of avowed enemies of Pres[ident] Trump.” 190 

Like Mr. Giuliani, President Trump would express hostility toward Ukraine in the days 

and weeks to come. 

Russian President Putin and Hungarian Prime Minister Orban 

Counseled President Trump on Ukraine 

In early May, Mr. Giuliani was not the only perso n who conveyed his skepticism of 

Ukraine to President Trump. The President reportedly discussed Ukraine with Russian President 

Vladimir Putin when they spoke by phone on May 3. President Trump posted on Twitter that he 

“[h]ad a long and very good convers ation with President Putin of Russia” and discussed “even 

the ‘Russian Hoax’” —an apparent reference to the unanimous finding by the U.S. Intelligence 

Community that Russia interfered in the 2016 election with the aim of assisting President 

Trump’s candidac y. 191 Mr. Kent subsequently heard from Dr. Hill, the NSC’s Senior Director 

for Europe and Russia, that President Putin also expressed negative views about Ukraine to 

President Trump. He testified that President Putin’s motivation in undercutting President -elect 

Zelensky was “very clear”: 

He denies the existence of Ukraine as a nation and a country, as he told President Bush in 

Bucharest in 2008. He invaded and occupied 7 percent of Ukraine’s territory and he’s led 

to the death of 13,000 Ukrainians on Ukra inian territory since 2014 as a result of 

aggression. So that’s his agenda, the agenda of creating a greater Russia and ensuring 

that Ukraine does not survive independently. 192 

On May 13, President Trump met one -on -one for an hour with Hungarian Prime Mini ster 

Viktor Orban. President Trump offered the leader a warm reception in the Oval Office and 

claimed Prime Minister Orban had “done a tremendous job in so many different ways. Highly 

respected. Respected all over Europe.” 193 The European Union and many European leaders, 

however, have widely condemned Mr. Orban for undermining Hungary’s democratic institutions 

and promoting anti -Semitism and xenophobia. 194 

Mr. Kent explained to the Committees that Prime Minister Orban’s “animus towards 

Ukraine is well -know n, documented, and has lasted now two years.” Due to a dispute over the 

rights of 130,000 ethnic Hungarians who live in Ukraine, Kent noted that Prime Minister Orban 

“blocked all meetings in NATO with Ukraine at the ministerial level or above,” undercutti ng 

U.S. and European efforts to support Ukraine in its war against Russia. 195 Nonetheless, President 

Trump told reporters prior to his meeting with Prime Minister Orban to not “f orget they’re a 

member of NATO, and a very good member of NATO.” 196 60 

Commenting o n what Dr. Hill shared with him following the May 3 call and May 13 

meeting, Mr. Kent said he understood President Trump’s discussions about Ukraine with 

President Putin and Prime Minister Orban “as being similar in tone and approach.” He explained 

that “ both leaders” had “extensively talked Ukraine down, said it was corrupt, said Zelensky was 

in the thrall of oligarchs” the effect of which was “negatively shaping a picture of Ukraine, and 

even President Zelensky personally.” 197 The veteran State Department diplomat concluded, 

“[T]hose two world leaders [Putin and Orban], along with former Mayor Giuliani, their 

communications with President Trump shaped the President’s view of Ukraine and Zelensky, 

and would account for the change from a very positive first call on April 21 to his negative 

assessment of Ukraine.” 198 

President Trump Instructs Vice President Pence Not to Attend 

President Zelensky’s Inauguration 

On Monday, May 13, at approximately 11 :00 a.m. Eastern Time , Ms. Williams received 

a call from an assistant to the Vice President’s chief of staff. 199 President Trump, the assistant 

relayed, had “decided that the Vice President would not attend the inauguration in Ukraine,” 

despite the fact that Vice President Pence previously had accepted the invitatio n. 200 Ms. 

Williams was never given a reason for the change in President Trump’s decision. 201 

Mr. Holmes later testified that: 

[The U.S. Embassy in Kyiv had] gone back and forth with NSC staff about proposing a 

list of potential members of the delegation. It was initially quite a long list. We had 

asked who would be the senior [U.S.] member of that delegation. We were told that Vice 

President Pence was likely to be that senior member, it was not yet fully agreed to. And 

so we were anticipating that to be the case. And then the Giuliani event happened, and 

then we heard that he was not going to play that role. 202 

Asked to clarify what he meant by “the Giuliani event,” Mr. Holmes replied, “the interview 

basically saying that he had planned to travel to Ukra ine, but he canceled his trip because there 

were, quote, unquote, enemies of the U.S. President in Zelensky’s orbit.” 203 

One of the individuals around President -elect Zelensky whom Mr. Giuliani publicly 

criticized was the oligarch Mr. Kolomoisky, who had re fused to set up a meeting between Mr. 

Giuliani and President Zelensky. On May 18, Mr. Giuliani complained on Twitter that the 

oligarch “returned from a long exile and immediately threatened and defamed two Americans, 

Lev Parnas and Igor Fruman. They are m y clients and I have advised them to press charges.” 204 

Mr. Kolomoisky responded to Mr. Giuliani in a televised interview and declared, “Look, 

there is Giuliani, and two clowns, Lev Parnas and Igor Fruman, who were engaging in nonsense. 

They are Giuliani’ s clients.” He added: “They came here and told us that they would organize a 

meeting with Zelensky. They allegedly struck a deal with [Prosecutor -General Yuriy] Lutsenko 

about the fate of this criminal case —Burisma, [former Vice President] Biden, meddlin g in the 

U.S. election and so on.” 205 He warned that a “big scandal may break out, and not only in 61 

Ukraine, but in the United States. That is, it may turn out to be a clear conspiracy against 

Biden.” 206 

Despite Ukraine’s significance to U.S. national securi ty as a bulwark against Russian 

aggression and the renewed opportunity that President Zelensky’s administration offered for 

bringing Ukraine closer to the United States and Europe, President Trump did not ask Secretary 

of State Michael Pompeo, Acting Secre tary of Defense Patrick Shanahan, or National Security 

Advisor John Bolton to lead the delegation to President Zelensky’s inauguration. Instead, 

according to Mr. Holmes, the White House “ultimately whittled back an initial proposed list for 

the official d elegation to the inauguration from over a dozen individuals to just five.” 207 

Topping that list was Secretary Perry. Accompanying him were Ambassador Sondland, 

U.S. Special Representative for Ukraine Negotiations Ambassador Volker, and NSC Director for 

Uk raine Lt. Col. Alexander Vindman. 208 Acting Deputy Chief of Mission (Chargé d’Affaires) of 

U.S. Embassy Kyiv Joseph Pennington joined the delegation, in place of outgoing U.S. 

Ambassador to Ukraine Marie Yovanovitch. U.S. Senator Ron Johnson also attended the 

inauguration and joined several meetings with the presidential delegation. When asked if this 

delegation was “a good group,” Mr. Holmes replied that it “was not as senior a delegation as we 

[the U.S. embassy] might have expected.” 209 

Secretary Perry, Ambassador Volker, and Ambassador Sondland subsequently began to 

refer to themselves as the “Three Amigos.” During the delegation’s meeting with President 

Zelensky, Mr. Holmes recounted that “Secretary Perry passed President Zelensky a list of, quote, 

‘pe ople he trusts’ from whom Zelensky could seek advice on energy sector reform, which was 

the topic of subsequent meetings between Secretary Perry and key Ukrainian energy sector 

contacts, from which Embassy personnel were excluded by Secretary Perry’s staff .” 210 

Mr. Holmes assessed that the delegation’s visit proceeded smoothly, although “at one 

point during a preliminary meeting of the inaugural delegation, someone in the group wondered 

aloud about why Mr. Giuliani was so active in the media with respect t o Ukraine.” 211 

Ambassador Sondland responded: “Dammit, Rudy. Every time Rudy gets involved he goes and 

effs everything up.” 212 Mr. Holmes added: “He used the ‘F’ word.” 213 

By the time of the inauguration, Mr. Holmes assessed that President Zelensky and the 

Ukrainians were already starting to feel pressure to conduct political investigations related to 

former Vice President Biden. 214 Lt. Col. Vindman also was concerned about the potentially 

negative consequences of Mr. Giuliani’s political efforts on behal f of President Trump —both for 

U.S. national security and also Ukraine’s longstanding history of bipartisan support in the U.S. 

Congress. 215 

During the U.S. delegation’s meeting with President Zelensky on the margins of the 

inauguration, Lt. Col. Vindman was the last person to speak. 216 He “offered two pieces of 

advice” to President Zelensky. First, he advised the new leader, “be particularly cautious with 

regards to Russia, and its desire to provoke Ukraine.” 217 And second, Lt. Col. Vindman warned ,

“stay out of U.S. domestic … politics.” 218 Referencing the activities of Mr. Giuliani, Lt. Col 

Vindman explained: 62 

[I] n the March and April timeframe, it became clear that there were —there were actors in 

the U.S., public actors, nongovernmental actors t hat were promoting the idea of 

investigations and 2016 Ukrainian interference. And it was consistent with U.S. policy to 

advise any country, all the countries in my portfolio, any country in the world, to not 

participate in U.S. domestic politics. So I w as passing the same advice consistent with 

U.S. policy. 219 

U.S. Officials Briefed President Trump About their Positive Impressions of Ukraine 

Ambassadors Volker and Sondland left Kyiv with “a very favorable impression” of the 

new Ukrainian leader. 220 They believed it was important that President Trump “personally 

engage with the President of Ukraine in order to demonstrate full U.S. support for him,” 

including by inviting him to Washington for a meeting in the Oval Office. 221 It was agreed that 

the delegatio n would request a meeting with President Trump and personally convey their 

advice. They were granted time with President Trump on May 23. 

According to Mr. Kent, the delegation was able to secure the Oval Office meeting shortly 

after the return from Kyi v because of Ambassador Sondland’s “connections” to Acting White 

House Chief of Staff Mick Mulvaney and President Trump. 222 Christopher Anderson, Special 

Advisor to Ambassador Kurt Volker, also attributed the delegation’s ability to quickly confirm a 

meetin g with President Trump to Ambassador Sondland’s “connections to the White House.” 223 

At the May 23 meeting, Ambassadors Sondland and Volker were joined by Secretary 

Perry, Senator Johnson, and Dr. Charles M. Kupperman, the Deputy National Security Advisor .

Mr. Mulvaney may have also participated. 224 

Lt. Col. Vindman, who had represented the White House at President Zelensky’s 

inauguration, did not participate in the meeting. Dr. Hill directed him not to join, because she 

had learned that “there was some confusion” from the President “over who the director for 

Ukraine is.” 225 Specifically, Dr. Hill testified that around the time of the May 23 debriefing in 

the Oval Office, she “became aware by chance and accident” that President Trump had requested 

to speak with the NSC’s Ukraine director about unspecified “materials.” 226 A member of the 

NSC executive secretary’s staff stated that in response to the President’s request, “we might be 

reaching out to Kash.” 227 

Dr. Hill testified that she understood the staff t o be referring to Mr. Patel, who then 

served as a director in the NSC’s directorate of International Organizations and Alliances , not the 

directorate of Europe and Russia .228 She subsequently consulted with Dr. Kupperman and 

sought to clarify if Mr. Patel “ had some special … Ambassador Sondland -like representational 

role on Ukraine” that she had not been informed about, but “couldn’t elicit any information about 

that.” 229 All Dr. Kupperman said was that he would look into the matter. 230 Dr. Hill also 

testified that she never saw or learned more about the Ukraine -related “materials” that the 

President believed he had received from Mr. Patel, who maintained a close relationship with 

Ranking Member Nunes after leaving his staff to join the NSC. 231 63 

President Trump Put the Three Amigos in Charge of the United States’ Ukraine Relationship 

and Directed Them to “Talk to Rudy” About Ukraine 

According to witness testimony, the May 23 debriefing with the President in the Oval 

Office proved consequential fo r two reasons. President Trump authorized Ambassador 

Sondland, Secretary Perry, and Ambassador Volker to lead engagement with the President 

Zelensky’s new administration in Ukraine. He instructed them, however, to talk to and 

coordinate with his personal attorney, Mr. Giuliani. 

Ambassador Sondland, Ambassador Volker, Secretary Perry, and Senator Johnson “took 

turns” making their case “that this is a new crowd, it’s a new President” in Ukraine who was 

“committed to doing the right things,” including figh ting corruption. 232 According to 

Ambassador Sondland, the group “emphasized the strategic importance of Ukraine” and the 

value to the United States of strengthening the relationship with President Zelensky. 233 They 

recommended that President Trump once again call President Zelensky and follow through on 

his April 21 invitation for President Zelensky to meet with him in the Oval Office. 234 

President Trump reacted negatively to the positive assessment of Ukraine. Ambassador 

Volker recalled that President Trum p said Ukraine is “a terrible place, all corrupt, terrible 

people” and was “just dumping on Ukraine.” 235 This echoed Mr. Giuliani’s public statements 

about Ukraine during early May. 

According to both Ambassadors Volker and Sondland, President Trump also alleged, 

without offering any evidence, that Ukraine “tried to take me down” in the 2016 election. 236 The 

President emphasized that he “didn’t believe” the delegation’s positive assessment of the new 

Ukrainian president, and added “that’s not what I he ar” from Mr. Giuliani. 237 President Trump 

said that Mr. Giuliani “knows all of these things” and knows that President Zelensky has “some 

bad people around him.” 238 Rather than committing to an Oval Office meeting with the 

Ukrainian leader, President Trump di rected the delegation to “[t]alk to Rudy, talk to Rudy.” 239 

Ambassador Sondland testified that the “Three Amigos” saw the writing on the wall and 

concluded “that if we did not talk to Rudy, nothing would move forward on Ukraine.” 240 He 

continued: 

[B]ased on the President’s direction we were faced with a choice. We could abandon the 

goal of a White House meeting for President Zelensky, which we all believed was crucial 

to strengthening U.S. -Ukrainian ties … or we could do as President Trump directed and 

talk to Mr. Giuliani to address the President’s concerns. We chose the latter path. 241 

Ambassador Volker reached a similar conclusion. He believed “that the messages being 

conveyed by Mr. Giuliani were a problem, because they were at variance with what our official 

message to the President was, and not conveying that positive assessment that we all had. And 

so, I thought it was important to try to step in and fix the problem.” 242 Ultimately, however, the 

“problem” posed by the President’s instruction to coo rdinate regarding Ukraine with his personal 

attorney persisted and would become more acute. 64 

After the May 23 meeting, Ambassador Sondland stayed behind with President Trump 

and personally confirmed that the Three Amigos “would be working on the Ukraine fi le.” 243 

Multiple witnesses testified about this shift in personnel in charge of the Ukraine 

relationship. 244 Mr. Kent recalled that, after the Oval Office meeting, Secretary Perry, 

Ambassador Sondland, and Ambassador Volker began “asserting that, going for ward, they 

would be the drivers of the relationship with Ukraine.” 245 Catherine Croft, Special Advisor to 

Ambassador Kurt Volker, recalled that “Sondland, Volker, and sort of Perry, as a troika, or as the 

Three Amigos, had been sort of tasked with Ukraine p olicy” by President Trump. 246 Under 

Secretary of State for Political Affairs David Hale testified about his understanding of the 

meeting, “[I] t was clear that the President, from the readout I had received, the President had 

tasked that group, members of th at delegation to pursue these objectives : the meeting, and the 

policy goals that I outlined earlier. So I was, you know, knowing I was aware that Ambassador 

Volker and Ambassador Sondland would be doing that.” 247 

On a June 10 conference call with the Thre e Amigos, “Secretary Perry laid out for 

Ambassador Bolton the notion that” they “would assist Ambassador Taylor on Ukraine and be 

there to support” him as the U.S. -Ukraine relationship “move[ed] forward.” 248 

This de facto change in authority was never off icially communicated to other officials, 

including Dr. Hill, who had responsibility for Ukraine at the National Security Council. 249 

U.S. Officials Collaborated with Rudy Giuliani to Advance the President’s Political Agenda 

Ambassador Sondland testified that in the weeks and months after the May 23 Oval 

Office meeting, “everyone was in the loop” regarding Mr. Giuliani’s role in advancing the 

President’s scheme regarding Ukraine. 250 The “Three Amigos” did as the President ordered and 

began communicating wit h Mr. Giuliani. E -mail messages described to the Committees by 

Ambassador Sondland showed that he informed Mr. Mulvaney, Ambassador Bolton, and 

Secretaries Pompeo and Perry, as well as their immediate staffs, of his Ukraine -related efforts on 

behalf of th e President. 251 

According to Ambassador Sondland, Secretary Perry agreed to reach out to Mr. Giuliani 

first “given their prior relationship.” 252 Secretary Perry discussed with Mr. Giuliani the political 

concerns that President Trump articulated in the May 23 meeting. 253 

Dr. Hill testified that Ambassador Volker, Ambassador Sondland, and Secretary Perry 

“gave us every impression that they were meeting with Rudy Giuliani at this point, and Rudy 

Giuliani was also saying on the television, and indeed has said subsequently, that he was closely 

coordinating with the State Department.” 254 These meetings ran counter to Ambassador Bolton’s 

repeated declarations that “nobody should be meeting with Giuliani” 255 

Like Dr. Hill, Ambassador Bolton also closely tracke d Mr. Giuliani’s activities on behalf 

of the President. According to Dr. Hill, Ambassador Bolton closely monitored Mr. Giuliani’s 

public statements and repeatedly referred to Mr. Giuliani as a “hand grenade that was going to 

blow everyone up.” 256 During a meeting on June 13, Ambassador Bolton made clear that he 65 

supported more engagement with Ukraine by senior White House officials but warned that “Mr. 

Giuliani was a key voice with the President on Ukraine.” 257 According to Ambassador Bolton, 

Mr. Giuliani’s i nfluence “could be an obstacle to increased White House engagement.” 258 

Ambassador Bolton joked that “every time Ukraine is mentioned, Giuliani pops up.” 259 

Ambassador Bolton also reportedly joined Dr. Hill in warning Ambassador Volker 

against contacting Mr. Giuliani. 260 Dr. Hill was particularly concerned about engagement with 

Mr. Giuliani because “the more you engage with someone who is spreading untruths, the more 

validity you give to those untruths.” 261 She further testified that she also disc ussed Mr. 

Giuliani’s activities with Dr. Kupperman, specifically her concern that “Ukraine was going to be 

played by Giuliani in some way as part of the campaign.” 262 

On June 18, Ambassador Volker, Acting Assistant Secretary of State Ambassador Philip 

T. Re eker, Secretary Perry, Ambassador Sondland, and State Department Counselor T. Ulri ch

Brechbuhl participated in a meeting at the Department of Energy to follow up to the May 23 

Oval Office meeting. 263 Ambassador Bill Taylor, Charg é d’Affaires for U.S. Embass y in Kyiv, 

who had arrived in Ukraine just the day before, participated by phone from Kyiv. 264 The group 

agreed that a meeting between President Trump and President Zelensky would be valuable. 265 

However, Ambassadors Volker and Sondland subsequently relayed to Ambassador Taylor that 

President Trump “wanted to hear from Zelensky before scheduling the meeting in the Oval 

Office.” 266 Ambassador Taylor testified that he did not understand, at that time, what the 

President wanted to hear from his Ukrainian counterp art. 267 However, Ambassador Volker’s 

assistant, Mr. Anderson, recalled “vague discussions” about addressing “Mr. Giuliani’s 

continued calls for a corruption investigation.” 268 

The quid pro quo —conditioning the Oval Office meeting that President Trump first 

offered the Ukrainian leader during their April 21 call on the Ukrainians’ pursuit of 

investigations that would benefit President Trump politically —was beginning to take shape. As 

Ambassador Sondland testified , the conditions put on the White House meeting and on Ukraine’s 

continued engagement with the White House would get “ more insidious ” with the passage of 

time .269 

President Trump Invited Foreign Interference in the 2020 Election 

As U.S. officials debated how to meet the President’s demands as ar ticulated by Mr. 

Giuliani, President Trump publicly disclosed on June 12 in an Oval Office interview with ABC 

News’ anchor George Stephanopoulos that there was “nothing wrong with listening” to a foreign 

power who offered political dirt on an opponent. Th e President added, “I think I’d want to hear 

it.” 

Mr. Stephanopoulos then pressed the President directly, “You want that kind of 

interference in our elections?” to which President Trump replied, “It’s not an interference, they 

have information. I think I’d take it.” 270 President Trump also made clear that he did not think a 

foreign power offering damaging information on an opponent was necessarily wrong, and said 

only that he would “maybe” contact the FBI “ if I thought there was something wrong.” 271 66 

Pre sident Trump’s willingness to accept foreign interference in a U.S. election during his 

interview with Mr. Stephanopoulos was consistent with tweets and interviews by Mr. Giuliani at 

this time. For example, on June 21, Mr. Giuliani tweeted: 

New Pres of U kraine still silent on investigation of Ukrainian interference in 2016 

election and alleged Biden bribery of Pres Poroshenko. Time for leadership and 

investigate both if you want to purge how Ukraine was abused by Hillary and Obama 

people. 272 

On June 18, Dr. Hill met with Ambassador Sondland at the White House. She “asked him 

quite bluntly” what his role was in Ukraine. Ambassador Sondland replied that “he was in 

charge of Ukraine.” 273 Dr. Hill was taken aback and a bit irritated. She prodded Ambassador 

Sondland again and asked, “ Who put you in charge of Ukraine?” Dr. Hill testified: “And, you 

know, I’ll admit, I was a bit rude. And that’s when he told me the President, which shut me 

up.” 274 

Dr. Hill tried to impress upon Ambassador Sondland the “imp ortance of coordinating” 

with other national security officials in the conduct of Ukraine policy, including the NSC staff 

and the State Department. Ambassador Sondland “retorted” that he was “coordinating with the 

President” and Mr. Mulvaney, “filling in” Ambassador Bolton, and talking to State Department 

Counselor Ulrich Brechbuhl. Ambassador Sondland asked: “Who else did he have to 

inform?” 275 

Dr. Hill stated that, in hindsight, with the benefit of the sworn testimony by others during 

the impeachment i nquiry and seeing documents displayed by witnesses, she realized that she and 

Ambassador Sondland were working on two fundamentally different tasks. Dr. Hill testified: 

But it struck me when yesterday, when you put up on the screen Ambassador Sondland's 

emails and who was on these emails, and he said, These are the people who need to 

know, that he was absolutely right. Because he was being involved in a domestic 

political errand, and we were being involved in national security foreign policy, and those 

two things had just diverged. So he was correct. And I had not put my finger on that at 

the moment, but I was irritated with him and angry with him that he wasn't fully 

coordinating. And I did say to him, Ambassador Sondland, Gordon, I think this is all 

going to blow up. And here we are. 276 

Reflecting on her June 18 conversation with Ambassador Sondland, Dr. Hill concluded: 

Ambassador Sondland is not wrong that he had been given a different remit than we had 

been. And it was at that moment that I started to realize how those things had diverged. 

And I realized, in fact, that I wasn’t really being fair to Ambassador Sondland, because 

he was carrying out what he thought he had been instructed to carry out, and we were 

doing something that we thought was just as —or perhaps even more important, but it 

wasn’t in the same channel. 277 67 

3. The President Froze Military Assistance to Ukraine 

The President froze military assistance to Ukraine against U.S. national security interests 

and over the objections o f career experts. 

Overview 

Since 2014, the United States has maintained a bipartisan policy of delivering hundreds 

of millions of dollars in security assistance to Ukraine each year. These funds benefit the 

security of the United States and Europe by ensuring that Ukraine is equipped to defend itself 

against Russian aggression. In 2019, that bipartisan policy was undermined when President 

Trump ordered, without justification, a freeze on military assistance to Ukraine. 

For fiscal year 2019, Congress authorized and appropriated $391 million in security 

assistance: $250 million through the Department of Defense’s (DOD) Ukraine Security 

Assistance Initiative and $141 million through the State Department’s Foreign Military 

Financing program. In July 2019, however, President Trump ordered the Office of Management 

and Budget (OMB) to put a hold on all $391 million in security assistance to Ukraine. 

The hold surprised experts from DOD and the State Department. DOD had alre ady 

announced its intent to deliver security assistance to Ukraine after certifying that the country had 

implemented sufficient anti -corruption reforms, and the State Department was in the process of 

notifying Congress of its intent to deliver foreign mili tary financing to Ukraine. In a series of 

interagency meetings, every represented agency other than OMB (which is headed by Mick 

Mulvaney, who is also the President’s Acting Chief of Staff) supported the provision of 

assistance to Ukraine and objected to President Trump’s hold. Ukraine experts at DOD, the 

State Department, and the National Security Council (NSC) argued that it was in the national 

security interest of the United States to continue to support Ukraine. Agency experts also 

expressed concerns about the legality of President Trump withholding assistance to Ukraine that 

Congress had already appropriated for this express purpose. 

Despite these concerns, OMB devised a plan to implement President Trump’s hold on the 

assistance. On July 25, 2019 , OMB began using a series of footnotes in funding documents to 

notify DOD that the assistance funds were temporarily on hold to allow for interagency review. 

Throughout August and September, OMB continued to use this method and rationale to maintain 

the hold, long after the final interagency meeting on Ukraine assistance occurred on July 31. The 

hold continued despite concerns from DOD that the hold would threaten its ability to fully spend 

the money before the end of the fiscal year, as legally required .

On July 25 —the same day as President Trump’s call with President Zelensky —officials 

at Ukraine’s embassy emailed DOD to ask about the status of the hold. By mid -August, officials 

at DOD, the State Department, and the NSC received numerous questions f rom Ukrainian 

officials about the hold. President Trump’s hold on the Ukraine assistance was publicly reported 

on August 28, 2019. 68 

Security Assistance to Ukraine is Important to U.S. National Security Interests 

The United States has an interest in providing security assistance to Ukraine to support 

the country in its longstanding battle against Russian aggression and to shore it up as an 

independent and democratic country that can deter Kremlin influence in both Ukraine and other 

European countries. In early 2014, in what became known as the Revolution of Dignity, 

Ukrainian citizens demanded democratic reforms and an end to corruption, thereby forcing the 

ouster of pro -Kremlin Viktor Yanukovych as Ukraine’s presi dent. Shortly thereafter, Russian 

military forces and their proxies began an incursion into Ukraine that led to Russia’s illegal 

annexation of the Crimean Peninsula of Ukraine, as well as the ongoing, Russian -led armed 

conflict in the Donbass region of ea stern Ukraine. Approximately 13,000 people have been 

killed as a result of the conflict and over 1.4 million people have been displaced. 278 

Former U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations, Nikki Haley, noted that “militants in 

eastern Ukraine report directl y to the Russian military, which arms them, trains them, leads them, 

and fights alongside them.” 279 Similarly, then -Secretary of Defense James Mattis, during a visit 

to Ukraine in 2017, chided Russia, stating that “despite Russia’s denials, we know they are 

seeking to redraw international borders by force, undermining the sovereign and free nations of 

Europe.” 280 

In response to Russia’s aggression, the international community imposed financial and 

visa sanctions on Russian individuals and entities, and comm itted to providing billions of dollars 

in economic, humanitarian, and security assistance to Ukraine to continue to support its 

sovereignty and democratic development. 

The European Union is the single largest contributor of total foreign assistance to 

Ukraine, having provided €15 billion in grants and loans since 2014. 281 In addition to economic 

and humanitarian assistance, the United States has contributed a substantial amount of security 

assistance, mostly lethal and non -lethal military equipment and tr aining, to Ukraine. In fact, the 

United States is the largest contributor of security assistance to Ukraine. Since 2014, the United 

States has delivered approximately $1.5 billion in security assistance to Ukraine. 282 

Multiple witnesses —including Ambassad or William Taylor, Deputy Assistant Secretary 

of State George Kent, Lt. Col. Alexander Vindman, and Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense 

Laura Cooper —testified that this security assistance to Ukraine is vital to the national security of 

the United States and Europe. 283 As Ambassador Taylor noted: 

[R]adar and weapons and sniper rifles, communication, that saves lives. It makes the 

Ukrainians more effective. It might even shorten the war. That’s what our hope is, to 

show that the Ukrainians can defend t hemselves and the Russians, in the end, will say 

“Okay, we’re going to stop.” 284 

State Department Special Advisor for Ukraine, Catherine Croft, further emphasized that 

Ukrainians currently “face casualties nearly every day in defense of their own territory against 

Russian aggression.” 285 Ambassador Taylor testified that American aid is a concrete 

demonstration of the United States’ “commitment to resist aggression and defend freedom.” 286 69 

Witnesses also testified that it is in the interest of the United State s for Russian 

aggression to be halted in Ukraine. In the 20th century, the United States fought two bloody 

wars to resist the aggression of a hostile power that tried to change the borders of Europe by 

force. As Ambassador Taylor put it, Russian aggressi on in Ukraine “dismissed all the principles 

that have kept the peace and contributed to prosperity in Europe since World War II.” 287 

Timothy Morrison, former Senior Director for Europe and Russia at the NSC, put the 

importance of U.S. assistance in stark terms: 

Russia is a failing power, but it is still a dangerous one. The United States aids Ukraine 

and her people so that they can fight Russia over th ere, and we don’t have to fight Russia 

here. 288 

Bipartisan Support for Security Assistance to Ukraine 

Congressional support for security assistance to Ukraine has been overwhelming and 

bipartisan. Congress provided $391 million in security assistance to U kraine for fiscal year 

2019: $250 million through the DOD -administered Ukraine Security Assistance Initiative 

(USAI) and $141 million through the State Department -administered Foreign Military Financing 

program. 

On September 26, 2018, Congress appropriat ed $250 million for the Ukraine Security 

Assistance Initiative, which is funded through DOD. The funding law made clear that the 

funding was only “available until September 30, 2019.” President Trump signed the bill into law 

on September 28, 2018. 289 

The Ukraine Security Assistance Initiative —a Congressionally -mandated program 

codifying portions of the European Reassurance Initiative, which was originally launched by the 

Obama Administration in 2015 —authorizes DOD to provide “security assistance and 

intell igence support, including training, equipment, and logistics support, supplies and services, 

to military and other security forces of the Government of Ukraine.” 290 Recognizing that 

strengthening Ukraine’s institutions, in addition to its military, is vital to helping it break free of 

Russia’s influence, Congress imposed conditions upon DOD before it could spend a portion of 

the security assistance funds. Half of the money was held in reserve until the Secretary of 

Defense, in coordination with the Secretar y of State, certified to Congress that Ukraine had 

undertaken sufficient anti -corruption reforms, such as in civilian control of the military and 

increased transparency and accountability. 291 

On February 28, 2019, John C. Rood, Under Secretary of Defense f or Policy, notified 

Congress that DOD intended to deliver the first half ($125 million) of assistance appropriated in 

September 2018 to Ukraine, including “more than $50 million of assistance to deliver counter -

artillery radars and defensive lethal assista nce.” 292 Congress cleared the Congressional 

notification, which enabled DOD to begin obligating (spending) funds. 293 

For Ukraine to qualify to receive the remaining $125 million of assistance, Congress 

required that the Secretary of Defense, in coordination with the Secretary of State, certify that the 70 

Government of Ukraine had taken substantial anticorruption reform actions. 294 Ms. Cooper and 

others at DOD conducted a review to evaluate whether Ukraine had met the required 

benchmarks. 295 Ms. Cooper explained that the review involved “pulling in all the views of the 

key experts on Ukraine defense, and coming up with a consensus view,” which was then run “up 

the chain in the Defense Department, to ensure we have approval.” 296 

On May 23, 2019, Under Secretary R ood certified to Congress that Ukraine had 

completed the requisite defense institutional reforms to qualify for the remaining $125 million in 

funds. He wrote: 

On behalf of the Secretary of Defense, and in coordination with the Secretary of State, I 

have certified that the Government of Ukraine has taken substantial actions to make 

defense institutional reforms for the purposes of decreasing corruption, increasing 

accountability, and sustaining improvements of combat capability enabled by U.S. 

assistance. 297 

Congress then cleared the related Congressional notification, which enabled DOD to begin 

obligating the remaining $125 million in funds. 298 

On June 18, 2019, DOD issued a press release announcing its intention to provide $250 

million in security assista nce funds to Ukraine “for additional training, equipment, and advisory 

efforts to build the capacity of Ukraine’s armed forces.” DOD announced that the security 

assistance would provide Ukraine with sniper rifles, rocket -propelled grenade launchers, and 

counter -artillery radars, command and control, electronic warfare detection and secure 

communications, military mobility, night vision, and military medical treatment. 299 

On February 15, 2019, Congress also appropriated $115 million for Ukraine through the 

State Department -administered Foreign Military Financing Program (FMF). 300 The Foreign 

Military Financing Program is administered by the State Department and provides grants or 

loans to foreign countries to help them purchase military services o r equipment manufactured by 

U.S. companies in the United States. In addition to the $115 million appropriated for fiscal year 

2019, approximately $26 million carried over from fiscal year 2018. 301 Thus, the total amount of 

foreign military financing availa ble for Ukraine was approximately $141 million. 

Before a country receives foreign military financing, the State Department must first seek 

Congressional approval through a notification to Congress. 302 The State Department never sent 

the required Congressional notification to Congress in the spring or summer of 2019. As 

described below, OMB blocked th e notification. 303 

President Trump Had Questions About Ukraine Security Assistance 

The day after DOD i ssued its June 18 press release announcing $250 million in security 

assistance funds for Ukraine, President Trump started asking OMB questions about the funding 

for Ukraine. On June 19, Mark Sandy, Deputy Associate Director for National Security 

Programs at OMB, was copied on an email from his boss, Michael Duffey, Associate Director 

for National Security Programs at OMB, to Elaine McCusker, Deputy Under Secretary of 71 

Defense (Comptroller) that said that “the President had questions about the press report a nd that 

he was seeking additional information.” 304 Notably, the same day, President Trump gave an 

interview on Fox News where he raised the so -called “Crowdstrike” conspiracy theory that 

Ukraine, rather than Russia, had interfered in the 2016 election, a li ne he would repeat during his 

July 25 call with the Ukrainian president. 305 

On June 20, in response to the President’s inquiry, Ms. McCusker responded to President 

Trump’s inquiry by providing Mr. Sandy information on the security assistance program. 306 Mr. 

Sandy shared the document with Mr. Duffey, who had follow -up questions about the “financial 

resources associated with the program, in particular,” the “history of the appropriations, [and] 

any more details about the intent of the program.” 307 Mr. Sandy s aid that his staff provided the 

relevant information to Mr. Duffey, but he did not know whether Mr. Duffey shared the 

information with the White House. 308 

Ms. Cooper also recalled receiving an email inquiring about DOD -administered Ukraine 

security assist ance a “few days” after DOD’s June 18, 2019 press release. 309 The email was from 

the Secretary of Defense’s Chief of Staff, “asking for follow -up on a meeting with the 

President.” The email contained three questions: 

And the one question was related to U.S. industry. Did U.S —is U.S. industry providing 

any of this equipment? The second question that I recall was related to international 

contributions. It asked, what are other countries doing, something to that effect. And 

then the third question, I do n’t recall —I mean, with any of these I don’t recall the exact 

wording, but it was something to the effect of, you know, who gave this money, or who 

gave this funding? 310 

Like Mr. Sandy, Ms. Cooper believed that the President’s inquiries were spurred by 

DOD’ s June 18 press release. She testified, “we did get that series of questions just within a few 

days after the press release and after that one article that had the headline.” 311 Ms. Cooper noted 

that it was “relatively unusual” to receive questions from th e President, and that she and her staff 

at the DOD responded “as quickly” as they could. 312 According to Ms. Cooper, DOD officials 

included in their answers that security assistance funding “has strong bipartisan support,” but 

never received a response. 313 

President Trump Froze Military Assistance 

Despite the fact that DOD experts demonstrated that the security assistance was crucial 

for both Ukraine and U.S. national security and had strong bipartisan support in Congress, 

President Trump ordered OMB to fr eeze the funds in July. 

On July 3, the State Department notified DOD and NSC staff that OMB was blocking the 

State Department from transmitting a Congressional notification for the provision of State 

Department -administered security assistance to Ukraine (i.e., the $141 million in foreign military 

financing). 314 Because the State Department is legally required to transmit such a notification to 

Congress before spending funds, blocking the Congressional notification effectively barred the 

State Department f rom spending the funding. 315 Ms. Williams testified that she saw the news in 72 

a draft email that was being prepared as part of the nightly update for the National Security 

Advisor .316 She agreed that the hold came “out of the blue” because it had not been dis cussed 

previously by OMB or the NSC. 317 

On or about July 12, 2019, President Trump directed that a hold be placed on security 

assistance funding for Ukraine. That day, Robert Blair, Assistant to the President and Senior 

Advisor to the Chief of Staff, sent an email to Mr. Duffey at OMB about Ukraine security 

assistance. 318 Mr. Sandy, who was on personal leave at the time but later received a copy of the 

email from Mr. Duffey, testified that in the July 12 email, Mr. Blair communicated “that the 

President is d irecting a hold on military support funding for Ukraine.” 319 The email mentioned 

no concerns about any other country, security assistance package, or aid of any sort. 320 

On or about July 15, Mr. Morrison learned from Deputy National Security Advisor 

Charles Kupperman “that it was the President’s direction to hold the assistance.” 321 On or about 

July 17 or 18, 2019, Mr. Duffey and Mr. Blair again exchanged emails about Ukraine security 

assistance. 322 Mr. Sandy later received a copy of the emails, which showed th at when Mr. 

Duffey asked Mr. Blair about the reason for the hold, Mr. Blair provided no explanation and 

instead said, “we need to let the hold take place” and then “revisit” the issue with the 

President. 323 

On July 18 or 19, when he returned from two weeks of personal leave, Mr. Sandy learned 

for the first time that the President had placed a hold on Ukraine security assistance from Mr. 

Duffey. 324 According to Mr. Sandy, Mr. Duffey was not aware of the reason but “there was 

certainly a desire to learn more about the rationale” for the hold. 325 

Agency Experts Repeatedly Objected to the Hold on Security Assistance 

Between July 18 and July 31, 2019 , the NSC staff convened a series of interagency 

meetings, at which the hold on security assistance was discussed in varying degrees of detail. 

Over the course of these meetings, it became evident that: 

• the President directed the hold through OMB; 

• no justification was provided for the hold; 

• with the exception of OMB, all represented agencies supported Ukraine security 

assistance because it was in the national security interests of the United States; and 

• there were concerns about the legality of the hold. 

The first interagency meeting was held on July 18 at the Deputy Assistant Secretary level 

(i.e., a “sub -Policy Coordination Committee”). It was supposed to be a “routine Ukraine policy 

meeting.” 326 Ambassador Taylor, Lt. Col. Vindman, Ms. Croft, and Mr. Kent were among the 

attendees. Witnesses testified that OMB announced at the meeting that President Trump had 

directed a hold on Ukraine security assistance. Mr. Kent testified that at the meeting, an OMB 

staff person announced that Acting White House Chief of Staff Mick Mulvaney “at the direction 73 

of the President had put a hold on all security assistance to the Ukraine.” 327 Ambassador Taylor 

testified that the “directive had come from the President to the Chief of Staff to OMB” and that 

when he le arned of the hold on military assistance, he “realized that one of the key pillars of our 

strong support for Ukraine was threatened.” 328 

According to Ms. Croft, when Mr. Kent raised the issue of security assistance, it “blew 

up the meeting.” 329 Ambassador Taylor testified that he and others on the call “sat in 

astonishment” when they learned about the hold. 330 David Holmes, Political Counselor at the 

U.S. Embassy in Kyiv, was also on the call. He testified he was “shocked” and thought the hold 

was “extremel y significant.” 331 He thought the hold undermined what he had understood to be 

longstanding U.S. policy in Ukraine. 332 

Ms. Croft testified that “the only reason given was that the order came at the direction of 

the President.” 333 Ms. Cooper, who did not parti cipate but received a readout of the meeting, 

testified that the fact that the hold was announced without explanation was “unusual.” 334 Mr. 

Kent testified that “[t]here was great confusion among the rest of us because we didn’t 

understand why that had happe ned.” 335 He explained that “[s]ince there was unanimity that this 

[security assistance to Ukraine] was in our national interest, it just surprised all of us.” 336 

With the exception of OMB, all agencies present at the July 18 meeting advocated for the 

lifti ng of the hold. 337 

There was also a lack of clarity as to whether the hold applied only to the State 

Department -administered Foreign Military Financing to Ukraine or whether it also applied to the 

DOD -administered Ukraine Security Assistance Initiative fu nding. 338 Ms. Cooper and her 

colleagues at the DOD were “concerned” about the hold. 339 After the meeting, DOD sought 

further clarification from the NSC and State Department about its impact on the DOD -

administered funding. 340 However, there was no “specific g uidance for DOD at the time.” 341 

The second interagency meeting to discuss the hold on Ukraine security assistance was 

held at the Assistant Secretary level (i.e., a “Policy Coordination Committee”) on July 23, 

2019. 342 The meeting was chaired by Mr. Morrison. 343 Ms. Cooper, who participated via secure 

video teleconference, testified that “the White House chief of staff ha[d] conveyed that the 

President has concerns about Ukraine and Ukraine security assistance.” 344 Jenni fer Williams, 

Special Advisor to Vice President Pence for Europe and Eurasia, who also attended the meeting 

on behalf of the Vice President, testified that the “OMB representative conveyed that they had 

been directed by the Chief of Staff, the White House Chief of Staff, to continue holding it [the 

Ukraine security assistance] until further notice.” 345 Similar to the July 18 meeting, the July 23 

meeting did not provide clarity about whether the President’s hold applied to the DOD -

administered funding or only to the funds administered by the State Department. 346 

Again, no reason was provided for the hold. 347 Mr. Sandy did not attend the July 23 

meeting as the representative for OMB, but he received a readout that other agencies expressed 

concerns about the hol d. Specifically, the concerns related to the lack of rationale for the hold, 

the hold’s implications on U.S. assistance and “overall policy toward Ukraine” and “similar legal 

questions.” 348 74 

Mr. Morrison also testified that there was a discussion at the Jul y 23 meeting about the 

legality of the hold, and specifically whether it is “actually legally permissible for the President 

to not allow for the disbursement of the funding.” 349 Mr. Morrison recalled that DOD raised 

concerns about possible violations of the Impoundment Control Act. 350 The Impoundment 

Control Act gives the President the authority to delay spending, or not spend, funds only if 

Congress is notified of those intentions and approves the proposed action (see below for further 

discussion of the act) .351 

With the exception of OMB, all agencies present at the July 23rd meeting advocated for 

the lifting of the hold. 352 Ambassador Taylor explained that the State Department “made a 

strong statement about the importance of this assistance” and that Ms. Coop er, on behalf of 

DOD, “made a very strong case and continued to make a very strong case for the effectiveness” 

of the security assistance. 353 Lt. Col. Vindman, who also attended the meeting, testified that 

there was agreement that the issue should be elevat ed to the Agency deputies “as quickly as 

possible to recommend a release of security assistance.” 354 

The third interagency meeting, a Deputies Small Group meeting at the Cabinet Deputies 

level, was held on July 26, 2019. Mr. Duffey was the OMB representa tive, and Mr. Sandy 

prepared Mr. Duffey for the meeting. 355 Mr. Sandy explained that he prepared Mr. Duffey to get 

policy guidance on six critical issues: (1) the reason for the hold; (2) the extent of the hold; (3) 

the duration of the hold; (4) the Congre ssional affairs approach; (5) the public affairs approach; 

and (6) and the diplomatic approach. 356 Mr. Sandy testified that on July 26, OMB still did not 

have an understanding of the reason for the hold. 357 According to Mr. Sandy, at that time, there 

was no discussion within OMB about the amount of money that was being contributed to 

Ukraine by other countries, or whether that topic was the reason for the President’s hold. 358 

Mr. Morrison, Lt. Col. Vindman , Ms. Cooper, Under Secretary of State for Political 

Affairs David Hale, and Mr. Duffey attended the July 26 meeting. At the meeting, OMB stated 

that “they had guidance from the President and from Acting Chief of Staff Mulvaney to freeze 

the assistance.” 359 It also was “stated very clearly” that the hold applied to both the State 

Department and Defense Department security assistance funds. 360 Ambassador Hale, as the 

representative for the Department of State, “advocated strongly for resuming the assistance,” as 

did representatives from all agencies other than OMB. 361 

Mr. Morrison testified that, at the meeting, “OMB represented that —and the Chief of 

Staff’s Office was present —that the President was concerned about corruption in Ukraine, and 

he wanted to make s ure that Ukraine was doing enough to manage that corruption.” 362 Ms. 

Cooper had a similar recollection but received no further understanding of what OMB meant by 

“corruption.” 363 Ms. Cooper recalled that the deputies did not consider corruption to be a 

legit imate reason for the hold because they unanimously agreed that Ukraine was making 

sufficient progress on anti -corruption reforms, as had been certified by DOD on May 23. 364 

President Trump Continued the Hold Despite Agency Concerns About Legality 

Prior to the passage of the Impoundment Control Act, presidents had frequently 

impounded —i.e., refused to spend —Congressionally -appropriated funds to enforce their policy 75 

priorities when they diverged from Congress’. However, most of these impoundments were 

small (i.e., no more than a few percent of the total program budget) or temporary (i.e., funds 

were released in time for them to be spent before the end of the fiscal year) and rooted in policy, 

rather than political interests of the President. It was not until President Nixon that presidential 

impoundment of funds would prompt Congress to take action citing constitutional concerns. 365 

Unlike his predecessors, Nixon undertook impoundments that were both substantial and, 

in some cases, permanent, which raised conc erns for Congress over its Article I powers. In fact, 

between 1969 and 1972, Nixon impounded between 15% and 20% of Congressionally -

appropriated funds in various accounts. 366 

To reassert Congressional authority over the budget, in 1973, Congress establish ed the 

Joint Study Committee on Budget Control, which held a series of hearings and produced more 

than 4,600 pages of testimony and reports. The Joint Study Committee’s findings ultimately led 

to the overwhelmingly bipartisan passage —over President Nixon’ s veto —of the Impoundment 

Control Act of 1974, one of a series of reform bills designed to reign in presidential power .

Looking back at that moment in history, Rep. Bill Archer (R -TX), a fiscal conservative who 

served 30 years in the House of Representati ves, including as the Chairman of the Ways and 

Means Committee, remarked, “the culture then was that the president had too much power…the 

president is abusing his power.” 367 

In addition to establishing the Congressional Budget Committees and the independent 

Congressional Budget Office, the Impoundment Control Act also limits the circumstances under 

which a president can legally impound Congressionally -appropriated funds. According to the 

Act, although the President may request authority from Congress to wit hhold or permanently 

cancel the availability of budget authority, such an action is not allowed without Congressional 

approval. Any amount of budget authority proposed to be deferred (i.e., temporarily withheld) or 

rescinded (i.e., permanently withheld) m ust be made available for obligation unless Congress, 

within 45 legislative days, completes action on a bill rescinding all or part of the amount 

proposed for rescission. 368 The Impoundment Control Act does not permit the withholding of 

funds through their date of expiration, which would be a de facto rescission without 

Congressional approval. 369 

At the July 26 interagency meeting, senior agency officials raised serious concerns about 

the legality of the hold under the Impoundment Control Act. Ms. Cooper tes tified: 

A: Well, I’m not an expert on the law, but in that meeting immediately deputies 

began to raise concerns about how this could be done in a legal fashion because 

there was broad understanding in the meeting that the funding —the State 

Department funding related to an earmark for Ukraine and that the DOD funding 

was specific to Ukraine security assistance. So the comments in the room at the 

deputies’ level reflected a sense that there was not an understanding of how this 

could legally play out. And at that meeti ng the deputies agreed to look into the 

legalities and to look at what was possible. 

Q: Okay. So is it fair to say the deputies thought the President was not authorized to 

place a hold on these funds? 76 

A: They did not use that term, but the expression i n the room that I recall was a sense 

that there was not an available mechanism to simply not spend money that has 

been in the case of USAI [DOD security assistance] already notified to 

Congress. 370 

Lt. Col. Vindman testified that the issue needed to be “el evated to a PC [Principals 

Committee] as quickly as possible to release the hold on security assistance” so that the funds 

could be obligated before the end of the fiscal year. 371 

A Principals Committee meeting was never convened. 372 According to Mr. Morriso n, 

National Security Advisor John Bolton “believed that it was unnecessary, that he already had a 

reasonable idea of where the principals were, and he wanted to get directly to the President as 

early as possible in the most effective way.” 373 Ambassador Bol ton understood that the 

principals “were all supportive of the continued disbursement of the aid.” 374 As had been clear 

since the very first interagency meeting on July 18, the lifting of the hold was “the unanimous 

position of the entire interagency.” 375 At this point, it remained unclear to many officials why 

the President continued to hold the funds. 

On July 31, 2019, a fourth and final interagency meeting was held at the Policy 

Coordination Committee level. Ms. Cooper attended the meeting on behalf of DOD. According 

to Ms. Cooper, the agenda “was largely focused on just routine Ukraine business, pos telection 

follow up,” and “security assistance was not actually an explicit agenda item.” 376 Ms. Cooper 

nevertheless raised security assistance and expressed her understanding, after consulting with 

DOD counsel, that there were only two legally available op tions to implement the hold: a 

Presidential rescission notice to Congress (i.e., requesting that Congress “take back” funds it had 

already appropriated) or for the Defense Department to do a reprogramming action (i.e., use 

Congressionally -appropriated fund s for a different purpose). 377 In either case, the law requires 

that the Executive Branch notify, and seek approval from, Congress before taking any action. 378 

At the July 31 meeting, Ms. Cooper emphasized to the participants that because “there 

are only two legally available options and we do not have direction to pursue either,” DOD 

would have to start obligating the funds on or about August 6. 379 She explained at her deposition 

that DOD would have had to begin obligating the funds by that date or risk viola tion of the 

Impoundment Control Act. 380 

The Administration, however, never proposed a rescission or reprogramming of funds for 

Ukraine security assistance and never notified Congress of its intent to withhold funds. 381 

OMB Used Unusual Process to Implement President’s Hold, Skirting Legal Concerns 

OMB plays a critical role in the release of security assistance funding. The 

Antideficiency Act requires that, before any department or agency may spend Congressionally -

appropriated funding, the Director of OMB or his delegates must “apportion” (i.e., make 

available to spend) the funds in writing. 382 Through this mechanism, OMB has the ability to 

directly impact security assistance funding or funding of any kind that is appropriated by 

Congress. 77 

In parallel with t he interagency meetings that occurred during the latter half of July 2019, 

OMB devised a way to implement the President’s hold on security assistance to Ukraine, 

notwithstanding DOD’s Congressional notifications of February 28 and May 23. Over the 

course of his twelve -year career at OMB, Mr. Sandy could not recall any other time when a hold 

had been placed on security assistance after a Congressional notification had been sent. 383 

When speaking with Mr. Duffey on or about July 18 or 19, Mr. Sandy immediat ely raised 

concerns about how to implement the hold without violating the Impoundment Control Act, 

which required that the funds be obligated (i.e. spent) before they expired at the end of the fiscal 

year, on September 30. 384 In light of that legal requirem ent, the hold would have to be 

temporary. 385 An additional hurdle was the fact that OMB had already authorized DOD to spend 

the security assistance funds DOD administered for fiscal year 2019. 386 Therefore, when 

President Trump directed the hold in July, OMB scrambled to reverse that prior authorization. 

From July 19 through July 24, Mr. Sandy consulted with the OMB Office of General 

Counsel as well as Ms. McCusker at DOD on how to legally implement a hold on the funds. 387 

Mr. Sandy’s staff at OMB also conf erred with OMB’s Budget Review Division. 388 Based on 

these consultations, OMB decided to implement the hold through a series of nine funding 

documents, known legally as “apportionments.” 389 Apportionments typically are used to convey 

authority to an agency t o spend funds, not to withhold funds; thus, in order to bar DOD from 

spending money, these particular apportionments included footnotes that would impose the holds 

while using creative language to skirt legal concerns. Mr. Sandy testified that “the purpos e of 

the footnote was to preclude obligation for a limited period of time but enable planning and 

casework to continue.” 390 He also testified that this use of footnotes was unusual and that in his 

12 years of OMB experience, he could “not recall another eve nt like it.” 391 

On July 25, OMB issued the first funding document implementing the hold. In this 

document, the relevant footnote notified DOD that the Ukraine Security Assistance Initiative 

funds “are not available for obligation until August 5, 2019, to allow for an interagency process 

to determine the best use of such funds.” The footnote also stated that: 

Based on OMB’s communication with DOD on July 25, 2019, OMB understands from 

the Department that this brief pause in obligations will not p reclude DOD’s timely 

execution of the final policy direction. DOD may continue its planning and casework for 

the Initiative during this period. 392 

Mr. Sandy explained that the “interagency process” referenced in the footnote referred to 

the NSC -led interag ency meetings convened during the latter half of July, and that the August 5 

date provided a “reasonable timeframe for an interagency process” to produce “clear guidance” 

on the hold. 393 The August 5 date was determined in consultation with Mr. Duffey at OM B and 

Ms. McCusker at DOD. 394 

Mr. Sandy further testified that the second sentence in the footnote —which states, in 

relevant part, that “OMB understands from the Department that this brief pause in obligations 

will not preclude DOD’s timely execution of the final policy direction” —was critical to the 

implementation of the hold: 78 

Well, that gets to the heart of that issue about ensuring that we don’t run afoul of the 

Impoundment Control Act, which means that you have to allow for the timely execution. 

And th is reflects my conversation with —conversations plural with Elaine McCusker that 

they can confirm that, during this brief period, they would not foresee any problem fully 

executing the program by the end of the fiscal year. 395 

The sentence, in effect, affir med that if the hold remained in place only until August 5, DOD 

would still have sufficient time to spend all security assistance funds by September 30, 2019. 

President Trump, however, would continue the hold long past August 5. 

Trump Appointee Took Over Signing Authority from Career Budget Expert 

Since becoming Deputy Associate Director for National Security in 2013, Mr. Sandy was 

responsible for approving release of the funding for programs within his portfolio, including the 

Ukraine Security Assis tance Initiative. 396 Mr. Sandy approved and signed the July 25 funding 

document. 397 On July 29, however, Mr. Duffey —a political appointee of President Trump 

whose prior position had been as Executive Director of the Republican Party of Wisconsin —told 

Mr. San dy —a career civil servant with decades of experience in this area —that he would no 

longer be responsible for approving the release of funding for Ukraine Security Assistance 

Initiative. 398 Mr. Duffey also revoked the authority for approving the release of f unding for 

Foreign Military Financing from Mr. Sandy’s colleague at OMB. 399 Instead, Mr. Duffey would 

himself assume authority for the $250 million in DOD -administered Ukraine security assistance 

and authority for approving the release of funding for the $1 41 million in State Department -

administered Foreign Military Financing to Ukraine. 400 

Mr. Duffey did not tell Mr. Sandy whether he requested this change in authority but did 

say that “it was in essence a joint decision reflecting both guidance from the A cting Director and 

also his support.” 401 Over the course of several days, Mr. Duffey explained to Mr. Sandy and 

others in the National Security Division that “there was interest among the leadership in tracking 

the uses of moneys [sic] closely.” 402 Mr. Duffe y expressed an “interest in being more involved 

in daily operations” and “regarded this responsibility as a way for him to learn more about 

specific accounts within his area.” 403 

Mr. Sandy testified that prior to July 29, he had never heard Mr. Duffey sta te any interest 

in approving the release of funding. 404 Furthermore, when they learned that Mr. Duffey was 

taking on this new responsibility, Mr. Sandy and other staff relayed their concerns to Mr. Duffey 

that it was a substantial workload. 405 Mr. Sandy also testified that “people were curious what he 

thought he would learn from apportionments about the accounts as opposed to the other, you 

know, sources of information.” 406 Mr. Sandy agreed that there are more efficient ways of 

learning about accounts and prog rams, and that “I can think of other ways —other materials that I 

personally would find more informative.” 407 

Mr. Sandy was not aware of any prior instance when a political appointee assumed this 

kind of funding approval authority. 408 79 

After the July 31 inte ragency meeting at which Ms. Cooper announced that DOD would 

have to start obligating the funds on or about August 6, Mr. Duffey sought clarification. 409 Ms. 

Cooper explained to Mr. Duffey that at a certain point DOD would not have sufficient time to 

fully obligate the funds before they expired at the end of the fiscal year. In response, Mr. Duffey 

“wanted more information on the precise nature of how long does it take to obligate, and how 

many cases, and that sort of thing.” 410 Ms. Cooper referred Mr. Duf fey to the DOD comptroller 

and to the Defense Security Cooperation Agency. 411 During the month of August, Mr. Duffey 

and Ms. McCusker communicated about the implementation of the hold on the Ukraine Security 

Assistance Initiative funds. 412 

On August 6 and A ugust 15, Mr. Duffey approved two more funding documents that 

contained footnotes with language nearly identical to the footnote in the July 25 funding 

document that initiated the hold; the only difference was that the date funds would become 

available for spending was changed from August 5 to August 12. 413 

The August 6 and 15 footnotes, and all subsequent footnotes through September 10, 

continued to state that the hold was in place “to allow for an interagency process to determine the 

best use of such funds,” even though the final interagency meeting regarding Ukraine security 

assistance occurred on July 31. 414 Not only was there no active interagency process after July, 

but Ms. Cooper also was not aware of any review of the funding conducted by DOD in J uly, 

August, or September. 415 In fact, Ms. Cooper noted that months before, DOD had completed its 

review of whether Ukraine “had made sufficient progress in meeting defense reform and 

anticorruption goals consistent with the NDAA,” and certified to Congress in May 2019 that 

Ukraine had met the requirements to receive funding. 416 Similarly, Mr. Kent testified that the 

State Department did not conduct, and was never asked to conduct, a review of the security 

assistance funding administered by the State Departme nt. 417 

At the same time that OMB was implementing the President’s hold through the funding 

footnotes, officials inside OMB were advocating for release of the funds. On August 7, the 

National Security Division, International Affairs Division, and Office o f Legal Counsel of OMB 

drafted and transmitted a memo on Ukraine security assistance to OMB Acting Director Vought 

“in anticipation of a principals -level discussion to address the topic.” 418 The National Security 

Division’s portion of the memorandum recomme nded to remove the hold because (1) the 

assistance was consistent with the national security strategy in terms of supporting a stable, 

peaceful Europe; (2) the aid countered Russian aggression; and (3) there was bipartisan support 

for the program. 419 Mr. Du ffey approved the memorandum and agreed with the policy 

recommendation. 420 

Sometime in mid -August, DOD raised concerns that it might not be able to fully obligate 

the Defense Department administered funds before the end of the fiscal year. 421 Ms. Cooper 

te stified that the Defense Security Cooperation Agency estimated that $100 million of aid might 

not be obligated in time and was at risk. 422 

Because of this, DOD concluded that it could no longer support OMB’s claim in the 

footnote that “this brief pause in obligations will not preclude DOD’s timely execution of the 80 

final policy direction.” 423 As mentioned above, Mr. Sandy testified that this sentence was at “the 

heart of that issue about ensuring that we don’t run afoul of the Impoundment Control Act.” 424 

As a result of DOD’s concerns, all of the subsequent footnotes issued by OMB during the 

pendency of the hold —approved by Mr. Duffey on August 20, 27, and 31, and September 5, 6, 

and 10 —removed the sentence regarding DOD’s ability to fully obligate by the en d of the fiscal 

year. 425 Each footnote extended the hold for a period of two to six days. 426 

Mr. Sandy and his staff “continued to express concerns [to Mr. Duffey] about the 

potential implications vis -à-vis the Impoundment Control Act,” 427 and advised Mr. Duffey to 

consult with OMB’s Office of General Counsel “on every single footnote.” 428 Mr. Sandy was 

copied on emails with the Office of General Counsel on these topics. 429 Although Mr. Sandy 

understood that the Office of General Counsel sup ported the footnotes, he noted that there were 

dissenting opinions within the Office of General Counsel. 430 Concerns about whether the 

Administration was bending, if not breaking, the law by holding back this vital assistance 

contributed to at least two OMB officials resigning, including one attorney in the Office of 

General Counsel. 431 Mr. Sandy testified that the resignation was motivated in part by concerns 

about the way OMB was handling the hold on Ukraine security assistance. 432 According to Mr. 

Sandy, th e colleague disagreed with the Office of General Counsel about the application of the 

Impoundment Control Act to the hold on Ukraine security assistance. 433 

Nevertheless, at the direction of the President, OMB continued to implement the hold 

through Septem ber 11. 

Senior Officials Failed to Convince President Trump to Release the Aid in August 

Sometime prior to August 16, Ambassador Bolton had a one -on -one meeting with 

President Trump about the aid. 434 According to Mr. Morrison, at that meeting the Presid ent “was 

not yet ready to approve the release of the assistance.” 435 Following the meeting, Ambassador 

Bolton instructed Mr. Morrison to look for opportunities to get the principals together “to have 

the direct, in -person conversation with the President abo ut this topic.” 436 

On or about August 13 or 14, Lt. Col. Vindman was directed to draft a Presidential 

Decision Memorandum for Ambassador Bolton and the other principals to present to President 

Trump for a decision on Ukraine security assistance. 437 The mem orandum, finalized on August 

15, recommended that the hold should be lifted, explained why, and included the consensus 

views from the July 26 meeting that the funds should be released. 438 Lt. Col. Vindman received 

conflicting accounts about whether the memo randum was presented to the President. 439 

Mr. Morrison, who was Lt. Col. Vindman’s supervisor at the NSC and agreed with the 

recommendation to lift the hold, testified that the memorandum was never provided to the 

President. 440 Mr. Morrison explained that Ambassador Bolton intended to present the 

memorandum to the President during an unrelated meeting in Bedminster, New Jersey, on 

August 15, but the “other subject matter of that meeting consumed all the time.” 441 However, 

while at Bedminster, the principals “all represented to Ambassador Bolton that they were 

prepared to tell the President they endorsed the swift release and disbursement of the funding.” 442 81 

Mr. Morrison testified that he attempted to gather the “the right group of principals” to 

meet with the P resident but was unable to do so because of scheduling issues. 443 According to 

Mr. Morrison, the next possible opportunity was during a trip to Warsaw, Poland at the 

beginning of September, but President Trump did not end up making that trip. 444 

Ms. Cooper recalled receiving an email at the end of August from Secretary of Defense 

Esper referencing a meeting or discussion with the President, and that there was “no decision on 

Ukraine.” 445 

Ukrainian Officials Learned About the Hold in July 2019 

Witnesses testified that officials in the Ukraine government knew of President Trump’s 

hold on security assistance before it was publicly reported in the press on August 28, 2019. Ms. 

Croft testified that after July 18 —when the hold was announced by OMB a t the interagency 

meeting —it was “inevitable that it was eventually going to come out.” 446 

Two individuals from the Ukrainian Embassy in Washington, D.C., approached Ms. 

Croft approximately a week apart “quietly and in confidence to ask me about an OMB ho ld on 

Ukraine security assistance.” 447 Ms. Croft could not precisely recall the dates of these 

conversations, but testified that she was “very surprised at the effectiveness of my Ukrainian 

counterparts’ diplomatic tradecraft, as in to say they found out ve ry early on or much earlier than 

I expected them to.” 448 

Ms. Croft explained that the Ukrainian officials came to her quietly because they would 

not want the hold to become public: 

I think that if this were public in Ukraine it would be seen as a reversa l of our policy and 

would, just to say sort of candidly and colloquially, this would be a really big deal, it 

would be a really big deal in Ukraine, and an expression of declining U.S. support for 

Ukraine. 449 

DOD also received questions from the Ukraine E mbassy about the status of the military 

assistance. Ms. Cooper testified that those occurred on July 25, 2019 —the same day as President 

Trump’s call with President Zelensky: 

On July 25th, a member of my staff got a question from a Ukraine Embassy contac t

asking what was going on with Ukraine security assistance, because at that time, we did 

not know what the guidance was on USAI [DOD -administered funds]. The OMB notice 

of apportionment arrived that day, but this staff member did not find out about it un til 

later. I was informed that the staff member told the Ukrainian official that we were 

moving forward on USAI, but recommended that the Ukraine Embassy check in with 

State regarding the FMF [State Department -administered funds]. 450 

On July 25, Ms. Coop er’s staff received two emails from the State Department revealing 

that the Ukrainian Embassy was “asking about security assistance” and that “the Hill knows 

about the FMF situation to an extent, and so does the Ukrainian Embassy.” 451 82 

One of Ms. Cooper’s staff members reported that sometime during the week of August 6, 

a Ukrainian Embassy officer stated that “a Ukrainian official might raise concerns about security 

assistance in an upcoming meeting,” but that the issue was “not, in fact, raised.” 452 Ms. Coo per’s 

staff further reported that Ukrainian officials were aware of the hold on security assistance in 

August. 453 

Lt. Col. Vindman testified that, by mid -August, he too was getting questions from 

Ukrainians about the status of the hold on security assis tance: 

So to the best of my knowledge, the Ukrainians, first of all, are in general pretty 

sophisticated, they have their network of, you know, Ukrainian interest groups and so 

forth. They have bipartisan support in Congress. And certainly there are —it was no 

secret, at least within government and official channels, that security assistance was on 

hold. And to the best of my recollection, I believe there were some of these light inquires 

in the mid -August timeframe. 454 

While numerous individuals, includ ing Ukrainians, were aware of the hold, it did not 

become publicly known until a Politico report on August 28, 2019. 455 83 

4. The President’s Meeting with the Ukrainian President Was Conditioned on An 

Announcement of Investigations 

President Trump demanded the public announcement by President Zelensky of 

investigations into President Trump’s political rival and alleged Ukrainian interference in 

the 2016 U.S. election in exchange for an Oval Office meeting. T he President’s 

representatives made that quid pro quo clear to Ukrainian officials .

Overview 

After ordering the hold on security assistance to Ukraine against the unanimous advice of 

the relevant U.S. government agencies , President Trump used his hand -picked representatives to 

demand that Ukr ainian leaders publicly announce investigations into his political rival , former 

Vice President Joe Biden , and into the debunked conspiracy theory that Ukraine, not Russia, 

interfered in the 2016 U.S. election. President Trump, through his agents, made cl ear that his 

demand needed to be met before a coveted White House meeting with Ukrainian President 

Volodymyr Zelensky would be scheduled . A face -to -face meeting with President Trump in the 

Oval Office would have conferred on the new Ukrainian leader much -sought prestige and would 

have signaled to Russia that Ukraine could continue to count on the support of the President of 

the United States, which was particularly important as Russia continued to wage war in eastern 

Ukraine .

To date, the White House meeting for President Zelensky has not occurred . Following 

the May 23 meeting in the Oval Office, President Trump’s hand -picked representatives —the so -

called “Three Amigos” —worked with the President’s personal attorney, Rudy Giuliani, to 

pressure Uk rainian leaders to announce publicly investigations that would benefit the President’s 

reelection campaign . Testimony of multiple witnesses and contemporaneous text messages 

exchanged between and among President Trump’s representatives confirm that the Wh ite House 

meeting —and later the release of security assistance for Ukraine —was conditioned on Ukraine 

acquiescing to the President’s demands .

In the weeks leading up to the July 25 call between President Trump and President 

Zelensky, President Trump’s r epresentatives repeatedly relayed the message of conditionality to 

Ukrainian government officials —including to President Zelensky himself —in meetings in Kyiv, 

Toronto, and Washington, D.C . President Zelensky and his advisors struggled to navigate these 

de mands , recognizing that President Trump’s desire that Ukraine announce these political 

investigations threatened to render Ukraine a “pawn” in U.S. domestic reelection politics .

An Oval Office Meeting for President Zelensky Was Important to 

Ukraine and U.S. National Security 

A face -to -face meeting with the President of the United States in the Oval Office was 

critical to President Zelensky as the newly -elected Ukrainian leader sought U.S. support for his 

ambitious anti -corruption agenda and to repel Rus sian aggression. A White House meeting was 84 

also important for U.S. national security because it would have served to bolster Ukraine’s 

negotiating position in peace talks with Russia . It also would have supported Ukraine as a 

bulwark against further Russian advances in Europe .

Multiple witnesses unanimously attested to the importance of a White House meeting for 

Ukraine and the United States. For example, David Holmes , the Political Counselor at the U.S. 

Embassy in Kyiv , testified that a White House meeting was “critical” to President Zelensky’s 

ability to “encourage Russian President Putin to take seriously President Zelensky’s peace 

efforts.” 456 Likewise, Deputy Assista nt Secretary George Kent explained that a White House 

meeting was “very important” for Ukrainians to demonstrate the strength of their relationship 

with “Ukraine’s strongest supporter .” He also said that it “makes sense” for the United States to 

meet with the Ukrainians as they we re on “the front lines of Russian malign influence and 

aggression.” 457 

Dr. Fiona Hill , Deputy Assistant to the President and Senior Director of European and 

Russian Affairs at the NSC, explained that a White House meeting would sup ply the new 

Ukrainian Government with “the legitimacy that it needed, especially vis -à-vis the Russians,” —

and that the Ukrainians viewed a White House meeting as “a recognition of their legitimacy as a 

sovereign state.” 458 Lt. Col. Alexander Vindman , the NS C Director for Ukraine, testified that a 

White House meeting would provide a “show of support” from “the most powerful country in 

the world and Ukraine’s most significant benefactor,” which would help the Ukrainian President 

“establish his bona fides” and “implement his agenda.” 459 

Ambassador Kurt Volker, Special Representative for Ukraine Negotiations , also 

recognized that it was “a tremendous symbol of support ” to have President Zelensky visit the 

White House. 460 He explained that a meeting “enhances [Pre sident Zelensky’s] stature, that he is 

accepted, that he is seen at the highest level. The image ry you get from being at the White 

House is the best in the world, in terms of how it enhances someone’s image.” 461 

President Trump “Wanted to Hear from Zelen sky” Before Scheduling Oval Office Meeting 

Ambassador William B. Taylor , Jr. arrived in Ukraine as the new Chargé d’Affaires at 

the U.S. Embassy in Kyiv on June 17, 2019. After arriving, Ambassador Taylor worked to 

secure a n Oval Office meeting between P resident Trump and President Zelensky . This was “an 

agreed -upon goal” of policymakers in both Ukraine and the United States. 462 

Ambassador Taylor worked with Ambassador Volker and Ambassador to the European 

Union Gordon Sondland —two of the Three Amigos —to try to schedule this meeting. Just days 

after beginning his new position, Ambassador Taylor learned that President Trump “wanted to 

hear from Zelensky ” before scheduling the Oval Office meeting, but Ambassador Taylor did not 

understand what that meant at the time .463 On June 27, Ambassador Sondland informed 

Ambassador Taylor that President Zelensky needed to “make clear ” to President Trump that he, 

Presid ent Zelensky, was not “standing in the way of ‘investigations.’” 464 Ambassador Taylor 

relayed this conversation to Mr. Holmes, who testified that he understood “investigations” in that 

context to mean the “Burisma -Biden investigations that Mr. Giuliani and his associates had been 

speaking about” publicly. 465 85 

On June 28, Secretary of Energy Rick Perry —the third of the Three Amigos —and 

Ambassadors Sondland, Volker, and Taylor participated in a conference call to prepare for a 

discussion later that day with Pres ident Zelensky. During this preparatory call, Ambassador 

Volker explained that he planned to be “explicit” with President Zelensky in an upcoming one -

on -one meeting in Toronto , Canada. Specifically, Ambassador Volker intended to inform 

President Zelensky that President Trump would require Ukraine to address “ rule of law, 

transparency, but a lso, specifically, cooperation on investigations to get to the bottom of things ”

in order to “ get the meeting in the White House.” 466 

For the subsequent call with Pres ident Zelensky on June 28, Ambassador Sondland 

sought to limit the number of U.S. government personnel listening in. According to Ambassador 

Taylor, Ambassador Sondland stated that he did not want to include “most of the regular 

interagency participants ” and that “he wanted to make sure no one was transcribing or 

monitoring ” the call when President Zelensky was patched in . Ambassador Taylor testified that 

he considered Ambassador Sondland’s requests to be “odd.” 467 During that call, President 

Zelensky and the U.S. officials discussed energy policy and the conflict with Russia in eastern 

Ukraine. The Ukrainian president also noted that he looked forward to the White House visit 

that President Trump had offered in a letter dated May 29. 468 

The exclusion of State Department staff and notetakers from the Ju ne 28 call was an early 

indication to Ambassador Taylor that separate channels of diplomacy related to Ukraine policy —

an official channel and an irregular channel —wer e “diverging .” Ambassador Taylor testified :

This suggested to me that there were the two channels. This suggested to me that the 

normal channel, where you would have staff on the phone call, was being cut out, and the 

other channel, of people who were w orking, again, toward a goal which I supported, 

which was having a meeting to further U.S. -Ukrainian relations, I supported, but that 

irregular channel didn’t have a respect for or an interest in having the normal staff 

participate in this call with the he ad of state. 469 

Given Ambassador Sondland ’s efforts to exclude staff on the June 28 call with President 

Zelensky , Ambassador Taylor asked Ambassadors Sondland and Volker by text message how 

they planned to handle informing other U.S. officials about the contents of the call . Ambassador 

Volker responded: “I think we just keep it among ourselves to try to build working relationship 

and just get the d*** date for the meeting!” 470 Ambassador Sondland then texted: “Agree with 

KV. Very close hold.” 471 Neverthe less, Ambassador Taylor informed Mr. Kent about the call 

and wrote a memo for the record dated June 30 that summarized the conversation with President 

Zelensky. 472 

Ambassador Volker Pressed “Investigations” with President Zelensky in Toronto 

On July 2, Ambassador Volker met with President Zelensky and his chief of staff on the 

sidelines of the Ukraine R eform Conference in Toronto. As he later texted to Ambassador 

Taylor, Ambassador Volker “pulled the two of them aside at the end and explained the Giuliani 

factor.” 473 Ambassador Volker clarified that by “the Giuliani factor,” he meant “a negative 86 

narrative about Ukraine” that was “being amplified by Rudy Giuliani” and was unfavorably 

impacting “Ukraine’s image in the United States and o ur ability to advance the bilateral 

relationship.” 474 Ambassador Volker later informed Ukraine’s incoming Minister of Foreign 

Affairs, Vadym Prystaiko, about his pull -aside with President Zelensky in Toronto via text 

message: “I talked to him privately abo ut Giuliani and impact on president T[rump].” 475 

On July 3, the day after his pull -aside with President Zelensky in Toronto, Ambassador 

Volker sent a message to Ambassador Taylor emphasizing that “The key thing is to tee up a 

phone call w potus and then get visit nailed down.” 476 Ambassador Volker told Ambassador 

Taylor that during the Toronto conference, he counseled the Ukrainian president about how he 

could “prepare for the phone call with President Trump.” Specifically, Ambassador Volker told 

the Ukraini an leader that President Trump “would like to hear about the investigations.” 477 In 

his public testimony, Ambassador Volker confirmed that he mentioned “investigations ” to 

President Zelensky in Toronto, explaining that he was “thinking of Burisma and 2016” in raising 

the subject, and that his “assumption” was that Ukrainian officials also understood his reference 

to “investigations ” to be “Burisma/2016.” 478 

Ambassador Volker’s efforts to prepare President Zelensky for his phone call with 

President Trump ap pear to have borne fruit. As discussed further in Chapter 5, during the July 

25 call, President Zelensky expressed his openness to pursuing investigations into President 

Trump’s political rival, former Vice President Biden, and the conspiracy theory that Ukraine, 

rather than Russia, interfered in the 2016 U.S. election. President Zelensky also specifically 

referenced “Burisma” during the call. 

Ambassador s Volker and Sondland Worked to Get Mr. Giuliani What He Needed 

According to Ambassador Sondland, President Zelensky’s commitment to make a public 

announcement about investigations into Burisma and the 2016 election was a “prerequisite []” for 

the White House meeting. 479 In fact, Ambassador Sondland testified that the announcement of 

the investigations —and not the investigations themselves —was the price President Trump 

sought in exchange for a White House meeting with Ukrainian President Zelensky: 

Q: But he had to get those two investigations if that official act was going to ta ke 

place, correct? 

A: He had to announce the investigations. He didn't actually have to do them, as I 

understood it. 

Q: Okay. President Zelensky had to announce the two investigations the President 

wanted, make a public announcement, correct? 

A: Correct. 480 

Ambassador s Sondland and Volker understood that they needed to work with Mr. 

Giuliani, who was publicly pressing for the announcement of investigations that would benefit 

President Trump politically. As discussed in Chapter 2, Ambassador Sond land testified that the 

key to overcom ing President Trump’s skepticism about Ukraine was satisfying the President’s 

personal attorney . Sondland said, “Nonetheless, based on the President’s direction, we were 

faced with a choice: We could abandon the effo rts to schedule the White House phone call and a 87 

White House visit ” or “do as President Trump had directed and ‘talk with Rudy’” because “it 

was the only constructive path open to us.” 481 

Ambassador Volker discussed his intention to contact Mr. Giuliani with Mr. Kent .

Ambassador Volker explained that he intended to reach out to Mr. Giuliani because it was clear 

that the former mayor “had influence” with President Trump “in terms of the way the President 

thought of Ukraine.” 482 Ukrainian officials also unde rstood the importance of working through 

Mr. Giuliani, something that was underscored by his successful effort to smear and remove 

Ambassador Marie Yovanovitch from Kyiv in late April .483 

In response to Ambassador Volker’s stated intention to reach out to Mr. Giuliani, Mr. 

Kent raised concerns about Mr. Giuliani’s “track record,” including “asking for a visa for a 

corrupt former prosecutor,” attacking Ambassador Yovanovitch, and “tweeting that the new 

President needs to investigate Biden and the 2016 campa ign.” Mr. Kent also warned 

Ambassador Volker that “asking another country to investigate a prosecution for political 

reasons undermines our advocacy of the rule of law.” 484 

On July 10, Ambassador Taylor met with Ukrainian officials in Kyiv, before their 

Ukrainian colleagues were scheduled to meet with National Security Advisor John Bolton at the 

White House later that day . At the meeting in Kyiv, the Ukrainian officials expr essed that they 

were “very concerned” because they had heard from former Prosecutor General Yuriy Lutsenko, 

who had learned from Mr. Giuliani , that President Trump had decided not to meet with President 

Zelensky. 485 

Ambassador Taylor texted Ambassador Volker to explain the situation and advised that 

he had also informed T. Ulrich Brechbuhl, Counselor of the Department of State :

Volker: Good grief. Please tell Vadym to let the official USG representatives 

speak fo r the U.S. lutsenko has his own self -Interest here… 

Taylor: Exactly what I told them. 

Taylor: And I said that RG is a private citizen. 

Taylor: I briefed Ulrich this afternoon on this. 486 

Despite his text message to Ambassador Taylor that official U.S. government 

representatives should be allowed to “speak for the U.S. ,” and notwithstanding Mr. Kent’s 

warnings about engaging with Mr. Giuliani , Ambassador Volker almost immediately reached out 

to Mr. Giuliani . Four minutes after sending the text message above, Ambassador Volker texted 

Mr. Giuliani to request a meeting to “update you on my conversations about Ukraine. ” He told 

Mr. Giuliani that he believed he had “ an opportunity to get you what you need.” 487 

One hour later, around 9:00 a.m. Eastern Time , Ambassador Volker met Ukrainian 

presidential aide Andriy Yermak for coffee at the Trump Hotel before they traveled down 

Pennsylvania Avenue to their afternoon meetings at the White House. 488 Over coffee, Mr. 

Yermak asked Ambassador Volker to connect him to Mr. Giuliani, thus further demonstrating 

the Ukrainians’ understanding that satisfying Mr. Giuliani’s demands was a key to getting what 

they wanted from President Trump , namely the Oval Office meeting. 489 88 

July 10 White House Meetings: Ambassador Sondland 

Explicitly Communicated the “Prerequisite of Investigations” to Ukrainians 

On July 10, during two separate meetings at the White House, A mbassador Sondland 

informed senior Ukrainian officials that there was a “prerequisite of investigations” before an

Oval Office meeting between President Trump and President Zelensky would be scheduled .490 

The first meeting took place in Ambassador Bolton’s office. NSC officials, including 

Ambassador Bolton’s staff responsibl e for Ukraine —Dr. Hill and Lt. Col. Vindman —attended, 

as did the Three Amigos: Secretary Perry, Ambassador Sondland, and Ambassador Volker. The 

Ukrain ian delegation included Mr. Yermak , a senior aide to President Zelensky, and Oleksandr 

“Sasha” Danyliuk, the incoming Ukrainian National Security Advisor .491 The purpose of the 

meeting was twofold . The Ukrainians were seeking advice and assistance from Ambassador 

Bolton about how to “revamp” the Ukrainian National Security Council, and they were also 

“very a nxious to set up a meeting, a first meeting between President Zelensky and our 

President. ”492 

Near the end of the meeting, the Ukrainian officials raised the scheduling of the Oval 

Office meeting for President Zelensky. A ccording to Dr. Hill, Ambassador Sondland, who is “a 

fairly big guy, kind of leaned over” and then “ blurted out: Well, we have an agreement with the 

[White House] C hief of Staff for a meeting if these investigations in the energy sector start.” Dr. 

Hill described that others in the room looked up from their notes, thinking the comment was 

“somewhat odd.” Ambassador Bolton “immediately stiffened ” and ended the meeting. Dr. Hill 

recounted that Ambassador Bolton was polite but was “very abrupt. I mean, he looked at the 

clock as if he had, you know, suddenly another meeting and his time was up, but it was obvious 

he ended the meeting ,” she added. 493 

Lt. Col. Vindman similarly testified that the meeting in Ambassador Bolton’s office 

“proceeded well ” until U krainian officials raised the meeting between President Trump and 

President Zelensky. The Ukrainians stated that they considered the Oval Office meeting to be 

“critically important in order to solidify the support for their most important international 

pa rtner.” When Ambassador Sondland mentioned Ukraine “delivering specific investigations in 

order to secure the meeting with the President,” Ambassador Bolton cut the meeting short. 494 

Although Ambassador Volker did not recall any mention of “investigations ” during the 

July 10 meeting at his deposition ,495 he later testified at his public hearing , “As I remember, the 

meeting [in Ambassador Bolton’s office] was essentially over when Ambassador Sondland made 

a general comment about investigations . I think all of us thought it was inappropriate” and “not 

what we should be talking about.” 496 

After Ambassador Bolton ended the meeting in his office, Ambassador Sondland “went 

out into the office in front of Ambassador Bolton” and made “unusual” arrangements for the 

Ukrainians, Ambassador Volker, Secretary Perry, and others to go to a second meeting in the 

Ward Room of the White House , located near the secure spaces of the White House Situation 

Room. As Dr. Hill described it, the purpose of the Ward Room meeting was “to talk to the 89 

Ukrainians about next steps ” regarding the Oval Office meeting for President Zelensky .497 As 

Dr. Hill was leaving Ambassador Bolton’s office , he pulled her aside and directed her to attend 

the Ward Room meeting to “ find out what they’re talking about and come back” and report to 

him. Dr. Hill followed his instruction. 498 

During the Ward Room meeting, which occurred after a brief photo opportunity outside 

the West Wing, Ambassador Sondland was more explicit in pressing the Ukrainians to undertake 

the investigations in order to secure an Oval Office meeting for President Zelensky . Lt. Col. 

Vindman testified that when the group entered the Ward Room , Ambassador Sondland began to 

“review what the deliverable would be in order to get the meeting,” and that “to the best of my 

recollection, he did specifically say ‘investigat ion of the Bidens.’” Lt. Col. Vindman said the 

request “was explicit. There was no ambiguity” and that Ambassador Sondland also mentioned 

“Burisma. ”499 

Dr. Hill entered the Ward Room as the discussion was underway . She testified that 

“Ambassador Sondland, in front of the Ukrainians, as I came in, was talking about how he had 

an agree ment with Chief of Staff Mulvaney for a meeting with the Ukrainians if they were going 

to go forward with investigations. And my director for Ukraine [Lt. Col. Vindman] was looking 

completely alarmed. ”500 Dr. Hill recall ed that Ambassador Sondland mention ed “Burisma” in 

the presence of the Ukrainians, in response to which Mr. Danyliuk also appeared “very alarmed” 

and as if he did not know what was happening. 501 

Dr. Hill confronted Ambassador Sondland, informing him that Ambassador Bolton had 

sent h er there to ensure that the U.S. officials did not commit “at this particular juncture” to a

meeting between President Trump and President Zelensky. Ambassador Sondland responded 

that he and the Ukrainians already had an agreement that the meeting would g o forward .502 At 

Dr. Hill’s urging, however, Ambassador Sondland excused the Ukrainian officials, who moved 

into the corridor near the White House Situation Room .

Dr. Hill then told Ambassador Sondland : “Look, I don’t know what’s going on here, but 

Amba ssador Bolton wants to make it very clear that we have to talk about, you know, how are 

we going to set up this meeting. It has to go through proper procedures.” Lt. Col. Vindman 

relayed his own concerns to Ambassador Sondland in the Ward Room. 503 He expl ained that “the 

request to investigate the Bidens and his son had nothing to do with national security, and that 

such investigations were not something that the NSC was going to get involved in or push.” 504 

Ambassador Sondland responded that he had had conv ersations with Mr. Mulvaney and 

he also mentioned Mr. Giuliani. Lt. Col. Vindman confirmed that Ambassador Sondland 

described an agreement he had with Mr. Mulvaney about the Oval Office meeting : “I heard him 

say that this had been coordinated with White House Chief of Staff Mr. Mick Mulvaney … He 

just said that he had had a conversation with Mr. Mulvaney, and this is what was required in 

order to get a meeting.” 505 Dr. Hill then cut the conversation short because she “didn’t want to 

get further into this discussion at all.” She testified that Ambassador Sondland “was clearly 

annoyed with this, but then , you know , he moved off. He said he had other meetings.” 506 90 

Later on July 10, when Ambassador Taylor asked Ambassador Volker how the meetings 

went with the Ukrainian officials and whether they had resulted in a decision on a presidential 

call , Ambassador Volker replied: “Not good —lets talk.” 507 

Following the July 10 White House meetings, Mr. Yermak followed up with Ambassador 

Volker by text message : “Thank you for meeting and your clear and very logical position. Will 

be great meet with you before my departure and discuss. I feel that the key for many things is 

Rudi and I ready to talk with him at any time.” 508 

Concerned Officials Reported Details of This “Drug Deal” to White House Lawyers 

After the Ward Room meeting, Dr. Hill returned to Ambassador Bolton’s office and 

relayed what she had just witnessed . Ambassador Bolton was “very angry” and instructed her to 

report the conversation to John Eisenb erg, Deputy Counsel to the President for National Security 

Affairs and the Legal Advisor to the National Security Council: 

And he told me, and this is a direct quote from Ambassador Bolton: You go and tell 

Eisenberg that I am not part of whatever drug deal Sondland and Mulvaney are cooking 

up on this, and you go and tell him what you’ve heard and what I’ve said. 509 

Dr. Hill explained that “drug deal” refer red to Ambassador Sondland ’s and Mr. 

Mulvaney’s conditioning of a White House meeting on investigations. 510 By this point, Dr. Hill 

explained , it was clear that investigations were “code, at least, for Burisma. Because that had 

been mentioned, you know, in th e course of Mr. Giuliani’s appearances on television.” 511 

Numerous U.S. officials, including Ambassadors Sondland, Volker, and Bolton, as well as Lt. 

Col. Vindman and others, were well aware of Mr. Giuliani’s efforts to push Ukraine to pursue 

these politica l investigations. 

Follow ing the meeting with Ambassador Bolton , Dr. Hill reported what had occurred to 

Mr. Eisenberg. She conveyed to Mr. Eisenberg the details of the two meetings , including 

Ambassador Sondland’s agreement with Mr. Mulvaney to provide th e White House meeting if 

Ukraine agreed to pursue the investigations. 512 The initial conversation between Dr. Hill and Mr. 

Eisenberg was brief , and they scheduled a longer discussion for the next day. 513 

On July 11, Dr. Hill enlisted another NSC official who attended the July 10 meetings ,

Senior Director for International Energy and Environment P. Wells Griffith, to attend the longer 

discussion with Mr. Eisenberg. 514 Dr. Hill and Mr. Griffith went over the events of July 10 and 

further explained that Ambassa dor Sondland said that he had been communicating with Mr. 

Giuliani . Mr. Eisenberg was “very concerned” and stated that he would follow up. Dr. Hill 

understood that Mr. Eisenberg later discussed the issue with his “reporting authority,” 

specifically, Whit e House Counsel Pat Cipollone. 515 

Lt. Col. Vindman separately reported his concerns about the July 10 meetings to Mr. 

Eisenberg. He told Mr. Eisenberg that Ambassador Sondland had asked for investigations into 

“Bidens and Burisma,” which he thought was “inappropriate.” 516 Lt. Col. Vindman also reported 

that the investigation “Mr. Giuliani was pushing was now being pulled into a, you kn ow, national 91 

security dialogue.” 517 Mr. Eisenberg said that he would look into it and invited Lt. Col. Vindman 

to return if any further concerns arose . No one from the of the White House C ounsel ’s Office, 

however, followed up with Lt. Col. Vindman on this issue. 518 

Dr. Hill and Lt. Col. Vindman discussed their reactions and alarm about the July 10 

discussions with each other . They both believed that Ambassador Sondland’s statements were 

inappropriate and “had nothing to do with national security ,” and tha t they would not get 

involved with the scheme. 519 On July 19, they also shared their concerns about Ambassador 

Sondland’s comments during the July 10 meetings with Ambassador Taylor. 520 

Ambassador Sondland Coache d President Zelensky on Investigations and 

Ke pt Senior White House and State Department Officials “In the Loop” 

In mid -July, Dr. Hill was preparing to depart the NSC and transitioning her role to 

Timothy Morrison, who had been serving in another role at the NSC. 521 On July 13 ,

Ambassador Sondland ema iled Mr. Morrison, explaining that the “ [s]ole purpose” of a 

presidential call was for President Zelensky to assure President Trump that, “Corruption ending, 

unbundling moving forward and any hampered investigations will be allowed to move forward 

transpar ently.” In exchange, Ambassador Sondland wrote , the “Goal is for Potus to invite him to 

Oval. Volker, Perry, Bolton and I strongly recommend.” 522 Later that evening, Mr. Morrison 

responded, “Thank you. Tracking.” 523 

On July 19 , a little over a week after the July 10 meetings at the White House, 

Ambassador Sondland spoke directly to President Zelensky about the upcoming call between the 

two presi dents: “It was a short call. I think I said: It looks like your call is finally on, and I 

think it’s important that you, you know, give President Trump —he wanted this —some kind of a 

statement about corruption.” 524 

Following his call with President Zel ensky, Ambassador Sondland emailed several senior 

Trump Administration officials, including Mr. Mulvaney, Secretary of State Michael Pompeo, 

Secretary Perry, and their staffs . The subject line of the July 19 email read : “I Talked to 

Zelensky just now .” Ambassador Sondland wrote: 

He is prepared to receive Potus’ call. Will assure him that he intends to run a fully 

transparent investigation and will “turn over every stone”. He would greatly appreciate a 

call prior to Sunday so that he can put out some media about a “friendly and productive 

call” (no details) prior to Ukraine election on Sunday. 525 

Secretary Perry responded that Mr. Mulvaney had confirmed a call would be set up “for 

tomorrow by NSC,” 526 and Mr. Mulvaney also responded to confirm that he had asked the NSC 

to set up the call between the presidents for the following day, July 20. 527 

Ambassador Sondland explained that this email chain showed that “[e] veryone was in the 

loop” regarding his discussions with Ukrainian officials about the nee d for the Ukrainian leader 

to confirm to President Trump that he would announce the investigations. As Ambassador 

Sondland further testified :92 

It was no secret. Everyone was informed via email on July 19th, days before the 

Presidential call. As I communi cated to the team, I told President Zelensky in 

advance that assurances to run a fully transparent investigation and turn over every 

stone were necessary in his call with President Trump. 528 

Call records reviewed by the Committee s show repeated contact between Ambassador 

Sondland and the White House around this time. For example, o n July 19 , at 10 :43 a.m. Eastern 

Time , a number associated with the White House dialed Ambassador Sondland. Four minutes 

later, a t 10 :47 a.m. , Ambassador Sondland cal led a White House phone number and connected 

for approximately seven minutes. 529 

Later in the afternoon of July 19, Ambassador Sondland texted Ambassadors Volker and 

Taylor: “Looks like Potus call tomorrow. I spike [ sic ] directly to Zelensky and gave hi m a full 

briefing. He’s got it.” 530 Ambassador Volker replied: “ Good. Had breakfast with Rudy this 

morning —teeing up call w Yermak Monday. Must have helped. Most impt is for Zelensky to 

say that he will help investigation —and address any specific person nel issues —if there are 

any .” 531 

Mr. Giuliani Met with State Department Officials and Ukrainian Government Officials 

As Ambassador Volker informed Ambassador Sondland in the above text message, on 

July 19 , Ambassador Volker met Mr. Giuliani and his now -indicted associate Lev Parnas for 

breakfast at the Trump Hotel in Washington , D.C .532 Ambassador Volker also texted Mr. 

Yermak to inform him that he and Mr. Giuliani were meet ing that day : “Having our long 

anticipated breakfast today —will let you know and try to connect you directly.” 533 

During the breakfast, Mr. Giuliani and Ambassador Volker discussed the discredited 

allegations against former Vice President Biden relating to Ukraine. Ambassador Volker 

testified that he pushed back a gainst the allegations during his breakfast with Mr. Giuliani :

One of the things that I said in that breakfast that I had with Mr. Giuliani, the only time 

Vice President Biden was ever discussed with me, and he was repeating —he wasn’t 

making an accusation and he wasn’t seeking an investigation —but he was repeating all of 

the things that were in the media that we talked about earlier about, you know, firing the 

prosecutor general and his son being on the company and all that. 

And I said to Rudy in that breakfast the first time we sat down to talk that it is simply not 

credible to me that Joe Biden would be influenced in his duties as Vice President by 

money or things for his son or anything like that. I’ve known him a long time, he’s a 

person of integrity, and that’s not credible. 534 

Ambassador Volker further advised Mr. Giuliani during the breakfast that the then -

Ukrainian Prosecutor General, Yuriy Lutsenko , was promoting a “self -serving narrative to 

preserve himself in power .” Mr. Giuliani agr eed with Ambassador Volker and stated that he had 

come to that conclusion as well .535 93 

Following the breakfast , Ambassador Volker connected Mr. Giuliani with Mr. Yermak 

by text message: 

Volker: Mr Mayor — really enjoyed breakfast this morning. As discussed, 

connecting you here with Andrey Yermak, who is very close to President 

Zelensky. I suggest we schedule a call together on Monday — maybe 

10am or 11am Washington time? Kurt 

Giuliani: Monday 1 0 to 11 

Yermak: Ok, thank you 

Volker: I will set up call — 10 am — thanks – Kurt 

Yermak: 👍 536 

On the morning of July 22, Mr. Yermak texted Ambassador Volker about the upcoming 

call with Mr. Giuliani , writing that it was “ very good ” that their discu ssion would take place 

before the call between President Trump and President Zelensky .537 Later that day, the three men 

spoke by phone. Ambassador Volker described the July 22 discussion as merely an 

“introductory phone call ,”538 although phone records indicate that the call lasted for 

approximately 38 minutes. 539 

Ambassador Volker testified that during the call, Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Yermak discussed 

plans for an in -person meeting in Madrid in early August. 540 Afterward , Ambassador Volker 

texted Mr. Yermak that he thought the call had been “very useful” and recommended that Mr. 

Yermak send Mr. Giuliani a text message to schedule a date for the Madrid meeting .541 Mr. 

Yermak text ed Mr. Giuliani later that day about a plan to “take this relatio nship to a new level” 

and to meet in person as soon as possible. 542 

Later on July 22, Ambassador Volker updated Ambassador Sondland on the “great call” 

he “ [o]rchestrated” between Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Yermak, noting that “Rudy is now advocating 

for phone call ,” an apparent reference to the call between President Trump and President 

Zelensky that would occur on July 25. Ambassador Volker also recommend ed that Ambassador 

Sondland inform Mr. Mulvaney that “Rudy agrees ,” and that he planned to convey th e same 

information to Ambassador Bolton . Ambassador Sondland replied that Mr. Morrison of the 

White House NSC was also in support of the call. 543 Ambassador Volker also told Ambassador 

Sondland that Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Yermak would meet in person in Madri d within a couple of 

weeks. 544 

President Zelensky Feared Becoming “A Pawn” in U.S. Reelection Campaign 

Around this time, senior Ukrainian officials informed U.S. officials that the new 

Ukrainian president did not want Ukraine to become enmeshed in U.S. domestic reelection 

politics. 94 

On July 20, Ambassador Taylor spoke with Mr. Danyliuk , the Ukrainian national security 

advisor, wh o conveyed that President Zelensky “did not want to be used as a pawn in a U.S. 

reelection campaign.” 545 Ambassador Taylor discussed President Zelensky’s concern with 

Ambassador Volker and, the next day, texted Ambassador Sondland: 

Taylor: Gordon, one th ing Kurt and I talked about yesterday was Sasha Danyliuk’s 

point that President Zelenskyy is sensitive about Ukraine being taken 

seriously, not merely as an instrument in Washington domestic, reelection 

politics. 

Sondland: Absolutely, but we need to get the conversation started and the 

relationship built, irrespective of the pretext. I am worried about the 

alternative. 546 

Ambassador Taylor explained that his reference to “Washington domestic reelection 

politics” was “a reference to the investigations that Mr. Giuliani wanted to pursue.” 547 

According to Ambassador Taylor, President Zelensky understood what President Trump and Mr. 

Giuliani meant by “investigations ,” and “ he did not want to get involved.” Specifically, the 

Ukrainians understood that the “inve stigations were pursuant to Mr. Giuliani’s request to 

develop information, to find information about Burisma and the Bidens. This was very well 

known in public. Mr. Giuliani had made this point clear in several instances in the beginning —

in the springtim e.” 548 Ambassador Taylor also testified that the “whole thrust” of the activities 

undertaken by Mr. Giuliani and Ambassador Sondland “was to get these investigations, which 

Danyliuk and presumably Zelensky were resisting because they didn’t want to be seen to be 

interfering but also to be a pawn.” 549 

Despite the Ukrainian resistance , Ambassador Sondland said he believed that the public 

announcement of investigations would “fix” an impasse between the Ukrainian government and 

President Trump. When asked what he meant by “irrespective of the pretext” in his July 21 text 

message to Ambassador Taylor, Ambassador Sondland explained , “Well, the pretext being the 

agreed -upon interview or the agreed -upon press statement. We just need to get by it so that the 

two can meet, because, again, it was back to once they meet, all of this will be fixed.” 550 

Witnesses Confirmed the President Conditioned an Oval Office Meeting on 

Investigations 

Multiple witnesses testified that the conditioning of an Oval Office meeting on President 

Zelensky’s announcement of investigations to benefit the President’s reelection campaign came 

from the very top: President Trump .

Ambassador Sondland testified that he , Secretary Perry, and Ambassador Volker worked 

with Mr. Giuliani “at the express direction of the President of the United States.” 551 Ambassador 

Sondland stated that “Mr. Giuliani was expressing the desires of the President of the United 

States, and we knew these investigations were important to the President.” 552 Ambassador 

Sondland explained that he “followed the directions of the President” and that “we followed the 

President’s orders.” 553 95 

Ambassador Sondland further testified that President Trump expressed —both directly 

and through Mr. Giuliani —that he wanted “a public statement from President Zelensky 

committing to the investigations of Burisma and the 2016 election” as “prerequisites for the 

White House call and the White House meeting.” 554 Ambassador Sondland explained :

I know that members of this committee frequently frame these complicated issues in the 

form of a simple question: Was there a quid pro quo? As I testified previously with 

regard to the requested White House call and the White House meeting, the answer is 

yes. 555 

Ambassador Sondland also tes tified that knowledge of this quid pro quo was widespread 

among the President’s advisers: “Everyone was in the loop” about the President’s expectation 

that President Zelensky had to announce these specific investigations to secure an Oval Office 

meeting. As an example, Ambassador Sondland cited an email —copying Senior Advisor to the 

White House Chief of Staff Robert Blair, State Department Executive Secretary Lisa Kenna, 

Chief of Staff to the Secretary of Energy Brian McCormack, Mr. Mulvaney, Secretary Perry, and 

Secretary Pompeo —where “[e]veryone was informed.” 556 

Other U.S. government officials also understood this scheme as a quid pro quo .

Ambassador Taylor testified that as early as mid -July, it was “becoming clear” to him that “the 

meetin g President Zelensky wanted was conditioned on investigations of Burisma and alleged 

Ukrainian influence in the 2016 elections” and that “this condition was driven by the irregular 

policy channel I had come to understand was guided by Mr. Giuliani.” 557 Mr. Holmes similarly 

understood that by July , “it was made clear that some action on a Burisma/Biden investigation 

was a precondition for an Oval Office visit.” 558 Dr. Hill testified that th is quid pro quo was 

readily apparent after reading the July 25 call sum mary, explaining that it revealed that the White 

House meeting was used as “some kind of asset” that was “dangled out to the Ukrainian 

Government” to secure a political benefit .559 

Final Preparation for Trump -Zelensky Call: Ambassador Volker Counseled Ukra inians and 

Ambassador Sondland Prepped President Trump 

Ambassador Taylor testified that the call between President Trump and President 

Zelensky that ultimately occurred on July 25 was not confirmed until the last minute: “We were 

trying to schedule it f or about a week in advance, that whole week. As I say, back and forth, yes, 

no, this time, that time. … it may have been about the day before that it was actually locked 

down, so about the 24th.” 560 According to Ambassador Taylor, at least one person had p rescient 

concerns about the call before it occurred: “Ambassador Bolton was not interested in having —

did not want to have the call because he thought it was going to be a disaster. He thought that 

there could be some talk of investigations or worse on th e call.” 561 

Before the call took place o n July 25, Ambassador Volker had lunch with Mr. Yermak in 

Kyiv . Ambassador Volker followed up with a text message to Mr. Yermak approximately 30 

minutes before the call, noting that a White House visit was still on the table if, during the call, 

President Zelensky convinced President Trump that Ukraine would “investigate” and “get to the 

bottom of what happened” in 2016: 96 

Volker: Good lunch – thanks. Heard from White House —assuming President Z 

convinces trump he will investigate / “get to the bottom of what 

happened” in 2016, we will nail down date for visit to Washington. Good 

luck! See you tomorrow - kurt 

Ambassador Volker later informed Ambassador Sondland that he had relayed this 

“message” to Mr. Yermak, which Ambassador Sondland had conveyed to Ambassador Volker 

earlier that day :

Volker: Hi Gordon - got your message. Had a great lunch w Yermak and then 

passed your message to him. He will see you tomorrow. Think 

everything in place 562 

Ambassador Sondland testified that the “message” that Ambassador Volker conveyed to 

Mr. Yermak in advance of the July 25 call likely originated from an earlier co nversation that 

Ambassador Sondland had with President Trump: 

Q: So is it fair to say that this message is what you received from President Trump on 

that phone call that morning? 

A: Again, if he testified to that, to refresh my own memory, then, yes, l ikely I would 

have received that from President Trump. 

Q: But the sequence certainly makes sense, right? 

A: Yeah, it does. 

Q: You talked to President Trump. 

A: Yeah. 

Q: You told Kurt Volker to call you. You left a message for Kurt Volker. Kurt 

Vol ker sent this text message to Andriy Yermak to prepare President Zelensky 

and then President Trump had a phone call where President Zelensky spoke very 

similar to what was in this text message, right? 

A: Right. 

Q: And you would agree that the message i n this —that is expressed here is that 

President Zelensky needs to convince Trump that he will do the investigations in 

order to nail down the date for a visit to Washington, D.C. Is that correct? 

A: Tha t’ s correct. 563 

Ambassador Sondland testified that he spoke with President Trump before the call with 

President Zelensky. 564 Mr. Morrison also confirmed that President Trump and Ambassador 

Sondland spoke before President Trump’s call with President Zelensky .565 Mr. Morrison stated 

that Ambassador Sondland emailed him on the morning of the call and listed “three topics that he 

was working on, the first of which was ‘I spoke to the President this morning to brief him on the 

call.’” 566 According to Mr. Morrison, Ambassador Sondl and “believed” that he helped to 

facilitate the July 25 call between President Trump and President Zelensky. 567 

On July 26, the day after the call between President Trump and President Zelensky, 

Ambassador Volker acknowledged his role in prepping President Zelensky for the call with 97 

President Trump in a text to Mr. Giuliani: “Hi Mr Mayor – you may have heard —the President 

has [sic] a great phone call with the Ukrainian President yesterday. Exactly the right messages 

as we discussed.” 568 98 

5. The President Asked the Ukrainian President to Interfere in the 2020 U.S. Election 

by Investigating the Bidens and 2016 Election Interference 

During a call on July 25, President Trump asked President Zelensky of Ukraine to “do us a 

favor though” and inve stigate his political opponent, former Vice President Joe Biden, and a 

debunked conspiracy theory that Ukraine interfered in the 2016 U.S. election. The next day, 

Ambassador Gordon Sondland informed President Trump that President Zelensky “was 

gonna do th e investigation” and “anything” President Trump asked of him. 

Overview 

During a telephone call on July 25, 2019, President Donald J. Trump asked Ukrainian 

President Volodymyr Zelensky to investigate his political rival, former Vice President Joseph 

Biden, and a debunked conspiracy theory that Ukraine interfered in the 2016 U. S. election. 

President Trump also discussed the removal of Ambassador Marie Yovanovitch, former U.S. 

Ambassador to Ukraine, said that she was “bad news,” and warned that she would “go through 

some things .” Two witnesses who listened to the call testified that they immediately reported the 

details of the call to senior White House lawyers. 

When asked by a reporter on October 3, 2019, what he had hoped President Zelensky 

would do following the call, President Trump responded: “Well, I would think that, if they were 

honest about it, they’d start a major investigation into the Bidens. It’s a very simple answer.” 

Witnesses unanimously testified that President Trump’s claims about former Vice 

President Biden and alleged Ukrainian interference in the 2016 U. S. election have been 

discredited. The witnesses reaffirmed that in late 2015 and early 2016, when former Vice 

President Biden advocated for the removal of a corrupt Ukrainian prosecutor, he acted in 

accordance with a “broad -based consensus” and the offic ial policy of the United States, the 

European Union, and major international financial institutions. Witnesses also unanimously 

testified that the removal of that prosecutor made it more likely that Ukraine would investigate 

corruption, not less likely. 

Dr. Fiona Hill, former Deputy Assistant to the President and Senior Director for 

Europe an and Russian Affairs at the National Security Council, testified that the conspiracy 

theories about Ukrainian interference in the 2016 U.S. election touted by Presiden t Trump are a 

“fictional narrative that is being perpetrated and propagated by the Russian security services.” 

She noted that President Trump’s former Homeland Security Advisor Tom Bossert and former 

National Security Advisor H.R. McMaster repeatedly advi sed the President that the so -called 

“CrowdStrike” conspiracy theory that President Trump raised in the July 25 call is completely 

“debunked,” and that allegations Ukraine interfered in the 2016 U.S. election are false. 

Nonetheless, on July 26, 2019, U. S. Ambassador to the European Union Gordon 

Sondland met with senior Ukrainian officials in Kyiv and then informed President Trump that 

President Zelensky “was gonna do the investigation” into former Vice President Biden and 99 

alleged Ukrainian interference i n the 2016 U.S. election. Ambassador Sondland added that 

President Zelensky would “do anything” President Trump asked of him. After the call, 

Ambassador Sondland told David Holmes, Counselor for Political Affairs at the U.S. Embassy in 

Kyiv, that Preside nt Trump “did not give a shit about Ukraine” and that he only cared about the 

“big stuff” that benefits his personal interests, like the “Biden investigation.” 

President Trump’s Call with President Zelensky on July 25, 2019 

On July 25, 2019, President Zelensky finally had a long -awaited phone call with 

Ukraine’s most important international partner: The President of the United States. 

It had been over three months since the two leaders first spoke. Despite a warm but 

lar gely non -substantive call on April 21, President Trump had since declined President 

Zelensky’s invitation to attend his inauguration and directed Vice President Mike Pence not to 

attend either. 569 Ukrainian efforts to set a date for a promised Oval Office m eeting with 

President Trump were stalled. As Mr. Holmes explained, following the April 21 call: 

President Zelensky’s team immediately began pressing to set a date for that visit. 

President Zelensky and senior members of his team made clear that they wa nted 

President Zelensky’s first overseas trip to be to Washington, to send a strong signal of 

American support, and requested a call with President Trump as soon as possible. 570 

Before scheduling the July 25 call or a White House visit, President Trump me t on June 

28 with Russian President Vladimir Putin —whose armed forces were engaged in a war of 

attrition against U.S. -backed Ukrainian forces —on the sidelines of the G20 summit in Osaka, 

Japan. 571 During their meeting, President Trump and President Putin sh ared a joke about 

Russia’s meddling in the 2016 U.S. election. 572 

On July 25, President Trump joined the call with President Zelensky from the Executive 

Residence at the White House, away from a small group of senior national security aides who 

would norm ally join him in the Oval Office for a conversation with a foreign head of state. 

President Trump and President Zelensky began to speak at 9:03 a.m. Washington time —4:03 

p.m. in Kyiv. According to Tim Morrison, the newly -installed Senior Director for Eur ope and 

Russia on the NSC, President Zelensky spoke in Ukrainian and occasionally in “chopped 

English.” 573 Translators interpreted the call on both sides. 574 American aides listening to the call 

from the White House Situation Room hoped that what was said ov er the next 30 minutes would 

provide President Zelensky with the strong U.S. endorsement he needed in order to successfully 

negotiate an end to the five -year -old war with Russia that had killed over 13,000 Ukrainian 

soldiers and to advance President Zelens ky’s ambitious anti -corruption initiatives in Ukraine. 575 

The Trump Administration’s subject -matter experts , NSC Director for Ukraine Lt. Col. 

Alexander Vindman and Mr. Morrison, were both on the call. 576 They had prepared talking 

points for President Trump and were taking detailed notes of what both leaders said, so that they 

could promptly implement any agreed -upon actions. 577 They were joined by Lt. Gen. Keith 

Kellogg, National Security Advisor to the Vice President, and Jennifer Williams, Special 

Advisor t o the Vice President for Europe and Russia. Assistant to the President Robert Blair, a 100 

senior aide to Acting Chief of Staff Mick Mulvaney, was also present, along with an NSC press 

officer. 578 Secretary of State Mike Pompeo listened from a different locati on, as did Dr. Charles 

M. Kupperman, the Deputy National Security Advisor .579 

Notably, Secretary Pompeo did not reveal that he listened to the July 25 call when asked 

directly about it on This Week on September 22. 580 Neither Secretary Pompeo nor the State 

Department corrected the record until September 30, when “a senior State Department official” 

disclosed the Secretary of State’s participation in the July 25 call. 581 

The two presidents first exchanged pleasantries. President Trump congratulated the 

Ukrainian leader on his party’s parliamentary victory. In a nod to their shared experience as 

political outsiders, President Zelensky called President Trump “a great teacher” who informed 

his own efforts to involve “many many new people” in Ukraine’s politics and “drain the swamp 

here in our country.” 582 

The discussion turned to U.S. support for Ukraine. President Trump contrasted U.S. 

assistance to that of America’s closest European allies, stating: “We spend a lot of effort and a 

lot of time. Much more than the European countries are doing and they should be helping you 

more than they are.” The call then took a more ominous turn. President Trump stated that with 

respect to U.S. support for Ukraine, “I wouldn’t say that it’s reciprocal necessarily because 

things are happening that are not good but the United States has been very very good to 

Ukraine.” 583 

President Zelensky, whose government receives billions of dollars in financial support 

from the European Union and its member states, responded that European nations were “not 

working as much as they should work for Ukraine,” including in the area of enforcing sanctions 

against Russia. 584 He noted that “the United States is a much bigger partner than the European 

Union” and stated that he was “very grateful” because “the United States is doing quite a lot for 

Ukraine.” 585 

President Zelensky then raised the issue of U.S. military assistance for Ukraine with 

President Trump: “I also would like to thank you for your great support in the area of 

defense” —an area where U.S. support is vital. 586 President Zelensky continued : “We are ready 

to continue to cooperate for the next steps specifically we are almost ready to buy more Javelins 

from the United States for defense purpose s.” 587 The Javelin anti -tank missiles, first transferred 

to Ukraine by the United States in 2018, were widely viewed by U.S. officials as a deterrent 

against further Russian encroachment into Ukrainian territory. 588 

Immediately after the Ukrainian leader ra ised the issue of U.S. military assistance to 

Ukraine, President Trump replied: “I would like you to do us a favor though because our 

country has been through a lot and Ukraine knows a lot about it.” 589 101 

Request to Investigate 2016 Election 

President Trump then explained the “favor” he wanted President Zelensky to do. He first 

requested that Ukraine investigate a discredited conspiracy theory aimed at undercutting the U.S. 

Intelligence Community’s unanimous conclusion that the Russian govern ment interfered in the 

2016 U.S. election. 590 Specifically, President Trump stated: 

I would like you to find out what happened with this whole situation with Ukraine, they 

say Crowdstrike... I guess you have one of your wealthy people... The server, they say 

Ukraine has it. There are a lot of things that went on, the whole situation. I think you’re 

surrounding yourself with some of the same people. I would like to have the Attorney 

General call you or your people and I would like you to get to the bott om of it. As you 

saw yesterday, that whole nonsense ended with a very poor performance by a man named 

Robert Mueller, an incompetent performance, but they say a lot of it started with Ukraine. 

Whatever you can do, it’s very important that you do it if th at’s possible. 591 

President Trump was referencing the widely debunked conspiracy theory that the 

Ukrainian government —and not Russia —was behind the hack of Democratic National 

Committee (DNC) servers in 2016, and that the American cybersecurity firm CrowdSt rike 

moved the DNC’s servers to Ukraine to prevent U.S. law enforcement from examining them. 

This theory is often referred to in shorthand as “CrowdStrike” and has been promoted by the 

Russian government. 592 

For example, during a press conference in Febr uary 2017, just weeks after the U.S. 

Intelligence Community unanimously assessed in a public report that Russia interfered in the 

2016 U.S. election to benefit the candidacy of Donald J. Trump, President Putin falsely asserted 

that “ the Ukrainian governmen t adopted a unilateral position in favour of one candidate. More 

than that, certain oligarchs, certainly with the approval of the political leadership, funded this 

candidate, or female candidate, to be more precise.” 593 President Trump’s reference in his J uly 

25 telephone call to “one of your wealthy people” tracked closely with President Putin’s 

accusations that “certain oligarchs” in Ukraine meddled in the 2016 U.S. election to support 

Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton. 

Dr. Hill, an expert on Russia a nd President Putin, testified that the claim that “Russia and 

its security services did not conduct a campaign against our country and that perhaps, somehow 

for some reason, Ukraine did” is “a fictional narrative that is being perpetrated and propagated 

by the Russian security services themselves.” Dr. Hill reaffirmed that the U.S. Intelligence 

Community’s January 2017 conclusion that Russia interfered in the 2016 U.S. election is 

“beyond dispute, even if some of the underlying details must remain classifi ed.” 594 

Tom Bossert, President Trump’s former Homeland Security Advisor , stated publicly that 

the CrowdStrike theory is “not only a conspiracy theory, it is completely debunked.” 595 Dr. Hill 

testified that White House officials —including Mr. Bossert and fo rmer National Security 

Advisor H.R. McMaster —“spent a lot of time” refuting the CrowdStrike conspiracy theory to 

President Trump. Dr. Hill explained that Mr. Bossert and others “who were working on 

cybersecurity laid out to the President the facts about t he interference.” She affirmed that 102 

President Trump was advised that “the alternative theory that Ukraine had interfered in the 

election was false.” 596 

President Zelensky did not directly address President Trump’s reference to CrowdStrike 

during the July 25 call, but he tried to assure President Trump that “it is very important for me 

and everything that you just mentioned earlier.” 597 President Zelensky committed to proceed 

with an investigation, telling President Trump that he had “nobody but friends” in the new 

Ukrainian presidential administration, possibly attempting to rebut Rudy Giuliani’s earlier claims 

that President Zelensky was surrounded by “enemies” of President Trump. President Zelensky 

then specifically noted that one of his assistants “spoke with Mr. Giuliani just recently and we 

are hoping very much that Mr. Giuliani will be able to travel to Ukraine and we will meet once 

he comes to Ukraine.” 598 

Significantly, President Zelensky referenced Mr. Giuliani even before President Trump 

had mentioned him, demonstrating the Ukrainian leader’s understanding that Mr. Giuliani 

represented President Trump’s interests in Ukraine. The Ukrainian leader then reassured 

President Trump, “I also plan to surround myself with great people and in addition to that 

investigation” into the CrowdStrike conspiracy theory . He said, “I guarantee as the President of 

Ukraine that all the investigations will be done openly and candidly. That I can assure you.” 599 

President Trump replied, “Rudy very much knows what’s happening and he is a very capable 

guy. If you could speak to him that would be great.” 600 

Request to Investigate Bidens 

President Trump then returned to his requested “favor,” asking President Zelensky about 

the “[t]he other thin g”: that Ukraine inve stigate President Trump’s U.S. political rival, former 

Vice President Biden, for allegedly ending an investigation into the Ukrainian energy company 

Burisma Holdings. Vice President Biden’s son, Hunter Biden, served as a member of Burisma’s 

board of direc tors. President Trump told President Zelensky: 

The other thing, There’s a lot of talk about Biden’s son, that Biden stopped the 

prosecution and a lot of people want to find out about that so whatever you can do with 

the Attorney General would be great. Biden went around bragging that he stopped the 

prosecution so if you can look into it... It sounds horrible to me. 601 

President Trump later continued, “I will have Mr. Giuliani give you a call and I am also 

going to have Attorney General Barr call and we w ill get to the bottom of it. I’m sure you will 

figure it out.” 602 

In public remarks on October 3, 2019, a reporter asked President Trump, “what exactly 

did you hope Zelensky would do about the Bidens after your phone call? Exactly.” President 

Trump responded: “Well, I would think that, if they were honest about it, th ey’d start a major 

investigation into the Bidens. It’s a very simple answer.” 603 

When President Trump asserted to President Zelensky during the July 25 call that former 

Vice President “Biden went around bragging that he stopped the prosecution,” President Trump 103 

was apparently referring to Vice President Biden’s involvement in the removal of the corrupt 

former Ukrainian prosecutor general, Viktor Shokin. 

Multiple witnesses —including Dr. Hill, former U.S. Ambassador to Ukraine Marie 

Yovanovitch, Mr. Holmes , and Deputy Assistant Secretary of State George Kent —testified that 

they were not aware of any credible evidence to support the claim that former Vice President 

Biden acted inappropriately when he advocated for the removal of Mr. Shokin. 604 To the 

contrary , those witnesses confirmed that it was the official policy of the United States, the 

European Union, and major international financial institutions, to demand Mr. Shokin’s 

dismissal. As Mr. Kent testified, there was “a broad -based consensus” that Mr. Sho kin was “a 

typical Ukraine prosecutor who lived a lifestyle far in excess of his government salary, who 

never prosecuted anybody known for having committed a crime” and who “covered up crimes 

that were known to have been committed.” 605 Mr. Kent further expl ained: 

What former Vice President Biden requested of former President of Ukraine Poroshenko 

was the removal of a corrupt prosecutor general, Viktor Shokin, who had undermined a 

program of assistance that we had spent, again, U.S. taxpayer money to try to build an 

independent investigator unit to go after corrupt prosecutors. 606 

As Ambassador Yovanovitch testified, the removal of a corrupt Ukrainian prosecutor 

general, who was not prosecuting enough corruption, increased the chance that alleged 

corruption in companies in Ukraine could be investigated. 607 

Mr. Shokin was a known associate of Mr. Giuliani. As described in Chapter 1, Mr. 

Giuliani had been communicating with Mr. Shokin since at least 2018. 608 Mr. Giuliani also 

lobbied the White House on behalf of Mr. Shokin to intervene earlier in 2019 when the State 

Department rejected a visa application for Mr. Shokin to visit the United States based upon Mr. 

Shokin’s notorious corrupt conduct. 609 Ambassador Kurt Volker, U.S. Special Representative 

for Ukraine Negotiations, testified that he explicitly warned Mr. Giuliani —to no avail —against 

pursuing “the conspiracy theory that Vice President Biden would have been influenced in his 

duties as Vice President by money paid to his son.” 610 Ambassador Volker affirmed that former 

Vice President Biden is “an honorable man, and I hold him in the highest regard.” 611 

Attacks Against Ambassador Yovanovitch 

During the July 25 call, President Trump also attacked Ambassador Yovanovitch, whom 

he had ousted as the U.S. Ambassador to Ukraine three months earlier after a concerted smear 

campaign perpetuated by Mr. Giuliani. As described in Chapter 1, Mr. Giuliani viewed 

Ambassador Yovanovitch —a decorated diplomat who had champio ned Ukrainian anti -

corruption officials and activists —as an impediment to his activities in Ukraine. 612 President 

Trump told President Zelensky : “The former ambassador from the United States, the woman, 

was bad news and the people she was dealing with in t he Ukraine were bad news so I just want 

to let you know that.” He later added : “Well, she’s going to go through some things.” 613 

Ambassador Yovanovitch described her visceral reaction when she first read the call 

record, after the White House released it publicly on September 25, 2019. She testified, “I was 104 

shocked. I mean, I was very surprised that President Trump would —first of all, that I would 

feature repeatedly in a Presidential phone call, but secondly, that the President would speak 

about me or an y ambassador in that way to a foreign counterpart.” 614 When asked whether she 

felt “threatened” by President Trump’s statement that “she’s going to go through some things,” 

Ambassador Yovanovitch answered that she did. 615 

Praise of Corrupt Former Ukrainian P rosecutor 

After disparaging Ambassador Yovanovitch, who had an extensive record of combatting 

corruption, President Trump praised an unnamed former Ukrainian prosecutor general —referring 

to Yuriy Lutsenko —who was widely considered to be corrupt and had pr omoted false allegations 

against Ambassador Yovanovitch. 616 President Trump told President Zelensky : “Good because 

I heard you had a prosecutor who was very good and he was shut down and that’s really unfair. 

A lot of people are talking about that, the wa y they shut your very good prosecutor down and 

you had some very bad people involved.” 617 He later added, “ I heard the prosecutor was treated 

very badly and he was a very fair prosecutor so good luck with everything.” 618 

At the time of the July 25 call, Mr. Lutsenko —who was collaborating with Mr. Giuliani 

to smear Ambassador Yovanovitch and the Bidens —was still the Ukrainian prosecutor general. 

Mr. Holmes testified that Mr. Lutsenko “was not a good partner. He had failed to deliver on the 

promised reforms t hat he had committed to when he took office, and he was using his office to 

insulate and protect political allies while presumably enriching himself.” 619 By July 2019, Mr. 

Holmes assessed that Mr. Lutsenko was “trying to angle to keep his job” under the new Zelensky 

Administration and that part of his strategy was “appealing to Rudy Giuliani and Donald Trump 

by pushing out these false theories about the Bidens and the 2016 election.” 620 

Multiple witnesses testified that another former Ukrainian prosecutor , Mr. Shokin, was 

also considered to be corrupt. For example, Mr. Kent testified during his deposition that Mr. 

Lutsenko and Mr. Shokin were “corrupt former prosecutors” who were “peddling false 

information in order to extract revenge against th ose who had exposed their misconduct, 

including U.S. diplomats, Ukrainian anticorruption officials, and reform -minded civil society 

groups in Ukraine.” 621 Ambassador Volker testified at his public hearing that Mr. Lutsenko was 

“not credible, and was acting in a self -serving capacity.” 622 Mr. Holmes further noted that Mr. 

Lutsenko “resisted fully empowering truly independent anticorruption institutions that would 

help ensure that no Ukrainians, however powerful, were above the law.” 623 

After the call, the White House press office issued a short and incomplete summary of the 

call, omitting major elements of the conversation. The press statement read: 

Today, President Donald J. Trump spoke by telephone with President Volodymyr 

Zelenskyy of Ukraine to congratulate him on his recent election. President Trump and 

President Zelenskyy discussed ways to strengthen the relationship between the United 

States and Ukraine, including energy and economic cooperation. Both leaders also 

expressed th at they look forward to the opportunity to meet. 624 105 

Concerns Raised by Lieutenant Colonel Alexander Vindman 

Prior to President Trump’s July 25 call with President Zelensky, Lt. Col. Vindman had 

prepared —with Mr. Morrison’s review and approval —a call brie fing package, including talking 

points for President Trump’s use. This was consistent with the NSC’s regular process of 

preparing for the President’s phone calls with foreign leaders. 625 The NSC -drafted talking points 

did not include any reference to Biden , Burisma, CrowdStrike, or alleged Ukrainian interference 

in the 2016 U.S. election. 626 

Lt. Col. Vindman testified during his deposition that, prior to the July 25 call, he was 

aware of concerns from former National Security Advisor John Bolton and other U. S. officials 

that President Trump might raise these discredited issues with President Zelensky. 627 Indeed, 

Ambassador Bolton had resisted scheduling the call because he believed it might be a 

“disaster.” 628 

As he sat in the White House Situation Room liste ning to the leaders, Lt. Col. Vindman 

quickly recognized that the President’s conversation was diverging from the talking points he 

helped prepare based on the interagency policy process, and “straying” into an “unproductive 

narrative” promoted by Mr. Giul iani and other “external and nongovernmental influencers” 629 —

topics that Lt. Col. Vindman dubbed “stray voltage.” 630 

Lt. Col. Vindman knew immediately that he had a duty to report the contents of the call 

to the White House lawyers. He explained, “I had conc erns, and it was my duty to report my 

concerns to the proper —proper people in the chain of command.” 631 Lt. Col. Vindman testified 

that President Trump’s request that a foreign leader dependent on the United States open an 

investigation into his U.S. politi cal opponent constituted a “demand” that President Zelensky had 

to meet in order to secure a White House meeting: 

So, Congressman, the power disparity between the President of the United States and the 

President of Ukraine is vast, and, you know, in the President asking for something, it 

became —there was —in return for a White House meeting, because that’s what this was 

about. This was about getting a White House meeting. It was a demand for him to fulfill 

his —fulfill this particular prerequisite in order to get the meeting. 632 

Lt. Col. Vindman further testified that President Trump’s demand of the Ukrainian leader 

was “inappropriate” and “improper,” and that it would undermine U.S. national security: 

Chairman, as I said in my statement, it was inappr opriate. It was improper for the 

President to request —to demand an investigation into a political opponent, especially a 

foreign power where there’s, at best, dubious belief that this would be a completely 

impartial investigation, and that this would have significant implications if it became 

public knowledge, and it would be perceived as a partisan play. It would undermine our 

Ukraine policy, and it would undermine our national security. 633 

Within an hour of the call ending, Lt. Col. Vindman reported his concerns to John A. 

Eisenberg, the Deputy Counsel to the President for National Security Affairs and the Legal 106 

Advisor to the NSC , and Michael Ellis, a Senior Associate Counsel to the President and the 

Deputy Legal Advisor to the NSC. 634 Lt. Col. Vindman r ecounted the content of the call based 

on his handwritten notes and told the lawyers that he believed it was “wrong” for President 

Trump to ask President Zelensky to investigate Vice President Biden. 635 

Concerns Raised by Timothy Morrison 

After 17 years as a Republican Congressional staffer and approximately a year serving 

elsewhere on the NSC staff, Mr. Morrison assumed his position as the NSC’s Senior Director for 

Europe and Russia on July 15, 2019, only 10 days before President Trump’s c all with President 

Zelensky. 636 

Before he transitioned into his new role, Mr. Morrison met with his predecessor, Dr. Hill. 

She advised him to stay away from efforts orchestrated by Mr. Giuliani and Ambassador 

Sondland to pressure Ukraine into investigati ng a “bucket of issues” that included “Burisma the 

company,” and “Hunter Biden on the board .” 637 Dr. Hill also warned Mr. Morrison before the 

July 25 call about the President’s interest in alleged Ukrainian interference in the 2016 U.S. 

election related to the DNC server. 638 

Mr. Morrison testified that he had no knowledge of any investigations at the time, but 

after performing a Google search of “what is Burisma?” and seeing the name Hunter Biden, Mr. 

Morrison decided to “stay away.” 639 Even though he was ne w to the portfolio, Mr. Morrison 

promptly concluded that because “Burisma” involved Hunter Biden, and because former Vice 

President Biden was running for President, such investigations could be a “problematic” area. 640 

Mr. Morrison further explained that he tried to stay away from requests related to Burisma and 

the 2016 U.S. election because these investigations were not related to “the proper policy process 

that I was involved in on Ukraine,” and “had nothing to do with the issues that the interagency 

was working on.” 641 

With that background in mind, Mr. Morrison admitted he was “concerned” when, while 

listening to the call on July 25, he heard President Trump raise “issues related to the [DNC] 

server.” Ultimately, Mr. Morrison said, “the call was not the f ull -throated endorsement of the 

Ukraine reform agenda that I was hoping to hear.” 642 

In “fairly short order,” Mr. Morrison reported the contents of the call to Mr. Eisenberg 

and Mr. Ellis, the NSC lawyers. He asked them to review the call, which he feared would be 

“damaging” if leaked. 643 Mr. Morrison stated that at the time of the call, he “did not have a 

view” on whether the call was “appropriate and proper.” 644 He also stated that he “was not 

concerned that anything illegal was discussed.” 645 During his de position, however, Mr. 

Morrison clarified, “I did not then and I do not now opine … as to the legality” of what happened 

on the call. 646 

In a second meeting with Mr. Eisenberg, Mr. Morrison requested that access to the 

electronic files of the call record be restricted. This was an unusual request. Mr. Morrison 

confirmed to the Committee that he had never before asked the NSC Legal Advisor to restrict 

access to a presidential call record. 647 It was also unusual because Mr. Morrison raised 107 

restricting access with Mr. Eisenberg despite the fact that Mr. Morrison himself had the 

authority, as a n NSC senior director, to recommend restrictions on the relevant files to the NSC’s 

Executive Secretariat. 

Lt. Col. Vindman also discussed restricting access to the Jul y 25 call summary with Mr. 

Eisenberg and Mr. Ellis. At some point after the call, Lt. Col. Vindman discussed with the NSC 

lawyers the “sensitivity” of the matters raised on the call and “the fact that … there are constant 

leaks.” 648 Lt. Col. Vindman explai ned that “[f]rom a foreign policy professional perspective, all 

of these types of calls would inherently be sensitive.” 649 But the July 25 call was particularly 

sensitive because it could “undermine our relationship with the Ukrainians” given that it “would 

implicate a partisan play.” 650 The NSC lawyers, therefore, believed that it was “appropriate to 

restrict access for the purpose of the leaks” and “to preserv[e] the integrity” of the transcript. 651 

Lt. Col. Vindman recalled that Mr. Ellis raised the idea of placing the call summary on the 

NSC’s server for highly classified information and Mr. Eisenberg “gave the go -ahead.” 652 

Some weeks after his discussions with the NSC attorneys, Mr. Morrison could not locate 

the call record. He contacted the staff of the NSC’s Executive Secretariat in search of an 

explanation and was informed that “John Eisenberg had directed it to be moved to a different 

server” utilized by the NSC staff for highly classified information. 653 This transfer occurred 

despite Mr. Morrison’s vi ew that the call record did not meet the requirements to be placed on 

the highly classified system. 654 

Mr. Eisenberg later told Mr. Morrison that the call record had been placed on the highly 

classified system by “mistake.” 655 Even after Mr. Eisenberg stated that the call record was 

moved to the highly classified system by “mistake,” it nevertheless remained on that system until 

at least the third week of September 2019 , shortly before its declassification and public release 

by the White House. 656 

Concerns Raised by Jennifer Williams 

Vice President Pence’s advisor, Ms. Williams, had listened to nearly a dozen phone calls 

between President Trump and other heads of state prior to July 25, 2019, as well as Vice 

President Pence’s April 23 call with President Zelensky. 657 As she sat listening to President 

Trump’s July 25 call, she was struck by his requests relating to Vice President Biden. She stated 

that she believed that President Trump’s comments were “unusual and inappr opriate.” 658 

Ms. Williams testified that she thought that “references to specific individuals and 

investigations, such as former Vice President Biden and his son” were “political in nature, given 

that the former Vice President is a political opponent of t he President.” 659 The comments struck 

her as “more specific to the President in nature, to his personal political agenda,” as opposed to 

“a broader foreign policy objective of the United States.” 660 She added, “it was the first time I 

had heard internally th e President reference particular investigations that previously I had only 

heard about through Mr. Giuliani’s press interviews and press reporting.” 661 108 

Significantly, Ms. Williams, who had learned about the hold on security assistance for 

Ukraine on July 3, also said that the Trump -Zelensky call “shed some light on possible other 

motivations behind a security assistance hold.” 662 

“Burisma” Omitted from Call Record 

Mr. Morrison, Lt. Col. Vindman, and Ms. Williams all agreed that the publicly released 

record of the call was substantially accurate, but Lt. Col. Vindman and Ms. Williams both 

testified that President Zelensky made an explicit reference to “Burisma” that was not included 

in the call record. Specifically, Lt. Col. Vindman testified that his notes indicated President 

Zelensky used the word “Burisma” —instead of generically referring to “the company” —when 

discussing President Trump’s request to investigate the Bidens. 663 Ms. Williams’ notes also 

reflected that President Zelensky had said “Burisma” lat er in the call when referring to a 

“case.” 664 

Lt. Col. Vindman indicated that President Zelensky’s mention of “Burisma” was notable 

because it suggested that the Ukrainian leader was “prepped for this call.” He explained that 

“frankly, the President of Ukr aine would not necessarily know anything about this company 

Burisma.” Lt. Col. Vindman continued, “he would certainly understand some of this —some of 

these elements because the story had been developing for some time, but the fact that he 

mentioned specif ically Burisma seemed to suggest to me that he was prepped for this call.” 665 

The Substance of the Call Remained Tightly Controlled 

Ms. Williams testified that staff in the Office of the Vice President placed the draft call 

record in the Vice President’s n ightly briefing book on July 25. 666 

Separately, and following established protocols for coordinating U.S. government 

activities toward Ukraine, Lt. Col. Vindman provided Mr. Kent at the State Department with a 

readout. Because Mr. Kent had worked on Ukrain e policy for many years, Lt. Col. Vindman 

sought Mr. Kent’s “expert view” on the investigations requested by the President. Mr. Kent 

informed him that “there was no substance” behind the CrowdStrike conspiracy theory and “took 

note of the fact that there was a call to investigate the Bidens.” 667 Recalling this conversation, 

Mr. Kent testified that Lt. Col. Vindman said “he could not share the majority of what was 

discussed [on the July 25 call] because of the very sensitive nature of what was discussed,” bu t

that Lt. Col. Vindman noted that the call “went into the direction of some of the most extreme 

narratives that have been discussed publicly.” 668 

Ambassador Sondland Followed Up on President Trump’s Request for Investigations 

Soon after arriving in Kyiv from Brussels on July 25, Ambassador Sondland asked the 

U.S. Embassy to arrange a meeting the next day with Ukrainian presidential aide Andriy 

Yermak. 669 

On the morning of July 26, Ambassadors Sondland , Volker and Taylor —accompan ied by 

Mr. Holmes, who acted as their official notetaker —went to the Presidential Administration 109 

Building in central Kyiv for meetings with Ukrainian officials. 670 Contrary to standard 

procedure, Mr. Holmes and Ambassador Taylor did not receive readouts of the July 25 call, so 

they were unaware of what President Trump and President Zelensky had discussed. 671 

Ambassador Volker also did not receive an official readout of the July 25 call from the NSC 

staff. He testified that Andriy Yermak, a senior aide to Pre sident Zelensky, simply characterized 

it as a “good call” in which “President Zelensky did reiterate his commitment to reform and 

fighting corruption in Ukraine.” 672 

The first meeting on July 26 was with Chief of Staff to President Zelensky Andriy 

Bohdan. 673 Regarding the July 25 call, Mr. Holmes recalled Mr. Bohdan sharing that “President 

Trump had expressed interest … in President Zelensky’s personnel decisions related to the 

Prosecutor General’s office [PGO].” 674 Mr. Holmes further testified that Mr. Bohd an then 

“started asking … about individuals I’ve since come to understand they were considering 

appointing to different roles in the PGO.” 675 Mr. Holmes explained that he “didn’t understand 

it,” and that “[i]t wasn’t until I read the July 25th phone call tr anscript that I realized that the 

President [Trump] had mentioned Mr. Lutsenko in the call.” 676 

Subsequently, Ambassadors Sondland, Taylor, and Volker met with President Zelensky 

and other senior officials. Mr. Holmes once again took notes. 677 He testified “During the 

meeting, President Zelensky stated that, during the July 25th call, President Trump had, quote, 

‘three times raised some very sensitive issues’ and that he would have to follow up —he, 

Zelensky —would have to follow up on those issues when he an d President Trump met in 

person.” 678 After he read the transcript of the July 25 call, Mr. Holmes determined that President 

Zelensky’s mention of “sensitive issues” was a reference to President Trump’s demands for a 

“Burisma Biden investigation.” 679 

Cather ine Croft, Special Advisor to Ambassador Kurt Volker, was also in Kyiv on July 

26. Although she did not attend the meeting with President Zelensky, she received a readout 

from Ambassadors Volker and Taylor later that day, as they were traveling in an embassy 

vehicle. Ms. Croft te stified that her handwritten notes from that readout indicate “the President 

[Trump] had raised investigations multiple times” in his July 25 call with President Zelensky. 680 

Ambassadors Sondland and Taylor told the Committee that they did not recall Presid ent 

Zelensky’s comments about investigations. 681 Ambassador Volker similarly did not recall that 

the issue of investigations was discussed, but testified that he did not dispute the validity of 

“notes taken contemporaneously at the meeting.” 682 

Ambassador Sondland Met One -on -One with Ukrainian Presidential Aide 

The meeting with President Zelensky ended around noon. 683 After the meeting, 

Ambassadors Taylor and Volker departed the Presidential Administration building for a visit to 

the front lines of the war with Russia in eastern Ukraine. 684 Ambassador Sondland separately 

headed for Mr. Yermak’s office. Mr. Holmes testified that, at the last minute, he received 

instruction from his leadership at the U.S. Embassy to join Ambassador Sondland. 685 By that 

point, M r. Holmes recalled, he “ was a flight of stairs behind Ambassador Sondland as he headed 

to meet with Mr. Yermak.” 686 Mr. Holmes continued, “When I reached Mr. Yermak’s office, 

Ambassador Sondland had already gone in to the meeting.” 687 Mr. Holmes then “explai ned to 110 

Mr. Yermak’s assistant that I was supposed to join the meeting as the Embassy’s representative 

and strongly urged her to let me in, but she told me that Ambassador Sondland and Mr. Yermak 

had insisted that the meeting be one on one with no note take r.” 688 Mr. Holmes “then waited in 

the anteroom until the meeting ended, along with a member of Ambassador Sondland’s staff and 

a member of the U.S. Embassy Kyiv staff.” 689 

Ambassador Sondland’s meeting with Mr. Yermak lasted approximately 30 minutes. 690 

When it ended, Ambassador Sondland did not provide Mr. Holmes an explanation of what they 

discussed. 691 Ambassador Sondland later testified that he did not “recall the specifics” of his 

conversation with Mr. Yermak, but he believed “the issue of investigations w as probably a part 

of that agenda or meeting.” 692 

Call Between President Trump and Ambassador Sondland on July 26, 2019 

After a busy morning of meetings with Ukrainian officials on July 26, Ambassador 

Sondland indicated that he wanted to get lunch. Mr. Holmes interjected that he would “be happy 

to join” Ambassador Sondland and two other State Department colleagues accompanying him “if 

he wanted to brief me out on his meeting with Mr. Yermak or discuss other issues.” 693 

Ambassador Sondland accepted the off er. The diplomats proceeded “to a nearby restaurant and 

sat on an outdoor terrace.” 694 Mr. Holmes “sat directly across from Ambassador Sondland,” 

close enough that they could “share an appetizer.” 695 

Mr. Holmes recounted that “at first, the lunch was largel y social. Ambassador Sondland 

selected a bottle of wine that he shared among the four of us, and we discussed topics such as 

marketing strategies for his hotel business.” 696 Later during the meal, Ambassador Sondland 

“said that he was going to call Preside nt Trump to give him an update.” 697 Ambassador 

Sondland then placed a call on his unsecure mobile phone. Mr. Holmes was taken aback. He 

told the Committee, “it was, like, a really extraordinary thing, it doesn’t happen very often” —a

U.S. Ambassador pickin g up his mobile phone at an outdoor cafe and dialing the President of the 

United States. 698 

Mr. Holmes, who was sitting directly opposite from Ambassador Sondland, said he 

“heard him announce himself several times, along the lines of, ‘Gordon Sondland, ho lding for 

the President.’ It appeared that he was being transferred through several layers of switchboards 

and assistants, and I then noticed Ambassador Sondland’s demeanor changed and understood 

that he had been connected to President Trump.” 699 

Mr. Hol mes stated he was able to hear the first part of Ambassador Sondland’s 

conversation with President Trump because it was “quite loud” and “quite distinctive” when the 

President began speaking. When President Trump started speaking, Ambassador Sondland “sor t

of winced and held the phone away from his ear,” and “did that for the first couple 

exchanges.” 700 

Recounting the conversation that followed, Mr. Holmes testified: 111 

I heard Ambassador Sondland greet the President and explain he was calling from Kyiv. 

I heard President Trump then clarify that Ambassador Sondland was in Ukraine. 

Ambassador Sondland replied, yes, he was in Ukraine, and went on to state that President 

Zelensky, quote, “loves your ass.” I then heard President Trump ask, “So he’s going to 

do the investigation?” Ambassador Sondland replied that he is going to do it, adding that 

President Zelensky will do “anything you ask him to do.” 701 

President Trump has denied that he spoke to Ambassador Sondland on July 26 and told 

reporters, “I know nothi ng about that.” 702 But in his public testimony before the Committee, 

Ambassador Sondland noted that White House call records made available to his legal counsel 

confirmed that the July 26 call in fact occurred. 703 Ambassador Sondland further explained that 

Mr. Holmes’s testimony —specifically, a “reference to A$AP Rocky” —refreshed his recollection 

about the July 26 call, which Ambassador Sondland had not originally disclosed to the 

Committee. 704 

Although Ambassador Sondland did not believe he mentioned the Bi dens by name, he 

testified that with regard to the substance of his July 26 conversation with President Trump: “I 

have no reason to doubt that this conversation included the subject of investigations.” 705 He 

added that he had “no reason” to doubt Mr. Holme s’ testimony about the contents of the call, and 

that he would “have been more surprised if President Trump had not mentioned investigations, 

particularly given what we were hearing from Mr. Giuliani about the President’s concerns.” 706 

Asked about his state ment to President Trump that President Zelensky “loves your ass,” 

Ambassador Sondland replied: “That sounds like something I would say. That’s how President 

Trump and I communicate, a lot of four -letter words, in this case three letter.” 707 

After the call between Ambassador Sondland and President Trump ended, Ambassador 

Sondland remarked to Mr. Holmes that “the President was in a bad mood,” as “was often the 

case early in the morning.” 708 Mr. Holmes, who had learned about the freeze on U.S. se curity 

assistance days earlier, was attempting to clarify the President’s thinking, and said he “took the 

opportunity to ask Ambassador Sondland fo r his candid impression of the President’s views on 

Ukraine”: 

In particular, I asked Ambassador Sondland if it was true that the President did not give a 

shit about Ukraine. Ambassador Sondland agreed that the President did not give a shit 

about Ukraine. I asked, why not, and Ambassador Sondland stated, the President only 

cares about, quote, unquote, “big stuf f.” I noted there was, quote, unquote, big stuff 

going on in Ukraine, like a war with Russia. And Ambassador Sondland replied that he 

meant, quote, unquote, “big stuff” that benefits the President, like the, quote, unquote, 

“Biden investigation” that Mr. Giuliani was pushing. The conversation then moved on to 

other topics. 709 

Ambassador Sondland did not dispute the substance of Mr. Holmes’ recollection of this 

discussion. He stated, “I don’t recall my exact words, but clearly the President, beginning o n

May 23, when we met with him in the Oval Office, was not a big fan” of Ukraine. Asked 

whether President Trump “was a big fan of the investigations,” Ambassador Sondland replied: 

“Apparently so.” 710 Asked to clarify if, during his July 26 conversation wi th Mr. Holmes, he 112 

recalled “at least referring to an investigation that Rudy Giuliani was pushing,” Ambassador 

Sondland replied, “I would have, yes.” 711 

Mr. Holmes Informed U.S. Embassy Leadership about 

President Trump’s Call with Ambassador Sondland 

After the lunch, Mr. Holmes dropped off Ambassador Sondland at his hotel, the Hyatt 

Regency Kyiv. Mr. Holmes then returned to the U.S. Embassy. 712 Ambassador Taylor, the 

acting Ambassador in Kyiv , was still visiting the front line. So when he arrived at the Em bassy, 

Mr. Holmes briefed his immediate supervisor, Kristina Kvien, Deputy Chief of Mission at U.S. 

Embassy Kyiv, about the President’s call with Ambassador Sondland and Ambassador 

Sondland’s subsequent description of President Trump’s priorities for Ukrai ne. 713 

After taking a long -planned vacation from July 27 to August 5, Mr. Holmes told 

Ambassador Taylor about his lunch with Ambassador Sondland on the first day he returned to 

work, August 6. 714 Mr. Holmes told the Committee that he did not brief the call in detail to 

Ambassador Taylor because “it was obvious what the President was pressing for”: 

Of course that’s what’s going on. Of course the President is pressing for a Biden 

investigation before he’ll do these things the Ukrainians want. There was nod ding 

agreement. So did I go through every single word in the call? No, because everyone by 

that point agreed, it was obvious what the President was pressing for. 715 

In October 2019, following the public release of testimony by several witnesses pursuant 

to the Committee’s impeachment inquiry, Mr. Holmes reminded Ambassador Taylor about 

Ambassador Sondland’s July 26 conversation with President Trump. Ambassador Taylor was 

preparing to return to Washington and testify publicly before the Committee . Mr. Holmes had 

been following news coverage of the inquiry and realized he had unique, firsthand evidence that 

“potentially bore on the question of whether the President did, in fact, have knowledge” of 

efforts to press the Ukrainian President to public ly announce investigations: 

I came to realize that I had firsthand knowledge regarding certain events on July 26 that 

had not otherwise been reported and that those events potentially bore on the question of 

whether the President did, in fact, have knowle dge that those senior officials were using 

the levers of diplomatic power to influence the new Ukrainian President to announce the 

opening of a criminal investigation against President Trump’s political opponent. It is at 

that point that I made the observ ation to Ambassador Taylor that the incident I had 

witnessed on July 26th had acquired greater significance, which is what he reported in his 

testimony last week and is what led to the subpoena for me to appear here today. 716 

Mr. Holmes testified that the July 26 call became “sort of a touchstone piece of 

information” for diplomats at the U.S. Embassy in Kyiv who “were trying to understand why we 

weren’t able to get the meeting” between President Trump and President Zelensky and “what 

was going on with the security hold.” 717 He elaborated: 113 

I would refer back to it repeatedly in our, you know, morning staff meetings. We’d talk 

about what we’re trying to do. We’re trying to achieve this, that. Maybe it will convince 

the President to have the meeting. And I would say, ‘Well, as we know, he doesn’t really 

care about Ukraine. He cares about some other things. And we’re trying to keep Ukraine 

out of our politics and so, you know, that’s what we’re up against.’ And I would refer —

use that repeatedly as a refr ain. 718 114 

6. The President Wanted Ukraine to Announce the Investigations Publicly 

In the weeks following the July 25 call, President Trump’s hand -picked representatives 

carried out his wishes to condition a coveted White House meeting for the Ukrainian 

Presid ent on the public announcement of investigations beneficial to President Trump. Top 

U.S. officials, including the Secretary of State and Secretary of Energy, were “in the loop.” 

Overview 

In the weeks following the July 25 call, during which President Trump had pressed 

Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky to “do us a favor though ,” the President’s 

representatives worked to secure from the Ukrainian President a public announcement about th e

requested investigations as a condition for the White House meeting .

That meeting would have confer red vital support on a new president who relied on the 

United States to help defend his nation militarily, diplomatically, and politically against Russi an 

aggression. U.S. Ambassador to the European Union Gordon Sondland provided testimony and 

quoted from documents demonstrating that he kept everyone “in the loop” about the plan, 

including the Secretar ies of State and Energy. 

Ambassador s Sondland and Vo lker worked closely with Mr. Giuliani, the President’s 

personal lawyer, to help draft Ukraine’s public statement . They sought to ensure that President 

Zelensky explicitly used the words “Burisma” —a reference to allegations about former Vice 

President Biden and his son —and “2016 elections .”

Ukrainian officials were “very uncomfortable” with the provision of this statement, 

which they understood to be a requirement and a “deliverabl e” demanded by President Trump. 

The Ukrainian President was elected on a platform of rooting out public corruption , and so he 

resisted issuing the statement. Instead, President Zelensky’s aides asked whether an official 

request for legal assistance with investigations had been made through appropriate channels at 

the U.S. Department of Justice. No such formal request was ever made . Consequently, 

Ukrainian officials made clear to Ambassador Volker that they did not support issuing a public 

statement because it could “play into” U.S. domestic politics. Neverthele ss, U.S. efforts to 

secure a public statement continued. 

Giuliani Met with Ukrainian Presidential Aide Andriy Yermak in 

Madrid and Discussed a White House Meeting 

On July 26, the day after the call between President Trump and President Zelensky, 

Ambassa dor Volker wrote to Mr. Giuliani to confirm that he would soon be meeting with And ri y

Yermak , a Ukrainian presidential aide, to “help” efforts. 719 

Ambassador Volker texted: “Please send dates when you will be in Madrid. I am seeing 

Yermak tomorrow morni ng. He will come to you in Madrid. Thanks for your help! Kurt.” 720 115 

Mr. Giuliani replied that he would travel to Spain from August 1 to 5, and Ambassador Volker 

affirmed that he would tell the Ukrainian presidential aide to “visit with you there.” 721 

Ambas sador Volker kept himself apprised of plans, texting Mr. Yermak on August 1 to ensure 

that everything was “on track” for the meeting in Spain’s capital. He also asked whether Mr. 

Yermak planned to visit Washington. 722 

On August 2, Mr. Yermak and Mr. Giul iani met in Madrid. 723 Ambassador Volker 

received a meeting summary from Mr. Yermak the same day: “My meeting with Mr. Mayor was 

very good.” Mr. Yermak added: “We asked for White House meeting during week start [sic] 16 

Sept. Waiting for confirmation. M aybe you know the date?” 724 

The Madrid meeting set off a “series of discussions” among Mr. Giuliani, Ambassador 

Volker, and Ambassador Sondland about the need for President Zelensky to issue a public 

statement about the investigations into Burisma and the 2016 election conspiracy theory in orde r

to secure a White House meeting with President Trump. 725 Ambassador Volker first spoke to 

Mr. Giuliani, who said that he thought Ukraine “should issue a statement.” 726 Ambassador 

Volker then spoke to Mr. Yermak, who affirmed that the Ukrainian leader was “prepared to 

make a statement” that “would reference Burisma and 2016 in a wider context of bilateral 

relations and rooting out corruption anyway.” 727 

Mr. Giuliani , acting as President Trump’s personal attorney, exerted significant influence 

in the proces s. On August 4, Mr. Yermak inquired again about the presidential meeting. 

Ambassador Volker replied that he would speak with Mr. Giuliani later that day and would call 

the Ukrainian aide afterward. 728 Ambassador Volker texted the former mayor about the Ma drid 

meeting and asked for a phone call. Mr. Giuliani replied: “It was excellent I can call a little 

later.” 729 

Phone records obtained by the Committee s show a 16 minute call on August 5 between 

Ambassador Volker and Mr. Giuliani. 730 Ambassador Volker te xted Mr. Yermak: “Hi 

Andrey —had a good long talk w Rudy —call anytime —Kurt.” 731 During the same period, 

Ambassador Volker informed Ambassador Sondland that “Giuliani was happy with that 

meeting ,” and “it looks like things are turning around.” 732 

“Potus Really Wants the Deliverable” Before Scheduling a 

White House Visit for President Zelensky 

Things had not turned around by August 7 . Ambassador Volker texted Mr. Giuliani to 

recommend that he report to “the boss” —President Trump —about his meeting w ith Mr. Yermak 

in Madrid. He wrote: 

Hi Rudy —hope you made it back safely. Let’s meet if you are coming to 

DC. And would be good if you could convey results of your meeting in 

Madrid to the boss so we can get a firm date for a visit. 733 

The Committee s did not find evidence that Mr. Giuliani responded to Ambassador 

Volker’s text message. 116 

However, c all records show that the next day, on August 8 , Mr. Giuliani connected with 

the White House Situation Room switchboard in the early afternoon , Eastern Time , for 42 

seconds, and then again for one minute , 25 seconds. 734 

The same day, Mr. Giuliani texted several times with a number associated with the White 

House. The Committees were unable to identify the official associated with the phone number. 

In the mid -afternoon, someone using a telephone number associated with the Office of 

Management and Budget (OMB) called Mr. Giuliani, and the call lasted for nearly 13 m inutes .

Mr. Giuliani called the OMB number and the White House Situation Room several more times 

that evening, but each time connected for only a few seconds or not at all. 

Rudy Giuliani Call History , August 8 

Date 

Connect -

ing Time 

(EDT) 

Duration 

of C all  Caller  Recipient 

08/08/19  12:44:56  0:42  Giuliani, Rudy 

White House Switchboard 

(Situation Room) 735 

08/08/19  12:45:38  1:25  Giuliani, Rudy 

White House Switchboard 

(Situation Room) 736 

08/08/19  13:02:37  TEXT  Giuliani, Rudy  White House Number 737 

08/08/19  13:02:37  TEXT  Giuliani, Rudy  White House Number 738 

08/08/19  13:02:57  TEXT  Giuliani, Rudy  White House Number 739 

08/08/19  14:14:53  TEXT  White House Number  Giuliani, Rudy 740 

08/08/19  14:15:17  TEXT  Giuliani, Rudy  White House Number 741 

08/08/19  14:21:13  TEXT  Giuliani, Rudy  White House Number 742 

08/08/19  15:13:05  12:56  OMB Number  Giuliani, Rudy 743 

08/08/19  15:56:44  0:00  Giuliani, Rudy  OMB Number 744 

08/08/19  15:56:51  0:00  Giuliani, Rudy  OMB Number 745 

08/08/19  15:57:05  0:00  Giuliani, Rudy  OMB Number 746 

08/08/19  15:57:21  0:22  Giuliani, Rudy 

White House Switchboard 

(Situation Room) 747 

08/08/19  17:20:33  0:17  Giuliani, Rudy 

White House Switchboard 

(Situation Room) 748 

08/08/19  19:14:48  0:00  Giuliani, Rudy 

White House Switchboard 

(Situation Room) 749 

Approximately 30 minutes after his text to Mr. Giuliani on August 7 , Ambassador Volker 

received a text message from Mr. Yermak: “Do you have some news about White House 117 

meeting date?” 750 Ambassador Volker responded that he had asked Mr. Giuliani to “weigh in ,” 

presumably with the President, “following your meeting,” and that Ambassador Sondland would 

be speaking with President Trump on Friday, August 9. Ambassador Volker added: “We are 

pressing this.” 751 The next day, on August 8, Mr. Yermak texted Ambassa dor Volker to report 

that he had “some news.” 752 Ambassador Volker replied that he was available to speak at that 

time .753 

Later on the evening of August 8 , Eastern Time , Mr. Giuliani sent a text message to a 

phone number associated with the White House. Approximately one hour 15 minutes later, 

someone using an unidentified number (“ -1”) dialed Mr. Giuliani three times in rapid succession. 

Less than three minutes later, Mr. Giuliani dialed the White House switchboard for the White 

House Situation Room. W hen the call did not connect, Mr. Giuliani immediately dialed another 

general number for the White House switchboard and connected for 47 seconds. Approximately 

16 minutes later, someone using the “ -1” number called Mr. Giuliani and connected for just ove r

four minutes. 754 

Rudy Giuliani Call History , August 8, cont.                                         

> Date
> Connect -
> ing Time
> (EDT)
> Duration
> of Call Caller Recipient
> 08/08/19 20:53:13 TEXT Giuliani, Rudy White House Number 755
> 08/08/19 22:09:31 0:00 “-1” Giuliani, Rudy 756
> 08/08/19 22:09:32 0:05 “-1” Giuliani, Rudy 757
> 08/08/19 22:09:46 0:00 “-1” Giuliani, Rudy (Cell 2) 758
> 08/08/19 22:09:47 0:02 “-1” Giuliani, Rudy (Cell 2) 759
> 08/08/19 22:10:08 0:05 “-1” Giuliani, Rudy 760
> 08/08/19 22:11:52 0:00 Giuliani, Rudy OMB Number 761
> 08/08/19 22:12:16 0:00 Giuliani, Rudy
> White House Switchboard
> (Situation Room) 762
> 08/08/19 22:12:25 0:47 Giuliani, Rudy
> White House
> Switchboard 763
> 08/08/19 22:28:51 4:06 “-1” Giuliani, Rudy 764

Late the next morning Washington time, on August 9, Ambassador Volker texted Mr. 

Giuliani and Ambassador Sondland: 

Hi Mr. Mayor! Had a good chat with Yermak last night. He was pleased 

with your phone call. Mentioned Z [President Zelensky] making a 

statement. Can we all get on the phone to make sure I advise Z [President 118 

Zelensky] correctly as to what he should be saying? Want to make sure 

we get this done right. Thanks! 765 

It is unclear which “phone call” Ambassador Volker was referencing .

Text messages and call records obtained by the Committee s show that Ambassador 

Volker and Mr. Giuliani connected by phone twice around noon Eastern Time on August 9 for 

several minutes each. 766 Following the calls with Mr. Giuliani, Ambassador Volker created a 

three -way group chat using WhatsApp that in cluded Ambassador Volker, Ambassador Sondland, 

and Mr. Yermak. 767 

At 2:24 p.m. Eastern Time on August 9 , Ambassador Volker texted the group: “Hi 

Andrey —we have all consulted here, including with Rudy. Can you do a call later today or 

tomorrow your after noon time?” 768 Ambassador Sondland texted that he had a call scheduled for 

3 p.m. Eastern Time “for the three of us. [State Department] Ops will call.” 769 

Call records obtained by the Committee s show that on August 9, Ambassador Sondland 

twice called numbers associated with the White House , once in early afternoon for 

approximately 18 minutes, and once in late afternoon for two minutes, 25 seconds with a number 

associated with OMB .770 

By early evening, minutes after his second call with OMB number, Ambassador Volker 

and Ambassador Sondland discussed a breakthrough they had reached in obtaining a date for a 

White House visit, noting that President Trump really wanted “the deliverable”: 

Sondland: [Tim] Morrison ready to get dates as soon as Yermak confirms. 

Volker: Excellent!! How did you sway him? :) 

Sondland: Not sure i did. I think potus really wants the deliverable 

Volker: But does he know that? 

Sondland: Yep 

Sondland: Clearly lots of convos going on 

Volker: Ok —then that’s good it’s coming from two separate sources 771 

Ambassador Sondland told the Committee s that the “deliverable” required by President 

Trump was a press statement from President Zelensky committing to “do the investigations ”

pushed by President Trump and Mr. Giuliani. 772 

To ensure progress, immediately after their text exchange, Ambassador Sondland 

recommended to Ambassador Volker that Mr. Yermak share a draft of th e press statement to 

“avoid misunderstandi ngs” and so they would know “exactly what they propose to cover.” 

Ambassador Sondland explained: “Even though Ze [President Zelensky] does a live presser 

[press event] they can still summarize in a brief statement.” Ambassador Volker agreed. 773 

As they were negotiating the language that would appear in a press statement , “there was 

talk about having a live interview or a live broadcast” during which President Zelensky would 

make the agreed -upon statement. 774 Ambassador Sondland suggested reviewing a writ ten 119 

summary of the statement because he was “concerned” that President Zelensky would “say 

whatever he would say on live television and it still wouldn’t be good enough for Rudy, slash, 

the President [Trump].” 775 

“Everyone Was in the Loop” About Plan for Ukrainians to Deliver a 

Public Statement about Investigations in Exchange for a White House Visit 

As negotiations continued, on August 10, Mr. Yermak texted Ambassador Volker in an 

attempt to schedule a White House meeting before the Ukrainian president made a public 

statement in support of investigations into Burisma and the 2016 election. He wrote :

I think it’s possible to make this declaration an d mention all these things. Which we 

discussed yesterday. But it will be logic [sic] to do after we receive a confirmation of 

date. We inform about date of visit about our expectations and our guarantees for future 

visit. Let [sic] discuss it 776 

Ambassa dor Volker responded that he agreed, but that first they would have to “iron out 

[a] statement and use that to get [a] date,” after which point President Zelensky would go 

forward with making the statement. 777 They agreed to have a call the next day, and to include 

Ambassador Sondland. Mr. Yermak texted: 

Excellent. Once we have a date, will call for a press briefing, announcing upcoming visit 

and outlining vision for the reboot of the US -UKRAINE relationship, including, among 

other things, Burisma and ele ction meddling in investigations. 778 

Ambassador Volker forwarded the message to Ambassador Sondland, and they agreed to 

speak with Mr. Yermak the next day .779 

Ambassador Sondland testified that “everyone was in the loop” regarding this plan. 780 

Also on Augu st 10, Ambassador Sondland informed Ambassador Volker that he briefed T. 

Ulrich Brechbuhl, Counselor of the Department of State, noting: “I briefed Ulrich. All good.” 781 

Ambassador Sondland testified that he “may have walked [Mr. Brechbuhl] through where we 

were.” 782 When asked if Mr. Brechbuhl briefed Secretary Pompeo , Ambassador Sondland noted 

that it was Mr. Brechbuhl’s “habit” to “consult with Secretary Pompeo frequently.” 783 

Secretary of Energy Rick Perry was also made aware of efforts to press ure Ukr aine to 

issue a public statement about political investigations in exchange for a White House meeting. 

Ambassador Sondland testified: 

Mr. Giuliani conveyed to Secretary Perry, Ambassador Volker, and others that President 

Trump wanted a public statement from President Zelensky committing to investigations 

of Burisma and the 2016 election. Mr. Giuliani expressed those requests directly to the 

Ukrainians. Mr. Giuliani also expressed those requests directly to us. We all understood 

that these prerequisit es for the White House call and the White House meeting reflected 

President Trump’s desires and requirements. 784 120 

On August 11, Ambassador Volker requested a phone call with Ambassador Sondland 

and Mr. Giuliani, noting that he had heard from Mr. Yermak that the Ukrainians we re 

“writing the statement now and will send to us .”785 According to call records obtained by the 

Committee s, Ambassador Volker and Mr. Giuliani connected for 34 second s.786 

The same day, Ambassador Sondland updated Mr. Brechbuhl and Lisa Kenna, Executive 

Secretary of the State Department, about efforts to secure a public statement and a “big presser” 

from President Zelensky, which he hoped might “make the boss happy enough to authorize an 

invitation.” He addressed the email to Secre tary Pompeo: 

Mike, 

Kurt [Volker] and I negotiated a statement from Zelensky to be delivered for our review 

in a day or two. The contents will hopefully make the boss happy enough to authorize an 

invitation. Zelensky plans to have a big presser on the openness subject (including 

specifics) next week. 787 

Ambassador Sondland made clear in his hearing testimony that by “specifics ,” he meant 

the “2016 and the Burisma” investigations ; “the boss” referred to “President Trump ;” and “the 

invitation” referred to “the White House meeting.” 788 Ms. Kenna replied to Ambassador 

Sondland that she would “ pass to S [Secretary Pompeo]. Thank you.” 789 Ambassador Sondland 

cited the email as evidence that “everyone was in the loop” on plans to condition a White House 

meeting o n a public statement about political investigations. 790 

President Trump ’s Agents Negotiated a Draft Statement about the Investigations 

In the evening of the next day, August 12 , Mr. Yermak texted Ambassador Volker an 

initial version of the draft statemen t, which read :

Special attention should be paid to the problem of interference in the political processes 

of the United States, especially with the alleged involvement of some Ukrainian 

politicians. I want to declare that this is unacceptable. We intend to initiate and complete 

a transparent and unbiased investigation of all available facts and episodes, which in turn 

will prevent the recurrence of this problem in the future. 791 

The draft statement did not explicitly mention Burisma or 2016 election interference , as 

ex pected .

On August 13, around 10 a.m. Eastern Time, Ambassador Volker texted Mr. Giuliani :

“Mr mayor —trying to set up call in 5 min via state Dept. If now is not convenient, is there a 

time later today?” 792 Phone records show that , shortly thereafter, som eone using a State 

Department number called Mr. Giuliani and connected for more than nine minutes. 793 

Ambassador Volker told the Committees that , during the call , Mr. Giuliani stated : “If [the 

statement] doesn’t say Burisma and 2016, it’s not credible, bec ause what are they hiding?” 794 

Ambassador Volker asked whether inserting references to “Burisma and 2016” at the end of the 

statement would make it “more credible.” Mr. Giuliani confirmed that it would. 795 121 

Two minutes after the call ended, Ambassador Volker sent a WhatsApp message to 

Ambassador Sondland and Mr. Yermak: “Hi Andrey —we spoke with Rudy. When is good to 

call you?” 796 Ambassador Sondland replied that it was, “Important. Do you have 5 mins.” 797 

They agreed to a call approximately 10 minutes later .798 When Ambassador Sondland suggested 

having his “operator” in Brussels dial in the group , Ambassador Volker asked if they could “do 

this one on what’s App?” 799 Text messages and calls in the WhatsApp cell phone application are 

encrypted from end -to -end, en suring that WhatsApp employees and third parties cannot listen in 

or retrieve deleted communications. 800 

Shortly before the call, Ambassador Volker sent a revised draft of the proposed statement 

to Ambassador Sondland. It had been edited to include ref erence to Burisma and the 2016 

elections: 

Special attention should be paid to the problem of interference in the political processes 

of the United States, especially with the alleged involvement of some Ukrainian 

politicians. I want to declare that this is unacceptable. We intend to initiate and complete 

a transparent and unbiased investigation of all available facts and episodes including 

those involving Burisma and the 2016 US elections , which in turn will prevent the 

recurrence of this problem in the future. 801 

Ambassador Sondland replied : “Perfect. Lets send to Andrey after our call.” 802 

Following the call, Ambassador Volker texted Ambassador Sondland and Mr. Yermak: 

“Andrey —good talking —following is text with insert at the end for the 2 key items. ”803 

Ambassador Volker then sent to them the revised statement that included the explicit references 

to “Burisma and 2016 elections.” 804 

Comparison of Draft Statements 

Yermak Draft 

August 12 

Giuliani -Volker -Sondland Draft 

August 13 

Special attention should be paid to the 

problem of interference in the political 

processes of the United States, especially 

with the alleged involvement of some 

Ukrainian politicians. I want to declare 

that this is unacceptable. We intend to 

initiate and complete a transparent and 

unbiased investigation of all available facts 

and episodes, which in turn will prevent 

the recurrence of this problem in the future. 

Special attention should be paid to the 

problem of interference in the political 

processes of t he United States, especially with 

the alleged involvement of some Ukrainian 

politicians. I want to declare that this is 

unacceptable. We intend to initiate and 

complete a transparent and unbiased 

investigation of all available facts and 

episodes, includi ng those involving Burisma 

and the 2016 US elections , which in turn will 

prevent the recurrence of this problem in the 

future. 122 

A “Quid Pro Quo” from “the President of the United States” 

Ambassador Volker testified that the language reflected what Mr. Giuliani deemed 

necessary for the statement to be “credible.” 805 Ambassador Sondland noted the language was 

“proposed by Giuliani.” 806 Ambassador Sondland explained that the language was a clear quid 

pro quo that expressed “the desire of the President of the United States ”:

Mr. Giuliani’s requests were a quid pro quo for arranging a White House visit for 

President Zelensky. Mr. Giuliani demanded that Ukraine make a public statement 

announcing investigations of the 2016 election/DNC server and Burisma. Mr. Giuliani 

was expressing the desires of the President of the United States, and we knew that these 

investigations were important to the President. 807 

Shortly a fter Ambassador Volker sent the revised statement to Mr. Yermak on August 13 ,

Ambassador Sondland called Mr. Giuliani and connected for nearly four minutes. 

Ukrainian Officials and Career State Department Became Increasingly Concerned 

On August 13 —while Ambassador Volker, Ambassador Sondland, and Mr. Yermak were 

negotiating the draft statement about investigations —Mr. Yermak asked Ambassador Volker 

“whether any request had ever been made by the U.S. to investigate election interference in 

2016 .” He app ea red interested in knowing whether the U.S. Department of Justice had made an 

official request to Ukraine’s law enforcement agency for legal assistance in such a matter .808 

When Ambassador Volker sent Mr. Giuliani’s approved draft statement to Mr. Yermak, he stated 

that he would “work on official request.” 809 

Ambassador Volker testified : “When I say official request, I mean law enforcement 

channels, Department of Justice to law enforcement in Ukraine, please investigate was there any 

effort to interfere in t he U.S. elections.” 810 Ambassador Volker explained :

He [Yermak] said, and I think quite appropriately, that if they [Ukraine] are responding to 

an official request, that’s one thing. If there’s no official request, that’s different. And I 

agree with that .811 

According to Ambassador Volker, he was merely trying to “find out” if there was ever an 

official request made by the Department of Justice : “As I found out the answer that we had not, I 

said, well, let’s just not go there.” 812 

On September 25 , within hours of the White House’s public release of the record of the 

July 25 call between President Trump and President Zelensky, a Justice Departme nt 

spokesperson issued a statement, apparently confirming that no such formal request had been 

made: 

The President has not spoken with the Attorney General about having Ukraine investigate 

anything relating to former Vice President Biden or his son. Th e President has not asked 123 

the Attorney General to contact Ukraine —on this or any other matter. The Attorney 

General has not communicated with Ukraine —on this or any other subject. 813 

Ukraine’s current Prosecutor General Ruslan Ryaboshapka , who assumed his new 

position in late August 2019, confirmed the Justice Department’s account. He told The 

Financial Times in late November 2019 that Attorney General Barr had made no formal request 

regarding a potential investigation into allegations of wrongdoing by former Vice President 

Biden. 814 In an apparent reference to President Trump’s demand that Ukraine interfere in U.S. 

elections, Mr. Ryaboshapka added : “It’s critically important for the w est not to pull us into some 

conflicts between their ruling elites, but to continue to support so that we can cross the point of 

no return. ”815 

Neither Ambassador Taylor in Ukraine nor Deputy Assistant Secretary George Kent in 

Washington were aware of the e fforts by Ambassadors Sondland and Volker, in coordination 

with Mr. Giuliani, to convince Ukrainian officials to issue a statement in real time. Ambassador 

Taylor told the Committees that, on August 16, in a text message exchange with Ambassador 

Volker, h e “learned that Mr. Yermak had asked that the United States submit an official request 

for an investigation into Burisma’s alleged violations of Ukrainian law, if that is what the United 

States desired.” 816 Ambassador Taylor noted that “a formal U.S. reques t to the Ukrainians to 

conduct an investigation based on violations of their own law” was “improper” and advised 

Ambassador Volker to “stay clear. ”817 

Nevertheless, Ambassador Volker requested Ambassador Taylor’s help with the 

matter. 818 “To find out the l egal aspect s of the question,” Ambassador Taylor gave Ambassador 

Volker the name of an official at the Department of Justice “whom I thought would be the proper 

point of contact for seeking a U.S. referral for a foreign investigation.” 819 

On August 15, Amb assador Volker texted Ambassador Sondland that Mr. Yermak 

wanted to “know our status on asking them to investigate.” 820 Two days later, Ambassador 

Volker wrote: “Bill [Taylor] had no info on requesting an investigation —calling a friend at 

DOJ.” Ambassador Volker testified that he was not able to connect with his contact at the 

Department of Justice. 821 

Mr. Kent testified that on August 15, Catherine Croft, Ambassador Volker’s special 

assistant, approached him to ask whether there was any precedent for the United States asking 

Ukraine to conduct investigations on its behalf. Mr. Kent advised Ms. Croft: 

[I]f you’re asking me have we ever gone to the Ukrainians and asked them to investigate 

or prosecute individuals for political reasons, the answer is, I ho pe we haven’t, and we 

shouldn’t because that goes against everything that we are trying to promote in post -

Soviet states for the last 28 years, which is the promotion of the rule of law. 822 

Mr. Kent testified that the day after his conversation with Ms. Cro ft, he spoke with 

Ambassador Taylor, who “amplified the same theme” and told Mr. Kent that “Yermak was very 

uncomfortable” with the idea of investigations and suggested that “it should be done officially 

and put in writing.” As a result, it became clear t o Mr. Kent in mid -August that Ukraine was 124 

being pressured to conduct politically -motivated investigations. Mr. Kent told Ambassador 

Taylor “that’s wrong, and we shouldn’t be doing that as a matter of U.S. policy.” 823 

After speaking to Ms. Croft and Ambassador Taylor, Mr. Kent wrote a memo to file on 

August 16 documenting his “concerns that there was an effort to initiate politically motivated 

prosecutions that were injurious to the rule of law, both in Ukraine and U.S. ”824 Mr. Kent 

testified: 

At the time, I had no knowledge of the specifics of the [July 25] call record, but based on 

Bill Taylor’s account of the engagements with Andriy Yermak that were engagements of 

Yermak with Kurt Volker, at that point it was clear t hat the investigations that were being 

suggested were the ones that Rudy Giuliani had been tweeting about, meaning Biden, 

Burisma, and 2016. 825 

On August 17, Mr. Yermak reached out to both Ambassador Sondland and Ambassador 

Volker. 826 Ambassador Sondland texted Ambassador Volker that “Yermak just tapped on me 

about dates. Havent responded. Any updates?” 827 Ambassador Volker responded that “I’ve got 

nothing” and stated that he was contacting the Department of Justice to find out about requesting 

an investigation. 828 

Ambassador Sondland then asked: “Do we still want Ze [Zelensky] to give us an 

unequivocal draft with 2016 and Boresma [sic]?” Ambassador Volker replied: “That’s the clear 

message so far ...” Ambassador Sondland said that he would a sk that Mr. Yermak “send us a 

clean draft,” to which Ambassador Volker replied that he had spoken to Mr. Yermak and 

suggested that he and Ambassador Sondland speak the following day , August 18, to discuss “all 

the latest.” 829 

Ambassador Volker claimed that he “stopped pursuing” the statement from the 

Ukrainians around this time because of concerns raised by Mr. Yermak that Yuriy Lutsenko was 

still the Prosecutor General. Mr. Lutsenko was likely to be replaced by President Zelensky, and 

because Mr. Lutsenko was alleging the same false claims that President Trump and Mr. Giuliani 

were demanding of President Zelensky, Ukrainian officials “ did not want to mention Burisma or 

2016 .” 830 Ambassador Volker testified that he “agreed” and advised Mr. Yermak that “making 

those specific refences was not a good idea” because making those statements might “look like it 

would play into our domestic politics.” 831 

Mr. Yermak agreed and , according t o Ambassador Volker, plans to put out a statement 

were “shelved.” 832 Ambassador Volker reasoned that the plan for a public statement did not 

materialize partly because of “the sense that Rudy was not going to be convinced that it meant 

anything, and, theref ore, convey a positive message to the President if it didn’t say Burisma and 

2016.” 833 He added: 

I agreed with the Ukrainians they shouldn’t do it, and in fact told them just drop it, wait 

till you have your own prosecutor general in place. Let’s work on substantive issues like 

this, security assistance and all. Let’s just do that. So we dropped it. 834 125 

Ambassador Volker testified that, “From that point on, I didn’t have any further 

conversations about this statement.” 835 Nevertheless, efforts to secure a presidential statement 

announcing the two investigations into the Bidens and the 2016 U.S. election interference 

continued well into September. 

On August 19, Ambassador Sondland told Ambassador Volker that he “drove the ‘larger 

issue’ home ” with Mr. Yermak : that this was bigger than just a White House meeting and was 

about “the relationship per se.” 836 Ambassador Volker told the Committees that he understood 

this referred to “the level of trust that the President has with President Zelensky . He has this 

general negative assumption about everything Ukraine , and that’s the larger issue.” 837 That 

negative assumption would prove difficult to overcome as Ukrainian and U.S. officials sought to 

finally obtain a White House meeting and shake free from the Whi te House hundreds of millions 

of dollars in Congressionally -approved security assistance for Ukraine. 126 

7. The President ’s Condition ing of Military Assistance and a White House Meeting on

Announcement of Investigations Raised Alarm 

Following the public disclosure in late August 2019 of a hold on U.S. security assistance to 

Ukraine, President Trump made clear that “everything” —an Oval Office meeting and the 

release of taxpayer -funded U.S. security assistance —was contingent on the Ukra inian 

president announcing investigations into former Vice President Joe Biden and a debunked 

conspiracy theory about Ukrainian interference in the 2016 U.S. election. President Trump 

wanted the Ukrainian leader “in a public box,” even as Ambassador Bill Taylor warned that it 

was “crazy to withhold security assistance for help with a political campaign.” 

Overview 

On August 28, 2019, Politico first reported that President Trump was withholding 

hundreds of millions of dollars of Congressionally -appropria ted U.S. security assistance from 

Ukraine , a fact that had been previously suspected by Ukrainian officials in July . Public 

revelations about the freeze raised question s about the U.S. commitment to Ukraine and harming 

efforts to deter Russian influence a nd aggression in Europe. 

Around this time, American officials made clear to Ukrainians that a public 

announcement about investigations into Ukrainian interference in the 2016 election and former 

Vice President Joe Biden was a pre -condition —not only to obtain a White House meeting for 

President Zelensky , but also to end the freeze on military and other security assistance for 

Ukraine. 

In early September, Ambassador Gordon Sondland conveyed President Trump’s demands 

to both U.S. and Ukrainian o fficials. On September 1, he informed a senior Ukrainian official 

that the military aid would be released if the “prosecutor general would to go the mike [sic]” and 

announce the investigations. Later, on September 7, President Trump informed Ambassador 

Sondland that he wanted President Zelensk y—not the Prosecutor General —in a “public box” and 

demanded that the Ukrainian president personally announce the investigations to “clear things 

up.” Only then would Ukraine end the “stalemate” with the White House related to security 

assistance. President Zelensky proceeded to schedule an interview on CNN in order to announce 

the investigations and satisfy President Trump .

The President’s efforts to withhold vital military and security assistance in exchange for 

political investigations troubled U.S. officials. NSC Senior Director for Europe and Russia 

Timothy Morrison twice reported what he understood to be the President’s requirement of a quid 

pro quo to National Security Advisor John Bolton, who advised him to “make sure the lawyers 

are tracking.” Ambassador Bill Taylor expressed his concerns to Ambassador Sondland, stating 

plainly that it was “crazy to withhold security assistance for help with a political campaign.” 127 

Secretary Pompeo and Ambassador Sondland Worked to “Break the Logjam” 

President Trump’s hold on security assistance persisted throughout August, without 

explanation to U.S. officials and contrary to the consensus recommendation of the President’s 

national security team . At the same time, Pres ident Trump refused to schedule a coveted White 

House visit for President Zelensky until he announced two investigations that could benefit 

President Trump’s reelection prospects. The confluence of those two circumstances led some 

American officials, incl uding Ambassador Sondland and David Holmes, Counselor for Political 

Affairs at the U.S. Embassy in Kyiv , to conclude that the military assistance was conditioned on 

Ukraine’s public announcement of the investigations. 838 

On August 20, Ambassador Kurt Volk er met with Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense 

Laura Cooper. Ms. Cooper and Ambassador Volker agreed that if the hold on security assistance 

was not lifted, “it would be very damaging to the relationship” between the U.S. and Ukraine. 839 

During this mee ting, Ambassador Volker mentioned that he was talking to an advis or to 

President Zelensky about making a statement “that would somehow disavow any interference in 

U.S. elections and would commit to the prosecution of any individuals involved in election 

in terference.” 840 Ambassador Volker indicated that if his efforts to get a statement were 

successful, the hold on security assistance might be lifted .841 

Although he did not mention that conversation during his deposition, Ambassador Volker 

had a similar rec ollection , during his public testimony , of the meeting with Ms. Cooper. 

Ambassador Volker recalled discussing with Ms. Cooper the draft statement that had been 

coordinated with Ukrainian presidential aide Andriy Yermak —which included reference to the 

two investigations that President Trump demanded in the July 25 call —and that such a statement 

“could be helpful in getting a reset of the thinking of the President, the negative view of Ukraine 

that he had” which might, in turn, “unblock[] whatever hold there was on security assistance.” 842 

Around this time, Ambassador Sondland sought to “break the logjam” on the security 

assistance and the White House meeting by coordinating a meeting between the two Presidents 

through Secretary of State Mike Pompeo. On August 22, Ambassador Sondland emailed 

Secretary Pompeo, copying the State Department’ s Executive Secretary, Lisa Kenna: 

Should we block time in Warsaw for a short pull -aside for POTUS to meet Zelensky? I 

would ask Zelensky to look him in the eye and tell him that once Ukraine’s new justice 

folks are in place (mid -Sept) Ze should be able to move forward publicly and with 

confidence on those issues of importance to Potus and to the US. Hopefully, that will 

break the logjam. 843 

Secretary Pompeo replied, “Yes.” 844 

Ambassador Sondland testified that when he referenced “issues of importance to Potus ,” 

he meant the investigation into the false allegations about Ukrainian interference in the 2016 

election and the investigation into the Bidens. 845 He told the Committee that his goal was to “do 

what was necessary to get the aid released, to break th e logjam.” 846 Ambassador Sondland 128 

believed that President Trump would not release the aid until Ukraine announced the two 

investigations the President wanted. 847 

Ambassador Sondland testified: “Secretary Pompeo essentially gave me the green light 

to brief President Zelensky about making those announcements.” 848 He explained: 

This was a proposed briefing that I was going to give President Zelensky, and I was 

going to call President Zelensky and ask him to say what is in this email. And I was 

asking essenti ally … [Secretary] Pompeo’s permission to do that, which he said yes. 849 

He then forwarded the email to Ms. Kenna , seeking confirmation of “10 -15 min on the 

Warsaw sched[ule]” for the pull -aside meeting. The Ambassador stated that he was seeking 

confirmati on in order to brief President Zelensky. Ms. Kenna replied, “I will try for sure.” 850 

On August 24, Ukraine celebrated its Independence Day. According to Mr. Holmes ,

Ukrainian Independence Day presented “another good opportunity to show support for 

Ukra ine.” 851 However, n obody senior to Ambassador Volker attended the festivities, even 

though Secretary of Defense James Mattis attended in 2017 and Ambassador Bolton attended in 

2018. 852 

Two days later, on August 26, Ambassador Bolton’s office requested Mr. Giuliani’s 

contact information from Ambassador Sondland. Ambassador Sondland sent Ambassador 

Bolton the information directly. 853 Ambassador Sondland testified that he had “no idea” why 

Ambassador Bolton requested the contact information .854 

Ambassador Bol ton Visited Kyiv 

On August 27, Ambassador Bolton arrived in Kyiv for an official visit. Ambassador 

Bolton emphasized to Andriy Bohdan, President Zelensky’s chief of staff, that an upcoming 

meeting between Presidents Trump and Zelensky, scheduled for September 1 in Warsaw, 

Poland, would be “crucial to cementing their relationship.” 855 Mr. Holmes, who accompanied 

Ambassador Bolton in Kyiv, testified that he also heard “Ambassador Bolton express to 

Ambassador Taylor and Mr. Morrison his frustration about Mr. Giuliani’s influence with the 

President, making clear there was nothing he could do about it.” 856 

Prior to Ambassador Bolton’s departure from Kyiv, Ambassado r Taylor asked to meet 

with him privately. Ambassador Taylor expressed his “serious concern about the withholding 

of military assistance to Ukraine while the Ukrainians were defending their country from 

Russian aggression.” 857 During the conversation, Amba ssador Bolton “indicated that he was 

very sympathetic” to Ambassador’s Taylor’s concerns. 858 He advised that Ambassador Taylor 

“send a first -person cable to Secretary Pompeo directly relaying my concerns” about the 

withholding of military assistance. 859 

Mr. Holmes testified that Ambassador Bolton advised during his trip that “the hold on 

security assistance would not be lifted prior to the upcoming meeting between President Trump 

and President Zelensky in Warsaw, where it would hang on whether Zelensky was ab le to 

favorably impress President Trump.” 860 129 

Ukrainian Concern Over Military Aid Intensified After First Public Report of Hold 

On August 28, 2019, Politico first reported that President Trump had implemented a hold 

on nearly $400 million of U.S. military assistance to Ukraine that had been appropriated by 

Congress. 

Almost immediately after the news became public, Ukrainian officials expressed alarm to 

their American counterparts. Mr. Yermak sent Ambassador Volker a link to the Politico story 

and then t exted: “Need to talk with you.” 861 Other Ukrainian officials also expressed concerns 

to Ambassador Volker that the Ukrainian government was being “singled out and penalized for 

some reason.” 862 

On August 29, Mr. Yermak also contacted Ambassador Taylor to ex press that he was 

“very concerned” about the hold on military assistance. 863 Mr. Yermak and other Ukrainian 

officials told Ambassador Taylor that they were “just desperate” and would be willing to travel 

to Washington to raise with U.S. officials the import ance of the assistance. Ambassador Taylor 

described confusion among Ukrainian officials over the hold on military aid: 

I mean, the obvious question was, “Why?” So Mr. Yermak and others were trying to 

figure out why this was … They thought that there mu st be some rational reason for this 

being held up, and they just didn’t —and maybe in Washington they didn’t understand 

how important this assistance was to their fight and to their armed forces. And so maybe 

they could figure —so they were just desperate. 864 

Without any official explanation for the hold, American officials could provide little 

reassurance to their Ukrainian counterparts. Ambassador Taylor continued , “ And I couldn’t tell 

them. I didn’t know and I didn’t tell them, because we hadn’t —we hadn’t —there’d been no 

guidance that I could give them. ”865 

Ambassador Taylor’s First -Person Cable Described the “Folly” in Withholding Military Aid 

The same day that Ambassador Taylor heard from Mr. Yermak about his concerns about 

the hold on military aid, Ambassador Taylor transmitted his classified, first -person cable to 

Washington. It was the first and only time in Ambassador Taylor’s career that he sent such a 

cable to the Secretary of State. 866 The cable described “the folly I saw in withholding military 

aid to Ukraine at a time when hostilities were still active in the east and when Russia was 

watching closely to gauge the level of American suppo rt for the Ukrainian Government.” 867 

Ambassador Taylor worried about the public message that such a hold on vital military 

assistance would send in the midst of Ukraine’s hot war with Russia: “The Russians, as I said at 

my deposition, would love to see t he humiliation of President Zelensky at the hands of the 

Americans. I told the Secretary that I could not and would not defend such a policy.” 868 

The cable also sought to explain clearly “the importance of Ukraine and the security 

assistance to U.S. nation al security,” according to Mr. Holmes. 869 However, Mr. Holmes 

worried that the national security argument might not achieve its purpose given the reasons he 130 

suspected for the hold on military aid. His “clear impression” at the time was that “the security 

assistance hold was likely intended by the President either as an expression of dissatisfaction 

with the Ukrainians, who had not yet agreed to the Burisma/Biden investigation, or as an effort 

to increase the pressure on them to do so.” 870 Mr. Holmes viewed t his as “the only logical 

conclusion.” 871 He had “no other explanation for why there was disinterest in this [White House] 

meeting that the President had already offered” and there was a “hold of the security assistance 

with no explanation whatsoever.” 872 

Ambassador Taylor never received a response to his cable , but was told that Secretary 

Pompeo carried it with him to a White House meeting about security assistance to Ukraine. 873 

Ambassador Sondland Told Senator Johnson 

That Ukraine Aid Was Conditioned on I nvestigations 

The next day, on August 30, Republican Senator Ron Johnson spoke with Ambassador 

Sondland to express his concern about President Trump ’s decision to withhold military 

assistance to Ukraine. According to Senator Johnson, Ambassador Sondland told him that if 

Ukraine would commit to “get to the bottom of what happened in 2016 —if President Trump has 

that confidence, then he’ll release the military spending.” 874 

On August 31, Senator Johnson spoke by phone with President Trump regarding the 

decisi on to withhold aid to Ukraine. 875 President Trump denied the quid pro quo that Senator 

Johnson had learned of from Ambassador Sondland. 876 At the same time, however, President 

Trump refused to authorize Senator Johnson to tell Ukrainian officials that the ai d would be 

forthcoming. 877 

The message that Ambassador Sondland communicated to Senator Johnson mirrored that 

used by President Trump during his July 25 call with President Zelensky, in which President 

Trump twice asked that the Ukrainian leader “get to the bottom of it,” including in connection to 

an investigation into the debunked conspiracy theory that Ukraine interfered in the 2016 election 

to help Hillary Clinton. 878 To the contrary, the U.S. Intelligence Community unanimously 

assessed that Russia interf ered in the 2016 election to help Donald Trump, as did Special 

Counsel Robert Mueller. 879 

In a November 18 letter to House Republicans, Senator Johnson confirmed the accuracy 

of the Wall Street Journal’s account of his August 30 call with Ambassador Sondla nd. 880 

Ambassador Sondland testified that he had “no reason to dispute” Senator Johnson’s 

recollection of the August 30 call and testified that by late August 2019, he had concluded that 

“if Ukraine did something to demonstrate a serious intention to figh t corruption, and specifically 

addressing Burisma and the 2016, then the hold on military aid would be lifted.” 881 131 

Ambassador Sondland Raised the Link Between Investigations and Security Assistance to 

Vice President Pence Before Meeting with President Zelensky 

On September 1, President Trump was scheduled to meet President Zelensky in Warsaw, 

Poland during an event commemorating World War II. Citing the approach of Hurricane Dorian 

towards American soil, the President canceled his trip just days before hand . Vice President 

Mike Pence traveled to Warsaw instead. 882 

Jennifer Williams, Special Advisor to the Vice President for Europe and Russia , learned 

of the change in the President’s travel plans on August 29 and “relied heavily on the NSC 

briefing papers” originally prepared for President Trump. Ms. Williams recalled that “prior to 

leaving, [National Secu rity Advisor to the Vice President] General Kellogg had asked, at the 

request of the Vice President, for an update on the status of the security assistance that was at 

that time still on hold.” Given the public reporting about the hold on August 29, White House 

officials expected that President Zelensky would seek further information on the status of the 

funds. 883 

The delegation arrived in Warsaw and gathered in a hotel room to brief the Vice 

President shortly before his engagement with President Zelensky. Ambassador Bolton, who had 

just arrived from Kyiv, led the Ukraine briefing. He updated Vice President Pence on President 

Zelensky’s efforts to combat corruption and explained “what the security assistance was for.” 

Advisors in the room “agreed on the need to get a final decision on that security assistance as 

soon as possible so that it could be implemented before the end of the fiscal year.” 884 

Before the bilateral meeting between Vice President Pence and President Zelensky, 

Ambassador Sondland attende d a “general briefing” for the Vice President. 885 Ambassador 

Sondland testified that he raised concerns that the delay in security assistance had “become tied 

to the issue of investigations.” 886 The Vice President “nodded like, you know, he heard what I 

said .” 887 

During Ambassador Sondland’s public testimony, Vice President Pence’s office issued a 

carefully worded statement claiming that the Vice President “never had a conversation with 

Gordon Sondland about investigating the Bidens, Burisma, or the condition al release of financial 

aid to Ukraine based upon potential investigations,” and that “Ambassador Gordon Sondland 

was never alone with the Vice President on the September 1 trip to Poland.” 888 Ambassador 

Sondland did not testify that he specifically mention ed the Bidens, Burisma, or the conditional 

release of financial aid to Ukraine during his discussion with Vice President Pence, nor did he 

testify that he was alone with the Vice President. 

Before Vice President Pence’s meeting with President Zelensky, Uk rainian National 

Security Advisor Oleksandr “Sasha” Danyliuk wrote Ambassador Taylor , incorrectly describing 

the failure to provide security assistance as a “gradually increasing problem.” 889 In the hours 

before Vice President Pence’s meeting with President Zelensky, Ambassador Taylor replied, 

clarifying that “the delay of U.S. security assistance was an all -or -nothing proposition, in the 

sense that if the White House did not lift the hold prior to the end of the fiscal year, September 

30 th , the funds would expire and Ukraine would receive nothing.” 890 Ambassador Taylor 132 

wanted to make sure Mr. Danyliuk understood that if the assistance was not provided “by the end 

of the fiscal year, then it goes away.” 891 

President Zelensky Immediately Asked Vice President Pe nce About Security Assistance 

As expected, at the outset of the bilateral meeting, President Zelensky immediately asked 

Vice President Pence about the status of U.S. security assistance. It was “the very first question” 

that he raised. 892 President Zelens ky emphasized the multifold importance of American 

assistance, stating that “the symbolic value of U.S. support in terms of security assistance … was 

just as valuable to the Ukrainians as the actual dollars.” 893 President Zelensky also expressed 

concern tha t “any hold or appearance of reconsideration of such assistance might embolden 

Russia to think that the United States was no longer committed to Ukraine.” 894 

According to Ms. Williams, t he Vice President “assured President Zelensky that there 

was no change in U.S. policy in terms of our … full -throated support for Ukraine and its 

sovereignty and territorial integrity.” 895 Vice President Pence also assured the Ukrainian 

delegation that he would convey to President Trump the details of President Zelensky’s “goo d

progress on reforms, so that hopefully we could get a decision on the security assistance as soon 

as possible.” 896 

The reassurance proved to be ineffective. The Washington Post later reported that one of 

President Zelensky’s aides told Vice President P ence: “You’re the only country providing us 

military assistance. You’re punishing us.” 897 

Mr. Holmes testified that President Trump’s decision to cancel his Warsaw trip 

effectively meant that “the hold [on security assistance] remained in place, with no c lear means 

to get it lifted.” 898 

Ambassador Sondland Informed President Zelensky’s Advisor that Military Aid 

Was Contingent on Ukraine Public ly Announc ing the Investigations 

After the bilateral meeting between Vice President Pence and President Zelensky, 

Ambassador Sondland briefly spoke to President Zelensky’s aide, Mr. Yermak. Ambassador 

Sondland conveyed his belief that “the resumption of U.S. aid would likely not occur un til 

Ukraine took some kind of action on the public statement that we had been discussing for many 

weeks” regarding the investigations that President Trump discussed during the July 25 call. 899 

Immediately following the conversation, Ambassador Sondland told Mr. Morrison what 

had transpired during his aside with Mr. Yermak. Mr. Morrison recounted to the Committees 

that Ambassador Sondland told Mr. Yermak “what could help them move the aid was if the 

prosecutor general would go to the mike [sic] and announce that he was opening the Burisma 

investigation.” 900 133 

Mr. Morrison Reported Ambassador Sondland’s Proposal to Get Ukrainians 

“Pulled Into Our Politics” to White House Officials and Ambassador Ta ylor 

Mr. Morrison felt uncomfortable with “any idea that President Zelensky should allow 

himself to be involved in our politics.” 901 He promptly reported the conversation between 

Ambassador Sondland and Mr. Yermak to Ambassador Bolton. Mr. Morrison had co ncerns with 

“what Gordon was proposing about getting the Ukrainians pulled into our politics.” 902 

Ambassador Bolton told Mr. Morrison —consistent with his own “instinct” —to “make sure the 

lawyers are tracking.” 903 Upon his return to Washington, Mr. Morrison r eported his concerns to 

NSC lawyers John Eisenberg and Michael Ellis. 904 

Mr. Morrison testified that, in speaking to the NSC legal advisors, he wanted to ensure 

“that there was a record of what Ambassador Sondland was doing, to protect the President.” 905 

At this point, Mr. Morrison was not certain that the President had authorized Ambassador 

Sondland’s activities, but Mr. Morrison agreed that if the President had been aware of 

Ambassador Sondland’s activities, the effect could be to create a paper trail tha t incriminated 

President Trump. 906 

Mr. Morrison also reported the conversation to Ambassador Taylor “because I wanted 

him to be in a position to advise the Ukrainians not to do it.” 907 Ambassador Taylor said that he 

was “alarmed” to hear about the remarks to Mr. Yermak. 908 He explained that “this was the first 

time that I had heard that the security assistance, not just the White House meeting, was 

conditioned on the investigations.” 909 To Ambassador Taylor, “It’s one thing to try to leverage a 

meeting in the White House. It’s another thing, I thought, to leverage security assistance … to a 

country at war, dependent on both the security assistance and the demonstration of support.” 910 

President Trump Wanted President Zelensky in a “Public Box,” and Said 

“Every thing” Depended on Announc ing the Investigations 

Upon hearing from Mr. Morrison about the conditionality of the military aid on Ukraine 

public ly announc ing the two investigations, Ambassador Taylor sent a text message to 

Ambassador Sondland: “Are we now saying that security assistance and WH meeting are 

conditioned on investigations?” Ambassador Sondland responded, “Call me.” 911 

Ambassador Sondland confirmed over the phone to Ambassador Taylor that 

“everything” —the Oval Office meeting and the security a ssistance —was dependent on the 

Ukrainian government publicly announcing the political investigations President Trump 

requested on July 25. Informed by a review of contemporaneous notes that he took during his 

phone call, Ambassador Taylor testified: 

Duri ng that phone call, Ambassador Sondland told me that President Trump had told him 

that he wants President Zelensky to state publicly that Ukraine will investigate Burisma 

and alleged Ukrainian interference in the 2016 election. Ambassador Sondland also to ld 

me that he now recognized that he had made a mistake by earlier telling Ukrainian 

officials that only a White House meeting with President Zelensky was dependent on a 

public announcement of the investigations. In fact, Ambassador Sondland said, 134 

everyth ing was dependent on such an announcement, including security assistance. He 

said that President Trump wanted President Zelensky in a public box, by making a public 

statement about ordering such investigations. 912 

By this point, Ambassador Taylor’s “clear understanding” was that President Trump 

would withhold security assistance until President Zelensky “committed to pursue the 

investigation.” 913 He agreed that the U.S. position was “if they don’t do this ,” referring to the 

investigations , “they are not going to get that ,” referring to the security assistance. 914 

Ambassador Taylor also concurred with the statement that “if they don’t do this, they are not 

going to get that” was the literal definition of a quid pro quo .915 

Ambassador Taylor testified that his contemporaneous notes of the phone call with 

Ambassador Sondland reflect that Ambassador Sondland used the phrase “public box” to 

describe President Trump’s desire to ensure that the initiation of his desired investigations was 

announced publicly. 916 Ambassador Sondland, who did not take contemporaneous notes of any 

of his conversations, did not dispute that he used those words. 917 He also testified that, when he 

spoke to Mr. Yermak, he believed that it would be sufficient to satisfy the re quirements of 

President Trump and Mr. Giuliani if the new Ukrainian prosecutor general issued a statement 

about investigations, but his understanding soon changed. 918 

President Trump Informed Ambassador Sondland that President Zelensky 

Personally “Must Announce the Opening of the Investigations” 

On September 7, Ambassador Sondland called Mr. Morrison to report that he had just 

concluded a call with President Trump. Mr. Morrison testified that Ambassador Sondland told 

him “that there w as no quid pro quo, but President Zelensky must announce the opening of the 

investigations and he should want to do it.” 919 This led Mr. Morrison to believe that a public 

announcement of investigations by the Ukrainian president —and not the prosecutor gener al —

was a prerequisite for the release of the security assistance. 920 He reported the conversation to 

Ambassador Bolton, who once again instructed him to “tell the lawyers,” which Mr. Morrison 

did. 921 

Later on September 7, Mr. Morrison relayed the substance of Ambassador Sondland’s 

conversation with President Trump to Ambassador Taylor. Ambassador Taylor explained :

I had a conversation with Mr. Morrison in which he described a phone conversation 

earlier that day between Ambassador Sondland and President T rump. Mr. Morrison said 

that he had a sinking feeling after learning about this conversation from Ambassador 

Sondland. According to Mr. Morrison, President Trump told Ambassador Sondland he 

was not asking for a quid pro quo, but President Trump did insis t that President Zelensky 

go to a microphone and say he is opening investigations of Biden and 2016 election 

interference and that President Zelensky should want to do this himself. Mr. Morrison 

said that he told Ambassador Bolton and the NSC lawyers of t his phone call between 

President Trump and Ambassador Sondland. 922 135 

The following day, on September 8, Ambassador Sondland texted Ambassadors Volker 

and Taylor: “Guys multiple convos with Ze, Potus. Lets talk.” Ambassador Taylor responded 

one minute later , “Now is fine with me.” 923 On the phone, Ambassador Sondland “confirmed 

that he had talked to President Trump” and that “President Trump was adamant that President 

Zelensky himself had to clear things up and do it in public. President Trump said it was no t a 

quid pro quo .” 924 Ambassador Sondland also shared that he told President Zelensky and Mr. 

Yermak that, “although this was not a quid pro quo , if President Zelensky did not clear things up 

in public, we would be at a stalemate.” 925 

Ambassador Taylor te stified that he understood “stalemate” to mean that “Ukraine would 

not receive the much -needed military assistance.” 926 During his public testimony, Ambassador 

Sondland did not dispute Ambassador Taylor’s recollection of events and agreed that the term 

“sta lemate” referred to the hold on U.S. security assistance to Ukraine. 927 

Although Ambassador Sondland otherwise could not independently recall any details 

about his September 7 conversation with President Trump, he testified that he had no reason to 

disput e the testimony from Ambassador Taylor or Mr. Morrison —which was based on their 

contemporaneous notes —regarding this conversation. 928 Ambassador Sondland, however, did 

recall that President Zelensky agreed to make a public announcement about the investigati ons 

into Burisma and the Bidens and the 2016 election in an interview on CNN.” 929 

According to Ambassador Taylor, Ambassador Sondland explained that President Trump 

was a “businessman,” and that when “a businessman is about to sign a check to someone who 

ow es him something, the businessman asks that person to pay up before signing the check.” 930 

Ambassador Taylor was concerned that President Trump believed Ukraine “owed him 

something” in exchange for the hundreds of millions of dollars in taxpayer -funded U.S. security 

assistance. 931 He argued to Ambassador Sondland that “the explanation made no sense. The 

Ukrainians did not owe President Trump anything. And holding up security assistance for 

domestic political gain was crazy.” 932 Ambassador Sondland did not re call this exchange 

specifically , but did not dispute Ambassador Taylor’s testimony. 933 

Ambassador Taylor Texted Ambassador Sondland that 

“It’s Crazy to Withhold Security Assistance for Help with a Political Campaign” 

Ambassador Taylor remained concerned by the President’s directive that “everything” 

was conditioned on President Zelensky public ly announc ing the investigations. He also worried 

that, even if the Ukrainian leader did as President Trump required, the President might continue 

to withhold the vital U.S. security assistance in any event. Ambassador Taylor texted his 

concerns to Ambassadors Volker and Sondland stating: “The nightmare is they give the 

interview and don’t get the security assistance. The Russians love it. (And I quit.)” 934 

Ambassador Taylor t estified :

“The nightmare ” is the scenario where President Zelensky goes out in public, makes an 

announcement that he’s going to investigate the Burisma and the ... interference in 2016 

election, maybe among other things. He might put that in some series of investigations. 136 

But ... the nightmare was he would mention those two, take all the heat f rom that, get 

himself in big trouble in this country and probably in his country as well, and the security 

assistance would not be released. That was the nightmare. 935 

Early in the morning in Europe on September 9, Ambassador Taylor reiterated his 

concerns about the President’s “ quid pro quo ” in another series of text messages with 

Ambassadors Volker and Sondland: 

Taylor: The message to the Ukrainians (and Russians) we send with the decision 

on security assistance is key. With the hold, we have already shaken their 

faith in us. Thus my nightmare scenario. 

Taylor: Counting on you to be right about this interview, Gordon. 

Sondland: Bill, I never said I was “right”. I said we are where we are and believe we 

have identified the best pathway for ward. Lets hope it works. 

Taylor: As I said on the phone, I think it’s crazy to withhold security assistance for 

help with a political campaign. 936 

By “help with a political campaign,” Ambassador Taylor was referring to President 

Trump’s 2020 reelection effort .937 Ambassador Taylor testified: “The investigation of Burisma 

and the Bidens was clearly identified by Mr. Giuliani in public for months as a way to get 

information on the two Bidens.” 938 

Ambassador Taylor framed the broader national security impl ications of President 

Trump’s decision to withhold vital security assistance from Ukraine. He said :

[T]he United States was trying to support Ukraine as a frontline state against Russian 

attack. And, again, the whole notion of a rules -based order was be ing threatened by the 

Russians in Ukraine. So our security assistance was designed to support Ukraine. And it 

was not just the United States; it was all of our allies. 939 

Ambassador Taylor explained: 

[S]ecurity assistance was so important for Ukraine as well as our own national interests, 

to withhold that assistance for no good reason other than help with a political campaign 

made no sense. It was counterproductive to all of what we had been trying to do. It was 

illogical. It could not be explained. It was crazy. 940 

Ambassador Sondland Repeated the President’s Denial of a “Quid Pro Quo” to Ambassador 

Taylor, While He and President Tru mp Continued to Demand Public Investigations 

In response to Ambassador Taylor’s text message that it was “crazy to withhold security 

assistance for help with a political campaign,” Ambassador Sondland denied that the President 

had demanded a “quid pro quo.” 137 

At approximately 5:17 a.m. Eastern Time, Ambassador Sondland responded to 

Ambassador Taylor: 

Bill, I believe you are incorrect about President Trump’s intentions. The President has 

been crystal clear: no quid pro quo’s of any kind. The President is trying to evaluate 

whether Ukraine is truly going to adopt the transparency and reforms that President 

Ze lensky promised during his campaign. I suggest we stop the back and forth by text. If 

you still have concerns, I recommend you give Lisa Kenna or S [Secretary Pompeo] a 

call to discuss them directly. Thanks. 941 

Notably, Ambassador Sondland recalled that President Trump raised the possible 

existence of a quid pro quo entirely on his own, without any prompting. Ambassador Sondland 

asked President Trump what he affirmatively wanted from Ukraine, yet President Trump 

reportedly responded by asserting what was not the case: 

Q: Okay. During that telephone conversation with President Trump, you didn’t ask 

the President directly if there was a quid pro quo, correct? 

A: No. As I testified, I asked the question open ended, what do you want from 

Ukraine? 

Q: Pre sident Trump was the first person to use the word “quid pro quo,” correct? 

A: That is correct. 942 

In contrast, Ambassador Sondland testified unequivocally there was a quid pro quo in 

connection to a telephone call between President Trump and President Zelensky, as well as a 

White House meeting for President Zelensky. 943 He acknowledged that the reference to 

“transparency and reforms” in his text message to Ambassador Taylor “was my clumsy way of 

saying he wanted these announcement to be made.” 944 

Ambassador Sondland also testified that President Trump immediately followed his 

stated denial of a quid pro quo by demanding that President Zelensky still make a public 

announcement, while the military assistance remained on an unexplained hold. Amba ssador 

Sondland agreed that President Trump said that he wanted President Zelensky to “clear things up 

and do it in public,” as Ambassador Taylor had testified. 945 Ambassador Sondland testified that 

nothing on his call with President Trump changed his under standing of a quid pro quo and, at 

least as of September 8, he was “absolutely convinced” the White House meeting and President 

Trump’s release of the military assistance w ere conditioned on the public announcement of the 

investigations President Trump sou ght. 946 

After hearing from President Trump, Ambassador Sondland promptly told the Ukrainian 

leader and Mr. Yermak that “if President Zelensky did not clear things up in public, we would be 

at a stalemate.” 947 President Zelensky responded to the demand relaye d by Ambassador 

Sondland, by agreeing to make an announcement of investigations on CNN. 948 

Regardless of when the call between President Trump and Ambassador Sondland 

occurred, both that phone call and Ambassador’s Sondland text message denying any quid p ro 

quo occurred after the White House had been informed of the whistleblower complaint 138 

discussing the hold on security assistance . The White House first received notice of the 

whistleblower complaint alleging wrongdoing concerning the President’s July 25 call with 

President Zelensky on August 26 —over a week before the “no quid pro quo” denial. 949 In 

addition, Ambassador Sondland wrote his text message on September 9, the same day that the 

IC IG informed the Committee of the existence of a “credible” and “urg ent” whistleblower 

complaint that was later revealed to be related to Ukraine. 950 The Administration received prior 

notice of the ICIG’s intent to inform the Committee. 951 

Ambassador Sondland’s Testimony is the Only Evidence the Committees Received Indicat ing 

That President Trump Denied Any “Quid Pro Quo” on the Phone on September 9 

Ambassador Sondland testified in his deposition that he sent a text message to 

Ambassador Taylor after speaking directly with President Trump on September 9. However, 

testimo ny from other witnesses and documents available to the Committees do not confirm that 

Ambassador Sondland and President Trump spoke on that day. 

Ambassador Sondland’s own testimony indicated some ambiguity in his recollection of 

the timing of the call. At a public hearing on November 20, Ambassador Sondland testified that 

he “still cannot find a record of that call [on September 9] because the Sta te Department and the 

White House cannot locate it.” 952 While Ambassador Sondland testified that “I’m pretty sure I 

had the call on that day,” 953 he acknowledged that he might have misremembered the date of the 

September 9 call —“I may have even spoken to him on September 6 th ”—and that without his 

call records, he could not be certain about when he spoke to President Trump. 954 

After the deposition transcripts of Ambassador Taylor and Mr. Morrison were made 

public, including their detailed accounts of the September 7 conversation that Ambassador 

Sondland had with President Trump, Ambassador Sondland submitted a written addendum to his 

deposition based on his “r efreshed” recollection. 955 In that addendum, Ambassador Sondland 

amended his testimony and stated, “I cannot specifically recall if I had one or two phone calls 

with President Trump in the September 6 -9 time frame.” 956 

Furthermore, t he conversation recalle d by Ambassador Sondland as having taken place 

on September 9 is consistent with a conversation that Ambassador Sondland relayed to Mr. 

Morrison and Ambassador Taylor during the previous two days. Both Mr. Morrison and 

Ambassador Taylor, after reviewing their contemporaneous written notes, provided detailed 

testimony about Ambassador Sondland’s description of his call with President Trump. For 

example, Ambassador Sondland shared with Ambassador Taylor that even though President 

Trump asserted that “there is no quid pro quo,” President Trump “did insist that President 

Zelensky go to a microphone and say he is opening investigations of Biden and 2016 election 

interference .”957 Mr. Morrison and Ambassador Taylor both testified that this conversation 

occurred o n September 7. 958 Ambassador Sondland acknowledged that he had no basis to 

dispute the recollections of Mr. Morrison and Ambassador Taylor. 959 Ambassador Sondland, 139 

who testified that he does not take notes, stated: “If they have notes and they recall that, I don’t 

have any reason to dispute it.” 960 

Text messages produced to the Committees also indicate that Ambassador Sondland 

spoke to President Trump prior to September 8. On September 4, Ambassador Volker texted Mr. 

Yermak that Ambassador Sondland planned t o speak to President Trump on September 6 or 7. 

Ambassador Volker wrote: “Hi Andrey. Reports are that pence liked meeting and will press 

trump on scheduling Ze visit. Gordon will follow up with pence and, if nothing moving, will 

have a chance to talk w ith President on Saturday [September 7].” 961 Ambassador Volker then 

corrected himself: “Sorry —on Friday [September 6].” 962 

On Sunday , September 8, at 11:20 a.m. Eastern Time, Ambassador Sondland texted 

Ambassadors Taylor and Volker: “Guys multiple convos with Ze, Potus. Lets talk.” 963 Shortly 

after this text, Ambassador Taylor testified that he spoke to Ambassador Sondland, who 

recounted his conversation with President Trump on September 7, as well as a separate 

conversation that Ambassador Sondland had w ith President Zelensky .

The timing of the text messages also raises questions about Ambassador Sondland’s 

recollection. If Ambassador Sondland spoke to President Trump after receiving Ambassador 

Taylor’s text message on September 9, and before he responded, then the timing of th e text 

messages would mean that President Trump took Ambassador Sondland ’s call in the middle of 

the night in Washington, D.C. Ambassador Taylor sent his message on September 9 at 12:47 

a.m. Eastern Time, and Ambassador Sondland responded less than five h ours later at 5:19 a.m. 

Eastern Time. 964 

In any event, President Trump’s purported denial of the “quid pro quo” was also 

contradicted when Acting Chief of Staff Mick Mulvaney publicly admitted that security 

assistance was withheld in order to pressure Ukr aine to conduct an investigation into the 2016 

election. 

On October 17, at a press briefing in the White House, Mr. Mulvaney confirmed that 

President Trump withheld the essential military aid for Ukraine as leverage to pressure Ukraine 

to investigate th e conspiracy theory that Ukraine had interfered in the 2016 U.S. election, which 

was also promoted by Vladimir Putin. 965 Mr. Mulvaney confirmed that President Trump 

“absolutely” mentioned “corruption related to the DNC server. ... No question about that.” 966 

When the White House press corps attempted to clarify this acknowledgement of a quid pro quo 

related to security assistance, Mr. Mulvaney replied: “We do that all the time with foreign 

policy .” He continued. “I have news for everybody: get over it.” 967 140 

8. The President’s Scheme Was Exposed 

President Trump lifted the hold on U.S. military assistance to Ukraine on September 11 after it 

became clear to the White House and President Trump that his scheme was exposed. 

Overview 

As news of the President’s hold on military assistance to Ukraine became public on 

August 28, Congress, the press, and the public increased their scrutiny of President Trump’s 

actions regarding Ukraine, which risked exposing President Trump’s scheme. By t his date, the 

White House had learned that the Inspector General of the Intelligence Community (ICIG) ,

Michael Atkinson, had determined that a whistleblower complaint related to the same Ukraine 

matters was “credible” and an “urgent concern,” and, pursuant to the applicable statute, 

recommended to the Acting Director of National Intelligence (DNI), Joseph Maguire, that the 

complaint should be transmitted to Congress. 

In early September, bipartisan Members of both houses of Congress —publicly, and 

privately —expressed concerns to the White House about the hold on military assistance. On 

September 9, after months of internal discussion due to growing concern about the activity of 

President Trump’s personal attorney, Rudy Giuliani, regarding Ukraine, the Chair s of the 

Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, the Committee on Foreign Affairs, and the 

Committee on Oversight and Reform announced a joint investigation into efforts by President 

Trump and Mr. Giuliani, “to improperly pressure the Ukrainian governm ent to assist the 

President’s bid for reelection,” including by withholding Congressionally -appropriated military 

assistance. 

Later that same day, the ICIG notified Chairman Schiff and Ranking Member Nunes that, 

despite uniform past practice and a statu tory requirement that credible, “urgent concern” 

complaints be provided to the intelligence committees, the Acting DNI was nevertheless 

withholding the whistleblower complaint from Congress . The Acting DNI later testified that his 

office initially withhel d the complaint on the advice of the White House , with guidance from the 

Department of Justice. 

Two days later, on September 11, the President lifted the hold on the military assistance 

to Ukraine. Numerous witnesses testified that they were never awa re of any official reason for 

why the hold was either implemented or lifted. 

Notwithstanding this ongoing inquiry, President Trump has continued to urge Ukraine to 

investigate his political rival, former Vice President Biden. For example, when asked by a 

journalist on October 3 what he hoped Ukraine’s President would do about the Bidens in 

response to the July 25 call, President Trump responded: “Well, I would think that, if they were 

honest about it, they’d start a major investigation into the Bidens. It’s a very simple answer.” 

President Trump reiterated his affinity for the fo rmer Prosecutor General of Ukraine, Yuriy 

Lutsenko, whom numerous witnesses described as inept and corrupt: “And they got rid of a 141 

prosecutor who was a very tough prosecutor. They got rid of him. Now they’re trying to make it 

the opposite way.” 

Public S crutiny of President Trump’s Hold on Military Assistance for Ukraine 

After news of the President’s freeze on U.S. military assistance to Ukraine became public 

on August 28, both houses of Congress increased their ongoing scrutiny of President Trump’s 

deci sion. 968 On September 3, a bipartisan group of Senators, including Senator Rob Portman and 

Senator Ron Johnson, sent a letter to Acting White House Chief of Staff Mick Mulvaney 

expressing “deep concerns” that the “Administration is considering not obligatin g the Ukraine 

Security Initiative funds for 2019.” 969 The Senators’ letter urged that the “vital” funds be 

obligated “immediately.” 970 On September 5, the Chairman and Ranking Member of the House 

Foreign Affairs Committee sent a letter to Mr. Mulvaney and Ac ting Director of the O MB 

Russell Vought expressing “deep concern” about the continuing hold on security assistance 

funding for Ukraine. 971 

On September 5, the Washington Post editorial board reported concerns that President 

Trump was withholding military as sistance for Ukraine and a White House meeting in order to 

force President Zelensky to announce investigations of Mr. Biden and purported Ukrainian 

interference in the 2016 U.S. election. The Post editorial board wrote: 

[W]e’re reliably told that the pre sident has a second and more venal agenda: He is 

attempting to force Mr. Zelensky to intervene in the 2020 U.S. presidential election by 

launching an investigation of the leading Democratic candidate, Joe Biden. Mr. Trump is 

not just soliciting Ukraine’s help with his presidential campaign; he is using U.S. military 

aid the country desperately needs in an attempt to extort it. 

It added: 

The White House claims Mr. Trump suspended Ukraine’s military aid in order for it [sic] 

be reviewed. But, as CNN reported, the Pentagon has already completed the study and 

recommended that the hold be lifted. Yet Mr. Trump has not yet acted. If his 

recalcitrance has a rationale, other than seeking to compel a foreign government to aid his 

reelection, the president has yet to reveal it. 972 

On the same day that the Washington Post published its editorial, Senators Christopher 

Murphy and Ron Johnson visited Kyiv, and met with President Zelensky . They were 

accompanied by Ambassador Bill Taylor and Counselor for Politica l Affairs David Holmes of 

U.S. Embassy Kyiv. President Zelensky’s “first question to the Senators was about the withheld 

security assistance.” 973 Ambassador Taylor testified that both Senators “stressed that bipartisan 

support for Ukraine in Washington was Ukraine’s most important strategic asset and that 

President Zelensky should not jeopardize that bipartisan support by getting drawn into U.S. 

domestic politics.” 974 

As Senator Johnson and Senator Murphy later recounted, the Senators sought to reassure 

President Zelensky that there was bipartisan support in Congress for providing Ukraine with 142 

military assistance for Ukraine and that they would continue to urge President Trump to lift the 

hold —as Senator Johnson had already tried, unsuccessfully, before tr aveling to Ukraine. 975 

Three Committees Announced Joint Investigation of President’s Scheme 

On September 9, the Chairs of the House Intelligence Committee, the Committee on 

Foreign Affairs, and the Committee on Oversight and Reform publicly announced a joi nt 

investigation of the scheme by President Trump and Mr. Giuliani “to improperly pressure the 

Ukrainian government to assist the President’s bid for reelection.” 976 The Committees had been 

planning and coordinating this investigation since early summer , af ter growing public scrutiny of 

Mr. Giuliani’s activities in Ukraine and questions about Ambassador Yovanovitch’s abrupt 

removal following a public smear campaign targeting her. 

In a letter sent to White House Counsel Pat Cipollone the same day, the thre e Chairs 

stated that President Trump and Mr. Giuliani “appear to have acted outside legitimate law 

enforcement and diplomatic channels to coerce the Ukrainian government into pursuing two 

politically -motivated investigations under the guise of anti -corrupt ion activity” —investigations 

into purported Ukrainian interference in the 2016 election and Vice President Biden and his 

son. 977 

With respect to the hold on Ukraine military assistance, the Chairs observed that “[i]f the 

President is trying to pressure Uk raine into choosing between defending itself from Russian 

aggression without U.S. assistance or leveraging its judicial system to serve the ends of the 

Trump campaign, this would represent a staggering abuse of power, a boon to Moscow, and a 

betrayal of th e public trust.” 978 The Chairs requested that the White House preserve all relevant 

records and produce them by September 16, including the transcript of the July 25 call between 

President Trump and President Zelensky. 979 

On the same day, the Chairs of the three Committees sent a similar letter to Secretary of 

State Mike Pompeo seeking the preservation and production of all relevant records at the 

Department of State by September 16. 980 To date, and as explained more fully in Section II, 

Secretary Pompeo has not produced a single document sought by the Committees pursuant to a 

lawful subpoena. 

NSC Senior Director for Russia and Europe Tim othy Morrison recalled seeing a copy of 

the letter that was sent by the three Chairs to the White House. 981 He also recalled that the three 

Committees’ Ukraine investigation was discussed at meeting of senior -level NSC staff soon after 

it was publicly announced. 982 The NSC’s legislative affairs staff issued a notice of the 

investigation to NSC staff members, although it is unclear exactly when. 983 NSC Director for 

Ukraine Alexander Vindman recalled discussions among NSC staff members, including Mr. 

Morrison’s deputy, John Erath, that the investigation “might have the effect of releasing the 

hold” on Ukraine military assis tance because it would be “potentially politically challenging” for 

the Administration to “justify that hold” to the Congress. 984 143 

Inspector General Notified Intelligence Committee that the Administration 

Was Withholding Whistleblower Complaint 

Later that same day, September 9, Inspector General Atkinson sent a letter to Chairman 

Adam Schiff and Ranking Member Devin Nunes notifying them that an Intelligence Community 

whistleblower had filed a complaint with the ICIG on August 12. 985 Pursuant to a statute 

governing whistleblower disclosures, the Inspector General —after a condensed, preliminary 

review —had determined that the complaint constituted an “urgent concern” and that its 

allegations appeared to be “credible.” 986 The Inspector General’s Septemb er 9 letter did not 

disclose the substance or topic of the whistleblower complaint. 

Contrary to uniform past practice and the clear requirements of the whistleblower statute, 

Acting DNI Maguire withheld the whistleblower complaint based on advice from t he White 

House. 987 Acting DNI Maguire also relied upon an unprecedented intervention by the 

Department of Justice in to Intelligence Community whistleblower matters to overturn the ICIG’s 

determination based on a preliminary investigation. 988 

The White House had been aware of the whistleblower complaint weeks prior to the 

ICIG’s letter of September 9. 989 Acting DNI Maguire testified that, after receiving the 

whistleblower complaint from the Inspector General on August 26, his office contacted the 

White House Counsel’s Office for guidance. 990 

Consistent with Acting DNI Maguire’s testimony, the New York Times reported that in 

late August, Mr. Cipollone and National Security Council Legal Advisor John Eisenberg 

personally briefed President Trump about the compla int’s existence —and explained to the 

President that they believed the complaint could be withheld on executive privilege grounds. 991 

The report alleged that Mr. Cipollone and Mr. Eisenberg “told Mr. Trump they planned to ask 

the Justice Department’s Office of Legal Counsel to determine whether they had to disclose the 

complaint to lawmakers.” 992 

On September 10, Chairman Schiff wrote to Acting DNI Maguire to express his concern 

about the Acting DNI’s “unprecedented departure from past practice” in withhold ing the 

whistleblower complaint from the Congressional intelligence committees notwithstanding his 

“express obligations under the law” and the Inspector General’s determination. 993 Chairman 

Schiff observed that the “failure to transmit to the Committee an u rgent and credible 

whistleblower complaint, as required by law, raises the prospect that an urgent matter of a 

serious nature is being purposefully concealed from the Committee.” 994 

Also on September 10, Ambassador John Bolton resigned from his position as National 

Security Advisor. Ambassador Bolton’s deputy, Dr. Charles Kupperman, became the Acting 

National Security Advisor. The Committee was unable to determine if Ambassador Bolton’s 

departure related to the matters under investigation because neithe r he nor Dr. Kupperman 

agreed to appear for testimony as part of this inquiry. 

On September 13, the Office of the Director of National Intelligence (ODNI) General 

Counsel informed the Committee that DOJ had overruled the ICIG’s determination, and that the 144 

ODNI could not transmit the complaint to the Committee at its discretion because it involved 

“potentially privileged communications by persons outside the Intelligence Community” —

presumably presidential communications. 995 In response, Chairman Schiff issued a subpoena to 

the Acting DNI on September 13 and announced to the public that ODNI was withholding a 

“credible” whistleblower complaint of “urgent concern.” 996 Following intense pressure from the 

public and Congress, o n September 25, the White House released the complaint to the 

intelligence committees and the July 25 call record to the public. 997 

President Trump Lifted the Hold on Military Assistance for Ukraine 

On September 11 —two days after the three Committees launched their investigation into 

President Trump’s scheme, and one day after Chairman Schiff requested that Acting DNI 

Maguire produce a copy of the whistleblower complaint —President Trump lifted the hold on 

military assistance for Ukraine. 

On the eve ning of September 11, prior to lifting the hold, President Trump met with Vice 

President Mike Pence, Mr. Mulvaney, and Senator Portman to discuss the hold. 998 Around 8:00 

p.m. on September 11, the Chief of Staff’s office informed Dr. Kupperman that the hold had 

been lifted. 999 

Just like there was no official explanation for why the hold on Ukraine security assistance 

was implemented, numerous witnesses testified that they were not provided with a reason for 

why the hold was lifted on September 11. 1000 For exa mple, Deputy Assistant Secretary of 

Defense Laura Cooper testified that President Trump’s lifting of the hold “really came quite out 

of the blue… It was quite abrupt.” 1001 Jennifer Williams, Special Advisor to the Vice President 

for Europe and Russia, testi fied that from the time when she first learned about the hold on July 

3 until it was lifted on September 11, she never came to understand why President Trump 

ordered the hold. 1002 

OMB Deputy Associate Director of National Security Programs Mark Sandy, who was 

the senior career official overseeing the administration of some of the Ukraine military 

assistance, only learned of a possible rationale for the hold in early September —after the Acting 

DNI had informed the White House about the whistleblow er complaint. 1003 Mr. Sandy testified 

that he could not recall another instance “where a significant amount of assistance was being 

held up” and he “didn’t have a rationale for as long as I didn’t have a rationale in this case.” 1004 

However, in “early Septembe r,” approximately two months after President Trump had 

implemented the hold , and several weeks after the White House learned of the whistleblower 

complaint , Mr. Sandy received an email from OMB Associate Director of National Security 

Programs Michael Duffe y. F or the first time, it “attributed the hold to the President’s concern 

about other countries not contributing more to Ukraine” and requested “information on what 

additional countries were contributing to Ukraine.” 1005 

Mr. Sandy testified that he was no t aware of any other countries committing to provide 

more financial assistance to Ukraine prior to the lifting of the hold on September 11. 1006 

According to Lt. Col. Vindman, none of the “facts on the ground” changed before the President 

lifted the hold. 1007 145 

After the Hold was Lifted, Congress was Forced to Pass a Law to Ensure All of the 

Military Aid Could Be Distributed to Ukraine 

The lengthy delay created by the hold on Ukraine military assistance prevented the 

Department of Defense from spending all of the Congressionally -appropriated funds by the end 

of the fiscal year, which meant that the funds would expire on September 30 because unused 

funds do not roll over to the next fiscal year. 1008 This confirmed the fears expressed by Ms. 

Cooper, Mr. Sandy, and oth ers related to the illegal impoundment of Congressionally -mandated 

funding —concerns that were discussed in some depth within the relevant agencies in late July 

and throughout August. 1009 

Prior to the release of the funds, DOD’s internal analysis raised con cerns that up to $100 

million of military assistance could go unspent as a result of the hold imposed by the 

President. 1010 Ultimately, approximately $35 million of Ukraine military assistance —14% of the 

total funds —remained unspent by the end of fiscal year 2019. 1011 Typically, DOD averages 

between 2 and 5 percent unspent funds for similar programs, substantially less than the 14 

percent left unspent in this case. 1012 

In order to ensure that Ukraine did not permanently lose $35 million of the critical 

military assistance frozen by the White House, 1013 Congress passed a provision on September 

27 —three days before funds were set to ex pire —to ensure that the remaining $35 million in 

2019 military assistance to Ukraine could be spent. 1014 Ms. Cooper testified that such an act of 

Congress was unusual —indeed, she had never heard of funding being extended in this 

manner. 1015 

As of November 2019 , Pentagon officials confirmed that the $35 million in security 

assistance originally held by the President and extended by Congress had still yet to be 

disbursed. When asked for an explanation, the Pentagon only confirmed that the funds had not 

yet been spent but declined to say why. 1016 

Pressure to Announce Investigations Continued After the Hold was Lifted 

Before President Trump lifted the hold on security assistance, Ukrainian officials had 

relented to the American pressure campaign to announce the inve stigations and had scheduled 

President Zelensky to appear on CNN. 1017 Even after President Trump lifted the hold on 

September 11, President Zelensky did not immediately cancel his planned CNN interview. 1018 

On September 12, Ambassador Taylor personally infor med President Zelensky and the 

Ukrainian foreign minister that President Trump’s hold on military assistance had been lifted. 1019 

Ambassador Taylor remained concerned, however, that “there was some indication that there 

might still be a plan for the CNN inte rview in New York” during which President Zelensky 

would announce the investigations that President Trump wanted Ukraine to pursue. 1020 

Ambassador Taylor testified that he “wanted to be sure that that didn’t happen, so I addressed it 

with Zelensky’s staff.” 1021 146 

On September 13, a staff member at the U.S. Embassy in Kyiv texted Mr. Holmes to 

relay a message that “Sondland said the Zelensky interview is supposed to be today or Monday, 

and they plan to announce that a certain investigation that was ‘on hold’ wil l progress.” 1022 The 

Embassy Kyiv staffer stated that he “did not know if this was decided or if Sondland was 

advocating for it. Apparently he’s been discussing this with Yermak.” 1023 

On September 13, during a meeting in President Zelensky’s office, Ukraini an presidential 

aide Andriy Yermak “looked uncomfortable” when Ambassador Taylor sought to confirm that 

there were no plans for President Zelensky to announce the investigations during a CNN 

interview. 1024 Although President Zelensky’s National Security Advi sor Oleksandr Danyliuk 

indicated that there were no plans for President Zelensky to do the CNN interview, Ambassador 

Taylor was still concerned after he and Mr. Holmes saw Mr. Yermak following the meeting. 1025 

According to Ambassador Taylor, Mr. Yermak’s “bo dy language was such that it looked to me 

like he was still thinking they were going to make that statement.” 1026 Mr. Holmes also recalled 

that when he and Ambassador Taylor ran into Mr. Yermak following the meeting, Ambassador 

Taylor “stressed the importanc e of staying out of U.S. politics and said he hoped no interview 

was planned,” but “Mr. Yermak shrugged in resignation and did not answer, as if to indicate he 

had no choice.” 1027 

That same day, September 13, President Zelensky reportedly met with CNN’s Fare ed 

Zakaria, who was in Kyiv to moderate the Yalta European Strategy Conference. 1028 During the 

meeting with Mr. Zakaria, President Zelensky did not cancel his planned CNN interview. 1029 

Conflicting advice prompted the Ukrainian foreign minister to observe in a meeting with 

Ambassador Volker, Ambassador Taylor, and Deputy Assistant Secretary of State George Kent, 

“You guys are sending us different messages in different channels.” 1030 

For example, at a September 14 meeting in Kyiv attended by Ambassador Volker, Mr. 

Yermak, and the Ukrainian foreign minister, Ambassador Volker stated that when the two 

Presidents finally meet, “it’s important that President Zelensky give the messages that we 

discussed before,” apparently referring to President Zelensky’s “ willingness to open 

investigations in the two areas of interest to the President and that had been pushed previously by 

Rudy Giuliani.” 1031 Ambassador Taylor, however, replied: “Don’t do that.” 1032 

On September 18 or 19, President Zelensky cancelled his sche duled interview with 

CNN. 1033 Although President Zelensky did not publicly announce the investigations that 

President Trump wanted, he remains under pressure from President Trump, particularly because 

he requires diplomatic, financial, and military backing f rom the United States, the most powerful 

supporter of Ukraine. That pressure continues to this day. As Mr. Holmes testified: 

[A]lthough the hold on the security assistance may have been lifted, there were still 

things they wanted that [the Ukrainians] w eren’t getting, including a meeting with the 

President in the Oval Office. Whether the hold —the security assistance hold continued 

or not, Ukrainians understood that that’s something the President wanted, and they still 

wanted important things from the Pr esident. 147 

And I think that continues to this day. I think they’re being very careful. They still need 

us now going forward. In fact, right now, President Zelensky is trying to arrange a 

summit meeting with President Putin in the coming weeks, his first face to face meeting 

with him to try to advance the peace process. He needs our support. He needs President 

Putin to understand that America supports Zelensky at the highest levels. So this doesn’t 

end with the lifting of the security assistance hold. Ukraine still needs us, and as I said, 

still fighting this war this very day. 1034 

Vice President Pence Spoke to President Zelensky 

On September 18, approximately one week before President Trump was scheduled to 

meet with President Zelensky at the United Nat ions General Assembly in New York, Vice 

President Pence spoke with President Zelensky by telephone. 1035 According to Ms. Williams, 

during the call, Vice President Pence “reiterat[ed] the release of the funds” and “ask[ed] a bit 

more about … how Zelensky’s ef forts were going.” 1036 

On November 26, Ms. Williams submitted a classified addendum to her hearing 

testimony on November 19 related to this telephone call. According to Ms. Williams’ counsel, 

the Office of the Vice President informed Ms. Williams’ counsel that certain portions of the 

September 18 call, including the additional information in Ms. Williams’ addendum, are 

classified. The Committee has requested that the Office of the Vice President conduct a 

declassification review so that the Committee may share this additional information regarding 

the substance of the September 18 call publicly. On October 9, Vice President Pence told 

reporters, “I’d have no objection” to the White House releasing the transcript of his calls with 

President Zelensky and sa id that “we’re discussing that with White House counsel as we 

speak.” 1037 In a November 7 interview with Fox Business , Vice President Pence reiterated, “I 

have no objection at all” to releasing records of his calls. 1038 

President Trump and Rudy Giuliani, Undeterred, Continued to

Solicit Foreign Interference in Our Elections 

On September 19, Rudy Giuliani was interviewed by Chris Cuomo on CNN. During the 

interview, Mr. Giuliani confirmed that he had urged Ukraine to in vestigate “the allegations that 

there was interference in the election of 2016, by the Ukrainians, for the benefit of Hillary 

Clinton[.]” When asked specifically if he had asked Ukraine to look into Vice President Biden, 

Mr. Giuliani replied immediately, “of course I did.” 

Seconds later, Mr. Giuliani attempted to clarify his admission, insisting that he had not 

asked Ukraine to investigate Vice President Biden but instead “to look into the allegations that 

related to my client [President Trump], which t angentially involved Joe Biden in a massive 

bribery scheme.” Mr. Giuliani insisted that his conduct was appropriate, telling Mr. Cuomo later 

in the interview that “it is perfectly appropriate for a President to say to a leader of a foreign 

country, invest igate this massive bribe … that was paid by a former Vice President.” 1039 148 

President Trump also has continued to publicly urge President Zelensky to launch an 

investigation of Vice President Biden and alleged 2016 election interference by Ukraine. On 

September 23, in a public press availability, President Trump stated: 

I put no pressure on them whatsoever. I could have. I think it would probably, possibly, 

have been okay if I did. But I didn’t. I didn’t put any pressure on them whatsoever. You 

know why? Because they want to do the right thing. 1040 

On September 24, in publi c remarks upon arriving at the opening session of the U.N. 

General Assembly, President Trump stated: “What Joe Biden did for his son, that’s something 

they should be looking at.” 1041 

On September 25 —in a joint public press availability with President Zele nsky —President 

Trump stated that “I want him to do whatever he can” in reference to the investigation of the 

Biden family. He added, “Now, when Biden’s son walks away with millions of dollars from 

Ukraine, and he knows nothing, and they’re paying him mill ions of dollars, that’s corruption.” 

President Trump added, “He [President Zelensky] was elected —I think, number one —on the 

basis of stopping corruption, which unfortunately has plagued Ukraine. And if he could do that, 

he’s doing, really, the whole worl d a big favor. I know —and I think he’s going to be 

successful.” 1042 

On September 30, during his remarks at the swearing -in ceremony of Labor Secretary 

Eugene Scalia, President Trump stated: 

Now, the new President of Ukraine ran on the basis of no corruptio n. That’s how he got 

elected. And I believe that he really means it. But there was a lot of corruption having to 

do with the 2016 election against us. And we want to get to the bottom of it, and it’s very 

important that we do. 1043 

On October 2, in a publ ic press availability, President Trump discussed the July 25 call 

with President Zelensky and stated that “the conversation was perfect; it couldn’t have been 

nicer.” He added: 

The only thing that matters is the transcript of the actual conversation that I had with the 

President of Ukraine. It was perfect. We’re looking at congratulations. We’re looking at 

doing things together. And what are we looking at? We’re looking at corruption. And, 

in, I believe, 1999, there was a corruption act or a corrupt ion bill passed between both —

and signed —between both countries, where I have a duty to report corruption. And let 

me tell you something: Biden’s son is corrupt, and Biden is corrupt. 1044 

On October 3, in remarks before he departed on Marine One, President Trump expressed 

his “hope” that Ukraine would investigate Mr. Biden and his son. Specifically, President Trump 

stated that he had hoped —after his July 25 conversation —that Ukraine would “start a major 

investigation into the Bidens.” The President also s tated that “by the way, likewise, China 

should start an investigation into the Bidens, because what happened in China is just about as 

bad as what happened with —with Ukraine.” He addressed the corrupt prosecutor general, Yuriy 149 

Lutsenko, who had recently b een removed by Parliament: “And they got rid of a prosecutor who 

was a very tough prosecutor. They got rid of him. Now they’re trying to make it the opposite 

way. 1045 

The next day, on October 4, in remarks before he departed on Marine One, the President 

ag ain said: 

When you look at what Biden and his son did, and when you look at other people —

what they’ve done. And I believe there was tremendous corruption with Biden, but I 

think there was beyond —I mean, beyond corruption —having to do with the 2016 

ca mpaign, and what these lowlifes did to so many people, to hurt so many people in the 

Trump campaign —which was successful, despite all of the fighting us. I mean, despite 

all of the unfairness. 1046 

President Trump reiterated his willingness to solicit fore ign assistance related to his 

personal interests: “Here’s what’s okay: If we feel there’s corruption, like I feel there was in the 

2016 campaign —there was tremendous corruption against me —if we feel there’s corruption, we 

have a right to go to a foreign c ountry.” 1047 President Trump added that asking President Xi of 

China to investigate the Bidens “is certainly something we can start thinking about.” 1048 

Consistent with the President’s remarks after this inquiry began, Ambassador Volker 

understood that referen ces to fighting “corruption” in Ukraine, when used by President Trump 

and Mr. Giuliani, in fact referred to the two investigations into “Burisma” —and former Vice 

President Biden —and the 2016 election interference that President Trump sought to benefit his 

reelection efforts. 1049 

The President’s Scheme Undermined U.S. Anti -Corruption Efforts in Ukraine 

Rather than combatting corruption in Ukraine, President Trump’s ongoing efforts to urge 

Ukraine to pursue an investigation into former Vice President Biden undermine longstanding 

U.S. anti -corruption policy, which encourage s countries to refrain from using the criminal justice 

system to investigate political opponents. When it became clear that President Trump was 

pressuring Ukraine to investigate his political rival, career public servants charged with 

implementing U.S. fore ign policy in a non -partisan manner, such as Lt. Col. Vindman and 

Ambassador Taylor, communicated to President Zelensky and his advisors that Ukraine should 

avoid getting embroiled in U.S. domestic politics. 1050 

Mr. Kent, an anti -corruption and rule of law e xpert, explained that U.S. anti -corruption 

efforts prioritize “building institutional capacity so that the Ukrainian Government has the ability 

to go after corruption and effectively investigate, prosecute, and judge alleged criminal activities 

using appro priate institutional mechanisms, that is, to create and follow the rule of law. 1051 

Mr. Holmes concurred: 

[O]ur longstanding policy is to encourage them [Ukraine] to establish and build rule of 

law institutions, that are capable and that are independent and that can actually pursue 150 

credible allegations. That’s our policy. We’ve been doing that for quite some time with 

some success. So focusing on [particular] cases, including [] cases where there is an 

interest of the President, it’s just not part of w hat we’ve done. It’s hard to explain why 

we would do that. 1052 

Mr. Kent emphasized that when foreign government officials “hear diplomats on the 

ground saying one thing, and they hear other U.S. leaders saying something else,” it raises 

concerns about the United States’ credibility on anti -corruption efforts. 1053 Ambassador Taylor 

agreed, stating that “[o]ur credibility is based on a respect for the United States” and “if we 

damage that respect, then it hurts our credibility and makes it more difficult for u s to do our 

jobs.” 1054 

Mr. Kent , like many other witnesses, explained that urging Ukraine to engage in 

“selective politically associated investigations or prosecutions” undermined the rule of law more 

generally: 

As a general principle, I do not believe the United States should ask other countries to 

engage in selective politically associated investigations or prosecutions against opponents 

of those in power because such selective actions undermine the rule of law, regardless of 

the country. 1055 

Mr. Kent agr eed that pressuring Ukraine to conduct political investigations is not a part 

of U.S. foreign policy to promote the rule of law in Ukraine and around the world. 1056 Mr. Kent 

concluded that the President’s request for investigations “went against U.S. policy” and 

“would’ve undermined the rule of law and our longstanding policy goals in Ukraine, as in other 

countries, in the post -Soviet space.” 1057 

These conflicting messages came to a head at a September 14 meeting between American 

and Ukrainian officials in K yiv. During that meeting, Ambassador Volker advised Mr. Yermak 

about the “potential problems” with investigations that the Zelensky administration was 

contemplating into former Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko. 1058 Mr. Yermak retorted, 

“what, you mean l ike asking us to investigate Clinton and Biden?” 1059 Ambassador Volker did 

not respond. 1060 151 

SECTION I ENDNOTES  

> 1

Yovanovitch Hearing Tr. at 16 -17.  

> 2

Kateryna Handziuk, Ukrainian Activist, Dies From Acid Attack , New York Times (Nov. 5, 2018) (online 

at www.nytimes.com/2018/11/05/world/europe/kateryna -handziuk -dies -ukraine.html).  

> 3

Yovanovitch Hearing Tr. at 30 -31.  

> 4

U.S. Embassy in Ukraine, Department of State, Ambassador Yovanovitch’s Remarks at a Women of 

Courage Reception in Honor of Kateryna Handziuk (Apr. 24, 2019) (online at 

https://ua.usembassy.gov/ambassador -yovanovitchs -remarks -at -a-women -of -courage -reception -in -honor -of -

kateryna -handziuk/).  

> 5

U.S. Embassy in Ukraine, Department of State, Ambassador Yovanovitch’s Remarks at a Women of 

Courage Reception in Honor of Kateryna Handziuk (Apr. 24, 2019) (online at 

https://ua.usembassy.gov/ambassador -yovanovitchs -rem arks -at -a-women -of -courage -reception -in -honor -of -

kateryna -handziuk/).  

> 6

Yovanovitch Hearing Tr. at 31.  

> 7

Yovanovitch Hearing Tr. at 31 -32.  

> 8

Yovanovitch Hearing Tr. at 32.  

> 9

Yovanovitch Hearing Tr. at 31.  

> 10

Yovanovitch Hearing Tr. at 31 -32.  

> 11

Giuliani to J oin Trump’s Legal Team , New York Times (April 19, 2018) (online at 

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/04/19/us/politics/giuliani -trump.html).  

> 12

Letter from John M. Dowd, Counsel to Igor Fruman and Lev Parnas, to Committee Staff (Oct. 3, 2019) . 

> 13

Department of Justice, Lev Parnas and Igor Fruman Charged with Conspiring to Violate Straw and 

Foreign Donor Bans (Oct. 10, 2019) (online at www.justice.gov/usao -sdny/pr/lev -parnas -and -igor -fruman -charged -

conspiring -violate -straw -and -foreign -donor -bans).  

> 14

Hill Dep. Tr . at 59.  

> 15

Yovanovitch Dep. Tr. at 28 -29.  

> 16

Ukraine Ousts Victor Shokin, Top Prosecutor, and Political Stability Hangs in the Balance , New York 

Times (Mar. 29, 2016) (online at www.nytimes.com/2016/03/30/world/europe/political -stability -in -the -balance -as -

ukraine -ousts -top -prosecutor.html).  

> 17

Kent Dep. Tr. at 45.  

> 18

Yovanovitch Dep. Tr. at 27 -28.  

> 19

Yovanovitch Dep. Tr. at 31 -32.  

> 20

Yov anovitch Dep. Tr. at 21.  

> 21

Yovanovitch Dep. Tr. at 32 -33, 38 (“I think that he felt that I and the embassy were effective at helping 

Ukrainians who wanted reform, Ukrainians who wanted to fight against corruption, and he did not – you know, that 

was not i n his interest.”).  

> 22

Yovanovitch Dep. Tr. at 30.  

> 23

Holmes Dep. Tr. at 14.  

> 24

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 25.  

> 25

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 132.  

> 26

Morrison -Volker Hearing Tr. at 27. 152  

> 27

Nickolay Kapitonenko, an advis or to the Ukrainian Parliament’s Foreign Policy Committee, described 

Giuliani as a “mythical link to the U.S.” who is viewed as “an extension of Trump.” Giuliani Sits at the Center of 

the Ukraine Controversy , Wall Street Journal (Sep. 26, 2019) (online at www.wsj.com/articles/giuliani -sits -at -the -

center -of -the -ukraine -controversy -11569546774); David Sakvarelidze, a former Ukrainian deputy prosecutor 

general, stated, “Lutsenko was trying to save his political skin by pretending to be Trumpist at the end of h is career.” 

Meet the Ukrainian Ex -Prosecutor Behind the Impeachment Furor , New York Times (Oct. 5, 2019) (online at 

www.nytimes.com/2019/10/05/world/europe/ukraine -prosecutor -trump.html).  

> 28

Yovanovitch Dep. Tr. at 30.  

> 29

Donald J. Trump, Twitter (Jan. 17, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/realdonaldtrump/status/1086096691613323265) (“Gregg Jarrett: ‘Mueller’s prosecutors knew the 

‘Dossier’ was the product of bias and deception.’ It was a Fake, just like so much news coverage in our Country. 

Nothing but a Witch Hunt, from beginning to end!”).  

> 30

Office of the Director of National Intelligence, Background to “Assessing Russian Activities and 

Intentions in Recent US Elections”: The Analytic Process and Cyber Incident Attribution (Jan. 6, 2017) (online at 

www .dni.gov/files/documents/ICA_2017_01.pdf); Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Russian Active 

Measures Campaigns and Interference in the 2016 U.S. Election (May 8, 2018) (online at 

www.intelligence.senate.gov/publications/report -select -committee -intel ligence -united -states -senate -russian -active -

measures); House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Report on Russian Active Measures (Mar. 22, 2018) 

(online at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/IG/IG00/20180322/108023/HRPT -115 -1_1 -p1 -U3.pdf); House 

Per manent Select Committee on Intelligence, Minority Views (Mar. 26, 2018) (online at 

https://intelligence.house.gov/uploadedfiles/20180411_ -_final_ -_hpsci_minority_views_on_majority_report.pdf).  

> 31

President Trump’s Former National Security Advisor ‘Deeply D isturbed’ by Ukraine Scandal: ‘Whole 

World Is Watching,’ ABC News (Sept. 29, 2019) (online at https://abcnews.go.com/Politics/president -trumps -

national -security -advisor -deeply -disturbed -ukraine/story?id=65925477).  

> 32

Charges of Ukrainian Meddling? A Russia n Operation, U.S. Intelligence Says , New York Times (Nov. 

22, 2019) (online at https://www.nytimes.com/2019/11/22/us/politics/ukraine -russia -interference.html).  

> 33

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 56 -57.  

> 34

Kent Dep. Tr. at 45.  

> 35

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr . at 330.  

> 36

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 330; Explainer: Biden, Allies, Pushed Out Ukrainian Prosecutor 

Because He Didn’t Pursue Corruption Cases, USA Today (Oct. 3, 2019) (online at 

www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2019/10/03/what -really -happ ened -when -biden -forced -out -ukraines -top -

prosecutor/3785620002/).  

> 37

See, e.g. , Ukraine Prosecutor Says No Evidence of Wrongdoing by Bidens , Bloomberg (May 16, 2019) 

(online at www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2019 -05 -16/ukraine -prosecutor -says -no -evidence -of-wrongdoing -by -

bidens) (“Hunter Biden did not violate any Ukrainian laws -- at least as of now, we do not see any wrongdoing. A 

company can pay however much it wants to its board … Biden was definitely not involved … We do not have any 

grounds to think t hat there was any wrongdoing starting from 2014.”).  

> 38

Notes of Call with Viktor Shokin (Jan. 2 3, 2019); Ukraine Prosecutor Says No Evidence of Wrongdoing 

by Bidens , Bloomberg (May 16, 2019) (online at www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2019 -05 -16/ukraine -

prosecutor -says -no -evidence -of -wrongdoing -by -bidens).  

> 39

Giuliani Pursued Business in Ukraine While Pushing for Inquiries for Trump , New York Times (Nov. 

27, 2019) (online at www.nytimes.com/2019/11/27/nyre gion/giuliani -ukraine -business -trump.html); Ukraine 

Prosecutor Says No Evidence of Wrongdoing by Bidens , Bloomberg (May 16, 2019) (online at 

www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2019 -05 -16/ukraine -prosecutor -says -no -evidence -of -wrongdoing -by -bidens).  

> 40

Notes of Meeting with Yuriy Lutsenko (Jan. 25, 2019); Ukraine Prosecutor Says No Evidence of 

Wrongdoing by Bidens , Bloomberg (May 16, 2019) (online at www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2019 -05 -

16/ukraine -prosecutor -says -no -evidence -of -wrongdoing -by -bidens). 153  

> 41

Giulia ni Pursued Business in Ukraine While Pushing for Inquiries for Trump , New York Times (Nov. 

27, 2019) (online at www.nytimes.com/2019/11/27/nyregion/giuliani -ukraine -business -trump.html).  

> 42

Rudy Giuliani, Twitter (Oct. 23, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter. com/RudyGiuliani/status/1187168034835894272).  

> 43

Rudy Giuliani, Twitter (Oct. 30, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/RudyGiuliani/status/1189667101079932928).  

> 44

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 19.  

> 45

As Russia Collusion Fades, Ukrainian Plot to Help Clinton E merges , The Hill (Mar. 20, 2019) (online at 

https://thehill.com/opinion/campaign/435029 -as -russia -collusion -fades -ukrainian -plot -to -help -clinton -emerges).  

> 46

Ukraine Prosecutor General Lutsenko Admits U.S. Ambassador Didn’t Give Him a Do Not Prosecute 

List , The Ukrainian (Apr. 18, 2019) (online at www.unian.info/politics/10520715 -ukraine -prosecutor -general -

lutsenko -admits -u-s-ambassador -didn -t-give -him -a-do -not -prosecute -list.html).  

> 47

As Russia Collusion Fades, Ukrainian Plot to Help Clinton Emerges , The Hill (Mar. 20, 2019) (online at 

https://thehill.com/opinion/campaign/435029 -as -russia -collusion -fades -ukrainian -plot -to -help -clinton -emerges).  

> 48

Yovanovitch Dep. Tr. at 21 , 37 . 

> 49

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI _20190930_00768, ATTHPSCI _2019093 0_00772, 

ATTHPSCI _20190930_00775.  

> 50

As Russia Collusion Fades, Ukrainian Plot to Help Clinton Emerges , The Hill (Mar. 20, 2019) (online at 

https://thehill.com/opinion/campaign/435029 -as -russia -collusion -fades -ukrainian -plot -to -help -clinton -emerges).  

> 51

Department of Justice, Lev Parnas and Igor Fruman Charged with Conspiring to Violate Straw and 

Foreign Donor Bans (Oct. 10, 2019) (online at www.justice.gov/usao -sdny/pr/lev -parnas -and -igor -fruman -charged -

conspiring -violate -straw -and -foreign -donor -bans) ( alleging that in May and June 2018, Mr. Parnas sought the 

assistance of an unnamed congressman in causing the removal or recall of the then -U.S. ambassador to Ukraine).  

> 52

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI _20190930_00775.  

> 53

Donald J. Trump, Twitter (Mar. 20, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/realdonaldtrump/status/1108559080204001280).  

> 54

Rudy Giuliani, Twitter (Mar. 22, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/RudyGiuliani/status/1109117167176466432); Giuliani Slams Mueller Leak , Fox News (April 7, 

2019) (online at https://www.foxnews.com/transcript/giuliani -slams -mueller -leak).  

> 55

Donald Trump, Jr., Twitter (Mar. 24, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/donaldjtrumpjr/status/1109850575926108161).  

> 56

Kent Dep. Tr. at 57 -58.  

> 57

Kent Dep. Tr. at 178.  

> 58

Yo vanovitch Dep. Tr. at 62.  

> 59

Hale Dep. Tr. at 37 -38.  

> 60

Hale Dep. Tr. at 99 -100.  

> 61

Yovanovitch Dep. Tr. at 63 -64.  

> 62

Hale Dep. Tr. at 27.  

> 63

Yovanovitch Dep. Tr. at 124.  

> 64

Yovanovitch Dep. Tr. at 267 -268.  

> 65

Yovanovitch Dep. Tr. at 268.  

> 66

Email from [Redact ed] to S_All (Mar. 26, 2019) (online at www.americanoversight.org/wp -

content/uploads/2019/11/AO_State_Ukraine_Docs_11 -22.pdf); Email from Operations Center to [Redacted] (Mar. 154 

29, 2019) (online at www.americanoversight.org/wp -content/uploads/2019/11/AO_Sta te_Ukraine_Docs_11 -22.pdf). 

(The same State Department records show that Secretary Pompeo was scheduled to have a secure call with Rep. 

Nunes on April 1, 2019.); Email from Operations Center to [Redacted] (Mar. 29, 2019) (online at 

www.americanoversight.o rg/wp -content/uploads/2019/11/AO_State_Ukraine_Docs_11 -22.pdf).  

> 67

Joe Biden’s 2020 Ukrainian Nightmare: A Closed Probe is Revived , The Hill (Apr. 1, 2019) (online at 

https://thehill.com/opinion/white -house/436816 -joe -bidens -2020 -ukrainian -nightmare -a-closed -probe -is -revived).  

> 68

Donald Trump, Jr., Twitter (Apr. 2, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/donaldjtrumpjr/status/1113046659456528385).  

> 69

AT&T Document Production , Bates ATTHPSCI _20190930_00848 -ATTHPSCI_20190930_00884. Mr. 

Parnas also had an aborted call that lasted 5 seconds on April 5, 2019 with an aide to Rep. Devin Nunes on the 

Intelligence Committee, Derek Harvey. AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20 190930_00876. Call 

records obtained by the Committees show that Mr. Parnas and Mr. Harvey had connected previously, including a 

four minute 42 second call on February 1, 2019, a one minute 7 second call on February 4, and a one minute 37 

second call on Fe bruary 7, 2019. AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930_00617, 

ATTHPSCI_20190930_00630, ATTHPSCI_20190930_00641. As explained later in this Chapter , Rep. Nunes 

would connect separately by phone on April 10, 11, and 12 with Mr. Parnas and Mr. Gi uliani. AT&T Document 

Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930_00913 - ATTHPSCI_20190930_00914; ATTHPSCI_20190930 -02125.  

> 70

Ukrainian to US Prosecutors: Why Don’t You Want Our Evidence on Democrats? , The Hill (Apr. 7, 

2019) (online at https://thehill.com/opini on/white -house/437719 -ukrainian -to -us -prosecutors -why -dont -you -want -

our -evidence -on -democrats).  

> 71

Ukrainian to US Prosecutors: Why Don’t You Want Our Evidence on Democrats? , The Hill (Apr. 7, 

2019) (online at https://thehill.com/opinion/white -house/437719 -ukrainian -to -us -prosecutors -why -dont -you -want -

our -evidence -on -democrats).  

> 72

Ukrainian to US Prosecutors: Why Don’t You Want Our Evidence on Democrats? , The Hill (Apr. 7, 

2019) (online at https://thehill.com/opinion/white -house/437719 -ukrainian -to -us -prose cutors -why -dont -you -want -

our -evidence -on -democrats).  

> 73

Ukrainian to US Prosecutors: Why Don’t You Want Our Evidence on Democrats? , The Hill (Apr. 7, 

2019) (online at https://thehill.com/opinion/white -house/437719 -ukrainian -to -us -prosecutors -why -dont -you -want -

our -evidence -on -democrats).  

> 74

Giuliani Slams Mueller Leak , Fox News (Apr. 7, 2019) (online at www.foxnews.com/transcript/giuliani -

slams -mueller -leak).  

> 75

Rudy Giuliani, Twitter (Apr. 8, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/RudyGiuliani/status/1115171828 618731520).  

> 76

Specifically, between April 8 and April 11, phone records show the following phone contacts: 

• six calls between Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Parnas (longest duration approximately five minutes), 

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -02115 -ATTHPSCI_20190930 -02131; 

• four calls between Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Solomon (all on April 8, longest duration approximately 

one minute, 30 seconds) AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -02114 -

ATTHPSCI_20190930 -02115; 

• nine calls between Mr. Parnas and Mr. Solomon (longest duration four minutes, 39 seconds) 

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -00885 - ATTHPSCI_20190930 -

00906; an d

• three calls between Mr. Parnas and Ms. Toensing (longest duration approximately six minutes), 

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -00885 - ATTHPSCI_20190930 -

00905.  

> 77

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -02125, ATTHPSCI_20190930 -03236. 155 

Date 

Connecting 

Time (ET) 

Duration of 

Call  Caller  Recipient 

04/10/19  12:00:36  0:35  Giuliani, Rudy  Nunes, Devin 

04/10/19  12:10:35  0:00  Nunes, Devin  Giuliani, Rudy 

04/10/19  12:10:37  0:31  Nunes, Devin  Giuliani, Rudy 

04/10/19  12:11:10  SMS  UNKNOWN  Giuliani, Rudy 

04/10/19  12:12:35  2:50  Giuliani, Rudy  Nunes, Devin 

04/10/19  12:15:38  0:00  Giuliani, Rudy  Nunes, Devin  

> 78

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -00902.  

> 79

Jay Sekulow, personal counsel to President Trump, stated that the President was disappointed that Mr. 

diGenova and Ms. Toensing had to withdraw due to a conflict of interest, but noted that “those conflicts do not 

prevent them from assisting the President in o ther legal matters. The President looks forward to working with 

them.” Trump’s Legal Team Remains in Disarray as New Lawyer Will No Longer Represent Him in Russia Probe ,

Washington Post (Mar. 25, 2018) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/politics/in -anothe r-blow -to -trumps -efforts -

to -combat -russia -probe -digenova -will -no -longer -join -legal -team/2018/03/25/8ac8c8d2 -3038 -11e8 -94fa -

32d48460b955_story.html).  

> 80

For example, between April 1 and April 7, Ms. Toensing exchanged approximately five calls with Mr. 

Parnas and two calls with Mr. Giuliani. In addition, on April 10, Ms. Toensing and Mr. Giuliani spoke for 

approximately six minutes, 19 seconds. AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -02126. Mr. 

diGenova and Ms. Toensing were also very active on s ocial media in promoting these conspiracy theories as well as 

the false accusations against Ambassador Yovanovitch. See, e.g ., Ryan Saavedra, Twitter (Mar. 23, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/RealSaavedra/status/1109546629672009728); Victoria Toensin g, Twitter (Mar. 21, 2019) (online 

at https://twitter.com/VicToensing/status/1108751525239762944); Victoria Toensing, Twitter (Mar. 24, 2019) 

(online at https://twitter.com/VicToensing/status/1109882728101625856).  

> 81

Retainer Letter, diGenova & Toensing, LL P, Yuriy Lutsenko, and Kostiantyn Kulyk (Apr. 12, 2019); 

Retainer Letter, diGenova & Toensing, LLP, Viktor Shokin (Apr. 15, 2019).  

> 82

On April 12, less than a week after the latest piece in The Hill , Ms. Toensing signed a retainer agreement 

between diGeno va & Toensing, LLP, Mr. Lutsenko, and his former deputy Kostiantyn Kulyk, two of the primary 

sources for Mr. Solomon’s articles. The Committees’ obtained a copy of this document which is not signed by the 

Ukrainians, but a spokesman for Ms. Toensing and M r. diGenova confirmed that the firm represented Mr. Lutsenko. 

See Giuliani Weighed Doing Business with Ukrainian Government , Wall Street Journal (Nov. 27, 2019) (online at 

www.wsj.com/articles/giuliani -weighed -doing -business -with -ukrainian -government -11574 890951). 

The first paragraph of the retainer agreement sets forth the services to be provided by diGenova & 

Toensing, LLP to their Ukrainian clients: 

Yurii Lutsenko and Kostiantyn Kulyk (“Clients”) hereby engage the firm of diGenova & Toensing, LLP 

(“Firm ” or “Attorneys”) to represent them in connection with recovery and return to the Ukraine 

government of funds illegally embezzeled from that country and providing assistance to meet and discuss 

with United States government officials the evidence of illega l conduct in Ukraine regarding the United 

States, for example, interference in the 2016 U.S. elections. 

See Retainer Letter, diGenova & Toensing, LLP, Yuriy Lutsenko, and Kostiantyn Kulyk (Apr. 12, 2019). 

The scope of representation —which includes represen ting Mr. Lutsenko and Mr. Kulyk in meetings with 

U.S. officials regarding Ukrainian interference in the 2016 U.S. elections —mirrors the allegations reported in The 156 

Hill , pursued by Mr. Giuliani on behalf of President Trump, and pushed by the President on h is July 25 call with 

President Zelensky. According to the retainer agreement, Mr. Lutsenko was to pay diGenova & Toensing, LLP 

$25,000 per month, plus costs, for four months for this work. See Retainer Letter, diGenova & Toensing, LLP, 

Yuriy Lutsenko, an d Kostiantyn Kulyk (Apr. 12, 2019). 

On April 12, the same day Ms. Toensing signed the retainer agreement with Mr. Lutsenko, phone records 

show contacts between Ms. Toensing, Mr. Giuliani, and Mr. Parnas, as well as contacts between Mr. Parnas and Mr. 

Solom on, and Mr. Parnas and Rep. Nunes. In addition, among these calls are contacts between Mr. Giuliani and a 

phone number associated with the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), an unidentified number (“ -1”), and a 

phone number associated with the White H ouse: 

Date  Connecting 

Time (ET) 

Duration 

of Call  Caller  Recipient  Source 

04/12/19  9:48:57  0:24  Toensing, Victoria  Parnas, Lev  AT&T Document Production, 

Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -

00908 

04/12/19  10:40:19  3:25  Parnas, Lev  Toensing, Victoria  AT&T Document Production, 

Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -

00909 

04/12/19  11:05:25  0:03  OMB Phone Number  Giuliani, Rudy  AT&T Document Production, 

Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -

02134 

04/12/19  11:05:39  12:10  “-1”  Giuliani, Rudy  AT&T Document Production, 

Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -

02134 

04/12/19  13:13:49  0:12  Giuliani, Rudy  White House Phone 

Number 

AT&T Document Production, 

Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -

02135 

04/12/19  13:18:46  0:07  Toensing, Victoria  Giuliani, Rudy  AT&T Document Production, 

Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -

02135 

04/12/19  13:26:54  0:24  Giuliani Partners  Parnas, Lev  AT&T Document Production, 

Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -

00911 

04/12/19  14:11:22  0:03  “-1”  Giuliani, Rudy  AT&T Document Production, 

Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -

02136 

04/12/19  14:11:27  0:03  OMB Phone Number  Giuliani, Rudy  AT&T Document Production, 

Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -

02136 

04/12/19  14:17:46  0:07  Toensing, Victoria  Parnas, Lev  AT&T Document Production, 

Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -

00912 157 

04/12/19  15:09:22  0:02  Parnas, Lev  Giuliani, Rudy  AT&T Document Production, 

Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -

00912 

04/12/19  15:09:32  0:01  Parnas, Lev  Giuliani, Rudy  AT&T Document Production, 

Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -

00912 

04/12/19  15:16:09  1:38  Parnas, Lev  Solomon, John  AT&T Document Production, 

Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -

00912 

04/12/19  15:48:09  0:03  OMB Phone Number  Giuliani, Rudy  AT&T Document Production, 

Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -

02137 

04/12/19  16:10:49  0:00  Parnas, Lev  Giuliani, Rudy  AT&T Document Production, 

Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -

00913 

04/12/19  16:10:51  0:02  Parnas, Lev  Giuliani, Rudy  AT&T Document Production, 

Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -

00913 

04/12/19  16:10:51  0:02  Parnas, Lev  Giuliani, Rudy  AT&T Document Production, 

Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -

00913 

4/12/19  16:12:53  1:00  Parnas, Lev  Nunes, Devin  AT&T Document Production, 

Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -

00913 

04/12/19  16:54:11  0:00  Nunes, Devin  Parnas, Lev  AT&T Document Production, 

Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -

00913 

04/12/19  16:54:13  0:02  Nunes, Devin  Parnas, Lev  AT&T Document Production, 

Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -

00913 

04/12/19  17:07:20  1:27  Parnas, Lev  Giuliani, Rudy  AT&T Document Production, 

Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -

00913 

04/12/19  17:17:36  7:52  Sekulow, Jay  Giuliani, Rudy  AT&T Document Production, 

Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -

03565 

04/12/19  17:24:05  1:49  Parnas, Lev  Solomon, John  AT&T Document Production, 

Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -

00914 158 

04/12/19  17:26:48  0:28  Parnas, Lev  Solomon, John  AT&T Document Production, 

Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -

00914 

04/12/19  17:30:19  8:34  Parnas, Lev  Nunes, Devin  AT&T Document Production, 

Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -

00914 

04/12/19  17:39:25  0:53  Parnas, Lev  Solomon, John  AT&T Document Production, 

Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -

00914 

04/12/19  19:56:43  5:03  Giuliani, Rudy  White House Phone 

Number 

AT&T Document Production, 

Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -

02139 

Mr. Lutsenko and Mr. Kulyk were not the only Ukrainians who appear to have engaged with diGenova & 

Toensing, LLP. On April 15, Ms. Toensing signed another retainer agreement between diGenova & Toensing, LLP 

and former Prosecutor General Viktor Shokin. Ag ain, the Committees’ copy is not signed by Mr. Shokin. A 

spokesman for Ms. Toensing and Mr. diGenova acknowledged that the firm represented “Ukrainian 

whistleblowers,” but claimed that the identities of those clients (other that Mr. Lutsenko) are protecte d by attorney -

client privilege. See Giuliani Weighed Doing Business with Ukrainian Government , Wall Street Journal (Nov. 27, 

2019) (online at www.wsj.com/articles/giuliani -weighed -doing -business -with -ukrainian -government -11574890951). 

The first paragraph of the retainer agreement outlined the services to be rendered: 

Viktor Shokin (“Client”) hereby engaged the firm diGenova & Toensing, LLP (“Firm” or “Attorneys”) to 

represent him for the purpose of collecting evidence regarding his March 2016 firing as Pro secutor General 

of Ukraine and the role of then -Vice President Joe Biden in such firing, and presenting such evidence to 

U.S. and foreign authorities. 

See Retainer Letter, diGenova & Toensing, LLP, Viktor Shokin (Apr. 15, 2019). 

The subject matter of the agreement —the activities of Vice President Biden —again echo Mr. Solomon’s 

pieces in The Hill , conspiracy theories spread by Mr. Giuliani on behalf of Presi dent Trump, and the President’s 

statements about Vice President Biden on his July 25 call with President Zelensky.  

> 83

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -00947 -ATTHPSCI_20190930 -00950.  

> 84

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -0222 2-ATTHPSCI_20190930 -02223. 

Date 

Connecting 

Time (ET) 

Duration of 

Call  Caller  Recipient 

04/23/19  14:00:56  1:50  Giuliani, Rudy  Parnas, Lev 

04/23/19  14:15:18  0:18  Giuliani, Rudy  White House Phone Number 

04/23/19  14:15:43  0:11  Giuliani, Rudy  White House Phone Number 

04/23/19  15:20:17  0:11  Giuliani, Rudy  White House Phone Number 

04/23/19  15:50:23  8:28  “-1”  Giuliani, Rudy  

> 85

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -02224. 159  

> 86

Rudy Giuliani, Twitter (Apr. 23, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/RudyGiuliani/status/1120798794692612097).  

> 87

Giuliani Fires Back at Hillary Clinton’s Remarks on Mueller Probe , Fox News (Apr. 24, 2019) (online at 

www.youtube.com/watch?v=FDtg8z12Q7s&fe ature=youtu.be).  

> 88

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 -02229 - ATTHPSCI_20190930 -02237. 

Date 

Connecting 

Time (ET) 

Duration of 

Call  Caller  Recipient 

04/24/19  7:17:48  0:42  OMB Phone Number  Giuliani, Rudy 

04/24/19  7:47:57  0:37  Giuliani, Rudy  White House Phone Number 

04/24/19  7:48:39  0:21  Giuliani, Rudy  White House Phone Number 

04/24/19  7:49:00  0:31  OMB Phone Number  Giuliani, Rudy 

04/24/19  7:49:00  0:20  Giuliani, Rudy  White House Phone Number 

04/24/19  7:49:35  4:53  Giuliani, Rudy  White House Phone Number 

04/24/19  7:54:52  0:24  Giuliani, Rudy  White House Phone Number 

04/24/19  13:03:50  13:44  OMB Phone Number  Giuliani, Rudy 

04/24/19  16:42:52  8:00  Parnas, Lev  Giuliani, Rudy 

04/24/19  18:38:57  0:44  Giuliani, Rudy  White House Phone Number 

04/24/19  18:42:43  8:42  “-1”  Giuliani, Rudy 

04/24/19  20:09:14  0:06  Giuliani, Rudy  White House Phone Number 

04/24/19  20:12:08  3:15  White House #  Giuliani, Rudy  

> 89

Yovanovitch Hearing Tr. at 31 -32.  

> 90

Yovanovitch Dep. Tr. at 22.  

> 91

Yovanovitch Hearing Tr. at 21 -22.  

> 92

Yovanovitch Dep. Tr. at 129.  

> 93

Yovanovitch Dep. Tr. at 139.  

> 94

Yovanovitch Hearing Tr. at 28.  

> 95

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 21.  

> 96

Yovanovitch Hearing Tr. at 131 -132.  

> 97

Hale Dep. Tr. at 16 -17; Hale Dep. Tr. at 112 -113; Yovanovitch Hearing Tr. at 21.  

> 98

“I only met her when I took this job, but immediately I understood that we had an exceptional officer 

doing exceptional work at a ver y critical embassy in Kyiv. And during my visits to Kyiv, I was very impressed by 160 

what she was doing there, to the extent that I asked her if she'd be willing to stay, if that was a possibility, because 

we had a gap coming up.” Cooper -Hale Hearing Tr. at 63.  

> 99

Cooper -Hale Hearing Tr. at 64.  

> 100

Biography of Marie L. Yovanovitch , Department of State (online at https://2009 -

2017.state.gov/r/pa/ei/biog/261588.htm).  

> 101

McKinley Transcribed Interview Tr. at 37.  

> 102

Reeker Dep. Tr. at 26.  

> 103

Kent Dep. Tr. at 188 -189 . 

> 104

Yovanovitch Hearing Tr. at 18 -19.  

> 105

Yovanovitch Hearing Tr. at 18 -19.  

> 106

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 18 -19, 45 -46.  

> 107

Holmes Dep. Tr. at 142.  

> 108

What “Corruption” Means in the Impeachment Hearings , New Yorker (Nov. 16, 2019) (online at 

www.newyorker.com/news/our -columnists/the -corruption -of -the -word -corruption -and -so -much -else -amid -the -

impeachment -hearings).  

> 109

22 U.S.C. § 3941.  

> 110

Yovanovitch Hearing Tr. at 110 -111.  

> 111

Ambassador Yovanovitch said: “Although then and now I have always understood that I served at the 

pleasure of the President, I still find it difficult to comprehend that foreign and private interests were able to 

undermine U.S. interests in this way. Indi viduals who apparently felt stymied by our efforts to promote stated U.S. 

policy against corruption, that is, to do our mission, were able to successfully conduct a campaign of disinformation 

against a sitting ambassador using unofficial back channels. As various witnesses have recounted, they shared 

baseless allegations with the President and convinced him to remove his ambassador despite the fact that the State 

Department fully understood that the allegations were false and the sources highly suspect.” Yovanovitch Hearing 

Tr. at 22.  

> 112

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 78 -79.  

> 113

Yovanovitch Dep. Tr. at 313 -314.  

> 114

Yovanovitch Hearing Tr. at 22.  

> 115

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 25.  

> 116

Kent. Dep. Tr. at 131 -132.  

> 117

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 31 -32.  

> 118

Comedian Vol odymyr Zelensky Unseats Incumbent in Ukraine’s Presidential Election, Exit Polls Show ,

Washington Post (Apr. 21, 2019) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/world/as -ukraine -votes -in -presidential -

runoff -a-comedian -looks -to -unseat -the -incumbent/2019/04/21/b7d69a38 -603f -11e9 -bf24 -

db4b9fb62aa2_story.html).  

> 119

Comedian Volodymyr Zelensky Unseats Incumbent in Ukraine’s Presidential Election, Exit Polls Show ,

The Washington Post (Apr. 21, 2019) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/world/as -ukraine -votes -in -presidential -

runoff -a-comedian -looks -to -unseat -the -incumbent/2019/04/21/b7d69a38 -603f -11e9 -bf24 -

db4b9fb62aa2_story.html).  

> 120

The White House, Memorandum of Telephone Conversation (Apr. 21, 2019) (online at 

https://assets.documentcloud.org/documents/6550349/First -Trump -Ukraine -Call.pdf).  

> 121

The White House, Memorandum of Telephone Conversation (Apr. 2 1, 2019) (online at 

https://assets.documentcloud.org/documents/6550349/First -Trump -Ukraine -Call.pdf). 161  

> 122

Conflicting White House accounts of 1 st Trump -Zelenskiy call , The Associated Press (Nov. 15, 2019) 

(online at https://apnews.com/2f3c9910e0a14ec08d6d76 ed93148059).  

> 123

The White House, Memorandum of Telephone Conversation (Apr. 21, 2019) (online at 

https://assets.documentcloud.org/documents/6550349/First -Trump -Ukraine -Call.pdf).  

> 124

The White House, Memorandum of Telephone Conversation (Apr. 21, 2019) (onlin e at 

https://assets.documentcloud.org/documents/6550349/First -Trump -Ukraine -Call.pdf).  

> 125

The White House, Memorandum of Telephone Conversation (Apr. 21, 2019) (online at 

https://assets.documentcloud.org/documents/6550349/First -Trump -Ukraine -Call.pdf).  

> 126

The White House, Memorandum of Telephone Conversation (Apr. 21, 2019) (online at 

https://assets.documentcloud.org/documents/6550349/First -Trump -Ukraine -Call.pdf).  

> 127

The White House, Memorandum of Telephone Conversation (Apr. 21, 2019) (online at 

https://ass ets.documentcloud.org/documents/6550349/First -Trump -Ukraine -Call.pdf).  

> 128

The White House, Memorandum of Telephone Conversation (Apr. 21, 2019) (online at 

https://assets.documentcloud.org/documents/6550349/First -Trump -Ukraine -Call.pdf).  

> 129

The White House, Memorandum of Telephone Conversation (Apr. 21, 2019) (online at 

https://assets.documentcloud.org/documents/6550349/First -Trump -Ukraine -Call.pdf).  

> 130

The White House, Memorandum of Telephone Conversation (Apr. 21, 2019) (online at 

https://assets.documentcloud .org/documents/6550349/First -Trump -Ukraine -Call.pdf).  

> 131

Williams Dep. Tr. at 36.  

> 132

Williams Dep. Tr. at 37.  

> 133

Williams Dep. Tr. at 36.  

> 134

Fox & Friends , Fox News (Apr. 24, 2019) (online at 

www.youtube.com/watch?v=FDtg8z12Q7s#action=share).  

> 135

Why Giuliani Singled Out 2 Ukrainian Oligarchs to Help Look for Dirt , New York Times (Nov. 25, 

2019) (online at www.nytimes.com/2019/11/25/us/giuliani -ukraine -oligarchs.html).  

> 136

Ukraine’s Unlikely President, Promising a New Style of Politics, Gets a Taste of T rump’s Swamp, New 

Yorker (Oct. 25, 2019) (online at www.newyorker.com/magazine/2019/11/04/how -trumps -emissaries -put -pressure -

on -ukraines -new -president).  

> 137

Why Giuliani Singled Out 2 Ukrainian Oligarchs to Help Look for Dirt , New York Times (Nov. 25, 

2019) (online at www.nytimes.com/2019/11/25/us/giuliani -ukraine -oligarchs.html).  

> 138

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930_00947; ATTHPSCI_20190930_00949; 

ATTHPSCI_20190930_02222; ATTHPSCI_20190930_02223.  

> 139

Joe Biden Announces 2020 Run for President, After Months of Hesitation , New York Times (Apr. 25, 

2019) (online at www.nytimes.com/2019/04/25/us/politics/joe -biden -2020 -announcement.html).  

> 140

How the Obama White House Engaged Ukraine to Give Russia Collusion Narrative an Early Boost , The 

Hill (Apr. 25, 2019) (online at https://thehill.com/opinion/white -house/440730 -how -the -obama -white -house -

engaged -ukraine -to -give -russia -collusion).  

> 141

Holmes Dep. Tr. at 17.  

> 142

Holmes Dep. Tr. at 116.  

> 143

Holmes Dep. Tr. at 116.  

> 144

AT&T Document Production, B ates ATTHPSCI_20190930_02245.  

> 145

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930_02245. 162  

> 146

Sean Hannity Interviews Trump on Biden, Russia Probe, FISA Abuse, Comey , Fox News (Apr. 26, 

2019) (online at 

www.realclearpolitics.com/video/2019/04/26/full_video_se an_hannity_interviews_trump_on_biden_russia_probe_fi 

sa_abuse_comey.html).  

> 147

Holmes Dep. Tr. at 55 -56.  

> 148

Sean Hannity Interviews Trump on Biden, Russia Probe, FISA Abuse, Comey , Fox News (Apr. 26, 

2019) (online at 

www.realclearpolitics.com/video/2019/04/26/ full_video_sean_hannity_interviews_trump_on_biden_russia_probe_fi 

sa_abuse_comey.html). As discussed later in this report, on the morning of September 25, 2019, the Department of 

Justice would quickly issue a statement after President Trump released the re cord of his July 25 call with President 

Zelensky. The statement asserted that that Attorney General Barr had not engaged on Ukraine matters at the 

President’s request: 

The President has not spoken with the Attorney General about having Ukraine investiga te anything relating 

to former Vice President Biden or his son. The President has not asked the Attorney General to contact 

Ukraine —on this or any other matter. The Attorney General has not communicated with Ukraine —on this 

or any other subject.  

> 149

Cl eaning Up Ukraine in the Shadow of Trump , The Financial Times (Nov. 28, 2019) (online at 

www.ft.com/content/eb8e4004 -1059 -11ea -a7e6 -62bf4f9e548a).  

> 150

Cleaning Up Ukraine in the Shadow of Trump , The Financial Times (Nov. 28, 2019) (online at 

www.ft.com/conte nt/eb8e4004 -1059 -11ea -a7e6 -62bf4f9e548a).  

> 151

Biden Faces Conflict of Interest Questions That Are Being Promoted by Trump and Allies , New York 

Times (May 1, 2019) (online at www.nytimes.com/2019/05/01/us/politics/biden -son -ukraine.html).  

> 152

Transcript: Fox Ne ws Interview with President Trump , Fox News (May 7, 2019) (online at 

www.foxnews.com/politics/transcript -fox -news -interview -with -president -trump).  

> 153

Transcript: Fox News Interview with President Trump , Fox News (May 7, 2019) (online at 

www.foxnews.com/poli tics/transcript -fox -news -interview -with -president -trump).  

> 154

Foreign Affairs Issue Launch with Former Vice President Joe Biden , Council on Foreign Relations (Jan. 

23, 2018) (online at: www.cfr.org/event/foreign -affairs -issue -launch -former -vice -president -joe -biden).  

> 155

Ukraine Ousts Viktor Shokin, Top Prosecutor, and Political Stability Hangs in the Balance , New York 

Times (Mar . 29, 2016) (online at www.nytimes.com/2016/03/30/world/europe/political -stability -in -the -balance -as -

ukraine -ousts -top -prosecutor.html).  

> 156

Yovanovitch Hearing Tr. at 50; Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 115.  

> 157

Trump Says He’d Consider Accepting Information from Foreign Governments on His Opponents , The 

Washington Post (June 12, 2019) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump -says -hed -consider -accepting -

dirt -from -foreign -governments -on -his -opponents/2019/06/12/b84ba860 -8d5c -11e9 -8f69 -a2795f ca3343_story.html).  

> 158

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930_02313.  

> 159

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930_02314; ATTHPSCI_20190930_02316; 

ATTHPSCI_20190930_02318; ATTHPSCI 20190930 01000.  

> 160

Kent Dep. Tr. at 137.  

> 161

Kent Dep. Tr. a t 137.  

> 162

Kent Dep. Tr. at 137.  

> 163

Rudy Giuliani Plans Ukraine Trip to Push for Inquiries That Could Help Trump , New York Times (May 

9, 2019) (online at www.nytimes.com/2019/05/09/us/politics/giuliani -ukraine -trump.html).  

> 164

Rudy Giuliani Plans Ukraine Tri p to Push for Inquiries That Could Help Trump , New York Times (May 

9, 2019) (online at www.nytimes.com/2019/05/09/us/politics/giuliani -ukraine -trump.html). 163  

> 165

Rudy Giuliani Plans Ukraine Trip to Push for Inquiries That Could Help Trump , New York Times (May 

9, 2019) (online at www.nytimes.com/2019/05/09/us/politics/giuliani -ukraine -trump.html).  

> 166

Rudy Giuliani Plans Ukraine Trip to Push for Inquiries That Could Help Trump , New York Times (May 

9, 2019) (online at www.nytimes.com/2019/05/09/us/politics/giu liani -ukraine -trump.html).  

> 167

Rudy Giuliani Plans Ukraine Trip to Push for Inquiries That Could Help Trump , New York Times (May 

9, 2019) (online at www.nytimes.com/2019/05/09/us/politics/giuliani -ukraine -trump.html).  

> 168

Rudy Giuliani Plans Ukraine Trip to Pu sh for Inquiries That Could Help Trump , New York Times (May 

9, 2019) (online at www.nytimes.com/2019/05/09/us/politics/giuliani -ukraine -trump.html).  

> 169

Rudy Giuliani Plans Ukraine Trip to Push for Inquiries That Could Help Trump , New York Times (May 

9, 2019 ) (online at www.nytimes.com/2019/05/09/us/politics/giuliani -ukraine -trump.html).  

> 170

Trump’s Interest in Stirring Ukraine Investigations Sows Confusion in Kiev , Washington Post (May 11, 

2019) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/world/europe/trumps -interest -st irring -ukraine -investigations -sows -

confusion -in -kiev/2019/05/11/cb94f7f4 -73ea -11e9 -9331 -30bc5836f48e_story.html).  

> 171

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930_02321; ATTHPSCI_20190930_02322.  

> 172

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930_02320, 02321, 02322, 02323, 03612.  

> 173

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930_03614; ATTHPSCI_20190930_02326; 

ATTHPSCI_20190930_02327; ATTHPSCI_20190930_03614.  

> 174

Rudy Giuliani, Twitter (May 9, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/RudyGiuliani/status/112 6701386224156673 ).  

> 175

Giuliani: "Massive Collusion" Between DNC, Obama Admin, Clinton People & Ukraine To Create 

False Info About Trump , Real Clear Politics (May 10, 2019) (online at 

www.realclearpolitics.com/video/2019/05/10/giuliani_massive_collusion_betw een_dnc_obama_admin_clinton_peo 

ple__ukraine_to_create_false_info_about_trump.html).  

> 176

Rudy Giuliani, Twitter (May 10, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/rudygiuliani/status/1126858889209831424?lang=en).  

> 177

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_2019093 0_ 02334.  

> 178

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 227; see also Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 32 -33, 36 

(describing the allegations).  

> 179

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 227.  

> 180

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930_ 02334.  

> 181

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930_ 02335.  

> 182

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930_ 02335.  

> 183

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930_ 02335.  

> 184

Trump: Discussing a Biden Probe with Barr Would Be ‘Appropriate,’ Politico (Ma y 10, 2019) (online at 

www.politico.com/story/2019/05/10/trump -biden -ukraine -barr -1317601).  

> 185

Trump Denies Sending Rudy Giuliani to Ukraine to Push Biden, Election Probes , CNBC (Nov. 27, 

2019) (online at www.cnbc.com/2019/11/27/trump -denies -sending -rudy -gi uliani -to -ukraine -to -push -biden -election -

probes.html).  

> 186

Remarks by President Trump and President Niinisto of the Republic of Finland in Joint Press 

Conference , The White House (Oct. 2, 2019) (online at www.whitehouse.gov/briefings -statements/remarks -

pres ident -trump -president -niinisto -republic -finland -joint -press -conference/).  

> 187

Remarks by President Trump before Marine One Departure , The White House (Oct. 4, 2019) (online at 

www.whitehouse.gov/briefings -statements/remarks -president -trump -mar ine -one -departure -68/). 164  

> 188

Giuliani: I didn't go to Ukraine to start an investigation, there already was one , Fox News (May 11, 

2019) (online at https://video.foxnews.com/v/6035385372001/#sp=show -clips).  

> 189

Trump: Discussing a Biden probe with Barr would b e ‘appropriate’ , Politico (May 10, 2019) (online at 

www.politico.com/story/2019/05/10/trump -biden -ukraine -barr -1317601) (documenting Giuliani text message).  

> 190

Trump: Discussing a Biden probe with Barr would be ‘appropriate’ , Politico (May 10, 2019) (onlin e at 

www.politico.com/story/2019/05/10/trump -biden -ukraine -barr -1317601) (documenting Giuliani text message).  

> 191

Donald J. Trump, Twitter (May 3, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/1124359594418032640)  

> 192

Kent Dep. Tr. at 338 -339.  

> 193

Remarks by President Trump and Prime Minister Orban of Hungary Before Bilateral Meeting, The 

White House (May 13, 2019) (online at www.whitehouse.gov/briefings -statements/remarks -president -trump -prime -

minister -orban -hungary -bilateral -meeting/).  

> 194

In Hung ary, a Freewheeling Trump Ambassador Undermines U.S. Diplomat’s , New York Times (Oct. 

22, 2019) (online at www.nytimes.com/2019/10/22/world/europe/david -cornstein -hungary -trump -orban.html); 

Hungarian prime minister earns rare rebuke from European bloc that has long backed him , The Washington Post 

(Mar. 20, 2019) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/world/europe/hungarys -orban -earns -rare -rebuke -from -

european -bloc -that -has -long -backed -him/2019/03/20/83be110a -4b17 -11e9 -8cfc -2c5d0999c21e_story.html).  

> 195

Kent Dep. Tr. at 339.  

> 196

Remarks by President Trump and Prime Minister Orban of Hungary Before Bilateral Meeting, The 

White House (May 13, 2019) (online at www.whitehouse.gov/briefings -statements/remarks -president -trump -prime -

minister -orban -hungary -bilateral -meeting/ ).  

> 197

Kent Dep. Tr. at 253.  

> 198

Kent Dep. Tr. at 254.  

> 199

Williams Dep. Tr. at 37 -38.  

> 200

Vindman -Williams Hearing Tr. at 14. Other witnesses testified that Vice President Pence may not have 

been able to attend on account of scheduling issues. See Hill Dep. Tr. at 316 (“there was a lot of scheduling issues” 

regarding the attempts to schedule the Vice President’s participation in the delegation); Kent Dep. Tr. at 189 -191 

(Vice President Pence was not available); Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 288 -290, 293 (Volker “wasn’t 

surprised” Pence could not make it and assumed it was a matter of sc heduling). However, Ms. Williams was the 

only staff member in the Office of the Vice President to testify before the Committees, and the only witness to 

testify to having heard an explanation from Vice President Pence’s staff about why Vice President Penc e did not 

attend the inauguration.  

> 201

Williams Dep. Tr. at 39.  

> 202

Holmes Dep. Tr. at 37.  

> 203

Holmes Dep. Tr. at 37.  

> 204

Rudy Giuliani, Twitter (May 18, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/RudyGiuliani/status/1129761193755910144)  

> 205

Kolomoisky: We Called Varkuc h and Asked: ‘Do You Support Zelensky or No?’ , Pravda (May 27, 2019) 

(online at www.pravda.com.ua/rus/articles/2019/05/27/7216183/).  

> 206

Kolomoisky: We Called Varkuch and Asked: ‘Do You Support Zelensky or No?’ , Pravda (May 27, 2019) 

(online at www.pravda.co m.ua/rus/articles/2019/05/27/7216183/).  

> 207

Holmes Dep. Tr. at 16.  

> 208

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 288 -290; Vindman Dep. Tr. at 125.  

> 209

Holmes Dep. Tr. at 101. 165  

> 210

Holmes Dep. Tr. at 18.  

> 211

Holmes Dep. Tr. 17 -18.  

> 212

Holmes Dep. Tr. at 18.  

> 213

Holmes Dep. Tr. at 18.  

> 214

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 61.  

> 215

Vindman -Williams Hearing Tr. at 26.  

> 216

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 61.  

> 217

Vindman -Williams Hearing Tr. at 26  

> 218

Vindman -Williams Hearing Tr. at 26  

> 219

Vindman -Williams Hearing Tr . at 26; David Holmes separately testified that Lt. Col. Vindman “made a 

general point about the importance of Ukraine to our national security, and he said it's very important that the 

Zelensky administration stay out of U.S. domestic politics.” Hill -Hol mes Hearing Tr. at 61.  

> 220

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 30.  

> 221

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 29 -30.  

> 222

Kent Dep. Tr. at 193.  

> 223

Anderson Dep. Tr. at 15, 54. Ambassador Sondland testified that he did not specifically recall who 

arranged the May 23 meeting and conjectured that “either Rick Perry or I reached out to someone at the NSC 

saying: Doesn’t the President want a briefing about the inauguration. And I think —I think it was Perry, if I recall 

correctly, that got it nailed down.” Sondland D ep. Tr. at 87.  

> 224

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 29, 303; Vindman Dep. Tr. at 168.  

> 225

Hill Dep. Tr. at 311.  

> 226

Hill Dep. Tr. at 308.  

> 227

Hill Dep. Tr. at 308.  

> 228

Hill Dep. Tr. at 309 -310.  

> 229

Hill Dep. Tr. at 309 -310.  

> 230

Hill Dep. Tr. at 309 -310.  

> 231

Nunes Ally Kash Patel Who Fought Russia Probe Gets Senior White House National Security Job , The 

Daily Beast (July 31, 2019) (online at www.thedailybeast.com/kash -patel -devin -nunes -ally -who -fought -russia -

probe -gets -senior -white -house -national -security -job).  

> 232

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 304.  

> 233

Sondland Dep. Tr. at 25.  

> 234

Sondland Dep. Tr. at 25.  

> 235

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 304.  

> 236

Sondland Dep. Tr. at 337; Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 304; Hill Dep. Tr . at 320 -321 (describing 

Volker’s readout); Croft Dep. Tr. at 90 (describing Volker’s readout); Anderson Dep. Tr. at 57 (describing Volker’s 

readout).  

> 237

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 305.  

> 238

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 305.  

> 239

Sondland Dep. Tr. at 62; Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. 305; Morrison -Volker Hearing Tr. at 40.  

> 240

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 71. 166  

> 241

Sondland Dep. Tr. at 26. See also Sondland Dep. Tr. at 87 -90.  

> 242

Morrison -Volker Hearing Tr. at 131.  

> 243

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 167.  

> 244

In addition to the testimony cited in this paragraph, see also Hill Dep. Tr. at 113; Hale Dep. Tr. at 90; 

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 58, 285; and Reeker Dep. Tr. at 148.  

> 245

Kent Dep. Tr. at 195.  

> 246

Croft Dep. Tr. at 91.  

> 247

Hale Dep. Tr. at 73.  

> 248

Sondlan d Dep. Tr. at 151 -152.  

> 249

Hill Dep. Tr. at 59 -60.  

> 250

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 24, 27, 123 -124, 125 -126.  

> 251

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 27 -30.  

> 252

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 22.  

> 253

Sondland Dep. Tr. at 77 -78.  

> 254

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 94.  

> 255

Hill Dep. Tr. at 127. According to call records obtained by the Committee, Mr. Giuliani connected with 

Ambassador Bolton’s office three times for brief calls of under a minute between April 23 and May 10, 2019 —a

time peri od that corresponds with the recall of Ambassador Yovanovitch and the acceleration of Mr. Giuliani’s 

efforts, on behalf of President Trump, to pressure Ukraine into opening investigations that would benefit his 

reelection campaign. AT&T Document Productio n, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930_02224, 02322, 23330.  

> 256

Hill Dep. Tr. at 127.  

> 257

Anderson Dep. Tr. at 15.  

> 258

Anderson Dep. Tr. at 15.  

> 259

Anderson Dep. Tr. at 101.  

> 260

Hill Dep. Tr. at 127 -128.  

> 261

Hill Dep. Tr. at 116 -117.  

> 262

Hill Dep. Tr. at 130.  

> 263

Anderson Dep. Tr. at 16.  

> 264

Anderson Dep. Tr. at 16; Taylor Dep. Tr. at 24 -25, 167.  

> 265

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 25.  

> 266

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 25.  

> 267

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 25.  

> 268

Anderson Dep. Tr. at 16 -17.  

> 269

Sondland Dep. Tr. at 240.  

> 270

ABC N ews’ Oval Office Interview with President Trump , ABC News (June 13, 2019) (online at 

https://abcnews.go.com/Politics/abc -news -oval -office -interview -president -donald -trump/story?id=63688943).  

> 271

ABC News’ Oval Office Interview with President Trump , ABC News (June 13, 2019) (online at 

https://abcnews.go.com/Politics/abc -news -oval -office -interview -president -donald -trump/story?id=63688943) 

(emphasis added). 167  

> 272

Rudy Giuliani, Twitter (June 21, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/RudyGiuliani/status/11420859752308 98176)  

> 273

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 77.  

> 274

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 91.  

> 275

Hill Dep. Tr. at 222 -223.  

> 276

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 92.  

> 277

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 93.  

> 278

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Report on the Human R ights 

Situation in Ukraine: 16 November 2018 to 15 February 2019 (online at 

https://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Countries/UA/ReportUkraine16Nov2018 -15Feb2019.pdf) ; Office of the United 

Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Report on the Human Rights Situation in Ukraine: 16 August to 15 

November 2017 (Dec. 12, 2017) (online at 

https://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Countries/UA/UAReport20th_EN.pdf ); Office of the Un ited Nations High 

Commissioner for Human Rights, Conflict in Ukraine Enters its Fourth Year with No End in Sight (June 13, 2017) 

(online at www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=21730&LangID=E ). These figures 

do not include the 298 ci vilians of 13 different nationalities killed aboard Malaysia Airlines Flight 17, which a 

Dutch -led joint investigation found was shot down by a Russian missile system from a Russian military unit, a 

conclusion supported by U.S. intelligence. See Dutch Saf ety Board, Report on the Crash of Malaysia Airlines Flight 

MH17 (Oct. 13, 2015) (online at www.onderzoeksraad.nl/en/page/3546/crash -mh17 -17 -july -2014); U.S. Discloses 

Intelligence on Downing of Malaysian Jet , Washington Post (July 22, 2014) (online at 

www. washingtonpost.com/world/national -security/us -discloses -intelligence -on -downing -of -malaysian -

jet/2014/07/22/b178fe58 -11e1 -11e4 -98ee -daea85133bc9_story.html).  

> 279

Ambassador Nikki Haley, United States Mission to the United Nations, Remarks at a U.N. Security 

Council Briefing on Ukraine (May 29, 2018) (online at https://usun.usmission.gov/remarks -at -a-un -security -council -

briefing -on -ukraine -2/).  

> 280

Department of Defense, Secretary of Defense James Mattis Remarks with President Petro Poroshenko 

(Aug. 24, 2017) (o nline at www.defense.gov/Newsroom/Speeches/Speech/Article/1291430/secretary -of -defense -

james -mattis -remarks -with -president -petro -poroshenko/).  

> 281

European Union External Action, EU -Ukraine Relations Factsheet (Sept. 30, 2019) (online at 

https://eeas.europa. eu/headquarters/headQuarters -homepage/4081/eu -ukraine -relations -factsheet_en); NATO, Fact 

Sheet: NATO’s Support to Ukraine (Nov. 2018) 

(www.nato.int/nato_static_fl2014/assets/pdf/pdf_2018_11/20181106_1811 -factsheet -nato -ukraine -support -eng.pdf).  

> 282

DOD An nounces $250M to Ukraine , U.S. Department of Defense (June 18, 2019) (online at 

www.defense.gov/Newsroom/Releases/Release/Article/1879340/dod -announces -250m -to -ukraine/).  

> 283

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 21, 28 -29, 50; Vindman Dep. Tr. at 40 -41, 113; Cooper De p. Tr. at 15 -16.  

> 284

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 153.  

> 285

Croft Dep. Tr. at 16.  

> 286

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 30.  

> 287

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 20.  

> 288

Morrison -Volker Hearing Tr. at 11.  

> 289

Department of Defense and Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education Appropriation s Act, 

2019 and Continuing Appropriations Act, 2019, Pub. L. No. 115 -245, § 9013 (2018).  

> 290

National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2016, Pub. L. 114 -92, § 1250 (2015), amended by 

the National Defense Act Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018, Pub. L. No. 115 -91, § 1234 (2017) and most 

recently amended by the John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019, Pub. L. No. 

115 -232, § 1246 (2018). 168  

> 291

National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2017, Pub. L. No. 114 -328, § 1237 (2016); National 

Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018, Pub. L. No. 115 -91, § 1234 (2018); John S. McCain National 

Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019, Pub. L. No. 115 -232, § 1246 (2018).  

> 292

Letter from John C. Rood, Under Secretary of Defense for Policy, Department of Defense, to Chairman 

Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs (sent Feb. 28, 2019, received Mar. 5, 2019).  

> 293

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 27 -28.  

> 294

National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2016, Pub. L. No. 114 -92, § 1250 (2015), as 

amended by the National Defense Act Authorization Act for Fiscal Y ear 2018, Pub. L. No. 115 -91, § 1234 (2017), 

and most recently amended by the John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019, Pub. 

L. No. 115 -232, § 1246 (2018).  

> 295

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 24.  

> 296

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 24.  

> 297

Letter from John C. Rood, Under Secretary of Defense for Policy, Department of Defense, to Chairman 

Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs (sent May 23, 2019, received May 28, 2019).  

> 298

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 31 -32.  

> 299

DOD Announces $250M to Ukraine , Department of Defense (June 18, 2019) (online at 

www.defense.gov/Newsroom/Releases/Release/Article/1879340/dod -announces -250m -to -ukraine/).  

> 300

Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2019, Pub. L. No. 116 -6, §7046(a)(2) (2019); Conference Report to 

Accompany C onsolidated Appropriations Act, 2019, H.R. Rep. No. 116 -9, p. 869 (2019).  

> 301

Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2018, Pub. L. No. 115 -141, Title VIII (2017).  

> 302

Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2019, Pub. L. No. 116 -6, §7015(c) (2019); Consolidated 

Appropriat ions Act, 2018, Pub. L. No. 115 -141, § 7015(c) (2017).  

> 303

OMB Circular No. A -11, § 22.3 (2019) (requiring that the State Department receive clearance from 

OMB before notifying Congress).  

> 304

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 25; DOD Announces $250M to Ukraine , Department of Defense (June 18, 2019) 

(online at www.defense.gov/Newsroom/Releases/Release/Article/1879340/dod -announces -250m -to -ukraine/).  

> 305

Sean Hannity Interviews Donald Trump via Telephone , Fox News (June 19, 2019) (transcript at 

https://factba.se/transcript/donald -trump -interview -sean -hannity -fox -telephone -june -19 -2019).  

> 306

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 26 -27.  

> 307

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 27 -28.  

> 308

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 29 -30.  

> 309

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 33 -34.  

> 310

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 33.  

> 311

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 34.  

> 312

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 38.  

> 313

Cooper De p. Tr. at 37 -38.  

> 314

Cooper -Hale Hearing Tr. at 14; Vindman Dep. Tr. at 178 -179. See also Stalled Ukraine Military Aid 

Concerned Members of Congress for Months, CNN (Sept. 30, 2019) (online at 

www.cnn.com/2019/09/30/politics/ukraine -military -aid -congress/in dex.html) (suggesting that the State Department 

sought OMB’s approval for $141 million in FMF funds on June 21, 2019).  

> 315

OMB Circular No. A -11, § 22.3 (2019) (requiring that the State Department receive clearance from 

OMB before notifying Congress).  

> 316

Wi lliams Dep. Tr. at 54 -55. 169  

> 317

Williams Dep. Tr. at 55.  

> 318

Blair previously served as Associate Director of National Security Programs at OMB (Blair was 

Duffey’s predecessor), and left OMB for the White House Office of Chief of Staff with Mick Mulvaney. Sandy 

Dep. Tr. at 36 -38.  

> 319

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 38 -39.  

> 320

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 39.  

> 321

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 161.  

> 322

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 141 -142.  

> 323

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 142.  

> 324

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 31 -32.  

> 325

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 41 -42.  

> 326

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 40; see also Croft Dep. Tr. at 83 (“very routine low -level business”).  

> 327

Kent Dep. Tr. at 303 -305.  

> 328

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 27 -28.  

> 329

Croft Dep. Tr. at 83.  

> 330

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 27.  

> 331

Holmes Dep. Tr. at 154.  

> 332

Holmes Dep. Tr. at 154.  

> 333

Croft Dep. Tr. at 15.  

> 334

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 45.  

> 335

Kent Dep. Tr. at 304.  

> 336

Kent Dep. Tr. at 305.  

> 337

Sandy D ep. Tr. at 99; Vindman Dep. Tr. at 182.  

> 338

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 40. Morrison, who did not attend the sub -PCC meeting but received a readout, 

testified that he thought OMB announced at the July 18th meeting that the hold “covered all dollars, DOD and 

Department of State, and it was —it was beyond fun ds not yet obligated to include funds that had, in fact, been 

obligated but not yet expended.” Morrison Dep. Tr. at 161.  

> 339

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 40.  

> 340

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 44 -45.  

> 341

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 40.  

> 342

Kent Dep. Tr. at 307 -308.  

> 343

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 162 . 

> 344

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 46.  

> 345

Williams Dep. Tr. at 91 -92; see also Morrison Dep. Tr. at 162 (testifying that representatives from OMB 

stated that the hold “had been imposed by the chief of staff’s office” and that the hold “was at the direction of the 

Presi dent”).  

> 346

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 46.  

> 347

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 162 -163; Kent Dep. Tr. at 310; Sandy Dep. Tr. at 91.  

> 348

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 91. 170  

> 349

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 163.  

> 350

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 163.  

> 351

2 U.S.C. § 601 et. seq.  

> 352

Williams Dep. Tr. at 91 -92; Vindman Dep. Tr. at 182; Morrison Dep. Tr. at 162; Sandy Dep. Tr. at 99.  

> 353

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 195.  

> 354

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 182.  

> 355

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 54.  

> 356

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 54, 96 -98.  

> 357

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 97.  

> 358

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 9 7.  

> 359

Hale Dep. Tr. at 81.  

> 360

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 47.  

> 361

Hale Dep. Tr. at 81; see also Vindman Dep. Tr. at 184 (“It was unanimous consensus on the approach 

that we had laid out in expanding engagement, the areas of cooperation that we wanted to focus on, and t hat this 

should be elevated to a PC as quickly as possible to release the hold on security assistance because we’re talking 

about the end of July, and time these funds were set to expire September 30th, so there was some urgency to it.”); 

Cooper Dep. Tr. a t 49 (“Although each member went around to talk about how important it [security assistance] was 

and how they assessed the future in Ukraine based on the recent election results.”).  

> 362

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 165.  

> 363

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 93.  

> 364

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 49, 93.  

> 365

Nixon’s Presidency: Crisis for Congress , New York Times (Mar. 5, 1973) (online at 

www.nytimes.com/1973/03/05/archives/nixons -presidency -crisis -for -congress -this -is -the -second -of -a.html).  

> 366

Congressional Research Service, The Congressional Bud get Act of 1974 (P.L. 93 -344) Legislative 

History and Analysis (Feb. 26, 1975) (online at https://budgetcounsel.files.wordpress.com/2018/05/added -crs -the -

congressional -budget -act -of -1974 -p-l-93 -344 -legislative -history -and -analysis -order -code -75 -94 -s-februa ry -26 -

1975.pdf).  

> 367

Calvin Coolidge Presidential Foundation, The History of the 1921 and 1974 Budget Acts (Nov. 26, 

2014); So… this is Nixon’s Fault? , Politico (Oct. 21, 2015) (online at 

www.politico.com/agenda/story/2015/10/richard -nixon -congressional -budg et -control -act -history -000282).  

> 368

2 U.S.C. § 683.  

> 369

U.S. Government Accountability Office, Impoundment Control Act —Withholding of Funds through 

Their Date of Expiration (Dec. 10, 2018) (online at www.gao.gov/assets/700/695889.pdf).  

> 370

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 47 -48. With regard to interagency discussions about the legality of the hold, 

Vindman testified “[s]o I’m not a legal expert, but there was a sufficient amount of —a significant amount of work 

done to determine whether it was legal for OMB to be able to plac e the hold. … I think at the —so my recollection in 

the [July 18th] sub -PCC was that the matter was raised; at the [July 23rd] PCC, it was tasked for further 

development; and I think by the time it got to our [July 26th] DSG it was determined that, you know , there was a 

legal basis to hold.” Vindman Dep. Tr. at 185.  

> 371

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 184.  

> 372

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 165.  

> 373

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 264.  

> 374

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 264. 171  

> 375

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 264.  

> 376

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 51.  

> 377

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 51; see also Cooper Dep. Tr. at 113 (explaining that she relied on a conversation 

with DOD legal to form her understanding of the two proper legal mechanisms).  

> 378

2 U.S.C. § 683.  

> 379

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 58 -59.  

> 380

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 114.  

> 381

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 51, 57; Sandy Dep. Tr. at 147 -148.  

> 382

31 U.S.C. §§ 1511 -1516.  

> 383

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 87, 163.  

> 384

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 34 -35.  

> 385

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 51.  

> 386

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 23.  

> 387

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 33 -35, 51 -52.  

> 388

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 86.  

> 389

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 86 -87.  

> 390

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 86.  

> 391

Sandy, Dep. Tr. at 87 -88.  

> 392

SF -132 Apportionment Schedule FY 2019, OMB Footnote A4 (July 25, 2019).  

> 393

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 94.  

> 394

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 94.  

> 395

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 94 -95; SF -132 Apportionment Schedule FY 2019, O MB Footnote A4 (July 25, 2019).  

> 396

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 87.  

> 397

SF -132 Apportionment Schedule FY 2019, OMB Footnote A4 (July 25, 2019); Sandy Dep. Tr. at 92.  

> 398

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 101.  

> 399

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 102.  

> 400

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 96 -97, 102.  

> 401

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 101 -102.  

> 402

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 63.  

> 403

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 63.  

> 404

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 102.  

> 405

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 64 -65.  

> 406

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 65.  

> 407

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 108 -109.  

> 408

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 104, 119 -120.  

> 409

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 58 -59.  

> 410

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 58 -59. 172  

> 411

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 59.  

> 412

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 74 -75, 127 -128.  

> 413

SF -132 Apportionment Schedule FY 2019, OMB Footnote A4 (August 6, 2019); SF -132 Apportionment 

Schedule FY 2019, OMB Footnote A4 (August 15, 2019). Because of a draf ting error in which OMB forgot to 

extend the date, the footnotes technically did not restrict DOD from spending funds between August 12 and August 

20 (the date of the subsequent funding document reinstating the hold). However, Sandy testified that the hol d was 

still in place and that the direction from the President remained unchanged. Sandy Dep. Tr. at 124 -126.  

> 414

SF -132 Apportionment Schedule FY 2019, OMB Footnote A4 (August 6, 2019); SF -132 Apportionment 

Schedule FY 2019, OMB Footnote A4 (August 15, 2019); SF -132 Apportionment Schedule FY 2019, OMB 

Footnote A4 (August 20, 2019); SF -132 Apportionment Schedule FY 2 019, OMB Footnote A4 (August 27, 2019); 

SF -132 Apportionment Schedule FY 2019, OMB Footnote A4 (August 31, 2019); SF -132 Apportionment Schedule 

FY 2019, OMB Footnote A4 (Sept. 5, 2019); SF -13; SF -132 Apportionment Schedule FY 2019, OMB Footnote A4 

(Sept. 6 , 2019); Apportionment Schedule FY 2019, OMB Footnote A4 (Sept. 10, 2019)  

> 415

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 91 -92.  

> 416

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 92.  

> 417

Kent Dep. Tr. at 318 -319.  

> 418

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 56 -61.  

> 419

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 59 -60.  

> 420

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 60 -61.  

> 421

Sandy Dep. Tr. a t 75, 127 -128; Cooper Dep. Tr. at 57 -58; see also Cooper Dep. Tr. at 59, (“And along 

the way, [the] Defense Security Cooperation Agency was expressing doubt that they could do it.”).  

> 422

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 80 -81. Ultimately, as described below, DOD was abl e to obligate all but 

approximately $35 million in USAI funds by September 30th. Sandy Dep. Tr. at 146 -147.  

> 423

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 127 -128.  

> 424

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 95.  

> 425

SF -132 Apportionment Schedule FY 2019 (August 20, 2019); SF -132 Apportionment Schedule FY 

20 19 (August 27, 2019); SF -132 Apportionment Schedule FY 2019 (August 31, 2019); SF -132 Apportionment 

Schedule FY 2019 (September 5, 2019); SF -132 Apportionment Schedule FY 2019 (September 6, 2019); SF -132 

Apportionment Schedule FY 2019 (September 10, 2019).  

> 426

SF -132 Apportionment Schedule FY 2019 (August 20, 2019) (funds not available for obligation until 

August 26); SF -132 Apportionment Schedule FY 2019 (August 27, 2019) (funds not available for obligation until 

August 31); SF -132 Apportionment Schedule FY 2019 (August 31, 2019) (funds not available for obligation until 

September 5); SF -132 Apportionment Schedule FY 2019 (September 5, 2019) (funds not available for obligation 

until September 7); SF -132 Apportionment Schedule FY 2019 (September 6, 2019) (fun ds not available for 

obligation until September 11); SF -132 Apportionment Schedule FY 2019 (September 10, 2019) (funds not 

available for obligation until September 12).  

> 427

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 131.  

> 428

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 136 -137.  

> 429

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 136.  

> 430

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 135 -137, 150 -155.  

> 431

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 149 -152.  

> 432

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 152.  

> 433

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 150 -156.  

> 434

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 266 -267. 173  

> 435

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 268.  

> 436

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 267.  

> 437

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 186.  

> 438

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 186.  

> 439

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 187 -188.  

> 440

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 167 -168.  

> 441

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 170 -171.  

> 442

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 265 -266.  

> 443

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 172, 266.  

> 444

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 266.  

> 445

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 68.  

> 446

Croft Dep. Tr. at 86.  

> 447

Croft De p. Tr. at 86 -87.  

> 448

Croft Dep. Tr. at 86 -87, 101.  

> 449

Croft Dep. Tr. at 97 -98.  

> 450

Cooper -Hale Hearing Tr. at 14.  

> 451

Cooper -Hale Hearing Tr. at 13 -14.  

> 452

Cooper -Hale Hearing Tr. at 14.  

> 453

Cooper -Hale Hearing Tr. at 15.  

> 454

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 221 -22.  

> 455

Trump Holds Up Ukraine Military Aid Meant to Confront Russia, Politico (Aug. 28, 2019) (online at 

www.politico.com/story/2019/08/28/trump -ukraine -military -aid -russia -1689531).  

> 456

Holmes Dep. Tr. at 18. (“It is important to understand that a White House visit was critical to President 

Zelensky. He needed to demonstrate U.S. support at the highest levels, both to advance his ambitious anti -corruption 

agenda at home and to encourage Russian President Putin to take seriously President Zelensky’s peace efforts.”)  

> 457

Kent Dep. Tr. at 202. (“The President of the United States is a longtime acknowledged leader of the 

free world, and the U.S. is Ukraine’s strongest supporter. And so in th e Ukraine context, it’s very important to show 

that they can establish a strong relationship with the leader of the United States. That’s the Ukrainian argument and 

desire to have a meeting. The foreign policy argument is it’s a very important country in the front lines of Russian 

malign influence and aggression. And the U.S. spends a considerable amount of our resources supporting Ukraine 

and therefore it makes sense.”)  

> 458

Hill Dep. Tr. at 158. (“He was just generally concerned about actually not having a meeting because he 

felt that this would deprive Ukraine, the new Ukrainian Government of the legitimacy that it needed, especially vis -

a-vis the Russians. So this gets t o, you know, the heart of our national security dilemma. You know, the Ukrainians 

at this point, you know, are looking at a White House meeting or looking at a meeting with the President of the 

United States as a recognition of their legitimacy as a sover eign state.”)  

> 459

Vindman Hearing Tr. at 38 -39. (“The show of support for President Zelensky, still a brand -new 

President, frankly, a new politician on the Ukrainian political scene, looking to establish his bona fides as a regional 

and maybe even a world le ader, would want to have a meeting with the United States, the most powerful country in 

the world and Ukraine’s most significant benefactor, in order to be able to implement his agenda.”)  

> 460

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 59.  

> 461

Volker Transcribed Inte rview Tr. at 328. 174  

> 462

Taylor Dep. Opening Statement at 5. (“In late June, one of the goals of both channels was to facilitate a 

visit by President Zelensky to the White House for a meeting with President Trump, which President Trump had 

promised in his con gratulatory letter of May 29. The Ukrainians were clearly eager for the meeting to happen. 

During a conference call with Ambassador Volker, Acting Assistant Secretary of State for European and Eurasian 

Affairs Phil Reeker, Secretary Perry, Ambassador Son dland, and Counsel of the U.S. Department of State Ulrich 

Brechbuhl on June 18, it was clear that a meeting between the two presidents was an agreed -upon goal.”)  

> 463

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 25. (“[D]uring my subsequent communications with Ambassadors Volker and 

Sondland, they relayed to me that the President ‘wanted to hear from Zelensky’ before scheduling the meeting in the 

Oval Office. It was not clear to me what this meant.”)  

> 464

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 25.  

> 465

Holmes Dep. Tr. at 20.  

> 466

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 25 -26.  

> 467

Tayl or Dep. Tr. at 25. 

Q: But Ambassador Sondland made it clear not only that he didn't wish to include most of the regular 

interagency participants but also that no one was transcribing or monitoring the call as they added 

President Zelensky. What struck you as odd about that? 

A: Same concern. That is, in the normal, regular channel, the State Department operations center that 

was putting the call together would stay on the line, in particular when you were having a 

conversation with the head of state, they w ould stay on the line, transcribe, take notes so that there 

could be a record of the discussion with this head of state. It is an official discussion. When he 

wanted to be sure that there was not, the State Department operations center agreed.  

> 468

Taylor Dep . Tr. at 26.  

> 469

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 127.  

> 470

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000036 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 471

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000036 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 472

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 26.  

> 473

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000027 (Oct . 2, 2019).  

> 474

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 242 -243.  

> 475

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000055 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 476

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000027 (Oct. 2, 2019). 

Taylor: Are you OK with me briefing Ulrich on these convers ations? Maybe you 

have already? 

Volker: I have not —please feel free 

Volker: The key thing is to tee up a phone call w potus and then get visit nailed down 

Taylor: I agree. Is Ze on board with a phone call? 

Volker: Yes — bogdan was a little skeptical, but Zelensky was ok with it. Now we need to get it on potus 

schedule… 

Taylor: The three amigos are on a roll. Let me know when I can help.  

> 477

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 65 -66. (“Kurt told me that he had discussed how Preside nt Zelensky could prepare for 

the phone call with President Trump. And without going into —without providing me any details about the specific 

words, did talk about investigations in that conversation ... Kurt suggested that President Trump would like to he ar 

about the investigations.”)  

> 478

Morrison -Volker Hearing Tr. at 94. 175 

Q: In the July 2nd or 3rd meeting in Toronto that you had with President Zelensky, you also 

mentioned investigations to him, right? 

A: Yes 

Q: And again, you were referring to the Burisma and the 2016 election. 

A: I was thinking of Burisma and 2016. 

Q: And you understood that that what the Ukrainians interpreted references to investigations to be, 

related to Burisma and the 2016 election? 

A: I don’t know specifically at that time if we ha d talked that specifically, Burisma/2016. That was 

my assumption, though, that they would’ve been thinking that too.  

> 479

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 27.  

> 480

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 43.  

> 481

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 21 -22.  

> 482

Kent Dep. Tr. at 246.  

> 483

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 59.  

> 484

Kent Dep. Tr. at 246 -47. (“I do not recall whether the follow -on conversation I had with Kurt about this 

was in Toronto, or whether it was subsequently at the State Department. But he did tell me that he planned to start 

reaching out to fo rmer Mayor of New York, Rudy Giuliani. And when I asked him why, he said that it was clear 

that the former mayor had influence on the President in terms of the way the President though of Ukraine. And I 

think by that moment in time, that was self -evidenc e to anyone who was working on the issues, and therefore, it 

made sense to try to engage the mayor. When I raised with Kurt, I said, about what? Because former Mayor 

Giuliani has a track record of, you know, asking for a visa for a corrupt former prosecu tor. He attacked Masha, and 

he’s tweeting that the new President needs to investigate Biden and the 2016 campaign. And Kurt’s reaction or 

response to me at that was, well, if there’s nothing there, what does it matter? And if there is something there, i t

should be investigated. My response to him was asking another country to investigate a prosecution for political 

reasons undermines our advocacy of the rule of law.”)  

> 485

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000036 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 486

Kurt Volker Docu ment Production, Bates KV00000036 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 487

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000006 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 488

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 308; Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000018 (Oct. 

2, 2019).  

> 489

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 138.  

> 490

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 23.  

> 491

Hill Dep. Tr. at 63.  

> 492

Hill Dep. Tr. at 63 -67, 155.  

> 493

Hill Dep. Tr. at 63 -67, 155. 

Q: Did anything happen in that meeting that was out of the ordinary? 

A: Yes. At one point during that meeting, Ambassador Bolton was, you know, basically trying very 

hard not to commit to a meeting, because, you know – and, again, these meetings have to be well -

prepared. They’re not just something that you say, yes, we’re going to have a meeting without 

there being a clear understanding of what the content of that meeting is going to be. … And 

Ambassador Bolton is always – was always very cautious and alway s very much, you know, by 

the book and was not going to certainly commit to a meeting right there and then, certainly not one 

where it wasn’t – it was unclear what the content of the meeting would be about, what kind of 

issues that we would discuss that wo uld be pertaining to Ukrainian -U.S. relations. … Then 176 

Ambassador Sondland blurted out: Well, we have an agreement with the chief of staff for a 

meeting if these investigations in the energy sector start. And Ambassador Bolton immediately 

stiffened. He sa id words to the effect —I can’t say word for word what he said because I was 

behind them sitting on the sofa with our Senior Director of Energy, and we all kind of looked up 

and thought that was somewhat odd. And Ambassador Bolton immediately stiffened and ended 

the meeting. 

Q: Right then, he just ended the meeting? 

A: Yeah. He said: Well, it was very nice to see you. You know, I can’t discuss a meeting at this time. 

We’ll clearly work on this. And, you know, kind of it was really nice to see you. So it was very 

abrupt. I mean, he looked at the clock as if he had, you know, suddenly another meeting and his 

time was up, but it was obvious he ended the meeting.  

> 494

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 17. (“The meeting proceeded well until the Ukrainians broached the subject of a 

meeting between the two Presidents. The Ukrainians saw this meeting as critically important in order to solidify the 

support for their most important international partner. Ambassador Sondland started -- when Ambassador Sondland 

started to speak abou t Ukraine delivering specific investigations in order to secure the meeting with the President, 

Ambassador Bolton cut the meeting short.”)  

> 495

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 310.  

> 496

Morrison -Volker Hearing Tr. at 23, 73, 103.  

> 497

Hill Dep. Tr. at 68. (“A nd Ambassador Sondland said to Ambassador Volker and also Secretary Perry 

and the other people who were with him, including the Ukrainians, to come down to —there’s a room in the White 

House, the Ward Room, to basically talk about next steps. And that’s als o unusual. I mean, he meant to talk to the 

Ukrainians about next steps about the meeting.”)  

> 498

Hill Dep. Tr. at 68. (“And Ambassador Bolton pulled me back as I was walking out afterwards and 

said: Go down to the Ward Room right now and find out what they’r e talking about and come back and talk to me. 

So I did go down.”)  

> 499

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 64 -65. 

Q: And what do you recall specifically of what Sondland said to the Ukrainians —

A: Right. 

Q: —in the Ward Room? 

A: So that is right, the conversation unf olded with Sondland proceeding to kind of, you know, review 

what the deliverable would be in order to get the meeting, and he talked about the investigation 

into the Bidens, and, frankly, I can’t 100 percent recall because I didn’t take notes of it, but 

Bu risma, that it seemed —I mean, there was no ambiguity, I guess, in my mind. He was calling for 

something, calling for an investigation that didn’t exist into the Bidens and Burisma. 

Q: Okay. Ambiguity in your mind is different from what you —

A: Sure. 

Q: —actually heard? 

A: Right. Correct. 

Q: What did you hear Sondland say? 

A: That the Ukrainians would have to deliver an investigation into the Bidens. 

Q: Into the Bidens. So in the Ward Room he mentioned the word “Bidens”? 

A: To the best of my recollection, yes. 

Q: Okay. Did he mention 2016? 

A: I don’t recall. 177 

Q: Did he mention Burisma? 

A: My visceral reaction to what was being called for suggested that it was explicit. There was no 

ambiguity. 

…

A: Again, based on my vi sceral reaction, it was explicit what he was calling for. And to the best of 

my recollection, he did specifically say “investigation of the Bidens.” 

…

A So the meeting that occurred in the Ward Room referenced investigations into the Bidens, to the 

best o f my recollection, Burisma and 2016  

> 500

Hill Dep. Tr. at 69.  

> 501

Hill Dep. Tr. at 151 -52.  

> 502

Hill Dep. Tr. at 69 -70.  

> 503

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 31. 

Q: Did Ambassador Sondland —were the Ukrainian officials in the room when he was describing the 

need for these inv estigations in order to get the White House meeting? 

A: So they were in the room initially. I think, once it became clear that there was some sort of 

discord amongst the government officials in the room, Ambassador Sondland asked them to step 

out of the r oom. 

Q: What was the discord? 

A: The fact that it was clear that I, as the representative —I, as the representative of the NSC, thought 

it was inappropriate and that we were not going to get involved in investigations. 

Q: Did you say that to Ambassador Sond land? 

A: Yes, I did.  

> 504

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 18. 

While not specifically disagreeing with any of the content of the discussion in the Ward Room, 

Ambassador Sondland generally disputed Dr. Hill and Lt. Col. Vindman’s accounts, saying that he did not recall 

“any yelling or screaming … as others have said.” Sondland Hearing Tr. at 23. Neither Dr. Hill nor Lt. Col. 

Vindman described yelling or screaming in the meetings. 

Ambassador Sondland also testified that “those recollections of protest do not square wi th the documentary 

record of our interactions with the NSC in the days and weeks that followed.” Sondland Hearing Tr. at 23. As an 

example, Sondland provided text from a July 13 email that he sent —not to Dr. Hill, but to her successor Tim 

Morrison —which said that the “sole purpose” of the call between President Trump and President Zelensky was to 

give the former “assurances of ‘new sheriff’ in town.” Sondland Hearing Tr. at 23. The email that Ambassador 

Sondland provided does not undermine Dr. Hill’s or Lt. Col. Vindman’s testimony that they objected to Ambassador 

Sondland’s conduct in the Ward Room meeting. The email provided by Ambassador Sondland, however, was sent 

to Mr. Morrison, not Dr. Hill. Mr. Morrison had not yet started working as NSC Senior Director for Europe and was 

not at the July 10 meeting.  

> 505

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 29. 

A: So I heard him say that this had been coordinated with White House Chief of Staff Mr. Mick 

Mulvaney. 

Q: What did he say about that? 

A: He just said that he had had a conversation with Mr. Mulvaney, and this is what was required in 

order to get a meeting.  

> 506

Hill Dep. Tr. at 69 -70. 178  

> 507

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000036 (Oct. 2, 2019). 

[7/10/19, 2:26:06 PM] Bill Taylor: Eager to hear if your meeting with Danyliuk and Bolton resulted in a 

decision on a call. 

[7/10/19, 10:26:13 PM] Bill Taylor: How did the meeting go? 

[7/10/19, 10:29:44 PM] Kurt Volker: Not good —lets talk —kv  

> 508

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000018 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 509

Hill Dep. Tr. at 70 -72.  

> 510

Hill Dep. Tr. at 126 -27. 

Q: Okay. But what did you understand hi m to mean by that? 

A: Well, based on what had happened in the July 10th meeting and Ambassador Sondland blurting 

out that he’d already gotten agreement to have a meeting at the White House for Zelensky if these 

investigations were started up again, clear ly Ambassador Bolton was referring directly to those.  

> 511

Hill Dep. Tr. at 129.  

> 512

Hill Dep. Tr. at 139. (“I told him exactly, you know, what had transpired and that Ambassador 

Sondland had basically indicated that there was an agreement with the Chief of S taff that they would have a White 

House meeting or, you know, a Presidential meeting if the Ukrainians started up these investigations again.”)  

> 513

Hill Dep. Tr. at 139.  

> 514

Hill Dep. Tr. at 146 -147.  

> 515

Hill Dep. Tr. at 158 -59, 161. 

Q: What was Mr. Eisenberg 's reaction to what you explained to him had and Mr. Griffith had 

explained to him had occurred the day before? 

A: Yeah. He was also concerned. I mean, he wasn’t aware that Sondland, Ambassador Sondland was, 

you know, kind of running around doing a lot o f these, you know, meetings and independently. 

We talked about the fact that, you know, Ambassador Sondland said he’d been meeting with 

Giuliani and he was very concerned about that. And he said that he would follow up on this.  

> 516

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 37. (“Sir, I think I —I mean, the top line I just offered, I’ll restate it, which is that 

Mr. Sondland asked for investigations, for these investigations into Bidens and Burisma. I actually recall having that 

particular conversation. Mr. Eisenberg doesn’t reall y work on this issue, so I had to go a little bit into the back story 

of what these investigations were, and that I expressed concerns and thought it was inappropriate.”)  

> 517

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 36.  

> 518

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 38. 

Q: Did he say anything to you, that, all right, I’m going to do anything with it? 

A: I vaguely recall something about: I’ll take a look into it. You know, there might not be anything 

here. We’ll take a look into it, something of that nature. But —and then h e offered to, you know, if 

I have any concerns in the future, you know, that I should be open —I should be —feel free to 

come back and, you know, share those concerns. 

Q: Did either he or anyone from the legal staff circle back to you on this issue? 

A: No.  

> 519

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 39 -40.  

> 520

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 29. (“In the same July 19th phone call, they gave me an account of the July 10th 

meeting with the Ukrainian officials at the White House. Specifically, they told me that Ambassador Sondland had 

connect ed investigations with an Oval Office meeting for President Zelensky, which so irritated Ambassador Bolton 179 

that he abruptly ended the meeting, telling Dr. Hill and Mr. Vindman that they should have nothing to do with 

domestic politics.”)  

> 521

Morrison Dep. Tr . at 12.  

> 522

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Written Statement of Ambassador Gordon 

Sondland, Impeachment , 116th Cong. (Nov. 20, 2019) ( “2. The call between Zelensky and Potus should happen 

before 7/21. (Parliamentary Elections) Sole purp ose is for Zelensky to give Potus assurances of ‘new sheriff’ in 

town. Corruption ending, unbundling moving forward and any hampered investigations will be allowed to move 

forward transparently. Goal is for Potus to invite him to Oval. Volker, Perry, Bolto n and I strongly recommend.”).  

> 523

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Written Statement of Ambassador Gordon 

Sondland, Impeachment , 116th Cong. (Nov. 20, 2019).  

> 524

Sondland Dep. Tr. at 227.  

> 525

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Opening Statement of Ambassador Gordon 

Sondland, Department of State, Impeachment , 116th Cong., at 21 (Nov. 20, 2019).  

> 526

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Opening Statement of Ambassador Gordon 

Sondland, Department of State, Impeachment , 116th Cong., at 21 (Nov. 20, 2019).  

> 527

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Opening Statement of Ambassador Gordon 

Sondland, Department of State, Impeachment , 116th Cong., at 21 (Nov. 20, 201 9).  

> 528

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 27.  

> 529

Verizon Document Production. It is unclear whether this call occurred before or after Ambassador 

Sondland spoke with President Zelensky, and it is also unclear whether the White House caller was an 

Administration offi cial or the President himself.  

> 530

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000037 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 531

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000037 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 532

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 229 -230.  

> 533

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000018 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 534

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 202 -203.  

> 535

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 232.  

> 536

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000002 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 537

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000018 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 538

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 138 -139.  

> 539

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930_02705 . 

> 540

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 139.  

> 541

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000018 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 542

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000002 - KV00000003 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 543

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000042 (Oct. 2, 2019). 

Volker: Orchestrated a great call w Rudy and Yermak. They are going to get together when Rudy 

goes to Madrid in a couple of weeks. 

Volker: In the meantime, Rudy is now advocating for phone call 

Volker: I have call into Fiona’s replacement and will call Bolton if needed. 

Volker: But I can tell Bolton and you can tell Mick that Rudy agrees on a call, if that helps 

Sondland: I talked to Tim Mo rrison. (Fiona’s replacement). He is pushing but feel free as well. 180  

> 544

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000042 (Oct. 2, 2019). 

Volker: Orchestrated a great call w Rudy and Yermak. They are going to get together when Rudy 

goes to Madrid in a co uple of weeks. 

Volker: In the meantime, Rudy is now advocating for phone call 

Volker: I have call into Fiona’s replacement and will call Bolton if needed. 

Volker: But I can tell Bolton and you can tell Mick that Rudy agrees on a call, if that helps 

Sondland: I talked to Tim Morrison. (Fiona’s eplacement). He is pushing but feel free as well.  

> 545

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 30.  

> 546

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV000000 37 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 547

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 74.  

> 548

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 68.  

> 549

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 177.  

> 550

Sondland Dep. Tr. at 183.  

> 551

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 17.  

> 552

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 18.  

> 553

Sondland Heari ng Tr. at 19; 17.  

> 554

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 27.  

> 555

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 26.  

> 556

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 27.  

> 557

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 26.  

> 558

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 25.  

> 559

Hill Dep. Tr. at 420 -421. 

Q: You’ve mentioned repeatedly concerns that you had about, in particular, Mr. Giuliani and his 

efforts. When you read the call transcript of July 25th, the call record, which you must have done 

just a couple weeks ago, did it crystalize in your head in any w ay a better understanding of what 

was transpiring while you were there? 

A: In terms of providing, you know, more information with hindsight, unfortunately, yes. 

Q: And in what way? 

A: The specific references, also juxtaposed with the release of the te xt messages by Ambassador 

Volker —you know, what I said before —really was kind of my worst fears and nightmares, in 

terms of, you know, there being some kind of effort not just to subvert the national security 

process but to try to subvert what really shoul d be, you know, kind of, a diplomatic effort to, you 

know, kind of, set up a Presidential meeting. 

Q: This may —

A: There seems to be an awful lot of people involved in, you know, basically turning a White House 

meeting into some kind of asset. 

Q: What do you mean by “asset”? 

A: Well, something that was being, you know, dangled out to the Ukrainian Government. They 

wanted the White House meeting very much. And this was kind of laying out that it wasn’t just a 

question of scheduling or having, you know , the national security issues worked out, that there 

were all of these alternative discussions going on behind. 181  

> 560

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 174.  

> 561

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 174.  

> 562

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000042 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 563

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 53 -55.  

> 564

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 52 -53.  

> 565

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 30 -31, 101, 247, 256.  

> 566

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 31.  

> 567

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 111.  

> 568

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 102 -103; Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000007 

(Oct. 2, 2019). 

In his testimony, Ambassador Volker did not explain to the Committees what he had heard about the July 

25 call put him in a position to tell Mr. Giuliani that the “right messages” were, in fact, discussed. 

Ambassador Volker testified twice about the readouts that he received of the July 25 call. In his deposition, 

he told the Committees that he received “the same” readout from both the State Department and Mr. 

Yermak: that there was a message of congratulat ions to President Zelensky, that President Zelensky 

promised to fight corruption and that President Trump repeated the invitation to visit the White House. 

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 102 -103. Volker described it as a “superficial” readout. Volke r

Transcribed Interview Tr. at 19. 

In his public testimony, Volker repeated that claim: the readouts from Mr. Yermak and Volker’s U.S. 

sources “were largely the same, that it was a good call, that it was a congratulatory phone call for the 

President winni ng the parliamentary election.” Volker -Morrison Hearing Tr. at 74. Volker did testify that 

he “expected” the call to cover the material in his July 25 text message – that the Ukrainians would 

“investigate/‘get to the bottom of what happened’ in 2016” – bu t did not receive anything more than a 

“barebones” description of what was said. Volker -Morrison Hearing Tr. at 87 -88, 75. 

If Volker is correctly describing the readouts he received, it is not clear what he heard that gave him the 

basis to tell Mr. Giulia ni that “exactly the right messages” were discussed.  

> 569

Williams Dep. Tr. at 37 -38.  

> 570

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 23.  

> 571

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 25.  

> 572

Trump and Putin Share Joke About Election Meddling, Sparking New Furor , New York Times (June 28, 

2019) (online at www.nytimes.com/2019/06/28/us/politics/trump -putin -election.html) (“As he sat down on Friday 

with Mr. Putin on the sidelines of an international summit in Japan, Mr. Trump was asked by a reporter if he would 

tell Russia not to meddle in Am erican elections. ‘Yes, of course I will,’ Mr. Trump said. Turning to Mr. Putin, he 

said, with a half -grin on his face and mock seriousness in his voice, ‘Don’t meddle in the election, President.’”).  

> 573

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 41.  

> 574

Williams Dep. Tr. at 131.  

> 575

See Vindman Dep. Tr. at 42, 109; Morrison Dep. Tr. at 41.  

> 576

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 18; Morrison Dep. Tr. at 15.  

> 577

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 42 -43; Morrison -Volker Hearing Tr. at 32.  

> 578

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 39; Vindman Dep. Tr. at 45.  

> 579

U.S. Embassy & Consulates in Italy, Secretary Michael R. Pompeo and Italian Foreign Minister Luigi 

Di Maio at a Press Availability (Oct. 2, 2019) (online at https://it.usembassy.gov/secretary -michael -r-pompeo -and -

italian -foreign -minister -luigi -di -maio -at -a-press -availability/). Mr . Morrison testified that Dr. Kupperman was not 

in the Situation Room, but Mr. Morrison was informed after the fact that Dr. Kupperman was listening. Morrison 182 

Dep. Tr. at 39 -40. Ms. Williams and Lt. Col. Vindman testified that they both believed Dr. Kupp erman was present, 

but neither had a clear recollection. Williams Dep. Tr. at 64; Vindman Dep. Tr. at 45.  

> 580

See Transcript, This Week with George Stephanopoulos , ABC News (Sept. 22, 2019) (online at 

https://abcnews.go.com/Politics/week -transcript -22 -19 -se cretary -mike -pompeo -gen/story?id=65778332) (Q: And I 

want to turn to this whistleblower complaint, Mr. Secretary. The complaint involving the president and a phone call 

with a foreign leader to the director of national intelligence inspector general. Tha t’s where the complaint was 

launched by the whistle -blower. ‘The Wall Street Journal’ is reporting that President Trump pressed the president of 

Ukraine eight times to work with Rudy Giuliani to investigate Joe Biden’s son. What do you know about those 

conversations? A: So, you just gave me a report about a I.C. whistle -blower complaint, none of which I’ve 

seen.…”).  

> 581

Pompeo Took Part in Ukraine Call, Official Says , Wall Street Journal (Sept. 30, 2019) (online at 

www.wsj.com/articles/pompeo -took -part -in -ukraine -call -official -says -11569865002).  

> 582

The White House, Memorandum of Telephone Conversation (July 25, 2019) (online at 

www.whitehouse.gov/wp -content/uploads/2019/09/Unclassified09.2019.pdf).  

> 583

The White House, Memorandum of Telephone Conversation (July 25, 2019) (online at 

www.whitehouse.gov/wp -content/uploads/2019/09/Unclassified09.2019.pdf).  

> 584

The White House, Memorandum of Telephone Conversation (July 25, 2019) (online at 

www.whitehouse.gov/wp -content/uploads/2019/09/Unclassified09.2019.pdf). See European Union External Action 

Service, EU -Ukraine relations -factsheet (Sept. 30, 2019) (online at 

https://eeas.europa.eu/headquarters/headquarters -Homepage/4081/eu -ukraine -relations -factsheet_en).  

> 585

The White House, Memorandum of Telephone Conversati on (July 25, 2019) (online at 

www.whitehouse.gov/wp -content/uploads/2019/09/Unclassified09.2019.pdf).  

> 586

The White House, Memorandum of Telephone Conversation (July 25, 2019) (online at 

www.whitehouse.gov/wp -content/uploads/2019/09/Unclassified09.2019.pd f); Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 29.  

> 587

The White House, Memorandum of Telephone Conversation (July 25, 2019) (online at 

www.whitehouse.gov/wp -content/uploads/2019/09/Unclassified09.2019.pdf).  

> 588

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 114.  

> 589

The White House, Memorandum of Tele phone Conversation (July 25, 2019) (online at 

www.whitehouse.gov/wp -content/uploads/2019/09/Unclassified09.2019.pdf).  

> 590

See Office of the Director of National Intelligence, Assessing Russian Activities and Intentions in Recent 

U.S. Elections (Jan. 6, 2017) (online at www.dni.gov/files/documents/ICA_2017_01.pdf).  

> 591

The White House, Memorandum of Telephone Conversation (July 25, 2019) (online at 

www.whitehouse.gov/wp -content/uploads/2019/09/Unclassified09.2019.pdf).  

> 592

Charges of Ukrainian Meddling? A Russian Operation, U.S. Intelligence Says , New York Times (Nov. 

22, 2019) (online at www.nytimes.com/2019/11/22/us/politics/ukraine -russia -interference.html).  

> 593

The President of Russia, Joint News Conference with Hungarian Prime Mini ster Viktor Orban (Feb. 2, 

2017) (online at http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/53806).  

> 594

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 39 -40.  

> 595

President Trump’s Former National Security Advisor ‘Deeply Disturbed’ by Ukraine Scandal: ‘Whole 

World Is Watching ,’ ABC N ews (Sept. 29, 2019) (online at https://abcnews.go.com/Politics/president -trumps -

national -security -advisor -deeply -disturbed -ukraine/story?id=65925477).  

> 596

Hill Dep. Tr. at 234 -235.  

> 597

The White House, Memorandum of Telephone Conversation (July 25, 2019) (onl ine at 

www.whitehouse.gov/wp -content/uploads/2019/09/Unclassified09.2019.pdf).  

> 598

The White House, Memorandum of Telephone Conversation (July 25, 2019) (online at 

www.whitehouse.gov/wp -content/uploads/2019/09/Unclassified09.2019.pdf). 183  

> 599

The White House, Memorandum of Telephone Conversation (July 25, 2019) (online at 

www.whitehouse.gov/wp -content/uploads/2019/09/Unclassified09.2019.pdf).  

> 600

The White House, Memorandum of Telephone Conversation (July 25, 2019) (online at 

www.whitehouse.gov/wp -content/uplo ads/2019/09/Unclassified09.2019.pdf).  

> 601

The White House, Memorandum of Telephone Conversation (July 25, 2019) (online at 

www.whitehouse.gov/wp -content/uploads/2019/09/Unclassified09.2019.pdf).  

> 602

The White House, Memorandum of Telephone Conversation (Ju ly 25, 2019) (online at 

www.whitehouse.gov/wp -content/uploads/2019/09/Unclassified09.2019.pdf).  

> 603

The White House, Remarks by President Trump before Marine One (Oct. 3, 2019) (online at 

www.whitehouse.gov/briefings -statements/remarks -president -trump -marine -one -departure -67/). 

> 604

Hill Dep. Tr. at 400; Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 73.; Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 63 -64.; Yovanovitch 

Hearing Tr. at 49 -50; Morrison -Volker Hearing Tr. at 23.  

> 605

Ken t Dep. Tr. at 45.  

> 606

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 116.  

> 607

Yovanovitch Hearing Tr. at 50.  

> 608

See Section I, Chapter 1.  

> 609

Kent Dep. Tr. at 44 -50.  

> 610

Morrison -Volker Hearing Tr. at 23.  

> 611

Morrison -Volker Hearing Tr. at 23.  

> 612

See Section I, Chapter 1.  

> 613

The White Hou se, Memorandum of Telephone Conversation (July 25, 2019) (online at 

www.whitehouse.gov/wp -content/uploads/2019/09/Unclassified09.2019.pdf).  

> 614

Yovanovitch Dep. Tr. at 192 -193.  

> 615

Yovanovitch Dep. Tr. at 192 -193.  

> 616

Ambassador Volker was the only witness to testify that President Trump’s reference to the “prosecutor” 

during the July 25 call was to Mr. Shokin, not Mr. Lutsenko. See Volker Dep. Tr. at 355. However, Mr. Holmes 

testified that, on July 26 —the day after th e call —he spoke with President Zelensky’s Chief of Staff Andriy Bohdan 

who told Holmes that “President Trump had expressed interest during the previous day's phone call in President 

Zelensky's personnel decisions related to the Prosecutor General ’s office, ” which Mr. Holmes understood to refer to 

Mr. Lutsenko once he saw the July 25 call transcript. Holmes Dep. Tr. at 22, 49. In addition, in a text message to 

Taylor and Sondland after his July 19 breakfast with Giuliani, Volker emphasized that “Most impt [ important] is for 

Zelensky to say” on the July 25 call “that he will help investigation —and address any specific personnel issues —if 

there are any.” Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000037 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 617

The White House, Memorandum of Telepho ne Conversation (July 25, 2019) (online at 

www.whitehouse.gov/wp -content/uploads/2019/09/Unclassified09.2019.pdf).  

> 618

The White House, Memorandum of Telephone Conversation (July 25, 2019) (online at 

www.whitehouse.gov/wp -content/uploads/2019/09/Unclassified09.2019.pdf).  

> 619

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 55.  

> 620

Holmes Dep. Tr. at 49 -50.  

> 621

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 25.  

> 622

Morrison -Volker Hearing Tr. at 19.  

> 623

Hill -Holmes Hearing T r. at 18. 184  

> 624

In -Town Pool Report #6 —Ukraine Call , White House Pool Report (July 25, 2019) (online at 

https://publicpool.kinja.com/subject -in -town -pool -report -6-ukraine -call -1836700221).  

> 625

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 42 -43.  

> 626

Vindman -Williams Hearing Tr. at 31 -33; M orrison -Volker Hearing Tr. at 34.  

> 627

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 46 -47.  

> 628

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 29.  

> 629

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 94.  

> 630

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 46 -47.  

> 631

Vindman -Williams Hearing Tr. at 28.  

> 632

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 147.  

> 633

Vindman -Williams Hearing Tr. at 28 -29.  

> 634

Vindm an Dep. Tr. at 96 -97.  

> 635

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 97 -98.  

> 636

Morrison -Volker Hearing Tr. at 29.  

> 637

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 23 -24.  

> 638

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 41 -42, 191 -192.  

> 639

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 97.  

> 640

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 97.  

> 641

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 101.  

> 642

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 41.  

> 643

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 43.  

> 644

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 44.  

> 645

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 16.  

> 646

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 101.  

> 647

Morrison -Volker Hearing Tr. at 38.  

> 648

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 121.  

> 649

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 122.  

> 650

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 122 -123.  

> 651

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 121.  

> 652

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 123 -124.  

> 653

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 121.  

> 654

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 55 -56.  

> 655

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 55 -56, 121 -123.  

> 656

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 270.  

> 657

Williams Dep. Tr. at 16, 63.  

> 658

Williams Dep. Tr. at 149.  

> 659

Vindman -Williams Hearing Tr. at 34. 185  

> 660

Williams Dep. Tr. at 148.  

> 661

Vindman -Williams Hearing Tr. at 29.  

> 662

Williams Dep. Tr. at 54, 149.  

> 663

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 54 -55. (“There’s one other substantive item in the next paragraph from Zelensky, 

where it says ‘He or she will look into the situation specifically to the company’ —it shouldn’t be ‘the company.’ It 

should be ‘to Burisma that you ment ioned.’ Because I think, you know, frankly these are not necessarily folks that 

are familiar with the substance. So President Zelensky specifically mentioned the company Burisma.”).  

> 664

Vindman -Williams Hearing Tr. at 61.  

> 665

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 89.  

> 666

Willia ms Dep. Tr. at 68 -69. 

Q: Okay. When the transcript was made available to the VP’s office, do you remember when that 

occurred? 

A: My colleagues —I can’t remember the precise time, but before the end of the day that day my 

colleagues who help prepare the V ice President’s briefing book received a hard copy of the 

transcript from the White House Situation Room to include in that book. I didn’t personally see it, 

but I understood that they had received it because we wanted to make sure the Vice President got 

it. 

Q: On the 25th or 26th? 

A: It was on the 25th.  

> 667

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 139 –141.  

> 668

Kent Dep. Tr. at 163 -165.  

> 669

Holmes Dep. Tr.at 107.  

> 670

Holmes Dep. Tr. at 21 -22.  

> 671

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 38; Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 26.  

> 672

Morrison -Volker Heari ng Tr. at 74. (“Yes. So I was not on the phone call. I had arrived in Ukraine, 

and I had had that lunch with Mr. Yermak that we saw on the day of the phone call. I had been pushing for the 

phone call because I thought it was important to renew the pers onal connection between the two leaders and to 

congratulate President Zelensky on the parliamentary election. The readout I received from Mr. Yermak and also 

from the U.S. side —although I’m not exactly sure who it was on the U.S. side, but there was U.S. and a Ukrainian 

readout —were largely the same, that it was a good call, that it was a congratulatory phone call for the President 

winning the parliamentary election. President Zelensky did reiterate his commitment to reform and fighting 

corruption in Ukra ine, and President Trump did reiterate his invitation to President Zelensky to come visit him in the 

White House. That’s exactly what I thought the phone call would be, so I was not surprised at getting that as the 

readout.”).  

> 673

Holmes Dep. Tr. at 22.  

> 674

Holmes Dep. Tr. at 22, 48 -49.  

> 675

Holmes Dep. Tr. at 49.  

> 676

Holmes Dep. Tr. at 49.  

> 677

Holmes Dep. Tr. at 22.  

> 678

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 27.  

> 679

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 48 -49.  

> 680

Croft Dep. Tr. at 118 -119.  

> 681

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 25; Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 38. 186  

> 682

Morrison -Volker Hearing Tr. at 89 -90.  

> 683

Holmes Dep. Tr. at 64.  

> 684

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 38.  

> 685

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 27.  

> 686

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 27.  

> 687

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 27 -28.  

> 688

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 27 -28.  

> 689

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 27 -28.  

> 690

Holmes Dep. Tr. at 108.  

> 691

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 49.  

> 692

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 25 -26.  

> 693

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 28.  

> 694

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 28.  

> 695

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 49. (“The restaurant has sort of glass doors that open onto a terrace, and we 

were at the first tables on the terrace, so immediately outside of the interior of the restaurant. The doors were all 

wide open. There were —there was tables, a table for f our, while I recall it being two tables for two pushed together. 

In any case, it was quite a wide table, and the table was set. There was sort of a table runner down the middle. I was 

directly across from Ambassador Sondland. We were close enough that we could, you know, share an appetizer 

between us, and then the two staffers were off to our right at this next table.”).  

> 696

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 28.  

> 697

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 28.  

> 698

Holmes Dep. Tr. at 160.  

> 699

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 28.  

> 700

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 50. 

Q: Now, you said that you were able to hear President Trump’s voice through the receiver. How 

were you able to hear if it was not on speaker phone? 

A: It was several things. It was quite loud when the President came on, q uite distinctive. I believe 

Ambassador Sondland also said that he often speaks very loudly over the phone, and I certainly 

experienced that. When the President came on, he sort of winced and held the phone away from 

his ear like this, and he did that for the first couple exchanges. I don’t know if he then turned the 

volume down, if he got used to it, if the President moderated his volume. I don’t know. But that’s 

how I was able to hear.  

> 701

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 28 -29.  

> 702

Trump Denies Discussing Ukra ine Investigations with Sondland in July Phone Call , Axios (Nov. 13, 

2019) (online at: www.axios.com/trump -denies -ukraine -investigation -sondland -6063f555 -2629 -4f99 -b2f9 -

fd38739c0548.html).  

> 703

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 26.  

> 704

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 46.  

> 705

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 26.  

> 706

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 26.  

> 707

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 48. 187  

> 708

Holmes Dep. Tr. at 25.  

> 709

Holmes Dep. Tr. at 25 -26.  

> 710

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 49 -50. Ambassador Sondland opined that, while he may have referred to an 

investigation that Mr. Giuliani was pushing as an example of an investigation that President Trump cared about, he 

believed that he would have said “Burisma, not Biden.” He testified, however: 

Q: But do you recall saying at least referring to an investigation that Rudy Giuliani was pushing? Is 

that something that you likely would have said? 

A: I would have, yes. Id. at 50.  

> 711

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 50.  

> 712

Holmes Dep. Tr. at 67.  

> 713

Holmes Dep. Tr. at 68 -69.  

> 714

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 30 . 

> 715

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 107.  

> 716

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 34.  

> 717

Holmes Dep. Tr. at 80.  

> 718

Holmes Dep. Tr. at 80 -81.  

> 719

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000007 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 720

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000007 (Oct. 2, 2019) . 

> 721

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000007 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 722

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000019 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 723

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 112.  

> 724

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000019 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 725

Mor rison -Volker Hearing Tr. at 42.  

> 726

Morrison -Volker Hearing Tr. at 42.  

> 727

Morrison -Volker Hearing Tr. at 20 -21.  

> 728

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000019 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 729

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000007 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 730

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930_02786.  

> 731

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000007 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 732

Sondland Dep. Tr. at 192 -193.  

> 733

Kurt Volker Document Product ion, Bates KV00000007 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 734

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930 _02797.  

> 735

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930_02797.  

> 736

Id . 

> 737

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930_03326.  

> 738

Id . 

> 739

Id . 

> 740

Id .188  

> 741

Id . 

> 742

Id . 

> 743

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930_02798.  

> 744

Id . 

> 745

Id . 

> 746

Id . 

> 747

Id . 

> 748

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930_02799.  

> 749

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930_02801.  

> 750

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000019 (Oct . 2, 2019).  

> 751

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000019 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 752

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000019 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 753

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000019 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 754

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930_02802 -03, 02813, 03326, 03719.  

> 755

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930_03326.  

> 756

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930_02802.  

> 757

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930_0280 3.  

> 758

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930_03719.  

> 759

Id . 

> 760

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930_02803.  

> 761

Id . 

> 762

Id . 

> 763

Id . 

> 764

Id . 

> 765

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000004 - KV00000005 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 766

Kurt Volker Document Pr oduction, Bates KV00000004 - KV00000005 (Oct. 2, 2019); AT&T Document 

Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930_02805 -06.  

> 767

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000023 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 768

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000023 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 769

Kur t Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000023 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 770

Verizon Document Production.  

> 771

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000042 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 772

Sondland Dep. Tr. at 290; Sondland Hearing Tr. at 100 -101.  

> 773

Kurt Volker Document Producti on, Bates KV00000042 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 774

Sondland Dep. Tr. at 291.  

> 775

Sondland Dep. Tr. at 291.  

> 776

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000019 (Oct. 2, 2019). 189  

> 777

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000019 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 778

Kurt Volker Document Prod uction, Bates KV00000019 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 779

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000042 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 780

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Opening Statement of Ambassador Gordon 

Sondland, Department of State, Impeachment , 116th Cong., at 15 (Nov. 20, 2019).  

> 781

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000042 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 782

Sondland Dep. Tr. at 291 -292.  

> 783

Sondland Dep. Tr. at 291 -292.  

> 784

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Opening Statement of Ambassador Gordon 

Sondland, Department of State, Impeachment , 116th Cong., at 14 (Nov. 20, 2019).  

> 785

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000005 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 786

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930_02816.  

> 787

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Opening Statement of Ambassador Gordon 

Sondland, Department of State, Impeachment , 116th Cong., at 22 (Nov. 20, 2019).  

> 788

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 102.  

> 789

Ho use Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Opening Statement of Ambassador Gordon 

Sondland, Department of State, Impeachment , 116th Cong., at 22 (Nov. 20, 2019).  

> 790

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 28.  

> 791

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000020 (Oct. 2 , 2019).  

> 792

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000007 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 793

AT&T Document Production, Bates ATTHPSCI_20190930_ 02828.  

> 794

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 113.  

> 795

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 71 -72.  

> 796

Kurt Volker Document Productio n, Bates KV00000023 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 797

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000023 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 798

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000023 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 799

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000023 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 800

WhatsApp Secur ity (online at www.whatsapp.com/security/ ) (accessed Nov. 29, 2019).  

> 801

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000043 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 802

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000043 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 803

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000023 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 804

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000023 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 805

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 43 -44, 113 -114.  

> 806

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Opening Statement of Ambassador Gordon 

Sondland, Department of St ate, Impeachment , 116th Cong., at 5 (Nov. 20, 2019).  

> 807

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 18.  

> 808

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 191, 197 -198.  

> 809

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 191 -192.  

> 810

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 201. 190  

> 811

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 198.  

> 812

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 197.  

> 813

Department of Justice, Ukraine Statement (Sept. 25, 2019).  

> 814

Cleaning Up Ukraine in the Shadow of Trump , The Financial Times (Nov. 28, 2019) (online at 

www.ft.com/content/eb8e4004 -1059 -11ea -a7e6 -62bf4f9e548a).  

> 815

Cleaning Up Ukraine in the Shadow of Trump , The Financial Times (Nov. 28, 2019) (online at 

www.ft.com/content/eb8e4004 -1059 -11ea -a7e6 -62bf4f9e548a).  

> 816

Ta ylor Dep. Opening Statement at 9.  

> 817

Taylor Dep. Opening Statement at 9.  

> 818

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 196 -197.  

> 819

Taylor Dep. Opening Statement at 9.  

> 820

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000043 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 821

Volker Transcribed Inte rview Tr. at 196 -197.  

> 822

Kent Dep. Tr. at 261  

> 823

Kent Dep. Tr. at 262 -263.  

> 824

Kent Dep. Tr. at 264.  

> 825

Kent Dep. Tr. at 264 -265.  

> 826

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000020 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 827

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000043 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 828

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000043 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 829

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000043 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 830

Volker Transcribed Interview Opening Statement at 8.  

> 831

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 44.  

> 832

Morrison -Vo lker Hearing Tr. at 21.  

> 833

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 259 -260.  

> 834

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 260.  

> 835

Morrison -Volker Hearing Tr. at 128.  

> 836

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000043 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 837

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 199 -200.  

> 838

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 31 -32, 68; Sondland Hearing Tr. at 55 -57.  

> 839

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 71.  

> 840

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 62, 66.  

> 841

Cooper Dep . Tr. at 62.  

> 842

Morrison -Volker Hearing Tr. at 90 -91.  

> 843

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Written Statement of Ambassador Gordon 

Sondland, at 23, Impeachment, 116th Cong. (Nov. 20, 2019).  

> 844

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence , Written Statement of Ambassador Gordon 

Sondland, at 23, Impeachment, 116th Cong. (Nov. 20, 2019). 191  

> 845

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 104.  

> 846

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Written Statement of Ambassador Gordon 

Sondland, at 18, Impeachment, 116th Cong. (Nov. 20, 2019).  

> 847

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 44.  

> 848

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 75.  

> 849

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 76.  

> 850

House Perma nent Select Committee on Intelligence, Written Statement of Ambassador Gordon 

Sondland, at 23, Impeachment, 116th Cong. (Nov. 20, 2019).  

> 851

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 30.  

> 852

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 30.  

> 853

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 28.  

> 854

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 106.  

> 855

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 31 -32.  

> 856

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 31.  

> 857

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 40.  

> 858

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 230.  

> 859

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 40.  

> 860

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 8.  

> 861

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates 20 (Aug. 29, 2019).  

> 862

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 80 -81. 

A: By the time it hit Politico publicly, I believe it was the end of August. And I got a text message 

from, it was either the Foreign Minister or —I think it was the future Foreign Minister. And, you 

know, basically, you’re just —you’re —I have to verbalize this. You’re just trying to explain that 

we are trying this. We have a complicated system. We have a lot of players in this. We are 

working this. Give us time to fix it. 

Q: So anybody on the Ukrainian side of things ever express like grave concern that this would not get 

worked out? 

A: Not that it wouldn’t get worked out, no, they did not. They expressed concern that, since this has 

now come out publicly in this Politico article, it looks lik e that they’re being, you know, singled 

out and penalized for some reason. That’s the image that that would create in Ukraine.  

> 863

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 34.  

> 864

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 137 -138.  

> 865

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 137 -138.  

> 866

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 174.  

> 867

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 40.  

> 868

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 40.  

> 869

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 31 -32.  

> 870

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 31 -32.  

> 871

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 68.  

> 872

Holmes Dep. Tr. at 58. 192  

> 873

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 40.  

> 874

Trump, in August Call w ith GOP Senator, Denied Official’s Claim on Ukraine Aid , Wall Street Journal 

(Oct. 4, 2019) (online at www.wsj.com/articles/trump -administration -used -potential -meeting -to -pressure -ukraine -

on -biden -texts -indicate -11570205661).  

> 875

Trump, in August Call With G OP Senator, Denied Official’s Claim on Ukraine Aid , Wall Street Journal 

(Oct. 4, 2019) (online at www.wsj.com/articles/trump -administration -used -potential -meeting -to -pressure -ukraine -

on -biden -texts -indicate -11570205661).  

> 876

Letter from Senator Ron Johnson to Ranking Member Jim Jordan, House Committee on Oversight and 

Reform, and Ranking Member Devin Nunes, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence (Nov. 18, 2019) 

(online at www.ronjohnson.senate.gov/public/_cache/files/e0b73c19 -9370 -42e6 -88b1 -b2458ea eeecd/johnson -to -

jordan -nunes.pdf).  

> 877

Letter from Senator Ron Johnson to Ranking Member Jim Jordan, House Committee on Oversight and 

Reform, and Ranking Member Devin Nunes, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence (Nov. 18, 2019) 

(online at www.ron johnson.senate.gov/public/_cache/files/e0b73c19 -9370 -42e6 -88b1 -b2458eaeeecd/johnson -to -

jordan -nunes.pdf).  

> 878

The White House, Memorandum of Telephone Conversation (July 25, 2019) (online at 

www.whitehouse.gov/wp -content/uploads/2019/09/Unclassified09.2019.p df).  

> 879

Office of the Director of National Intelligence, Background to “Assessing Russian Activities and 

Intentions in Recent US Elections”: The Analytic Process and Cyber Incident Attribution (Jan. 6, 2017) (online at 

www.dni.gov/files/documents/ICA_201 7_01.pdf).  

> 880

Letter from Senator Ron Johnson to Ranking Member Jim Jordan, Committee on Oversight and Reform, 

and Ranking Member Devin Nunes, Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence (Nov. 18, 2019) (online at 

www.ronjohnson.senate.gov/public/_cache/file s/e0b73c19 -9370 -42e6 -88b1 -b2458eaeeecd/johnson -to -jordan -

nunes.pdf).  

> 881

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 30.  

> 882

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr. at 251 -252; Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 41.  

> 883

Williams Dep. Tr. at 74 -77.  

> 884

Williams Dep. Tr.at 76.  

> 885

Williams Dep. Tr. at 78 -79.  

> 886

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 30.  

> 887

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 38. See also Sondland Hearing Tr. at 57: 

A: I don’t know exactly what I said to him. This was a briefing attended by many people, and I was 

invited at the very last minute. I wasn’t scheduled to be there. But I think I spoke up at some 

point late in the meeting and said, it looks like everything is being held up until these statements 

get made, and that’s my, you know, personal belief. 

Q: And Vice President Pence just nodded his head? 

A: Again, I don’t recall any exchange or where he asked me any questions. I think he —it was sort of 

a duly n oted response. 

Q: Well, he didn’t say, Gordon, what are you talking about? 

A: No, he did not. 

Q: He didn’t say, what investigations? 

A: He did not. 193  

> 888

Pence Disputes that Sondland Raised Concerns to Him About Ukraine Aid -Investigations Link , Wal l

Street Journal (Nov. 20, 2019) (online at www.wsj.com/livecoverage/gordon -sondland -testifies -

impeachment/card/1574268547).  

> 889

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 190.  

> 890

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 35.  

> 891

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 190 -191.  

> 892

Williams Dep. Tr. at 81.  

> 893

Williams Dep. Tr. at 82.  

> 894

Williams Dep. Tr. at 82 -83.  

> 895

Williams Dep. Tr. at 83.  

> 896

Williams Dep. Tr. at 83.  

> 897

How a CIA Analyst, Alarmed by Trump’s Shadow Foreign Policy, Triggered an Impeachment Inquiry ,

Washington Post (Nov. 16, 2019) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/national -security/how -a-cia -analyst -alarmed -

by -trumps -shadow -foreign -policy -triggered -an -impeachment -inquiry/2019/11/15/042684a8 -03c3 -11ea -8292 -

c46ee8cb3dce_story.html ).  

> 898

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 31.  

> 899

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 31.  

> 900

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 134.  

> 901

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 155.  

> 902

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 155.  

> 903

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 137.  

> 904

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 182.  

> 905

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 184.  

> 906

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 228.  

> 907

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 154.  

> 908

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 42.  

> 909

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 42.  

> 910

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 57.  

> 911

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates 39 (Oct. 4, 2019).  

> 912

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 42.  

> 913

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 190.  

> 914

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 190.  

> 915

Taylor D ep. Tr. at 190.  

> 916

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 60.  

> 917

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 59.  

> 918

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 59 -60.  

> 919

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 190 -191.  

> 920

Morrison -Volker Hearing Tr. at 52.  

> 921

Morrison -Volker Hearing Tr. at 53 -54; Morrison Dep. Tr. at 238. 194  

> 922

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 43 -44.  

> 923

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates 53 (Oct. 4, 2019).  

> 924

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 44.  

> 925

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 44.  

> 926

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 44.  

> 927

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 109 -110.  

> 928

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 109 -110.  

> 929

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 110 -111.  

> 930

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 45.  

> 931

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 45, 63.  

> 932

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 45.  

> 933

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 110. Ambassador Volk er also testified that Ambassador Sondland used the 

same analogy to him when discussing the release of the hold on security assistance. Morrison -Volker Hearing Tr. at 

96 -97.  

> 934

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates 53 (Oct. 4, 2019).  

> 935

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 209.  

> 936

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates 53 (Oct. 4, 2019).  

> 937

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 54.  

> 938

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 54.  

> 939

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 54.  

> 940

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 54.  

> 941

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates 53 (Oct. 4, 2019).  

> 942

Sondland Dep. Tr. at 217.  

> 943

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 26 (“Was there a quid pro quo? As I testified previously with regard to the 

requested White House call and the White House meeting, the answer is yes.”).  

> 944

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 41.  

> 945

Sondland Heari ng Tr. at 112  

> 946

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 61 -62.  

> 947

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 39.  

> 948

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 39.  

> 949

Maguire Hearing Tr. at 110; Whistleblower Compl. Appendix 2. Public reporting indicates that 

“[l]awyers from the White House counsel’s office told Mr. Trump in late August about the complaint, explaining 

that they were trying to determine whether they were legally required to give it to Congress.” Trump Knew of 

Whistle -Blower Complaint When He Released Aid to Ukraine , New York Times (Nov. 26, 2019) (online a t

www.nytimes.com/2019/11/26/us/politics/trump -whistle -blower -complaint -ukraine.html).  

> 950

Letter from Michael Atkinson, Inspector General of the Intelligence Community, to Chairman Adam B. 

Schiff and Ranking Member Devin Nunes, House Permanent Select Commi ttee on Intelligence (Sept. 9, 2019) 

(online at https://intelligence.house.gov/uploadedfiles/20190909_ -_ic_ig_letter_to_hpsci_on_whistleblower.pdf).  

> 951

Letter from Michael Atkinson, Inspector General of the Intelligence Community, to Chairman Adam B. 

Schi ff and Ranking Member Devin Nunes, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence (Sept. 9, 2019) 

(online at https://intelligence.house.gov/uploadedfiles/20190909_ -_ic_ig_letter_to_hpsci_on_whistleblower.pdf). 195  

> 952

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 118. See also Witness Testimony and Records Raise Questions About Account 

of Trump’s ‘No Quid Pro Quo’ Call , Washington Post (Nov. 27, 2019) (online at 

www.washingtonpost.com/politics/witness -testimony -and -records -raise -questions -about -account -of -trumps -no -

quid -pro -quo -call/2019/11/27/425545c2 -0d49 -11ea -8397 -a955cd542d00_story.html).  

> 953

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 118.  

> 954

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 73.  

> 955

Statement of Ambassador Gordon Sondland at 1 (Nov. 4, 2019). This addendum did not address the 

July 26 telephone conversation that Sondland had with President Trump, which he only recalled following the 

testimony of David Holmes on November 15, 2019.  

> 956

Statement of Ambassador Gordon Sondland at 3 (Nov. 4, 2019).  

> 957

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 43 -44; Morrison Dep. Tr. at 190 -191.  

> 958

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 190 -191; Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 43 -44.  

> 959

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 109.  

> 960

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 45, 109.  

> 961

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates 20 (Oct. 4, 2019).  

> 962

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates 20 (Oct. 4, 2019).  

> 963

Ku rt Volker Document Production, Bates 53 (Oct. 4, 2019).  

> 964

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates 53 (Oct. 4, 2019).  

> 965

The White House, Press Briefing by Acting Chief of Staff Mick Mulvaney (Oct. 17, 2019) (online at 

www.whitehouse.gov/briefings -statements /press -briefing -acting -chief -staff -mick -mulvaney/).  

> 966

The White House, Press Briefing by Acting Chief of Staff Mick Mulvaney (Oct. 17, 2019) (online at 

www.whitehouse.gov/briefings -statements/press -briefing -acting -chief -staff -mick -mulvaney/).  

> 967

The White H ouse, Press Briefing by Acting Chief of Staff Mick Mulvaney (Oct. 17, 2019) (online at 

www.whitehouse.gov/briefings -statements/press -briefing -acting -chief -staff -mick -mulvaney/). Ambassador Taylor’s 

testimony contradicted Mr. Mulvaney’s statement about the ubiquity of such quid pro quos in American foreign 

policy. Ambassador Taylor testified that in his decades of military and diplomatic service, he had never seen 

another example of foreign aid conditioned on the personal or political interests of the Pres ident. Kent -Taylor 

Hearing Tr. at 55. Rather, “We condition assistance on issues that will improve our foreign policy, serve our foreign 

policy, ensure that taxpayers’ money is well -spent.” Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 150.  

> 968

There were early concerns ra ised in the House and Senate about the frozen aid, even before the news 

became public. On August 9, the Democratic leadership of the House and Senate Appropriations Committees wrote 

to OMB and the White House warning that the August 3 letter apportionment might constitute an illegal 

impoundment of funds. They urged the Trump Administration to adhere to the law and obligate the withheld 

funding. Letter from Vice Chairman Patrick Leahy, Senate Committee on Appropriations, and Chairwoman Nita M. 

Lowey, Hous e Committee on Appropriations, to Acting Chief of Staff Mick Mulvaney, The White House, and 

Acting Director Russell Vought, Office of Management and Budget (Aug. 9, 2019) (online at 

https://appropriations.house.gov/sites/democrats.appropriations.house.gov/ files/documents/SFOPS%20Apportionme 

nt%20Letter%20Lowey -Leahy%20Signed%202019.8.9.pdf). On August 19, the Democratic leadership of the 

House and Senate Budget Committees wrote to OMB and the White House urging the Administration to comply 

with appropriatio ns law and the Impoundment Control Act. Letter from Chairman John Yarmuth, House Committee 

on the Budget, and Ranking Member Bernard Sanders, Senate Committee on the Budget, to Acting Chief of Staff 

Mick Mulvaney, The White House (Aug. 19, 2019) (online a t

https://budget.house.gov/sites/democrats.budget.house.gov/files/documents/OMB%20Letter_081919.pdf).  

> 969

Letter from Senators Jeanne Shaheen, Rob Portman, Richard Durbin, Ron Johnson, and Richard 

Blumenthal to Acting White House Chief of Staff Mick Mulvane y (Sept. 3, 2019) (online at 

www.shaheen.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/Ukraine%20Security%20Letter%209.3.2019.pdf ). 196  

> 970

Letter from Senators Jeanne Shaheen, Rob Portman, Richard Durbin, Ron Johnson, and Richard 

Blumenthal to Acting White House Chi ef of Staff Mick Mulvaney (Sept. 3, 2019) (online at 

www.shaheen.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/Ukraine%20Security%20Letter%209.3.2019.pdf ).  

> 971

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel and Ranking Member Michael T. McCaul, House Foreign Affairs 

Committ ee to Mick Mulvaney, Director, and Russell Vought, Acting Director, Office of Management and Budget, 

The White House (Sept. 5, 2019) (online at https://foreignaffairs.house.gov/_cache/files/c/4/c49328c2 -941b -4c41 -

8c00 -8c1515f0972f/D1968A9C42455BB3AFC38F97D 966857B.ele -mccaul -letter -to -mulvaney -vought -on -ukraine -

assistance.pdf ).  

> 972

Trump Tries to Force Ukraine to Meddle in the 2020 Election , Washington Post (Sept. 5, 2019) 

(online at www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/global -opinions/is -trump -strong -arming -ukrain es -new -

president -for -political -gain/2019/09/05/4eb239b0 -cffa -11e9 -8c1c -7c8ee785b855_story.html).  

> 973

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 37 -38.  

> 974

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 38.  

> 975

See Letter from Senator Christopher Murphy, to Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select 

Comm ittee on Intelligence, and Acting Chairwoman Carolyn Maloney, House Committee on Oversight and Reform 

(Nov. 19, 2019) (online at www.murphy.senate.gov/download/111919 -sen -murphy -letter -to -house -impeachment -

investigators -on -ukraine) (“Senator Johnson and I assured Zelensky that Congress wanted to continue this funding, 

and would press Trump to release it immediately.”); Letter from S enator Ron Johnson, to Ranking Member Jim 

Jordan, Committee on Oversight and Reform, and Ranking Member Devin Nunes, Permanent Select Committee on 

Intelligence (Nov. 18, 2019) (online at www.ronjohnson.senate.gov/public/_cache/files/e0b73c19 -9370 -42e6 -88b1 -

b2458eaeeecd/johnson -to -jordan -nunes.pdf) (“I explained that I had tried to persuade the president to authorize me 

to announce the hold was released but that I was unsuccessful.”).  

> 976

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Three House Committees Launch Probe Into 

Trump and Giuliani Pressure Campaign (Sept. 9, 2019) (online at 

https://intelligence.house.gov/news/documentsingle.aspx?DocumentID=685).  

> 977

Letter from Chairma n Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to Pat Cipollone, Counsel to the President, The White House (Sept. 9, 2019) (online at 

https://intelligence.house.gov/uploadedfiles/ele_schiff_cummings_letter_to_cipollone_on_ukraine.pdf).  

> 978

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Sel ect Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to Pat Cipollone, Counsel to the President, The White House (Sept. 9, 2019) (online at 

https://intelligence.house.gov/uploadedfiles/ele_schiff_cummings _letter_to_cipollone_on_ukraine.pdf).  

> 979

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and R eform, to Pat Cipollone, Counsel to the President, The White House (Sept. 9, 2019) (online at 

https://intelligence.house.gov/uploadedfiles/ele_schiff_cummings_letter_to_cipollone_on_ukraine.pdf).  

> 980

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on F oreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to Michael R. Pompeo, Secretary of State (Sept. 9, 2019) (online at 

https://intelligence.ho use.gov/uploadedfiles/ele_schiff_cummings_letter_to_sec_pompeo_on_ukraine.pdf).  

> 981

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 245.  

> 982

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 245.  

> 983

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 303.  

> 984

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 304.  

> 985

Letter from Michael Atkinson, Inspector General of the Int elligence Community, to Chairman Adam B. 

Schiff and Ranking Member Devin Nunes, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence (Sept. 9, 2019) 

(online at https://intelligence.house.gov/uploadedfiles/20190909_ -_ic_ig_letter_to_hpsci_on_whistleblower.pdf). 197  

> 986

Letter from Michael Atkinson, Inspector General of the Intelligence Community, to Chairman Adam B. 

Schiff and Ranking Member Devin Nunes, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence (Sept. 9, 2019) 

(online at https://intelligence.house.gov/uploa dedfiles/20190909_ -_ic_ig_letter_to_hpsci_on_whistleblower.pdf); 

see also 50 U.S.C. § 3033(k)(5) (setting forth procedures for reporting of complaints or information with respect to 

an “urgent concern” to Congressional intelligence committees).  

> 987

Maguir e Hearing Tr. at 14 (“As a result, we consulted with the White House Counsel's Office, and we 

were advised that much of the information in the complaint was, in fact, subject to executive privilege, a privilege 

that I do not have the authority to waive. B ecause of that, we were unable to immediately share the details of the 

complaint with this committee but continued to consult with the White House counsels in an effort to do so.”).  

> 988

Maguire Hearing Tr. at 15 -16 (“Because the allegation on its face did n ot appear to fall in the statutory 

framework, my office consulted with the United States Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel. … After 

reviewing the complaint and the Inspector General’s transmission letter, the Office of Legal Counsel determined that 

the complaint’s allegations do not meet the statutory definition concerning legal urgent concern, and found that I 

was not legally required to transmit the material to our oversight committee under the Whistleblower Protection 

Act.”).  

> 989

Maguire Hear ing Tr. at 22 -23. See also CIA’s Top Lawyer Made ‘Criminal Referral’ on Complaint 

about Trump Ukraine Call , NBC News (Oct. 4, 2019) (online at www.nbcnews.com/politics/trump -impeachment -

inquiry/cia -s-top -lawyer -made -criminal -referral -whistleblower -s-compl aint -n1062481) (reporting that the CIA’s 

General Counsel, Courtney Simmons Elwood, informed NSC chief lawyer John Eisenberg about an anonymous 

whistleblower complaint on August 14, 2019).  

> 990

Maguire Hearing Tr. at 14, 21 -22. On September 26, Acting DNI Ma guire testified that he and the 

ODNI General Counsel first consulted with the White House counsel’s office before discussing the whistleblower 

complaint with the Department of Justice’s Office of Legal Counsel: 

The Chairman. I’m just trying to understand the chronology. You first went to the Office of 

Legal Counsel, and then you went to the White House Counsel? 

Acting Director Maguire. No, no, no, sir. No, sir. No. We went to the White House first to determine —to 

ask the question —

The Chairman. That’ s all I want to know is the chronology. So you went to the White House 

first. So you went to the subject of the complaint for advice first about whether 

you should provide the complaint to Congress? 

Acting Director Maguire. There were issues within thi s, a couple of things: One, it did appear that it has 

executive privilege. If it does have executive privilege, it is the White House 

that determines that. I cannot determine that, as the Director of National 

Intelligence .

Id. at 21 -22.  

> 991

Trump Knew of Whistle -Blower Complaint When He Released Aid to Ukraine, New York Times (Nov. 

26, 2019) (online at www.nytimes.com/2019/11/26/us/politics/trump -whistle -blower -complaint -ukraine.html).  

> 992

Trump Knew of Whistle -Blower Complaint When He Releas ed Aid to Ukraine, New York Times (Nov. 

26, 2019) (online at www.nytimes.com/2019/11/26/us/politics/trump -whistle -blower -complaint -ukraine.html). The 

Administration repeatedly referenced privilege concerns in connection with the whistleblower complaint. See, e.g. ,

Letter from Jason Klitenic, General Counsel, Office of the Director of National Intelligence, to Chairman Adam B. 

Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence (Sept. 13, 2019) (noting that “the complaint involves 

confidential and pot entially privileged communications by persons outside the Intelligence Community”) (emphasis 

added); Letter from Jason Klitenic, General Counsel, Office of the Director of National Intelligence, to Chairman 

Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence (Sept. 17, 2019) (characterizing subpoena to 

the Acting DNI for documents as demanding “sensitive and potentially privileged ” materials and whistleblower 

complaint as involving “ potentially privileged matters relating to the interests of ot her stakeholders within the 

Executive Branch”) (emphasis added). 

However, the White House never formally invoked executive privilege as to the whistleblower complaint. 

See Maguire Hearing Tr. at 20 (“Chairman Schiff: So they never asserted executive priv ilege, is that the answer? 198 

Acting Director Maguire: Mr. Chairman, if they did, we would not have released the letters yesterday and all the 

information that has been forthcoming.”).  

> 993

Letter from Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committe e on Intelligence, to 

Joseph Maguire, Acting Director of National Intelligence (Sept. 10, 2019) (online at 

https://intelligence.house.gov/uploadedfiles/20190910_ -_chm_schiff_letter_to_acting_dni_maguire.pdf).  

> 994

Letter from Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, to Joseph 

Maguire, Acting Director of National Intelligence (Sept. 10, 2019) (online at 

https://intelligence.house.gov/uploadedfiles/20190910_ -_chm_schiff_letter_to_acting_dni_maguire. pdf).  

> 995

See Letter from Jason Klitenic, General Counsel, Office of the Director of National Intelligence, to 

Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence (Sept. 13, 2019).  

> 996

Letter from Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanen t Select Committee on Intelligence, to Joseph 

Maguire, Acting Director of National Intelligence (Sept. 13, 2019) (online at 

https://intelligence.house.gov/uploadedfiles/20190913_ -_chm_schiff_letter_to_acting_dni_re_whistleblower_ -

_subpoena.pdf).  

> 997

The Wh ite House, Memorandum of Telephone Conversation (July 25, 2019) (online at 

www.whitehouse.gov/wp -content/uploads/2019/09/Unclassified09.2019.pdf).  

> 998

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 305 -06; Morrison Dep. Tr. at 242.  

> 999

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 242.  

> 1000

See, e.g. , Morrison Dep . Tr. at 244; Vindman Dep. Tr. at 306; Williams Dep. Tr. at 147.  

> 1001

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 68 -69.  

> 1002

Williams Dep. Tr. at 147. Ms. Williams did testify that President Trump’s pressure on 

President Zelensky to open investigations into the Bidens on the July 25 c all “shed some light on possible 

other motivations behind a security assistance hold.” Williams Dep. Tr. at 149.  

> 1003

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 42, 139 -140. According to a press report, after Congress began investigating 

President Trump’s scheme, the White House C ounsel’s Office reportedly opened an internal investigation relating to 

the July 25 call. As part of that internal investigation, White House lawyers gathered and reviewed “hundreds of 

documents” that “reveal extensive efforts to generate an after -the -fac t justification” for the hold on military 

assistance for Ukraine ordered by President Trump. These documents reportedly include “early August email 

exchanges between acting chief of staff Mick Mulvaney and White House budget officials seeking to provide a n

explanation for withholding the funds after the president had already ordered a hold in mid -July on the nearly $400 

million in security assistance.” White House Review Turns Up Emails Showing Extensive Effort to Justify Trump’s 

Decision to Block Ukraine Military Aid , Washington Post (Nov. 24, 2019) (online at 

www.washingtonpost.com/politics/white -house -review -turns -up -emails -showing -extensive -effort -to -justify -trumps -

decision -to -block -ukraine -military -aid/2019/11/24/2121cf98 -0d57 -11ea -bd9d -c628fd48b3a0_s tory.html). The 

White House has withheld these documents from the Committee, so the Committee cannot verify the accuracy of the 

reporting as of the publication of this report.  

> 1004

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 49.  

> 1005

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 42, 44.  

> 1006

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 180.  

> 1007

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 306.  

> 1008

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 83.  

> 1009

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 47 -48, 58, 112 -114; Sandy Dep. Tr. at 34 -35, 85 -86, 95, 128, 139 -131, 133; 

Morrison Dep. Tr. at 163; Kent Dep. Tr. at 308 -309; Reeker Dep. Tr. at 133. News reports indicate that a 

conf idential White House review of President Trump’s hold on military assistance to Ukraine has identified 

hundreds of documents revealing “extensive efforts to generate an after -the -fact justification for the decision and a 

debate over whether the delay was l egal.” White House Review Turns Up Emails Showing Extensive Effort to Justify 

Trump’s Decision to Block Ukraine Military Aid , Washington Post (Nov. 24, 2019) (online at 199 

www.washingtonpost.com/politics/white -house -review -turns -up -emails -showing -extensive -ef fort -to -justify -trumps -

decision -to -block -ukraine -military -aid/2019/11/24/2121cf98 -0d57 -11ea -bd9d -c628fd48b3a0_story.html). 

According to “two people briefed on an internal White House review,” in August, Acting Chief of Staff Mulvaney 

“asked … whether ther e was a legal justification for withholding hundreds of millions of dollars in military aid to 

Ukraine.” Mulvaney Asked About Legal Justification for Withholding Ukraine Aid , New York Times (Nov. 24, 

2019) (online at www.nytimes.com/2019/11/24/us/politics /mulvaney -ukraine -aid.html). Reports indicate that, 

“[e]mails show [OMB Director] Vought and OMB staffers arguing that withholding aid was legal, while officials at 

the National Security Council and State Department protested. OMB lawyers said that it wa s legal to withhold the 

aid, as long as they deemed it a ‘temporary’ hold.” White House Review Turns Up Emails Showing Extensive Effort 

to Justify Trump’s Decision to Block Ukraine Military Aid , Washington Post (Nov. 24, 2019) (online at 

www.washingtonpos t.com/politics/white -house -review -turns -up -emails -showing -extensive -effort -to -justify -trumps -

decision -to -block -ukraine -military -aid/2019/11/24/2121cf98 -0d57 -11ea -bd9d -c628fd48b3a0_story.html). The 

White House and State Department’s obstruction of Congress has prevented the Committee from obtaining any 

documents on this matter and, therefore, the Committee cannot verify the accuracy of this reporting as of the 

publication of this report.  

> 1010

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 80.  

> 1011

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 146 -147.  

> 1012

See Department of Defense, DOD Budget Materials (FY2011 -FY2018) (online at 

https://comptroller.defense.gov/Budget -Materials/). In 1974, President Nixon impounded 15 -20 percent of a number 

of specific programs, which prompted the passage of the Impoundment Control Act o f 1974. Congressional 

Research Service, The Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (P.L. 93 -344) Legislative History and Analysis (Feb. 26, 

1975).  

> 1013

Department of Defense and Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education Appropriations Act, 

2019 and Continuing Appropriations Act, 2019, Pub. L. No. 115 -245, § 9013 (2018); Sandy Dep. Tr. at 147.  

> 1014

Continuing Appropriations Act 2020, and Health Extende rs Act of 2019, Pub. L. No. 116 -59, § 124 

(2019).  

> 1015

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 98.  

> 1016

$35 Million in Pentagon Aid Hasn’t Reached Ukraine Despite White House Assurances , L.A. Times 

(Nov. 19, 2019) (online at www.latimes.com/politics/story/2019 -11 -19/documents -show -nearly -40 -million -in -

ukraine -aid -delayed -despite -white -house -assurances).  

> 1017

Zelensky Planned to Announce Trump’s ‘Quo’ on My Show. Here’s What Happened , Washington Post 

(Nov. 14, 2019) (online at ww w.washingtonpost.com/opinions/zelensky -was -planning -to -announce -trumps -quid -

pro -quo -on -my -show -heres -what -happened/2019/11/14/47938f32 -072a -11ea -8292 -c46ee8cb3dce_story.html).  

> 1018

Zelensky Planned to Announce Trump’s ‘Quo’ on My Show. Here’s What Happened , Washington Post 

(Nov. 4, 2019) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/zelensky -was -planning -to -announce -trumps -quid -pro -

quo -on -my -show -heres -what -happened/2019/11/14/47938f32 -072a -11ea -8292 -c46ee8cb3dce_story.html).  

> 1019

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 40.  

> 1020

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 106.  

> 1021

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 106.  

> 1022

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 33.  

> 1023

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 33.  

> 1024

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 41.  

> 1025

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 217 -18.  

> 1026

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 217 -18.  

> 1027

Holmes Dep. Tr. at 30. 200  

> 1028

Zel ensky Planned to Announce Trump’s ‘Quo’ on My Show. Here’s What Happened ,

Washington Post (Nov. 4, 2019) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/zelensky -was -planning -to -

announce -trumps -quid -pro -quo -on -my -show -heres -what -happened/2019/11/1 4/47938f32 -072a -11ea -8292 -

c46ee8cb3dce_story.html).  

> 1029

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 33; see also Zelensky Planned to Announce Trump’s ‘Quo’ on My 

Show. Here’s What Happened , Washington Post (Nov. 4, 2019) (online at 

www.washingtonpost.com/opinio ns/zelensky -was -planning -to -announce -trumps -quid -pro -quo -on -my -

show -heres -what -happened/2019/11/14/47938f32 -072a -11ea -8292 -c46ee8cb3dce_story.html).  

> 1030

Kent. Dep. Tr. at 333.  

> 1031

Kent Dep. Tr. at 329 -31.  

> 1032

Kent Dep. Tr. at 330.  

> 1033

Zelensky Planned to Announce Trump’s ‘Quo’ on My Show. Here’s What Happened ,

Washington Post (Nov. 4, 2019) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/zelensky -was -planning -to -

announce -trumps -quid -pro -quo -on -my -show -heres -what -happened/2019/11/14/47938f32 -072a -11ea -8292 -

c46ee8cb3dce_story.html).  

> 1034

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 46 -47.  

> 1035

Williams Dep. Tr. at 156.  

> 1036

Williams Dep. Tr. at 156.  

> 1037

Pence Says He ’s Working to Release Transcripts of His Calls with Ukraine Leader , Politico (O ct. 9, 

2019) (online at www.politico.com/news/2019/10/09/pence -ukraine -zelensky -biden -043684 ).  

> 1038

Pence: I Don't Object To Releasing My Call Transcripts With Zelensky , Fox Business (Nov. 7, 2019) 

(online at 

www.realclearpolitics.com/video/2019/11/07/pence_i_do nt_object_to_releasing_my_call_transcripts_with_zelensky 

.html ).  

> 1039

Rudy Giuliani’s Remarkable Ukraine Interview, Annotated , Washington Post (Sept. 20, 2019) (online 

at www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2019/09/20/rudy -giulianis -remarkable -ukraine -interview -an notated/).  

> 1040

The White House, Remarks by President Trump and President Duda of Poland Before Bilateral 

Meeting (Sept. 23, 2019) (online at www.whitehouse.gov/briefings -statements/remarks -president -trump -president -

duda -poland -bilateral -meeting/).  

> 1041

The White House, Remarks by President Trump Upon Arriving at the U.N. General Assembly (Sept. 

24, 2019) (online at www.whitehouse.gov /briefings -statements/remarks -president -trump -upon -arriving -u-n-general -

assembly -new -york -ny/).  

> 1042

The White House, Remarks by President Trump and President Zelensky of Ukraine Before Bilateral 

Meeting (Sept 25, 2019) (online at www.whitehouse.gov/briefings -statements/remarks -president -trump -president -

zelensky -ukraine -bilateral -meeting -new -york -ny/).  

> 1043

The White House, Remarks by President Trump at the Swearing -in Ceremony of Secretary of Labor 

Eugene Scalia (Sept 30, 2019) (online at www.whit ehouse.gov/briefings -statements/remarks -president -trump -

swearing -ceremony -secretary -labor -eugene -scalia/).  

> 1044

The White House, Remarks by President Trump and President Niinistö of the Republic of Finland 

Before Bilateral Meeting (Oct. 2, 2019) (www.whiteh ouse.gov/briefings -statements/remarks -president -trump -

president -niinisto -republic -finland -bilateral -meeting/).  

> 1045

The White House, Remarks by President Trump Before Marine One Departure (Oct. 3, 2019) (online at 

www.whitehouse.gov/briefings -statements/remar ks -president -trump -marine -one -departure -67/).  

> 1046

The White House, Remarks by President Trump Before Marine One Departure (Oct. 4, 2019) (online at 

www.whitehouse.gov/briefings -statements/remarks -president -trump -marine -one -departure -68). 201  

> 1047

The White House, Remarks by President Trump Before Marine One Departure (Oct. 4, 2019) (online at 

www.whitehouse.gov/briefings -statements/remarks -president -trump -marine -one -departure -68).  

> 1048

The White House, Remarks by President Trump Before Marine One Departure (Oct. 3, 201 9) (online at 

www.whitehouse.gov/briefings -statements/remarks -president -trump -marine -one -departure -67/). These recent 

statements by President inviting foreign assistance for his personal political interests are consistent with his 

statements to George Stephanopoulos of ABC News on June 12, when President Trump indicated a desire to receive 

dirt on a political opponent provided by a foreign country. ABC News' Oval Office interview with President Trump ,

ABC News (Jun. 13, 2019) (online at https://abcnews.go.com/Politics/ abc -news -oval -office -interview -president -

donald -trump/story?id=63688943).  

> 1049

Morrison -Volker Hearing Tr. at 46 -47, 91 -92.  

> 1050

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 158 -19; Holmes Dep. Tr. at 100; Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 43.  

> 1051

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 24.  

> 1052

Hill -Holmes Hea ring Tr. at 46.  

> 1053

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 165.  

> 1054

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 165.  

> 1055

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 24.  

> 1056

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 55 -56.  

> 1057

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 164.  

> 1058

Kent Dep. Tr. at 329; Morrison -Volker Hearing Tr. at 138 -139.  

> 1059

Mor rison -Volker Hearing Tr. at 139.  

> 1060

Morrison -Volker Hearing Tr. at 139. 202 

SECTION II .

THE PRESIDENT’S OBST RUCTION OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES’ 

IMPEACHMENT INQUIRY 203 

1. Constitutional Authority for Congressional Oversight and Impeachment 

Article I of the Constitution vests in the House of Representatives the “sole Power of 

Impeachment.” Congress is authorized to conduct oversight and investigations in support 

of its Article I powers. The Supreme Court —and previous Presidents —have acknowledged 

these authorities. 

Overview 

The House’s Constitutional and legal authority to conduct an impeachment inquiry is 

clear, as is the duty of the President to cooperate with the House’s exercise of this authority. The 

Constitution vests in the House of Representatives the “sole Power of Impeachment” as well as 

robust oversight powers. As the Founders intended, the courts have agreed, and prior Presidents 

have acknowledged, the H ouse’s sweeping powers to investigate are at their peak during an 

impeachment inquiry of a President. Congress has also enacted statutes to support its power to 

investigate and oversee the Executive Branch. 

Unlike President Donald J. Trump, past Presiden ts who were the subject of impeachment 

inquiries acknowledged Congress’ authority to investigate and —to varying degrees —complied 

with information requests and subpoenas. Even so, the House has previously determined that 

partial noncooperation can serve as a ground for an article of impeachment against a President as 

it would upend the separation of powers to allow the President to dictate the scope of an 

impeachment inquiry. When President Richard Nixon withheld tape recordings and produced 

heavily edited and inaccurate records, the House Judiciary Committee approved an article of 

impeachment for obstruction. 

Constitutional Power of Congress to Investigate —and to Impeach 

Article I of the U.S. Constitution gives the House of Representatives the “sole Pow er of 

Impeachment.” 1 The Framers intended the impeachment power to be an essential check on a 

President who might engage in corruption or abuse power. For example, during the 

Constitutional Convention, George Mason stated: 

No point is of more importance than that the right of impeachment should be continued. 

Shall any man be above Justice? Above all shall that man be above it, who can commit 

the most extensive injustice? … Shall the man who has practised corruption & by that 

means procured his appointme nt in the first instance, be suffered to escape punishment, 

by repeating his guilt? 2

Congress is empowered to conduct oversight and investigations to carry out its authorities 

under Article I. 3 In light of the core nature of the impeachment power to th e nation’s 

Constitutional system of checks and balances, Congress’ investigative authority is at its zenith 

during an impeachment inquiry. 4204 

As the House Judiciary Committee explained during the impeachment of President 

Nixon: 

Whatever the limits of legislative power in other contexts —and whatever need may 

otherwise exist for preserving the confidentiality of Presidential conversations —in the 

context of an impeachment proceeding the balance was struck in favor of the power of 

inquiry when the impeachm ent provision was written into the Constitution. 5

This conclusion echoed an early observation on the floor of the House of Representatives 

that the “House possessed the power of impeachment solely, and that this authority certainly 

implied the right to in spect every paper and transaction in any department, otherwise the power 

of impeachment could never be exercised with any effect.” 6

The House’s “sole Power of Impeachment” is the mechanism provided by the 

Constitution to hold sitting Presidents accountab le for serious misconduct. The Department of 

Justice has highlighted the importance of the impeachment power in justifying the Department’s 

view that a sitting President cannot be indicted or face criminal prosecution while in office. 7 The 

Department’s p osition that the President is immune from prosecution has not been endorsed by 

Congress or the courts, but as long as the Department continues to refuse to prosecute a sitting 

President, Congress has a heightened responsibility to exercise its impeachment power, if 

necessary, to ensure that no President is “above the law.” 8

The Supreme Court has recognized that Congress has broad oversight authorit y under 

the Constitution to inquire about a wide array of topics , even outside the context of 

impeachment :

The power of inquiry has been employed by Congress throughout our history, over the 

whole range of the national interests concerning which Congress might legislate or decide 

upon due investigation not to legislate; it has similarly been utili zed in determining what 

to appropriate from the national purse, or whether to appropriate. The scope of the power 

of inquiry, in short, is as penetrating and farreaching as the potential power to enact and 

appropriate under the Constitution. 9

The Sup reme Court has made clear that Congress’ authority to investigate includes the 

authority to compel the production of information by issuing subpoenas, 10 a power the House has 

delegated to its committees pursuant to its Constitutional authority to “determine the Rules of its 

Proceedings.” 11 

The Supreme Court has affirmed that compliance with Congressional subpoenas is 

mandatory: 

It is unquestionably the duty of all citizens to cooperate with the Congress in its efforts to 

obtain the facts needed for intell igent legislative action. It is their unremitting obligation 

to respond to subpoenas, to respect the dignity of the Congress and its committees and to 

testify fully with respect to matters within the province of proper investigation. 12 205 

Federal courts hav e held that the “legal duty” to respond to Congressional subpoenas 

extends to the President’s “senior -level aides” and that the failure to comply violates the 

separation of powers principles in the Constitution. 13 As one court recently explained: 

[W]hen a committee of Congress seeks testimony and records by issuing a valid 

subpoena in the context of a duly authorized investigation, it has the Constitution’s 

blessing, and ultimately, it is acting not in its own interest, but for the benefit of the 

People of the United States. If there is fraud or abuse or waste or corruption in the 

federal government, it is the constitutional duty of Congress to find the facts and, as 

necessary, take corrective action. Conducting investigations is the means that Congress 

uses to carry out that constitutional obligation. Thus, blatant defiance of Congress’ 

centuries -old power to compel the performance of witnesses is not an abstract injury, nor 

is it a mere banal insult to our democracy. It is an affront to the mechanism f or curbing 

abuses of power that the Framers carefully crafted for our protection, and, thereby, 

recalcitrant witnesses actually undermine the broader interests of the People of the United 

States. 14 

Laws Passed by Congress 

Congress has enacted statutes to support its power to investigate and oversee the 

Executive Branch. These laws impose criminal and other penalties on those who fail to comply 

with inquiries from Congress or block others from doing so, and they reflect the broader 

Constitutional requireme nt to cooperate with Congressional investigations. For example: 

• Obstructing Congress: Obstructing a Congressional investigation is a crime punishable 

by up to five years in prison. An individual is guilty of obstruction if he or she 

“corruptly, or by threats or force, or by any threatening letter or communication 

influences, obstructs, or impedes or endeavors to inf luence, obstruct, or impede” the “due 

and proper exercise of the power of inquiry under which any inquiry or investigation is 

being had by either House, or any committee of either House.” 15 

• Concealing Material Facts: Concealing information from Congress i s also punishable 

by up to five years in prison. This prohibition applies to anyone who “falsifies, conceals, 

or covers up” a “material fact” in connection with “any investigation or review, 

conducted pursuant to the authority of any committee, subcommitt ee, commission or 

office of the Congress, consistent with applicable rules of the House or Senate.” 16 

• Intimidating and Harassing Witnesses: Intimidating witnesses in a Congressional 

investigation is a crime punishable by up to twenty years in prison. Thi s statute applies 

to anyone who “knowingly uses intimidation, threatens, or corruptly persuades another 

person, or attempts to do so, or engages in misleading conduct toward another person,” 

with the intent to “influence, delay, or prevent the testimony of any person in an official 

proceeding.” 17 An individual who “intentionally harasses another person and thereby 

hinders, delays, prevents, or dissuades” a person from “attending or testifying in an 

official proceeding” is also guilty of a crime punishable b y fines and up to three years in 

prison. 18 206 

• Retaliating Against Employees Who Provide Information to Congress: Employees who 

speak to Congress have the right not to have adverse personnel actions taken against 

them. Retaliatory actions taken against Execu tive Branch employees who cooperate with 

Congress may constitute violations of this law. 19 Any Executive Branch official who 

“prohibits or prevents” or “attempts or threatens to prohibit or prevent” any officer or 

employee of the federal government from speaking with Congress could have his or her 

salary withheld. 20 

Precedent of Previous Impe achments and Other Investigations 

Unlike President Trump, past Presidents who were the subject of impeachment 

inquiries —including Presidents Andrew Johnson, Richard Nixon, and Bill Clinton —

acknowledged Congress’ authority to investigate and, to varying de grees, complied with 

information requests and subpoenas. 

For example, President Johnson complied with the House’s requests for information. 

According to a report subsequently adopted by the House Judiciary Committee, “There is no 

evidence that Johnson ever asserted any privilege to prevent disclosure of presidential 

conversations to the Committee, or failed to comply with any of the Committee’s requests.” 21 

Similarly, President Clinton provided written responses to 81 interrogatories from the 

House Ju diciary Committee during the House’s impeachment inquiry. 22 

Even President Nixon agreed to let his staff testify voluntarily in the Senate Watergate 

investigation, stating: “All members of the White House Staff will appear voluntarily when 

requested by the committee. They will testify under oath, and they will answer fully all proper 

questions.” 23 As a result, numerous senior White House officials testified, including White 

House Counsel John Dean III, White House Chief of Staff H.R. Haldeman, Deputy As sistant to 

the President Alexander Butterfield, and Chief Advisor to the President for Domestic Affairs 

John D. Ehrlichman. 24 President Nixon also produced numerous documents and records in 

response to the House’s subpoenas as part of its impeachment inqui ry, including more than 30 

transcripts of White House recordings and notes from meetings with the President. 25 

However, President Nixon’s production of documents was incomplete. For example, he 

did not produce tape recordings, and transcripts he produce d were heavily edited or inaccurate. 

President Nixon claimed that his noncompliance with House subpoenas was necessary to protect 

the confidentiality of Presidential conversations, but the House Judiciary Committee rejected 

these arguments and approved an article of impeachment for obstruction of the House’s 

impeachment inquiry. 26 

In a letter to President Nixon, Judiciary Committee Chairman Peter Rodino explained 

that it would upend the separation of powers to allow the President to dictate the scope of an 

impeachment inquiry: 207 

Under the Constitution it is not within the power of the President to conduct an inquiry 

into his own impeachment, to determine which evidence, and what version or portion of 

that evidence, is relevant and necessary to such an inquiry. These are matters which, 

under the Constitution, the House has the sole power to determine. 27 

Consistent with that long -settled understanding, other Presidents have recognized that 

they must comply with information requests issued in a House i mpeachment inquiry. In 1846, 

for example, President James Polk stated in a message to the House: 

It may be alleged that the power of impeachment belongs to the House of 

Representatives, and that with a view to the exercise of this power, that House has t he 

right to investigate the conduct of all public officers under the government. This is 

cheerfully admitted. In such a case, the safety of the Republic would be the supreme law; 

and the power of the House in the pursuit of this object would penetrate in to the most 

secret recesses of the executive departments. It could command the attendance of any 

and every agent of the government, and compel them to produce all papers, public or 

private, official or unofficial, and to testify on oath to all facts withi n their knowledge. 28 

Past Presidents have also produced documents and permitted senior officials to testify in 

connection with other Congressional investigations, including inquiries into Presidential actions. 

For example, i n the Iran -Contra inquiry , Pres ident Ronald Reagan’s former National 

Security Advisor , Oliver North , and the former Assistant to the President for National Security 

Affairs , John Poindexter , testified before Congress .29 President Reagan also produced “relevant 

excerpts of his personal d iaries to Congress.” 30 

During the Clinton Administration, Congress obtained testimony fr om top advisors to 

President Bill Clinton, including C hief of Staff Mack McLarty, Chief of Staff Erskine Bowles, 

White House Counsel Bernard Nussbaum, and White House Counsel Jack Quinn. 31 

Similarly, in the Benghazi investigation, led by Chairman Trey Gowdy, President Barack 

Obama made many of his top aides available for transcribed interviews, including National 

Security Advisor Susan Rice and Deputy National Sec urity Advisor for Strategic 

Communications Benjamin Rhodes. 32 The Obama Administration also produced more than 

75,000 pages of documents in that investigation, including 1,450 pages of White House emails 

containing communications of senior officials on the National Security Council .33 208 

2. The President’s Categorical Refusal to Comply 

President Trump categorically directed the White House, federal departments and agencies, 

and federal officials not to cooperate with the House’s inquiry and not to comply with duly 

authorized subpoenas for documents or testimony. 

Overview 

Donald Trump is the first and only President in American history to openly and 

indiscriminately defy all aspects of the Constitutional impeachment process, ordering all federal 

agencies and officials categorically not to comply with voluntary requests or compulsory 

demands for documents or testimony. 

On September 26, President Trump argued that Congress should not be “allowed” to 

impeach him under the Constitution and that the re “should be a way of stopping it —maybe 

legally, through the courts.” A common theme of his defiance has been his claims that Congress 

is acting in an unprecedented way and using unprecedented rules. However, the House has been 

following the same invest igative rules that Republicans championed when they were in control. 

On October 8, White House Counsel Pat Cipollone —acting on behalf of President 

Trump —sent a letter to House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and the three investigating Committees 

confirming that Pre sident Trump directed his entire Administration not to cooperate with the 

House’s impeachment inquiry. Mr. Cipollone wrote: “President Trump cannot permit his 

Administration to participate in this partisan inquiry under these circumstances.” 

Mr. Cipol lone’s letter elicited immediate criticism from legal experts across the political 

spectrum. He advanced remarkably politicized arguments and legal theories unsupported by the 

Constitution, judicial precedent, and more than 200 years of history. If allow ed to stand, the 

President’s defiance, as justified by Mr. Cipollone, would represent an existential threat to the 

nation’s Constitutional system of checks and balances, separation of powers, and rule of law. 

The House’s Impeachment Inquiry of President T rump 

In January, the House of Representatives voted to adopt its rules for the 116th Congress. 

These rules authorized House committees to conduct investigations, hold hearings, issue 

subpoenas for documents and testimony, and depose witnesses. 34 Significantly, these authorities 

are similar to those adopted when Republicans controlled the House during previous 

Congresses. 35 

In April, Special Counsel Robert S. Mueller III, who was appointed by then -Deputy 

Attorney General Rod J. Rosenstein to investigate Russian interference in the 2016 U.S. 

Presidential election and potential obstruction of justice by President Trump, issued a two -

volume report. 36 In connection with that report, the Committee on the Judiciary began an inquiry 

int o “whether to approve articles of impeachment with respect to the President.” 37 The Judiciary 209 

Committee detailed its authority and intent to conduct this investigation in a series of reports, 

memoranda, and legal filings. 38 

On August 22, Rep. Jerrold Nad ler, the Chairman of the Judiciary Committee, sent a 

letter requesting that the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, the Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, the Committee on Foreign Affairs, and the Committee on Financial 

Services provide “informatio n, including documents and testimony, depositions, and/or interview 

transcripts” relevant to the “ongoing impeachment investigation relating to President Trump.” 39 

In September, the Intelligence Committee, the Oversight Committee, and the Foreign 

Affairs Committee sent letters requesting documents and interviews from the White House and 

the Department of State regarding the actions of President Trump, the President’s personal agent, 

Rudy Giuliani, and others to press ure Ukraine to launch investigations in to former Vice 

President Joe Biden and a debunked conspiracy theory alleging Ukrainian interference in the 

2016 election. 40 

On September 22, President Trump admitted to discussing former Vice President Biden 

and his son with the President of Ukraine durin g a telephone call on July 25. 41 

On September 24, Speaker Nancy Pelosi stated publicly that the House Committees were 

“moving forward” to “proceed with their investigations under that umbrella of impeachment 

inquiry.” She explained that, for the past seve ral months, the House had been “investigating in 

our Committees and litigating in the courts, so the House can gather ‘all the relevant facts and 

consider whether to exercise its full Article I powers, including a constitutional power of the 

utmost gravity —approval of articles of impeachment.’” 42 

On September 25, the White House made public a Memorandum of Telephone 

Conversation of President Trump’s call with President Zelensky on July 25. As discussed in 

detail in Section I, this call record documented ho w President Trump directly and explicitly 

asked President Zelensky to launch investigations of former Vice President Biden and the 2016 

election. 43 

Following the Speaker’s announcement and the release of the call record, the Intelligence 

Committee, the Ov ersight Committee, and the Foreign Affairs Committee continued their 

investigation, requesting documents and information, issuing subpoenas, and conducting 

interviews and depositions. The Committees made clear that this information would be 

“collected as part of the House’s impeachment inquiry and shared among the Committees, as 

well as with the Committee on the Judiciary as appropriate.” 44 

On October 31, the House voted to approve House Resolution 660, directing the 

Committees “to continue their ongoing investigations as part of the existing House of 

Representatives inquiry into whether sufficient grounds exist for the House of Representatives to 

exercise its Constitutional power to impeach Donald John Trump, President of the United States 

of America.” T he resolution set forth the process for holding public hearings, releasing 

deposition transcripts, presenting a report to the Judiciary Committee, holding proceedings 210 

within the Judiciary Committee, and submitting to the House of Representatives “such 

reso lutions, articles of impeachment, or other recommendations as it deems proper.” 45 

President Trump’s Unprecedented Order Not to Comply 

President Trump’s categorical and indiscriminate order and efforts to block witness 

testimony and conceal documentary ev idence from the Committees investigating his conduct as 

part of the House’s impeachment inquiry stand in contrast to his predecessors and challenge the 

basic tenets of the Constitutional system of checks and balances. 

Even before the House of Representati ves launched its investigation regarding Ukraine, 

President Trump made numerous statements rejecting the fundamental authority of Congress to 

investigate his actions as well as those of his Administration. For example, on April 24, he 

stated, in response to Congressional investigations: “We’re fighting all the subpoenas.” 46 

Similarly, during a speech on July 23, he stated: “I have an Article II, where I have to the right 

to do whatever I want as president.” 47 

When the three investigating Committees began reviewing the President’s actions as part 

of the House’s impeachment inquiry, President Trump repeatedly challenged the investigation’s 

legitimacy in word and deed. President Trump’s rhetorical attacks appeared intended not just to 

dispute public reports of his misconduct, but to persuade the public that the House lacks 

authority to investigate the President and the inquiry is therefore invalid and fraudulent. For 

example, the President described the impeachment inquiry as: 

• “a COUP” 48 

• “illegal, invalid, and unconstitutional” 49 

• “an unconstitutional power grab” 50 

• “Ukraine Witch Hunt” 51 

• “a continuation of the Greatest and most Destructive Witch Hunt of all time” 52 

• “a total Witch Hunt Scam by the Democrats” 53 

• “bad for the country” 54 

• “all a hoax” 55 

• “the single greatest witch hunt in American history” 56 

• “Democrat Scam” 57 

• “just another Democrat Hoax” 58 

• “a fraud against the American people” 59 

• “A Witch Hunt Scam” 60 

• “a con being perpetrated on the United States public and even the world” 61 

• “ridiculous” 62 

• “a co ntinuation of the greatest Scam and Witch Hunt in the history of our Country” 63 

• “Ukraine Hoax” 64 

• “No Due Process Scam” 65 

• “the phony Impeachment Scam” 66 

• “the phony Impeachment Hoax” 67 211 

On September 26, President Trump argued that Congress should not be “allowed” to 

impeach him under the Constitution: “What these guys are doing —Democrats —are doing to 

this country is a disgrace and it shouldn’t be allowed. There should be a way of stopping it —

maybe legally, through the courts.” 68 

A common theme of President Trump’s defiance has been his claims that Congress is 

acting in an unprecedented way and using unprecedented rules. However, the House has been 

following the same investigative rules that Republicans championed when they were in control 

and cond ucted aggressive oversight of previous Administrations. 69 

White House Counsel’s Letters Implementing the President’s Order 

On October 8, White House Counsel Pat Cipollone sent a letter to Speaker Pelosi and the 

three Committees explaining that President T rump had directed his entire Administration not to 

cooperate with the House’s impeachment inquiry. He wrote: 

Consistent with the duties of the President of the United States, and in particular his 

obligation to preserve the rights of future occupants of his office, President Trump cannot 

permit his Administration to participate in this partisan inquiry under these 

circumstances. 70 

On October 10, President Trump confirmed that Mr. Cipollone was indeed conveying his 

orders, stating: 

As our brilliant White House Counsel wrote to the Democrats yesterday, he said their 

highly partisan and unconstitutional effort threatens grave and lasting damage to our 

democratic institutions, to our system of free elections, and to the American people. 

That’s what it is. T o the American people. It’s so terrible. Democrats are on a crusade 

to destroy our democracy. That’s what’s happening. We will never let it happen. We 

will defeat them. 71 

Mr. Cipollone’s letter elicited immediate criticism from legal experts from acro ss the 

political spectrum. 72 

Mr. Cipollone wrote a second letter to the Committees on October 18, declaring that the 

White House would refuse to comply with the subpoena issued to it for documents. 73 

On November 1 —after the House had already issued sever al subpoenas to White House 

and other Executive Branch officials for testimony —the Trump Administration issued a new 

“Letter Opinion” from Assistant Attorney General Steven A. Engel to Mr. Cipollone. The Office 

of Legal Counsel opinion sought to extend th e reach of the President’s earlier direction to defy 

Congressional subpoenas and to justify noncompliance by officials who could not plausibly be 

considered among the President’s closest advisors. 

Mr. Engel’s opinion asserted that the House’s impeachment inquiry seeks information 

that is “potentially protected by execu tive privilege” and claimed the Committees’ deposition 212 

subpoenas are “invalid” and “not subject to civil or criminal enforcement” because the House’s 

long -standing deposition rules do not allow the participation of attorneys from the White House 

or other g overnment agencies. 74 These claims are without basis and unsupported by precedent. 

The Letter Opinion cited statements from previous Presidents and Attorneys General that 

directly undercut the Administration’s position. For example, President James K. Polk, stated 

that in an impeachment inquiry the House had power to “penetrate into the most secret recesses 

of the Executive Departments.” 75 In addition, Attorney General Robert H. Jackson, who later 

served on the Supreme Court, stated that “pertinent info rmation would be supplied in 

impeachment proceedings, usually instituted at the suggestion of the Department and for the 

good of the administration of justice.” 76 

In his letters conveying the President’s direction, Mr. Cipollone advanced remarkably 

politi cized arguments and legal theories unsupported by the Constitution, judicial precedent, and 

more than 200 years of history. These letters effectuated the President’s order and campaign to 

obstruct and thwart the House’s exercise of its sole power of impea chment under the 

Constitution. They are rebutted as follows: 

• The Impeachment Inquiry is Constitutional: According to Mr. Cipollone, “the 

President did nothing wrong,” and “there is no basis for an impeachment inquiry.” 77 

President Trump has repeatedly described his call with President Zelensky as “perfect.” 78 

Speaking for President Trump, Mr. Cipollone also asserted that the impeachment inquiry 

is “partisan and unconstitutional,” “a naked political strategy that began th e day he was 

inaugurated, and perhaps even before,” and that it “plainly seeks to reverse the election of 

2016 and to influence the election of 2020.” 79 

However, as this report details in Section I, Congress found abundant evidence of a 

scheme directed by the President to solicit foreign election interference by pressing the 

newly -elected President of Ukraine to announce publicly politically -motivated 

investigations to benefit President Trump’s own reelection campaign. Fundamentally, 

the Constitutional val idity of an impeachment inquiry cannot depend on a President’s 

view that he did nothing wrong or on the political composition of the House. Such an 

extreme reimagining of the Constitution would render the Article I impeachment power 

meaningless and provid e the President with power the Constitution does not grant him to 

thwart, manipulate, and stonewall an impeachment inquiry conducted by the House, 

including by concealing information of his own misconduct. 80 Taken to its logical 

conclusion, the President’s position would eliminate the impeachment power in every 

year during which a political party other than the President’s is in power. Under this 

approach, the impeachments of President Clinton, President Nixon, and President 

Andrew Johnson would not have b een permitted. 81 

The purpose of an impeachment inquiry is for the House to collect evidence to determine 

for itself whether the President may have committed an impeachable offense warranting 

articles of impeachment. Because the Constitution vests the Hous e alone with “the sole 

Power of Impeachment,” it is not for the President to decide whether the House is 

exercising that power properly or prudently. The President is not free to arrogate the 213 

House’s power to himself —or to order across -the -board defiance of House subpoenas —

based solely on his unilateral characterization of legislative motives or because he 

opposes the House’s decision to investigate his actions. 

• The Impeachment Inquiry is Properly Authorized: According to Mr. Cipollone, the 

“House has n ot expressly adopted any resolution authorizing an impeachment 

investigation” nor has it “delegated such authority to any of your Committees by rule.” 82 

However, nothing in either the Constitution or the House Rules requires the full House to 

vote to autho rize an impeachment inquiry. 83 The impeachment inquiries into Presidents 

Andrew Johnson, Nixon, and Clinton all began prior to the House’s consideration and 

approval of a resolution authorizing the investigations. 84 The same is true of many 

judicial impeac hments; 85 indeed, numerous judges have been impeached without any 

prior vote of the full House authorizing a formal inquiry. 86 Even though Mr. Cipollone’s 

argument is inherently invalid, the House has taken two floor votes that render it 

obsolete —the first on January 9 to adopt rules authorizing committees to conduct 

investigations, and the second on October 31 to set forth procedures for open hearings in 

the Intelligence Committee and for additional proceedings in the Judiciary Committee .87 

Even following p assage of House Resolution 660, whereby the House confirmed the 

preexisting and ongoing impeachment inquiry, the President and the White House 

Counsel, acting on the President’s behalf, have persisted in their obstructive conduct. 

• President Has No Valid Due Process Claims: According to Mr. Cipollone, “the 

Committees have not established any procedures affording the President even the most 

basic protections demanded by due process under the Constitution and by fundamental 

fairness,” and the Committees “ha ve denied the President the right to cross -examine 

witnesses, to call witnesses, to receive transcripts of testimony, to have access to 

evidence,” and “to have counsel present.” 88 Yet, there is no requirement that the House 

provide these procedures during an impeachment inquiry. The Constitution vests the 

House with “the sole Power of Impeachment,” and provides no constraints on how the 

House chooses to conduct its impeachment pr ocess. 89 Nevertheless, Mr. Cipollone’s 

complaints are unfounded as the House has implemented procedural protections for the 

President in its exercise of its Constitutional power. House Resolution 660 authorizes 

procedures to “allow for the participation o f the President and his counsel.” 90 The 

Committee Report accompanying House Resolution 660 explains that these protections 

for the President are part of the Judiciary Committee hearing process and are “based on 

those provided during the Nixon and Clinton i nquiries.” These procedures include “that 

the president and his counsel are invited to attend all hearings; the ability for the 

president’s counsel to cross -examine witnesses and object to the admissibility of 

testimony; and the ability of the president’s counsel to make presentations of evidence 

before the Judiciary Committee, including the ability to call witnesses.” 91 

• Fact -Finding Was Appropriately Transparent: According to Mr. Cipollone, the 

Committees conducted their proceedings “in secret.” 92 Thi s argument fundamentally 

misconstrues and misapprehends the fact -gathering process required at this initial stage of 

the House’s impeachment inquiry. Unlike in the cases of Presidents Nixon and Clinton, 

the House conducted a significant portion of the fac tual investigation itself because no 214 

independent prosecutor was appointed to investigate President Trump’s conduct 

regarding Ukraine. Attorney General William P. Barr refused to authorize a criminal 

investigation into the serious allegations of misconduct , and even this decision was 

limited to possible violations of federal campaign finance laws .93 The investigative 

Committees proceeded consistent with the House’s rules of procedure and in keeping 

with investigative best practices, including the need to re duce the risk that witnesses may 

try to coordinate or align testimony. As the House explained in its report accompanying 

House Resolution 660: 

The initial stages of an impeachment inquiry in the House are akin to those 

preceding a prosecutorial chargin g decision. Under this process, the House is 

responsible for collecting the evidence and, rather than weighing the question of 

returning an indictment, the Members of the House have the obligation to decide 

whether to approve articles of impeachment. 94 

The Committees have released transcripts of all interviews and depositions conducted 

during the investigation. As these transcripts make clear, all Members of all three 

Committees —including 47 Republican Members of Congress —had the opportunity to 

ask ques tions, and these transcripts are now available to the President and his counsel. 

These same procedures were supported by Acting White House Chief of Staff Mick 

Mulvaney when he served as a Member of the Oversight Committee and by Secretary of 

State Mike P ompeo when he served as a Member of the Benghazi Select Committee. In 

fact, some of the same Members and staff currently conducting depositions as part of the 

present impeachment inquiry participated directly in depositions during the Clinton, 

Bush, and O bama Administrations. 95 The Intelligence Committee also held public 

hearings with 12 of these witnesses. 

• Agency Attorneys Can Be (And Should Be) Excluded from Depositions: According to 

Mr. Cipollone, “it is unconstitutional to exclude agency counsel from participating in 

congressional depositions.” 96 Mr. Cipollone cites no case law to support his position —

because there is none. Instead, he relies on a single opinion from the Trump 

Administration’s Office of Legal Counsel and ignores the ample legal autho rity and 

historical precedent that clearly support the Committees’ actions. For example, the 

Constitution expressly delegates to Congress the authority to “determine the Rules of its 

Proceedings,” 97 which includes the power to determine the procedures used for gathering 

information from witnesses whether via interview, staff deposition, or in a public 

hearing. 98 The basis for the rule excluding agency counsel is straightforward: it p revents 

agency officials who are directly implicated in the abuses Congres s is investigating from 

trying to prevent their own employees from coming forward to tell the truth to Congress. 

The rule protects the rights of witnesses by allowing them to be accompanied in 

depositions by personal counsel. Agency attorneys have been e xcluded from 

Congressional depositions of Executive Branch officials for decades, under both 

Republicans and Democrats, including Chairmen Dan Burton, Henry Waxman, Darrell 

Issa, Jason Chaffetz, Trey Gowdy, Kevin Brady, and Jeb Hensarling, among others. 99 215 

• Congress Can Exercise Its Broad Oversight Authority: According to Mr. Cipollone, 

“you simply cannot expect to rely on oversight authority to gather information for an 

unauthorized impeachment inquiry that conflicts with all historical precedent and ride s

roughshod over due process and the separation of powers.” 100 But, of course, the present 

impeachment inquiry does neither. Moreover, the Supreme Court has made clear that 

Congress’ “power of inquiry” is “as penetrating and farreaching as the potential po wer to 

enact and appropriate under the Constitution.” 101 The subject matter of the impeachment 

inquiry implicates the House’s impeachment -specific as well as legislative and oversight 

authorities and interests. The activity under investigation, for instanc e, relates to a broad 

array of issues in which Congress has legislated and may legislate in the future, including 

government ethics and transparency, election integrity, appropriations, foreign affairs, 

abuse of power, bribery, extortion, and obstruction o f justice. In fact, Members of 

Congress have already introduced legislation on issues related to the impeachment 

inquiry. 102 The House does not forfeit its Constitutional authority to investigate and 

legislate when it initiates an impeachment inquiry. 103 Co ngress passed sweeping 

legislative reforms following the scandal over the Watergate break -in and President 

Nixon’s resignation. 104 

• “Confidentiality Interests” Do Not Eliminate Congress’ Authority: According to Mr. 

Cipollone, the Administration would also not comply with the Committees’ demands for 

documents and testimony because of unspecified Executive Branch “confidentiality 

interests.” 105 There is no basis in the law of executive privilege for declaring a 

categorical refusal to respond to any House subpoena. In an impeachment inquiry , the 

House’s need for information and its Constitutional authority are at their greatest, and the 

Executive’s interest in confidentiality must yield. Only the President can assert executive 

privilege, yet he has not done so in the House’s impeachment inquiry. Prior to asserting 

executive privilege, the Executive Branch is obligated to seek to accommodate the 

legitimate informational needs of Congress , which, as discussed below, it has not done. 106 

In any event, much of the information sought by the Committees would not be covered 

by executive privilege under any theory, 107 and the privilege —where validly asserted on 

a particularized basis and not outweig hed by the legitimate needs of the impeachment 

inquiry —would protect any legitimate Executive Branch interest in confidentiality. 108 

• President’s Top Aides Are Not “Absolutely Immune”: According to Mr. Cipollone, the 

President’s top aides are “absolutely i mmune” from being compelled to testify before 

Congress. 109 This extreme position has been explicitly and repeatedly rejected by 

Congress —which has received testimony from senior aides to many previous 

Presidents —and by federal courts. In 2008, a federal co urt rejected an assertion by 

President George W. Bush that White House Counsel Harriet Miers was immune from 

being compelled to testify, noting that the President had failed to identify even a single 

judicial opinion to justify his claim. 110 On November 25, 2019, another federal judge 

rejected President Trump’s claim of absolute immunity for former White House Counsel 

Don McGahn, concluding: “Stated simply, the primary takeaway from the past 250 years 

of recorded American history is that Presidents are not kings,” and that “Executive 

branch officials are not absolutely immune from compulsory congressional process —no 

matter how many times the Executive branch has asserted as much over the years —even 216 

if the President expressly directs such officials’ non -compl iance.” 111 Mr. Cipollone’s 

position, adopted by President Trump, has thus been repudiated by Congress and the 

courts, and is not salvaged by Executive Branch legal opinions insisting upon a wholly 

fictional ground for non -compliance. In ordering categorica l defiance of House 

subpoenas, President Trump has confirmed the unlimited breadth of his position and his 

unprecedented view that no branch of government —even the House —is empowered to 

investigate whether he may have committed constitutional offenses. 

In addition to advancing specious legal arguments, President Trump has made no effort to 

accommodate the House’s interests in conducting the impeachment inquiry. For example, the 

Committees first requested documents from the White House on September 9, but the White 

House disregarded the request. 112 The Committees made a second request on September 24, but 

the White House again ignored the request. 113 Finally, on October 4, the Committees transmitted 

a subpoena for the documents. 114 However, on October 18, the White House Counsel sent a 

letter stating that “the White House cannot comply with the October 4 subpoena.” 115 

Since then, there has been no evidence of a willingness by the President to produce any 

of the documents covered by the subpoena to the White Hou se. The State Department made 

passing references to potentially engaging in an “accommodations” process in response to its 

September 27 subpoena. 116 However, there has been no effort to do so, and departments and 

agencies have not produced any documents in response to subpoenas issued as part of the House 

impeachment inquiry. The President also made no apparent effort to accommodate the House’s 

need for witness testimony and instead continued to flatly refuse to allow Executive Branch 

officials to testify. 217 

3. The President’s Refusal to Produce Any and All Subpoenaed Documents 

Pursuant to the President’s orders, the White House, federal departments and agencies, and 

key witnesses refused to produce any documents in response to duly authorized subpoenas 

issued pursuant to the House’s impeachment inquiry. 

Overview 

Following President Trump’s categorical order, not a single document has been produced 

by the White House, the Office of the Vice President, the Office of Management and Budget, the 

Department of State, the Department of Defense, or the Department of Energy in response to 71 

specific, individualized requests or demands for records in their possession, custody, or control. 

The subpoenas to federal departments and agencies remain in fu ll force and effect. These 

agencies and offices also blocked many current and former officials from producing records 

directly to the Committees. 

Certain witnesses defied the President’s sweeping, categorical, and baseless order and 

identified the subs tance of key documents. Other witnesses identified numerous additional 

documents that the President and various agencies are withholding that are directly relevant to 

the impeachment inquiry. 

The President’s personal attorney, Mr. Giuliani, although a pr ivate citizen, also sought to 

rely on the President’s order, as communicated in Mr. Cipollone’s letter on October 8, to justify 

his decision to disobey a lawful subpoena for documents. 

The White House 

On September 9, the Committees sent a letter to Whit e House Counsel Pat Cipollone 

seeking six categories of documents in response to reports indicating that, “for nearly two years, 

the President and his personal attorney, Rudy Giuliani, appear to have acted outside legitimate 

law enforcement and diplomatic channels to coerce the Ukrainian government into pursuing two 

politically -motivated investigations under the guise of anti -corruption activity.” 117 The 

Committees asked the White House to voluntarily produce responsive documents by September 

16. 118 The White House did not provide any response by that date. 

On September 24, the Committees sent a follow -up letter requesting that the White House 

produce the documents by September 26. 119 Again, the White House did not provide any 

documents or respond by that date .

Having received no response from the White House, then -Chairman Elijah E. Cummings 

sent a memorandum to Members of the Committee on Oversight and Reform, which has 

jurisdiction over the Executive Office of the President, explaining that he was preparin g to issue 

a subpoena in light of the White House’s non -compliance and non -responsiveness. He wrote: 218 

Over the past several weeks, the Committees tried several times to obtain voluntary 

compliance with our requests for documents, but the White House has refused to engage 

with —or even respond to —the Committees. 120 

On October 4, the Committees sent a letter to Acting White House Chief of Staff Mick 

Mulvaney transmitting a subpoena issued by Chairman Cummings compelling the White House 

to produce document s by October 18. 121 

As discussed above, on October 8, the White House Counsel sent a letter to Speaker 

Pelosi and the Committees stating that “President Trump cannot permit his Administration to 

participate in this partisan inquiry under these circumstances .” 122 The White House Counsel also 

sent a letter on October 18, confirming that “the White House cannot comply with the October 4 

subpoena to Acting Chief of Staff Mulvaney.” 123 

To date, the White House has not produced a single document in response to the 

subpoena. 124 Instead, the White House has released to the public only two documents —call 

records from the President’s phone calls with President Zelensky on April 21 and July 25. 125 

Witnesses who testified before the Committees have identified multiple addi tional 

documents that the President is withholding that are directly relevant to the impeachment 

inquiry, including but not limited to: 

• briefing materials for President Trump’s call with President Zelensky on July 25 prepared 

by Lt. Col. Alexander S. Vind man, Director for Ukraine at the National Security 

Council; 126 

• notes relating to the July 25 call taken by Lt. Col. Vindman and Tim Morrison, the 

former Senior Director for Europe and Russia on the National Security Council; 127 

• an August 15 “Presidential d ecision memo” prepared by Lt. Col. Vindman and approved 

by Mr. Morrison conveying “the consensus views from the entire deputies small group” 

that “the security assistance be released”; 128 

• National Security Council staff summaries of conclusions from meetin gs at the principal, 

deputy, or sub -deputy level relating to Ukraine, including military assistance; 129 

• call records between President Trump and Ambassador Gordon Sondland, United States 

Ambassador to the European Union; 130 

• National Security Council Legal Advisor John Eisenberg’s notes and correspondence 

relating to discussions with Lt. Col. Vindman regarding the July 10 meetings in which 

Ambassador Sondland requested investigations in exchange for a White House 

meeting; 131 

• the memorandum of conversation f rom President Trump’s meeting in New York with 

President Zelensky on September 25; 132 and 219 

• as explained below, emails and other messages between Ambassador Sondland and 

senior White House officials, including Acting Chief of Staff Mick Mulvaney, Senior 

Adviso r to the Chief of Staff Rob Blair, and then -National Security Advisor John Bolton, 

among other high -level Trump Administration officials. 133 

The Committees also have good -faith reason to believe that the White House is in 

possession of and continues to withhold significantly more documents and records responsive to 

the subpoena and of direct relevance to the impeachment inquiry. 

The Committee s have closely tracked public reports that the White House is in 

possession of other correspondence and records of direct relevance to the impeachment inquiry. 

On November 24, for instance, a news report revealed that the White House had conducted a 

confi dential, internal records review of the hold on military assistance in response to the 

Committees’ inquiry. The review reportedly “turned up hundreds of documents that reveal 

extensive efforts to generate an after -the -fact justification for the decision a nd a debate over 

whether the delay was legal.” 134 

Office of the Vice President 

On October 4, the Committees sent a letter to Vice President Mike Pence seeking 13 

categories of documents in response to reports that he and his staff were directly involved i n the 

matters under investigation. The Committees wrote: 

Recently, public reports have raised questions about any role you may have played in 

conveying or reinforcing the President’s stark message to the Ukrainian President. The 

reports include specific references to a member of your staff who may have participated 

directly in the July 25, 2019, call, documents you may have obtained or reviewed, 

including the record of the call, and your September 1, 2019, meeting with the Ukrainian 

President in Warsaw, during which you reportedly discussed the Administration’s hold 

on U.S. security assistance to Ukraine. 135 

The Committees asked the Vice President to produce responsive documents by October 

15. 136 On that date, Matthew E. Morgan, Counsel to the Vice Preside nt, responded to the 

Committees by refusing to cooperate and reciting many of the same baseless arguments as the 

White House Counsel. He wrote: 

[T]he purported “impeachment inquiry” has been designed and implemented in a manner 

that calls into question y our commitment to fundamental fairness and due process rights. 

… Never before in history has the Speaker of the House attempted to launch an 

“impeachment inquiry” against a President without a majority of the House of 

Representatives voting to authorize a constitutionally acceptable process. 137 

To date, the Vice President has not produced a single document sought by the 

Committees and has not indicated any intent to do so going forward. 220 

Witnesses who testified before the Committees have identified multip le additional 

documents that the Vice President is withholding that are directly relevant to the impeachment 

inquiry, including but not limited to: 

• notes taken by Jennifer Williams, Special Advisor to the Vice President for Europe and 

Russia, during the call between President Trump and President Zelensky on July 25; 138 

• notes taken by Lt. Gen. Keith Kellogg, National Security Advisor to the Vice President, 

during the call between President Trump and President Zelensky on July 25; 139 

• materials regarding the July 25 call that were placed in the Vice President’s briefing book 

that same day; 140 

• the memorandum of conversation from Vice President Pence’s call with President 

Zelensky on September 18; 141 and 

• briefing materials prepared for Vice Presid ent Pence’s meeting with President Zelensky 

September 1 in Warsaw, Poland. 142 

The Committees also have good -faith reason to believe that the Office of the Vice 

President is in possession of and continues to withhold significantly more documents and records 

responsive to their request and of direct relevance to the impeachment inquiry. 

Office of Management and Budget 

On October 7, the Committees sent a letter to Russell Vought, Acting Director of the 

Office of Management and Budget (OMB), conveying a subpo ena issued by the Intelligence 

Committee for nine categories of documents in response to public reports that the President 

directed OMB to freeze hundreds of millions of dollars in military assistance appropriated by 

Congress to help Ukraine counter Russia n aggression. The Committees wrote: 

According to multiple press reports, at some point in July 2019, President Trump ordered 

Acting Chief of Staff and Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Director Mick 

Mulvaney to freeze the military aid to Ukraine, and Mr. Mulvaney reportedly conveyed 

the President’s order “through the budget office to the Pentagon and the State 

Department, which were told only that the administration was looking at whether the 

spending was necessary.” 143 

The subpoena compelled Acting D irector Vought to produce responsive documents by 

October 15. 144 On that day, OMB Associate Director for Legislative Affairs Jason Yaworske 

responded by refusing to produce any documents and reciting many of the same baseless 

arguments as the White House Co unsel: 

[T]he President has advised that “[g]iven that your inquiry lacks any legitimate 

constitutional foundation, any pretense of fairness, or even the most elementary 

due process protections, the Executive Branch cannot be expected to participate in 221 

it.” … President Trump cannot permit his Administrat ion to participate in this 

partisan inquiry under these circumstances. 145 

To date, Acting Director Vought has not produced a single document sought by the 

Committees and has not indicated any intent to do so going forward. 

Witnesses who testified before the Committees have identified multiple additional 

documents that Acting Director Vought is withholding that are directly relevant to the 

impeachment inquiry, including but not limited to: 

• a June 19 email from OMB Associate Director of National Security Programs Michael 

Duffey to DOD Deputy Comptroller Elaine McCusker regarding the fact that “the 

President had seen a media report and he had questions about the assistance” and 

expressing “interest in getting more information from the Department of Defense ,” 

specifically a “description of the program”; 146 

• a July 12 email from White House Assistant to the President and Senior Advisor to the 

Chief of Staff Robert Blair to Associate Director Duffey explaining that the “President is 

directing a hold on militar y support for Ukraine” and not mentioning any other country or 

security assistance package; 147 and 

• an August 7 memorandum drafted in preparation for Acting Director Vought’s 

attendance at a Princip als Committee meeting on Ukrainian security assistance, whi ch 

included a recommendation to lift the military assistance hold. 148 

The Committees also have good -faith reason to believe that the Office of Management 

and Budget is in possession of and continues to withhold significantly more documents and 

records respo nsive to the subpoena and of direct relevance to the impeachment inquiry. 

Department of State 

On September 9, the Committees sent a letter to Secretary of State Mike Pompeo 

requesting six categories of documents in response to reports that “President Trump and his 

personal attorney appear to have increased pressure on the Ukrainian government and its justice 

system in service of President Trump’s reelection campaign” and “the State Department may be 

abetting this scheme.” 149 The Committees re quested that Secretary Pompeo produce responsive 

documents by September 16. The Secretary did not provide any documents or response by that 

date. 

On September 23, the Committees sent a follow -up letter asking Secretary Pompeo to 

“inform the Committees by close of business on Thursday, September 26, 2019, whether you 

intend to fully comply with these requests or whether subpoenas will be necessary.” 150 The 

Secretary did not provide any documents or respond by that date. 222 

On September 27, the Committees sent a letter to Secretary Pompeo conveying a 

subpoena for documents issued by Rep. Eliot Engel, the Chairman of the Committee on Foreign 

Affairs, compelling the production of documents by October 4. 151 

Since Secretary Pompeo had failed to respond, the Commit tees also sent separate letters 

to six individual State Department employees seeking documents in their possession and 

requesting that they participate in depositions with the Committees. 152 

On October 1, Secretary Pompeo responded to the Committees for th e first time. He 

objected to the Committees seeking documents directly from State Department employees after 

he failed to produce them, claiming inaccurately that such a request was “an act of intimidation 

and an invitation to violate federal records laws .” 153 He also claimed that the Committees’ 

inquiry was “an attempt to intimidate, bully, and treat improperly the distinguished professionals 

of the Department of State.” 154 

To the contrary, Deputy Assistant Secretary George Kent, one of the State Department 

professionals from whom the Committees sought documents and testimony, testified that he “had 

not felt bullied, threatened, and intimidated.” 155 Rather, Mr. Kent said that the language in 

Secretary Pompeo’s letter, which had been drafted by a Sta te Department attorney without 

consulting Mr. Kent, “was inaccurate.” 156 Mr. Kent explained that, when he raised this concern, 

the State Department attorney “spent the next 5 minutes glaring at me” and then “got very 

angry.” According to Mr. Kent, the offi cial “started pointing at me with a clenched jaw and 

saying, What you did in there, if Congress knew what you were doing, they could say that you 

were trying to sort of control, or change the process of collecting documents.” 157 

With respect to his own comp liance with the subpoena for documents, Secretary Pompeo 

wrote that he “intends to respond to that subpoena by the noticed return date of October 4, 

2019.” 158 

Later on October 1, the Committees sent a letter to Deputy Secretary of State John J. 

Sullivan in light of new evidence that Secretary Pompeo participated on President Trump’s call 

with President Zelensky on July 25. The Committees wrote: 

We are writing to you because Secretary Pompeo now appears to have an obvious 

conflict of interest. He reportedl y participated personally in the July 25, 2019 call, in 

which President Donald Trump pressed President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine to 

investigate the son of former Vice President Joseph Biden immediately after the 

Ukrainian President raised his desire fo r United States military assistance to counter 

Russian aggression. 

If true, Secretary Pompeo is now a fact witness in the impeachment inquiry. He should 

not be making any decisions regarding witness testimony or document production in 

order to protect hi mself or the President. Any effort by the Secretary or the Department 

to intimidate or prevent witnesses from testifying or withhold documents from the 

Committees shall constitute evidence of obstruction of the impeachment inquiry. 159 223 

The following day, at a press conference in Italy, Secretary Pompeo publicly 

acknowledged that he had been on the July 25 call between Presidents Trump and Zelensky. 160 

On October 7, Committee staff met with State Department officials who acknowledged 

that the y had taken no steps to collect documents in response to the September 9 letter, but 

instead had waited for the September 27 subpoena before beginning to search for responsive 

records. During that conversation, the Committees made a good -faith attempt to engage the 

Department in the constitutionally -mandated accommodations process. The Committees 

requested, on a priority basis, “any and all documents that it received directly from Ambassador 

Sondland,” as well as “documents —especially those documents iden tified by the witnesses as 

responsive —related to Ambassador Yovanovitch and DAS [Deputy Assistant Secretary] Kent.” 

The depositions of these witnesses —Ambassador Sondland, Ambassador Yovanovitch, and Mr. 

Kent —were scheduled for the days shortly after that October 7 meeting. The Department’s 

representatives stated that they would take the request back to senior State Department officials, 

but never provided any further response. 161 

To date, Secretary Pompeo has not produced a single document sought by the 

Committees and has not indicated any intent to do so going forward. In addition, the Department 

has ordered its employees not to produce documents in their personal possession. For example, 

on October 14, the Department sent a letter to Mr. Kent’s person al attorney warning that “your 

client is not authorized to disclose to Congress any records relating to official duties.” 162 

Moreover, the Department appears to have actively discouraged its employees from 

identifying documents responsive to the Committees’ subpoena. Mr. Kent testified in his 

deposition that he informed a Department attorney about additional responsive records that the 

Department had not collected, including an email from Assistant Secretary of State for Consular 

Affairs David Risch, who “h ad spoken to Rudy Giuliani several times in January about trying to 

get a visa for the corrupt former prosecutor general of Ukraine, Viktor Shokin.” 163 The 

Department attorney “objected to [Mr. Kent] raising of the additional information” and “made 

clear th at he did not think it was appropriate for [Mr. Kent] to make the suggestion.” 164 Mr. Kent 

responded that what he was “trying to do was make sure that the Department was being fully 

responsive.” 165 

Certain witnesses defied the President’s directive and produ ced the substance of key 

documents. For example, Ambassador Sondland attached ten exhibits to his written hearing 

statement. 166 These exhibits contained replicas of emails and WhatsApp messages between 

Ambassador Sondland and high -level Trump Administratio n officials, including Secretary 

Pompeo, Secretary Perry, Acting Chief of Staff Mick Mulvaney, and former National Security 

Advisor John Bolton. 167 The exhibits also contained a replica of a WhatsApp message between 

Ambassador Sondland and Mr. Yermak. 168 

Ear lier in the investigation, Ambassador Kurt Volker had produced key text messages 

with Ambassador Taylor, Ambassador Sondland, President Zelensky’s senior aide, Andriy 

Yermak, Mr. Giuliani, and others very soon after the Committees requested them and prior to 

Mr. Cipollone’s letter on October 8 conveying the President’s directive not to comply. 169 224 

The Department also prevented Ambassador Sondland —a current State Department 

employee —from accessing records to prepare for his testimony. As described above, fede ral law 

imposes fines and up to five years in prison for anyone who corruptly or by threats “impedes or 

endeavors to influence, obstruct, or impede” the “due and proper exercise of the power of inquiry 

under which any inquiry or investigation is being had by either House, or any committee of 

either House.” 170 Ambassador Sondland explained that the Department’s actions directly 

impeded his testimony: 

I have not had access to all of my phone records, State Department emails, and other 

State Department documen ts. And I was told I could not work with my EU Staff to pull 

together the relevant files. Having access to the State Department materials would have 

been very helpful to me in trying to reconstruct with whom I spoke and met, when, and 

what was said. … 

My lawyers and I have made multiple requests to the State Department and the White 

House for these materials. Yet, these materials were not provided to me. They have also 

refused to share these materials with this Committee. These documents are not class ified 

and, in fairness, should have been made available. 171 

He testified, “I have been hampered to provide completely accurate testimony without the 

benefit of those documents.” 172 Ambassador Sondland also stated: 

Despite repeated requests to the White Ho use and the State Department, I have not been 

granted access to all of the phone records, and I would like to review those phone 

records, along with any notes and other documents that may exist, to determine if I can 

provide more complete testimony to assi st Congress. 173 

On November 22, the Department produced 99 pages of emails, letters, notes, timelines, 

and news articles to a non -partisan, nonprofit ethics watchdog organization pursuant to a court 

order in a lawsuit filed under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA). 174 This handful of 

documents was limited to a narrow window of time and specific people, but it clearly indicates 

that the Department is withholding documents that are responsive to the Committees’ requests. 

For example, the Depar tment’s FOIA production contains an email from the Office 

Manager to the Secretary of State to “S_All” sent on March 26 which states that “S is speaking 

with Rudy Giuliani.” 175 It also contains a March 27 email in which Madeleine Westerhout, the 

Personal Se cretary to President Trump, facilitates another phone call between Rudy Giuliani and 

Secretary Pompeo. 176 These documents are directly responsive to the September 27 subpoena 

for “all documents and communications, from January 20, 2017 to the present, relat ing or 

referring to: Communications between any current or former State Department officials or 

employees and Rudolph W. Giuliani, including any text messages using personal or work -related 

devices.” 177 

Witnesses who testified before the Committees have i dentified multiple additional 

documents that Secretary Pompeo is withholding that are directly relevant to the impeachment 

inquiry, including but not limited to: 225 

• a cable on August 29 from Bill Taylor, the Chargé d’Affaires for U.S. Embassy in Kyiv, 

Ukraine , at the recommendation of National Security Advisor John Bolton, sent directly 

to Secretary Pompeo “describing the folly I saw in withholding military aid to Ukraine at 

a time when hostilities were still active in the east and when Russia was watching clo sely 

to gauge the level of American support for the Ukrainian Government” and telling 

Secretary Pompeo “that I could not and would not defend such a policy”; 178 

• WhatsApp messages and emails that Ambassador Sondland replicated and provided as 

exhibits to th e Intelligence Committee showing key communications between 

Ambassador Sondland and high -level Trump Administration officials, including 

Secretary Pompeo, Secretary Perry, Acting Chief of Staff Mick Mulvaney, and National 

Security Advisor John Bolton, as w ell as President Zelensky’s senior aide, Andriy 

Yermak; 179 

• notes and memoranda to file from Mr. Kent, Ambassador Taylor, and others, including 

Ambassador Taylor’s “little notebook” in which he would “take notes on conversations, 

in particular when I’m not in the office,” such as meetings with Ukrainians or when out 

and receiving a phone call,” as well as his “small, little spiral notebook” of calls that took 

place in the office; 180 

• emails among Philip Reeker, Acting Assistant Secretary of State, Bureau of European 

and Eurasian Affairs; David Hale, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs; Mr. 

Kent; and others regarding the unsuccessful effort to issue a public statement in support 

of Ambassador Yovanovitch, including the “large number of emails relate d to the press 

guidance and the allegations about the Ambassador” from the “late March timeframe.” 181 

The Committees also have good -faith reason to believe that the Department of State is in 

possession of and continues to withhold significantly more documen ts and records responsive to 

the subpoena and of direct relevance to the impeachment inquiry. 

Department of Defense 

On October 7, the Committees sent a letter to Secretary of Defense Mark Esper 

conveying a subpoena issued by the Intelligence Committee f or 14 categories of documents in 

response to reports that the President directed a freeze of hundreds of millions of dollars in 

military aid appropriated by Congress to help Ukraine counter Russian aggression. The 

Committees wrote: 

Officials at the Departments of State and Defense reportedly were “puzzled and alarmed” 

after learning about the White House’s directive. Defense Department officials 

reportedly “tried to make a case to the White House that the Ukraine aid was effective 

and should not be looked at in the same manner as other aid,” but “those arguments were 

ignored.” 182 226 

The subpoena required Secretary Esper to produce responsive documents by October 15. 

On October 13, Secretary Esper stated in a public interview that the Department would co mply 

with the Intelligence Committee’s subpoena: 

Q: Very quickly, are you going to comply with the subpoena that the House provided 

you and provide documents to them regarding to the halt to military aid to 

Ukraine? 

A: Yeah we will do everything we can to cooperate with the Congress. Just in the 

last week or two, my general counsel sent out a note as we typically do in these 

situations to ensure documents are retained. 

Q: Is that a yes? 

A: That’s a yes. 

Q: You will comply with the subpoena? 

A: We will do everything we can to comply. 183 

On October 15, however, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Legislative Affairs Robert 

R. Hood responded by refusing to produce any documents and reciting many of the same legally 

unsupportable arguments as the White H ouse Counsel: 

In light of these concerns, and in view of the President’s position as expressed in the 

White House Counsel’s October 8 letter, and without waiving any other objections to the 

subpoena that the Department may have, the Department is unable t o comply with your 

request for documents at this time. 184 

To date, Secretary Esper has not produced a single document sought by the Committees 

and has not indicated any intent to do so going forward, notwithstanding his public promise to 

“do everything we can to comply.” 185 

Witnesses who testified before the Committees have identified multiple additional 

documents that Secretary Esper is withholding that are directly relevant to the impeachment 

inquiry, including but not limited to: 

• DOD staff readouts from National Security Council meetings at the principal, deputy, or 

sub -deputy level relating to Ukraine, including military assistance; 186 

• an email from Secretary Esper’s Chief of Staff, to Laura K. Cooper, Deputy Assistant 

Secretary of Defense for Russia, Ukraine, and Eurasia, in late July “asking for follow -up 

on a meeting with the President,” including information on whether “U.S. industry [is] 

providing any of this equipment,” “international contributions” to Ukraine, and “who 

gave this funding”; 187 

• fact sheets and ot her information provided by Ms. Cooper in response to the email 

request; 188 

• an email sent to Ms. Cooper’s staff on July 25 at 2:31 p.m. —the same day as President’s 

Trump’s call with Ukrainian President Zelensky —stating that the Ukrainian Embassy 227 

was inquir ing about the status of military aid, suggesting that Ukrainian officials were 

concerned about the status of the military aid much earlier than ever previously 

acknowledged by the Executive Branch; 189 

• an email sent to Ms. Cooper’s staff on July 25 at 4:2 5 p.m. stating that the Ukrainian 

Embassy and The Hill newspaper had become aware of the situation with the military 

assistance funding; 190 and 

• an email received by Ms. Cooper’s staff on July 3 at 4:23 p.m. from the Department of 

State explaining that the Department of State “had heard the CN [ Congressional 

Notification] is currently being blocked by OMB.” 191 

The Committees also have good -faith reason to believe that the Department of Defense is 

in possession of and continues to withhold significantly more documents and records responsive 

to the subpoena and of direct relevance to the impeachment inquiry. 

Department of Energy 

On October 10, the Committees sent a letter to Secretary of Energy Rick Perry conveying 

a subpoena issued by the Intelligence Committee for ten categories of documents in response to 

reports about his involvement with matters under investigation. The Committees wrote: 

Recently, public reports have raised questions about any role you may have played in 

conveying or reinforcing the President’s stark message to the Ukrainian President. These 

reports have also raised significant questions about your efforts to press Ukrainian 

officials to change the management structure at a Ukrainian state -owned energy company 

to bene fit individuals involved with Rudy Giuliani’s push to get Ukrainian officials to 

interfere in our 2020 election. 192 

The subpoena required Secretary Perry to produce responsive documents by October 18. 

On that day, Melissa F. Burnison, the Assistant Secret ary of Energy for Congressional and 

Intergovernmental Affairs, responded by refusing to produce any documents and reciting many 

of the same flawed arguments as the White House Counsel: 

Pursuant to these concerns, the Department restates the President’s po sition: “Given that 

your inquiry lacks any legitimate constitutional foundation, any pretense of fairness, or 

even the most elementary due process protections, the Executive Branch cannot be 

expected to participate in it.” 193 

To date, Secretary Perry has n ot produced a single document sought by the Committees 

and has not indicated any intent to do so going forward. 

Witnesses who testified before the Committees have identified multiple documents that 

Secretary Perry is withholding that are directly relev ant to the impeachment inquiry, including 

but not limited to: 228 

• a document passed directly from Secretary Perry to President Zelensky in a May 2019 

meeting with a list of “people he trusts” that President Zelensky could seek advice from 

on issues of relati ng to “key Ukrainian energy -sector contacts,” according to David 

Holmes, the Political Counselor at the U.S. Embassy in Kyiv; 194 

• a June 5 email from Philip Reeker, Acting Assistant Secretary of State, Bureau of 

European and Eurasian Affairs, to Secretary Perry and others, regarding “Zelenskyy’s 

visit to Brussels, and the critical —perhaps historic —role of the dinner and engagement 

Gordon [Ambassador Sondland] coordinated”; 195 and 

• a July 19 email from Secretary Perry in which he states “Mick [Acting Chief of Staff 

Mick Mulvaney] just confirmed the call being set up for tomorrow by NSC” in reference 

to a call between President Trump and President Zelensky. 196 

The Committees also have good -faith reason to believe that the Department of Energy is 

in poss ession of and continues to withhold significantly more documents and records responsive 

to the subpoena and of direct relevance to the impeachment inquiry. 

Rudy Giuliani and His Associates 

On September 30, the Committees sent a letter conveying a subpoe na issued by the 

Intelligence Committee to the President’s personal attorney, Rudy Giuliani, compelling the 

production of 23 categories of documents relating to his actions in Ukraine. 197 

On October 15, Mr. Giuliani’s counsel responded to the Committees b y stating that Mr. 

Giuliani “will not participate because this appears to be an unconstitutional, baseless, and 

illegitimate ‘impeachment inquiry.’” 198 He also stated: “Mr. Giuliani adopts all the positions set 

forth in Mr. Cipollone’s October 8, 2019 lett er on behalf of President Donald J. Trump.” 199 

To date, Mr. Giuliani has not produced a single document sought by the Committees and 

has not indicated any intent to do so going forward. 

On September 30, the Committees sent letters to two of Mr. Giuliani’ s business 

associates —Igor Fruman and Lev Parnas —requesting testimony and eleven categories of 

documents from each. 200 The Committees sought documents from Mr. Fruman and Mr. Parnas 

related to their efforts to influence U.S. elections. 

According to press reports, Mr. Parnas and Mr. Fruman reportedly were “assisting with 

Giuliani’s push to get Ukrainian officials to investigate former vice pr esident Joe Biden and his 

son as well as Giuliani’s claim that Democrats conspired with Ukrainians in the 2016 campai gn.” 

Press reports also indicate that Mr. Parnas and Mr. Fruman were involved with efforts to press 

Ukrainian officials to change the management structure at a Ukrainian state -owned energy 

company, Naftogaz, to benefit individuals involved with Mr. Giulia ni’s push to get Ukrainian 

officials to interfere in the 2020 election. 201 229 

On October 3, counsel to Mr. Fruman and Mr. Parnas responded to Committee staff, 

explaining his clients’ relationship with Mr. Giuliani and President Trump: 

Be advised that Messrs. Parnas and Fruman assisted Mr. Giuliani in connection with his 

representation of President Trump. Mr. Parnas and Mr. Fruman have also been 

represented by Mr. Giuliani in connection with their personal and business affairs. They 

al so assisted Joseph DiGenova and Victoria Toensing in their law practice. 202 

With respect to preparing Mr. Fruman and Mr. Parnas’ response, their counsel wrote: 

“The amount of time requires is difficult to determine. [sic] but we are happy to keep you 

advis ed of our progress and engage in a rolling production of non -privileged documents.” 

On October 8, their counsel wrote again to Committee staff, stating: 

This is an update. We continue to meet with Mr. Parnas and Mr. Fruman to gather the 

facts and do cuments related to the many subjects and persons detailed in your September 

30 letter and to evaluate all of that information in light of the privileges we raised in our 

last letter. 203 

On October 9, their counsel wrote to Committee staff, stating, “Pleas e be advised that 

Messrs. Parnas and Fruman agree with and adopt the position of White House Counsel 

pertaining to Democrat inquiry.” 204 

On October 10, the Committees transmitted subpoenas compelling Mr. Fruman and Mr. 

Parnas to produce eleven categories of documents. 205 That same day, their counsel responded: 

As I did in my recent letter of October 8, 2019, please be advised we were in the 

formative stages of recovering and reviewing records on October 9 when Messrs. Parnas 

and Fruman were arrested by the F BI and locked up in Virginia pursuant to Four Count 

Indictment by a Federal Grand Jury in the Southern District of New York unsealed on 

October 10, 2019. 

Further their records and other belongings, including materials sought by your subpoenas, 

were seize d pursuant warrants [sic] by the FBI in several locations on the 9th or 10th of 

October. 206 

To date, Mr. Fruman has not produced a single document in response to his subpoena and 

has not indicated any intent to do so going forward. 

With respect to Mr. Par nas, he obtained new counsel during the course of the 

impeachment inquiry. His new attorney has asserted that Mr. Parnas will cooperate with the 

House’s inquiry, stating: “We will honor and not avoid the committee’s requests to the extent 

they are legall y proper, while scrupulously protecting Mr. Parnas’ privileges including that of the 

Fifth Amendment.” 207 230 

In contrast to Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Fruman, Mr. Parnas has begun rolling production of 

certain records in his possession, custody, or control in respon se to the subpoena, which the 

Committees are evaluating. The Committees expect Mr. Parnas’ full compliance with the 

subpoena. 231 

4. The President’s Refusal to Allow Top Aides to Testify 

At President Trump’s direction, twelve current or former Administration officials refused to 

testify as part of the House’s impeachment inquiry, ten of whom did so in defiance of duly 

authorized subpoenas. The President’s orders were coordinated and execu ted by the White 

House Counsel and others, and they prevented testimony from officials from the White 

House, National Security Council, Office of Management and Budget, Department of State, 

and Department of Energy. 

Overview 

No other President in his tory has issued an order categorically directing the entire 

Executive Branch not to testify before Congress, including in the context of an impeachment 

inquiry. President Trump issued just such an order. 

As reflected in White House Counsel Pat Cipollon e’s October 8 letter, President Trump 

directed all government witnesses to violate their legal obligations by defying House 

subpoenas —regardless of their office or position. 208 President Trump even extended his order to 

former officials no longer employed b y the federal government. This Administration -wide effort 

to prevent all witnesses from providing testimony was coordinated and comprehensive. 

These witnesses were warned that their refusal to testify “shall constitute evidence that 

may be used against y ou in a contempt proceeding” and “may be used as an adverse inference 

against you and the President.” 

Despite the President’s unprecedented commands, the House gathered a wealth of 

evidence of his conduct from courageous individuals who were willing to follow the law, comply 

with duly authorized subpoenas, and tell the truth. Nevertheless, the President’s efforts to 

obstruct witness testimony deprived Congress and the public of additional evidence. 

In following President Trump’s orders to defy duly au thorized Congressional subpoenas, 

several Administration officials who, to date, remain under subpoena may have placed 

themselves at risk of being held in criminal contempt of Congress. 209 These witnesses were 

warned explicitly that their refusal to obey la wful orders to testify “shall constitute evidence that 

may be used against you in a contempt proceeding” and could also result in adverse inferences 

being drawn against both them and the President. 210 

Mick Mulvaney, Acting White House Chief of Staff 

On November 5, the Committees sent a letter to Mick Mulvaney, the Acting White House 

Chief of Staff, seeking his appearance at a deposition on November 8. 211 The Committees 

received no response to this letter. 232 

On November 7, the Intelligence Committee issued a subpoena compelling Mr. 

Mulvaney’s appearance at a deposition on November 8. 212 On November 8, Mr. Mulvaney’s 

personal attorney sent an email to Committee staff stating that “Mr. Mulvaney will not be 

attending the deposition today, and he is considering t he full range of his legal options.” 213 

Mr. Mulvaney’s personal attorney provided a letter that was sent on November 8 from 

Mr. Cipollone, stating that “the President directs Mr. Mulvaney not to appear at the Committee’s 

scheduled deposition on November 8, 2019.” 214 Mr. Mulvaney’s personal attorney also provided 

a letter sent on November 7 from Steven A. Engel, Assistant Attorney General at the Office of 

Legal Counsel of the Department of Justice, to Mr. Cipollone, stating, “Mr. Mulvaney is 

absolutely immune from compelled congressional testimony in his capacity as a senior advis or to 

the President.” 215 

Mr. Mulvaney did not appear at the deposition on November 8, in defiance of the 

Committees’ subpoena. The Committees met, and Chairman Schiff acknowledged Mr. 

Mulvaney’s absence, stating: 

Neither Congress nor the courts recognize a blanket absolute immunity as a basis to defy 

a congressional subpoena. Mr. Mulvaney and the White House, therefore, have no 

legitimate legal basis to evade a duly authorized subpoen a. The President’s direction to 

Mr. Mulvaney to defy our subpoena can, therefore, only be construed as an effort to delay 

testimony and obstruct the inquiry, consistent with the White House Counsel’s letter 

dated October 8, 2019. 216 

Chairman Schiff also explained Mr. Mulvaney’s knowledge of and role in facilitating the 

President’s conduct: 

Mr. Mulvaney’s role in facilitating the White House’s obstruction of the impeachment 

inquiry does not occur in a vacuum. Over the past several weeks, we have gat hered 

extensive evidence of the President’s abuse of power related to pressuring Ukraine to 

pursue investigations that would benefit the President personally and politically and 

jeopardize national security in doing so. Some of that evidence has revealed that Mr. 

Mulvaney was a percipient witness to misconduct by the President and may have had a 

role in certain actions under investigation. The evidence shows that Mr. Mulvaney may 

have coordinated with U.S. Ambassador to the European Union Gordon Sondland, Rudy 

Giuliani, and others to carry out President Trump’s scheme to condition a White House 

meeting with President Zelensky on the Ukrainians’ pursuit of investigations of the 

Bidens, Burisma holdings, and purported Ukrainian interference in the 2016 U.S. 

Presidential election. In addition, evidence suggests that Mr. Mulvaney may have played 

a central role in President Trump’s attempt to coerce Ukraine into launching his desired 

political investigations by withholding nearly $400 million in vital security assistance 

from Ukraine that had been appropriated by Congress. At a White House press briefing 

on October 17, 2019, Mr. Mulvaney admitted publicly that President Trump ordered the 

hold on Ukraine security assistance to further the President’s own persona l political 

interests rather than the national interest. …233 

Based on the record evidence gathered to date, we can only infer that Mr. Mulvaney’s 

refusal to testify is intended to prevent the Committees from learning additional evidence 

of President Trump’s misconduct and that Mr. Mulvaney’s testimony would corroborate 

and confirm other witnesses’ accounts of such misconduct. If the White House had 

evidence to contest those facts, they would allow Mr. Mulvaney to be deposed. Instead, 

the President and the White House are hiding and trying to conceal the truth from the 

American people. Given the extensive evidence the Committees have already uncovered, 

the only result of this stonewalling is to buttress the case for obstruction of this inquiry. 217 

To date, M r. Mulvaney has not changed his position about compliance with the 

subpoena. 218 

Robert B. Blair, Assistant to the President and Senior Advisor to the Chief of Staff 

On October 24, the Committees sent a letter to Robert B. Blair, an Assistant to the 

Preside nt and the Senior Advisor to Acting Chief of Staff Mulvaney, seeking Mr. Blair’s 

appearance at a deposition on November 1. 219 On November 2, Mr. Blair’s personal attorney 

sent a letter to the Committees stating: 

Mr. Blair has been directed by the White Hou se not to appear and testify at the 

Committees’ proposed deposition, based on the Department of Justice’s advice that the 

Committees may not validly require an executive branch witness to appear at such a 

deposition without the assistance of agency counsel . In light of the clear direction he has 

been given by the Executive Branch, Mr. Blair must respectfully decline to testify, as you 

propose, on Monday, November 4, 2019. 220 

On November 3, the Committees sent a letter to Mr. Blair’s personal attorney 

transmitting a subpoena compelling Mr. Blair to appear at a deposition on November 4. 221 

On November 4, Mr. Blair did not appear for the scheduled deposition, in defiance of the 

Committees’ subpoena. The Committees met and Chairman Schiff acknow ledged Mr. Blair’s 

absence, stating: 

Although the committees requested a copy of the correspondence from the White House 

and Department of Justice, Mr. Blair’s Counsel did not provide it to the Committees. 

This new and shifting rationale from the White H ouse, like the others it has used to 

attempt to block witnesses from appearing to provide testimony about the President’s 

misconduct, has no basis in law or the Constitution and is a serious affront to decades of 

precedent in which Republicans and Democrat s have used exactly the same procedures to 

depose executive branch officials without agency counsel present, including some of the 

most senior aides to multiple previous Presidents. 222 

Unlike President Trump’s directive to Acting Chief of Staff Mulvaney, ne ither Mr. Blair 

nor the White House have asserted that Mr. Blair is “absolutely immune” from providing 

testimony to Congress. To date, Mr. Blair has not changed his position or contacted the 

Committees about compliance with the subpoena. 234 

Ambassador John B olton, Former National Security Advisor 

On October 30, the Committees sent a letter to the personal attorney of Ambassador John 

Bolton, the former National Security Advisor to President Trump, seeking his appearance at a 

deposition on November 7. 223 Later that day, Ambassador Bolton’s personal attorney sent an 

email to Committee staff stating, “As you no doubt have anticipated, Ambassador Bolton is not 

willing to appear voluntarily.” 224 

On November 7, Ambassador Bolton did not appear for the scheduled depo sition. On 

November 8, Ambassador Bolton’s personal attorney sent a letter to Douglas Letter, the General 

Counsel of the House of Representatives, suggesting that, if Ambassador Bolton were 

subpoenaed, he would file a lawsuit and would comply with the sub poena only if ordered to do 

so by the court. He referenced a lawsuit filed by another former official, Dr. Charles 

Kupperman, represented by the same attorney and stated: 

As I emphasized in my previous responses to letters from the House Chairs, Dr. 

Kupp erman stands ready, as does Ambassador Bolton, to testify if the Judiciary resolves 

the conflict in favor of the Legislative Branch’s position respecting such testimony. 225 

To date, Ambassador Bolton has not changed his position or come forward to testify. 226 

John A. Eisenberg, Deputy Counsel to the President for 

National Security Affairs and Legal Advisor, National Security Council 

On October 30, the Committees sent a letter to John A. Eisenberg, the Deputy Counsel to 

the President for National Security Af fairs and the Legal Advisor at the National Security 

Council, seeking his appearance at a deposition on November 4. 227 The Committees received no 

response to this letter. 228 

On November 1, the Committees sent a letter to Mr. Eisenberg transmitting a subpoena 

compelling his appearance at a deposition on November 4. 229 On November 4, Mr. Eisenberg’s 

personal attorney sent a letter to the Committees, stating: 

Even if Mr. Eisenberg had been afforded a reasonable amount of time to prepare, t he 

President has instructed Mr. Eisenberg not to appear at the deposition. Enclosed with this 

letter is the President’s instruction as relayed by Pat A. Cipollone, Counsel to the 

President, in a letter dated November 3, 2019. We also enclose a letter, al so dated 

November 3, 2019, from Steven A. Engel, Assistant Attorney General for the Office of 

Legal Counsel at the Department of Justice, to Mr. Cipollone advising that Mr. Eisenberg 

is “absolutely immune from compelled congressional testimony in his capac ity as a 

senior advisor to the President.” Under these circumstances, Mr. Eisenberg has no other 

option that is consistent with his legal and ethical obligations except to follow the 

direction of his client and employer, the President of the United States . Accordingly, Mr. 

Eisenberg will not be appearing for a deposition at this time. 230 235 

Enclosed was a letter sent on November 3 from Mr. Cipollone to Mr. Eisenberg’s 

personal attorney stating that “the President directs Mr. Eisenberg not to appear at the 

Com mittee’s deposition on Monday, November 4, 2019.” 231 Also enclosed was a letter sent on 

November 3 by Assistant Attorney General Steven A. Engel to the Office of Legal Counsel of 

the Department of Justice to Mr. Cipollone stating: 

You have asked whether th e Committee may compel Mr. Eisenberg to testify. We 

conclude that he is absolutely immune from compelled congressional testimony in his 

capacity as a senior advisor to the President. 232 

Mr. Eisenberg did not appear for the scheduled deposition, in defiance of the 

Committees’ subpoena. The Committees met and Chairman Schiff acknowledged Mr. 

Eisenberg’s absence, stating: 

Despite his legal obligations to comply, Mr. Eisenberg is not present here today and has 

therefore defied a duly authorized congressional subpoena. This morning, in an email 

received at 9:00 a.m., when the deposition was supposed to commence, Mr. Eisenberg’s 

personal attorney sent a letter to the committee stating that President Trump had, quote, 

“instructed Mr. Eisenberg not to appear at t he deposition,” unquote. The attorney 

attached correspondence from White House counsel Pat Cipollone and a letter from the 

Office of Legal Counsel at Department of Justice. The OLC letter informs the White 

House that Mr. Eisenberg is purportedly, quote, “absolutely immune from compelled 

congressional testimony in his capacity as a senior advisor to the President,” unquote. … 

Moreover, neither Congress nor the courts recognize a blanket, quote, “absolute 

immunity,” unquote, as a basis to defy a congressi onal subpoena. Mr. Eisenberg and the 

White House, therefore, have no basis for evading a lawful subpoena. As such, the 

President’s direction to Mr. Eisenberg to defy a lawful compulsory process can only be 

construed as an effort to delay testimony and obstru ct the inquiry, consistent with the 

White House counsel’s letter dated October 8, 2019. As Mr. Eisenberg was informed, the 

Committees may consider his noncompliance with the subpoena as evidence in a future 

contempt proceeding. His failure or refusal to appear, moreover, shall constitute 

evidence of obstruction of the House’s impeachment inquiry and may be used as an 

adverse inference against the President. The subpoena remains in full force. The 

committees reserve all of their rights, including the rig ht to raise this matter at a future 

Intelligence Committee proceeding, at the discretion of the chair of the committee. 

Mr. Eisenberg’s nonappearance today adds to a growing body of evidence of the White 

House seeking to obstruct the White House’s impea chment inquiry. To the extent the 

White House believes that an issue could be raised at the deposition that may implicate a 

valid claim of privilege, the White House may seek to assert that privilege with the 

Committee in advance of the deposition. To da te, as has been the case in every other 

deposition as part of the inquiry, the White House has not done so. Mr. Eisenberg’s 

failure to appear today also flies in the face of historical precedent. Even absent 

impeachment proceedings, congressional committ ees have deposed senior White House 

officials, including White House counsels and senior White House lawyers. 233 236 

Michael Ellis, Senior Associate Counsel to the President and 

Deputy Legal Advisor, National Security Council 

On October 30, the Committees sent a letter to Michael Ellis, a Senior Associate Counsel 

to the President and the Deputy Legal Advisor at the National Security Council, seeking his 

appearance at a deposition on November 4. 234 On November 2, Mr. Ellis’ personal attorney sent 

an email to Comm ittee staff stating: 

[W]e are in receipt of an opinion from the Office of Legal Counsel providing guidance on 

the validity of a subpoena under the current terms and conditions and based on that 

guidance we are not in a position to appear for a deposition at this time. 235 

This email followed the November 1 Office of Legal Counsel opinion, discussed above, 

which sought to extend the reach of the President’s earlier direction to defy Congressional 

subpoenas and provided justification for noncompliance by offic ials who could not plausibly be 

considered among the President’s closest advisors. 

On November 3, Mr. Ellis’ personal attorney sent another email to Committee staff 

stating: 

[O]ur guidance is that the failure to permit agency counsel to attend a deposition of Mr. 

Ellis would not allow sufficient protection of relevant privileges and therefore render any 

subpoena constitutionally invalid. As an Executive branch employee Mr. Ellis i s required 

to follow this guidance. 236 

On November 3, the Committees sent a letter to Mr. Ellis’ personal attorney transmitting 

a subpoena compelling his appearance at a deposition on November 4, stating: 

Mr. Ellis’ failure or refusal to comply with the su bpoena, including at the direction or 

behest of the President or the White House, shall constitute further evidence of 

obstruction of the House’s impeachment inquiry and may be used as an adverse inference 

against Mr. Ellis and the President. 237 

On November 4, Mr. Ellis did not appear for the scheduled deposition, in defiance of the 

Committees’ subpoena. The Committees met and Chairman Schiff acknowledged Mr. Ellis’ 

absence, stating: 

Other than the White House’s objections to longstanding congressional pra ctice, the 

committees are aware of no other valid constitutional privilege asserted by the White 

House to direct Mr. Ellis to defy this subpoena. 238 

To date, Mr. Ellis has not changed his position or contacted the Committees about 

compliance with the subpoe na. 237 

Preston Wells Griffith, Senior Director for International 

Energy and Environment, National Security Council 

On October 24, the Committees sent a letter to Preston Wells Griffith, the Senior Director 

for International Energy and Environment at the N ational Security Council, seeking his 

appearance at a deposition on November 5. 239 On November 4, Mr. Griffith’s personal attorney 

sent a letter to the Committees stating: 

As discussed with Committee counsel, Mr. Griffith respectfully declines to appear fo r a 

deposition before the joint Committees conducting the impeachment inquiry, based upon 

the direction of White House Counsel that he not appear due to agency counsel not being 

permitted. 240 

Later that day, the Committees sent a letter to Mr. Griffith’s pe rsonal attorney 

transmitting a subpoena compelling his appearance at a deposition on November 5, stating: 

Mr. Griffith’s failure or refusal to comply with the subpoena, including at the direction or 

behest of the President or the White House, shall consti tute further evidence of 

obstruction of the House’s impeachment inquiry and may be used as an adverse inference 

against Mr. Griffith and the President. 241 

On November 5, Mr. Griffith did not appear for the scheduled deposition, in defiance of 

the Committees’ subpoena. The Committees met and Chairman Schiff acknowledged Mr. 

Griffith’s absence, stating: 

Although the committees requested a copy of any written direction from the White 

House, Mr. Griffith’s counsel has not provided any such documentat ion to the 

committees. The White House’s newly invented rationale for obstructing the 

impeachment inquiry appears based on a legal opinion that was issued by the Department 

of Justice Office of Legal Counsel just last Friday, November 1. It is noteworthy and 

telling that OLC issued this opinion after multiple current and former White House, State 

Department, and Department of Defense officials testified before the committees, both 

voluntarily and pursuant to subpoena, all without agency counsel present. The White 

House’s invocation of this self -serving OLC opinion should therefore be seen for what it 

is: a desperate attempt to staunch the flow of incriminating testimony from the executive 

branch officials about the President’s abuse of power. 242 

To date, Mr. Griffith has not changed his position or contacted the Committees about 

compliance with the subpoena. 

Dr. Charles M. Kupperman, Former Deputy Assistant to the President 

for National Security Affairs, National Security Council 

On October 16, the Comm ittees sent a letter to Dr. Charles M. Kupperman, a former 

Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, seeking his appearance at a 

deposition on October 23. 243 238 

On October 25, the Intelligence Committee issued a subpoena compelling Dr. 

Kupperman to appear at a deposition on October 28. 244 

Later that day, Dr. Kupperman’s personal attorney sent an email to Committee staff 

attaching a 17 -page complaint in federal court seeking a declaratory judgment as to whether he 

should comply with the su bpoena. 245 His counsel wrote: 

Pending the courts’ determination as to which Branch should prevail, Dr. Kupperman 

will not effectively adjudicate the conflict by appearing and testifying before the 

Committees. 246 

Enclosed as part of the complaint was a lette r sent on October 25 from Mr. Cipollone to 

Dr. Kupperman’s personal attorney stating that “the President directs Mr. Kupperman not to 

appear at the Committee’s scheduled hearing on Monday, October 28, 2019.” 247 Also enclosed 

was a letter sent on October 25 from Steven A. Engel, Assistant Attorney General at the Office 

of Legal Counsel of the Department of Justice, to Mr. Cipollone stating that Dr. Kupperman “is 

absolutely immune from compelled congressional testimony in his capacity as a former senior 

advis or to the President.” 248 

On October 26, the Committees sent a letter to Dr. Kupperman’s personal attorneys, 

stating: 

In light of the direction from the White House, which lacks any valid legal basis, the 

Committees shall consider your client’s defiance of a congressional subpoena as 

additional evidence of the President’s obstruction of the House’s impeachment inquiry. 249 

Later that day, Dr. Kupperman’s personal attorney sent a letter to Committee staff, 

stating: “The proper course for Dr. Kupperman, we respectfully submit, is to lay the conflicting 

positions before the Court and abide by the Court’s judgment as to which is correct.” 250 On 

October 27, Dr. Kupperman’s personal attorney sent a letter to Committee staff, writing: “If 

your clients’ position o n the merits of this issue is correct, it will prevail in court, and Dr. 

Kupperman, I assure you again, will comply with the Court’s judgment.” 251 

On November 5, the Committees sent a letter to Dr. Kupperman’s personal attorneys 

withdrawing the subpoena, stating: 

The question whether the Executive Branch’s “absolute immunity” theory has any basis 

in law is currently before the court in Committee on the Judiciary v. McGahn , No. 19 -cv -

2379 (D.D.C. filed Aug. 7, 2019). In addition to not suffering from the jurisdictional 

flaws in Dr. Kupperman’s suit, McGahn is procedurally much further along. 252 

On November 8, Dr. Kupperman’s personal attorney sent a letter to Douglas Letter , the 

General Counsel of the House of Representatives, stating that Dr. Kupperman stands ready to 

testify “if the Judiciary resolves the conflict in favor of the Legislative Branch’s position 

respecting such testimony.” 253 239 

On November 25, the district cou rt in McGahn held that “with respect to senior -level 

presidential aides, absolute immunity from compelled congressional process simply does not 

exist.” The court explained there is “no basis in the law” for a claim of absolute immunity 

regardless of the p osition of the aides in question or whether they “are privy to national security 

matters, or work solely on domestic issues.” 254 To date and notwithstanding the ruling in 

McGahn as it relates to Presidential aides who “are privy to national security matters ,” Dr. 

Kupperman continues to refuse to testify, and his case remains pending in federal court. 255 

Russell T. Vought, Acting Director, Office of Management and Budget 

On October 11, the Committees sent a letter to Russell T. Vought, the Acting Director of 

OMB, seeking his appearance at a deposition on October 25. 256 On October 21, an attorney at 

OMB sent an email to Committee staff stating: 

Per the White House Counsel’s October 8, 2019 letter, the President has directed that 

“[c]onsistent with the duties o f the President of the United States, and in particular his 

obligation to preserve the rights of future occupants of his office, [he] cannot permit his 

Administration to participate in this partisan inquiry under these circumstances.” 

Therefore, Acting Di rector Vought will not be participating in Friday’s deposition. 257 

That same day, Mr. Vought publicly stated: 

I saw some Fake News over the weekend to correct. As the WH letter made clear two 

weeks ago, OMB officials —myself and Mike Duffey —will not be com plying with 

deposition requests this week. #shamprocess. 258 

On October 25, the Committees sent a letter transmitting a subpoena compelling Mr. 

Vought’s appearance at a deposition on November 6. 259 

On November 4, Jason A. Yaworske, the Associate Director for Legislative Affairs at 

OMB, sent a letter to Chairman Schiff stating: 

The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) reasserts its position that, as directed by 

the White House Counsel’s October 8, 2019, letter, OMB will not participate in this 

partisan and un fair impeachment inquiry. … Therefore, Mr. Vought, Mr. Duffey, and Mr. 

McCormack will not appear at their respective depositions without being permitted to 

bring agency counsel. 260 

On November 5, Mr. Vought did not appear for the scheduled deposition, in de fiance of 

the Committees’ subpoena. The Committees met and Chairman Schiff acknowledged Mr. 

Vought’s absence, stating: 

On Monday of this week, OMB reasserted its position that, quote, “as directed by the 

White House Counsel’s October 8, 2019, letter, OMB will not participate in this partisan 

and unfair impeachment inquiry,” unquote. OMB argues that the impeachment inquiry 

lacks basic due process protections and relies on OLC opinion that the committee cannot 240 

lawfully bar agency counsel from depositions. This new and shifting rationale from the 

White House, like the others it has used to attempt to block witnesses from app earing to 

provide testimony about the President’s misconduct, has no basis in law or the 

Constitution and is a serious affront to decades of precedent in which Republicans and 

Democrats have used exactly the same procedures to depose executive branch offic ials 

without agency counsel present, including some of the most senior aides to multiple 

previous Presidents. 261 

To date, Mr. Vought has not changed his position or contacted the Committees about 

compliance with the subpoena. 

Michael Duffey, Associate Dire ctor for National Security Programs, 

Office of Management and Budget 

On October 11, the Committees sent a letter to Michael Duffey, the Associate Director 

for National Security Programs at OMB, seeking his appearance at a deposition on October 

23. 262 

On O ctober 21, an attorney at OMB sent an email to Committee staff stating: 

Per the White House Counsel’s October 8, 2019 letter, the President has directed that 

“[c]onsistent with the duties of the President of the United States, and in particular his 

oblig ation to preserve the rights of future occupants of his office, [he] cannot permit his 

Administration to participate in this partisan inquiry under these circumstances.” 

Therefore, Mike Duffey will not be participating in Wednesday’s deposition. 263 

On Octo ber 25, the Committees sent a letter transmitting a subpoena compelling Mr. 

Duffey to appear at a deposition on November 5, 2019, stating: 

Your failure or refusal to appear at the deposition, including at the direction or behest of 

the President or the Wh ite House, shall constitute evidence of obstruction of the House’s 

impeachment inquiry and may be used as an adverse inference against the President. 264 

On November 4, Jason A. Yaworske, the Associate Director for Legislative Affairs at 

OMB, sent a letter t o Chairman Schiff stating that, “as directed by the White House Counsel’s 

October 8, 2019, letter,” Mr. Duffey will not appear at his deposition. 265 

On November 5, Mr. Duffey did not appear for the scheduled deposition, in defiance of 

the Committees’ subpoe na. The Committees met and Chairman Schiff acknowledged Mr. 

Duffey’s absence, stating: 

This effort by the President to attempt to block Mr. Duffey from appearing can only be 

interpreted as a further effort by the President and the White House to obstruct the 

impeachment inquiry and Congress’s lawful and constitutional functions. 266 241 

To date, Mr. Duffey has not changed his position or contacted the Committees about 

compliance with the subpoena. 

Brian McCormack, Associate Director for Natural Resources, 

Energy, and Science, Office of Management and Budget 

On October 24, the Committees sent a letter to Brian McCormack, the Associate Director 

for Natural Resources, Energy, and Science at OMB, seek ing his appearance at a deposition on 

November 4. 267 

On November 1, the Committees sent a letter transmitting a subpoena compelling Mr. 

McCormack’s appearance at a deposition on November 4. 268 

On November 4, Jason A. Yaworske, the Associate Director for Le gislative Affairs at 

OMB, sent a letter to Chairman Schiff stating that, “as directed by the White House Counsel’s 

October 8, 2019, letter,” Mr. McCormack will not appear at his deposition. 269 

On November 4, Mr. McCormack did not appear for the scheduled de position, in 

defiance of the Committees’ subpoena. The Committees met and Chairman Schiff 

acknowledged Mr. McCormack’s absence, stating: 

At approximately 11:30 a.m. today, committee staff received via email a letter from the 

Associate Director for Legisl ative Affairs at OMB. The letter states that, quote, “As 

directed by the White House counsel’s October 8, 2019, letter,” unquote, OMB will not 

participate in the House’s impeachment inquiry. The letter further states that, based on 

the advice of the Offi ce of Legal Counsel that, quote, “the committee cannot lawfully bar 

agency counsel from these depositions,” unquote, Mr. McCormack will not appear at his 

deposition today without agency counsel present. As Mr. McCormack was informed, the 

committees may co nsider his noncompliance with a subpoena as evidence in a future 

contempt proceeding. His failure or refusal to appear, moreover, shall constitute 

evidence of obstruction of the House’s impeachment inquiry and may be used as an 

adverse inference against t he President. 270 

To date, Mr. McCormack has not changed his position or contacted the Committees 

about compliance with the subpoena. 

T. Ulrich Brechbuhl, Counselor, Department of State 

On September 13, the Committees sent a letter to Secretary of State Mike Pompeo 

seeking transcribed interviews with Counselor T. Ulrich Brechbuhl and other officials. 271 The 

Committees received no direct, substantive response to this letter. 

On September 2 7, the Committees sent a letter informing Secretary Pompeo that Mr. 

Brechbuhl’s deposition was being scheduled on October 8, stating: 242 

On September 13, the Committees wrote to request that you make State Department 

employees available for transcribed inter views. We asked you to provide, by September 

20, dates by which the employees would be made available for transcribed interviews. 

You failed to comply with the Committees’ request. 272 

That same day, the Committees sent a letter directly to Mr. Brechbuhl s eeking his 

appearance at a deposition on October 8. 273 

On October 1, Secretary Pompeo sent a letter to the Committees stating, “Based on the 

profound procedural and legal deficiencies noted above, the Committee’s requested dates for 

depositions are not feasible.” 274 

Later that day, the Committees sent a letter to Deputy Secretary of State John J. Sullivan 

stating that the State Department “must immediately halt all efforts to interfere with the 

testimony of State Department witnesses before Congress.” 275 

On October 2, Mr. Brechbuhl’s personal attorney sent an email to Committee staff 

stating: 

My law firm is in the process of being formally retained to assist Mr. Brechbuhl in 

connection with this matter. It will take us some time to complete those logist ics, review 

the request and associated request for documents, and to meet with our client to insure he 

is appropriately prepared for any deposition. It will not be possible to accomplish those 

tasks before October 8, 2019. Thus, as I am sure that you can understand, Mr. Brechbuhl 

will not be able to appear on that date as he requires a sufficient opportunity to consult 

with counsel. Moreover, given the concerns expressed in Secretary Pompeo’s letter of 

October 1, 2019, to Chairman Engel, any participatio n in a deposition would need to be 

coordinated with our stakeholders. 276 

On October 8, Committee staff sent an email to Mr. Brechbuhl’s personal attorney 

stating: “The Committees have agreed to reschedule Mr. Brechbuhl’s deposition to Thursday, 

October 17. Please confirm that Mr. Brechbuhl intends to appear voluntarily.” 277 On October 9, 

Committee staff sent an email to Mr. Brechbuhl’s personal attorney asking him to “confirm by 

COB today whether Mr. Brechbuhl intends to appear voluntarily.” 278 Later that da y, Mr. 

Brechbuhl’s personal attorney sent an email to Committee staff stating, “I am still seeking 

clarification from the State Department regarding this deposition.” 279 

On October 25, the Committees sent a letter to Mr. Brechbuhl’s personal attorney 

transm itting a subpoena compelling Mr. Brechbuhl’s appearance at a deposition on November 

6. 280 

On November 5, Mr. Brechbuhl’s personal attorney sent a letter to the Committees 

stating: 

Mr. Brechbuhl respects the important Constitutional powers vested in the Uni ted States 

Congress. And, indeed, he would welcome the opportunity to address through testimony 243 

an existing inaccuracy in the public record —the false claim that Mr. Brechbuhl in any 

way personally participated in the telephone call between President Trump and President 

Zelensky that occurred on July 25, 2019. However, Mr. Brechbuhl has received a letter 

of instruction from the State Department, directing that he not appear. The State 

Department letter of instruction asserts significant Executive Branch i nterests as the basis 

for direction not to appear and also asserts that the subpoena Mr. Brechbuhl received is 

invalid. The letter is supported by analysis from the United States Department of Justice. 

We are also aware that litigation has recently been initiated in the United States District 

Court for the District of Columbia that may bear on resolving the significant issues now 

arising between the Committees and the President. Given these circumstances, Mr. 

Brechbuhl is not able to appear on November 6 , 2019. 281 

On November 6, Mr. Brechbuhl did not appear for the scheduled deposition, in defiance 

of the Committees’ subpoena. The Committees met and Chairman Schiff acknowledged Mr. 

Brechbuhl’s absence, stating: 

The committees requested a copy of the Stat e Department’s letter and the Department of 

Justice analysis, but Mr. Brechbuhl’s attorney has not responded. While the letter from 

Mr. Brechbuhl’s attorney provides only vague references to unidentified executive 

branch interests and a DOJ analysis as th e basis for the State Department’s blocking of 

Mr. Brechbuhl’s testimony, the Department’s latest obstruction of this inquiry appears to 

be predicated on the opinion issued by the Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel 

just last Friday, November 1, well after the subpoena was issued to Mr. Brechbuhl. It is 

noteworthy and telling that the OLC issued this opinion only after multiple State 

Department officials testified in this inquiry, both voluntarily and pursuant to subpoena, 

all without agency coun sel present. Indeed, this morning, the third -highest -ranking 

official at the State Department, Under Secretary David Hale, appeared and has begun 

testifying in accordance with his legal obligations pursuant to a subpoena. 282 

The Committees sent Mr. Brechbu hl’s personal attorney two separate inquiries asking 

him to provide a copy of the “letter of instruction” that Mr. Brechbuhl claimed to have received 

from the State Department directing him to defy a congressional subpoena. 283 Mr. Brechbuhl’s 

personal attor ney furnished the Committees with a copy of the letter on December 2. The State 

Department’s letter to Mr. Brechbuhl is dated November 4, 2019. 284 

To date, Mr. Brechbuhl has not changed his position or contacted the Committees about 

compliance with the sub poena. 

Secretary Rick Perry, Department of Energy 

On November 1, the Committees sent a letter to Secretary of Energy Rick Perry seeking 

his appearance at a deposition on November 6, stating: 

Your failure or refusal to appear at the deposition, including at the direction or behest of 

the President or the White House, shall constitute evidence of obstruction of the House’s 

impeachment inquiry and may be used as an adverse inference against the President. 285 244 

On November 5, an attorney at the Department of Energy sent a letter to the Committees 

stating: 

Please be advised that the Secretary will not appear on Wednesday, November 6, 2019, at 

2:00 pm for a deposition to be conducted jointly by the Permanent Select Committee on 

Intelligence, t he Committee on Foreign Affairs, and the Committee on Oversight and 

Reform. 286 

To date, Secretary Perry has not changed his position or come forward to testify. 245 

5. The President’s Unsuccessful Attempts to Block Key Witnesses 

Despite President Trump’s expl icit orders that no Executive Branch employees should 

cooperate with the House’s impeachment inquiry and efforts by federal agencies to limit the 

testimony of those who did, multiple key officials complied with duly authorized subpoenas 

and provided critic al testimony at depositions and public hearings. These officials adhered 

to the rule of law and obeyed lawful subpoenas. 

Overview 

Despite President Trump’s orders that no Executive Branch employees should cooperate 

with the House’s impeachment inquiry, multiple key officials complied with duly authorized 

subpoenas and provided critical testimony at depositions and public hearings. These officials not 

only served their nation honorably, but they fulfilled their oath to support and de fend the 

Constitution of the United States. 

In addition to the President’s broad orders seeking to prohibit all Executive Branch 

employees from testifying, many of these witnesses were personally directed by senior political 

appointees not to cooperate w ith the House’s impeachment inquiry. These directives frequently 

cited or enclosed copies of Mr. Cipollone’s October 8 letter conveying the President’s order not 

to comply. 

For example, the State Department, relying on President Trump’s order, attempted to 

block Ambassador Marie Yovanovitch from testifying, but she fulfilled her legal obligations by 

appearing at a deposition on October 11 and a hearing on November 15. More than a dozen 

current and former officials followed her courageous example by testi fying at depositions and 

public hearings over the course of the last two months. The testimony from these witnesses 

produced overwhelming and clear evidence of President Trump’s misconduct, which is described 

in detail in Section I of this report. 

Ambass ador Marie Yovanovitch, Former 

U.S. Ambassador to Ukraine, Department of State 

On September 13, the Committees sent a letter to Secretary of State Mike Pompeo 

seeking a transcribed interview with Ambassador Marie Yovanovitch and other State 

Department off icials. 287 The Committees received no direct, substantive response to this letter. 

On September 27, the Committees sent a letter informing Secretary Pompeo that 

Ambassador Yovanovitch’s deposition was being scheduled on October 2, stating: 

On September 13 , the Committees wrote to request that you make State Department 

employees available for transcribed interviews. We asked you to provide, by September 

20, dates by which the employees would be made available for transcribed interviews. 

You failed to comp ly with the Committees’ request. 288 246 

Also on September 27, the Committees sent a letter directly to Ambassador Yovanovitch 

seeking her appearance at a deposition on October 2. 289 

On October 1, Secretary Pompeo sent a letter to the Committees stating: 

Therefore, the five officials subject to your letter may not attend any interview or 

deposition without counsel from the Executive Branch present to ensure that the 

Executive Branch’s constitutional authority to control the disclosure of confidential 

infor mation, including deliberative matters and diplomatic communications, is not 

impaired. 290 

After further discussions with Ambassador Yovanovitch’s counsel, her deposition was 

rescheduled for October 11. On October 10, Brian Bulatao, the Under Secretary of State for 

Management, sent a letter to Ambassador Yovanovitch’s personal attorney directing Ambassador 

Yovanovitch not to appear for her deposition and enclosing Mr. Cipollone’s October 8 letter 

stating that President Trump and his Administration would not participate in the House’s 

impeachment inquiry. Mr. Bulatao’s letter stated: 

Accordingly, in accordance with applicable law, I write on behalf of the Department of 

State, pursuant to the President’s instruction reflected in Mr. Cipollone’s letter, to in struct 

your client (as a current employee of the Department of State), consistent with Mr. 

Cipollone’s letter, not to appear before the Committees under the present 

circumstances. 291 

That same day, October 10, when asked whether he intended to block Ambassa dor 

Yovanovitch from testifying the next day, President Trump stated: “You know, I don’t think 

people should be allowed. You have to run a country, I don’t think you should be allowed to do 

that.” 292 

On the morning of Ambassador Yovanovitch’s deposition on October 11, the Committees 

sent a letter to her personal attorney transmitting a subpoena compelling her appearance, stating: 

In light of recent attempts by the Administration to direct your client not to appear 

voluntarily for the deposition, the en closed subpoena now compels your client’s 

mandatory appearance at today’s deposition on October 11, 2019. 293 

Later on October 11, Ambassador Yovanovitch’s personal attorney sent a letter to Mr. 

Bulatao, stating: 

In my capacity as counsel for Ambassador Ma rie Yovanovitch, I have received your 

letter of October 10, 2019, directing the Ambassador not to appear voluntarily for her 

scheduled deposition testimony on October 11, 2019 before the Committee on Foreign 

Affairs, the Permanent Select Committee on Intel ligence, and the Committee on 

Oversight and Reform in connection with the House of Representatives ’s impeachment 

inquiry. Just this morning, the Ambassador received a subpoena issued by the House 

Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, requiring her t o appear for the deposition as 247 

scheduled. Although the Ambassador has faithfully and consistently honored her 

professional duties as a State Department employee —including at all times following her 

abrupt termination as U.S. Ambassador to Ukraine —she is u nable to obey your most 

recent directive. As the recipient of a duly issued congressional subpoena, Ambassador 

Yovanovitch is, in my judgment, legally obligated to attend the depositions as 

scheduled. 294 

Ambassador Yovanovitch participated in the depositio n on October 11, in compliance 

with the Committees’ subpoena. 295 During her deposition, Ambassador Yovanovitch’s personal 

attorney confirmed that “she received a direction by the Under Secretary to decline to appear 

voluntarily.” 296 

On November 15, the Commi ttees transmitted a subpoena to Ambassador Yovanovitch 

compelling her to testify at a public hearing of the Intelligence Committee that same day. 297 

Ambassador Yovanovitch complied with the Committees’ subpoena and testified at the public 

hearing. During t he hearing, Chairman Schiff acknowledged Ambassador Yovanovitch’s 

compliance, stating: 

Ambassador, I want to thank you for your decades of service. I want to thank you, as Mr. 

Maloney said, for being the first one through the gap. What you did in coming forward 

and answering a lawful subpoena was to give courage to others that also witnessed 

wrongdoing, that they, too, could show the same courage that you have, that they could 

stand up, speak out, answer questions, they could endure whatever threats, ins ults may 

come their way. And so in your long and distinguished career you have done another 

great public service in answering the call of our subpoena and testifying before us 

today. 298 

Ambassador Gordon Sondland, U.S. Ambassador to the 

European Union, Department of State 

On September 27, 2019, the Committees sent a letter informing Secretary Pompeo that 

Ambassador Gordon Sondland’s deposition was being scheduled on October 10. 299 That same 

day, the Committees sent a letter directly to Ambassador Sondland seeking his appearance at the 

deposition. 300 On October 1, Secretary Pompeo sent a letter to the Committees stating that 

Ambassador Sondland “may not attend” the deposition. 301 

After further discussions with Ambassador Sondland’s personal attorney, his deposition 

was rescheduled for October 8. On October 7, Mr. Bulatao sent a letter to Ambassador 

Sondland’s personal attorney, stating: 

Based on consultations with the White House , the State Department hereby instructs your 

client, Ambassador Gordon Sondland, not to appear tomorrow for his voluntary 

deposition based on the Executive Branch confidentiality interests remaining to be 

addressed, including, in particular, the Committee’ s refusal to permit agency counsel to 

appear. 302 248 

On October 8, Ambassador Sondland’s personal attorney sent an email to the Committees 

stating: 

I am incredibly disappointed to report that, overnight, the State Department advised that 

it will direct Ambassad or Sondland not to appear before the Committee this morning. 

While we have not yet gotten written confirmation of that direction, we wanted to advise 

you of this development at the earliest opportunity. As the sitting US Ambassador to the 

EU and employee of the State Department, Ambassador Sondland is required to follow 

this direction. I hope that whatever concerns the Department has can be resolved 

promptly and that Ambassador Sondland’s testimony can be scheduled at the earliest 

opportunity. I am very sorry for the inexcusably late notice, but we are sharing this with 

you as soon as it was confirmed to us. Ambassador Sondland is personally disappointed 

that he will not be able to answer the Committee’s questions this morning. 303 

On October 8, the Commit tees sent a letter to Ambassador Sondland transmitting a 

subpoena compelling his appearance at a deposition on October 16, stating: 

The Committees have not received any communication directly from the White House or 

the State Department about this matter. In light of Secretary Pompeo’s direct 

intervention to block your appearance before our Committees, we are left with no choice 

but to compel your appearance at a deposition pursuant to the enclosed subpoena. 304 

On October 14, the Committees sent a letter to Ambassador Sondland stating: 

We hereby write to memorialize our agreement with your counsel, Mr. Robert Luskin, 

Esq., to adjourn the date and time of your document production and deposition to October 

17, 2019, at 9:30 a.m. at the Capitol, HVC -304. 305 

Ambassador Sondland participated in the deposition on October 17, in compliance with 

the Committees’ subpoena. 306 During the deposition, Ambassador Sondland’s personal attorney 

stated: 

But we also wish to emphasize that it’s his belief, and ours, that the C ommittee should 

have access to all relevant documents, and he regrets that they have not been provided in 

advance of his testimony. Having those documents would lead to a more fulsome and 

accurate inquiry into the matters at hand. Indeed, Ambassador Sond land has not had 

access to all of the State Department records that would help him refresh his recollection 

in anticipation of this testimony. 307 

During the deposition, Ambassador Sondland stated: 

I was truly disappointed that the State Department prevent ed me at the last minute from 

testifying earlier on October 8, 2019. But your issuance of a subpoena has supported my 

appearance here today, and I’m pleased to provide the following testimony. 308 249 

On November 4, Ambassador Sondland’s personal attorney transmitted to the 

Committees a sworn declaration from Ambassador Sondland, which supplemented his deposition 

testimony and noted that despite “repeated requests to the White House and the State 

Department,” he still had not been granted access to records he sought to review to determine if 

he could “provide more complete testimony to assist Congress.” 309 

On November 20, the Committees transmitted a subpoena to Ambassador Sondland 

compelling him to testify at a public hearing of the Intelligence Com mittee that same day. 310 

Ambassador Sondland complied with the Committees’ subpoena and testified at the public 

hearing. During the hearing, Ambassador Sondland described the direction he received from the 

White House: 

Q: Ambassador Sondland, in your depo sition, you lamented, quote: I was truly 

disappointed that the State Department prevented me at the last minute from 

testifying earlier on October 8, 2019, but your issuance of a subpoena has 

supported my appearance here today, and I am pleased to provide the following 

testimony. So it is clear that the White House, the State Department did not want 

you to testify at that deposition. Is that correct? 

A: That is correct. 

Q: And since then, you have on numerous occasions during your opening statement 

tod ay indicated that you have not been able to access documents in the State 

Department. Is that correct? 

A: Correct. 

Q: So you have been hampered in your ability to provide testimony to this 

committee. Is that correct? 

A: I have been hampered to provide co mpletely accurate testimony without the 

benefit of those documents. 311 

George P. Kent, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State, 

Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs, Department of State 

On September 13, 2019, the Committees sent a letter to Secretary of Sta te Pompeo 

seeking a transcribed interview with Deputy Assistant Secretary of State George Kent and other 

State Department officials. 312 The Committees received no direct, substantive response to this 

letter. 

On September 27, the Committees sent a letter in forming Secretary Pompeo that Mr. 

Kent’s deposition was being scheduled on October 7. 313 That same day, the Committees sent a 

letter directly to Mr. Kent seeking his appearance at the deposition on that date. 314 Later that 

day, Mr. Kent sent an email to Comm ittee staff acknowledging receipt of the Committees’ 

request and copying an official from the Office of Legislative Affairs at the Department of 

State. 315 On October 1, Secretary Pompeo sent a letter to the Committees stating that Mr. Kent 

“may not attend” the deposition. 316 250 

After consulting with Mr. Kent’s personal attorney, the Committees rescheduled his 

deposition for October 15. 317 On October 10, Under Secretary Bulatao sent a letter to Mr. Kent’s 

personal attorney enclosing the White House Counsel’s lett er of October 8, and stating: 

I write on behalf of the Department of State, pursuant to the President’s instruction 

reflected in Mr. Cipollone’s letter, to instruct your client (as a current employee of the 

Department of State), consistent with Mr. Cipoll one’s letter, not to appear before the 

Committees under the present circumstances. 318 

On October 15, the Committees sent a letter to Mr. Kent’s personal attorney transmitting 

a subpoena compelling him to appear at a deposition on that date. 319 

Mr. Kent participated in the deposition on October 15, in compliance with the 

Committees’ subpoena. 320 During the deposition, he stated: 

As you all know, I am appearing here in response to your congressional subpoena. If I 

did not appear I would have bee n exposed to being held in contempt. At the same time, I 

have been instructed by my employer, the U.S. Department of State, not to appear. I do 

not know the Department of State’s views on disregarding that order. 321 

On November 13, the Committees transmit ted a subpoena to Mr. Kent compelling him to 

testify at a public hearing before the Intelligence Committee on that day. 322 Mr. Kent complied 

with the Committees’ subpoena and testified at the public hearing. During the hearing, Mr. Kent 

described the direc tion he received from the White House, stating that he “received, initially, a 

letter directing me not to appear. And once the committees issued a subpoena, I was under legal 

obligation to appear, and I am here today under subpoena.” 323 

Ambassador William B. Taylor, Jr., Chargé d’Affaires for 

U.S. Embassy in Kyiv, Department of State 

On October 4, 2019, the Committees sent a letter to Deputy Secretary of State John 

Sullivan seeking a deposition with Ambassador William B. Taylor, Jr. on October 15. 324 That 

same day, the Committees sent a letter directly to Ambassador Taylor seeking his appearance at 

the deposition. 325 

On October 14, after consulting with Ambassador Taylor’s counsel, the Committees sent 

a letter to Ambassador Taylor stating: “We hereby write to adjourn the date and time of your 

deposition to Tuesday, October 22, 2019, at 9:30 a.m. at the Capitol, HVC -304.” 326 

On October 22, the Committees transmitted a subpoena to Ambassador Taylor’s personal 

attorneys compelling Ambassador Taylor to appear at a deposition on that date, stating: 

In light of recent attempts by the Administration to direct witnesses not to appear 

voluntarily for depositions, the enclosed subpoena compels your client’s mandatory 

appearance at today’s deposition. 327 251 

Ambassador Tayl or participated in the deposition on October 22, in compliance with the 

Committees’ subpoena. During the deposition, Ambassador Taylor’s personal attorney stated, in 

regard to communications with the Department of State: 

They sent us the directive that s aid he should not appear under I think the quote is under 

the present circumstances. We told the majority that we could not appear; he’d been 

instructed not to. We saw the pattern. 328 

On November 13, the Committees transmitted a subpoena to Ambassador Tay lor 

compelling him to testify at a public hearing of the Intelligence Committee that same day. 329 

Ambassador Taylor complied with the Committees’ subpoena and testified at the public hearing. 

During the hearing, Ambassador Taylor described the direction he received from the State 

Department: 

Q: Ambassador, were you also asked not to be part of the deposition? 

A: Mr. Quigley, I was told by the State Department: Don’t appear under these 

circumstances. That was in the letter to me. And when I got the subpoena, 

exactly as Mr. Kent said, that was different circumstances and obeyed a legal 

subpoena. So, yes, sir, I’m here for that reason. 330 

Catherine Croft and Christopher Anderson, Department of State 

On October 24, 2019, the Committees sent letters t o the personal attorney representing 

two State Department officials, Catherine Croft and Christopher Anderson, seeking their 

attendance at depositions on October 30 and November 1, respectively. 331 

On October 25, their attorney sent a letter to the Committe es acknowledging receipt of 

the Committees’ requests and stating that “we are in the process of contacting the Office of the 

Legal Adv iso r of the Department of State in an effort to learn the disposition of that Office with 

regard to the Committee’s reques t.” 332 

On October 28, Under Secretary Bulatao sent letters to the personal attorney for Ms. 

Croft and Mr. Anderson. Both letters enclosed the White House Counsel’s October 8 letter and 

stated: 

Pursuant to Mr. Cipollone’s letter and in light of these defe cts, we are writing to inform 

you and Ms. Croft of the Administration -wide direction that Executive Branch personnel 

“cannot participate in [the impeachment] inquiry under these circumstances.” 333 

On October 30, the Committees transmitted subpoenas to the p ersonal attorney for Ms. 

Croft and Mr. Anderson compelling their appearance at depositions on October 30, stating: 

In light of recent attempts by the Administration to direct witnesses not to appear 

voluntarily for depositions, the enclosed subpoenas comp el your clients’ mandatory 

appearance. 334 252 

Ms. Croft and Mr. Anderson participated in their depositions on October 30, in 

compliance with the Committees’ subpoenas. 335 During Ms. Croft’s deposition, her personal 

attorney stated: 

On October 28th, 2019, Ms. C roft received a letter through her lawyers from Under 

Secretary of State Brian Bulatao, in which we were instructed that Ms. Croft cannot 

participate in the impeachment inquiry being conducted by the House of Representatives 

and these committees. Under Se cretary Bulatao’s letter stated that these instructions 

were issued pursuant to a directive from the Office of White House Counsel. 

Nonetheless, Ms. Croft has been served with a valid subpoena, and so she is obliged to be 

here today. 336 

During Mr. Anderson ’s deposition, his personal attorney stated: 

On October 28th, 2019, Mr. Anderson received a letter, through his lawyers, from Under 

Secretary of State Brian Bulatao in which we were instructed that Mr. Anderson cannot 

participate in the impeachment inquir y being conducted by the House of Representatives 

and these committees. Under Secretary Bulatao’s letter stated that these instructions 

were issued pursuant to a directive from the Office of White House Counsel. 

Nonetheless, Mr. Anderson has been served with a valid subpoena, and so he is obliged 

to be here today. 337 

Laura K. Cooper, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for 

Russia, Ukraine, and Eurasia, Department of Defense 

On October 11, the Committees sent a letter to Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense 

Laura K. Cooper seeking her attendance at a deposition on October 18. 338 

After consulting with Ms. Cooper’s personal attorney, the Committees rescheduled her 

deposition for October 23. 

On October 22, Deputy Secretary of Defense Davi d L. Norquist sent a letter to Ms. 

Cooper’s personal attorney, stating: 

This letter informs you and Ms. Cooper of the Administration -wide direction that 

Executive Branch personnel “cannot participate in [the impeachment] inquiry under these 

circumstances” [Tab C]. In the event that the Committees issue a subpoena to compel 

Ms. Cooper’s appearance, you should be aware that the Supreme Court has held, in 

United States v. Rumely , 345 U.S. 41 (1953), that a person cannot be sanctioned for 

refusing to comply w ith a congressional subpoena unauthorized by House Rule or 

Resolution. 339 

On October 23, the Committees sent an email transmitting a subpoena compelling Ms. 

Cooper to appear at a deposition on that date, stating: 253 

In light of recent attempts by the Adminis tration to direct witnesses not to appear 

voluntarily for depositions, the enclosed subpoena compels your client’s mandatory 

appearance at today’s deposition. 340 

Ms. Cooper participated in the deposition on October 23, in compliance with the 

Committees’ s ubpoena. 341 

During her deposition, Ms. Cooper stated with regard to the Department of Defense, 

“They instructed me yesterday not to participate.” 342 

On November 20, the Committees transmitted a subpoena to Ms. Cooper compelling her 

to testify at a public hearing before the Intelligence Committee on that day. 343 Ms. Cooper 

complied with the Committees’ subpoena and testified at the public hearing. 344 

Mark Sandy, Deputy Associate Director of 

National Security Programs, Office of Management and Budget 

On November 5, the Committees sent a letter to Mark Sandy, the Deputy Associate 

Director of National Security Programs at OMB, seeking his appearance at a deposition on 

November 8. 345 On November 6, Mr. Sandy responded to confirm receipt of the Comm ittees’ 

letter. 346 

On November 7, an attorney at OMB sent an email to Committee staff stating: 

In light of the Committee’s rules that prohibit agency counsel from being present in a 

deposition of an executive branch witness and consistent with the November 1, 2019 

OLC letter opinion addressing this issue, OMB has directed Mr. Sandy not to appear at 

tomorrow’s deposition. 347 

After consulting with Mr. Sandy’s personal attorney, the Committees rescheduled his 

deposition for November 16. 

On November 16, the Committees sent an email transmitting a subpoena compelling Mr. 

Sandy to appear at a deposition on that date, stating: 

In light of recent attempts by the Administration to direct witnesses not to appear 

voluntarily for depositions, the enclosed subpo ena compels your client’s mandatory 

appearance. 348 

Mr. Sandy participated in the deposition on November 16, in compliance with the 

Committees’ subpoena. 349 During his deposition, Mr. Sandy also testified that the 

Administration sent his personal attorney an official communication with further direction, 

stating: “It did direct me to have my personal counsel ask for a postponement until agency 

counsel could accompany me.” 350 254 

Dr. Fiona Hill, Former Deputy Assistant to the President and 

Senior Director for Euro pe and Russian Affairs, National Security Council 

On October 9, 2019, the Committees sent a letter seeking Dr. Hill’s testimony at a 

deposition on October 14. 351 On October 13, Dr. Hill’s personal attorney informed the White 

House that she intended to appe ar at the scheduled deposition. 352 On October 14, the White 

House sent a letter to Dr. Hill’s personal attorney stating that “Dr. Hill is not authorized to reveal 

or release any classified information or any information subject to executive privilege.” 353 Al so 

on October 14, the Committees sent Dr. Hill a subpoena seeking her testimony the same day. 354 

Dr. Hill complied and participated in the deposition. 355 

On November 18, Dr. Hill’s personal attorney sent a letter to the White House stating that 

Dr. Hill ha d been invited to provide testimony at a public hearing on November 21, and stating: 

“We continue to disagree with regard to the parameters of executive privilege as you articulated 

it on October 14 and our prior telephone calls.” 356 On November 20, the Wh ite House sent a 

letter to Dr. Hill’s personal attorney stating that Dr. Hill “continues to be bound by important 

obligations to refrain from disclosing classified information or information subject to executive 

privilege in her upcoming testimony before t he House Permanent Select Committee on 

Intelligence.” 357 On November 21, the Committees sent Dr. Hill a subpoena seeking her 

testimony the same day. 358 Dr. Hill also complied with this subpoena and testified at the public 

hearing. 359 

Lieutenant Colonel Alexander S. Vindman, 

Director for Ukraine, National Security Council 

On October 16, 2019, the Committees sent a letter seeking Lt. Col. Alexander Vindman’s 

testimony at a deposition on October 24. 360 After discussions with Lt. Col. Vin dman’s personal 

attorneys, the deposition was rescheduled to October 29. On October 29, the Committees sent 

Lt. Col. Vindman a subpoena seeking his testimony the same day. 361 Lt. Col. Vindman 

complied. 362 In addition, on November 19, the Committees conveyed a subpoena seeking Lt. 

Col. Vindman’s testimony at a public hearing that same day. 363 Lt. Col. Vindman also complied 

with this subpoena and testified at the public hearing. 364 

Timothy Morrison, Former Deputy Assistant to the President 

and Senior Director for Europe and Russia, National Security Council 

On October 16, 2019, the Committees sent a letter to Timothy Morrison seeking his 

testimony at a deposition on October 25. 365 After discussions with Mr. Morrison’s personal 

attorney, the deposition was rescheduled to October 31. On October 31, the Committees sent 

Mr. Morrison a subpoena seeking his testimony the same day. 366 Mr. Morrison complied. 367 In 

addition, on November 19, the Committees conveyed a subpoena seeking Mr. Morrison’s 

testimony at a public hearing that same day. 368 Mr. Morrison also complied with this subpoena 

and testified at the public hearing. 369 255 

David Hale, Under Secretary for Political Affairs, Department of State 

On November 1, 2019, the Committees sent a letter seeking Under S ecretary David 

Hale’s testimony at a deposition on November 6. 370 On November 5, Mr. Hale’s counsel wrote 

to the Committees, stating that Mr. Hale would be willing to testify pursuant to a subpoena. 371 

On November 6, the Committees sent Mr. Hale a subpoena seeking his testimony the 

same day. 372 Mr. Hale complied. 373 In addition, on November 20, the Committees conveyed a 

subpoena seeking Mr. Hale’s testimony at a public hearing that same day. 374 Mr. Hale also 

complied with this subpoena and testified at the pub lic hearing. 375 

David Holmes, Counselor for Political Affairs at the 

U.S. Embassy in Kyiv, Ukraine, Department of State 

On November 12, 2019, the Committees sent a letter to Political Counselor David 

Holmes’ personal attorney seeking his testimony at a de position on November 15. 376 On 

November 15, the Committees conveyed a subpoena to Mr. Holmes’ personal attorney seeking 

his testimony the same day. 377 Mr. Holmes complied. 378 In addition, on November 21, the 

Committees conveyed a subpoena seeking Mr. Holmes’ testimony at a public hearing that same 

day. 379 Mr. Holmes also complied with this subpoena and testified at the public hearing. 380 

Ambassador P. Michael McKinley, Former Senior Advisor 

to the Secretary of State, Department of State 

On October 12, 2019, Committee staff emailed Ambassador P. Michael McKinley 

requesting his voluntary participation in a transcribed interview on October 16. 381 On October 

14, the Committees sent a letter formalizing this request. 382 On October 16, Ambassador 

McKinley parti cipated in the scheduled transcribed interview. 383 

Ambassador Philip T. Reeker, Acting Assistant Secretary, 

Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs, Department of State 

On October 16, 2019, the Committees sent a letter seeking Ambassador Philip T. 

Reeker’ s testimony at a deposition on October 23. 384 On October 25, the Committees sent 

Ambassador Reeker a subpoena seeking his testimony on October 26. 385 Ambassador Reeker 

complied and testified at the scheduled deposition. 386 

Ambassador Kurt Volker, Former U.S. Special Representative 

for Ukraine Negotiations, Department of State 

On September 13, 2019, the Committees wrote a letter to Secretary Pompeo requesting 

the testimony of four witnesses, including Ambassador Kurt Volker. 387 On September 27, the 

Committees sent a follow up letter to Secretary Pompeo, noting that Ambassador Volker’s 

deposition had been scheduled for October 3. 388 On that same day, the Committees sent a letter 

directly to Ambassador Volker, seeking his testimony at the deposition scheduled for October 

3. 389 256 

On October 1, Secretary Pompeo responded to the Committees, refusing to make 

Ambassador Volker available on the requested date. 390 On October 2, the Department of State 

wrote a letter to Ambassador Volker’s counsel instructing Ambassador Volke r not to reveal 

classified or privileged information and prohibiting Ambassador Volker from producing any 

government documents. 391 

On October 2, Ambassador Volker produced copies of text messages in response to the 

Committees’ request. 392 On October 3, Amb assador Volker voluntarily participated in a 

transcribed interview. 393 In addition, on November 19, Ambassador Volker testified voluntarily 

at a public hearing. 394 

Jennifer Williams, Special Advisor for 

Europe and Russia, Office of the Vice President 

On Nov ember 4, 2019, the Committees sent a letter to Jennifer Williams seeking her 

testimony at a deposition on November 7. 395 On November 7, the Committees sent Ms. 

Williams a subpoena seeking her testimony the same day. 396 Ms. Williams complied. 397 On 

November 11 , Ms. Williams sent a letter to Chairman Schiff to make one amendment to her 

deposition testimony. 398 In addition, on November 19, the Committees conveyed a subpoena 

seeking Ms. William’s testimony at a public hearing on November 19. 399 Ms. Williams also 

com plied with this subpoena and testified at the public hearing. 400 257 

6. The President’s Intimidation of Witnesses 

President Trump publicly attacked and intimidated witnesses who came forward to comply 

with duly authorized subpoenas and testify about his conduct. The President also 

threatened and attacked an Intelligence Community whistleblower. 

Overview 

President Trump engaged in a brazen effort to publicly attack and intimidate witnesses 

who came forward to comply with duly authorized subpoenas and testify about his conduct, 

raising grave concerns about potential violations of the federal obstruction statute and other 

criminal laws intended to protect witnesses appearing before Congressional proceedings. 

President Trump issued threats, openly discus sed possible retaliation, made insinuations about 

witnesses’ character and patriotism, and subjected them to mockery and derision. The 

President’s attacks were broadcast to millions of Americans —including witnesses’ families, 

friends, and coworkers —and hi s actions drew criticism from across the political spectrum, 

including from his own Republican supporters. 

It is a federal crime to intimidate or seek to intimidate any witness appearing before 

Congress. This statute applies to all citizens, including federal officials. Violations of this law 

can carry a criminal sentence of up to 20 years in prison. 

This campaign of intimidation risks discouraging witnesses from coming forward 

voluntarily, complying with mandatory subpoenas for documents and testimon y, and disclosing 

evidence that may support consideration of articles of impeachment. 

Ambassador Marie Yovanovitch, Former 

U.S. Ambassador to Ukraine, Department of State 

As discussed above, President Trump removed Marie Yovanovitch as the U.S. 

Ambassador to Ukraine in May 2019 following a concerted effort by Rudy Giuliani, his 

associates Lev Parnas and Igor Fruman, and others to spread false conspiracy theories about her. 

The smearing of the Ambassador was part of the larger campaign undertaken by Mr. Giuliani at 

President Trump’s direction and in his capacity as President Trump’s representative. During her 

deposition on October 11, Ambassador Yovanovitch explained that s he felt threatened and “very 

concerned” after she read President Trump’s statements about her during his July 25 call with 

President Zelensky, including President Trump’s claim that “she’s going to go through some 

things.” 401 

On November 15, Ambassador Yo vanovitch testified at a public hearing that she was 

“shocked” and “devastated” by the President’s statements about her: 

I was shocked and devastated that I would feature in a phone call between two heads of 

state in such a manner, where President Trump s aid that I was bad news to another world 258 

leader and that I would be “going through some things.” So I was —it was —it was a 

terrible moment. A person who saw me actually reading the transcript said that the color 

drained from my face. I think I even had a physical reaction. I think, you know, even 

now, words kind of fail me. 402 

Ambassador Yovanovitch was also asked about her reaction to the President’s comment 

that she would “go through some things.” She acknowledged feeling threatened, stating: “It 

didn ’t sound good. It sounded like a threat.” 403 

As Ambassador Yovanovitch was in the process of testifying before the Committee, 

President Trump tweeted an attack against her. He wrote: 

Everywhere Marie Yovanovitch went turned bad. She started off in Somal ia, how did 

that go? Then fast forward to Ukraine, where the new Ukrainian President spoke 

unfavorably about her in my second phone call with him. It is a U.S. President’s absolute 

right to appoint ambassadors. 404 

During the hearing, Chairman Schiff asked Ambassador Yovanovitch for her reaction to 

the President’s attacks: 

Q: Ambassador, you’ve shown the courage to come forward today and testify, 

notwithstanding the fact you were urged by the White House or State Department 

not to; notwithstanding the fact that, as you testified earlier, the President 

implicitly threatened you in that call record. And now, the President in real -time 

is attacking you. What effect do you think that has on other witnesses’ 

willingness to come forward and expose wrongdoing? 

A: Well, it’s very intimidating. 

Q: It’s designed to intimidate, is it not? 

A: I—I—I mean, I can’t speak to what the President is trying to do, but I think the 

effect is to be intimidating. 

Q: Well, I want to let you know, Ambassador, that some of us he re take witness 

intimidation very, very seriously. 405 

In response to the President’s attacks, Rep. Liz Cheney, Chair of the House Republican 

Caucus, stated that the President “was wrong” and that Ambassador Yovanovitch “clearly is 

somebody who’s been a pub lic servant to the United States for decades and I don’t think the 

President should have done that.” 406 Rep. Francis Rooney, also a Republican, stated: “I don’t 

necessarily think it’s right to be harassing or beating up on our professional diplomatic 

servi ce.” 407 

Even after these rebukes, the President continued to attack and threaten Ambassador 

Yovanovitch. For example, in an interview on November 22, President Trump stated: “This was 

not an angel, this woman, okay? And there are a lot of things that s he did that I didn’t like. And 

we will talk about that at some time.” 408 259 

Lieutenant Colonel Alexander S. Vindman, 

Director for Ukraine, National Security Council 

On October 29, President Trump tweeted that Lt. Col. Alexander Vindman is a “Never 

Trumper.” 409 When asked by a reporter what evidence he had for his claim, the President 

responded: “We’ll be showing that to you real soon. Okay?” 410 President Trump continu ed 

attacking Lt. Col. Vindman during his testimony on November 19, seeking to question his 

loyalty to the United States. The President retweeted: “Lt. Col. Vindman was offered the 

position of Defense Minister for the Ukrainian Government THREE times!” 411 Allies of the 

President also questioned Lt. Col. Vindman’s loyalty to the country and amplified the smear. 412 

For his part, Lt. Col. Vindman stated during his testimony: 

I want to take a moment to recognize the courage of my colleagues who have appeared 

and are scheduled to appear before this Committee. I want to state that the vile character 

attacks on these distinguished and honorable public servants is reprehensible. 413 

Ambassador William B. Taylor, Jr., Chargé d’Affaires for 

U.S. Embassy in Kyiv, Department of State 

On October 23, one day after Ambassador William Taylor’s deposition, the President 

sent a tweet comparing “Never Trumper Republicans” to “human scum.” 414 An hour later, he 

described Ambassador Taylor in a tweet as a “Never Trumper.” 415 

On October 25, the President discussed Ambassador Taylor’s testimony with reporters, 

and again dismissed the Ambassador as a “Never Trumper.” After a reporter noted that 

Secr etary of State Mike Pompeo had hired Ambassador Taylor, the President responded: “Hey, 

everybody makes mistakes.” He then had the following exchange about Ambassador Taylor: 

Q: Do you want him out now as the top diplomat? 

A: He’s a Never Trumper. His lawyer is the head of the Never Trumpers. They’re a 

dying breed, but they’re still there. 416 

On the morning of November 13, just before Ambassador Taylor and George Kent 

testified at a public hearing, the President tweeted: “NEVER TRUMPERS!” 417 

Jennifer Williams, Special Advisor for 

Europe and Russia, Office of the Vice President 

On November 17, two days before Jennifer Williams testified at a public hearing, 

President Trump sent a tweet attacking her and stating that “she should meet with the other 

Never Trumpers, who I don’t know & mostly never even heard of, & work out a better 

presidential attack!” 418 During the hearing, Rep. Jim Himes asked Ms. Williams what 

impression the President’s tweet had made on her. She responded: “It certainly sur prised me. I 

was not expecting to be called out by name.” Rep. Himes noted that the tweet “surprised me, 260 

too, and it looks an awful lot like witness intimidation and tampering, and an effort to try to get 

you to perhaps shape your testimony today.” 419 

Threats of Retaliation 

The President suggested that witnesses who testified as part of the impeachment inquiry 

could face retaliation. For example, on November 16, the President sent a pair of tweets 

indicating that three witnesses appearing before the i mpeachment inquiry could face dismissals 

as a result of their testimony. The President tweeted language he attributed to radio host Rush 

Limbaugh: 

“My support for Donald Trump has never been greater than it is right now. It is 

paramountly obvious watchi ng this, these people have to go. You elected Donald Trump 

to drain the Swamp, well, dismissing people like Yovanovitch is what that looks like. 

Dismissing people like Kent … and Taylor, dismissing everybody involved from the 

Obama holdover days trying to undermine Trump, getting rid of those people, dismissing 

them, this is what it looks like. It was never going to be clean, they were never going to 

sit by idly and just let Trump do this!” Rush L 420 

Intelligence Community Whistleblower 

In addition to hi s relentless attacks on witnesses who testified in connection with the 

House’s impeachment inquiry, the President also repeatedly threatened and attacked a member 

of the Intelligence Community who filed an anonymous whistleblower complaint raising an 

“urge nt concern” regarding the President’s conduct. The whistleblower filed the complaint 

confidentially with the Inspector General of the Intelligence Community, as authorized by the 

relevant whistleblower law. Federal law prohibits the Inspector General fro m revealing the 

whistleblower’s identity. 421 Federal law also protects the whistleblower from retaliation. 422 

On September 9, the Inspector General notified Congress that this individual had filed a 

credible complaint regarding an “urgent concern,” but that the Acting Director of National 

Intelligence was withholding the complaint from Congress —contrary to his statutory obligation 

to have submitted the complaint to the congressional intelligence committees by no later than 

September 2. 423 On September 13, 201 9, the Intelligence Committee issued a subpoena to the 

Acting Director of National Intelligence for the whistleblower’s complaint and other records. 424 

On September 26, the Intelligence Committee received the declassified whistleblower 

complaint and made i t available to the public. 425 

That day, the President issued a chilling threat against the whistleblower and those who 

provided information to the whistleblower regarding the President’s misconduct, suggesting that 

they could face the death penalty for treason. President Trump stated: 

I want to know who’s the person who gave the whistle -blower the information because 

that’s close to a spy. You know what we used to do in the old days when we were smart 

with spies and treason, right? We used to handle it a little differently than we do now. 426 261 

In response, the Committees warned President Trump to stop attacking the 

whistleblower, stating: 

The President’s comments today constitute reprehensible witness intimidation and an 

attempt to obstruct Congress’ impeachment inquiry. We condemn the President’s 

attacks, and we invite our Republican counterparts to do the same because Congress must 

do all it can to protect this whistleblower, and all whistleblowers. Threats of violence 

from the leader of our country have a chilling effect on the entire whistleblower process, 

with grave consequences for our democracy and national security. 427 

Yet the President’s attacks did not stop. Instead, he continued to threaten the 

whistleblower, publicly questioned the whistleblower’s motives, dispute d the accuracy of the 

whistleblower’s account, and encouraged others to reveal the whistleblower’s identity. The 

President’s focus on the whistleblower has been obsessive, with the President making more than 

100 public statements about the whistleblower o ver a period of just two months. For example, 

the President stated: 

• “I want to meet not only my accuser, who presented SECOND & THIRD HAND 

INFORMATION, but also the person who illegally gave this information, which 

was largely incorrect, to the ‘Whistleb lower.’ Was this person SPYING on the 

U.S. President? Big Consequences!” 428 

• “I think it’s outrageous that a Whistleblower is a CIA agent.” 429 

• “But what they said is he’s an Obama person. It was involved with Brennan; 

Susan Rice, which means Obama. But he was like a big —a big anti -Trump 

person. Hated Trump.” 430 

• “The Whistleblower got it sooo wrong that HE must come forward. The Fake 

News Media knows who he is but, being an arm of the Democrat Party, don’t 

want to reveal him because there would be hell to p ay. Reveal the Whistleblower 

and end the Impeachment Hoax!” 431 

• “But the whistleblower should be revealed because the whistleblower gave false 

stories. Some people would call it a fraud; I won’t go that far. But when I read it 

closely, I probably would. But the whistleblower should be revealed.” 432 

• “I think that the whistleblower gave a lot of false information.” 433 

• “The whistleblower is not a whistleblower. He’s a fake. … Everybody knows 

who the whistleblower is. And the whistleblower is a political o perative.” 434 

In response to a request from Intelligence Committee Ranking Member Devin Nunes to 

call the whistleblower to testify at an open hearing, Chairman Schiff underscored the danger 

posed by the President’s threats against the whistleblower and why the whistleblower’s 

testimony was now unnecessary: 

The Committee also will not facilitate efforts by President Trump and his allies in 

Congress to threaten, intimidate, and retaliate against the whistleblower who 

courageously raised the initial alarm. It remains the duty of the Intelligence Committee 

to protect whistleblowers, and until recently, this was a bipartisan priority. The 262 

whistleblower has a right under laws championed by this Committee to remain 

anonymous and to be protected from harm. 

The impeachment inquiry, moreover, has gathered an ever -growing body of evidence —

from witnesses and documents, including the President’s own words in his July 25 call 

record —that not only confirms, but far exceeds, the initial information in the 

whistleblower’ s complaint. The whistleblower’s testimony is therefore redundant and 

unnecessary. In light of the President’s threats, the individual’s appearance before us 

would only place their personal safety at grave risk. 435 

Until President Trump’s attacks on the whistleblower, Republicans and Democrats were 

united in protecting whistleblowers’ right to report abuses of power and be free from 

retaliation. 436 For example, Rep. Nunes, serving in 2017 as Chairman of the Intelligence 

Committee, spoke in defense of whis tleblowers, stating: “We want people to come forward and 

we will protect the identity of those people at all cost. ”437 He also stated: 

As you know, and I’ve said this several times, we don’t talk about sources at this 

committee. … The good thing is, is th at we have continued to have people come forward, 

voluntarily, to this committee and we want to continue that and I will tell you that that 

will not happen if we tell you who our sources are and people that come —come to the 

committee. 438 

Other Republican Members of Congress have opposed efforts to expose the 

whistleblower. For example, Senator Charles Grassley stated: 

This person appears to have followed the whistleblower protection laws and ought to be 

heard out and protected. We should alwa ys work to respect whistleblowers’ requests for 

confidentiality. Any further media reports on the whistleblower’s identity don’t serve the 

public interest —even if the conflict sells more papers or attracts clicks. 439 

Senator Richard Burr, the Chair of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, affirmed 

that he would “never” want the identity of the whistleblower revealed and stated, “We protect 

whistleblowers. We protect witnesses in our committee.” 440 

Senator Mitt Romney also called for support of the whistle blower’s rights, stating: 

“[W]histleblowers should be entitled to confidentiality and privacy, because they play a vital 

function in our democracy.” 441 263 

SECTION II ENDNOTES  

> 1

U.S. Const. Art. I, § 2, cl. 5.  

> 2

Statement of George Mason, Madison Debates (July 20, 1787).  

> 3

McGrain v. Daugherty , 273 U.S. 135 (1927) (“We are of [the] opinion that the power of inquiry —with 

process to enforce it —is an essential and appropriate auxiliary to the legislative function.”); Eastland v. United 

States Servicemen’s Fund , 421 U.S. 491 (1975) (“ the power to i nvestigate is inherent in the power to make laws”); 

Committee on the Judiciary v. McGahn , Case No. 1:19 -cv -02379, Memorandum Opinion, Doc. No. 46 (D.D.C. 

Nov. 25, 2019) (“[T]he House of Representatives has the constitutionally vested responsibility to cond uct 

investigations of suspected abuses of power within the government, and to act to curb those improprieties, if 

required.”). As of this report, an appeal is pending in the D.C. Circuit. No. 19 -5331 (D.C. Cir.).  

> 4

Cf. Nixon v. Fitzgerald , 457 U.S. 731 (1982) (“Vigilant oversight by Congress also may serve to deter 

Presidential abuses of office, as well as to make credible the threat of impeachment.”); Senate Select Committee on 

Presidential Campaign Activities v. Nixon, 498 F.2d 725 (D.C. Cir. 1974) (d iscussing in dicta the “inquiry into 

presidential impeachment” opened by the House Judiciary Committee regarding President Nixon and explaining, 

“The investigative authority of the Judiciary Committee with respect to presidential conduct has an express 

con stitutional source.”); In re Report & Recommendation of June 5, 1972 Grand Jury Concerning Transmission of 

Evidence to House of Representatives , 370 F. Supp. 1219 (D.D.C. 1974) (“ [I]t should not be forgotten that we deal 

in a matter of the most critical moment to the Nation, an impeachment investigation involving the President of the 

United States. It would be difficult to conceive of a more compelling need than that of this country for an 

unswervingly fair inquiry based on all the pertinent inf ormation .”). In 1833, Justice Joseph Story reasoned —while 

explaining why pardons cannot confer immunity from impeachment —that, “The power of impeachment will 

generally be applied to persons holding high office under the government; and it is of great cons equence that the 

President should not have the power of preventing a thorough investigation of their conduct, or of securing them 

against the disgrace of a public conviction by impeachment, should they deserve it. The constitution has, therefore, 

wisely i nterposed this check upon his power.” Joseph L. Story, 3 Commentaries on the Constitution of the United 

States § 1501 (1873 ed., T.M. Cooley (ed.)).  

> 5

House Committee on the Judiciary, Impeachment of Richard M. Nixon, President of the United States, 

93rd Cong. (1974) (H. Rep. 93 -1305).  

> 6

Statement of Rep. William Lyman, Annals of Congress, 4th Cong. 601 (1796).  

> 7

Department of Justice, Office of Legal Counsel, A Sitting President’s Amenability to Indictment and 

Criminal Prosecution (Oct. 16, 2000) (explain ing that a President “who engages in criminal behavior falling into the 

category of ‘high Crimes and Misdemeanors’” is “always subject to removal from office upon impeachment by the 

House and conviction by the Senate”) (online at www.justice.gov/sites/defa ult/files/olc/opinions/2000/10/31/op -olc -

v024 -p0222_0.pdf).  

> 88

Id. (“Moreover, the constitutionally specified impeachment process ensures that the immunity [of a 

sitting President from prosecution] would not place the President ‘above the law.’”). Preside nt Trump’s personal 

lawyers have staked out the more extreme position that the President may not be investigated by law enforcement 

agencies while in office. For example, President Trump’s personal attorney asserted in court that the President 

could not b e investigated by local authorities if he committed murder while in office. If Trump Shoots Someone on 

5th Ave., Does He Have Immunity? His Lawyer Says Yes, New York Times (Oct. 23, 2019) (online at 

www.nytimes.com/2019/10/23/nyregion/trump -taxes -vance.h tml). A federal district court and appeals court 

rejected this argument. Trump v. Vance , 941 F.3d 631 (2nd Cir. 2019) (“presidential immunity does not bar the 

enforcement of a state grand jury subpoena directing a third party to produce non -privileged ma terial, even when the 

subject matter under investigation pertains to the President”); Trump v. Vance, 395 F. Supp. 3d 283 (S.D.N.Y. 2019) 

(calling the President’s claims of “unqualified and boundless” immunity from judicial process “repugnant to the 

nation ’s governmental structure and constitutional values”). The case is currently being appealed.  

> 9

Barenblatt v. U.S , 360 U.S. 109 (1959).  

> 10

McGrain v. Daugherty , 273 U.S. 135 (1927) (“A legislative body cannot legislate wisely or effectively in 

the absence of information respecting the conditions which the legislation is intended to affect or change; and where 

the legislative body does not itself possess the requ isite information —which not infrequently is true —recourse must 264 

be had to others who do possess it. Experience has taught that mere requests for such information often are 

unavailing, and also that information which is volunteered is not always accurate or complete; so some means of 

compulsion are essential to obtain what is needed.”); Eastland v. United States Servicemen’s Fund , 421 U.S. 491 

(1975) (“the subpoena power may be exercised by a committee acting, as here, on behalf of one of the Houses”); 

Commi ttee on the Judiciary v. Miers, 558 F. Supp. 2d 84 (D.D.C. 2008) (“ In short, there can be no question that 

Congress has a right —derived from its Article I legislative function —to issue and enforce subpoenas, and a 

corresponding right to the information tha t is the subject of such subpoenas. … Congress’s power of inqu iry is as 

broad as its power to legislate and lies at the very heart of Congress’s constitutional role. Indeed, the former is 

necessary to the proper exercise of the latter: according to the S upreme Court, the ability to compel testimony is 

‘necessary to the effective functioning of courts and legislatures.’”) (citation omitted).  

> 11

U.S. Const. Art. I, § 5, cl. 2.  

> 12

Watkins v. United States , 354 U.S. 178 (1957).  

> 13

See Committee on the Judiciary v. Miers, 558 F. Supp. 2d 84 (D.D.C. 2008) (“ Thus, federal precedent 

dating back as far as 1807 contemplates that even the Executive is bound to comply with duly issued subpoenas.”) . 

> 14

Committee on the Judiciary v. McGahn , Case No. 1:19 -cv -02379, Memorand um Opinion, Doc. No. 46 

(D.D.C. Nov. 25, 2019). As of this report, an appeal is pending in the D.C. Circuit. No. 19 -5331 (D.C. Cir.).  

> 15

18 U.S.C. § 1505.  

> 16

18 U.S.C. § 1001 (also prohibiting making “any materially false, fictitious, or fraudulent statem ent or 

representation” or making or using “any false writing or document knowing the same to contain any materially false, 

fictitious, or fraudulent statement or entry” in connection with a Congressional investigation).  

> 17

18 U.S.C. § 1512(b); See also 18 U .S. C. § 1515(a) (defining “official proceeding” to include “a 

proceeding before the Congress”).  

> 18

18 U.S.C. § 1512(d).  

> 19

See, e.g. , 5 U.S.C. § 2302; 10 U.S.C. § 1034; P.L. 113 -126.  

> 20

P.L. 116 -6, § 713 (“No part of any appropriation contained in this or an y other Act shall be available for 

the payment of the salary of any officer or employee of the Federal Government, who ... prohibits or prevents, or 

attempts or threatens to prohibit or prevent, any other officer or employee of the Federal Government from having 

any direct oral or written communication or contact with any Member, committee, or subcommittee of the Congress 

in connection with any matter pertaining to the employment of such other officer or employee or pertaining to the 

department or agency of such other officer or employee in any way, irrespective of whether such communication or 

contact is at the initiative of such other officer or employee or in response to the request or inquiry of such Member, 

committee, or subcommittee.”).  

> 21

House Commi ttee on the Judiciary, Impeachment of Richard M. Nixon, President of the United States, 

93rd Cong. (1974) (H. Rep. 93 -1305).  

> 22

House Committee on the Judiciary, Impeachment of William Jefferson Clinton, President of the United 

States , 105th Cong. (1998) (H . Rep. 105 -830).  

> 23

The White House, The President’s Remarks Announcing Developments and Procedures to be Followed 

in Connection with the Investigation (Apr. 17, 1973). President Nixon initially stated that members of his “personal 

staff” would “decline a request for a formal appearance before a committee of the Congress,” but reversed course 

approximately one month later. The White House, Statement by the President, Executive Privilege (Mar. 12, 1973).  

> 24

See, e.g. , Senate Select Committee on Presidential Campaign Activities, Testimony of John Dean, 

Watergate and Related Activities, Phase I: Watergate Investigation , 93rd Cong. (June 25, 1973); Senate Select 

Committee on Presidential Campaign Activities, Testimony o f H.R. Haldeman, Watergate and Related Activities, 

Phase I: Watergate Investigation , 93rd Cong. (July 30, 1973); Senate Select Committee on Presidential Campaign 

Activities, Testimony of Alexander Butterfield, Watergate and Related Activities, Phase I: W atergate Investigation ,

93rd Cong. (July 16, 1973); Senate Select Committee on Presidential Campaign Activities, Testimony of John 

Ehrlichman, Watergate and Related Activities, Phase I: Watergate Investigation , 93rd Cong. (July 24, 1973). 265  

> 25

See House Committee on the Judiciary, Impeachment of Richard M. Nixon, President of the United 

States, 93rd Cong. (1974) (H. Rep. 93 -1305).  

> 26

Id.  

> 27

Id . (quoting letter from Chairman Peter W. Rodino, Jr., House Committee on the Judiciary, to President 

Richar d M. Nixon (May 30, 1974)).  

> 28

H.R. Jour., 29th Cong., 1st Sess., 693 (Apr. 20, 1846).  

> 29

Senate Select Committee on Secret Military Assistance to Iran and the Nicaraguan Opposition and House 

Select Committee to Investigate Covert Arms Transactions with Ira n, Testimony of Oliver North, Iran -Contra 

Investigation: Joint Hearings Before the House Select Committee to Investigate Covert Arms Transactions with 

Iran and the Senate Select Committee on Secret Military Assistance to Iran and the Nicaraguan Opposition s, 100th 

Cong. (July 7, 1987); Senate Select Committee on Secret Military Assistance to Iran and the Nicaraguan Opposition 

and House Select Committee to Investigate Covert Arms Transactions with Iran , Testimony of John Poindexter, 

Iran -Contra Investigation : Joint Hearings Before the House Select Committee to Investigate Covert Arms 

Transactions with Iran and the Senate Select Committee on Secret Military Assistance to Iran and the Nicaraguan 

Oppositions , 100th Cong. (July 15, 1987).  

> 30

Committee on the Judi ciary v. McGahn , Civ. No. 1:19 -cv -02379, Memorandum Opinion, Doc. No. 46 

(D.D.C. Nov. 25, 2019). As of this report, an appeal is pending in the D.C. Circuit. No. 19 -5331 (D.C. Cir.).  

> 31

Committee on Government Reform, Democratic Staff, Congressional Over sight of the Clinton 

Administration (Jan. 17, 2006) (online at https://wayback.archive -it.org/4949/20141031200116/http://oversight -

archive.waxman.house.gov/documents/20060117103516 -91336.pdf) (noting that Republican Dan Burton, Chairman 

of the Committee on Government Reform, deposed 141 Clinton Administration officials during his tenure).  

> 32

Select Committee on the Events Surrounding the 2012 Terrorist Attack in Benghazi, Final Report of the 

Select Committee on the Events Surrounding the 2012 Terrorist Attac k in Benghazi , 114th Cong. (2016) (H. Rep. 

114 -848) (noting that the Select Committee interviewed or received testimony from 107 people —none of whom was 

instructed not to appear —including 57 current and former State Department officials such as Secretary o f State 

Hillary Clinton, Chief of Staff and Counselor to the Secretary of State Cheryl Mills, Deputy Chief of Staff and 

Director of Policy Planning, Jacob Sullivan, and Deputy Chief of Staff for Operations Huma Abedin; 24 Defense 

Department officials such as Secretary Leon Panetta and General Carter Ham; and 19 Central Intelligence Agency 

officials such as Director David Petraeus and former Deputy Director Michael Morell).  

> 33

Id. (including productions of 71,640 pages of State Department documents, 300 pages of CIA 

intelligence analyses, 200 pages of FBI documents, 900 pages of Defense Department documents, and 750 pages of 

National Security Agency documents).  

> 34

See, e.g. , House rule X, clause 2(a) (assigning “general oversight responsibilities” to committees); House 

Rule XI, clause 2(m) (authorizing Committees to “hold such hearings as it considers necessary” and to “require, by 

subpoena or otherwise, the attendance and tes timony of such witnesses and the production of such books, records, 

correspondence, memoranda, papers, and documents as it considers necessary”); H.Res. 6 (2019) (granting 

deposition authority to committees); 116th Congress Regulations for Use of Depositio n Authority, Congressional 

Record (Jan. 25, 2019) (establishing procedures for committee depositions).  

> 35

See, e.g. , House Rules (2017); H.Res. 5 (2017); 115th Congress Staff Deposition Authority Procedures, 

Congressional Record (Jan. 13, 2017).  

> 36

Special C ounsel Robert S. Mueller III, Department of Justice, Report on The Investigation Into Russian 

Interference In The 2016 Presidential Election, Vol. I (March 2019) (online at www.justice.gov/storage/report.pdf); 

Special Counsel Robert S. Mueller, III, Depart ment of Justice, Report on The Investigation Into Russian Interference 

In The 2016 Presidential Election, Vol. II (March 2019) (online at www.justice.gov/storage/report_volume2.pdf).  

> 37

See H. Res. 430; see also H. Rep. 116 -105 (2019) (the purposes of the J udiciary Committee’s 

investigation include “considering whether any of the conduct described in the Special Counsel’s Report warrants 

the Committee in taking any further steps under Congress’ Article I powers,” including “whether to approve articles 

of imp eachment with respect to the President or any other Administration official”). 266  

> 38

See Letter from Chairman Jerrold Nadler, House Committee on the Judiciary, to Chairman Adam B. 

Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Chairman Maxine Waters , House Committee on 

Financial Services, Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on Oversight and Reform, and Chairman Eliot 

L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs (Aug. 22, 2019) (online at 

https://judiciary.house.gov/sites/democrats.judiciary. house.gov/files/documents/FiveChairsLetter8.22.pdf).  

> 39

Id . 

> 40

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committe e on 

Oversight and Reform, to Pat A. Cipollone, Counsel to the President, The White House (Sept. 9, 2019) (online at 

https://intelligence.house.gov/uploadedfiles/ele_schiff_cummings_letter_to_cipollone_on_ukraine.pdf); Letter from 

Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select 

Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on Oversight and Reform, to 

Secretary Michael R. Pompeo, Department of State (Sept. 9, 2019) (on line at 

https://intelligence.house.gov/uploadedfiles/ele_schiff_cummings_letter_to_sec_pompeo_on_ukraine.pdf); Letter 

from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, Permanent Select 

Committee on Intelligence, and Chair man Elijah E. Cummings, Committee on Oversight and Reform, to Secretary 

Michael R. Pompeo, Department of State (Sept. 13, 2019) (online at 

https://oversight.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight.house.gov/files/2019 -09 -

13.EEC%20ELE%20Schiff%20re%20Ukraine.pd f).  

> 41

The White House, Remarks by President Trump Before Marine One Departure (Sept. 22, 2019) (online 

at www.whitehouse.gov/briefings -statements/remarks -president -trump -marine -one -departure -66/) (“We had a great 

conversation. The conversation I had was l argely congratulatory. It was largely corruption —all of the corruption 

taking place. It was largely the fact that we don’t want our people, like Vice President Biden and his son, creating to 

the corruption already in the Ukraine.”).  

> 42

Speaker of the Hous e Nancy Pelosi, Pelosi Remarks Announcing Impeachment Inquiry (Sept. 24, 2019) 

(online at www.speaker.gov/newsroom/92419 -0).  

> 43

The White House, Memorandum of Telephone Conversation (July 25, 2019) (online at 

www.whitehouse.gov/wp -content/uploads/2019/09/Un classified09.2019.pdf).  

> 44

See, e.g. , Letter from Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on Oversight and Reform, 

Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House 

Committee on Foreign Affa irs, to Mick Mulvaney, Acting Chief of Staff, The White House (Oct. 4, 2019) (online at 

https://oversight.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight.house.gov/files/documents/2019 -10 -

04.EEC%20Engel%20Schiff%20to%20Mulvaney -WH%20re%20Subpoena.pdf).  

> 45

H. Res. 660 (2019).  

> 46

Trump Vows Stonewall of ‘All’ House Subpoenas, Setting Up Fight Over Powers , New York Times (Apr. 

24, 2019) (online at www.nytimes.com/2019/04/24/us/politics/donald -trump -subpoenas.html).  

> 47

While Bemoaning Mueller Probe, Trump Falsely Says the Constitution Gives Him ‘The Right to do 

Whatever I Want’ , Washington Post (July 23, 2019) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2019/07/23/trump -

falsely -tells -auditorium -full -teens -constitution -gives -him -right -do -whatever -i-want/).  

> 48

Donald J. Trump, Twitter (Oct. 1, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/1179179573541511176).  

> 49

At Louisiana Rally, Trump Lashes Out at Impeachment Inquiry and Pelosi, New York Times (Oct. 11, 

2019) (online at www.nytimes.com/2019/10/11/us/trump -rally -louisiana -lake -charles.html).  

> 50

Donald J. Trump, Twitter (Oct. 18, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/1185374394350215169) (purporting to quote fo rmer Rep. Jason 

Chaffetz).  

> 51

Donald J. Trump, Twitter (Sept. 21, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/1175409914384125952). 267  

> 52

Donald J. Trump, Twitter (Sept. 24, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/1176559970390806530).  

> 53

Donald J. Trump , Twitter (Sept. 24, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/1176623010230525953).  

> 54

The White House, Remarks by President Trump and President Salih of Iraq Before Bilateral Meeting 

(Sept. 24, 2019) (online at www.whitehouse.gov/briefin gs -statements/remarks -president -trump -president -salih -iraq -

bilateral -meeting -new -york -ny -2/).  

> 55

The White House, Remarks by President Trump and President Bukele of El Salvador Before Bilateral 

Meeting (Sept. 25, 2019) (online at www.whitehouse.gov/briefin gs -statements/remarks -president -trump -president -

bukele -el -salvador -bilateral -meeting -new -york -ny/).  

> 56

The White House, Remarks by President Trump in a Multilateral Meeting on the Bolivarian Republic of 

Venezuela (Sept. 25, 2019) (online at www.whitehouse.g ov/briefings -statements/remarks -president -trump -

multilateral -meeting -bolivarian -republic -venezuela -new -york -ny/).  

> 57

Donald J. Trump, Twitter (Sept. 26, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/1177285017636093953).  

> 58

Donald J. Trump, Twi tter (Oct. 1, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/1179023004241727489).  

> 59

Donald J. Trump, Twitter (Oct. 5, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/1180482408522629120).  

> 60

Donald J. Trump, Twitter (Oct. 8, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/1181761045486080002).  

> 61

The White House, Remarks by President Trump at Signing of Executive Orders on Transparency in 

Federal Guidance and Enforcement (Oct. 9, 2019) (online at www.whitehouse.gov/briefi ngs -statements/remarks -

president -trump -signing -executive -orders -transparency -federal -guidance -enforcement/).  

> 62

Donald J. Trump, Twitter (Oct. 9, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/1181913137483829250).  

> 63

Donald J. Trump, Twitter ( Oct. 9, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/realdonaldtrump/status/1181969511697788928).  

> 64

Donald J. Trump, Twitter (Oct. 20, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/1186035686396321793).  

> 65

Donald J. Trump, Twitter (Nov. 12, 2019) (onl ine at 

https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/1194214569591394304).  

> 66

Donald J. Trump, Twitter (Nov. 24, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/1198733640722718725).  

> 67

Donald J. Trump, Twitter (Nov. 26, 2019) (online at 

https://twi tter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/1199352977934487553).  

> 68

The White House, Remarks by President Trump Upon Air Force One Arrival (Sept. 26, 2019) (online at 

www.whitehouse.gov/briefings -statements/remarks -president -trump -upon -air -force -one -arrival -prince -geo rges -

county -md/).  

> 69

See, e.g., Co -Equal, Investigative Rules and Practices Followed by House Republicans (online at 

www.co -equal.org/guide -to -congressional -oversight/investigative -rules -and -practices -followed -by -house -

republicans). See also Committee on G overnment Reform, Democratic Staff, Congressional Oversight of the 

Clinton Administration (Jan. 17, 2006) (online at https://wayback.archive -

it.org/4949/20141031200116/http://oversight -archive.waxman.house.gov/documents/20060117103516 -91336.pdf) 

(noting th at House Republicans conducted hundreds of confidential depositions of both political appointees and 

career officials without agency counsel present, with one Committee alone conducting over 140 depositions of 

Clinton Administration officials). 268  

> 70

Letter fr om Pat A. Cipollone, Counsel to the President, The White House, to House Speaker Nancy 

Pelosi, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Chairman Eliot L. Engel, 

House Committee on Foreign Affairs Committee, and Chairman El ijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform (Oct. 8, 2019) (online at www.whitehouse.gov/wp -content/uploads/2019/10/PAC -Letter -

10.08.2019.pdf).  

> 71

Speech: Donald Trump Holds a Political Rally in Minneapolis, Minnesota , Factbase Videos (Oct. 1 0, 

2019) (online at www.youtube.com/watch?time_continue=742&v=_y8Al_mGwmc&feature=emb_logo).  

> 72

Gregg Nunziata, a former legal counsel and senior policy advisor to Senator Marco Rubio, stated: “This 

letter is bananas. A barely -lawyered temper tantrum.” G regg Nunziata, Twitter (Oct. 8, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/greggnunziata/status/1181685021926662144). Jonathan Turley, a law professor who has 

represented House Republicans, stated: “A President cannot simply pick up his marbles and leave the g ame because 

he does not like the other players. A refusal to cooperate with a constitutionally mandated process can itself be an 

abuse of power.” White House Issues Defiant Letter Refusing to Cooperate in Impeachment Proceedings, Res Ipsa 

Loquitur (Oct. 9, 2019) (online at https://jonathanturley.org/2019/10/09/white -house -issues -defiant -letter -refusing -

to -cooperate -in -impeachment -proceedings/). Preet Bharara, the former U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of 

New York, stated, “It’s one of the worst letters I’ve seen from the White House counsel’s office.” George Conway, 

a prominent conservative attorney, called Mr. Cipollone’s letter “a disgrace to the country, a disgrace to the 

presidency, and a disgrace to the legal profess ion.” He accused the White House of “clearly engaging in 

obstructionist tactics.” Diagnosing Trump (with George Conway), Stay Tuned with Preet Bharara (Oct. 9, 2019) 

(online at https://cafe.com/stay -tuned -transcript -diagnosing -trump -with -george -conway/). Mr. Conway also stated: 

“I cannot fathom how any self -respecting member of the bar could affix his name to this letter. It’s pure hackery, 

and it disgraces the profession.” George T. Conway, III, Twitter (Oct. 8, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/gt conway3d/status/1181685229687394307).  

> 73

Letter from Pat A. Cipollone, Counsel to the President, The White House, to Acting Chairwoman 

Carolyn Maloney, House Committee on Oversight and Reform, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select 

Committee on Int elligence Chairman Eliot L. Engel, Chairman, House Committee on Foreign Affairs (Oct. 18, 

2019).  

> 74

Department of Justice, Office of Legal Counsel, Exclusion of Agency Counsel from Congressional 

Depositions in the Impeachment Context (Nov. 1, 2019) (online at www.justice.gov/olc/file/1214996/download).  

> 75

Department of Justice, Office of Legal Counsel, Legal Aspects of Impeachment: An Overview (1974) 

(quoting President James K. Polk) (online at www.justice.gov/olc/page/file/980036/download).  

> 76

Position of the Executive Department Regarding Investigative Reports , 40 Op. Atty Gen. 45 (1941).  

> 77

Letter from Pat A. Cipollone, Counsel to the Presiden t, The White House, to House Speaker Nancy 

Pelosi, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Chairman Eliot L. Engel, 

House Committee on Foreign Affairs Committee, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversig ht and Reform (Oct. 8, 2019) (online at www.whitehouse.gov/wp -content/uploads/2019/10/PAC -Letter -

10.08.2019.pdf).  

> 78

See, e.g. , The White House, Remarks by President Trump and President Salih of Iraq Before Bilateral 

Meeting (Sept. 24, 2019) (online at www. whitehouse.gov/briefings -statements/remarks -president -trump -president -

salih -iraq -bilateral -meeting -new -york -ny/) (“The phone call was perfect.”); The White House, Remarks by President 

Trump Upon Arriving at the U.N. General Assembly (Sept. 24, 2019) (onlin e at www.whitehouse.gov/briefings -

statements/remarks -president -trump -upon -arriving -u-n-general -assembly -new -york -ny/ ) (“ That call was perfect.”); 

Donald J. Trump, Twitter (Nov. 11, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/1193615188311912449) (“The call to the Ukrainian President was 

PERFECT.”).  

> 79

Letter from Pat A. Cipollone, Counsel to the President, The White House, to House Speaker Nancy 

Pelosi, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House P ermanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Chairman Eliot L. Engel, 

House Committee on Foreign Affairs Committee, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform (Oct. 8, 2019) (online at www.whitehouse.gov/wp -content/uploads/2019/ 10/PAC -Letter -

10.08.2019.pdf). 269  

> 80

See House Committee on the Judiciary, Impeachment of Richard M. Nixon, President of the United 

States , 93rd Cong. (1974) (H. Rep. 93 -1305) (Impeachment Article III: “In refusing to produce these papers and 

things, Richard M. Nixon, substituting his judgment as to what materials were necessary for the inquiry, interposed 

the powers of the presidency against the lawful subpoenas of the House of Representatives, thereby assuming to 

himself functions and judgments necessary to the exercise of the sole power of impeachment vested by the 

Constitution in the House of Representatives.”).  

> 81

In this case, one Republican Member of the House of Representatives supported impeaching President 

Trump —Rep. Justin Amash from Michigan. In exp laining his support, Rep. Amash noted the importance of 

upholding Congress’ “duties under our Constitution” rather than “loyalty to a political party.” After Rep. Amash 

announced his support for impeachment, President Trump denounced him as a “total light weight” and a “loser.” 

Rep. Amash subsequently declared that he was leaving the Republican party. See Justin Amash, Twitter (May 18, 

2019) (online at https://twitter.com/justinamash/status/1129831626844921862); Trump Calls Representative Justin 

Amash a ‘ Loser’ Over Impeachment Talk, New York Times (May 19, 2019) (online at 

www.nytimes.com/2019/05/19/us/politics/trump -justin -amash -impeachment.html ); Justin Amash: Our politics is in 

a partisan death spiral. That’s why I’m leaving the GOP , Washington Post (J uly 4, 2019) (online at 

www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/justin -amash -our -politics -is -in -a-partisan -death -spiral -thats -why -im -leaving -

the -gop/2019/07/04/afbe0480 -9e3d -11e9 -b27f -ed2942f73d70_story.html).  

> 82

Letter from Pat A. Cipollone, Counsel to the Preside nt, The White House, to Acting Chairwoman 

Carolyn Maloney, House Committee on Oversight and Reform, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select 

Committee on Intelligence, Chairman Eliot L. Engel, Chairman, House Committee on Foreign Affairs (Oct. 18, 

2019).  

> 83

Jefferson’s Manual of Parliamentary Practice § 603 (stating that “various events have been credited with 

setting an impeachment in motion,” including “facts developed and reported by an investigating committee of the 

House”). On October 25, 2019, a federal district court affirmed that “no governing law requires” the House to hold 

a such a vote. In re Application of the Committee on the Judiciary, United States House of Representatives , 2019 

U.S. Dist. LEXIS 184857 (D.D.C. 2019). More than 300 leg al scholars agreed, concluding that “the Constitution 

does not mandate the process for impeachment and there is no constitutional requirement that the House of 

Representatives authorize an impeachment inquiry before one begins.” An Open Letter from Legal Scholars on 

Trump Impeachment Inquiry (Oct. 17, 2019) (online at www.law.berkeley.edu/wp -content/uploads/2019/10/Open -

Letter -from -Legal -Scholars -re -Impeachment.pdf).  

> 84

In re Application of the Committee on the Judiciary, United States House of Representati ves, 2019 U.S. 

Dist. LEXIS 184857 (D.D.C. 2019).  

> 85

See, e.g., 3 Deschler Ch. 14 § 5 (discussing impeachment of Justice William O. Douglas).  

> 86

See, e.g. , H. Res. 87, 101st Cong. (1989) (impeachment of Judge Walter L. Nixon, Jr.); H. Res. 461, 99th 

Cong. (19 86) (impeachment of Judge Harry E. Claiborne).  

> 87

H. Res. 6 (2019); H. Res. 660 (2019). In addition, on June 11, 2019, the House approved House 

Resolution 430, which, in part, authorized the House Committee on the Judiciary to seek judicial enforcement of 

subpoenas in the ongoing investigation related to Special Counsel Mueller’s report. The resolution granted the 

Committee “any and all necessary authority under Article I of the Constitution” to seek judicial enforcement. The 

accompanying report by the Ho use Committee on Rules explained that this authority is intended to further the 

Judiciary Committee’s ongoing investigation, the purpose of which includes assessing whether to recommend 

“articles of impeachment with respect to the President.” H. Rep. 116 -108, quoting H. Rep. 116 -105.  

> 88

Letter from Pat A. Cipollone, Counsel to the President, The White House, to House Speaker Nancy 

Pelosi, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Chairman Eliot L. Engel, 

House Committee on F oreign Affairs Committee, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform (Oct. 8, 2019) (online at www.whitehouse.gov/wp -content/uploads/2019/10/PAC -Letter -

10.08.2019.pdf). President Trump has also made these claims directly, sta ting: “we had a great two weeks watching 

these crooked politicians, not giving us due process, not giving us lawyers, not giving us the right to speak, and 

destroying their witnesses,” and “we weren’t allowed any rights.” Speech: Donald Trump Holds a Po litical Rally 

in Sunrise, Florida , Factbase Videos (Nov. 26, 2019) (online 

atwww.youtube.com/watch?v=zoRcCRULQl8&feature=youtu.be). 270  

> 89

Indeed, Mr. Cipollone articulated no basis under the Constitution for his various “due process” 

demands —and there is no su ch basis, especially when the House is engaged in a fact -finding investigation as part of 

its efforts to ascertain whether to consider articles of impeachment. See H. Rept. 116 -266 (2019).  

> 90

H. Res. 660 (2019).  

> 91

H. Rept. 116 -266 (2019) (“The purpose of providing these protections is to ensure that the president has a 

fair opportunity to present evidence to the Judiciary Committee if it must weigh whether to recommend articles of 

impeachment against him to the full House.”).  

> 92

Letter from Pat A. Cipollone, Counsel to the President, to House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, Chairman Adam 

B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on 

Foreign Affairs, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, Committee on Oversight and Reform (Oct. 8, 2019) (online at 

www.whitehouse.gov/wp -content/uploads/2019/10/PAC -Letter -10.08.2019.pdf).  

> 93

In a September 25, 2019, statement, a Department of Justice spokesperson stated: “The Attorney General 

was first notifi ed of the President’s conversation with Ukrainian President Zelensky several weeks after the call took 

place, when the Department of Justice learned of a potential referral. The President has not spoken with the 

Attorney General about having Ukraine inves tigate anything relating to former Vice President Biden or his son. The 

President has not asked the Attorney General to contact Ukraine —on this or any other matter. The Attorney General 

has not communicated with Ukraine —on this or any other subject. Nor has the Attorney General discussed this 

matter, or anything relating to Ukraine, with Rudy Giuliani.” As to the President’s conduct with regard to Ukraine, 

the Department stated: “In August, the Department of Justice was referred a matter relating to a letter the Director 

of National Intelligence had received from the Inspector General for the Intelligence Community regarding a 

purported whistleblower complaint. The Inspector General’s letter cited a conversation between the President and 

Ukrainian Pres ident Zelensky as a potential violation of federal campaign finance law, while acknowledging that 

neither the Inspector General nor the complainant had firsthand knowledge of the conversation. Relying on 

established procedures set forth in the Justice Man ual, the Department’s Criminal Division reviewed the official 

record of the call and determined, based on the facts and applicable law, that there was no campaign finance 

violation and that no further action was warranted. All relevant components of the D epartment agreed with this 

legal conclusion, and the Department has concluded the matter.” Statement of Kerri Kupec, Spokesperson, 

Department of Justice (Sept. 25, 2019) (as emailed by the Department of Justice to the House Permanent Select 

Committee on I ntelligence).  

> 94

H. Rept. 116 -266 (2019) (The report continued: “As previously described, an impeachment inquiry is 

not a criminal trial and should not be confused with one. The president’s liberty is not at stake and the constitutional 

protections afford ed a criminal defendant do not as a matter of course apply. The constitutionally permitted 

consequences of impeachment are limited to immediate removal from office and potentially being barred from 

holding future federal office. Moreover, it is the Senat e that conducts the trial to determine whether the conduct 

outlined in the articles warrant the president’s removal from office, which requires a 2/3 majority vote. Indeed, 

given the nature of the ongoing investigation into the Ukraine matter, President T rump has received additional 

procedural protections. During closed door depositions held by HPSCI and others related to the Ukraine matter, 

minority members have been present and granted equal time to question witnesses brought before the committees. 

Thi s is unlike the process in the preceding two presidential impeachment inquiries, which relied significantly upon 

information gathered by third -party investigators.”).  

> 95

See Committee on Government Reform, Democratic Staff, Congressional Oversight of the Cl inton 

Administration (Jan. 17, 2006) (online at https://wayback.archive -it.org/4949/20141031200116/http://oversight -

archive.waxman.house.gov/documents/20060117103516 -91336.pdf) (explaining that when Rep. Dan Burton served 

as Chairman of the Committee on Go vernment Reform, the Committee deposed 141 Clinton Administration 

officials without agency counsel present —including White House Chief of Staff Mack McLarty; White House Chief 

of Staff Erskine Bowles; White House Counsel Bernard Nussbaum; White House Couns el Jack Quinn; Deputy 

White House Counsel Bruce Lindsey; Deputy White House Counsel Cheryl Mills; Deputy White House Chief of 

Staff Harold Ickes; Chief of Staff to the Vice President Roy Neel; and Chief of Staff to the First Lady Margaret 

Williams).  

> 96

Lett er from Pat A. Cipollone, Counsel to the President, The White House, to House Speaker Nancy 

Pelosi, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Chairman Eliot L. Engel, 

House Committee on Foreign Affairs, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, Committee on Oversight and Reform 271 

(Oct. 8, 2019) (online at www.whitehouse.gov/wp -content/uploads/2019/10/PAC -Letter -10.08.2019.pdf). On 

November 1, 2019, after the House approved H. Res. 660, the Administration continued to press this spurio us claim, 

with the Office of Legal Counsel issuing an opinion asserting that “Congressional committees participating in an 

impeachment inquiry may not validly compel executive branch witnesses to testify about matters that potentially 

involve information p rotected by executive privilege without the assistance of agency counsel.” Department of 

Justice, Office of Legal Counsel, Exclusion of Agency Counsel from Congressional Depositions in the Impeachment 

Context (Nov. 1, 2019) (online at www.justice.gov/olc/ file/1214996/download). As discussed in this section, this 

position is entirely unsupported by judicial precedent and erroneous.  

> 97

U.S. Const., Art. I, sec. 5, cl. 2.  

> 98

The regulations that govern House depositions state: “Only members, Committee staff d esignated by the 

chair or ranking minority member, an official reporter, the witness, and the witness’s counsel are permitted to attend. 

Observers or counsel for other persons, including counsel for government agencies, may not attend .” 116th 

Congress Re gulations for Use of Deposition Authority, Congressional Record, H1216 (Jan. 25, 2019) (online at 

www.congress.gov/116/crec/2019/01/25/CREC -2019 -01 -25 -pt1 -PgH1216 -2.pdf).  

> 99

Committee on Oversight and Reform, Committee Depositions in the House of Representatives: 

Longstanding Republican and Democratic Practice of Excluding Agency Counsel (Nov. 5, 2019) (online at 

https://oversight.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight.house.gov/files/Committee%20Depositions%20in%20the%20 

House%20of%20Representatives_ Longstanding%20Republican%20and%20Democratic%20Practice%20of%20Exc 

luding%20Agency%20Counsel.pdf).  

> 100

Letter from Pat A. Cipollone, Counsel to the President, The White House, to House Speaker Nancy 

Pelosi, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Comm ittee on Intelligence, Chairman Eliot L. Engel, 

House Committee on Foreign Affairs Committee, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform (Oct. 8, 2019).  

> 101

Barenblatt v. United States , 360 U.S. 109 (1959).  

> 102

See, e.g. , S. 2537 (requiring an investigation by the State Department Inspector General into the 

withholding of aid to Ukraine, directing the President to immediately obligate previously appropriated funds, and 

authorizing funds to counter Russian influence); H.R. 3047 (pro viding support to Ukraine to defend its 

independence, sovereignty, and territorial integrity).  

> 103

In re Application of the Committee on the Judiciary, United States House of Representatives , 2019 U.S. 

Dist. LEXIS 184857 (D.D.C. 2019), quoting Trump v. Maza rs United States , 2019 U.S. App. LEXIS 30475 (D.D.C. 

2019) (“Nothing ‘in the Constitution or case law ... compels Congress to abandon its legislative role at the first scent 

of potential illegality and confine itself exclusively to the impeachment process. ’”).  

> 104

See, e.g. , the 1974 Amendments to the Freedom of Information Act, P.L. 93 -502; Ethics in Government 

Act of 1978, P.L. 95 -52; Presidential Records Act of 1978, P.L. 95 -591; Federal Election Campaign Act 

Amendments of 1974, P.L. 93 -443.  

> 105

Letter from Pat A. Cipollone, Counsel to the President, The White House, to House Speaker Nancy 

Pelosi, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Chairman Eliot L. Engel, 

House Committee on Foreign Affairs Committee, and Chairman Elija h E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform (Oct. 8, 2019) (online at www.whitehouse.gov/wp -content/uploads/2019/10/PAC -Letter -

10.08.2019.pdf); Letter from Pat A. Cipollone, Counsel to the President, The White House, to Acting Chairwoman 

Carolyn Maloney, House Committee on Oversight and Reform, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select 

Committee on Intelligence Chairman Eliot L. Engel, Chairman, House Committee on Foreign Affairs (Oct. 18, 

2019).  

> 106

United States v. American Tel. & Tel. Co. , 567 F.2d 121 (D.C. Cir. 1977) ( “Rather, each branch should 

take cognizance of an implicit constitutional mandate to seek optimal accommodation through a realistic evaluation 

of the needs of the conflicting branches in the particular fact situation.”).  

> 107

For example, on November 22, 2019, the Department of State produced to a private party 99 pages of 

emails, letters, notes, timelines, and news articles under a court order pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act. 

State Department Releases Ukraine Docum ents to American Oversight , American Oversight (Nov. 22, 2019) (online 

at www.americanoversight.org/state -department -releases -ukraine -documents -to -american -oversight). 272  

> 108

Even if the President were to make a colorable assertion of executive privilege, which he has not, the 

Supreme Court has held that the privilege is not absolute. In the context of a grand jury subpoena, the Supreme 

Court found that the President’s “generalized assertion of privilege must yield to the demonstrated, specific need for 

evidenc e in a pending criminal trial.” United States v. Nixon , 418 U.S. 683 (1974). Similarly, the D.C. Circuit has 

held that executive privilege is a “qualified” privilege and that “courts must balance the public interests at stake in 

determining whether the privilege should yield in a particular case, and must sp ecifically consider the need of the 

party seeking privileged evidence.” In re Sealed Case , 121 F.3d 729 (D.C. Cir. 1997). As described above, 

Congress’ need for information during an impeachment inquiry is particularly “compelling.” In re Report &

Recomm endation of June 5, 1972 Grand Jury Concerning Transmission of Evidence to House of Representatives ,

370 F. Supp. 1219 (D.D.C. 1974) (“ [I]t should not be forgotten that we deal in a matter of the most critical moment 

to the Nation, an impeachment investiga tion involving the President of the United States. It would be difficult to 

conceive of a more compelling need than that of this country for an unswervingly fair inquiry based on all the 

pertinent information .”).  

> 109

See, e.g., Letter from Pat A. Cipollon e, Counsel to the President, The White House, to William Pittard, 

Counsel to Mick Mulvaney, Acting Chief of Staff, The White House (Nov. 8, 2019) (asserting that Acting Chief of 

Staff Mick Mulvaney “is absolutely immune from compelled congressional testimo ny with respect to matters related 

to his service as a senior advisor to the President” and that “[s]ubjecting a senior presidential advisor to the 

congressional subpoena power would be akin to requiring the President himself to appear before Congress on 

matters relating to the performance of his constitutionally assigned executive functions”).  

> 110

Committee on the Judiciary v. Miers , 558 F. Supp. 2d 53 (D.D.C. 2008) (“The Executive cannot identify 

a single judicial opinion that recognizes absolute immunity f or senior presidential advisors in this or any other 

context. That simple yet critical fact bears repeating: the asserted absolute immunity claim here is entirely 

unsupported by existing case law. In fact, there is Supreme Court authority that is all bu t conclusive on this question 

and that powerfully suggests that such advisors do not enjoy absolute immunity. The Court therefore rejects the 

Executive’s claim of absolute immunity for senior presidential aides.”).  

> 111

Committee on the Judiciary v. McGahn, Case No. 1:19 -cv -02379, Memorandum Opinion, Doc. No. 46 

(D.D.C. Nov. 25, 2019). As of this report, an appeal is pending in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit. 

No. 19 -5331 (D.C. Cir.).  

> 112

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee o n Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to Pat A. Cipollone, Counsel to the President, The White House (Sept. 9, 2019) (online a t

https://intelligence.house.gov/uploadedfiles/ele_schiff_cummings_letter_to_cipollone_on_ukraine.pdf ).  

> 113

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, an d Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to Pat A. Cipollone, Counsel to the President, The White House (Sept. 24, 2019) (online at 

https://intelligence.house.gov/uploadedfiles/2019 -09 -24.eec_engel_schiff_to_cipollone -wh_re_p otus_ukraine.pdf).  

> 114

Letter from Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on Oversight and Reform, Chairman 

Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House 

Committee on Foreign Affairs, to Pat A. Cip ollone, Counsel to the President, The White House (Oct. 4, 2019) 

(online at https://oversight.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight.house.gov/files/documents/2019 -10 -

04.EEC%20Engel%20Schiff%20to%20Mulvaney -WH%20re%20Subpoena.pdf ).  

> 115

Letter from Pat A. Cipoll one, Counsel to the President, The White House, to Acting Chairwoman 

Carolyn Maloney, House Committee on Oversight and Reform, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select 

Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreig n Affairs, (Oct. 18, 2019).  

> 116

Email from Bureau of Legislative Affairs, Department of State, to Committee Staff (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 117

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Commi ttee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to Pat A. Cipollone, Counsel to the President, The White House (Sept. 9, 2019) (online at 

https://intelligence.house.gov/uploadedfiles/ele_schiff_cummings_lette r_to_cipollone_on_ukraine.pdf).  

> 118

Id. 273  

> 119

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Re form, to Pat A. Cipollone, Counsel to the President, The White House (Sept. 24, 2019).  

> 120

Memorandum from Chairman Elijah E. Cummings to Members of the House Committee on Oversight 

and Reform, Notice of Intent to Issue Subpoenas (Oct. 2, 2019) (online at 

https://oversight.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight.house.gov/files/documents/2019 -10 -

02 .COR%20WH%20Subpoena%20Memo%20and%20Schedule.pdf).  

> 121

Letter from Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on Oversight and Reform, Chairman 

Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House 

Committee o n Foreign Affairs, to Pat A. Cipollone, Counsel to the President, The White House (Oct. 4, 2019) 

(online at https://oversight.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight.house.gov/files/documents/2019 -10 -

04.EEC%20Engel%20Schiff%20to%20Mulvaney -WH%20re%20Subpoena.p df).  

> 122

Letter from Pat A. Cipollone, Counsel to the President, The White House, to Speaker Nancy Pelosi, 

Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House 

Committee on Foreign Affairs, and Chairman El ijah E. Cummings, House Committee on Oversight and Reform 

(Oct. 8, 2019) (online at www.whitehouse.gov/wp -content/uploads/2019/10/PAC -Letter -10.08.2019.pdf).  

> 123

Letter from Pat A. Cipollone, Counsel to the President, The White House, to Acting Chairwoman 

Ca rolyn Maloney, House Committee on Oversight and Reform, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select 

Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, (Oct. 18, 2019).  

> 124

On September 13, the Intelligence Committ ee issued a subpoena pursuant to its oversight authority to 

the Acting Director of National Intelligence to compel the production of a complaint submitted by an Intelligence 

Community whistleblower, as well as other records. The Intelligence Committee iss ued this subpoena before 

Speaker Pelosi announced on September 24 that the Intelligence Committee and other committees would be 

continuing their work under the umbrella of the impeachment inquiry being conducted by the Judiciary Committee. 

As a result, th is subpoena should not be conflated with subpoenas issued as part of the impeachment inquiry. See 

Letter from Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, to Joseph Maguire, 

Acting Director of National Intelligence, Office of the Director of National Intelligence (Sept. 13, 2019).  

> 125

The White House, Memorandum of Telephone Conversation (Apr. 21, 2019) (online at 

http://cdn.cnn.com/cnn/2019/images/11/15/4 -21 -19.trump -zelensky.call.pdf); The White House, Memorandum of 

Telephone Conversation (July 25, 2019) (online at www.whitehouse.gov/wp -

content/uploads/2019/09/Unclassified09.2019.pdf).  

> 126

Vindman -Williams Hearing Tr. at 31 -32.  

> 127

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 53; Morrison Dep. Tr. at 19 -20.  

> 128

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 186 -187; Morrison Dep. Tr. at 166 -167.  

> 129

See, e.g. , Cooper Dep. Tr. at 42 -43.  

> 130

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 78 -79.  

> 131

Vindman Dep. Tr. at 36 -37 . 

> 132

Holmes Dep. Tr. at 31.  

> 133

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Opening Statement of Ambassador Gordon 

Sondland, Department of State, Impeachment , 116th Cong. (Nov. 20, 2019).  

> 134

The review reportedly uncovered “early August email exchanges b etween acting chief of staff Mick 

Mulvaney and White House budget officials seeking to provide an explanation for withholding the funds after the 

president had already ordered a hold in mid -July on the nearly $400 million in security assistance.” The revi ew also 

reportedly included interviews with “some key White House officials involved in handling Ukraine aid and dealing 

with complaints and concerns in the aftermath of the call between Trump and Zelensky.” White House Review 

Turns Up Emails Showing Exte nsive Effort to Justify Trump’s Decision to Block Ukraine Military Aid, Washington 

Post (Nov. 24, 2019) (online at www.washingtonpost.com/politics/white -house -review -turns -up -emails -showing -274 

extensive -effort -to -justify -trumps -decision -to -block -ukraine -milit ary -aid/2019/11/24/2121cf98 -0d57 -11ea -bd9d -

c628fd48b3a0_story.html).  

> 135

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, Hou se Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to Vice President Michael Pence, Office of the Vice President (Oct. 4, 2019) (online at 

https://oversight.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight.house.gov/files/documents/2019 -10 -

04.EEC%20Engel%20Schiff%20%20re%20Request% 20to%20VP%2010 -04 -

19%20Letter%20and%20Schedule.pdf).  

> 136

Id.  

> 137

Letter from Matthew E. Morgan, Counsel to the Vice President, Office of the Vice President, to 

Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on Oversight and Reform, Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House 

Committee on Foreign Affairs, and Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence 

(Oct. 15, 2019).  

> 138

Vindman -Williams Hearing Tr. at 61.  

> 139

Williams Dep. Tr. at 129.  

> 140

Vindman -Williams Hearing Tr. at 15.  

> 141

Vindman -Williams Hearing Tr. at 23 -24.  

> 142

Williams Dep. Tr. at 74 -75.  

> 143

Letter from Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Chairman 

Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, Hou se Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to Acting Director Russell T. Vought, Office of Management and Budget (Oct. 7, 2019) 

(online at https://intelligence.house.gov/uploadedfiles/2019 -10 -07.eec_engel_schiff_to_vought -

_omb_re_subpoena.pdf).  

> 144

Id.  

> 145

Letter from Jason Yaworske, Associate Director for Legislative Affairs, Office of Management and 

Budget, to Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence (Oct. 15, 2019).  

> 146

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 23 -26.  

> 147

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 36 -41.  

> 148

Sandy De p. Tr. at 57 -60, 62 -63.  

> 149

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to Secre tary Michael R. Pompeo, Department of State (Sept. 9, 2019) (online at 

https://intelligence.house.gov/uploadedfiles/ele_schiff_cummings_letter_to_sec_pompeo_on_ukraine.pdf).  

> 150

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairma n Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to Secretary Michael R. Pompeo, Department of State (Sept. 23, 2019).  

> 151

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to Secretary Michael R. Pompeo, Department of State (Sept. 27, 2019) (online at 

https://oversight.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight.house.gov/files/documents/2019 -09 -

27.EEC%20Engel%20Schiff%20%20to%20Pompeo -%20State%20re%20Document%20Subpoena.pdf).  

> 152

Letter from Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intell igence, Chairman 

Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on Oversight and Reform, and Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee 

on Foreign Affairs, to Ambassador Gordon Sondland, Department of State (Oct. 8, 2019) (online at 

https://oversight.house.gov/sites/de mocrats.oversight.house.gov/files/documents/2019 -10 -

08.EEC%20Engel%20Schiff%20to%20Sondland%20re%20Subpoena.pdf); Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, 275 

House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on 

Intellig ence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on Oversight and Reform, to Ambassador 

William Taylor, Department of State (Oct. 4, 2019); Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on 

Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Perman ent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman 

Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on Oversight and Reform, to Counselor T. Ulrich Brechbuhl, Department of 

State (Sept. 27, 2019) (online at https://intelligence.house.gov/uploadedfiles/20190927_ -

_eec_en gel_schiff_to_brechbuhl_re_individual_deposition_request.pdf); Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, 

House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on 

Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Commit tee on Oversight and Reform, to Deputy Assistant 

Secretary George P. Kent, Department of State (Sept. 27, 2019); Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House 

Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intellige nce, and 

Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on Oversight and Reform, to Ambassador Kurt Volker, 

Department of State (Sept. 27, 2019); Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, 

Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanen t Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, 

House Committee on Oversight and Reform, to Ambassador Marie Yovanovitch, Department of State (Sept. 27, 

2019).  

> 153

Letter from Secretary Michael R. Pompeo, Department of State, to Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House 

Committee on Foreign Affairs (Oct. 1, 2019) (Secretary Pompeo sent identical letters to Chairman Elijah. E. 

Cummings, House Committee on Oversight and Reform, and Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select 

Committee on Intelligence, the same day).  

> 154

Id . 

> 155

Kent Dep. Tr. at 27.  

> 156

Kent Dep. Tr. at 33 -34.  

> 157

Kent Dep. Tr. at 34 -35.  

> 158

Letter from Secretary Michael R. Pompeo, Department of State, to Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House 

Committee on Foreign Affairs (Oct. 1, 2019) (Secretary Pompeo sent identical letters to Chairman Elijah. E. 

Cummings, House Committee on Oversight and Reform, and Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select 

Committee on Intelligence, t he same day).  

> 159

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to Deputy Secretar y John J. Sullivan, Department of State (Oct. 1, 2019) (online at 

https://foreignaffairs.house.gov/_cache/files/4/6/4683bc86 -be2a -49fc -9e76 -

7cdbf669592f/98BEBD8006DE62BA36BEBD175775F744.2019 -10 -1-ele -abs -eec -to -depsec -sullivan.pdf).  

> 160

Pompeo: ‘I Was on th e Phone Call’ with Trump and Ukrainian President , CNN (Oct. 2, 2019) (online 

at www.cnn.com/2019/10/02/politics/mike -pompeo -ukraine -call/index.html).  

> 161

Email from Committee Staff to Bureau of Legislative Affairs, Department of State (Oct. 7, 2019).  

> 162

Lett er from Brian Bulatao, Under Secretary of State for Management, Department of State, to Andrew 

Wright, Counsel to Deputy Assistant Secretary George P. Kent, Department of State (Oct. 14, 2019).  

> 163

Kent Dep. Tr. at 30 -31, 46.  

> 164

Kent Dep. Tr. at 32.  

> 165

Kent De p. Tr. at 35.  

> 166

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Opening Statement of Ambassador Gordon 

Sondland, Department of State, Impeachment , 116th Cong. (Nov. 20, 2019).  

> 167

Id.  

> 168

Id . In addition, Dr. Fiona Hill, the former Senior Director for Euro pean and Russian Affairs at the 

National Security Council, produced calendar entries relating to relevant meetings. Fiona Hill Document 

Production, Bates Hill0001 through Hill0049 (Oct. 13, 2019). 276  

> 169

Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV00000001 -KV0000 0065 (Oct. 3, 2019).  

> 170

18 U.S.C. § 1505.  

> 171

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Opening Statement of Ambassador Gordon 

Sondland, Department of State, Impeachment , 116th Cong., at 3 -4 (Nov. 20, 2019).  

> 172

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 160.  

> 173

Declaratio n of Ambassador Gordon Sondland, Department of State, at 3 (Nov. 4, 2019).  

> 174

State Department Releases Ukraine Documents to American Oversight , American Oversight (Nov. 22, 

2019) (online at www.americanoversight.org/state -department -releases -ukraine -documents -to -american -oversight); 

American Oversight v. Dep’t of State , Case No. 19 -cv -2934, Doc. No. 15 (D.D.C. November 25, 2019).  

> 175

Email from Of fice Manager to the Secretary of State to S_All (Mar. 26, 2019) (online at 

www.americanoversight.org/wp -content/uploads/2019/11/AO_State_Ukraine_Docs_11 -22.pdf).  

> 176

Email from Madeleine Westerhout to State Department Official, (Mar. 27, 2019) (online at 

www .americanoversight.org/wp -content/uploads/2019/11/AO_State_Ukraine_Docs_11 -22.pdf).  

> 177

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to Secretary Michael R. Pompeo, Department of State (Sept. 27, 2019) (online at 

https://oversight.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight.house.gov/files/documents/2019 -09 -

27.EEC%20Engel%20Schiff%20%20to%20Po mpeo -%20State%20re%20Document%20Subpoena.pdf).  

> 178

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 33 -34.  

> 179

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Opening Statement of Ambassador Gordon 

Sondland, Department of State, Impeachment , 116th Cong., at 20 -23 (Nov. 20, 2019).  

> 180

Taylo r Dep. Tr. at 45 -46.  

> 181

Hale Dep. Tr. at 147 -148.  

> 182

Letter from Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Chairman 

Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to Secretary Mark Esper, Departme nt of Defense (Oct. 7, 2019) (online at 

https://intelligence.house.gov/uploadedfiles/2019 -10 -07.eec_engel_schiff_to_esper -dod_re_subpoena.pdf).  

> 183

Transcript: Secretary of Defense Mark Esper on “Face the Nation,” October 13, 2019 , CBS News 

(Oct. 13, 2019) (online at www.cbsnews.com/news/transcript -secretary -of -defense -mark -esper -on -face -the -nation -

october -13 -2019/).  

> 184

Letter from Robert R. Hood, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Legislative Affairs, Department of 

Defense, to Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Chairman Eliot L. 

Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on Oversight 

and Reform (Oct. 15, 2019).  

> 185

Transcript: Secretary of Defense Mark Esper on “Face the Nation,” October 13, 2019 , CBS News 

(Oct. 13, 2019) (online at www.cbsnews.com/news/transcript -secretary -of -defense -mark -esper -on -face -the -nation -

october -13 -2019/).  

> 186

See, e.g. , Cooper Dep. Tr. at 42 -43.  

> 187

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 33.  

> 188

Cooper Dep. Tr. at 33 -38 . 

> 189

Cooper Hearing Tr. at 13 -14.  

> 190

Cooper Hearing Tr. at 14.  

> 191

Cooper Hearing Tr. at 14. 277  

> 192

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Eli jah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to Secretary Rick Perry, Department of Energy (Oct. 10, 2019) (online at 

https://oversight.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight.house.gov/files/documents/2019 -10 -

10.EEC%20Engel%20Schiff%20to%20Perry -DOE%20Joint%20Cover%20Letter%20re%20Subpoena.pdf).  

> 193

Letter from Melissa F. Burnison, Assistant Secretary for Congressional and Intergovernmental Affairs, 

Department of Energy, to Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. 

Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee 

on Oversight and Reform (Oct. 18, 2019).  

> 194

Hill -Holmes Hearing Tr. at 160.  

> 195

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Opening Statement o f Ambassador Gordon 

Sondland, Department of State, Impeachment , 116th Cong. (Nov. 20, 2019).  

> 196

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Opening Statement of Ambassador Gordon 

Sondland, Department of State, Impeachment , 116th Cong. (Nov. 20, 2019).  

> 197

Letter from Chairman Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, 

Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to Rudy Giuliani (Sept. 30, 201 9) (online at 

https://oversight.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight.house.gov/files/documents/20190930%20 -

%20Giuliani%20HPSCI%20Subpoena%20Letter.pdf).  

> 198

Letter from Jon A. Sale, Counsel to Rudy Giuliani, to Committee Staff (Oct. 15, 2019).  

> 199

Id.  

> 200

Letter from Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Chairman 

Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to Igor Fruman (Sept. 30, 2019) (online at 

https://oversight.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight.house.gov/files/documents/20190930%20 -

%20Fruman%20Letter%20and%20Doc%20Request%20Schedule.pdf); Letter from Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Chairman Eliot L . Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, 

and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on Oversight and Reform, to Lev Parnas (Sept. 30, 2019) 

(online at https://oversight.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight.house.gov/files/documents/20190930%20 -

%20 Parnas%20Letter%20and%20Doc%20Request%20Schedule.pdf).  

> 201

Letter from Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Chairman 

Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to John M. Dowd, Counsel to Igor Fruman and Lev Parnas (Oct. 10, 2019) (online at 

https://intelligence.house.gov/uploadedfiles/2019 -10 -09.eec_engel_schiff_to_parnas_fruman_re_subpoena.pdf).  

> 202

Letter from John M. Dowd, Counsel to Igor Fruman and Lev Parnas, to Committee Staff (Oct. 3, 2019).  

> 203

Letter from John M. Dowd, Counsel to Igor Fruman and Lev Parnas, to Committee Staff (Oct. 8, 2019).  

> 204

Email from John M. Dowd, Counsel to Igor Fruman and Lev Parnas, to Committee Staff (Oct. 9, 2 019).  

> 205

Email from Committee Staff to John M. Dowd, Counsel to Igor Fruman and Lev Parnas (Oct. 10, 2019).  

> 206

Email from John M. Dowd, Counsel to Igor Fruman and Lev Parnas, to Committee Staff (Oct. 10, 

2019).  

> 207

Exclusive: Giuliani Associate Parnas Will C omply with Trump Impeachment Inquiry —Lawyer , Reuters 

(Nov. 4, 2019) (online at www.reuters.com/article/us -usa -trump -impeachment -parnas -exclusiv/exclusive -giuliani -

associate -now -willing -to -comply -with -trump -impeachment -inquiry -lawyer -idUSKBN1XE297). On November 23, 

2019, Mr. Parnas’ attorney inform ed the press that “Mr. Parnas learned from former Ukrainian Prosecutor General 

Victor Shokin that [Ranking Member Devin] Nunes had met with Shokin in Vienna last December.” According to 

the report, “Parnas says he worked to put Nunes in touch with Ukraini ans who could help Nunes dig up dirt on 

Biden and Democrats in Ukraine, according to Bondy.” Exclusive: Giuliani Associate Willing to Tell Congress 

Nunes Met with Ex -Ukrainian Official to Get Dirt on Biden, CNN (Nov. 23, 2019) (online at 278 

www.cnn.com/2019 /11/22/politics/nunes -vienna -trip -ukrainian -prosecutor -biden/index.html). On November 24, 

2019, Mr. Parnas’ attorney told press that his client had arranged skype and phone calls earlier this year between 

Ranking Member Nunes’ staff and Ukraine’s chief an ti -corruption prosecutor, Nazar Kholodnytsky, as well as a 

deputy in Ukraine’s Prosecutor General’s office, Konstantin Kulik. According to Mr. Parnas’ attorney, Ranking 

Member Nunes had actually planned a trip to Ukraine instead of the calls, but cancelle d the trip when his staff 

realized it would require alerting Chairman Schiff about the travel. Giuliani Associate Parnas Wants to Testify that 

Nunes Aides Hid Ukraine Meetings on Biden Dirt from Schiff , CNBC (Nov. 24, 2019) (online at 

www.cnbc.com/2019/11 /24/giuliani -ally -would -testify -that -nunes -staffers -hid -ukraine -meetings -from -schiff.html).  

> 208

Letter from Pat A. Cipollone, Counsel to the President, The White House, to House Speaker Nancy 

Pelosi, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Chairman Eliot L. Engel, 

House Committee on Foreign Affairs Committee, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform (Oct. 8, 2019) (online at www.whitehouse.gov/wp -content/uploads/2019/10/PAC -Letter -

10.08.2019.p df).  

> 209

See 2 U.S.C. §§ 192, 194. Witnesses who received subpoenas that were subsequently withdrawn would 

not face a similar risk of being held in contempt of Congress.  

> 210

See, e.g. , Email from Committee Staff to Mick Mulvaney, Acting Chief of Staff, The White House 

(Nov. 7, 2019) (“Your failure or refusal to comply with the subpoena, including at the direction or behest of the 

President, shall constitute further evidence of obstruction of the House’s impeachment inquiry and may be used as 

an adverse inference agains t you and the President. Moreover, your failure to appear shall constitute evidence that 

may be used against you in a contempt proceeding.”).  

> 211

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permane nt Select Committee on Intelligence, and Acting Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, House 

Committee on Oversight and Reform, Mick Mulvaney, Acting Chief of Staff, The White House (Nov. 5, 2019) 

(online at https://oversight.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight.ho use.gov/files/2019 -11 -

05.CBM%20Engel%20Schiff%20to%20Mulvaney -WH%20re%20Depo%20Notice.pdf).  

> 212

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Subpoena to Mick Mulvaney, Acting Chief of 

Staff, The White House (Nov. 7, 2019).  

> 213

Email from William Pittard, Counsel to Mick Mulvaney, Acting Chief of Staff, The White House, to 

Committee Staff (Nov. 8, 2019).  

> 214

Letter from Pat A. Cipollone, Counsel to the President, The White House, to William Pittard, Counsel to 

Mick Mulvaney, Acting Chief of Staff, The White H ouse (Nov. 8, 2019) (online at www.whitehouse.gov/wp -

content/uploads/2019/10/PAC -Letter -10.08.2019.pdf).  

> 215

Letter from Steven A. Engel, Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, Department of 

Justice, to Pat A. Cipollone, Counsel to the Presiden t, The White House (Nov. 7, 2019).  

> 216

Mulvaney Dep. Tr. at 5.  

> 217

Mulvaney Dep. Tr. at 7 -9.  

> 218

On November 8, 2019, Mr. Mulvaney filed a motion in federal court seeking to join a lawsuit, discussed 

below, filed by Dr. Charles Kupperman seeking a declaratory j udgment as to whether he should comply with the 

Committees’ subpoena. On November 11, 2019, Mr. Mulvaney withdrew his request to join the case. White House 

Chief of Staff Mulvaney Drops Bid to Join Kupperman Impeachment Lawsuit, Washington Post (Nov. 11, 2019) 

(online at www.washingtonpost.com/local/legal -issues/bolton -and -kupperman -reject -white -house -chief -of -staff -

mulvaneys -bid -to -join -impeachment -lawsuit/2019/11/11/cdf40226 -04ac -11ea -8292 -c46ee8cb3dce_story.html).  

> 219

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Acting Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, House 

Committee on Oversight and Reform, to Robert B. Blair, Assistant to the President and Senior Adv isor to the Chief 

of Staff, The White House (Oct. 24, 2019).  

> 220

Letter from Whitney C. Ellerman, Counsel to Robert B. Blair, Assistant to the President and Senior 

Advisor to the Chief of Staff, The White House, to Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, 279 

Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Acting Chairwoman Carolyn B. 

Maloney, House Committee on Oversight and Reform (Nov. 2, 2019).  

> 221

Letter from Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Com mittee on Intelligence, Acting 

Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, House Committee on Oversight and Reform, and Chairman Eliot L. Engel, 

House Committee on Foreign Affairs, to Whitney C. Ellerman, Counsel to Robert B. Blair, Assistant to the 

President and Senio r Advis or to the Chief of Staff, The White House (Nov. 3, 2019); House Permanent Select 

Committee on Intelligence, Subpoena to Robert B. Blair, Assistant to the President and Senior Advisor to the Chief 

of Staff, The White House (Nov. 3, 2019).  

> 222

Blair Dep . Tr. at 6 -7.  

> 223

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Acting Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, House 

Committee on Oversight and Reform, to Charle s J. Cooper and Michael W. Kirk, Counsel to Ambassador John 

Bolton, Former National Security Advisor, The White House (Oct. 30, 2019).  

> 224

Email from Charles J. Cooper, Counsel to Ambassador John Bolton, Former National Security Advisor, 

The White House, to Committee Staff (Oct. 30, 2019).  

> 225

Letter from Charles J. Cooper, Counsel to Ambassador John Bolton, Former National Security Advisor, 

The White House, to Douglas N. Letter, General Counsel, House of Representatives (Nov. 8, 2019).  

> 226

In early November 2019 , Ambassador Bolton’s personal attorney also informed Committee staff that if 

the Committees were to issue a subpoena to compel his testimony, he would seek to join the lawsuit filed by Dr. 

Kupperman. On November 24, 2019, Chairman Schiff stated, “We’ve c ertainly been in touch with his lawyer and 

what we’ve been informed by his lawyer —because we invited him and he did not choose to come in and testify, 

notwithstanding the fact that his deputy Fiona Hill and his other deputy Colonel Vindman and Tim Morrison and 

others on the National Security Council have shown the courage to come in —is if we subpoena him, they will sue us 

in court.” Schiff Pushes Bolton to Testify But Will Not Go to Court to Force Him , CNN (Nov. 24, 2019) (online at 

www.cnn.com/2019/11/24/ politics/adam -schiff -house -democrats -impeachment -state -of -the -union -

cnntv/index.html).  

> 227

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Acting Chairwom an Carolyn B. Maloney, House 

Committee on Oversight and Reform, to John A. Eisenberg, Deputy Counsel to the President for National Security 

Affairs and Legal Advisor to the National Security Council, National Security Council, The White House (Oct. 30, 

201 9).  

> 228

Eisenberg Dep. Tr. at 6 (“Mr. Eisenberg never acknowledged receipt or otherwise responded to the 

committees’ deposition request, nor did any official at the White House.”).  

> 229

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Ch airman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Acting Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, House 

Committee on Oversight and Reform, to John A. Eisenberg, Deputy Counsel to the President for National Security 

Affairs and Legal Adviso r to the National Security Council, National Security Council, The White House (Nov. 1, 

2019); House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Subpoena to John A. Eisenberg, Deputy Counsel to the 

President for National Security Affairs and Legal Advisor to the National Security Council, The White House (Nov. 

1, 2019).  

> 230

Letter from William A. Burck, Counsel to John A. Eisenberg, Deputy Counsel to the President for 

National Security Affairs and Legal Advisor to the National Security Council, National Secur ity Council, The White 

House, to Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House 

Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Acting Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform (Nov. 4, 2019).  

> 231

Letter from Pat A. Cipollone, Counsel to the President, The White House, to William A. Burck, Counsel 

to John A. Eisenberg, Deputy Counsel to the President for National Security Affairs and Legal Advisor to the 

National Security Council, Natio nal Security Council, The White House (Nov. 3, 2019).  

> 232

Letter from Steven A. Engel, Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, Department of 

Justice, to Pat A. Cipollone, Counsel to the President, the White House (Nov. 3, 2019). 280  

> 233

Eisenberg Dep. Tr. at 6 -8.  

> 234

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Acting Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, House 

Committee on Oversight and Reform, to Michae l Ellis, Senior Associate Counsel to the President and Deputy Legal 

Advisor to the National Security Council, National Security Council, The White House (Oct. 30, 2019).  

> 235

Email from Paul Butler, Counsel to Michael Ellis, Senior Associate Counsel to the Pr esident and Deputy 

Legal Advisor to the National Security Council, National Security Council, The White House, to Committee Staff 

(Nov. 2, 2019).  

> 236

Email from Paul Butler, Counsel to Michael Ellis, Senior Associate Counsel to the President and Deputy 

Legal Advisor to the National Security Council, National Security Council, The White House, to Committee Staff 

(Nov. 3, 2019).  

> 237

Letter from Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Acting 

Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, House Committee on Oversight and Reform, Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House 

Committee on Foreign Affairs, to Paul W. Butler, Counsel t o Michael Ellis, Senior Associate Counsel to the 

President and Deputy Legal Advisor to the National Security Council, National Security Council, The White House 

(Nov. 3, 2019); House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Subpoena to Michael Ellis, Se nior Associate 

Counsel to the President and Deputy Legal Advisor to the National Security Council, National Security Council, 

The White House (Nov. 3, 2019).  

> 238

Ellis Dep. Tr. at 7.  

> 239

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Acting Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, House 

Committee on Oversight and Reform, to Preston Wells Griffith, Senior Director for International Energy and 

Environment, National Secu rity Council (Oct. 24, 2019).  

> 240

Letter from Karen D. Williams, Counsel to Preston Wells Griffith, Senior Director for International 

Energy and Environment, National Security Council, to Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign 

Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Acting Chairwoman 

Carolyn B. Maloney, House Committee on Oversight and Reform (Nov. 4, 2019).  

> 241

Letter from Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Act ing 

Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, House Committee on Oversight and Reform, and Chairman Eliot L. Engel, 

House Committee on Foreign Affairs, to Karen D. Williams, Counsel to Preston Wells Griffith, Senior Director for 

International Energy and Environment, National Security Council (Nov. 4, 2019); House Permanent Select 

Committee on Intelligence, Subpoena to Preston Wells Griffith, Senior Director for International Energy and 

Environment, National Security Council (Nov. 4, 2019).  

> 242

Griffith Dep. Tr. at 5 -6.  

> 243

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to Dr. Charles M. Kupperman, For mer Deputy Assistant to the President for National 

Security Affairs, National Security Council (Oct. 16, 2019).  

> 244

Email from Committee Staff to Charles J. Cooper and Michael W. Kirk, Counsel to Dr. Charles M. 

Kupperman, Former Deputy Assistant to the Presi dent for National Security Affairs, National Security Council (Oct. 

25, 2019); House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Subpoena to Dr. Charles M. Kupperman, Former 

Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, National Security Council (Oct. 25, 2019).  

> 245

Compl., Kupperman v. U.S. House of Representatives et al. , No. 19 Civ. 3224 (D.D.C. filed Oct. 25, 

2019).  

> 246

Email from Michael W. Kirk, Counsel to Dr. Charles M. Kupperman, Former Deputy Assistant to the 

President for National S ecurity Affairs, National Security Council, to Committee Staff (Oct. 25, 2019).  

> 247

Letter from Pat A. Cipollone, Counsel to the President, The White House, to Charles J. Cooper, Counsel 

to Dr. Charles M. Kupperman, Former Deputy Assistant to the President f or National Security Affairs, National 

Security Council (Oct. 25, 2019). 281  

> 248

Letter from Steven A. Engel, Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, Department of 

Justice, to Pat A. Cipollone, Counsel to the President, The White House (Oct. 25, 201 9).  

> 249

Letter from Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Chairman 

Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, and Acting Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, House 

Committee on Oversight and Reform, to Charles J. Coope r and Michael W. Kirk, Counsel to Dr. Charles M. 

Kupperman, Former Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, National Security Council (Oct. 

26, 2019).  

> 250

Letter from Charles J. Cooper, Counsel to Dr. Charles M. Kupperman, Former Depu ty Assistant to the 

President for National Security Affairs, National Security Council, to Committee Staff (Oct. 26, 2019).  

> 251

Letter from Charles J. Cooper, Counsel to Dr. Charles M. Kupperman, Former Deputy Assistant to the 

President for National Security Affairs, National Security Council, to Committee Staff (Oct. 27, 2019).  

> 252

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Acting Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, House 

Committee on Oversight and Reform to Charles J. Cooper and Michael W. Kirk, Counsel to Dr. Charles M. 

Kupperman, Former Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, National Security Council, 

(Nov. 5, 2019).  

> 253

Letter from Charles J. Cooper, Counsel to Dr. Charles M. Kupperman, Former Deputy Assistant to the 

President for National Security Affairs, National Security Council, to Douglas N. Letter, General Counsel, House of 

Representatives (Nov. 8, 2019).  

> 254

Committee on the J udiciary v. McGahn , Memorandum Opinion (D.D.C. Nov. 25, 2019) (“To make the 

point as plain as possible, it is clear to this Court for the reasons explained above that, with respect to senior -level 

presidential aides, absolute immunity from compelled congre ssional process simply does not exist. Indeed, absolute 

testimonial immunity for senior -level White House aides appears to be a fiction that has been fastidiously 

maintained over time through the force of sheer repetition in OLC opinions, and through acco mmodations that have 

permitted its proponents to avoid having the proposition tested in the crucible of litigation. And because the 

contention that a President’s top advisors cannot be subjected to compulsory congressional process simply has no 

basis in t he law, it does not matter whether such immunity would theoretically be available to only a handful of 

presidential aides due to the sensitivity of their positions, or to the entire Executive branch. Nor does it make any 

difference whether the aides in qu estion are privy to national security matters, or work solely on domestic issues.”). 

As of this report, an appeal is pending in the D.C. Circuit. No. 19 -5331 (D.C. Cir.).  

> 255

See , Kupperman v. U.S. House of Representatives, et al. , No. 19 Civ. 3224 (D.D.C .). As of this report, 

the House Defendants’ Motion to Dismiss (Nov. 14, 2019), ECF No. 41, remains pending. Although the Committee 

will not reissue the subpoena to Dr. Kupperman and the court case is moot, he could choose to appear on a voluntary 

basis to assist Congress in the discharge of its Constitutional responsibilities.  

> 256

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cumming s, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to Acting Director Russell T. Vought, Office of Management and Budget (Oct. 11, 2019).  

> 257

Email from Jessica L. Donlon, Deputy General Counsel for Oversight, Office of Management and 

Budget, to Committee Staff (Oc t. 21, 2019).  

> 258

Russell T. Vought, Twitter (Oct. 21, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/RussVought45/status/1186276793172578306?s=20).  

> 259

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Sel ect Committee on Intelligence, and Acting Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, House 

Committee on Oversight and Reform, to Acting Director Russell T. Vought, Office of Management and Budget 

(Oct. 25, 2019).  

> 260

Letter from Jason A. Yaworske, Associate Director for Legislative Affairs, Office of Management and 

Budget, to Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence (Nov. 4, 2019).  

> 261

Vought Dep. Tr. at 10 -11. 282  

> 262

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chai rman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to Associate Director Michael Duffey, Office of Management and Budget (Oct. 11, 2019).  

> 263

Email from Jessica L. Donlon, Deputy General Counsel for Oversight, Office of Management and 

Budget, to Committee Staff (Oct. 21, 2019).  

> 264

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Acting Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, House 

Committee on Oversight and Reform, to Michael Duffey, Assoc iate Director of National Security Programs, Office 

of Management and Budget (Oct. 25, 2019) (online at https://intelligence.house.gov/uploadedfiles/20191025_ -

_letter_duffey_re_subpoena.pdf); House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Subpoena to Mi chael Duffey, 

Associate Director of National Security Programs, Office of Management and Budget (Oct. 25, 2019).  

> 265

Letter from Jason A. Yaworske, Associate Director for Legislative Affairs, Office of Management and 

Budget, to Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence (Nov. 4, 2019).  

> 266

Duffey Dep. Tr. at 7.  

> 267

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Acting Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, House 

Committee on Oversight and Reform, to Brian McCormack, Associate Director for Natural Resources, Energy, and 

Science, Office of Management and Budget (Oct. 24, 2019).  

> 268

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Fore ign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Acting Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, House 

Committee on Oversight and Reform, to Brian McCormack, Associate Director for Natural Resources, Energy, and 

Science, Of fice of Management and Budget (Nov. 1, 2019); House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, 

Subpoena to Brian McCormack, Associate Director for Natural Resources, Energy, and Science, Office of 

Management and Budget (Nov. 1, 2019).  

> 269

Letter from Jason A. Yaworske, Associate Director for Legislative Affairs, Office of Management and 

Budget, to Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence (Nov. 4, 2019).  

> 270

McCormack Dep. Tr. at 6.  

> 271

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to Secretary Michael R. Pompeo, Department of State (Sept. 13, 2019).  

> 272

Lette r from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to Secretary Michael R. Pompeo, Departm ent of State (Sept. 27, 2019) (internal citations 

omitted) (online at https://oversight.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight.house.gov/files/documents/2019 -09 -

27.EEC%20Engel%20Schiff%20%20to%20Pompeo -%20State%20re%20Depositions.pdf).  

> 273

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to T. Ulrich Brechbuhl, Counselor, Department of State (Sept. 27, 2019).  

> 274

Letter from Secretary Michael R. Pompeo, Department of State, to Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House 

Committee on Foreign Affairs (Oct. 1, 2019) (Secretary Pompeo sent identical letters to Chairman Elijah. E. 

Cummings, House Committee on Ove rsight and Reform, and Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select 

Committee on Intelligence, the same day).  

> 275

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelli gence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to Deputy Secretary of State John J. Sullivan, Department of State (Oct. 1, 2019) (online at 

https://oversight.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight.house.gov/files/documents/20 19 -10 -

01%20ELE%20ABS%20EEC%20TO%20DEPSEC%20SULLIVAN.pdf).  

> 276

Email from Ronald J. Tenpas, Counsel to T. Ulrich Brechbuhl, Counselor, Department of State, to 

Committee Staff (Oct. 2, 2019). 283  

> 277

Email from Committee Staff, to Ronald J. Tenpas, Counsel to T. Ulr ich Brechbuhl, Counselor, 

Department of State (Oct. 8, 2019).  

> 278

Email from Committee Staff, to Ronald J. Tenpas, Counsel to T. Ulrich Brechbuhl, Counselor, 

Department of State (Oct. 9, 2019).  

> 279

Email from Ronald J. Tenpas, Counsel to T. Ulrich Brechbuhl, C ounselor, Department of State, to 

Committee Staff (Oct. 9, 2019).  

> 280

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Acting Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney , House 

Committee on Oversight and Reform, to T. Ulrich Brechbuhl, Counselor, Department of State (Oct. 25, 2019); 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Subpoena to T. Ulrich Brechbuhl, Counselor, Department of 

State (Oct. 25, 2019).  

> 281

Letter f rom Ronald J. Tenpas, Counsel to T. Ulrich Brechbuhl, Counselor, Department of State to 

Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House 

Committee on Foreign Affairs, and Acting Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, House Committee on Oversight and 

Reform (Nov. 5, 2019).  

> 282

Brechbuhl Dep. Tr. at 4 -5.  

> 283

Email from Committee staff to Ronald J. Tenpas, Counsel to T. Ulrich Brechbuhl, Counselor, 

Department of State (Nov. 5, 2019); Email from Committee Staff to R onald J. Tenpas, Counsel to T. Ulrich 

Brechbuhl, Counselor (Nov. 22, 2019).  

> 284

Letter from Brian Bulatao, Under Secretary of State for Management, to Ronald J. Tenpas, Counsel to 

T. Ulrich Brechbuhl, Counselor, Department of State (Nov. 4, 2019.)  

> 285

Letter f rom Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Acting Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, House 

Committee on Oversight and Reform, to Secretary Rick Perry, Departme nt of Energy (Nov. 1, 2019).  

> 286

Letter from General Counsel Bill Cooper, Department of Energy, to Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House 

Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, and 

Acting Chairwoman C arolyn B. Maloney, House Committee on Oversight and Reform (Nov. 5, 2019).  

> 287

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings , House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to Secretary Michael R. Pompeo, Department of State (Sept. 13, 2019).  

> 288

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelli gence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to Secretary Michael R. Pompeo, Department of State (Sept. 27, 2019) (internal citations 

omitted).  

> 289

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, C hairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to Ambassador Marie Yovanovitch, Former U.S. Ambassador to Ukraine, Department of 

State (Sept. 27, 2019).  

> 290

Letter from Secretary Michael R. Pompeo, Department of State, to Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House 

Committee on Foreign Affairs (Oct. 1, 2019) (Secretary Pompeo sent identical letters to Chairman Elijah. E. 

Cummings, House Committee on Oversight and Reform, a nd Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select 

Committee on Intelligence, the same day).  

> 291

Letter from Brian Bulatao, Under Secretary of State for Management, Department of State, to Lawrence 

S. Robbins, Counsel to Ambassador Marie Yovanovitch, Former U.S. Ambassador to Ukraine, Department of State 

(Oct. 10, 2019).  

> 292

The White House, Remarks by President Trump Be fore Marine One Departure (Oct. 10, 2019) (online 

at www.whitehouse.gov/briefings -statements/remarks -president -trump -marine -one -departure -69/). 284  

> 293

Letter from Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Chairman 

Eliot L. Engel , House Committee on Foreign Affairs, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to Lawrence S. Robbins, Counsel to Ambassador Marie Yovanovitch, Former U.S. 

Ambassador to Ukraine, Department of State (Oct. 11, 2019); House P ermanent Select Committee on Intelligence, 

Subpoena to Ambassador Marie Yovanovitch, Former U.S. Ambassador to Ukraine, Department of State (Oct. 11, 

2019).  

> 294

Letter from Lawrence S. Robbins, Counsel to Ambassador Marie Yovanovitch, Former U.S. 

Ambassador to Ukraine, Department of State, to Brian Bulatao, Under Secretary of State for Management, 

Department of State (Oct. 11, 2019) (citations omitted).  

> 295

Yovanovitch Dep. Tr.  

> 296

Id. at 70.  

> 297

Email from Committee Staff to Lawrence S. Robbins, Counsel to Ambassa dor Marie Yovanovitch, 

Former U.S. Ambassador to Ukraine, Department of State (Nov. 15, 2019); House Permanent Select Committee on 

Intelligence, Subpoena to Ambassador Marie Yovanovitch, Former U.S. Ambassador to Ukraine, Department of 

State (Nov. 15, 2019 ).  

> 298

Yovanovitch Hearing Tr. at 157 -158.  

> 299

Letter from Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on Oversight and Reform, Chairman 

Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, and Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select 

Committee on Intelligence, to Secretary Michael R. Pompeo, D epartment of State (Sept. 27, 2019) (internal citations 

omitted) (online at https://oversight.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight.house.gov/files/documents/2019 -09 -

27.EEC%20Engel%20Schiff%20%20to%20Pompeo -%20State%20re%20Depositions.pdf).  

> 300

Letter from Cha irman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on Oversight and Reform, Chairman 

Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, and Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select 

Committee on Intelligence, to Ambassador Gordon Sondland, U.S. Ambassador to the European Union, Department 

of State (Sept. 27, 2019).  

> 301

Letter from Secretary Michael R. Pompeo, Department of State, to Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House 

Committee on Foreign Affairs (Oct. 1, 2019) (Secretary Pompeo sent identical letters to Chairman El ijah. E. 

Cummings, House Committee on Oversight and Reform, and Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select 

Committee on Intelligence, the same day).  

> 302

Letter from Brian Bulatao, Under Secretary of State for Management, Department of State, to Robert 

Luskin, Counsel to Ambassador Gordon Sondland, U.S. Ambassador to the European Union, Department of State 

(Oct.7, 2019).  

> 303

Email from Robert Luskin, Counsel to Ambassador Gordon Sondland, U.S. Ambassador to the 

European Union, Department of State, to Commit tee Staff (Oct. 8, 2019).  

> 304

Letter from Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Chairman 

Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on Oversight and Reform, and Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee 

on Foreign Affairs, to Amb assador Gordon Sondland, U.S. Ambassador to the European Union, Department of State 

(Oct. 8, 2019); House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Subpoena to Ambassador Gordon Sondland, 

U.S. Ambassador to the European Union, Department of State (Oct. 1 1, 2019).  

> 305

Letter from Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Chairman 

Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on Oversight and Reform, and Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee 

on Foreign Affairs, to Ambassador Gordon S ondland, U.S. Ambassador to the European Union, Department of State 

(Oct. 14, 2019).  

> 306

Sondland Dep. Tr.  

> 307

Id. at 16.  

> 308

Id. at 17.  

> 309

Letter from Robert Luskin, Counsel to Ambassador Gordon Sondland, U.S. Ambassador to the 

European Union, Department of Stat e, to Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on 285 

Intelligence (Nov. 4, 2019); Declaration of Ambassador Gordon Sondland, U.S. Ambassador to the European 

Union, Department of State (Nov. 4, 2019).  

> 310

House Permanent Select Committee on Inte lligence, Subpoena to Ambassador Gordon Sondland, U.S. 

Ambassador to the European Union, Department of State (Nov. 20, 2019).  

> 311

Sondland Hearing Tr. at 160.  

> 312

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schif f, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to Secretary Michael R. Pompeo, Department of State (Sept. 13, 2019).  

> 313

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on F oreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to Secretary Michael R. Pompeo, Department of State (Sept. 27, 2019) (online at 

https://ove rsight.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight.house.gov/files/documents/2019 -09 -

27.EEC%20Engel%20Schiff%20%20to%20Pompeo -%20State%20re%20Depositions.pdf) (internal citations 

omitted).  

> 314

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to George P. Kent, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State, Bureau of European and Eurasian 

Affairs, Department of State (Sept. 27, 2019).  

> 315

Email from George P. Kent, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State, Bureau of European and Eurasian 

Affairs, Department of State, to Committee Staff (Sept. 27, 2019).  

> 316

Letter from Secretary Michael R. Pompeo, Department of State, to Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House 

Committee on Foreign Affairs (Oct. 1, 2019) (Secretary Pompeo sent identical letters to Chairman Elijah. E. 

Cummings, House Committee on Oversight and Reform, and Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select 

Committee on Intelligence, the same day).  

> 317

Email from Committee Staff to Andrew M. Wright, Counsel to George P. Kent, Deputy Assistant 

Secretary of State, Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs, Department of State (Oct. 8, 2019).  

> 318

Letter from Brian Bulatao, Unde r Secretary of State for Management, Department of State, to Andrew 

M. Wright, Counsel to George P. Kent, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State, Bureau of European and Eurasian 

Affairs, Department of State (Oct. 10, 2019).  

> 319

Letter from Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Chairman 

Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to Andrew M. Wright, Counsel to G eorge P. Kent, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State, 

Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs, Department of State (Oct. 15, 2019); House Permanent Select Committee 

on Intelligence, Subpoena to George P. Kent, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State, Bureau of E uropean and Eurasian 

Affairs, Department of State (Oct. 15, 2019).  

> 320

Kent Dep. Tr.  

> 321

Id. at 17.  

> 322

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Subpoena to George P. Kent, Deputy Assistant 

Secretary of State, Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs, De partment of State (Nov. 20, 2019).  

> 323

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 142 -143.  

> 324

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to John J. Sullivan, Deputy Secretary of State, Department of State (Oct. 4, 2019).  

> 325

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committe e on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to Ambassador William B. Taylor, Jr., Chargé d’Affaires, U.S. Embassy, Kyiv, Department 

of State (Oct. 4, 2019). 286  

> 326

Letter from Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Perma nent Select Committee on Intelligence, Chairman 

Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on Oversight and Reform, and Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee 

on Foreign Affairs, to Ambassador William B. Taylor, Jr., Ambassador William B. Taylor, Jr., Chargé d’ Affaires, 

U.S. Embassy, Kyiv, Department of State (Oct. 14, 2019).  

> 327

Email from Committee Staff to John B. Bellinger, III, and Jeffrey H. Smith, Counsel to Ambassador 

William B. Taylor, Jr., Chargé d’Affaires, U.S. Embassy, Kyiv, Department of State (Oct. 22, 2019); House 

Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Subpoena to Ambassador William B. Taylor, Jr., Chargé d’Affaires, 

U.S. Embassy, Kyiv, Department of State (Oct. 22, 2019).  

> 328

Taylor Dep. Tr. at 83.  

> 329

House Permanent Select Committee on Intellige nce, Subpoena to Ambassador William B. Taylor, Jr., 

Chargé d’Affaires, U.S. Embassy, Kyiv, Department of State (Nov. 13, 2019).  

> 330

Kent -Taylor Hearing Tr. at 143.  

> 331

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Sc hiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Acting Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, House 

Committee on Oversight and Reform, to Mark J. MacDougall, Counsel to Catherine Croft, Foreign Service Officer, 

Department of State (Oct. 24, 2019); Lett er from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, 

Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Acting Chairwoman Carolyn B. 

Maloney, House Committee on Oversight and Reform, to Mark J. MacDougall, Counse l to Christopher Anderson, 

Foreign Service Officer, Department of State (Oct. 24, 2019).  

> 332

Letter from Mark J. MacDougall, Counsel to Catherine Croft, Foreign Service Officer, Department of 

State, and Christopher Anderson, Foreign Service Officer, Departme nt of State, to Committee Staff (Oct. 25, 2019).  

> 333

Letter from Brian Bulatao, Under Secretary of State for Management, Department of State, to Mark J. 

MacDougall, Counsel to Catherine Croft, Foreign Service Officer, Department of State (Oct. 28, 2019) (bra cketed 

text in original); Letter from Brian Bulatao, Under Secretary of State for Management, Department of State, to Mark 

J. MacDougall, Counsel to Christopher Anderson, Foreign Service Officer, Department of State (Oct. 28, 2019) 

(bracketed text in origi nal); see Letter from Pat A. Cipollone, Counsel to the President, The White House, to 

Speaker Nancy Pelosi, Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on Oversight and Reform, Chairman Eliot 

L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, and Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee 

on Intelligence (Oct. 8, 2019).  

> 334

Email from Committee Staff to Mark J. MacDougall and Abbey McNaughton, Counsel to Catherine 

Croft, Foreign Service Officer, Department of State and Christopher Anderson, Foreign Service Officer, Department 

of State (Oct. 30, 2019); House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Subpoena to Catherine Croft, Foreign 

Service Officer, Department of State (Oct. 30, 2019); House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Subpoena 

to Christopher Anderson, Foreign Service Officer, Department of State (Oct. 30, 2019).  

> 335

Croft Dep. Tr.; Anderson Dep. Tr.  

> 336

Croft Dep. Tr. at 12.  

> 337

Anderson Dep. Tr. at 11 -12.  

> 338

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to Laura K. Cooper, Deputy Assist ant Secretary of Defense for Russia, Ukraine, Eurasia, 

Department of Defense (Oct. 11, 2019).  

> 339

Letter from Deputy Secretary of Defense David L. Norquist to Daniel Levin, Counsel to Laura K. 

Cooper, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Russia, Ukraine , Eurasia, Department of Defense (Oct. 22, 

2019).  

> 340

Email from Committee Staff to Dan Levin, Counsel to Laura K. Cooper, Deputy Assistant Secretary of 

Defense for Russia, Ukraine, Eurasia, Department of Defense (Oct. 23, 2019); House Permanent Select Commi ttee 

on Intelligence, Subpoena to Laura K. Cooper, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Russia, Ukraine, Eurasia, 

Department of Defense (Oct. 23, 2019). 287  

> 341

Cooper Dep. Tr.  

> 342

Id. at 108.  

> 343

Email from Committee Staff to Dan Levin, Counsel to Laura K. Coo per, Deputy Assistant Secretary of 

Defense for Russia, Ukraine, Eurasia, Department of Defense (Nov. 20, 2019); House Permanent Select Committee 

on Intelligence, Subpoena to Laura K. Cooper, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Russia, Ukraine, Eurasi a, 

Department of Defense (Nov. 20, 2019).  

> 344

Cooper -Hale Hearing Tr.  

> 345

Letter from Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Acting 

Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, House Committee on Oversight and Reform, and Chairman Eliot L. Engel, 

House Committee on Foreign Affairs, to Mark Sandy, Deputy Associate Director of National Security Programs, 

Office of Management and Budget (Nov. 5, 2019).  

> 346

Email from Mark Sandy, Deputy Associate Director of National Security Programs, Office o f

Management and Budget, to Committee Staff (Nov. 6, 2019).  

> 347

Email from Jessica L. Donlon, Deputy General Counsel for Oversight, Office of Management and 

Budget, to Committee Staff (Nov. 7, 2019).  

> 348

Email from Committee Staff to Barbara Van Gelder, Counsel to Mark Sandy, Deputy Associate Director 

of National Securi ty Programs, Office of Management and Budget (Nov. 16, 2019); House Permanent Select 

Committee on Intelligence, Subpoena to Mark Sandy, Deputy Associate Director of National Security Programs, 

Office of Management and Budget (Nov. 16, 2019).  

> 349

Sandy Dep. T r.  

> 350

Sandy Dep. Tr. at 161.  

> 351

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to D r. Fiona Hill, Former Deputy Assistant to the President and Senior Director for Europe 

and Russian Affairs, National Security Council (Oct. 9, 2019).  

> 352

Letter from Lee S. Wolosky, Counsel to Dr. Fiona Hill, Former Deputy Assistant to the President and 

Seni or Director for Europe and Russian Affairs, National Security Council, to Michael M. Purpura, Deputy Counsel 

and Deputy Assistant to the President, The White House, and Patrick F. Philbin, Deputy Counsel and Deputy 

Assistant to the President, The White Hou se (Oct. 13, 2019).  

> 353

Letter from Michael M. Purpura, Deputy Counsel and Deputy Assistant to the President, The White 

House, to Lee S. Wolosky, Counsel to Dr. Fiona Hill, Former Deputy Assistant to the President and Senior Director 

for Europe and Russian A ffairs, National Security Council (Oct. 14, 2019).  

> 354

Email from Committee Staff to Lee S. Wolosky and Samuel S. Ungar, Counsel to Dr. Fiona Hill, 

Former Deputy Assistant to the President and Senior Director for Europe and Russian Affairs, National Security 

Council (Oct. 14, 2019); House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Subpoena to Dr. Fiona Hill, Former 

Deputy Assistant to the President and Senior Director for Europe and Russian Affairs, National Security Council 

(Oct. 14, 2019).  

> 355

Hill Dep. Tr.  

> 356

Letter from Lee S. Wolosky, Counsel to Dr. Fiona Hill, Former Deputy Assistant to the President and 

Senior Director for Europe and Russian Affairs, National Security Council, to Michael M. Purpura, Deputy Counsel 

and Deputy Assistant to the President, Th e White House (Nov. 18, 2019).  

> 357

Letter from Michael M. Purpura, Deputy Counsel and Deputy Assistant to the President, The White 

House, to Lee S. Wolosky, Counsel to Dr. Fiona Hill, Former Deputy Assistant to the President and Senior Director 

for Europe an d Russian Affairs, National Security Council (Nov. 20, 2019).  

> 358

Email from Committee Staff to Lee S. Wolosky and Samuel S. Ungar, Counsel to Dr. Fiona Hill, 

Former Deputy Assistant to the President and Senior Director for Europe and Russian Affairs, Nation al Security 

Council (Nov. 21, 2019); House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Subpoena to Dr. Fiona Hill, Former 288 

Deputy Assistant to the President and Senior Director for Europe and Russian Affairs, National Security Council 

(Nov. 21, 2019).  

> 359

Hil l-Holmes Hearing Tr.  

> 360

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to Lieutena nt Colonel Alexander S. Vindman, Director for Ukraine, National Security 

Council (Oct. 16, 2019).  

> 361

Email from Committee Staff, to Michael Volkov and Matt Stankiewicz, Counsel to Lieutenant Colonel 

Alexander S. Vindman, Director for Ukraine, National Secu rity Council (Oct. 29, 2019); House Permanent Select 

Committee on Intelligence, Subpoena to Lieutenant Colonel Alexander S. Vindman, Director for Ukraine, National 

Security Council (Oct. 29, 2019).  

> 362

Vindman Dep. Tr. (During the deposition, Lieutenant Col onel Vindman stated: “I was subpoenaed to 

appear here. You know, absent a subpoena, I would believe I was operating under the President’s guidance to not 

appear, but I was subpoenaed and I presented myself.” Vindman Dep. Tr. at 232).  

> 363

Email from Comm ittee Staff, to Michael Volkov and Matt Stankiewicz, Counsel to Lieutenant Colonel 

Alexander S. Vindman, Director for Ukraine, National Security Council (Nov. 19, 2019); House Permanent Select 

Committee on Intelligence, Subpoena to Lieutenant Colonel Alex ander S. Vindman, Director for Ukraine, National 

Security Council (Nov. 19, 2019).  

> 364

Vindman -Williams Hearing Tr.  

> 365

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intell igence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to Timothy Morrison, Former Deputy Assistant to the President and Senior Director for 

Europe and Russia, National Security Council (Oct. 16, 2019).  

> 366

Email from Committee Sta ff to Barbara Van Gelder, Counsel to Timothy Morrison, Former Deputy 

Assistant to the President and Senior Director for Europe and Russia, National Security Council (Oct. 31, 2019); 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Subpoena to Timothy Morr ison, Former Deputy Assistant to 

the President and Senior Director for Europe and Russia, National Security Council (Oct. 31, 2019).  

> 367

Morrison Dep. Tr.  

> 368

Email from Committee Staff to Barbara Van Gelder, Counsel to Timothy Morrison, Former Deputy 

Assistant to the President and Senior Director for Europe and Russia, National Security Council (Nov. 19, 2019); 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Subpoena to Timothy Morrison, Former Deputy Assistant to 

the President and Senior Director for Europe and Russia, National Security Council (Nov. 19, 2019).  

> 369

Morrison -Volker Hearing Tr.  

> 370

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Acting Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, House 

Committee on Oversight and Reform, to David Hale, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Department of 

State (Nov. 1, 2019).  

> 371

Letter from Brian A. Glasser, Counsel to David Hale, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, 

Department of State, to Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Chairman 

Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, and Acting Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, House 

Committee on Oversight and Reform (Nov. 5, 2019).  

> 372

Email from Committee Staff to Brian Glasser and Cary Joshi, Counsel for David Hale, Under Secretary 

of State for Political Affairs, Departm ent of State (Nov. 6, 2019); House Permanent Select Committee on 

Intelligence, Subpoena to David Hale, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Department of State (Nov. 6, 

2019).  

> 373

Hale Dep. Tr. 289  

> 374

Email from Committee Staff to Brian A. Glasser, Counsel to David Hale, Under Secretary of State for 

Political Affairs, Department of State (Nov. 20, 2019); House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, 

Subpoena to David Hale, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Department of State (Nov. 20, 2019).  

> 375

Cooper -Hale Hearing Tr.  

> 376

Letter from Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Acting 

Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, House Committee on Oversight and Reform, and from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, 

House Committee on Foreign Affairs, to Kenneth L. Wainstein, Counsel to David Holmes, Political Counselor at the 

U.S. Embassy in Kyiv, Ukraine, Department of State (Nov. 12, 2019).  

> 377

Email from Committee Staff to Kenneth L . Wainstein, Paul J. Nathanson, and Katherine Swan, Counsel 

to David Holmes, Political Counselor at the U.S. Embassy in Kyiv, Ukraine, Department of State (Nov. 15, 2019); 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Subpoena to David Holmes, Politica l Counselor at the U.S. 

Embassy in Kyiv, Ukraine, Department of State (Nov. 15, 2019).  

> 378

Holmes Dep. Tr.  

> 379

Email from Committee Staff to Kenneth L. Wainstein, Paul J. Nathanson, and Katherine Swan, Counsel 

to David Holmes, Political Counselor at the U.S. E mbassy in Kyiv, Ukraine, Department of State (Nov. 21, 2019); 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Subpoena to David Holmes, Political Counselor at the U.S. 

Embassy in Kyiv, Ukraine, Department of State (Nov. 21, 2019).  

> 380

Hill -Holmes Hearing T r.  

> 381

Email from Committee Staff to Ambassador P. Michael McKinley, Former Senior Advisor to the 

Secretary of State, Department of State (Oct. 12, 2019).  

> 382

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to John B. Bellinger, III, Counsel to Ambassador P. Michael McKinley, Former Senior 

Advisor to the Secretary of State, Department of State (Oct. 14, 2019).  

> 383

McKinley Transcribed Interview Tr.  

> 384

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committ ee on 

Oversight and Reform, to Ambassador Philip T. Reeker, Acting Assistant Secretary, Bureau of European and 

Eurasian Affairs, Department of State (Oct. 16, 2019).  

> 385

Letter from Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, C hairman 

Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, and Acting Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, House 

Committee on Oversight and Reform, to Margaret E. Daum, Counsel to Ambassador Philip T. Reeker, Acting 

Assistant Secretary, Bureau of European and E urasian Affairs, Department of State (Oct. 25, 2019); House 

Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Subpoena to Ambassador Philip T. Reeker, Acting Assistant 

Secretary, Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs, Department of State (Oct. 25, 2019).  

> 386

Ree ker Dep. Tr.  

> 387

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to Secretary Michae l R. Pompeo, Department of State (Sept. 13, 2019).  

> 388

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Ove rsight and Reform, to Secretary Michael R. Pompeo, Department of State (Sept. 27, 2019).  

> 389

Letter from Chairman Eliot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Chairman Adam B. Schiff, 

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elij ah E. Cummings, House Committee on 

Oversight and Reform, to Ambassador Kurt Volker, U.S. Special Representative for Ukraine Negotiations, 

Department of State (Sept. 27, 2019). 290  

> 390

Letter from Secretary Michael F. Pompeo, Department of State, to Chairman Elio t L. Engel, House 

Committee on Foreign Affairs (Oct. 1, 2019) (Identical letters transmitted to Chairman Schiff and Chairman 

Cummings).  

> 391

Letter from Marik A. String, Acting Legal Advisor, Department of State, to Margaret E. Daum, Counsel 

to Ambassador Kur t Volker, U.S. Special Representative for Ukraine Negotiations, Department of State (Oct. 2, 

2019).  

> 392

Letter from Margaret E. Daum, Counsel to Ambassador Kurt Volker, U.S. Special Representative for 

Ukraine Negotiations, Department of State, to Chairman El iot L. Engel, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, 

Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Chairman Elijah E. Cummings, 

House Committee on Oversight and Reform (Oct. 2, 2019); Kurt Volker Document Production, Bates KV0 0000001 

– KV00000065 (Oct. 2, 2019).  

> 393

Volker Transcribed Interview Tr.  

> 394

Morrison -Volker Hearing Tr.  

> 395

Letter from Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Acting 

Chairwoman Carolyn B. Maloney, House Committee on Over sight and Reform, and Chairman Eliot L. Engel, 

House Committee on Foreign Affairs, to Justin Shur, Counsel to Jennifer Williams, Special Advisor for Europe and 

Russia, Office of the Vice President (Nov. 4, 2019).  

> 396

Email from Committee Staff to Justin Shur , Counsel to Jennifer Williams, Special Advisor for Europe 

and Russia, Office of the Vice President (Nov. 7, 2019); House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, 

Subpoena to Jennifer Williams, Special Advisor for Europe and Russia, Office of the Vice P resident (Nov. 7, 2019).  

> 397

Williams Dep. Tr.  

> 398

Letter from Jennifer Williams, Special Advisor for Europe and Russia, Office of the Vice President, 

Justin Shur, Emily K. Damrau, and Caleb Hayes -Deats, Counsel to Jennifer Williams, Special Advisor for Europe 

and Russia, Office of the Vice President, to Chairman Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on 

Intelligence (Nov. 11, 2019).  

> 399

Email from Committee Staff to Justin Shur and Caleb Hayes -Deats, Counsel to Jennifer Williams, 

Special Advisor for Eu rope and Russia, Office of the Vice President (Nov. 19, 2019); House Permanent Select 

Committee on Intelligence, Subpoena to Jennifer Williams, Special Advisor for Europe and Russia, Office of the 

Vice President (Nov. 19, 2019).  

> 400

Vindman -Williams Hearing Tr.  

> 401

Yovanovitch Dep. Tr. at 193.  

> 402

Yovanovitch Hearing Tr. at 37 -38.  

> 403

Yovanovitch Hearing Tr. at 38.  

> 404

Donald J. Trump, Twitter (Nov. 15, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/1195356198347956224).  

> 405

Yovanovitch Hearing Tr. at 46.  

> 406

The Latest: Ousted Ukraine Ambassador Has Her Say in Hearing, Associated Press (Nov. 16, 2019) 

(online at https://apnews.com/2f420045618b4106b6fa7419a3d75b8e).  

> 407

Impeachment Inquiry Hearing with Former US Ambassador to Ukraine , CNN (Nov. 15, 2019) (online 

at www.cnn.com/politics/live -news/impeachment -hearing -11 -15 -19/h_fb32b149181437e02e5d937c6fc64f35). 

During a recess in the hearing at which Ambassador Yovanovitch was testifying, a federal jury returned a verdict of 

guilty ag ainst President Trump’s longest -serving political advisor, Roger Stone, on seven criminal counts, including 

witness tampering and obstruction of Congress’ investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 election and 

possible links to President Trump’s campaign. Mr. Stone used threats and intimidation to attempt to persuade a 

witness to withhold information and lie to Congress. He has yet to be sentenced. See Roger Stone Guilty on All 

Counts of Lying to Congress, Witness Tampering , Washington Post (No v. 15, 2019) (online at 

www.washingtonpost.com/local/public -safety/roger -stone -jury -weighs -evidence -and -a-defense -move -to -make -case -291 

about -mueller/2019/11/15/554fff5a -06ff -11ea -8292 -c46ee8cb3dce_story.html). Mr. Stone was convicted of giving 

false and misl eading statements to the Intelligence Committee, failing to produce and lying about the existence of 

records responsive to Committee requests, and attempting to persuade a witness to give false testimony to the 

Committee. Among other acts of witness tampe ring, Mr. Stone told the witness to “Stonewall it. Plead the Fifth” 

and to “be honest w fbi” that “there was no back channel.” He also called the witness a “rat” and “stoolie” and 

threatened retaliation. United States v. Roger Stone , Indictment, No. 1:1 9-cr -00018 -ABJ (Jan. 24, 2019). Mr. Stone 

was convicted of violating 18 U.S.C. § 1505 (obstruction), 18 U.S.C. § 1001 (false statements), and 18 U.S.C. § 

1512(b) (witness tampering).  

> 408

Fox and Friends , Fox News (Nov. 22, 2019) (online at www.youtube.com /watch?v=WNqKhRcpktU).  

> 409

Donald J. Trump, Twitter (Oct. 23, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/1189167309455331328).  

> 410

The White House, Remarks by President Trump Before Marine One Departure (Nov. 3, 2019) (online at 

www.whitehouse .gov/briefings -statements/remarks -president -trump -marine -one -departure -74/).  

> 411

Donald J. Trump, Twitter (Nov. 19, 2019) (retweeting Dan Scavino Jr., Twitter (Nov. 19, 2019) (online 

at https://twitter.com/Scavino45/status/1196860213233684480)).  

> 412

See, e.g , Berman Shocked by Republican’s Attacks on US War Vet , CNN (Oct. 29, 2019) (online at 

www.cnn.com/videos/politics/2019/10/29/duffy -berman -spar -over -vindman -loyalty newday -vpx.cnn) (former Rep. 

Sean Duffy claiming that Lt. Col Vindman “has an affinity, I t hink for the Ukraine,” that “it seems very clear that he 

is incredibly concerned about Ukrainian defense,” and that “I don’t know that he’s concerned about American 

policy”); see also Rudy Giuliani, Twitter (Oct. 30, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/Ru dyGiuliani/status/1189732605383630850) (claiming that Lt. Col. Vindman was “giving advice 

to two countries” and stating that “I thought he worked for US”).  

> 413

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Written Statement of Lieutenant Colonel Alexan der 

S. Vindman, Impeachment, 116 th Cong. (Nov. 19, 2019).  

> 414

Donald J. Trump, Twitter (Oct. 23, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/1187063301731209220).  

> 415

Donald J. Trump, Twitter (Oct. 23, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/realD onaldTrump/status/1187080923961012228).  

> 416

The White House, Remarks by President Trump Before Marine One Departure (Oct. 25, 2019) (online 

at www.whitehouse.gov/briefings -statements/remarks -president -trump -marine -one -departure -72/).  

> 417

Donald J. Trump, Twitt er (Nov. 13, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/realdonaldtrump/status/1194608482793795584).  

> 418

Donald J. Trump, Twitter (Nov. 17, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/1196155347117002752).  

> 419

Vindman -Williams Hearing Tr. at 97.  

> 420

Do nald J. Trump, Twitter (Nov. 16, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/1195727871765073921); Donald J. Trump, Twitter (Nov. 16, 2019) 

(online at https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/1195727879780360193).  

> 421

50 U.S.C. § 3033(g)(3) (when a complaint is received from a member of the Intelligence Community, 

“the Inspector General shall not disclose the identity of the employee without the consent of the employee, unless 

the Inspector General determines that such disclosure is unavoida ble during the course of the investigation or the 

disclosure is made to an official of the Department of Justice responsible for determining whether a prosecution 

should be undertaken”).  

> 422

50 U.S.C. § 3234(b).  

> 423

Letter from Michael K. Atkinson, Inspector General of the Intelligence Community, to Chairman Adam 

B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and Ranking Member Devin Nunes, House 

Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence (Sept. 9, 2019); see also 50 U.S.C. § 3033(k)(5)(C) (“Upon receipt of 292 

the transmittal from the ICIG, the Director shall within 7 calendar days of such receipt, forward such transmittal to 

the congressional intelligence committees, together with any comments the Director considers appropriate.”)  

> 424

Letter from Chai rman, Adam B. Schiff, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, to Joseph 

Maguire, Acting Director of National Intelligence, Office of the Director of National Intelligence (Sept. 13, 2019).  

> 425

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, House Intelligence Committee Releases 

Whistleblower Complaint (Sept. 26, 2019) (online at 

https://intelligence.house.gov/news/documentsingle.aspx?DocumentID=708).  

> 426

Listen: Audio of Trump Discussing Whistleblower at Private Event: ‘That’s Close to a Spy,’ Los 

Angeles Times (Sept. 26, 2019) (online at www.latimes.com/politics/story/2019 -09 -26/trump -at -private -breakfast -

who -gave -the -whistle -blower -the -information -because -thats -almost -a-spy).  

> 427

House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Chairmen Warn President to Stop Attacking 

Whistleblower and Witnesses to His Misconduct and to Halt Efforts to Obstruct Impeachment Inquiry (Sept. 26, 

2019) (online at https://intelligence.house.gov/news/d ocumentsingle.aspx?DocumentID=709).  

> 428

Donald J. Trump, Twitter (Sept. 29, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/1178442765736333313?s=20).  

> 429

Donald J. Trump, Twitter (Oct. 4, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status /1180123504924151809).  

> 430

The White House, Remarks by President Trump Before Marine One Departure (Nov. 3, 2019) (online at 

www.whitehouse.gov/briefings -statements/remarks -president -trump -marine -one -departure -74/).  

> 431

Donald J. Trump, Twitter (Nov. 3, 2019) (online at 

https://twitter.com/realdonaldtrump/status/1191000516580519937).  

> 432

The White House, Remarks by President Trump Before Marine One Departure (Nov. 3, 2019) (online at 

www.whitehouse.gov/briefings -statements/remarks -president -trump -marine -one -depa rture -74/).  

> 433

The White House, Remarks by President Trump Before Marine One Departure (Nov. 4, 2019) (online at 

www.whitehouse.gov/briefings -statements/remarks -president -trump -marine -one -departure -75/).  

> 434

The White House, Remarks by President Trump After T our of Apple Manufacturing Plant (Nov. 20, 

2019) (online www.whitehouse.gov/briefings -statements/remarks -president -trump -tour -apple -manufacturing -plant -

austin -tx/).  

> 435

Letter from Chairman Adam B. Schiff to Ranking Member Devin Nunes, House Permanent Select 

Committee on Intelligence (Nov. 9, 2019).  

> 436

In 2017, every Republican Member of Congress joined a unanimous vote in the House of 

Representatives to increase penalties for retaliation against whistleblowers. U.S. House of Representatives, Roll 

Call Vote Approving S. 585, The Dr. Chris Kirkpatrick Whistleblower Protection Act of 2017 (Oct. 12, 2017) (420 

yeas, 0 nays) (online at www.govtrack.us/congress/votes/115 -2017/h568).  

> 437

House Intelligence Chair News Conference , C -SPAN (Mar. 24, 2017) (online at www. c-

span.org/video/?425953 -1/paul -manafort -volunteered -intelligence -committee -chairman -nunes ).  

> 438

Id.  

> 439

Office of Senator Chuck Grassley, Grassley Statement Regarding Intel Community Whistleblower (Oct. 

1, 2019) (online at www.grassley.senate.gov/news/news -re leases/grassley -statement -regarding -intel -community -

whistleblower).  

> 440

Senate Intel Chair Doesn’t Want Whistleblower’s Identity Disclosed , The Hill (Nov. 7, 2019) (online at 

https://thehill.com/homenews/senate/469455 -senate -intel -chair -doesnt -want -whistlebl owers -identity -disclosed).  

> 441

Republicans Break with Trump and Rand Paul on Whistleblower Unmasking , Politico (Nov. 5, 2019) 

(online at www.politico.com/ news/2019/11/05/rand -paul -trump -whistleblower -065917). 293 

APPEN DIX A: KEY PEOPLE AND ENTITIES 

Anderson, Christopher J. Spe cial Advisor for Ukraine Negotiations, Department of State, 

August 2017 -July 2019 

Atkinson, Michael K. Inspector General of the Intelligence Community, May 2018 -

present 

Avakov, Arsen Ukrainian Minister of Internal Affairs, February 2014 -present 

Bakanov, Ivan Head of Security Service of Ukraine, August 2019 -present; First 

Deputy Chief of the Security Service of Ukraine, May 2019 -

August 2019 

Barr, William P. Attorney General, Department of Justice, February 2019 -present 

Biden, Hunt er Son of former Vice President Joe Biden 

Biden, Joseph R., Jr. U.S. Vice President, January 2009 -January 2017 

Blair, Robert B. Assistant to the President and Senior Advisor to the Chief of Staff, 

February 2019 -present 

Bohdan (Bogdan) , Andriy Head of Uk rainian Presidential Administration, May 2019 -present 

Bolton, John National Security Advisor, March 2018 -September 2019 

Brechbuhl, T. Ulrich Counselor, Department of State, May 2018 -present 

Bulatao, Brian Under Secretary of State for Management, Depar tment of State, 

May 2019 -present 

Burisma Holdings Ukrainian energy company 

Cipollone, Pat White House Counsel, December 2018 -present 

Clinton, Hillary Rodham Democratic Presidential candidate, November 2016 

Cooper, Laura K. Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Russia, Ukraine, 

Eurasia, Department of Defense, 2016 -present 

Croft, Catherine M. Special Advisor for Ukraine Negotiations, Department of State, 

July 2019 -present; Ukraine director, National Security Council, 

July 2017 -July 2018 294 

CrowdStrike Cybersecurity company; object of conspiracy theories claiming 

that CrowdStrike framed Russia in hack of the DNC server in the 

2016 U.S. election 

Danyliuk (Danylyuk), Secretary, Ukrainian National Security and Defense Council, 

Oleksandr “Sasha” May 2019 -September 2019 

diGenova, Joseph Attorney allegedly working for President Trump to obtain 

information from Ukr ainian officials on the Bidens 

Duffey, Michael Associate Director, National Security Programs, Office of 

Management and Budget, May 2019 -present 

Eisenberg, John Legal Advisor to the National Security Council and Deputy 

Counsel to the President for Nation al Security Affairs, February 

2017 -present 

Ellis, Michael Senior Associate Counsel to the President and Deputy Legal 

Advisor to the National Security Council, March 2017 -present 

Elwood, Courtney Simmons General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, June 2017 -present 

Engel, Steven A. Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, Department 

of Justice, November 2017 -present 

Esper, Mark Secretary of Defense, Department of Defense, July 2019 -presen t; 

Acting Secretary of Defense, June 2019 -July 2019 

Fruman, Igor Giuliani associate named in indictment unsealed on October 10, 

2019 

Giuliani, Rudolph “Rudy” President Trump’s agent and personal attorney 

Griffith, P. Wells Senior Director for Internatio nal Energy and Environment, 

National Security Council, April 2018 -present 

Hale, David M. Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Department of State, 

August 2018 -present 

Hannity, Sean Host of Hannity , Fox News, January 2009 -present 

Hill, Fiona Deputy Assistant to the President and Senior Director for European 

and Russian Affairs, National Security Council, April 2017 -July 

2019 

Hochstein, Amos J. Supervisory Board Member, Naftogaz, November 2017 -present 295 

Holmes, David A. Political Counselo r, U.S. Embassy in Kyiv, Ukraine, August 2017 -

present 

Johnson, Ron Senator from Wisconsin, Chairman, Senate Homeland Security 

and Governmental Affairs Committee, January 2015 -present 

Kellogg, Keith National Security Advisor to the Vice President, April 2 018 -

present 

Kenna, Lisa D. Executive Secretary in the Office of the Secretary, Department of 

State, June 2017 -present 

Kent, George P. Deputy Assistant Secretary of State, Bureau of European and 

Eurasian Affairs, September 2018 -present; Deputy Chief of 

Mi ssion in Kyiv, Ukraine, 2015 -2018 

Kholodnitsky, Nazar Head, Ukrainian Specialized Anti -Corruption Prosecutor’s Office, 

November 2015 -present 

Klitenic, Jason General Counsel, Office of the Director of National Intelligence 

Kulyk, Konstiantyn Deputy Head of the Ukrainian Department of International Legal 

Cooperation of the Prosecutor General’s Office, November 2018 -

November 2019 

Kupperman, Charles M. Deputy National Security Advisor, January 2019 -September 2019 

Kushner, Jared Assistant to the President and Senior Advisor, 2017 -present 

Kvien, Kristina Deputy Chief of Mission, U.S. Embassy in Kyiv, May 2019 -

present 

Lutsenko, Yuriy Ukrainian Prosecutor General, May 2016 -August 2019 

McCormack, Brian Associate Director for Natural Resources, Office of Management 

and Budget, September 2019 -present; Chief of Staff, Department 

of Energy, March 2017 -September 2019 

McKinley, P. Michael Senior Advisor to the Secretary, Department of State, May 2018 -

October 2019 

McKusker, Elaine A. Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller), Department of 

Defense, August 2017 -present 

Maguire, Joseph Acting Director of National Intelligence, August 2019 -present 296 

Manafort, Paul Chairman, Donald J. Trump presidential campaign, May 2016 -

August 2016; convicted in August 2018 on two counts of bank 

fraud, five counts of tax fraud, and one count of failure to disclose 

a foreign bank account 

Morrison, Tim Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security, National 

Security Council, July 2019 -October 2019 

Mueller, Robert S. , III Special Counsel, Department of Justice, May 2017 -May 2019 

Mulvaney, John Michael Acting Chief of Staff, White House, January 2019 -present 

“Mick” 

Murphy, Chris Senator from Connecticut, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on 

Near East, South Asia, Central Asia, and Counterterrorism, Senate 

Committee on Foreign Relations, formerly Ranking Member, 

Subcommittee on Europe and Regional Security Cooperation, 

Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, January 2017 -January 

2019 

Naftogaz Ukrainian state -owned national gas company 

Parnas, Lev Giuliani associate named in indictment unsealed on October 10, 

2019 

Patel, Kashyap “Kash” Senior Director for Counterterrorism, National Security Council, 

July 2019 -present; former Staff, Directorate of International 

Organization s and Alliances, National Security Council, February 

2019 -July 2019; former National Security Advisor, House 

Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, March 2018 -January 

2019; former Senior Counsel for Counterterrorism, House 

Permanent Select Committee o n Intelligence, April 2017 -March 

2018 

Pence, Michael R. Vice President, January 2017 -present 

Pennington, Joseph Chargé d’Affaires, of the U.S. Embassy in Ukraine, May 2019 

Perez, Carol Z. Director General of the Foreign Service and Director of Human 

Services, January 2019 -present 

Perry, James Richard “Rick” Secretary of Energy, March 2017 -December 2019 

Pompeo, Michael Secretary of State, April 2018 -present 

Poroshenko, Petro President of Ukraine, June 2014 -May 2019 297 

Portman, Robert U.S. Senator from Ohio, January 2011 -present; Chairman, 

Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, Senate Homeland 

Security and Governmental Affairs Committee, January 2015 -

present 

Purpura, Michael Deputy Couns el to the President, December 2018 -present 

Putin, Vladimir Russian President, May 2012 -present 

Reeker, Philip T. Acting Assistant Secretary, Bureau of European and Eurasian 

Affairs, Department of State, March 2019 -present 

Rood, John C. Under Secretary o f Defense for Policy, Department of Defense, 

January 2018 -present 

Sandy, Mark Deputy Associate Director for National Security at the Office of 

Management and Budget, December 2013 -present; Acting Director 

of the Office of Management and Budget, January 20 17 -February 

2017 

Sekulow, Jay Personal attorney for President Trump 

Shokin, Viktor Ukrainian Prosecutor General of Ukraine, February 2015 -March 

2016 

Short, Marc Chief of Staff to Vice President Mike Pence, February 2019 -

present 

Solomon, John Author of articles promoting debunked conspiracy theories about 

the Bidens, Crowdstrike, and the 2016 U.S. election 

Sondland, Gordon U.S. Ambassador to the European Union, July 2018 -present 

String, Marik Acting Legal Advisor, Office of the Legal Adviso r, Department of 

State, June 2019 -present 

Sullivan, John J. Deputy Secretary of State, Department of State, June 2017 -present 

Taylor, William B., Jr. Chargé d’Affaires for the U.S. Embassy in Kyiv, Ukraine, June 

2019 -present 

“Three Amigos” Secretary of Energy Rick Perry, Ambassador Gordon Sondland, 

and Ambassador Kurt Volker 

Toensing, Victoria Attorney allegedly working “off the books” for President Trump to 

obtain information from Ukrainian officials on the Bidens 298 

Trump, Donald J. U.S. President, January 2017 -present 

Trump, Donald J., Jr. Son of President Trump 

Vindman, Alexander S. Director for Ukraine, National Security Council, July 2018 -

present; Lieutenant Colonel, U.S. Army 

Volker, Kurt U.S. Special Representativ e for Ukraine Negotiations, Department 

of State, July 2017 -September 2019 

Vought, Russell T. Acting Director, Office of Management and Budget, January 2019 -

present 

Whistleblower Author of complaint declassified by the Office of the Director of 

National I ntelligence on September 25, 2019 

Williams, Jennifer Special Advisor for Europe and Russia, Office of the Vice 

President, April 2019 -present 

Yermak, Andriy Assistant to the President of Ukraine, May 2019 -present 

Yovanovitch, Marie L. U.S. Ambassador to Ukraine, August 2016 -May 2019 

Zakaria, Fareed Host, Fareed Zakaria GPS , June 2008 -present 

Zelensky, Volodymyr President of Ukraine, May 2019 -present 299 

APPENDIX B: ABBREVI ATIONS AND COMMON TE RMS 

AntAC Anti -Corruption Action Center 

CDA Chargé d’Affaires / Acting Ambassador 

CIA Central Intelligence Agency 

Chargé d’Affaires Acting Ambassador 

CN Congressional Notification 

COM Chief of Mission 

DAS Deputy Assistant Secretary 

DC Deputies Committee 

DCM Deputy Chief of Mission 

DNI Director of National Intelligence 

DNC Democratic National Committee 

DOD Department of Defense 

DOE Department of Energy 

DOJ Department of Justice 

DOS Department of State 

DSCA Defense Security Cooperation Agency 

EDI European Deterrence Initiative 

ERI European Reassurance Initiative 

FBI Federal Bureau of Investigation 

FMF Foreign Military Financing 

FMS Foreign Military Sales 

FSB Russian Federal Security Service 

IC Intelligence Community 

ICIG Inspector General for the Intelligence C ommunity 

IO Bureau of International Organizations 

IG Inspector General 

Legatt Legal Attaché 

LNG Liquefied Natural Gas 

MEMCON Memorandum of Conversation 

MLAT Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty 

NABU National Anti -Corruption Bureau of Ukraine 

NBU National Bank of Ukraine 

NDAA National Defense Authorization Act 

NSC National Security Council 

ODNI Office of the Director of National Intelligence 

OFAC Office of Foreign Assets Control 

OMB Office of Management and Budget 

OSCE Organization for Security and C o-operation in Europe 

OVP Office of the Vice President 

PAC Political Action Committee 

PC Principals Committee 

PCC Policy Coordination Committee 

PDB President’s Daily Briefing 

PDM Presidential Decision Memorandum 300 

PGO Prosecutor General’s Office 

SAPO Specialized Anti -Corruption Prosecutor’s Office 

SBU Security Service of Ukraine 

SDN Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons 

SMM Special Monitoring Mission 

SOC Summary of Conclusions 

SVTC Secure Video Teleconference 

TCG Trilateral Con tact Group 

UNSCR United Nations Security Council Resolution 

USAI Ukraine Security Assistance Initiative 

USAID United States Agency for International Development 

WHSR White House Situation Room 

YES Yalta European Strategy
