Title: Hillary Clinton Lays Out Economic Vision : CSPAN : August 12, 2016 1:14am-2:07am EDT : Free Borrow & Streaming : Internet Archive

URL Source: https://archive.org/details/CSPAN_20160812_051400_Hillary_Clinton_Lays_Out_Economic_Vision

Markdown Content:
1:14 am

lecture. she speaks of politics and prose in washington, d.c.. and at 10 p.m. eastern, afterwards with a syndicated radio host, arguing that the u.s. is entering into two countries, which he calls coastal america and flyover america. you cannot run a country you have never been to.she is interviewed by guy benson, town hall little editor. ways that notd 70 just some with people in flyover nation, although i think they are targeted, you have the right in the left that are pulling them in one direction or another. and it goes back to we need you to show up a certain way, or support this particular issue. but that divide is kind of scary, because now politics is affecting whether or not we will equally defend ourselves against a major threat. >> on sunday at 7 p.m. eastern,

1:15 am

a journalist looks at how some policies are having a negative impact on the lives of black female students in her book, the proliferation of black girls in school. she argues that schools and other institutions are supposed to help are the very places criminalizing black girls. go to book tv for the complete schedule. c-span.org, you can watch our public affairs and political programming anytime at your convenience on your laptop, desktop, or mobile device. go to our home page, c-span.org, and click on the library bar. you can type in a speaker, the sponsor of the bill, even an event topic. you can click on the programming you would like to watch, or a fine your search with our many tools. if you are looking for our most current program you don't want to search the library, our homepage has many programs ready for your immediate viewing, such as today's washington journal.

1:16 am

c-span.org is a public service of your cable or satellite provider. check it out at c-span.org. >> in a campaign stop in warren, michigan, hillary clinton outlined her position on international trade deal. she criticizes donald trump for being pessimistic and lacking, in her words, credible solutions. remarks are 45 minutes. [applause] clinton: thank you so much. thank you. i have to tell you i am thrilled to be here for a number of reasons. first, it is wonderful to be back in michigan. and you can really feel the energy and dynamism that is driving this state's come back.

1:17 am

in detroit, we have got new businesses opening, neighborhoods like midtown and eastern market are coming back. the auto industry just had it best year ever. [cheers and applause] mrs. clinton: high-tech firms are thriving. the next generation of engineers are getting trained, and here, you are on the front lines of what i believe will be a true manufacturing renaissance in america. [applause] mrs. clinton: i just was given a short but exciting tour by mark and john who were telling me about how this company was started as and for most of its

1:18 am

early history, was an auto supply company. and then in 2000, as the market began to change and some of the auto companies began to realign, they were faced with a choice. we all face choices in life, don't we? and this company could have just said, hey, you know, our business will not be what it was. we have got to just pulled up and let's just kind of quit. but that is not what happened here. and what happened here is what can happen across america. you are in now what is largely an aerospace company. [applause] mrs. clinton: and because of the workforce and the work ethic,

1:19 am

and the commitment of the future, you are seeing the future unfold. so, i got to see what is happening here, to help build rocket that is going to go from macomb to mars. [cheers and applause] mrs. clinton: i saw the two halves of an f 35 nosecone . waiting to be put together. i talked with some of the workers about the absolute perfection required to do the work. and what i believe with all my heart is what is happening here can happen in so many places if we put our minds to it, if we supported mass manufacturing, if we are the kind of country that once again understands how

1:20 am

important it is to build things. we are builders. and we need to get back to building. [applause] so, we are making progress. none of us can be satisfied , until the economic seeing intion we are some parts of michigan reaches every community, but it is inspiring to see this combination of old-fashioned hard work and cutting-edge innovation. and i know my opponents in the election was here in michigan about week ago and it was like he was in a different place. when he visited detroit on monday, he talked only of failure, poverty, and crime. he is missing so much about what makes michigan great. [cheers and applause] and the same is true when it

1:21 am

comes to our country. he describes america as an embarrassment. he said, and i quote, we are becoming a third world country. look around you, my friend. go visit with the workers building rockets. that does not happen in third world countries. [applause] now, we have a lot of urgent and important work to do and that is what i'm going to talk about today. all the people i have met throughout this campaign really prove how wrong this negative, pessimistic view is. america's best days are still ahead of us, if we make up our minds to actually go out and make that happen. [applause] just consider our assets. we have the most dynamic, productive workforce in the

1:22 am

world, bar none. [applause] we have the most innovative businesses, top colleges, universities, community colleges, training programs in the world, and the best science and technology. we have enormous capacity for clean energy production. we are resilient, determined, hard-working. there is nothing america cannot do, if we do it together. and i know this because this is how i was raised. and i don't think mr. trump understands any of it. he has not offered any credible solutions to the very real economic challenges we face. now, those challenges emerged long before the great recession and they have persisted through our recovery. there is too much inequality,

1:23 am

too little upward mobility. it is just too hard to get ahead today. but there are common sense things that your government could do that would give americans more opportunities to succeed. why don't we do it? because powerful special interests and the tendency to put ideology ahead of political progress have led to gridlock in congress. and how can you not be frustrated and even angry, when you see nothing getting done? and a lot of people feel know -- no one is on their back. that is not how it is supposed to be in america. if i am fortunate enough to be your president, i have your back every single day that i serve. [cheers]

1:24 am

and my mission in the white house will be to make the economy work for everyone, and not just those at the top. this is personal for me. i am the product of the american middle class. i was born in chicago, raised in a suburb. but my grandfather worked at the scranton lace mill in scranton, pennsylvania for 50 years. and because he worked hard, my dad was able to go to college and eventually start his own small business, and send me out into the world to follow my own dreams. no matter how far those dreams have taken me, i have always remembered i am the daughter of a small business owner and the granddaughter of a factory owner and proud of both. [cheers]

1:25 am

so, here is what i want, i want every american family to be able to tell the same story. if you work hard, do your part, you should be able to give your children all of the opportunities they deserve. that is the basic bargain of america. now, whether we will be able to renew that bargain on even better terms for the 21st depends in large measure on the outcome of this election. so, here are four questions i hope the american people will ask of both candidates. and that the answers should help make your choice in november crystal clear. first, which candidate has a real plan to create good paying jobs? second, who will restore fairness to the economy and ensure that those at the top pay

1:26 am

their fair share of taxes. [applause] third, who will really go to bat for working families? fourth, who can bring people together to deliver the results that will make a difference in your lives? [cheers and applause] now, i hope that after giving a fair hearing to both sides, you will join the millions of people across our country supporting this campaign, not just democrats, but a growing number of republicans and independents , as well. now, when it comes to creating jobs, i would argue it's not even close. even conservative experts say trump's agenda will pull our economy back into a recession.

1:27 am

and according to an independent analysis by former economic adviser to senator john mccain, if you add up all of the ideas from cutting taxes for the wealthy and corporations, to starting a trade war with china , to deporting millions of hard-working immigrants, the result would be a loss of 3.4 million jobs. [booing] now, by contrast, the same analyst found that our plan, the economy would create more than 10 million new jobs. [applause] so, let me tell you how we would do that. i believe every american willing to work hard should be able to find a job that provides dignity, pride, and a decent pay

1:28 am

that can support a family. so, starting on day one, we will work with both parties to pass the biggest investment in new, good paying jobs, since world war ii. [cheers] we will put americans to work, building and modernizing our roads, bridges, tunnels, railways, ports, airports. [applause] we are way overdue for this. my friends, we are living off of the investments made by our parents and grandparents generation. we will also help cities like detroit and flint connect underserved neighborhoods to opportunity-expanding affordable housing. and we will repair schools and

1:29 am

failing water systems as well. [cheers and applause] you know, i happen to think we should be ambitious. while we're at it, we should connect every household in america to broadband by the year 2020. [cheers and applause] it is astonishing to me how many places in america, not way far away from cities, but in cities, and near cities, that do not have access to broadband. and that disadvantages kids, who are asked to do homework using the internet, 5 million of them live at homes without access to the internet. so, you talk about the achievement gap, it starts right there. and let's build a cleaner and more resilient power grid with enough renewable energy to power every home in our country as well. [applause]

1:30 am

some country is going to be the clean energy superpower of the 21st century, and create millions of jobs and businesses. it will probably be either china, germany, or america. i want it to be us. we have the technology. we should make it and use it and exported. and it will help grow our economy. and here is something you do not always hear enough of from democrats. a big part of our plan will be unleashing the power of the private sector to create more jobs at a higher pay. and that means, for us, creating an infrastructure bank to get private funds off the sidelines and complement our private

1:31 am

investment. $25 billion in government seed funding could unlock more than $250 billion and really get our country moving on our infrastructure plans. and we are going to invest $10 callingin what we are make it in america partnership to support american manufacturing and recommit research that can create entire new industries. when mark and john were given me the tour i was talking to and workers along the way and asking them were some of the precision machinery came from that is being used here, it is what i hear all over the country. germany, japan, italy. i want to bring that precision manufacturing back to the united states. there is no reason we cannot

1:32 am

begin to make those machines ourselves and supply the rest of the world, instead of buying from somewhere else. [applause] let's also expand incentives like the new market tax credit that can bring businesses, government, and communities together to create good jobs and places that will be left out and left behind. from neglected neighborhoods in detroit and flint, to logging country, coal country, native american communities, rural areas, ravaged by addiction and loss jobs, to industrial regions hollowed out when factories closed. as president, i will also make a major push to empower small businesses and entrepreneurs. [applause] with new national initiatives to cut red tape at every level and

1:33 am

expand access to credit, especially through community banks and credit unions. i will propose a new plan to dramatically simplify tax filing for small businesses. [applause] right now, the smallest businesses, the kind my dad had, and it was a really small business, spent 20 times more per employee to prepare their taxes, compared to larger companies. it should be as easy as printing out a bank statement. let's free entrepreneurs to do what they do best. innovate, grow and hire. [applause] as mark said, this company started because of a drive down a road and thinking about it and talking about it and see one of the old oldsmobile future mx, not only do ihey,

1:34 am

have a dream, i have a name. and in america if you can dream , it, you should be able to build it. we will get back to doing that. [cheers and applause] now, donald trump has a different view. he has made a career out of stiffing small businesses, from atlantic city to las vegas. there are companies that were left hanging, because he refused to pay their bills. a lot of those companies scraped together what they could to pay their employees, and many of them put their businesses at risk and some of them ended up taking bankruptcies. it was not because trump could not pay them, it is because he would not pay them. and that is why i take it personally. my dad ran a printing plant. he had two really long tables.

1:35 am

he printed fabric for draperies. he would lay out the fabric and then would take a silkscreen and he would go down the table and put the silkscreen down, take the squeegee, go across the screen, lifted up, go down, all the way at the end and that he would start at the other table. he worked hard. and then when he finished, he would load up the fabric, put it in his car, and take it to the business that had ordered it. maybe a restaurant or a hotel or some office. he expected to be paid when he showed up. he did the work. he paid for the supplies, for the labor the often hired to help him on big jobs. he expected to be paid. i cannot imagine what would've happened to my father and his business if he had gotten a contract from trump.

1:36 am

and showing up and submitting his bill, and being told we are not going to pay and if you do not like it, sue us. my father could never have sued a big organization like that. i just don't understand it. i have met all kinds of workers, painters, plumbers, i have met small businesses that provided pianos and glass and marble, all of whom were denied payment, and after going back time and again and being told, maybe we will pay you $.50 on the dollar, it is not how we do business in america. so, we have got to create more good jobs that are going to help more people. for example, our modern service economy is empowering consumers with more choices and greater flexibility, but we do have to empower the workers in our service sector. the people taking care of our

1:37 am

children and our parents, they deserve a good wage and good benefits and a secure retirement. [applause] and it is crucial that every american have access to the education and skills they need to get the jobs in the future. so, we will fight to make college tuition-free for the middle-class and debt-free for everyone. [cheers and applause] we will also liberate millions of people who already have student debt, by making it easier to refinance and repay what you owe as a portion of your income. so, you do not have to pay more then you can afford. it is just not right donald trump can ignore his debt but students and families cannot refinance their debt. and here's something else that i

1:38 am

really want to emphasize. because i don't think anybody in america is talking about this enough. and that is a four-year degree should not be the only path to a good job in america. [cheers] you should be able to learn a skill, practice a trade, make a good living doing it. so many americans have the talent and will to succeed, whether their kid is right at a high school or older people displaced by automation and outsourcing. and for too long, big promises about the power of training and re-training have not delivered like they should. it doesn't help anyone to be trained for a job that does not exist. so, here is what we are going to do. we will support high-quality union training programs.

1:39 am

we will propose new tax credits, to encourage more companies to offer paid apprenticeship that let you earn while you learn. we will do more, including a national campaign, to dignify skills training, across the board. i think we have to reverse what has become a kind of commonplace view, which is everybody needs to go to college. well, in fact, more than half of the jobs that will be available in 2020 do not require a college four-year degree. for welders and machinists and health technicians and so many others, let's get the word out, there are really good jobs for people right now, and there will be more in the future if you get the skills in high school, at a

1:40 am

community college, apprenticeship program or other training program. [cheers] and i want to acknowledge the great role the community college county hasomb played, in working with companies like this one to make sure people do have the skills. i imagine some of you might be thinking that all sounds good, but what about trade? after all, trump talks about it all the time. well, let's start with this, it is true too often passed trade deals have been sold to the american people with rosie scenarios that did not pan out. those promises now ring hollow in many communities across michigan and our country that have seen factories close and jobs disappear.

1:41 am

too many companies lobbied for trade deals, so they could sell product abroad but then they instead moved abroad and sold back into the united states. it is also true that china and other countries have cheated the system for too long. enforcement, particularly during the bush administration, has been too lax. investments at home that would make us more competitive have been completely blocked in congress. and american workers and communities have paid the price. but the answer is not to rant and rave or cut ourselves off from the other side of the world, that would end up killing even more jobs. the answer is to finally make trade work for us, not against us. so, my message to every worker in michigan and across america is this, i will stop any trade

1:42 am

deal that kills jobs or holds down wages, including the transpacific partnership. [cheers] i oppose it now, i'll oppose it after the election, and as president. as a senator from new york, i fought to defend new york manufacturers and steelmakers from unfair chinese trading practices. and i opposed the only multilateral trade deal that came before the senate while i was there because it did not meet my high bar. as secretary of state i fought hard for american businesses to get a fair shot around the world and to stop underhanded trading practices like currency manipulation and theft of intellectual property. so, as president i will stand up

1:43 am

to china and anyone else who tries to take advantage of american workers and companies. [applause] and i am going to ramp up enforcement by appointing for the first time, a chief trade prosecutor. i will triple the number of enforcement officers, and when countries break the rules, we will not hesitate to impose targeted tariffs. [cheers] now, mr. trump may talk of big game on trade. but his approach is based on fear, not strength. fear that we cannot compete with the rest of the world, even when the rules are fair. fear that our country has no choice but to hide behind walls.

1:44 am

if team usa was as fearful as donald trump, michael phelps and simone biles would be cowering in the locker room afraid to come out to compete. [cheers] instead, they are winning gold medals. america is not afraid to compete. right now, thousands of michigan companies are exporting billions of dollars of products around the world. we want them to sell even more and create even more jobs here at home. but corporations should not abandon profitable operations in the united states to move abroad just to give shareholders a quicker return. ceo's, a bigger bonus and unions a weaker hand to play.

1:45 am

eets --e before the tw [laughter] [applause] about how he is really the one who will put america first and trade, let's remember where trump makes many of his own products, because it sure is not america. [cheers] he has made trump ties in china, mexico, suit in instead of michigan. he says is not possible to make these things in america. and that is just wrong. so, we created a website. hillaryclinton.com/makeithere. on it, we list 100 places across the united states that are already producing similar goods. now, one positive thing trump

1:46 am

could do to make america great again is to actually make great things in america again. now, let us look at the second question. which candidate will fight for fairness? and this is an urgent need. we need to grow the economy and make it fairer. the tide is not rising fast enough and certainly not lifting all boats. since the crash, too many of the gains have gone to the top 1%. the rules and incentives in our system reward companies for putting short-term stock prices along long time investment in workers, equipment and research. while corporate profits are at near record high, paychecks for most people have barely budge. incomes are not growing to keep up with the cost of living. like prescription drugs and childcare. i believe every employee to the ceo suite and factory floor

1:47 am

contributes to a business of success. so, everybody should share in the rewards. especially, those putting in long hours for little pay. so, i am proposing a new tax credit to encourage shared profits with workers. more broadly, we will fight for a more progressive or patriotic tax code that puts american jobs first. right now, when a corporation outsources jobs in production, it could write off the cost. we must stop that. and must make them pay back any tax break they ever received them any level of government in our country. [cheers] and for those that move their headquarters overseas to avoid paying their fair share of

1:48 am

taxes, they will have to pay a new exit tax. so, if they want go, they will have to pay to go. [cheers] wall street corporations and the super rich should finally pay their fair share of taxes. that is why i support the so-called buffet rural. because multibillionaires should not be able to pay a lower tax rate than their secretaries. [applause] we should also add a new tax on multimillionaires. crackdown on tax gaming by corporations. and close the carried interest loophole, something i have advocated for years. now, compare what trump says. now, there is a myth out there that he will stick it to the rich and powerful, because somehow he is really on the side

1:49 am

of the little guy. don't believe it. not when he pledges to rip up basic rules that hold corporations accountable. when he wants to scrap regulations that stop polluters from poisoning the air our children breathe and the water we drink. let insurance companies write their own rules again. trump will roll back the tough rules we have imposed on the financial industry. i will do the opposite. i think we should strengthen those rules so wall street can reck main street again. [applause] trump even wants to abolish the consumer financial protection bureau. a new agency that has already returned more than $11 billion to 25 million americans who were

1:50 am

taken advantage of by corporations. why would you get rid of that? and then, there is his tax plan. he would give trillions to money big corporations. that would explode the national debt and eventually lead to massive cuts in priorities like education, health care, and environmental protection. in his speech on monday, he calls for any tax loophole. let's call it the trump loophole. because it would allow him to pay less than half the current tax rate on income for many of his companies. he would pay a lower rate than millions of middle-class families. one nonpartisan expert at the tax policy center described this plan as a really nice deal, for donald trump.

1:51 am

of course, it is hard to say how nice, because he refuses to do what every other candidate has done and release his tax returns. [applause] but we do know the 400 richest taxpayers in america would get an average tax cut of more than $15 million per year from the trump loophole. and then, there is the estate tax, which donald trump once to eliminate altogether. now, if you believe he is as wealthy as he says, that alone would save the trump family $4 billion. it would do nothing for 99.8% of americans. so, they would get a $4 billion tax cut and 99.8% of americans would get nothing. just think of what we could do

1:52 am

with those $4 billion? we could pay for more than 47,000 veterans to get a four-year college degree. we could provide a years worth of health care to nearly 3 million kids. or we could fund a years worth of federal assistance to law enforcement. i think there are a lot of better way to spend the money. on monday, i'm going to be in scranton, pennsylvania with vice president biden. and he has a saying, don't tell me what you value, show me your budget and i will tell you what you value. well, donald trump wants to give trillions in tax breaks to people like himself. i want to invest it in veterans, our kids, our police officers, and so much more. and you can then draw your own conclusion about values. now, it is true that both of us have proposed to cut taxes for middle-class families.

1:53 am

he is making a big promise, but his advisers have said, he may not stand by them. instead, the tax cuts he doubled down on in his speech in detroit on monday offer trillions to the richest americans and corporations. and what are the differences between donald trump and me? i am telling what i will do come , laying out my plan, and i will stand by them, and want to you to hold me accountable for delivering results. [applause] now, this all reminds me of that old saying, if it sounds too good to be true, it probably is. and that brings us to the third question, which candidate can can you count on to go to bat for workers and working families? it is not enough to pay lip

1:54 am

service to being on your side. we have to recognize how americans actually live and work in the 21st century and then , offer real solutions that make your lives easier. we know that women are now the sole or primary breadwinner in a growing number of families. we know that more americans are cobbling together part-time work or striking out on their own, so we have to make it easier to be good workers, the parents, and good caregivers all at the same time. that is why i have set out a bold vision to make quality, affordable childcare available to all americans and limit the cost to 10% of family income. [applause] on monday, trump offered his first real idea on this topic. because previously, he dismissed concerns about childcare. he said it was not an expensive thing because you just need some blocks and some swings. now, he said he wants to exclude

1:55 am

childcare payments from taxation. his plan was panned from the left, right, and center because it transparently is designed for rich people. like him. he would give wealthy families $.40 on the dollar for their nannies, and little or nothing for millions of hard-working families, trying to afford childcare, so they can get to work and keep the job. [applause] i think, instead, we should expand the child tax credit to provide real relief to tens of millions of working families, struggling with the cost of raising children. the same family that his plan ignores. and that is just a start. because the more we do to help working families, the more the entire economy will benefit. for example, guaranteeing equal

1:56 am

pay will not just increased paychecks for women, it will boost family budgets and get incomes rising across the board. [applause] i don't understand why trump is against that. paid family leave well not only make life easier for moms and dads, it will keep skilled, talented americans in the workforce and grow our economy. that is why every other advance economy already has it. raising the federal minimum wage will not just put more money in the pockets of low income families, it means they will spend more at the businesses in their neighborhood. [applause] this is something that even the original automakers understood way back at the beginning of the

1:57 am

20th century when they decided to pay the unbelievable sum of five dollars per day to auto workers. and when they were criticized by other businesses, they have the best answer, we want people to be able to buy our cars. this is economics 101. we need to get incomes and wages rising, and it will help the whole economy grow and be fairer. [applause] and protecting and expanding social security does not just help older americans retire with dignity, it helps to ease burdens on families and communities. and i also believe the same thing about comprehensive immigration reform. we already have millions of people working in the economy and paying 12 billion per year to social security, even though they are undocumented. so, by moving toward reform, we will unleash a lot of new income and growth and level the playing

1:58 am

field, so american workers cannot be taken advantage of because undocumented workers can be exploited by employers, which is one of the reasons we have this disconnect. [applause] finally, strengthening unions does not just serve members, it leads to better pay and benefits and working conditions for all employees. [applause] so, i have also set i will defend and improve the affordable care act. that includes giving americans in every state the choice of a public option health insurance plan. that will help everyone afford coverage. it will strengthen competition and drive down costs. now, these are all causes i have worked on for decades, and i

1:59 am

believe they point to a fundamental truth about the economy. it can seem like zero sum, when you are competing for a job, promotion, or contract if someone wins and loses, but that is not the full picture. if you step back, you can see we are all in this together. if we can grow together, we can all rise together. because, you know what i like to say, we are all stronger together. and that is why the fourth question is key. and it is this, who can bring people together to get any any of this done? right? well, i believe i can because i think i can provide serious, steady leadership that can find common ground to and on it based upon hard but respectful bargaining with the other side. leadership that rises above personal attacks and name-calling, not revels in it. [applause] i just do not think insults and

2:00 am

bullying is how we are to get things done. i don't think that is the appropriate approach for us. i know it is hard to imagine, that there was a time when democrats and republicans actually worked together. i know that is true. [applause] hillary clinton: i did as first lady and secretary of state. it is how we created the children's health care program, which covers 8 million kids. it is how we rebuilt new york after 9/11 and how we passed a treaty reducing the threat from russia's nuclear weapons. so, i am convinced, based on my experience, that we can do this. one of the reasons i asked senator tim kaine to be my running mate is he also has a reputation for working across the aisle to get things done as a mayor and senator. we will use full use of the

2:01 am

white house's power to convene. we look at everyone at the table, not just republicans and democrats. businessmen and experts, but most importantly, americans, like all of you. [applause] hillary clinton: i think there are a lot of great ideas out of america and i want you to have a say in your government. that means we have to get unaccountable money out of politics, overturn citizens united, and expand voting write irights, not restrict them. [applause] hillary clinton: i intend, starting before the election even, to bring together leaders from across our economy from a lot of different places, to talk about jobs and competitiveness, and i hope mark and john can join me, because we need the best ideas out there, making a difference.

2:02 am

we need to pull together. the bottom line is this. i am running for president to build an economy that works for everyone, not just those at the top. [applause] based on whatn: we know from the trump campaign, he wants america to work for him and his friends at the expense of everyone else. he has offered no credible plans to address what working families are up against today, nothing on student loans or the cost of prescription drugs. for farmers or struggling rural communities, nothing to build a new future with clean energy, nothing for cities to overcome the barriers of systemic racism, nothing to create new opportunities for young people, just a more extreme version of the failed theory of trickle-down economics with his own addition of outlandish trumpian ideas that

2:03 am

even republicans reject. [cheers and applause] clinton: as the heard him say in his convention, he may believe that he alone can fix our country, but clearly, he does not know the people of michigan. he does not see the businesses and the labor unions, the local governments, the clergy coming together every day to make things better. so, yes, there is still a long road ahead, but michigan is on the rise, and everyone is contributing. that is america at its best. so, i hope you will stay active and engaged, working together to create jobs and to strengthen your own communities. and i hope you will. work to get out the vote in november because if we -- [cheers and applause] hillary clinton: if we are able to win, i want you all to work

2:04 am

with me to build the kind of progress that america deserves to see. we are going to do this together. we are stronger together. let's go out and build the future. thank you, all. god bless you! [cheers and applause] chanting "hillary"] ain't no mountain high enough enough. ♪iver wide >> c-span's "washington journal," live every day with news and policy issues that impact you. coming up, friday morning, the president of the carolina naacp on his efforts to mobilize people of faith with regards to political issues, like minimum wage and lgbt rights.

2:05 am

the latest on the dnc, reportedlythe by russia. health caretracer, reporter for bloomberg news, talk about the impact the affordable care act is having on insurance providers. be sure to watch "washington journal," live, beginning at 7:00 a.m. eastern. join the discussion. issuesaturday, c-span's of spotlight looks that trade deals, their impact on the economy, jobs, and the presidential election. hillary clinton: we will defend american jobs and american workers by saying "no" to bad trade deals, like the transpacific partnership's and unfair trade practices. donald trump: the state of pennsylvania have lost 1/3 of their manufacturing jobs since

2:06 am

the clintons put china into the wto. >> the program has a look at nafta, the 90 a four free trade agreement between the united states -- the 1984 free trade agreement between the united states, mexico, and canada. experts, markets, and more democracy for our allies. >> a discussion on how the founding fathers viewed trade. >> historically, the united states was not a free-trade nation. for most of american history, the united states is a tariff protected economy. th and an in dep organization of the global trade organization. >> at the time the wto was being negotiated, or its evil smaller 800 more specific rules and regulations. my book would be very

131 Views

info Stream Only

Uploaded by TV Archive on August 12, 2016
