Title: Trump calls Chicago a 'killing field' as he targets city for next federal crackdown

URL Source: https://idahonews.com/news/nation-world/president-trump-calls-chicago-illinois-a-killing-field-as-he-targets-city-for-next-federal-crackdown-mayor-brandon-johnson-governor-pritzker-national-guard-troops-crime

Published Time: 2025-08-25T15:17:34.000-04:00

Markdown Content:
by ALEXX ALTMAN-DEVILBISS | The National News Desk

Mon, August 25th 2025 at 1:17 PM

Updated Mon, August 25th 2025 at 3:04 PM

FILE - Mayor Brandon Johnson responds to an overnight shooting during a news conference at City Hall in the Loop, July 3, 2025. (Ashlee Rezin/Chicago Sun-Times via AP, File)

TOPICS:

Trump Chicago Crime National Guard Crackdown Mayor Johnson Pritzker

WASHINGTON (TNND) — President Donald Trump repeatedly criticized Illinois lawmakers on Monday morning and called Chicago a "killing field" as he threatened to send the National Guard to tackle crime.

"I think Chicago will be our next," Trump told reporters, later adding, "And then we’ll help with New York."

Trump said on Friday that Chicago would likely be the next target for a crackdown on crime similar to the one in Washington, D.C.

He also took aim at Chicago Mayor Brandon Johnson on Truth Social by calling him "incompetent."

Idaho foster care summit focuses on collaboration and reform

“The incompetent Mayor of Chicago just stated that, in DC, where crime has been brought down to almost nothing, there have been no murders in 9 days, something which hasn’t happened in years, and people are safe again, only nine people have been arrested,” Trump wrote. “That is wrong, hundreds of criminals have been held, captured, and arrested, and their guns have been taken away. DC IS SAFE AND BOOMING!!!"

As of Sunday, the White House reported 910 total arrests in D.C.and 101 firearms have been seized since the federal crackdown on Aug. 7.

Johnson responded by calling the move "costly, illegal and unconstitutional."

"The brave men and women who signed up to serve our country did not sign up to Occupy American cities," Johnson told reporters. "This is costly. Illegal and unconstitutional. I'm going to use every single tool that is at my disposal in order to keep the people of the city safe."

Trump also attacked Illinois Gov. JB Pritzker, calling him "corrupt."

“I hate to barge in on a city and then be treated horribly by corrupt politicians and bad politicians, like a guy like Pritzker,” he said.

Pritzker accused Trump of "attempting to manufacture a crisis" in a statement released on Saturday.
