Title: Republicans’ shutdown blame game is fracturing

URL Source: https://www.politico.com/news/2025/09/25/government-shutdown-republican-split-00579533

Published Time: 2025-09-25T04:45-0400

Markdown Content:
Most of those claims are rooted in a Democratic proposal to roll back parts of the Republican-passed domestic policy megabill that Trump signed in July. That law includes new curbs meant to keep noncitizens from accessing public benefits such as Medicaid, as well as other new verification requirements and border security funding.

His arguments on transgender surgeries, however, appear to stem from Democrats’ demand for a permanent extension of Obamacare insurance subsidies that are set to expire at the end of the year and are currently used by more than 20 million Americans.

Five states require insurance plans to cover gender-reassignment surgeries and related health care for transgender enrollees, and top Trump advisers and outside groups argue that a straight extension of the existing federal tax credits would continue taxpayer support for those policies. They believe that argument should be a key GOP focus ahead of the potential shutdown, according to three Trump officials granted anonymity to describe the deliberations.

But some Hill Republicans were confused and caught off-guard by Trump’s focus on transgender politics. It also served to create headaches for a handful of the most vulnerable House Republicans, who are pushing for a one-year clean extension of the insurance subsidies. They include Rep. Jen Kiggans (R-Va.), a co-author of the proposal who has strong backing from House GOP leaders.

The White House further scrambled the GOP strategy late Wednesday when it circulated a draft memo instructing agencies to create plans for mass firings of federal workers if Democrats don’t relent and a shutdown occurs. That alarmed some Hill Republicans who saw it as an unnecessary provocation that, in the words of one, “would give Democrats an excuse to vote against” the GOP-led stopgap — and muddy their message that it was Democrats, not Republicans, who were unreasonable hostage-takers.

House Republican leaders, meanwhile, are much more comfortable hammering Democrats over illegal immigration — an issue they believe has the best chance of keeping their fractious conference united ahead of the looming shutdown. In interviews and social media posts, they’ve conspicuously embraced those arguments while steering clear of the transgender themes some of Trump’s top advisers are keenly focused on.

“House Republicans have already done the job of passing a clean, bipartisan bill to keep the government open,” Johnson posted on X Wednesday. “Now it’s up to Senate Democrats - who have long said shutdowns are bad and hurt people - to vote to fund the American government, or shut it down because they want to restore taxpayer-funded benefits to illegal aliens.”

Some Senate Republicans have also mentioned illegal immigration — such as Sen. John Barrasso of Wyoming, the No. 2 GOP leader, who said last week that “Democrats would rather shut down the government than stop states from paying for free health care for illegal immigrants.” The Senate GOP campaign arm also knocked Democrats in key races, arguing they would vote with Schumer and force “American taxpayers to fund illegal immigrants’ government benefits.”

But Thune and other GOP senators have been most comfortable battling Democrats on process grounds, arguing that there is no reason to hold up a short-term funding patch and potentially shutter federal agencies over the insurance subsidies or any other policy dispute. Thune characterized Democrats’ demands Wednesday as “completely unhinged” in a CNN interview.

Asked about extending the expiring tax credits, Thune reiterated his and Johnson’s position to push off those discussions until later this year.

“It ought to be done in regular order,” he said, without repeating any of Trump’s arguments about transgender surgeries or illegal immigration.

Jeffries on Wednesday said it was Trump who was the “unhinged” one, citing his Truth Social screed Tuesday. He said the GOP has “no path forward” without Democratic cooperation.

“They’re running scared,” he said. “They have no defensible position, and that’s why, unfortunately, they’re marching us to a government shutdown.”
