Title: Macron condemns ‘cocaine train’ conspiracy spread by Russia

URL Source: https://www.thetimes.com/uk/politics/article/cocaine-on-the-train-with-merz-and-starmer-absurd-says-macrons-team-wsmw7qffl

Published Time: 2025-05-12T15:41:26.000Z

Markdown Content:
The French presidency has ridiculed false claims promoted on pro-Russia social media channels that President Macron snorted cocaine with Friedrich Merz, the chancellor of Germany, aboard the train that took them and Sir Keir Starmer to Kyiv at the weekend.

“This fake news is being spread by France’s enemies, both abroad and at home. We must remain vigilant against manipulation,” the Élysée Palace posted on X after images were shared online of Macron picking up a used tissue from a table where he was sitting with the British prime minister and Merz.

According to accounts that circulate conspiracy theories, Macron was trying to hide a crumpled bag of cocaine while Merz was handling a white cocaine spoon when cameramen were allowed to enter the train’s conference saloon.

The Élysée Palace shared images mocking the Russian conspiracy

High-definition video of the scene made clear that Macron was actually removing a crumpled tissue and the alleged “cocaine spoon” was a plastic coffee stirrer.

The Élysée added: “When European unity becomes inconvenient, disinformation goes so far as to make a simple tissue look like drugs.”

The German government called the claims “absurd” while Merz’s party, the CDU, added on X: “It is indeed just a tissue. Many sides are currently trying to influence public opinion through disinformation campaigns. Enemies of our democracy are specifically trying to weaken European unity and social cohesion.”

The three leaders were travelling through Ukraine from Poland on the night train to meet President Zelensky and Donald Tusk, the Polish prime minister, on Saturday morning. In Kyiv they challenged Russia to declare a 30-day ceasefire by Monday, which President Putin rejected.

The Russian foreign ministry boosted the cocaine story on Sunday, when Maria Zakharova, its spokeswoman, posted on Telegram that “a Frenchman, an Englishman and a German” had been spotted with cocaine paraphernalia on a train.

“The fate of Europe is being decided by utterly (drug) dependent individuals,” she wrote. “It’s as if the Almighty Himself is lifting the veil on this putrid spectacle.”

One of the social media posts targeting Macron

Repeating a longstanding Kremlin claim, she called Zelensky an “unstable cocaine addict” and claimed that a western diplomat had told her that drug use was normal among European leaders.

Such claims are a staple of the false news circulated on social media by Kremlin-backed accounts. One French-language pro-Russia account commented: “Coke is going to take decisions on the third world war.”

This month France said that the GRU, Russia’s military intelligence service, had stepped up a social media and cyber offensive that it has been waging against the Macron administration since 2017.

“It infiltrates French digital networks with two aims: collecting intelligence for the benefit of the Kremlin and destabilising our society by creating distrust,” the foreign ministry said.

Macron has been personally targeted with online campaigns initiated or fanned by Russia, according to the French. These promote false rumours that he is homosexual, that his wife Brigitte was born a man and that he is part of a corrupt worldwide cabal backed by George Soros, the financier.

The accounts that spread the claims about cocaine use have now claimed that the Élysée has ordered the news media to “shut it down” as a story.
