Title: Lincoln Chafee's unconventional political career

URL Source: https://turnto10.com/politics/a-history-of-lincoln-chafee

Published Time: 2015-06-03T17:32:25.000-04:00

Markdown Content:
by FRANK COLETTA, NBC 10 NEWS

Wed, June 3rd 2015 at 5:32 PM

Updated Tue, January 7th 2020 at 9:51 PM

Lincoln Chafee (WJAR File Photo)

TOPICS:

Centrism In The United States Farriers John Chafee Legislatures Lincoln Chafee Lincoln Chafee 2016 Presidential Campaign Politicians Rhode Island Democratic Party

Lincoln Chafee, nicknamed "Linc," is one of the sons of legendary Rhode Island Gov. and U.S. Sen. John Chafee.

But politics was not Chafee's original career track.

After college, he became a farrier. He shoed horses in Montana and worked at harness racetracks.

His political career began in 1985 as a delegate to the Rhode Island Constitutional Convention.

7.3K

Food bank braces for increased demand amid potential SNAP benefits freeze

From there, he became the only Republican on the City Council in what was then Rhode Island's second largest city -- Warwick -- and then Warwick mayor.

When Sen. John Chafee died in office in 1999, Chafee was appointed to his father's Senate seat, and was elected senator a year later.

On Capitol Hill, he became known as the most liberal of Republican senators, as he was the only GOP senator to vote against authorizing the use of force in Iraq.

He did not vote to re-elect President George W. Bush in 2004. Instead, he wrote in the name of George H.W. Bush.

His dissatisfaction with his political party led him to say publicly he wasn't sure he wanted to stay a Republican, while Rhode Island voters weren't sure they wanted him to stay in the Senate. They voted him out in 2006, voting in the current liberal Democrat Sheldon Whitehouse.

Chafee left the Republican Party in 2007 and became an independent.

After several years as a lecturer at his alma mater, Brown University, Chafee was elected Rhode Island governor in 2011 and served one term, joining the Democratic Party while in office.

He ran as a Democrat in a short-lived campaign for president in 2015.

Chafee moved to the state of Wyoming in 2019 and joined the Libertarian Party.

Chafee was never a conventional politician. His honesty had a tendency to be startling at times.

In a "10 News Conference" interview program, he admitted, when asked, that he had used cocaine as a youth. That was before it became common for public officials to make admissions of that type.

He once called Republican vice presidential candidate Sarah Palin a "cocky wacko."

As governor, his positions were sometimes not conventional, or in agreement, with much of the Rhode Island public. He angered many when he refused to call the Christmas tree at the State House a Christmas tree. Rather, he called it a holiday tree.

Chafee claimed some accomplishments as governor, helping to reduce the state's high unemployment rate and helping to reform the state employee pension system to prevent it from going bankrupt.
