Title: 

URL Source: https://www.pchrd.dost.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2024/03/2023-Annual-Report.pdf

Published Time: Wed, 27 Mar 2024 00:43:20 GMT

Markdown Content:
# ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

# Transforming Healthcare through Digitalization 03 07 09 11 29 97 INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY AND TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMENT 103 RESEARCH TO POLICY TRANSLATION 107 HERDIN 123 NATIONAL COLLABORATIONS 129 INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATIONS 109 COMMUNICATIONS 61 47 

# 27 01 148 ANNEXES ABOUT PCHRD 

MESSAGES EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR’S REPORT 2023 AT A GLANCE PCHRD 41st ANNIVERSARY PNHRS TUKLAS LUNAS DIGITAL AND FRONTIER TECHNOLOGIES FOR HEALTH DISASTER RISK REDUCTION AND CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN HEALTH 

# 71 95 121 137 139 

# RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING RESEARCH UTILIZATION COLLABORATIONS FINANCIAL OVERVIEW INSIDE PCHRD 

19 FUNCTIONAL FOODS OMIC TECHNOLOGIES FOR HEALTH HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT AWARDS DIAGNOSTICS NUTRITION AND FOOD SAFETY BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING FOR HEALTH MENTAL HEALTH RE-EMERGING AND EMERGING DISEASES 35 65 73 79 51 39 53 43 58 83 BALIK SCIENTIST PROGRAM 91 ETHICS 87 REGIONAL HEALTH RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT CONSORTIA (RHRDC) 

# Contents The Philippine Council for Health Research and Development (PCHRD) is one of the three sectoral councils of the Department of Science and Technology (DOST). It is a forward-looking, partnership-based national body responsible for coordinating and monitoring research activities in the country. The DOST-PCHRD provides support at every stage of health research. In collaboration with international partners and local partners through the Philippine National Health Research System (PNHRS), the Council is committed to advance health research in the Philippines. 

## DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 

# Philippine Council for Health Research and Development 

# VISION MISSION CORE VALUES QUALITY POLICY 

The DOST-PCHRD as the recognized lead provider of research-based solutions and innovations to address health system needs by 2028. We are committed to serve, within the highest standards of professionalism, within our core competency and available resources, in accordance to customer requirements, and in adherence to applicable requirements and towards continual improvement, the following: • formulation of strategies, policies, plans, and programs for S&T in health; • programming and allocation of government funds, and generation of external funds for R&D; and • monitoring of R&D projects. As the national coordinating body for health research, we provide central direction, leadership and coordination of health research activities. To achieve this, we are committed to do the following: • Formulate agenda, plans, policies, and strategies for health research • Mobilize resources to support health research • Develop and strengthen capacity for health research • Support the development of affordable, accessible,and quality S&T-based solutions and innovations • Ensure the dissemination and utilization of health research outputs • Monitor and evaluate health research activities • Establish linkages and partnerships with local and international organizations • Promote good governance among health research organizations through efficient, effective, transparent, and ethical health research management system. 

Passion for excellence and innovation in public service 

Culture of teamwork and collaboration 

High regard for work ethics and integrity 

Responsive personal effectiveness 

Dynamic involvement in quality management system 

# Leading the coordination and monitoring of health research in the Philippines 

> PCHRD ANNUALREPORT 2023

1

> ABOUT THE COUNCIL

2The year 2023 called for renewed commitment to support the attainment of the country’s long-term vision, the AmBisyon Natin 2040, where all Filipinos are envisioned to enjoy strongly rooted, comfortable, and secure lives. With the approval of the Philippine Development Plan 2023-2028, DOST-PCHRD charted new directions for greater impact and clearer outcomes. The Philippine National Health Research System (PNHRS), transitioned into a new administration and alongside this transition, the PNHRS Strategy Map and Plans for 2023-2028, signifying the renewal of a dynamic and operational PNHRS network in the coming years, was crafted. The DOST-PCHRD also unveiled the National Unified Health Research Agenda (NUHRA) 2023-2028 which provides direction for health research and development and guide for better decision-making among health research generators, funders, and end-users. Aligned with the DOST’s mantra, #OneDOST4U, which signifies working as one in forwarding scientific and technological (S&T) advancements, the collaborative initiatives of the Council scored a couple of wins this year, proving that staunch partnerships bring significant results. Since 2012, the partnership with the Department of Health (DOH) has continued to foster, starting with the Health System Research Management (HSRM) and Advancing Health through Evidence-Assisted Decisions (AHEAD) programs, and now with another collaboration for the Research-driven Epidemiological Advancements and Catalysts for Health (REACH) and Pharmaceutical Division programs. Since the start of the partnership, the DOST-PCHRD has managed around 200 DOH projects worth around 1.2 billion pesos. I am very pleased that our partnership with the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation has continuously grown to ensure the effective implementation of Universal Health Care and to further improve the national healthcare system by providing evidence through research. The efforts to bridge the gap between technology generators and potential partners for eventual transfer, adoption, or commercialization of new health technologies is likewise commendable. I am grateful for the initiatives of DOST-PCHRD on science communication, which is one of the priorities of this administration. The launch of the HeaRT (health research and technology) for the Filipino campaign signifies a strengthened thrust for research dissemination. True to its name, the campaign showcases health research and technology developed by Filipinos, for Filipinos. I am proud of the many achievements of DOST-PCHRD in 2023. This annual report is a reaffirmation of its commitment in leading the direction of Philippine health research. With the leadership it has displayed in the last 41 years, I am confident that the Council’s future initiatives will soon bring forth a better and healthier lives for the Filipinos. One with the DOST, continue providing solutions and opening opportunities to every Filipino through science, technology, and innovation. Again, congratulations and more power to DOST-PCHRD! 

# Message from the DOST SECRETARY DR. RENATO U. SOLIDUM, JR. 

Secretary Department of Science and Technology 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

4

# "With the leadership it has displayed in the last 41 years, I am confident that the Council’s future initiatives will soon bring forth a better and healthier lives for the Filipinos. " As we reflect on the achievements of the Department of Science and Technology - Philippine Council for Health Research and Development (DOST-PCHRD) throughout the transformative year of 2023, I am filled with gratitude and pride for the strides we have made in advancing Health R&D in our country. In 2023, DOST-PCHRD opened its doors to 229 proposals during the R&D Call for Proposals, indicative of the active engagement and commitment of our research community in identifying and addressing pressing health issues. The influx of proposals in health research reflects not only the wealth of ideas within the Filipino research community but also the urgency of addressing health challenges through evidence-based and innovative approaches. The DOST-Science for Change Program (S4CP), established to create opportunities in advancing science, technology and innovation in the country, 

# Message from the DOST Undersecretary for Research and Development 

In addition to these remarkable achievements, I want to highlight DOST-PCHRD’s contributions to R&D communications. The emphasis on science communication in health and health R&D is particularly crucial in aligning with the broader goals of DOST. The DOST-PCHRD's dedication to science communication not only enhances the visibility of health research but also contributes significantly to the translation of scientific knowledge into actionable policies and practices, thereby positively influencing public health outcomes. Finally, I want to express my deepest appreciation to each member of the DOST-PCHRD team, our esteemed partners, and collaborators for your dedication and hard work. Together, we have not only made significant strides in health R&D, but have also sown the seeds for a healthier and more innovative future for the Philippines. Thank you for your unwavering commitment to the health and prosperity of our nation. PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

5

also witnessed a surge of enthusiasm with 24 research proposals under health, received and facilitated by DOST-PCHRD. By providing financial resources, technical expertise, and a conducive environment for research, DOST empowers researchers to transform their proposals into actionable projects. In health research, PCHRD significantly facilitates the translation of scientific ideas into tangible interventions, technologies, or policies that can directly impact public health. In 2023, we proudly welcomed 19 Balik Scientists, with 10 having completed their engagements. The Balik Scientist Program is not merely a program; it is a testament to our dedication to harnessing the intellectual wealth of our scientists abroad, fostering collaboration, and driving progress in our own R&D landscape. By welcoming and supporting returning Filipino scientists, DOST-PCHRD not only enriches the local research landscape but also paves the way for a more robust, collaborative, and globally connected R&D ecosystem. 

DR. LEAH J. BUENDIA 

Undersecretary for Research and Development Department of Science and Technology 

# "By providing financial resources, technical expertise, and a conducive environment for research, DOST empowers researchers to transform their proposals into actionable projects." EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR’S REPORT 

It is with pride that I present to you the 2023 Annual Report of the Department of Science and Technology - Philippine Council for Health Research and Development (DOST-PCHRD). This publication compiles our achievements for the year, and our stories towards our continuing strides of making lives better for the Filipino people through health research and development. Every year, we strive to expand our support for health research, forge fruitful and stronger partnerships, capacitate our researchers, and translate research outputs to solutions that are responsive to the needs of our communities. To provide an overview of our achievements, this year we utilized more than 508 million pesos for research and development projects, 86 million pesos for capacity building activities, and 56 million pesos for S&T services. Aside from these, we were 

To all of our partners, stakeholders, and the Filipino community: 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

8

DR. JAIME C. MONTOYA 

Executive Director, PCHRD Lead Coordinator, PNHRS 

# "Every year, we strive to expand our support for health research, forge fruitful and stronger partnerships, capacitate our researchers, and translate research outputs to solutions that are responsive to the needs of our communities." 

also able to allocate more than 50 million pesos for health research activities, derived from the support given by our partners. Our growth in the field continues to be notable across our supported projects under our priority research programs. Consistent with the previous year, our Re-emerging and Emerging Diseases or RED program received the biggest allocation in terms of combined funding from the DOST and the PCHRD. Under this program, we continued our thrust to establish the Virology and Vaccine Institute of the Philippines (VIP) in partnership with the DOST-Industrial Technology Development Institute (ITDI). In the field of drug discovery and development, we built on years of R&D progress exploring promising herbal and drug candidates with the support of our 29 Tuklas Lunas partners. In fact, this year saw the successful launch of the kadios-based product line with a brand name, Skivios, which offers skin products such as serum gel and toner spray born from the efforts of the research team from the University of San Agustin - Tuklas Lunas Development Center (USA-TLDC). We were also able to lead high-impact projects under our Biomedical Engineering for Health Program, such as that of the POWER mobile van which will help enhance access to biomedical products (i.e., assistive devices) at the primary care level. We are also happy to report that our Mental Health R&D Program received a Gold Award from the Healthy Pilipinas Awards for Partners 2023 of the Department of Health (DOH) and the Galing Pook Foundation for its contributions to advancing community health. As you read through this publication, you will gain more insights into how our supported research programs grew in the past year. Likewise, we continue to intensify our efforts in the regions, with the support of the 17 regional health research and development consortia (RHRDC) of the Philippine National Health Research System (PNHRS). In 2023, we disbursed a total of 63.9 million pesos for the operational activities of all 17 regions through the RHRDCs, supported 18 early-career researchers under the Regional Research Fund (RRF) Initiative, conducted a total of 94 trainings, and capacitated a total of 3356 researchers based in the regions. Steadfast in our commitment to further build our capacities in the field, we continue to invest in capacity building programs and initiatives for Filipino researchers. This is done through the provision of scholarship or fellowship programs with our partner institutions both here and abroad. This year, we were able to support and monitor a total of 205 scholars. Among them, 13 have already completed their programs, while 15 have recently just started their endeavors. Our graduates this year include the first batch of scholars under the PhD in Molecular Biomedicine Scholarship Program, implemented in partnership with the University of Trieste and Fondazione Italiana Fegato in Italy: Dr. Loraine Kay D. Cabral and Dr. Noel C. Salvoza. Reiterating the critical importance of adhering to the highest ethical standards in conducting health research, we continued to work with the Philippine Health Research Ethics Board (PHREB) for the accreditation of research ethics committees (RECs). A total of 45 RECs were accredited in 2023: 17 in level 1; 15 in level 2; and 13 in level 3. Moving forward to advancing research utilization, we were able to mobilize more than 40 million pesos of funding support for technology transfer initiatives and more than six million pesos for research dissemination activities. This covered various endeavors, such as that of Filipino startups for the Telepainfree for real time treatment to patients experiencing body aches and pain; HOCLOMAC for safe and effective disinfectant using accessible raw materials; and the PlusPal for integrated HIV service delivery. Our Health Research and Development Information Network (HERDIN) recorded 4,412 new articles and 496,252 website visits providing access to timely and reliable health research information. We also conducted a total of 10 Talakayang HeaRTBeat press conference sessions, providing a platform for conversation between our researchers, the media, and the general public on diverse health research-related topics. Our initiatives to heighten our presence online led to a significant increase in following for our official Facebook page, which now has over 83,000 followers. Building on our Making Your Life Better campaign, this year we introduced our HeaRT for the Filipino campaign, which carries the tagline: “Your health at the heart of research.” These are a few of our achievements this year. As you read through this publication, it is our hope to impart our story and include you in our journey of working towards achieving better health for our communities. To all our partners, the people who work behind our successes, we thank you for your continuing support and dedication to the field. To the Filipino people – it is our commitment and privilege to serve you. RESEARCH PROGRAM MANAGEMENT Completed Ongoing New 43 50 508M 29 

funds utilized 

MENTAL HEALTH R&D PROGRAM GOLD AWARD (HEALTHY PILIPINAS AWARDS FOR PARTNERS 2023) NEW SCHOLARS 9 4Local Foreign RESEARCH ETHICS COMMITTEES ACCREDITED 

PUBLICATIONS LAUNCHED 

# 3REGIONAL RESEARCH FUND LAUNCHED REGIONAL CONSORTIA SUPPORTED 

# 18 48 11.607M disbursed funds disbursed funds early career researchers Secured RRF Ongoing projects Php 1st Batch of PhD in Molecular Biomedicine Scholars Graduated Level 1: 17 Level 2: 15 Level 3: 13 BALIK SCIENTIST 

Completed Engagements Continuing Engagements 18 17 21 Policy recommendations formulated SUPPORT TO RESEARCH DISSEMINATION Projects Supported 

# followers News releases Advertising space rate 

## Photojournalism Contest Fund released 26 45 6.5M 83k 10 57 20.760M 

> 2023 AT A GLANCE

# Php 1,075 Inquiries served new HERDIN records partnerships established 

# 4,412 

HERDIN website Visits 

# 496,252 9

# LAUNCHED 

Products commercialized 

Bioprinting laboratory for Human skin equivalent fund released 65.456M 

Inaugurated renovated animal lab facility 

# 21 17 

TRAINING SESSIONS CONDUCTED RESEARCHERS TRAINED 

# 94 3356 TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER 

# IPTM 40M funds utilized 2 Teki in Health 6Startup Grant IPROTECH 6Completed Projects PUBLISHED IN THE OFFICIAL GAZETTE 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

9

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

10 PCHRD 

PCHRD 41st ANNIVERSARY 12 

PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 11 

# 41 st To celebrate its journey after 40 years of dedicated service, the DOST-PCHRD bannered the theme “ PCHRD Beyond XL: Transforming Healthcare Through Digitalization,” during its 41st Anniversary celebration on 17 March 2023 at the Philippine International Convention Center (PICC), Pasay City. DOST-PCHRD Executive Director Jaime Montoya opened the celebration with a report on the Council’s accomplishments in the previous year. Highlighted in the presentation was the Council’s support under its Digital and Frontier Technologies for Health (DFTH) where 22 research projects were funded. Some of these technologies included the POWer App, a mobile application for the development of remote screening and early detection of children with mobility impairment, and the LISA Telepresence Robot which enables healthcare workers perform mundane tasks such as delivering documents, samples, or medicines in healthcare facilities remotely. Director Montoya also proudly presented the Council’s efforts in leveraging partnerships to advance health research in the country. One of the engagements is the Newton Agham Program implemented with the United Kingdom government to provide funding for collaborative research between Filipino and British researchers on communicable and non-communicable diseases. For local partnerships, he presented the PhilHealth STUDIES Program implemented with the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PhilHealth) and Advancing Health through Evidence-Assisted Decisions with Health Policy and Systems Research (AHEAD-HPSR) Program with the Department of Health (DOH). Other accomplishments noted were the scholarships, capacity building in ethics, and support to research utilization and dissemination. Following the DOST-PCHRD’s report was a congratulatory message by the DOST Secretary Dr. Renato Solidum, Jr. The Secretary lauded the Council’s efforts and accomplishments, being the backbone of health research and development in the country since 1982. As the demand for sustainable innovations continues to grow, he recognized the Council at the forefront of supporting the discovery of solutions and technological advances by Filipino researchers, for Filipinos. 

# PCHRD Beyond XL: Transforming Healthcare Through Digitalization ANNIVERSARY Zeroing in on the celebration’s theme, keynote speaker Dr. Sidney Yee, founding CEO of Diagnostics Development (DxD) Hub and advisor at Singapore’s A*STAR, Innovation & Enterprise Division, provided insights on the role of health R&D in revolutionizing healthcare by underlining Singapore’s journey in forwarding research, innovation, and enterprise (RIE). Dr. Yee underscored the need to emphasize the importance of digitalization and creating a system that enables its integration in health. “Digitalization is everywhere, it is in everything that we do. How we are able to capitalize on that depends on the tools that we build to enable that. Digitalization is one of the many things that we can do to further improve human lives.” 

Dr. Yee’s message focused on sharing Singapore’s best practices in transforming healthcare with digitalization: 

Also part of the celebration is the launching of the Council’s major programs under its research utilization arm: Health Research Innovation (HeaRTNovation) Hubs Program, and the HeaRT for the Filipino as part of its Communication Campaign. Under the Mental Health R&D Program, three booklets were launched namely: Mental Health Services for Psychosocial Interventions, Treatment Recommendations for Psychosocial Interventions for Referred In-patients, and Quality Mental Health Research in the Philippines. 

“We will continue to expand our programs, spanning the whole spectrum of health research, from basic cutting-edge research to applied researches, to policy and health systems researches, and promote the utilization of health research initiatives to make sure that they will serve the needs of our communities,” said Director Montoya in his message. Following the launchings, a panel discussion on issues on transforming healthcare through digitalization was held. The distinguished panel of speakers included Usec. Jocelle Batapa Sigue, Undersecretary for ICT Industry Development of the Department of Information and Communication Technology, Dr. Iris Thiele Isip-Tan, Professor 12 of the University of the Philippines College of Medicine, Dr. Dennis Batangan, Research Scientist and Faculty at the Ateneo de Manila University, and Dr. Jeremie de Guzman, Research Faculty at Ateneo School of Medicine and Public Health. The celebration also featured a health digitalization exhibit showcasing some of the Council’s programs and projects under its Digital and Frontier Technologies for Health Program, and a photo exhibit of former and current DOST-PCHRD employees in the last 41 years. The event was attended by more than 340 key stakeholders in the health research sector, including government officials, researchers, and representatives from the private sector. 

• Building a commercialization ecosystem. Collaborate with the industry who are willing to adopt the technologies to ensure commercialization of innovations created by researchers. • Developing talent for R&D output. Teach researchers to adopt the perspective of their technology’s end users and ask the questions, “Who is going to use this?” and “Who is going to pay for it?” • Developing products and business engines. Develop a sustainable business model in order for the product to have an impact on the people. • Deepening borderless partnerships - Partnerships can facilitate high impact initiatives such as the first ASEAN-wide longitudinal study involving six (6) countries for COVID-19 entitled, “ASEAN Sero-Surveillance Study on COVID-19 Vaccines.” PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

13 

> PCHRD 41st ANNIVERSARY

14 The importance of digital health technologies and technology adoption was highlighted in a breakout session entitled, “Bringing Digital Solutions Closer to the People,” featuring DOST-PCHRD-supported projects and their impact to Filipino communities. The RabDash, a rabies data analytics dashboard developed by the team of Ms. Sherelyn Evangelio from the University of the Philippines (UP) Mindanao, contributed in guiding rabies control programs in Davao City. Through close partnerships with local government units (LGUs), RabDash is used by authorities to show epidemiological parameters that affect the spread of rabies and analyze the impact of rabies control interventions. Ultimately, the tool benefits communities by assisting decision-making through availability of crucial data to LGUs. Also building on partnerships with LGUs is the “Smarter and Integrated Local Health Information System” (SmiLHIS) developed by the Ateneo De Manila University (AdMU) Institute of Philippine Culture (IPC). Presented by Mr. Philip Christian Zuniga, the SmiLHIS allows seamless transfer of data within the health service delivery network at the local level. The project has collaborated with LGUs from Pulilan, Bulacan, Cagayan de Oro City, and Pangasinan Province in the integration of digital health solutions and systems for the management of their local health information. Another project presented by Dr. Paolo Antonio Silva of the Philippine Eye Research Institute focused on the use of AI in retinal imaging. The project entitled, “The UK-Philippines Remote Retinal Evaluation Collaboration in Health: Diabetic Retinopathy” or REACH-DR brings retinopathy screening closer to Filipinos. The study was able to demonstrate a point-of-care (POC) AI algorithm that can accurately evaluate retinal images captured using handheld devices for presence of referable diabetic retinopathy, an eye disease damaging the retina. This initiative is the first to use AI in a point-of-care setting in ophthalmology. Through this, diagnostic imaging would be able to deliver retinal information quickly and to reach a wider population by using a less expensive and more convenient handheld imaging device and a centralized evaluation of retinal images. 

Furthering discussions of digitalization in healthcare, a breakout session entitled, “The Role of the Private Partners in Reinforcing Digitalization in Healthcare,” featured technologies supported by the DOST-PCHRD that promote digital transformation through private partnerships in health research and development. One of the innovations discussed was the “POWer App" Mobile Health Application Development for Remote Screening & Early Detection of Children with Mobility Impairment,” or POWer App developed under the leadership of Dr. Josephine Bundoc of the Physicians for Peace Inc. The project is developing a mobile application for mobility impairment screening and early detection of disabilities among children. Dr. Bundoc presented the POWer App, how to use it, its features, as well as the results of the inter-rater variability tests of the app. Following the promising outcomes of the project, the team plans to refine the app, further partnerships with local government units (LGUs), and network with community-based service providers. The team is also geared towards providing capacity building, particularly PhilHealth contracting. The second project entitled, "NeuRoTech: Establishment of the Neurorobotics Technology Center integrates neuroscience, robotics, and AI," focused on the applications of technology in neuroscience. The De La Salle University (DLSU) - Institute of Biomedical Engineering and Health Technologies (IBEHT) implements the program. Dr. Roy 

# The Role of Private Partners in Reinforcing Digitalization in Healthcare 

Francis Navea presented the current projects of the program which included health innovations for patients with physical disabilities, depression, and stroke. The talk discussed how intelligent devices and systems such as robotics and brain computer interface technologies, can aid health practitioners in objectively assessing health and providing evidence-based theraphy. Moving forward, the NeuRoTech plans to generate working prototypes, and to adopt international practices in product development, manufacturing, and commercialization. The third presentation showed the importance of collaboration with the private sector through the project entitled, “QARE-HHC: Quicker Analytics for ResponsivE Home Health Care" or QARE-HHC study. The team led by Dr. Christian Alis partnered with Qavalo, a Cebu-based Business Process Outsourcing (BPO) specializing in providing tech solutions to optimize administrative processes for US home health providers. The QARE-HHC assists Qavalo in leveraging its resources through predictive analytics, while working towards advancing home health care in the Philippines. Qavalo integrates data processing pipelines and AI predictive and prescriptive models into their current system. Dr. Alis’ team envisions continued partnerships to achieve their goal of better access to quality and affordable home healthcare, inclusion of home health care in PhilHealth coverage, and the creation of an ecosystem of data science modules to expand the project to other applications. 

# Breakout Sessions 

# Bringing Digital Solutions Closer to the People 1 2

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

15 

> PCHRD 41st ANNIVERSARY

16 Held as part of the DOST-PCHRD 41st Anniversary celebration, the 2023 PCHRD Scholars Society (PSS) Convention discussed digitalization as an innovation driver in healthcare. The Convention is a platform for the networking and exchange of knowledge and insights between former and current DOST-PCHRD scholars. The panel discussion was facilitated by Dr. Josefina Tuazon, the Founding President of the PSS and a member of the Health Technology Assessment Council (HTAC). Providing insights on the direction of digital health in the country, Dr. Raymond Sarmiento, Director of the National Telehealth Center (NTC), presented the NTC’s ongoing efforts. Currently, the Center is pursuing further development and integration of electronic medical records (EMR), interoperable systems, and blockchain apps as digital health solutions, as well as disease modeling and digital health ecosystems. Applications of digitalization in cancer diagnosis was also highlighted in a talk delivered by Prof. Pia Marie Albano, an Academic Researcher at the University of Santo Tomas. Prof. Albano focused on cancer diagnosis utilizing artificial intelligence (AI) and shared her work on AI-enhanced Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) Spectroscopy in predicting malignancy of cancerous cells. She also presented the advantages and limitations of using AI in cancer diagnosis and the future direction of using this technology. The PSS also elected a new set of Board of Directors for CY 2023-2025 during the Convention. 

# Fellowship Night: A celebration of stars Current issues and pathways for the advancement of the Philippine health research publishing Forwarding digitalization in health 

Part of the DOST-PCHRD 41st Anniversary Celebration is a learning session led by the Philippine Association of Medical Journal Editors (PAMJE), the Council's staunch partner in raising the standards of medical and health-related journal publishing in the country by fostering continuing education for medical and health journal editors, reviewers, editorial staff, publishers, and librarians across the nation. With the session theme, “Navigating a New Normal for Philippine Scientific Publications: A Continuum of Emerging and Re-emerging Issues,” the session featured discussions on the emerging and re-emerging issues that surround scholarly publishing at today’s age including dangers of pre-prints, paper mills, AI publications, shortage of peer-reviewers, among others. Other topics discussed included various tools for research writing, publication ethics, journal indexing, and the peer-review process. The two-day event gathered a total of 235 participants in a virtual setting. The resource speakers who graced the event were as follows: Dr. Rakesh Aggarwal of the World Association of Medical Editors, Dr. Ourlad Alzeus Tantengco of the University of the Philippines College of Medicine, Dr. Joven Jeremius Q. Tanchuco 

of the Acta Medica Philippina, Dr. Jigisha Patel of the Committee on Publication Ethics (COPE), Dr. Amado Tandoc III of the Philippine Journal of Pathology, Ms. Alma Mila Properoso of the World Health Organization (WHO) Regional Office for the Western Pacific Region, Ms. Mariya Maistrovskaya and Patricia Mangahis of the Public Knowledge Project and Dr. Jose Florencio Lapeña Jr , Charter President of PAMJE. 

Wrapping up DOST-PCHRD’s 41st Anniversary, a Fellowship Night themed "SINAGTALA: Pagbibigay Pugay sa mga Natatanging Bituin ng PCHRD," gathered former and current DOST-PCHRD employees to celebrate the accomplishments and the “stars” of the Council, or everyone who became part of its four-decade-long journey. 

# 3 4PCHRD Scholars Society Convention PAMJE Convention 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

17 

> PCHRD 41st ANNIVERSARY

18 Reconstitution of the PNHRS Technical Working Committees 

As the PNHRS transitioned into a new administration, the DOST-PCHRD facilitated the reconstitution of the PNHRS Technical Working Committees. Pursuant to Rule 21 of the revised PNHRS IRR, the chairs and members of the TWCs shall serve for a term of two years, renewable for another term. Representation of the four PNHRS implementing institutions, private sector, civil society, and regional, national or international institutions or organizations were considered in the creation of the committees. Upon completion of the new roster of PNHRS TWC members and election of the committee chairs and vice-chairs, PCHRD officially issued a Special Order on March 15, 2023, formalizing the assumption of members in their respective committees. This organizational move signifies the revitalization of a dynamic and operational PNHRS Network. Simultaneously, the Philippine Health Research Ethics Board (PHREB) underwent reconstitution through DOST Special Order No. 798, dated July 21, 2023. The following are the newly-elected chairs of the respective committees of the System. 

Committees Research Agenda Management Committee (RAMC) 

Chair: Dr. Ma. Lourdes K. Otayza 

> Mariano Marcos Memorial Hospital & Medical Center

Capacity Building Committee (CBC) 

Chair: Dr. Unity H. Cortez 

> Ilocos Training and Regional Medical Center

Research Utilization Committee (RUC) 

Chair: Dr. Marie Carmela M. Lapitan 

> University of the Philippines Manila

Resource Mobilization Committee (ResMob) 

Chair: Dr. Jaime Z. Galvez-Tan 

> Health Futures Foundation, Inc.

Structure, Organization, Monitoring and Evaluation Committee (SOME) 

Chair: Dr. Anthony C. Sales 

> Department of Science and Technology Regional Office No. XI

Philippine Health Research Ethics Board (PHREB) 

Chair: Dr. Sonia E. Bongala 

> Makati Medical Center

The Philippine National Health Research System (PNHRS), institutionalized through Republic Act 10532 or the PNHRS Act of 2013, is a national convergent strategy that aims to promote cooperation and integration of all health research efforts in the country. The PNHRS is implemented by four institutions: the Department of Science and Technology (DOST); Department of Health (DOH); Commission on Higher Education (CHED); and the University of the Philippines Manila (UPM) The newly reconstituted PNHRS Steering Committee conducted their 8th Committee Meeting last 10 July 2023 at the One Pacific Place, Makati City. The meeting covered an overview of the PNHRS, its reconstituted committees, significant amendments to the implementing rules and regulations, and plans and activities for CY 2023. The following are the new PNHRS Steering Committee members: The PNHRS Steering Committee recommends policies to the Governing Council, performs oversight function on the implementation and harmonization of the PNHRS activities and the allocation of the PNHRS fund, coordinates and harmonizes the activities of the PNHRS Technical Working Committees (TWCs), and monitors and reports to the Governing Council the progress of the PNHRS programs. The Steering Committee meets twice a year at every first and third quarter of the year in accordance with the revised implementing rules and regulations of the PNHRS. 

DOST-PCHRD - Dr. Jaime C. Montoya 

Ms. Lucila E. Roja, PCHRD (Alternate) 

DOH-HPDPB - Ms. Frances Rose E. Mamaril 

Mr. Pio Justin V. Asuncion (Alternate) 

CHED-OPRKM - Dr. Mary Sylvette T. Gunigundo 

Ms. Kristianne Aireen P. Maturana (Alternate) 

UPM-NIH - Dr. Eva Maria Cutiongco-de la Paz 

Dr. Marie Carmela M. Lapitan (Alternate) 

PHREB - Dr. Sonia E. Bongala 

Dr. Ricardo M. Manalastas, Jr. (Alternate) 

NEDA - Dir. Girlie Grace J. Casimiro-Igtiben 

Mr. Edgardo S. Aranjuez II (Alternate) 

Mr. Tomasito P. Javate, Jr. (Alternate) 

PHIC - Dr. Edwin M. Oriña 

Ms. Janice Angelique Olea, (Alternate) 

Reconstitution of the PNHRS Steering Committee 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

19 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

20 

PSA - Engr. Marizza B. Grande, PSA 

Ms. Marjorie B. Villaver (Alternate) 

DENR-EMB - Engr. Esperanza A. Sajul 

Ms. Fatima Anneglo R. Molina (Alternate) 

PRC - Hon. Jose Y. Cueto, Jr. 

Atty. Keiron Jems E. Gubatan (Alternate) 

Dr. Louie S. Miranda (Alternate) 

ULAP - Ms. Aileen B. Leycano 

Mr. Lawrence John Paulo L. Trinidad, 

(Alternate) 

PNHRS RAMC Chair - Dr. Ma. Lourdes K. Otayza PNHRS CBC Chair - Dr. Unity H. Cortez PNHRS RUC Chair - Dr. Marie Carmela M. Lapitan PNHRS ResMob Chair - Dr. Jaime Z. Galvez Tan PNHRS SOME Chair - Dr. Anthony C. Sales Covering a six-year period, the National Unified Health Research Agenda (NUHRA) provides focus and direction to health research and development initiatives in the country. The updated NUHRA for 2023 to 2028 was launched during the opening ceremonies of the 16th PNHRS Week celebration at the Summit Hotel, Tacloban City on 10 August 2023. Spearheaded by the PNHRS Research Agenda Management Committee (RAMC), the development of the updated document involved regional consultations, and gathered inputs from a variety of research stakeholders. From these consultations, a total of 170 health research priorities were identified and were consolidated into themes and sub-themes. 

Main themes under NUHRA 2023-2028 

• Disease Management; • Halal in Health; • Health Security, Emergency, and Disaster Risk Management; • Health Technology and Innovation; • Health of Vulnerable Populations; • Health Promotion; • Health Systems Strengthening towards UHC; • Maternal, Newborn, and Child Health; • Mental Health; • Nutrition and Food Security; and • Sexual and Reproductive Health. 

The PNHRS held a strategic planning workshop for 2023-2028 on 28-30 September 2023 at the Heritage Hotel Manila, Pasay City. It was attended by the PNHRS Governing Council, PNHRS Steering Committee, PNHRS Technical Working Committee Chairs and Secretariats, and representatives from the 17 Regional Health Research Development Consortia including BARMM. The three-day workshop, facilitated by Ms. Ramonesa Ricardo, gathered everyone to collaborate in improving the capacity of the System in delivering its mandate and identify new directions or objectives for the improved performance of PNHRS. Specifically, the workshop aims to 1) Develop plans, programs, and activities that will be implemented by PNHRS and its Committees in the next five (5) years; 2) Reassess and reevaluate the PNHRS Strategy Map and Scorecard 2017-2022, its existing programs and accomplishments vis-à-vis set goals, objectives, and strategies; 3) Revisit the roles and responsibilities of PNHRS committees and its secretariat; and 4) Develop the PNHRS Strategy Map and Plans for 2023-2028. A Post-Strategic Planning meeting will be set to meticulously review and validate the draft strategic plan. Subsequently, the plan will undergo the approval process by the PNHRS Steering Committee, Governing Council, and implementing institution heads. Upon approval, it will be deployed to the TWCs and regions, and translated into annual plans. 

PNHRS Strategic Planning 2023-2028 Workshop National Unified Health Research Agenda (NUHRA) 2023-2028 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

21 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

22 16 th PNHRS WEEK “Sustainable Development: Resilience through Health Research” 

The Eastern Visayas Health Research and Development Consortium (EVHRDC) hosted the celebration of the 16th Philippine National Health Research System (PNHRS) Week on 8-11 August 2023, at the Summit Hotel, Tacloban City. With the theme: “Sustainable Development: Resilience through Health Research,” the event underscored the contribution of health research and innovation in advancing sustainable development, particularly in the post-COVID-19 landscape. PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

23 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

24 

In the first two days of the week-long celebration, a series of pre-conference sessions, including a press conference, meetings of the different PNHRS Technical Working Committees (TWC), practical training for Research Ethics Committee members and staff and the PAMJE Educational Forum, were conducted. Competitions on research posters, oral research paper presentation and 3-Minute Pitch to Policymakers competition also took place. The main conference featured plenary sessions that delved into sub themes such as "Strategic Health Research Directions for Sustainable Development" and "Developing Sustainable Solutions through Research and Innovation for Health." A special session was also dedicated to discuss the topic of "Building Resilience at the Nexus of Health and Environment." In his keynote message delivered by Chief Attorney Mark Stephen Reyes, Hon. Ferdinand Martin Romualdez of Leyte expressed the full support of the entire House of Representatives in the noble courses of action of the PNHRS and the health research community to sustainably protect and promote the right of all Filipinos to health. A total of 450 health research stakeholders from all the 17 regions of the country participated in the event onsite, while thousands of virtual participants joined through Facebook Live streaming. The PNHRS week is celebrated annually every second week of August, by virtue of Proclamation No. 1309. PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 26 

PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 25 Research & Development 1To ensure that research results support the development of affordable, accessible, and quality S&T-based solutions and innovations, the Council invests in research aligned with the National Unified Health Research Agenda (NUHRA) and the Harmonized National Research and Development Agenda (HNRDA) 

PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 28 

PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 27 

# Distribution of R and D Projects in 2023 

Research Expenditures in 2023 

PCHRD Php 508.636 M PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

27 

> RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT

28 

The Tuklas Lunas® Program is the drug discovery and development program of the DOST and DOST-PCHRD which envisions to “produce world-class medicines derived from the Philippine biodiversity, leveraging on local expertise”. Building on the experience and successes of the National Integrated Research Program on Medicinal Plants (NIRPROMP) which produced lagundi and sambong herbal drugs now valued to be a PhP 1 billion industry, Tuklas Lunas aims to further tap into the potential of Philippine biodiversity as sources of drug candidates, contribute to addressing local need for more safe, effective, affordable and accessible locally-developed health products; and to the growth of the local natural products and pharmaceutical industry. Recognizing that significant resources are needed to bring one (1) successful drug candidate from early discovery to commercialization, the Tuklas Lunas program has adopted a strategic framework that pursues two tracks of development: (1) Herbal (Biodiversity/Folkloric) track: development of standardized herbal drugs, (2) Drug (Synthesis/Pure Compound) track: the identification of high-value compounds that can be offered for early licensing for further development as drugs. In the process, several outputs may be produced such as functional food, standardized herbal supplements, standardized herbal drugs, and pure drug candidate compounds. 

The Tuklas Lunas® program supports the following: 

• Building institutional and human capacity for discovery and development of natural products through R&D grants; • Developing bioresources (unique in the regions) into natural products; and • Bringing candidate substances/compounds to a stage where they are sufficiently de-risked and ripe for early licensing (not necessarily for full product development). 

# TUKLAS LUNAS ® Chemical and Biological Characterization of Pure Bioactive Compounds from Kadios (Cajanus cajan) Seeds and its Topical Formulation Studies 

Dr. Doralyn Dalisay, University of San Agustin 

TOTAL EXPENDITURES 

PCHRD DOST Php 72.966 M Php 59.228 M newly-approved completed ongoing 2 27 19 

“Skivios, skin invigorating from kadios” 

In 2023, the brand Skivios or “skin invigorating from kadios” was launched in Iloilo as a kadios-based product line, which includes skin products such as serum gel and toner spray. The successful launch of the brand was born from more than two years of research and development on kadios (C. cajan) seeds by the University of San Agustin (USA) led by Dr. Doralyn Dalisay. The commercialization was made in partnership with local pharmaceutical firms Maridan Industries Inc. and Pharma GalenX Innovations Inc.. Initiated in 2020, the research project aimed to develop an effective and accessible antibacterial formulations from kadios seeds, against multidrug resistant Staphylococcus aureus , and characterize the active component to provide a validated claim on the health benefit information of kadios beyond its basic nutritional value. At the end of the project implementation, the project team was able to identify three (3) secondary metabolites in C. cajan seeds with antibacterial properties against skin infection-causing S. aureus strains; and, developed two (2) topical antibiotic formulations (serum gel and toner spray) derived from kadios seeds antibiotic secondary metabolites, which were both launched under the brand Skivios. The research project started in October 2020 and was completed in December 2022, with funding from DOST-PCHRD amounting to Php 19,605,407.68. PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

29 30 

Completed Projects 2023 Project Status Empowering drug discovery in PH: Visayas NMR Laboratory’s pioneering role in 21st Century Medicine 

Dr. Jonel Saludes, University of San Agustin 

Microwave-Assisted Synthesis, Characterization, and Testing of Quinoline Compounds for Tuberculosis Treatment 

Dr. Allan Patrick G. Macabeo, University of Santo Tomas 

In modern drug discovery where strict standards govern the creation of new drugs, an NMR spectrometer is crucial, offering scientists with detailed insights into the essential building blocks of medicines. Failing to accurately determine the structure of a compound can significantly impact the trajectory of discovering new medicines. Thus, the NMR is crucial in identifying promising molecules that can advance through drug discovery stages and eventually into drug development. NMR's significance lies not just in understanding molecules but also in preventing potential setbacks that may arise from gaps in structural knowledge. A first in the Philippines, and fourth in Asia, this project led by Dr. Jonel Saludes of the University of San Agustin (USA) yielded the USA Magnetic Resonance Facility with the 600 MHz cryoprobe NMR spectrometer. This laboratory houses a new generation of 17 scientists from Visayas and Mindanao who are fully equipped with advanced skills in NMR spectroscopy. In the course of its 2023 implementation, the NMR project conducted training sessions encompassing theoretical principles and practical applications of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. These sessions were tailored to enhance the technical and practical abilities of personnel from Tuklas Lunas Development Centers from Visayas and Mindanao, specifically CMU, MSU-IIT, USA, USM, and staff from DOST Region VI. The training was designed to equip participants with necessary knowledge and skills essential for leveraging NMR spectroscopy in drug discovery. Notably, the cryoprobe NMR spectrometer is remotely operable, a pioneering achievement in the Philippines. Beyond its regional significance, the NMR Facility is open to researchers nationwide, facilitating NMR analysis—a triumph within the Tuklas Lunas research landscape. Further, a comprehensive training module has been meticulously developed, covering various aspects including technical proficiency, practical skills, and the examination of practical skills. The successful completion of this training underscores the dedication to cultivating a skilled workforce capable of making meaningful contributions to drug discovery on both local and global scales. Completed in February 2023, the three-year project aimed to develop new compounds for treating tuberculosis (TB) using a microwave-assisted synthesis, a rapid and efficient method for generating chemical compounds. In 2023, the team successfully synthesized 106 different compounds, of which 16 showed promising results in inhibiting the growth of various strains of the TB bacteria during laboratory testing. TB, caused by the bacteria Mycobacterium tuberculosis , remains a leading cause of illness and death worldwide, particularly in low- and middle-income countries. Despite the availability of treatment options, challenges such as drug resistance and the persistence of latent infections continue to hinder efforts to control the disease. The said technique allowed the team to synthesize 106 compounds designed and synthesized based on the quinoline scaffold, drawing inspiration from natural sources such as the Philippine endemic Rutaceae species. Following synthesis, the compounds underwent thorough characterization to ensure their chemical identity and purity, and were subjected to rigorous testing to evaluate their efficacy against various strains of the TB bacteria which yielded 16 compounds that showed the ability to inhibit the growth of TB bacteria in laboratory settings. The identification of these hit compounds represents a significant achievement with profound implications for TB treatment and control efforts. By expanding the options of potential antitubercular agents, the project offers improved treatment outcomes and the prospect of overcoming challenges such as drug resistance. PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

31 

> RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT

32 Pre-Clinical Studies and Scale Up Formulation of Anti-Inflammatory PharmaFern Ointments 

Dr. Reggie Y. dela Cruz, Central Mindanao University 

Building on the program’s previously completed projects, the three component projects of USC-TLDC Phase II intended to continue the discovery of cardiometabolic bioactives from various plants in Central Philippines as complementary medicine for the treatment, control, or prevention of hyperglycemia, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and hypercholesterolemia. In 2023, the team developed a plant formulation with good pharmacopoeial results and retention of alpha-glucosidase inhibition and glucose uptake activity and alpha-glucosidase inhibition. These outcomes offer a promising foundation for future up-scale manufacturing. The Projects 3, 5, and 7 components, which were led by Ms. Angel Lyn Kristin C. Tan, Dr. Gerard Lee L. See, and Ms. Queenie Marie A. Maquilang, respectively, commenced in May 2021 and ended in 2023. The herbal-based medicines that will be generated in the future can impact different sectors from farming industries to pharmaceutical companies, eventually leading to cheaper alternative medicines. The Central Mindanao University - Tuklas Lunas Development Center (CMU-TLDC) explores the potential of local fern species for the development of skin ointments. Initiated in 2022, the project entitled, “Pre-Clinical Studies and Scale Up Formulation of Anti-Inflammatory PharmaFern Ointments,” aims to assess the industrial applicability of anti-inflammatory PharmaFern ointments developed from two bioactive fern species. Together with the UP-Manila College of Pharmacy, the CMU-TLDC pursues the project through the conduct of two studies: (1) the first study will propagate the two identified fern species and evaluate the anti-inflammatory potential of the extracts and the formulated ointments; while (2) the second study will conduct pilot scale manufacturing of the anti-inflammatory ointments. To date, the project team was already able to identify two fern extracts to be nontoxic with significant anti-inflammatory activities in terms of in vitro inhibition of cyclooxygenase and carrageenan-induced paw edema assay. From these extracts, ointment products were developed and have been submitted for patent or utility model grant. Initial user acceptability studies show that the ointment is generally acceptable in terms of look, smell, color, and packaging. Currently, the research team is continuing the pilot scale manufacturing of the ointment, paw edema assay to assess the anti-inflammatory effect of the product in mice, and the production of ointments in preparation for Phase 1 of clinical trials. The project started last 1 September 2022, and is expected to be completed on 31 March 2025 with a total allocated budget of PhP 22,357,091.00. 

Discovery of Cardiometabolic Bioactives from Plants in Central Philippines 

Dr. Patrick John Y. Lim, University of San Carlos - Tuklas Lunas Development Center (USC-TLDC) 

Project 3: Chemical Standardization of the Raw Material, Spray-dried Extracts and Dosage Forms 

from Selected Plants with Antihyperglycemic Activity 

Project 5: Formulation Studies of Spray-dried Extracts from Plants with Antihyperglycemic Activity 

Project 7: In vitro Cardiometabolic Activity and Toxicity Monitoring of Product Development 

Samples and Screening of New Herbals 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

33 

> RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT

34 

Ongoing Project Functional Foods 

The PCHRD's Functional Food Program concentrates on research aimed at crops and food products with potential health benefits extending beyond their inherent nutritional value, in preventing non-communicable diseases. In 2023, the program received 18 proposals during the Call for Proposals and is implementing six newly approved projects. This year, one completed Council-supported project received substantial information on the potential health benefits of the developed seaweed wines, which can be used for further studies and commercialization of the said product. The program garnered recognition through an online newspaper feature in November 2023, shedding light on functional foods and emphasizing PCHRD's pivotal role in this domain of research. To amplify the impact on crops within the priority commodities of the program, the upcoming research call will encompass crops with limited data or requiring sustained investigation. Anticipated collaborations in 2024 are poised to fortify both local and international partnerships, further elevating the program's effectiveness and reach 

TOTAL EXPENDITURES 

PCHRD DOST Php 20.565 M Php 126.812 M newly-approved completed ongoing 6 2 7

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

35 

> RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT

36 

2023 Project Status Health benefits and safety of wines produced from brown, green, and red seaweeds 

Mr. Hilario S. Taberna, Iloilo Science and Technology University 

Seaweeds are widely acknowledged as rich sources of bioactive compounds and exhibit considerable chemical diversity. Despite these attributes, seaweeds in the Philippines remain underutilized and lack significant economic value. This project, centered on Panay Island, specifically aims to evaluate the potential health benefits and safety of wines derived from brown, green, and red seaweeds. Led by Mr. Hilario S. Taberna and implemented by the Iloilo Science and Technology University in collaboration with DOST-PCHRD, the project team successfully formulated three (3) optimized seaweed wine concoctions, conducted safety assays and physico-chemical tests, and evaluated sensory characteristics. Preliminary findings indicate that seaweed wines boast higher antioxidant and antihyperlipidemic properties compared to commercially available wines. Upon successful commercialization, this project envisions offering more affordable and healthier wine options for the Filipino market, while contributing valuable scientific data on Turbinaria spp., Ulva spp., and Acanthophora spicifera . Furthermore, it aspires to strengthen the seaweed industry in Northern Iloilo, generating additional livelihood opportunities for coastal communities. The project has garnered widespread recognition, being featured in various platforms such as Mabuhay Pilipinas of Radyo Pilipinas Radio Program, Manila Bulletin, and DOST's Regional and National Science and Technology Week. 

Completed Project 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

37 

> RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT

38 

Development of a Safe Lactic Acid Bacteria (LAB)-based Biofunctional Health-promoting Product as an Adjunct Intervention for the Management of HIV-associated Metabolic Complications 

Dr. Leslie Michelle M. Dalmacio, University of the Philippines College of Medicine 

The project, led by Dr. Leslie Michelle M. Dalmacio, seeks to enhance the health of HIV-infected individuals by developing a Lactic Acid Bacteria (LAB)-based health-promoting product. This product aims to serve as an adjunct therapy for managing HIV patients with metabolic complications. Key achievements of the project include obtaining data on antibiotic susceptibility of probiotic strains, conducting whole genome sequencing of two probiotic strains, optimizing studies for probiotic strains and probiotic + prebiotic combinations, and experimenting on product shelf life and stability under different storage conditions. This project is implemented in collaboration with UP College of Medicine, National Institutes of Health Manila, UP Diliman Institute of Biology and BIOTECH-UPLB with a total budget of Php 23,122,808.88 Additionally, the project team presented their preliminary results at the 30th Federation of Asian and Oceanian Biochemists and Molecular Biologists (FAOBMB) Conference in Bangkok, Thailand, held from November 22-25, 2023. 

Ongoing Project The Nutrition and Food Safety Program endeavors to tackle prevalent human nutrition challenges in the country, encompassing issues like micronutrient and macronutrient deficiencies, overnutrition, nutrition-related diseases, and emerging concerns in food safety. Through leveraging science, technology, and innovation, the program is dedicated to identifying pathways and seizing opportunities to offer solutions that enhance the health of Filipinos by promoting proper nutrition and ensuring the safety of their food. Officially launched in March 2022 as a new priority program area within R&D Management, this initiative garnered 18 proposals in response to the 2023 Call for Proposals. In the next years, the program will continue in its commitment to integrating nutrition and food safety trends while actively monitoring research gaps in lesser-explored areas of nutrition-related diseases and food safety issues. Simultaneously, efforts will be intensified to strengthen collaborations both locally and internationally. 

TOTAL EXPENDITURES 

PCHRD DOST Php 2.97 M Php 18.56 M newly-approved completed ongoing 1 3 7Nutrition and Food Safety 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

39 

> RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT

40 

2023 Project Status Healthy Aging Program for Pinoy (HAPPY) Senior Citizens: Promoting Quality of Life Among Older Filipinos Through Food and Nutrition Solutions (Project 2) 

Ms. Vanizsa Ramos, Food and Nutrition Research Institute 

HAPPY Senior Citizens is a research and development program that investigates the nutrition and health concerns of elderly Filipinos. It is composed of four component projects that delve into various areas, such as body composition, cognition function, and functional foods. The project entitled, “Development and Pilot-Scale Production of Innovation Food Products for Older Male and Female Filipinos,” under this program aims to develop two food products that will contain the recommended nutrients needed by older persons, and determine the effect of consuming the said products towards their muscle strength and physical performance. Specifically, the project aims to develop one beverage and one snack food, utilizing mature green tomatoes (MGTs) which are known to contain Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA). GABA, an inhibitory neurotransmitter, known to cause several health benefits such as providing support to the immune and nervous systems. To date, the project team already tested the use of MGT powder on several food products such as biscuits, chicken nuggets, skinless longganisa, and tomato sauce. The team was also able to develop a prototype of the high-protein beverage for enteral formula which will be used for pilot-scale production during the second year implementation of the project. Supported by DOST and monitored by the DOST-PCHRD, the project received a total allocation of Php 9,036,790.22. 

Ongoing Project Bacteriophage in Food Safety: Biosensing and Biocontrol of Food Pathogens 

Dr. Jose H. Bergantin, Jr. & Dr. Donna May D. Papa, University of Santo Tomas 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

41 

> RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT

42 

This completed program, led by Dr. Jose H. Bergantin, Jr. and Dr. Donna May D. Papa, primarily explored the application of bacteriophages (phages), a relatively new microbial advancement, in ensuring food safety. Phages are cost-effective, self-replicating, and easy to isolate, making them efficient tools in this context. The program's main objectives include creating a portable biosensor device for real-time screening of Salmonella spp . and Listeria monocytogenes 

cells and developing a phage product for use as a biocontrol agent against foodborne pathogens. Project 1, led by Dr. Bergantin, focused on developing an electrochemical biosensor array by immobilizing bacteriophages on an electrode surface. Project 2, led by Dr. Papa explored applying phages directly onto the surface of food to control bacteria. These projects are aimed to enhance good manufacturing practices and quality control in food handling processes, offering valuable tools for both large-scale and small-scale food processing, including meat, fruits, vegetables, and dairy industries. The Council provided support amounting to Php 4,959,167.68 for Project 1 and Php 4,936,289.04 for Project 2 for their two years of implementation: 

Project 1: Phage-based Electrochemical Impedimetric Biosensing of 

Salmonella enterica and Listeria monocytogenes in Meat 

Products 

Project 2: Phage-based biocontrol of Salmonella enterica and Listeria 

monocytogenes in Meat Products 

Completed Project Mental Health 

Embracing the priorities set by the National Unified Health Research Agenda and the three outcome-based themes of the National Mental Health Research Agenda, the Mental Health R&D program orchestrates its initiatives to comprehend the intricate interplay between biological, psychological, social, and spiritual dimensions of human experiences. This holistic approach underscores the commitment to foster the well-being of individuals by steering groundbreaking research initiatives. In 2023, the Program received the prestigious Gold Awardee from the Department of Health's Healthy Pilipinas Awards for Partners 2023, underscoring its exceptional contributions to promoting mental health and well-being. Moreover, the program spearheaded a comprehensive year-long Mental Health R&D Promotion, amplifying awareness and understanding of mental health issues within the community. Complementing its advocacy, the program successfully launched three Mental Health R&D books, offering valuable insights and knowledge to a diverse audience. Furthermore, the program actively supported numerous capacity-building activities through funded projects, reinforcing the development of mental health professionals and practitioners across the nation. 

TOTAL EXPENDITURES IN 2023 

PCHRD DOST Php 11.65 M Php 23.690 M newly-approved completed ongoing 11 4 8

2023 Project Status 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

43 

> RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT

44 

Healthy Pilipinas Awards for Partners 2023 

In recognition of the initiatives that shed light on the interplay between mental health, research, and spirituality, the Healthy Pilipinas Awards for Partners 2023 conferred a Gold Award to the Mental Health R&D Program of the DOST-PCHRD on 27 October 2023 at the Philippine International Convention Center (PICC) Reception Hall, Pasay City. The program earned the Gold Award for its initiatives and activity entitled, “Spirituality in Philippine Mental Health Research and Practice, ” a product of multiple round table discussions (RTDs) conducted with different faith-based organizations, mental healthcare providers, and researchers to identify the role, application, and effect of spirituality and religiosity in mental health and to generate research topics for the next mental health research agenda. This comprehensive approach effectively addressed the three core elements of strategic health promotion implementation: healthy governance, healthy settings, and health literacy. The Healthy Pilipinas Awards, a collaborative initiative between the DOH and the Galing Pook Foundation, sought to celebrate and honor outstanding contributions by "Healthy Champions" or partner organizations dedicated to advancing community health. The 2023 edition of the awards recognized entities that have played a pivotal role in aligning with the Department of Health's Health Promotion Framework Strategy for 2021-2030. 

Unlocking Insights: The Launch of Three Mental Health Publications 

In a stride towards advancing mental health literacy, the Mental Health R&D Program in 2023 launched three publications, each contributing valuable insights to the evolving landscape of mental health care: 

1. Treatment Recommendations for Psychosocial Interventions for Referred In-patients 

2. Mental Health Services for Psychosocial Interventions 

3. Quality Mental Health Research in the Philippines The first two publications, crafted under the leadership of Dr. Cynthia Leynes and her team at the Cardinal Santos Medical Center, unfolded under the project entitled, "Psychosocial interventions used by mental health professionals for in-patients of tertiary hospitals referred for psychosocial problems." These publications serve guide in addressing mental health challenges within non-psychiatry in-patient units of tertiary hospitals. The first book, "Treatment Recommendations for Psychosocial Interventions for Referred In-patients," provides a comprehensive guideline for managing mental health issues among in-patients referred for psychosocial problems. Meanwhile, the second book, "Mental Health Services for Psychosocial Interventions," serves as a compendium of community resources tailored for the aftercare of patients discharged from tertiary hospitals grappling with persistent psychosocial issues. Further enriching the literary landscape of mental health, the Mental Health R&D Program launched a new edition of the book entitled, "Quality Mental Health Research in the Philippines," encapsulating essential discussions and exchanges between lecturers and participants from the 2020 mental health write shop. This initiative not only reinforces the value of ongoing research but also serves as a reservoir of insights, fostering a culture of continuous learning within the mental health community. #MentalHealthPH's Automated Chatbots Project 

The project entitled, "Development and Effectiveness of Fully Automated Conversational Agents (Chatbots) for Enhancing Public Mental Health," focused on the creation of fully automated conversational agents, or chatbots, designed to champion mental well-being and alleviate psychological distress within the public domain. In 2023, the project successfully leveraged innovative technology to provide accessible and timely assistance to those in need. The product of this project are two applications: Gabay and SIBOL. Gabay is a supportive companion that understands the unique needs of its users. Gabay is a mobile mental health application and a compassionate companion committed to acknowledging, empowering, and supporting individuals diagnosed with depression and anxiety disorders tailored specifically for the Filipino context. On the other hand, SIBOL will be the first Filipino-made mobile app developed specifically to address general psychological distress. The app includes features that will enhance mental health literacy, journaling, and mood tracking. It also promotes interpersonal connections through communication cards and acts of kindness. 

DOST-PCHRD's Mental Health R&D Program at BrainConnects 2023 International Conference 

In August 2023, the Philippines showcased its commitment to advancing neurology and neurosciences at the BrainConnects International Conference in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam. Representatives from the DOST-PCHRD and its Mental Health R&D Program were invited to participate, sharing insights on research funding opportunities in the Philippines. The conference themed: "Healthy Brain Aging: from Technology to Intervention," gathered 19 speakers from nine countries, including the Philippines, covering diverse fields such as medical physics, psychology, neurology, and artificial intelligence. The multidisciplinary discussions aimed to implement cutting-edge strategies and promote global collaboration at the intersection of technology, neuroscience, and cognitive sciences. Beyond the conference, a collaborative meeting with international experts in neuroscience and biomedical engineering further strengthened connections and supported the advancement of the Philippine Brain Research Agenda (PBRA). This initiative underscores DOST-PCHRD's commitment to prioritizing vulnerable populations through innovative research in neurosciences and brain mapping, shaping the future of healthcare and well-being in the Philippines. Aimed to comprehensively understand the mental health landscape among the youth in the Province of Tarlac, the project engaged the Provincial Government of Tarlac, Department of Health (DOH), Local Government Units, Rural Health Units, and Sanguniang Kabataan (SK) Federations in the province that fostered a holistic approach to the study, ensuring a better understanding of the mental health status and available resources for the youth. In 2023, the study involved 400 participants, mostly 18-year-olds attending school and coming from families with monthly incomes between Php 10,000 to 20,000. The results revealed that over half of the participants struggled with mild to extremely severe depression, whereas 45.75% displayed a standard level of mental health. Findings also suggest that there are prevalent mental health challenges among Tarlac's youth, indicating that nearly 75% reported experiencing anxiety levels ranging from moderate to extremely severe. Additionally, 40% of the participants grappled with similar levels of stress. These results, now integral baseline data, are poised to play a pivotal role in informing policies and guidelines developed by the Local Government Unit. Moreover, it will serve as a foundation for the creation of targeted programs addressing the specific mental health needs of Tarlac's youth. 

Mental Health Status of Youth and Mental Health Resources in the Province of Tarlac - Tarlac Agricultural University  

> Dr. Rohani Cena-Navarro ,University of the Philippines Dr. Benny S. Soliman, Tarlac Agricultural University

In a bid to revolutionize addiction and depression treatments, the program entitled, "Novel Approaches to Treatment of Addiction and Depression using Animal Models" explores pharmacological and behavioral interventions. In 2023, a significant milestone was reached as the project gained access to the newly-renovated animal laboratory facility at the National Institutes of Health, University of the Philippines Manila. Marked by a ribbon-cutting ceremony on 27 January 2023, the facility became the focal point for testing treatments to address toluene craving using a rodent model. During the same year, the program celebrated additional accomplishments. Two posters on inhalant addiction were successfully presented, and meaningful consultation meetings were conducted with esteemed addiction neuroscientists, namely Dr. Yavin Shaham of the US NIH National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) and Dr. John Woodward of the Medical University of South Carolina. These pivotal interactions occurred at the Society for Neuroscience Conference in Washington, DC, from 11 to 16 November 2023. 

Advancing Treatment Innovations: Addiction and Depression Research Completed Projects Ongoing Project 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

45 

> RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT

46 The Philippines, due to its topographic location, stands among the nations most vulnerable to natural catastrophes and climatic impacts. Annually, the country experiences natural disasters resulting in loss of lives, property destruction, and substantial economic ramifications. Recognizing the urgent need to address these challenges, the Council identified the Disaster Risk Reduction and Climate Change Adaptation in Health (DRR-CCAH) as a priority theme within its R&D initiatives. The Program strives to pioneer innovative technologies and solutions that mitigate or prevent the health consequences arising from disasters and climate change, ultimately fostering a health-resilient Philippines. In 2023, breakthrough findings from studies on airborne pollen's seasonality and allergenicity advanced our understanding of climate-related health impacts. Capacity-building initiatives empowered healthcare professionals, while community engagement campaigns heightened awareness and preparedness. Building on 2023's success, the DRR-CCAH program looks ahead to 2024 with a strategic focus. Anticipated regional consultations will deepen stakeholder engagement, and the agenda's launch through regional caravans aims to attract proposals aligned with program priorities. 

# Disaster Risk Reduction and Climate Change Adaptation in Health 

TOTAL EXPENDITURES IN 2023 

# Php 48.450 M newly-approved completed ongoing 5 1 1

2023 Project Status Completed Project 

The project aims to develop a Geographic Information System (GIS) and a Health Needs Assessment (HNA) tool to facilitate post-disaster response for Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) in evacuation centers. By integrating demographic, health, and basic needs data, along with logistical information, the project seeks to enhance the efficiency of aid distribution and logistical planning during and after disasters. In 2023, the project has achieved the following accomplishments: • Developed a comprehensive training video for the GIS web application that includes a detailed walkthrough of the web application with voice-over narration, supplemented by a user-friendly web interface guide; • Created a detailed user guide to assist Local Government Units (LGUs) in utilizing the GIS system effectively; • Developed the Health Needs Assessment (HNA) Tool through extensive document reviews and stakeholder consultations with key government agencies; • Integrated the HNA Tool into an online format for real-time accessibility of data from different evacuation centers, which facilitates decision-making by providing summaries, reports, and hazard maps; • Developed a detailed guide showcasing the functionalities of the web application, including screenshots with annotations on necessary actions; • Documented technical informationn for the maintenance and continuous improvement of the web application; and • Engaged with participating LGUs, including Tuguegarao, San Fernando, Lagawe, Digos, Iloilo, and Roxas City and turned over the HNA tool, GIS system, and user guides. The project continues to foster partnerships and empower LGUs in utilizing GIS technology to address the basic and health needs of IDPs efficiently. Moving forward, the project aims to continuously improve the sustainability and effectiveness of the developed systems. 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

47 

> RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT

48 

PCHRD Developing a Geographic Information System to Address Post-Disaster Basic and Health Needs in Temporary Housing Facilities 

Dr. Catrina M. Yang, EpiMetrics, Inc. Seasonal distribution of allergenicity of Airborne Pollen in Ilocos Norte 

> Dr. Maureen B. Sabit, University of Santo Tomas Mr. Karl Gerrard T. See, National Research Council of the Philippines

To ensure that the Disaster Risk Reduction and Climate Change Adaptation in Health (DRR-CCAH) Program remains responsive to emerging health challenges, aligning seamlessly with the evolving national health research landscape, the Council supported the "Development of the DRR-CCA in Health Research Agenda 2023-2028" allowing the program to adapt swiftly to new priorities outlined in the NUHRA. The objective is to identify, prioritize, and address critical research areas at the intersection of disaster risk reduction, climate change adaptation, and health. The research agenda will serve as a guiding framework for collaborative efforts between research institutions, government agencies, and other stakeholders. The project kicked off in November 2023 and is set to run for seven months, contributing significantly to the nation's preparedness in the face of emergencies, disasters, and the impacts of climate change on public health. Understanding pollen dynamics is crucial for addressing health challenges, especially allergies, which affect a significant portion of the population. Allergies stemming from airborne pollen can lead to conditions such as allergic rhinitis, asthma, and atopic dermatitis. By studying the seasonality, characterization, and allergenicity of airborne pollen in Ilocos Norte, this project aims to address health-related problems and educate the public on allergies, their potential causes, and the plant sources of pollen allergens that may adversely affect their health. In 2023, the project revealed that the dominant airborne pollen sources in the region are mulberry, grasses, malunggay, Talisay, myrtle, Agoho, and aratilis. Pollen sensitivity studies underscored a notable prevalence of allergic conditions, particularly in response to carabao mango and Indian mango pollen, with allergic rhinitis emerging as the most frequently reported condition. Moreover, a gender-based analysis indicated a higher prevalence of self-reported allergic diseases among females. Contributing to these findings, the project identified 220 plant species in semi-urban areas of Ilocos Norte, while urban vegetation surveys in Batac and Laoag revealed 144 plant species, mostly herbs. Meanwhile, research on soil heavy metal concentration demonstrated compliance with safety limits across all vegetation locations. With the recent pandemic highlighting the gaps in the Philippine health system and other systems interlinked with health, the concept of human security urges a whole-of-government approach in strengthening pandemic prevention, preparedness and response for threats to create resilient and sustainable systems. This project aims to improve national and local government initiatives to enhance resilience against health threats and beyond, encompassing safety in various aspects such as health, food, economic, environmental, personal, community, and political security. The project focuses on the following areas: 1. Stakeholders’ understanding of human security and its application using the UNDP seven human security areas; 2. Perception-based vulnerabilities of the Philippines per region; and 3. Web-based application incorporating the human security profile per region in the country By adopting a multidimensional approach and creating a detailed human security profile, the project aims to develop data-driven solutions addressing daily insecurities, economic challenges, and other issues Filipinos encounter in the post-pandemic period. Building on a previous 2015 study, this project will identify gaps and establish a human security map of the Philippines, providing insights into the impact of events like the COVID-19 pandemic and natural disasters on people's lives. The goal is not only to enhance individual and community resilience but also to lay the foundation for future research on vulnerabilities, ultimately contributing to a safer and more secure Philippines. 

Development of DRR-CCA in Health Research Agenda 2023-2028 Development Post-Pandemic Human Security Map of the Philippines  

> Dr. Carlos Primero D. Gundran ,University of the Philippines Manila

Ongoing Projects 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

49 

> RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT

50 AMPLIFIED: Clinical Development of a Simplified SARS-CoV-2 Genomic Point-of-Care Diagnostic 

Dr. rer. nat Crisanto M. Lopez Ateneo de Manila University 

NICER: Biomaterials for Diagnostics and Therapeutics Research and Development Center 

Dr. Reynaldo DL. Bundalian Jr. 

Angeles University Foundation 

CRISPR-based Diagnostics (CRISPR-Dx) for the Detection of SARS-CoV-2 and TB 

Dr. Ron Leonard V. Dy University of the Philippines Diliman 

Under the Diagnostics Program, the DOST-PCHRD is helping to create local tools for detecting and treating diseases in the country. In 2023, the program focused on important health issues like communicable diseases, non-communicable diseases, and neglected tropical diseases. The program's goal is to build a supportive system for developing diagnostics. It aims to help innovators throughout the entire process and foster collaborations between institutions and research groups. This will create a self-sufficient and sustainable system for diagnostics development. 

# DIAGNOSTICS newly-approved completed ongoing 4 4 11 

TOTAL EXPENDITURES 

PCHRD DOST Php 75 M Php 22 M The project aimed to create fast and accurate diagnostic tools for COVID-19 and tuberculosis using CRISPR technology. Led by Dr. Ron Leonard V. Dy, the team successfully demonstrated that CRISPR-based diagnostics can detect specific targets of SARS-CoV-2 and tuberculosis with high sensitivity. They also improved an enzyme to identify genes of SARS-CoV-2 and M. tuberculosis. The team plans to move to Phase II with DOST-PCHRD's support and collaborate with Manila Healthtek, Inc. and the National Tuberculosis Reference Laboratory for further testing. Once established, the detection platform can be turned into easy-to-use strips for national health emergencies. These tests are affordable and don't require extra equipment in existing labs. The project, in collaboration with the Philippine Genome Center and the National Institutes of Health, University of the Philippines Manila, concluded in June 2023, with a total duration of 30 months and a six-month extension, supported by P12,968,083.50 from the DOST-PCHRD. This project is working on creating a vertical flow microarray (VFM) to detect enteric viruses. In the first year, they developed the kit's amplification and detection parts, including six separate amplification detections for each target. They also completed sample collection, designed primers and capture probes for virus detection, and achieved 90% optimization of the Recombinase Polymerase Amplification (RPA) assay, along with designing the VFM prototype. Dr. rer. nat Crisanto M. Lopez from Ateneo de Manila University leads a project that builds upon three completed COVID-19 projects – ADDS, SWIFTeR, and SPECIFieD. The goal is to overcome limitations in previous prototypes and submit at least one clinically-validated SARS-CoV-2 detection test to the Philippine FDA for approval and eventual commercialization through a local company, BAYAN Life Sciences. Started in September 2022 with an approved duration of 18 months, the project has made significant progress in developing and optimizing COVID-19 assays using minimally processed saliva. They are also working on prototypes for influenza. With Php 18,803,940.00 support from the DOST-PCHRD, the project aims to enhance healthcare in the Philippines by providing affordable yet high-quality diagnostic products for Led by Dr. Reynaldo DL. Bundalian Jr. from Angeles University Foundation, this program, which is a part of DOST's NICER Program, aims to establish an R&D center focusing on biomaterials and nanomaterials for health applications. The center works on developing biomaterials like antibodies (mammalian and avian) for diagnostic and therapeutic uses. It also aims to contribute in the development of point-of-care testing devices (POCT) for priority disease diagnosis and create nanomaterials as carriers for vaccine preparations. Started in July 2021, the program consists of three component projects: 

Project 1. Development of a POCT Device 

for Rotavirus (Viral Gastroenteritis) 

Detection 

Project 2. Fecal Lactoferrin, 

Myeloperoxidase, and Calprotectin 

as Differential Markers of Pediatric Acute 

Gastroenteritis: A Preliminary Investigation 

Project 3. Synthesis of Biocompatible 

Nanomaterial Conjugated Rabies Peptide 

Immunogen Recent achievements include progress in anti-rotavirus antibody production, patient recruitment and sample collection for acute gastroenteritis study, and nanomaterial development for rabies immunogen. With a budget of Php 26,670,032.79 and an approved duration of thirty-six months (plus atwelve-month extension), the program aims to play a significant role in developing local health technologies for priority diseases in Central Luzon (Region III). The project aimed to create a simple test for early detection of leptospirosis using aptamers and a paper-based kit, which benefits clinicians and researchers. The project led by Dr. Windell L. Rivera produced two publications in respected journals, partnered with the Leptospirosis Referral Center, and collaborated with biotech companies. With the Council’s assistance of Php 25,305,161.59, the project, spanning 36 months, the Phase 1 of the project concluded on 28 February 2023. 

Aptamer-based Multiplex Detection Assay for the Early Detection of Leptospirosis 

Dr. Windell L. Rivera, University of the Philippines 

Enteric Solutions: Development of a Vertical Flow Microarray (VFM) for the Detection of Enteric Viruses 

Ms. Joy Ann P. Santos University of the Philippines Manila 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

51 

> RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT

52 

2023 Project Status Completed Projects 

Led by Ms. Joy Ann P. Santos from the University of the Philippines Diliman, the project is collaborating with the University of the Philippines Manila. The project, supported with Php 5,257,786.00 from the DOST-PCHRD, will conclude on 15 February 2024, with an approved duration of 30 months. 

Ongoing Projects Biomedical Engineering for Health 

The Biomedical Engineering for Health Program aims to develop accessible, affordable, good-quality, and innovative Filipino-made biomedical devices and technologies. Efforts from the program are also envisioned to contribute in establishing and strengthening support systems towards a Philippine Biomedical Engineering Industry. In 2023, the program spearheaded innovative projects to advance healthcare technologies and enhance patient outcomes. Key highlights included progress in 3D bioprinting, prosthetics, alternative implant materials, and enzyme and protein production among others; showcasing a dedicated commitment to innovation in Philippine healthcare. On partnerships, a DOST-PCHRD-supported program, the De La Salle University (DLSU) - Institute of Biomedical Engineering and Health Technologies (IBEHT) forged a new partnership focusing on enriching biomedical research in the country with the Auckland Bioengineering Institute (ABI). 

SiglaVent Design Optimization and Clinical Testing 

Engr. John Joel Martinez, Technological Institute of the Philippines 

The COVID-19 pandemic challenged the capacity of resource-limited countries like the Philippines. With the increased demand for mechanical ventilators, manual ambu-bagging of patients by healthcare workers and family members became common practice. In response to this, engineers and experts led by Engr. John Joel Martinez, designed a prototype of SiglaVent, an innovative automated ambu bag which was intended to prevent manual ambu bagging of COVID-19 suspect, probable, or confirmed patients. Successfully designing and developing a prototype, Engr. Martinez’ team has acquired a Certificate of Medical Device Listing with the Philippine Food and Drug Administration (FDA), authorizing use of the technology for research and trials. Currently, three units are deployed to the Lung Center of the Philippines for clinical testing. 

Nanotexturing of Stainless Steel 316L by Electrochemical Etching for Biological Implants 

Ms. Abigail I. Santillan Industrial Technology Development Institute- Advanced Devices and Materials Testing Laboratory 

Osteoarthritis is a medical condition in which the cartilage or the tissue between joints thins down causing pain from the friction between the bones. For severe cases, knee replacement surgery is recommended to give patients suffering from the condition a better quality of life. In the Philippines, around 4.2 million suffer from osteoarthritis and there are an estimated 180,000 candidates for total knee replacement annually. In a research study by the Philippine Journal of Orthopaedics, experts found that bacterial adherence in stainless steel implants can cause peri-implant infection within two weeks. As a solution, the project proposed the use of the electrochemical etching in stainless steel for biological implants to decrease possible infection among patients. Recognizing this need, Ms. Abigail Santillan led the development of an electrochemical etching set-up for nanotexturing application using Stainless Steel 316L, the material commonly used for medical grade implants. The development of a unique nano texturing surface modification technology may prevent bacterial adhesions and further lower implant infections to less than its reported 2% infection rate. Ms. Santilla’s team has completed the etching setup and developed a nanotextured device/surgical implant. 

Development of a Three-dimensional Bioprinted Human Skin Equivalent for 

In Vitro Biocompatibility Studies of Topical Formulations 

Mr. Jan Vincent N. Sollesta, Pharma GalenX Innovations, Inc. 

Human skin equivalents (HSE) are cell models mimicking human skin, commonly used for experiments related to skin development, treatment, and more. Catering to local researchers, Mr. Jan Vincent Sollesta initiated a project aiming to develop a human skin equivalent (HSE) using 3D bioprinting technology. Specifically, the product is intended for biocompatibility studies for the development of topical medications, serving as an alternative for product testing on animals. On 13 July 2023, Pharma GalenX Innovations, Inc. unveiled its groundbreaking bioprinting laboratory marking a significant milestone in the advancement of science and technology in health services in Jaro, Iloilo City. The 3D Bioprinting Laboratory is being monitored by the DOST-PCHRD and supported through DOST’S Science 4 Change Program's Business Innovation through S&T Program. PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

53 

> RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT

54 

Completed Projects newly-approved completed ongoing 10 5 12 

TOTAL EXPENDITURES 

PCHRD DOST Php 37.422 Php 30.822 2023 Project Status Hydrogel from pig kidneys: Preparation, characterization, and pre-clinical assessment for kidney tissue regeneration 

Dr. Nathaniel Dugos, De La Salle University - Manila 

Developing potential biomaterial that could be of use in promoting the repair and reconstruction of kidneys with mild to moderate loss of function or up to Stage 3 of Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD), an ECM-based hydrogel from porcine kidneys was explored by Dr. Nathaniel Dugos. Aside from transplantation, the development and characterization of hydrogels from pig kidneys can be utilized in a multitude of applications such as 3D bioprinting, 3D cell culture, and drug delivery systems to further develop products depending on the patient’s personal type of treatment needed. To date, Dr. Dugos’ team have fabricated and produced hydrogel from decellularized pig kidneys. In vitro testing of the hydrogel to test its biocompatibility will be conducted in 2024. 

Benchtop and Clinical Validation of an Energized Reusable Laparoscopic Blunt Dissector 

Deogracias Alberto G. Reyes Sacred Heart Hospital of Malolos 

In minimally invasive surgery, the operation consists of a variety of techniques that cause less damage than open surgery, reducing the risk of complications. One of the first types used is laparoscopy, a procedure done through one or more small incisions using small tubes and tiny cameras and surgical instruments. Though this technique is beneficial to patients, the strain it induces to surgeons is noticeable. Such operations consist of a remarkable time for operating surgeons to set-up and prepare all the necessary instruments and make incisions to start, the long operating procedures give the doctors muscle pains in their hands, back, and legs. In response to this, Dr. Deogracias Alberto is developing an Energized Reusable Laparoscopic Blunt Dissector (ERLBD) that will reduce operating time and consumables used in an operation. It is made of a single piece of metal which eliminates risk of foreign bodies being retained due to the detachable part of the instruments. During the Year 2 implementation, the project has completed most of its target activities including the completion of all benchtop trials and collation of data in preparation for the ex vivo trials involving porcine livers and gallbladder. All results have been statistically analyzed by the statistician. The project completed 87.5% of the Year 2 activities, and is currently awaiting the approval of their ethics application for the ex vivo trials. The ERLBD will lead to a safer, lesser cost and ergonomic surgery. Collectively, it is envisioned that this will reduce overall morbidity and mortality in laparoscopic surgeries. 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

55 

> RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT

Ongoing Projects 

56 RE-EMERGING AND EMERGING DISEASES 

Led by Dr. Marita V.T. Reyes, the project aimed to develop a gender-responsive tuberculosis (TB) program to support improved reporting, management, and prevention of TB among communities. Through the project, the research team aims to support local government units (LGUs) in implementing policies and guidelines for TB, help break the stigma on the disease, and promote awareness and proper health-seeking behavior. The project is divided into three major phases. First, a qualitative research was conducted to validate a gender responsive (GR) checklist and evaluate the baseline GR score of the existing TB program. In the second phase, the research team trained city and barangay staff on gender sensitivity and responsiveness. Lastly, the team presented the results from Phase 1 and 2 to community leaders and policymakers for the development of sustainability measures of gender responsiveness. Last 23 March 2023, the research team presented the project’s accomplishments to the Pasig LGU. The team also conducted a poster making competition among high school students in Barangay Santolan and Manggahan in Pasig to facilitate dissemination of accurate gender responsive messages about TB prevention and management with the help of the community. Concluded last June 2023, the project is funded with a total budget of PhP 4,421,728.80 by the DOST-PCHRD. 

Modeling a Gender Responsive TB Program in the Community: Validation of Gender Responsiveness Standards in TB Prevention and Management 

Dr. Marita V.T. Reyes, Women’s Health Care Foundation (WHCF) 

newly-approved completed ongoing 17 6 35 

TOTAL EXPENDITURES 

# Php 45.669 M Php 365.978 M PCHRD DOST 

The Re-emerging and Emerging Diseases (RED) Program envisions utilizing research on the development of local and novel technology platforms, therapeutics, preventive measures, epidemiology, surveillance, control, and management protocols against re-emerging and emerging diseases, for the benefit of the Filipino people, especially the marginalized and impoverished populations. The program has identified the following key research areas: 1. Novel therapeutics and drug delivery systems against emerging and re-emerging diseases (NCDs and infectious diseases); 2. Epidemiological research on communicable and non-communicable diseases; 3. Preventive interventions (vaccine, and other modalities) against emerging and re-emerging diseases, such as early warning, patient support and biosecurity, biopreparedness systems/platforms against emerging and re-emerging diseases; and 4. Early warning, patient support and biosecurity, biopreparedness systems/ platforms against emerging and re-emerging diseases. 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

57 

> RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT

58 

Completed Project 2023 Project Status 

Aiming to determine the in-vitro effect of bacteriophages in restoring the activity of OXA (Oxacillin) and SXT (Sulfamethoxazole/ Trimethoprim) against Methicillin-resistant Staphyloccocus aureus , this newly implemented DOST-funded project led by Dr. Karl Evans R. Henson of The Medical City will produce a proof-of-concept for phage-antibiotic synergy which could potentially be converted into a therapeutic product in the future. Being implemented under the Virology and Vaccine Research and Development Program (VRP), it aims to establish a niche expertise in advanced testing of phage-antibiotic combination efficacy against multidrug-resistant pathogens. Based on the project team’s preliminary findings, all of the purified 

S. aureus phage lysates have shown complete clearing against most clinical and reference MRSA strains allowing them to move forward to the succeeding parts of their experiment. The project is expected to conclude in July 2024 with a total approved budget of Php 4,940,560.80. 

ResBac MRSA: Restoring antibiotic activity using Bacteriophages against biofilm-forming Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus 

Dr. Karl Evans R. Henson, The Medical City 

Ongoing Projects Inter-Regional Network through One Health Approach to Combat AMR 

Dr. Fema Abamo, Mindanao State University-Marawi 

Led by Mindanao State University - Marawi, in collaboration with its partners across regions, including MSU-General Santos City, University of the Philippines-Diliman, and Central Luzon State University, this program aims to establish an inter-regional network dedicated to combating Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR) within a One-health framework in the Philippines. The primary objectives include assessing the extent of AMR contamination in diverse settings, encompassing hospitals, communities, the water-fish-nexus, animal farms, soil environs, and the entire animal farm to fork continuum. Additionally, the initiative will explore the sociocultural and socioeconomic dimensions of AMR in selected areas across Luzon, Visayas, and Mindanao through collaborative efforts among Higher Education Institutions (HEIs). The program, which is implemented for three years, has a total approved allocated budget of Php 169,372,872.60 which is distributed to its six projects 

Project 1. Sociocultural Dimensions of AMR in the Community and Surveillance of Multidrug Resistant ESKAPE Pathogens in the Hospital Setting 

Leader: Dr. Beverly B. Amparado 

Project 2. Antimicrobial Resistance in Water-Fish-Human Nexus: Mapping of Antibiotic Resistant Escherichia coli, Salmonella spp., Shigella spp. and Vibrio cholerae Using One Health Approach 

Leader: Dr. Fema M. Abamo 

Project 3. Antibiotics and antibiotic resistant bacteria propagating AMR in Soil (AMR Soil) 

Leader: Dr. Maria Pythas B. Espino 

Project 4. Surveillance, Social Dimension and Policy Analysis to Mitigate Antimicrobial Resistance in Swine, Poultry and Aquaculture Farms 

Leader: Dr. Alona T. Badua 

Project 5. Multi-Dimensional Landscape Analysis of Food-Associated Antibiotic Resistance in Selected Areas in the Philippines 

Leader: Dr. Lynn Esther E. Rallos 

Project 6. Cutting-Edge Strategies to Combat AMR Using Biotechnology-based Interventions 

Leader: Dr. Rubiguida Paraguison-Alili 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

59 

> RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT

60 

Virology and Vaccine Research and Development Program (VRP) former Virology and Vaccine Institute of the Philippines (VIP) 

Dr. Anabelle V. Briones, Industrial Technology Development Institute 

Viral diseases pose constant threats against humans, plants, and animals, and impact the different sectors of the economy. A prominent example of such crises would be the emergence of the COVID-19 pandemic. Recognizing the need to create a sustainable and proactive approach against viral diseases, the DOST has initiated several R&D projects through the Industrial Technology Development Institute (ITDI) as the program lead of the The Virology and Vaccine Research Program (VRP), and the DOST-PCHRD being the studies’ monitoring agency. To date, the projects have completed the following accomplishments: 

Project 1. Isolation and purification of Philippine common viruses with medical importance and pandemic potential for antigen-antibody studies - developed different protocols in the metagenomics sequence analyses, viral cultures, and detection via PCR, and different assays in detection of viral antigens. 

Leader: Dr. Anabelle V. Briones 

Project 2. Combination Therapy: Lytic Bacteriophages and Plant Extracts against Multidrug- Resistant Bacteria - isolated fifty-one (51) bacteriophages against ATCC bacteria and multidrug resistant bacteria and is currently undergoing a biological and molecular characterization process 

Leader: Dr. Ursela P. Bigol 

Project 3. Detection of Food and Water-borne Bacterial Pathogens Using Phage-based Diagnostics -sourced a total of 20 coliphages through various sewage facilities and local drainage systems along Metro Manila (Sta. Mesa, Marikina, Manila), and Subic, Zambales in Luzon 

Leader: Mr. Gelito Joseph M. Sikat 

Project 4 . De novo synthesis of a non-Infective Flaviviridae Pseudovirion: Initial development of a template for a safer conduct of Zika-related diagnostics research in the Philippines - constructed arrays of VLP ZIKA targets in preparation for the modified VLP targets to the cloning and expression vector with validation using agarose gel electrophoresis (AGE), polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and DNA sequencing analysis (Macrogen). 

Leader: Dr. Ursela P. Bigol 

The program will benefit public health professionals, policy planners, and the end-users at the community-level, who may use results of the studies in comprehensive understanding of viruses of clinical, agricultural, industrial, and environmental importance as a means to implement evidence-informed decisions. Handwriting assessments among children are crucial as it may be indicative of impairments and affect academic performance. While there are handwriting tools and programs for children, having varying tools result in having different scoring systems, affecting overall handwriting evaluation. The project i-SULAT (Intelligent Stroke Utilization, Learning, Assessment and Testing): A Development of an Intelligent Quantitative Software-Based Handwriting Assessment and Testing System for Early Childhood Handwriting Evaluation led by Dr. Edison Roxas of the University of Santo Tomas (UST) aims to address these problems of inter-tool scoring systems by developing an intelligent, unified handwriting assessment tool. In 2023, the project team successfully built prototypes of the i-SULAT pen and made adjustments to the designs based on testing. A first batch of handwriting evaluations have also been completed. Through this, the team has specified handwriting parameters for both impaired and unimpaired children to enhance the performance of the i-SULAT system. Aside from the development of the handwriting tool, the team is also establishing a standardized handwriting database of primary school children. The database is intended to become a benchmark for future studies and analyses involving handwriting assessments across various medical, neurological, and psychological conditions. 

The project i-SULAT (Intelligent Stroke Utilization, Learning, Assessment and Testing): A Development of an Intelligent Quantitative Software-Based Handwriting Assessment and Testing System for Early Childhood Handwriting Evaluation 

Dr. Edison A. Roxas , Electronics Engineering Department University of Santo Tomas 

The Digital and Frontier Technologies for Health (DFTH) Program focuses on fostering an advanced healthcare landscape through innovative research and development initiatives that seamlessly integrate digital solutions, artificial intelligence, and emerging technologies. In 2023, the DFTH Program demonstrated its commitment to advancing healthcare through a range of projects that highlight achievements in digital health and emerging technologies. These initiatives spanned from innovative solutions for handwriting assessments in children to the integration of artificial intelligence in home healthcare, as well as the development of tools for monitoring rabies, and addressing antibiotic resistance. Aside from support to research, the program participated in activities that showcased DOST-PCHRD-supported projects. The DFTH Team co-organized the iSCENE 2023: International Smart City Exposition and Networking Engagement and participated in the Community Empowerment through Science and Technology for the Municipalities of Bokod and Kabayan, Benguet virtual training, 2023 Samsung Open Source Conference Philippines, and the 2023 Public Sector Day. Through these engagements, it can be ensured that the team is aware of the emerging trends in digital and frontier technologies and find ways to leverage these in health research. In the coming years, the DFTH Program aims to further exemplify its quest for excellence, equity, and effectiveness of healthcare research in the country. 

# DIGITAL AND FRONTIER TECHNOLOGIES FOR HEALTH 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

61 

> RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT

62 

Building from the development of a DOST-PCHRD-supported rabies forecasting tool, Ms. Sherelyn Evangelio of the University of the Philippines Mindanao leads the RabDash DC: A rabies data analytics dashboard integrating predictive models and genome informatics to support the rabies control program in Davao City. The project aims to develop a rabies data analytics dashboard application for Davao Central Veterinary Office (CVO) to make evidence-based strategies to control rabies prevalence in Davao City. Ms. Evangelio’s team developed the dashboard prototype for the Davao Central Veterinary Office and conducted user training on the use of RabDash, which also served as an opportunity to gain feedback on the technology. Furthering their advocacy on rabies control, the team also organized a webinar on “Responsible Pet Ownership” in collaboration with the academe and non-government organizations. In 2023, the proponents received an award from the City Government of Davao called “Pasidungog 2023: Garbo sa Dabaw Award'' in recognition of their commendable effort and enduring commitment in the field of animal health, welfare, and productivity. By employing the dashboard across local government units, the project hopes to contribute in realizing a rabies-free Philippines. 

RabDash DC: A rabies data analytics dashboard integrating predictive models and genome informatics to support the rabies control program in Davao City 

Ms. Sherelyn Evangelio, University of the Philippines Mindanao 

newly-approved completed ongoing 2 5 15 

TOTAL EXPENDITURES 

PCHRD Php 44.486 M 2023 Project Status Ongoing Projects QARE-HHC: Quicker Analytics for ResponsivE Home Health Care 

Dr. Christian Alis, Asian Institute of Management 

Contributing to the initiatives in addressing antimicrobial resistance, this project aims to address the gaps of the Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance Program (ARSP) by creating a prospective online registry on the burden of multidrug-resistant organisms. The proponents successfully established the online registry containing complete antibiotic resistance profiles from the 172 collected Multi-Drug Resistant Gram Negative Bacteria (MDR-GN) isolates. Also, the project team was able to determine clinical information from antibiotic consumption data, which may be leveraged to further improve antimicrobial stewardship in the Philippines. These accomplishments show the importance on how establishing a centralized network for multi-drug resistant bacteria can heavily influence further research in the pharmaceutical field, as well as improving clinical outcome by influencing antimicrobial stewardship practices in the healthcare setting. 

An Online Registry of Carbapenemase Producing Gram Negative Organisms for Evaluating the Clinical Profile, Outcomes, Mechanisms of Resistance and Antimicrobial Stewardship Practices of Two Tertiary Level Hospitals (ORiGiN Study) 

Dr. Cybele Lara Abad, The Medical City 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

63 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

64 

In the Philippines, home health care (HHC) remains to be fairly untapped. Due to this, the regulatory framework for such services is limited. To nurture the HHC landscape in the country, the team of Dr. Christian Alis of the Asian Institute of Management (AIM) partnered with Qavalo, a Cebu-based Business Process Outsourcing (BPO) specializing in providing tech solutions for US home health providers, through the project QARE-HHC: Quicker Analytics for ResponsivE Home Health Care. The QARE-HCC project will develop models using artificial intelligence and machine learning to predict the demand for home healthcare (HHC) services in the country using the existing Qavalo data. QARE-HCC will provide models for data ingestion, preprocessing, and predictive analytics targeting local HHC services to be integrated into Qavalo’s processes. The proponents successfully initiated the construction of a model for home health care data and expanded their regulatory knowledge to include the regulations of the United States, the European Union, and Singapore. In terms of artificial intelligence, efforts included scoping machine learning use cases, setting up a cloud server for secure data access with Qavalo, and creating a proof of concept for an EMR schema in the Philippines. The project team also achieved major milestones by developing four initial machine learning models addressing key aspects of home health care, such as predicting activity intensity and treatment planning. They were also able to finalize a software pipeline for data transformation and cleansing. Information and outputs generated by the project may be used as reference in projects furthering HHC in the country. OMIC TECHNOLOGIES FOR HEALTH 

The OMIC Technologies for Health Program aims to utilize genomics or ‘OMIC' technology platforms in generating meaningful information as inputs into the development of personalized and precision medicines, diagnostics, therapeutics, and other technologies, to support clinical practice guidelines and policies of the Philippines. Knowledge gained from looking into the genes-- and extending these to different biomolecules (RNA, proteins, lipids, carbohydrates, etc.)-- of the Filipino may lead into the development of better, more personalized medicines and therapies for optimum, individualized treatment tailored for the Filipinos. The year 2023 is full of noteworthy events and accomplishments that highlight the advances in omics research and its applications. The DOST’s efforts in genomics research were showcased in the Genomics Impact Assessment Press Conference, which was held at the Philippine Genome Center Diliman on 14 April 2023, with the theme: "From Labs to Lives: Impact of the DOST-led Genomics Program in PH." Research partners, stakeholders, and the media were present to witness the benefits of the genomics projects that were funded by the DOST and DOST-PCHRD between 2010 and 2020, as well as their contribution to improving human health, increasing productivity in agriculture and aquatics, and combating the COVID-19 pandemic. Several initiatives supported by the program were also showcased during the Health Cluster Exhibit and HeaRT Report as part of the 2023 National Science, Technology and Innovation Week Celebration in Iloilo City, specifically the Phil-DIAMOND Program and the Philippine Genome Center in Visayas, which are flagship projects supported by the Council . Through supported projects, the year also witnessed the establishment and operationalization of various laboratories, namely the Center for Research and Development New Laboratory in Davao Medical School Foundation Inc. (DMSFI), Flow Cytometry Core Laboratory in University of the Philippines Manila (UPM), the Mammalian Cell Culture Laboratory-Stem Cell In Vitro Applications in Research and Modeling (MCCL-SCIARM) in University of the Philippines Diliman (UPD), and the satellite disease modeling laboratory at the Mindanao State University-Iligan Institute of Technology (MSU-IIT), which are poised to play a vital role in advancing research capabilities across the country. 

Exploring the unknown on XDP in the Philippines Investigating the Epidemiology of X-Linked Dystonia-Parkinsonism 

Dr. Eva Maria Cutiongco-dela Paz, University of the Philippines Manila 

In 2014, an international consortium was formed to find new treatments for X-Linked Dystonia Parkinsonism (XDP). This global coalition, termed the Collaborative Center for X-Linked Dystonia-Parkinsonism (CCXDP) consisting of scientists and physicians from around the world, works in close partnership with neurology experts and patient advocates in the Philippines. As part of the CCXDP network, Filipino investigators continue to lead new initiatives, including advanced neuroimaging of XDP patients, detailed clinical studies of disease manifestation, and the establishment of the first human brain tissue repository in the Philippines. Even though genetic studies indicate that XDP most likely represents a founder mutation that has occurred within the Panay population, the actual mutation frequency and how widely it is carried among individuals in the Philippines remain unknown. To address this gap, the investigators aim to characterize the genetic prevalence of XDP in the Philippines. In collaboration with the CCXDP of the Massachusetts General Hospital (Harvard Medical School) and Philippine Genome Center, the project will use randomly selected biobanked de-identified residual dried blood spots, or rDBS, from the Philippine Newborn Screening Program. The characterization of the genetic prevalence of the causative gene will provide a better understanding of the burden of disease in the country, as well as help decision-makers to determine where investments in healthcare should be targeted for such a rare disease. To date, Dr. Cutiongco-dela Paz’ team completed the retrieval, sampling, and processing of the total target number of male rDBS, as well as the procurement of major laboratory equipment needed for the semi-automation process of genotyping of rDBS. The team is actively working on the genotyping assay of the collected rDBS samples with almost 40% of the total assays done. DNA extraction of disease-specific changes (DSC-1)-positive cards were performed and were transferred to CCXDP for further genetic testing. By the end of implementation, the outputs of the study can serve as a reference for further research, clinical guidelines, and public health policymaking concerning XDP. A similar workflow may also be developed, tested, and validated for application to other rare diseases. Ultimately, the findings are envisioned to lead to the improvement of clinical management of this uniquely Filipino rare disease. 

newly-approved completed ongoing 9 16 27 

TOTAL EXPENDITURES 

PCHRD DOST Php 22.690 M Php 70.556 M 2023 Project Status Ongoing Projects 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

65 

> RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT

66 Project 1: Biomarkers of Immune Dysfunction in HIV–associated Metabolic and Neurocognitive Complications 

Dr. Marissa M. Alejandria, University of the Philippines Manila 

Project 2: Development of HIV Disease Models and in vitro Investigation of HIV-related Neurocognitive and 

Metabolic Complications 

Dr. Ahmad Reza Mazahery, University of the Philippines 

In the past decade, the Philippines recorded a high incidence rate of HIV infection predominantly affecting the younger, and economically-productive population. This poses an alarming development of HIV-related metabolic and neurocognitive complications as seen in chronically-infected Filipino patients. While antiretroviral therapy (ART) is now available for HIV-positive patients, ART cannot fully eradicate the virus in various reservoir sites (i.e., brain, bone marrow, lymph nodes, and gut), which leads to a continuous cycle of inflammation and failure of the immune system. This immune dysregulation results in serious non-AIDS events (SNAEs) such as neurocognitive dysfunction, metabolic complications, and cardiovascular events. With this, it is imperative to address the gap in cross-sectional studies of viral illnesses like HIV in response to the changing landscape of the disease. To address this, the DOST-PCHRD is supporting two (2) projects under Phil-DIAMOND. Project 1 of the Phil-DIAMOND Program, aims to determine the proportion of Filipino HIV+ patients with neurocognitive and metabolic complications, as well as identify possible biomarkers or genetic mutations that codes for immune dysfunction and viral persistence. This project is headed by Dr. Marissa M. Alejandria of the University of the Philippines Manila, and in collaboration with the Hawaii Center for AIDS (HICFA) and Ndhlovu laboratory at the University of Hawaii in Manoa. Meanwhile, Project 2 of the Phil-DIAMOND Program, headed by Dr. Ahmad Reza Mazahery of the University of the Philippines Diliman, aims to help improve the efforts of personalized medicine in the country. The project aims to develop in vitro biological models that simulate the effects of immune biomarkers during the onset of conditions accelerated by HIV such as neuroinflammation and atherosclerosis, the condition of the thickening of arteries. To date, Project 1 has established a fully-functioning Flow Cytometry Core Laboratory, a facility for the analysis and sorting of cells, in the UPM. The facility is also envisioned to become a training ground for the DOST-PCHRD’s MD-PhD in Molecular Medicine scholars. In support of the Laboratory’s human resources, flow cytometry and virological techniques have been institutionalized and included in the course syllabus of UPM. In addition, blood samples and clinical data from study participants were collected, and DNA extraction protocols on human blood samples and immune marker panels have been optimized. The extracted DNA from the collected samples will be sent to the Philippine Genome Center for sequencing. At the same time, the team is continuously recruiting HIV+ patients for the study. 

Philippine Program for Diagnostic Biomarkers, Disease Modeling, and Nutraceutical Product Development (Phil-DIAMOND): Initial Focus on HIV-related Neurocognitive and Metabolic Complications 

For Project 2, the team has completed the establishment and development of Mammalian Cell Culture Laboratory-Stem Cell In Vitro Applications in Research and Modeling (MCCL-SCIARM) in UPD. This disease modeling laboratory will help in training undergraduate and graduate students, and MD-PhD/Ph.D. students whose research interests include cellular disease modeling, advanced molecular biology techniques, and infectious disease pathogenesis. Moreover, a satellite disease modeling laboratory is being developed at the Mindanao State University - Iligan Institute of Technology (MSU-IIT) in Iligan City. The project team also conducted various inter-program training and workshops on flow cytometry, disease modeling, cell culture, and natural product extraction, as well as completed the training of personnel for induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) generation at Cambridge, United Kingdom hosted by StemCell Technologies. To date, Dr. Mazahery’s team has successfully generated the first-ever iPSCs from Filipino cells. The completion of this experiment will complete the disease models for HIV-related neurocognitive disorders and metabolic complications. By the end of implementation, the outputs of the program can provide awareness and knowledge on the current burden of HIV-related complications. Through the comprehensive test for neurocognitive performance, the results of the study can also provide normative scores that can be used for the diagnosis of HIV-associated neurocognitive disease (HAND) and other neurodegenerative conditions. Ultimately, the findings can provide possible recommendations for the standard of care for people living with HIV which could be made in terms of screening for neurocognitive impairment, as well as monitoring of immune dysfunction levels. More importantly, possible biobanking of the first-ever Filipino-derived iPSCs will provide a safer and more personalized way to study the mechanisms of HIV. The success in developing iPSCs can be used as a disease model not only for HIV, but also to other known diseases that are of high morbidity rate. 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

67 

> RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT

68 Aiming to contribute to the country’s ongoing efforts against cancer, the program explores approaches to cancer characterization and diagnosis geared towards individualized/personalized cancer management. The program is composed of two projects. Led by Dr. Rodney B. Dofitas of the University of the Philippines Manila - Philippine General Hospital (UPM-PGH), the first project: “Next Generation Sequencing-based expression profiling of Breast Cancer among Filipinos and Prediction of Response to Neoadjuvant Therapy for Locoregionally-Advanced Breast Cancer in Filipinos,” seeks to provide further insight into the biology of sporadic cancers that comprise the majority of breast cancer patients. Data from this project can be used to study better treatment options. The project has already completed the dry-run and optimization of core needle biopsy and mastectomy. The research team is also completing the last batch of specimen collection, processing, RNA sequencing, and bioinformatic analysis. The team was also able to establish a partnership with AVATAMED, a Precision Medicine company in Singapore, which will enable the project to exchange facilities, researchers, and students, in addition to sharing of relevant information, materials, and other industry-academia activities. Moreover, the team also partnered 5 Health Pte Ltd., a Singaporean company for the Bot MD platform, to establish an AI-powered tool on Viber and FB Messenger, automating patient engagement, education, and monitoring through reminders, which will simplify data collection for patients' convenience. On the other hand, Dr. Michael Velarde of the University of the Philippines Diliman - Institute of Biology leads the second project: “Development of Breast Cancer Mammosphere Assay for Chemotherapy Screening,” which aims to create a breast cancer mammosphere assay for chemotherapy screening. The mammosphere assay can be used in investigations on the response of breast tumors to specific chemotherapy treatments. To date, the second project has successfully yielded viable organoids that can be used to test for sensitivity of at least 2 chemotherapeutic drugs. The Institute of Biology - Cell Repository website was also integrated with a webpage that can serve as a bioresource for 3D culture, which will enable the expansion of research capabilities, support ongoing scientific trends, and provide enhanced services to the research community. Overall, the program has successfully developed a 3D Cell Culture Breast Cancer Chemotherapy Testing Panel for an individualized therapy and precision medicine. The team also formulated policies, guidelines, and standard operating procedures (SOPs) covering sample collection and RNA preservation in the Philippine Genome Center and University of the Philippines Manila to strengthen breast cancer biobanking capacity in the country. The implementation of the first project is allocated with funding support amounting to Php 65,058,506.39, while the second project is allocated with funding support amounting to Php 24,481,536.00. PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

69 

> RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT

70 

Breast Cancer in the Philippines: Gene Expression Profiling of Breast Cancer Among Filipinos and Development of Breast Cancer Mammosphere Assay Toward Individualized Cancer Management 

Dr. Michael Velarde, University of the Philippines Diliman - Institute of Biology 

Led by Dr. Beatrice J. Tiangco of the UP Manila and Dr. Ranzivelle Marianne Roxas-Villanueva of the UP Los Baños, the program aims to improve the healthcare system concerning liver cancer through the development of an artificial intelligence-driven (AI-driven) platform or system for early liver cancer diagnosis. The platform is intended to be integrated with genomic, ultrasound images, and clinical data specific to Filipino cohorts. The program is composed of two component projects. The first project: “Establishing a Clinical and Genomic Profile of Filipinos for Early Detection of Liver Cancer,” aims to establish baseline and longitudinal data on the genomic profile of healthy versus chronic viral Hepatitis B carriers with and without cirrhosis versus liver cancer patients in the Philippines. Currently, the project has already established a complete clinical and genomic profile of the Filipino population for early detection of liver cancer from a cohort of 800 patients from Luzon, Visayas, and Mindanao. Through the course of its implementation, all enrolled liver cancer and Hepatitis B patients were given crucial medical examinations and treatments, offering a complete approach to patient care which was made possible through strong support from local specialty groups such as the Cancer CARE Registry Philippines Foundation, Inc., the Philippine Society of Medical Oncology, the Philippine Society of Gastroenterology, and the Philippine Cooperative Oncology Group. The resulting data from this project will help Project 2 create an AI-driven algorithm for analyzing and establishing causation between genomic and clinical data for liver diseases. Meanwhile, the second project: “AI-driven Integration of Genomic, Ultrasound, Serum Biomarkers, and Clinical data for Early Diagnosis of Liver Cancer,” has already developed a model to predict disease outcomes using clinical findings. This can offer actionable insights to healthcare professionals in managing disease risks and in planning appropriate interventions for health improvement. The research team is also working on the development of an AI-powered model that can predict normal and abnormal liver ultrasound images from Filipino cohorts. The team was also successful in developing an AI-driven computational platform (Philippine Liver Cancer Data Repository (PLCDR)) that can ingest genomic data, ultrasound images, serum biomarkers, and other clinical information. The first project was implemented from 1 February 2019 to 31 January 2023, with funding from the DOST amounting to Php 113,572,647.36. The second project is currently in its third year of implementation with funding from the DOST amounting to Php 26,658,901.18 

Early CANcer Detection in the LivEr of Filipinos with Chronic Hepatitis B Using AI-Driven Integration of Clinical and Genomic Biomarkers (CANDLE Study) 

Dr. Ranzivelle Marianne Roxas-Villanueva of the UP Los Baños 2INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING For more than four decades, the Council continuously supports initiatives to sustain the country's health research sector by implementing capacity building and development programs 

PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 72 

PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 71 Scholarship Grants 

# Human Resource Development 

The DOST-PCHRD implements scholarship programs to develop and nurture the next generation of Filipino health researchers. This is significant for the ongoing generation of knowledge and advancements in the field of health research and development. Scholarship grants are given to qualified students who must enroll in the Council’s priority graduate degree programs such as MS, PhD, and MD-PhD in local and international partner institutions. (See Annex for the list of scholars 

Status of scholars funded and monitored by DOST-PCHRD 

The MS Molecular Medicine Scholarship Program is a two-year program implemented through the joint efforts of DOST-PCHRD and the St. Luke’s Medical Center College of Medicine William H. Quasha Memorial. The program aims to upgrade the skills of the students in the application of molecular medicine in the clinical setting. It also provides students an opportunity to train in the fully-equipped research laboratories of St. Luke’s Research and Biotechnology Division. In 2023, two (2) new scholars Mr. Joshua Alex Binza and Ms. Alea Jasmine B. Villanueva were accepted into the program. The other two (2) scholars, Ms. Patrice Melody C. Contreras-Hangod and Mr. Romar G. Dabban graduated from the program in August 2023. 

MS Molecular Medicine Scholarship Program 

St. Luke’s Medical Center 

The PhD in Health Research Program is a three-year transnational education program operationalized under the University of Santo Tomas Graduate School in collaboration with the University of South Australia. The program provides an alternative track to acquiring a doctorate degree. This PhD program aims to improve the teaching and research capabilities of health professionals in order to be able to meet the future needs of the country. In 2023, a total of four (4) ongoing scholars were continuously supported under the PhD in Health Research program. The scholars have published three (3) research papers and two (2) abstracts in various scientific journals. They have also presented four (4) research papers in scientific conferences, local and abroad. 

PhD in Health Research Scholarship Program 

University of Santo Tomas 

## Local Scholarships 

STATUS Completed O

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

73 

> INSTITUTIONAL  STRENGTHENING

74 

13 8The MD-PhD in Molecular Medicine Scholarship Program is an eight-year dual degree program implemented through the joint initiatives of the Department of Science and Technology – Philippine Council for Health Research and Development (DOST-PCHRD) and University of the Philippines Manila (UPM). The program aims to develop and train aspiring physician-scientists with a strong background in clinical and biomedical research. In 2023, eleven (11) scholars were conferred with their MD-PhD degrees. To date, the program has a total of 37 graduates. Seven (7) new scholars were accepted in the program this year. 

MD-PhD in Molecular Medicine Scholarship Program 

> University of the Philippines

MD-PhD Summit 2023 

To welcome the new batch of MD-PhD scholars, the MD-PhD Committee organized the MD-PhD Summit 2023 with the theme: “Dilaab: Fueling Curiosity and Fanning the Flames of Passion in Advancing Research” on 07 October 2023 at the Buenafe Hall of the UP College of Medicine main building (Calderon Hall). The event aimed to immerse the new scholars in the life of MD-PhD (student and professional) as well as to recognize the achievements of ongoing scholars during the past academic year. It was attended by the then-Chancellor Carmencita Padilla as the special guest together with the MD-PhD Coordinator, Dr. Leslie Michelle Dalmacio. The presence of the MD-PhD advisers and faculty members such Dr. Paul Medina and Dr. Fresthel Climacosa, who’s also an MD-PhD graduate, was also noted during the event. 

Summer Immersion Program for MD-PhD scholars 

The Council conducted the Summer Immersion Program for the MD-PhD Molecular Medicine Batch 13 scholars on 14-18 August 2023. The program's objective is to provide the opportunity to familiarize the scholars with the DOST system and with the Research and Development landscape of the country, exposing them to different science-oriented and research-oriented institutions. The scholars visited the following DOST agencies and institutions: DOST Central Office (DOST-CO), DOST-Philippine Council for Health Research and Development (DOST-PCHRD), DOST-Food and Nutrition Research Institute (DOST-FNRI), DOST-Industrial Technology Development Institute (DOST-ITDI), University of the Philippines Los Baños (UPLB) - BIOTECH, UPLB - School of Environmental Science and Management (SESAM), United Laboratories (Sekaya R&D Plant), Research Institute for Tropical Medicine (RITM), University of the Philippines, Diliman- Philippine Genome Center (UP-PGC), and UP National Institutes Of Health (UP-NIH). 

2023 Physician Licensure Examination (PLE) Passers 

Four (4) graduates of MD-PhD in Molecular Medicine program, Dr. Jeremiah V. Reyes, Dr. Mark John G. Girasol, Dr. Federico Cristobal C. de Jesus II, and Dr. Mary Elise L. Severino passed the October 2023 Physician Licensure Examination. 

MD-PhD in Molecular Medicine Graduates PCHRD 

Fatima Ericka S. Vista 

Accelerated Science and Technology Human Resource Development Program (ASTHRDP) 

Inah Marie C. Aquino Federico Cristobal C. De Jesus II Eloina Faye S. Gampoy Mark John G. Girasol Ben Anthony A. Lopez Eric David B. Ornos Elgin Paul B. Quebral Jeremiah V. Reyes Joyce Ann H. Robles Mary Elise L. Severino PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

75 

> INSTITUTIONAL  STRENGTHENING

76 

Jeremiah V. Reyes 

MD, PhD 

Federico Cristobal C. de Jesus II 

MD, PhD 

Mark John G. Girasol 

MD, PhD 

Mary Elise L. Severino 

MD, PhD 

List of Board Passers under the MD-PhD scholarship Cohort Doctoral Studies Scholarship Program 

> James Cook University, Australia

The DOST-PCHRD and James Cook University (JCU) offer a Cohort Doctoral Studies Program that will allow professionals to continue addressing health system needs and saving lives in the Philippines while pursuing a doctoral degree in JCU, a world-class teaching and research institution. The flexible part-time PhD program will allow clinicians to benefit from the expertise of a JCU-based supervisor while conducting research locally. Clinicians will be fully-registered as JCU students while spending the majority of their research in an approved institution in the Philippines. Students will have access to high-quality online resources and training provided by JCU and scholarship privileges provided by DOST. The first scholar under the new program, Dr. Marc Edsel Ayes began his PhD studies last February while based at the UP Philippine Genome Center. He was able to attend the cohort block week at JCU in Townsville, Australia in July where he met his colleagues and advisors from JCU. 

MSc/PhD in Tropical Medicine Scholarship Program 

> Mahidol University–SEAMEO TROPMED Network, Thailand

PhD in Molecular Biomedicine Scholarship Program 

> University of Trieste/Fondazione Italiana Fegato, Italy

The DOST-PCHRD, the University of Trieste (UniTS), and Fondazione Italiana Fegato (FIF) entered into an Agreement in 2019 to develop and implement a program focused on molecular hepatology within the PhD Program in Molecular Biomedicine of UniTS. The three-year graduate program integrates basic research and clinics focusing on the study of molecular approaches to cancer biology, genetics, jaundice, and metabolic diseases in the liver. The first batch of scholars in the program, Dr. Loraine Kay D. Cabral and Dr. Noel C. Salvoza, defended their respective dissertations and earned their PhD degree last September 2023. In addition to the four (4) ongoing PhD scholars who are currently working on their dissertations, Melvin E. Bernardino and Cyrollah R. Disoma are the newly-accepted scholars (Batch 4) of the program. DOST-PCHRD partnered with the Faculty of Tropical Medicine (FTM), Mahidol University–SEAMEO TROPMED Thailand to implement two foreign graduate scholarship programs: MSc and PhD in Tropical Medicine Scholarship Program. This partnership aims to offer opportunities for research training, particularly on tropical diseases with the mission of addressing the health systems needs in the country. In 2023, one (1) scholar, Dr. Van Jerwin P. Mercado, was accepted in the PhD program. While the two (2) MSc ongoing scholars, Kristal Dale F. Corpuz and Beatriz Aira C. Jacob, are working on their theses and are expected to graduate in 2024. 

## Foreign Scholarships 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

77 

> INSTITUTIONAL  STRENGTHENING

78 Awards 

The DOST-PCHRD recognizes individuals and institutions for their exemplary research efforts and contributions in enhancing health research capabilities through various health research awards. 

Best Mentor in Health Research Award 

UNDERGRADUATE STUDENTS CATEGORY GRADUATE STUDENTS CATEGORY 

Undergraduate and graduate category cluster winners received plaques of recognition and a cash prize amounting to Php 50,000.00 each. For the junior/early-career researchers category, the cluster winners received plaques of recognition and a cash prize amounting to Php 100,000.00 each. Among the cluster winners, a national winner per category was selected. The national winners are: 

JUNIOR/ EARLY CAREER RESEARCHERS CATEGORY 

The Best Mentor Award is given biennially to recognize and reward mentors in health research who have built the capacities of researchers in the health sector and in the process propelled significant advances in the Philippine National Health Research System’s (PNHRS) thrusts as identified in the National Unified Health Research Agenda (NUHRA). Awardees are selected per cluster (Luzon, Visayas, Mindanao, and NCR) and categorized according to their mentees (Undergraduate Students, Graduate Students and Junior/Early Career Researchers). National winners are also selected per category. Regional cluster and national selection committee meetings were held to determine the winners. The deliberation meetings were attended by representatives from the central offices of DOST, DOH, and CHED, as well as other technical experts. The selected cluster winners are as follows: 

2023 CLUSTER WINNERS 2023 NATIONAL WINNERS 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

79 80 

> Selection Committees of the 2023 Best Mentor in Health Research Award

National winners received trophies and additional cash prizes amounting to One Hundred Fifty Thousand Pesos for Undergraduate and Graduate Category and Two Hundred Thousand Pesos for Junior/Early Career Researchers Category. The winners were awarded during the PCHRD's 42nd Anniversary Celebration. DOST-PCHRD Undergraduate Thesis Grant in Natural Products Oral Research Paper Presentation for the Grantees of the 2022 DOST-PCHRD Undergraduate Thesis Grant in Natural Products 

Encouraging the youth to engage in health research, the DOST-PCHRD Undergraduate Thesis Grant in Natural Products provides fund support to undergraduate students who will conduct their thesis on natural products. It aims to sustain a research culture in natural products and consequently build a pool of researchers specializing in the field. The thesis grant program also supports the Drug Discovery and Development (Tuklas Lunas) Program of the Council which aims to develop safe, effective, and affordable alternative drugs from the country’s natural resources. The 2023 call for applications for the DOST-PCHRD Undergraduate Thesis Grant in Natural Products was started from 10 March and ended last 31 May 2023. The DOST-PCHRD, through the Regional Health Research and Development Consortia (RHRDCs), received a total of 38 proposals from various regions. Out of the 38 applications, a total of 19 grantees from 12 regions were selected for funding. 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

81 

> INSTITUTIONAL  STRENGTHENING

82 

CAR Janyte M. Macanes Benguet State University 

“Characterization of Flavonoids using Quercetin as a Standard for Glochidion luzonense Methanolic Leaf Extract from Atok, Benguet” 

Geraldine Joy Adora Baluquing, Christa Honeyka Quilla, Jemima Bisquera, Colleen Anne Maluyo,Shayne Lynnex Omilla, and Hannah Mae Sicuan 

University of Baguio 

“In Vitro Study of the Potential of Powdered Bugnay (Antidesma bunius (L.) Spreng) Fruit Extract as an Hmg-CoA Reductase Inhibitor” 

Region 1 Ajih Dalle Mayo 

Lyceum-Northwestern University 

“Potential Antioxidant and Antibacterial Activity of Volvariella volvacea Soap: A Promising Defense Against Bacterial Infections” 

Merlie Joy H. Aguila, Immanuel L. Dickson, Genesis Bigie L. Gaspar, Jeza Lauren V. Pilarta, Roshine Joy G. Queddeng, Kayla Mae R. Querubin, and Rheidhel John P. Recaido 

University of Northern Philippines 

“Anti-Angiogenic Property of Synsepalum dulcificum (Miracle Berry) Ethanolic Leaf Extract using In-Ovo Duck Chorioallantoic Membrane (CAM) Assay” 

Region 3 Renalyn Mae E. Diaz 

Nueva Ecija University of Science and Technology 

“Identification and Quantification of Secondary Metabolites of Ficus nota (Blanco) Ethanolic Extracts and its In Vitro Antioxidant and Anti-Cancer Activities” 

Region 4A Daryl B. Ceribo 

University of the Philippines Los Banos 

“Morphology, Chlorotype, Phytochemical Content, and Antioxidant Activity of Philippine Camia (Hedychium philippinense K. Schum.) for Possible Use in Organic Agricultural System” 

Region 9 Jonathan Atendido, Kayla Clarisse Cabilin, and Renz Jeanno Taronga 

Western Mindanao State University 

“In Vitro Litholytic and Nephrolithiasis Inhibition Potential of Asplenium nidus (Bird's nest fern) Leaves Methanolic Crude Extract” 

Florence Midel and Lovey Nino Jey Perez 

Ateneo de Zamboanga University 

“Synergistic Antibacterial Potential of Hylocereus undatus (Red Flesh Dragon fruit) and Persea americana Mill. (Avocado) Fruit Peel Extracts against Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus” 

Region 10 Phil John Vincent L. Datoy 

Mindanao State University - Iligan Institute of Technology 

“Anti-Inflammatory, Antioxidant, and Anthelmintic Activities of Artocarpus odoratissimus Blanco (Marang) Core” 

Bethlehem O. Cabañeros, Kharen Mae P. De Torres, and John Reymart Quejano 

Southern Luzon State University 

“Biological Activities of Endolichenic fungi (ELF) inhabiting Ramalina hossei from Brgy. Anos Tayabas City” 

NCR Angel Yanni Mikaela S. Bolacito, Kaye Ria Julienne L. Cortado, Jenn Christel C. Sampiano, and Renz Miciel M. Trovela 

Ateneo de Manila University 

“Combating Multidrug Resistant Nosocomial Bacteria with Philippine Indigenous Plants” 

Nathalee Kate V. Encinas and Maria Fatima C. Flores 

Centro Escolar University 

“Antibacterial Activity of Selected Mangrove Plants Leaf Extracts against Shrimp Pathogen Vibrio parahaemolyticus” 

Region 6 Alleiah John G. Gumban, Rina Jane B. Lumawag, and Mia Rose B. Vergara 

Central Philippine University 

“Antiparasitic Activity of Ethanolic Extracts from Makabuhay (Tinospora rumphii Boerl) Stem and Dumb Cane (Dieffenbachia seguine (Jacq.) Schott) Leaves Against Sea Lice (Lepeophtheirus spinifer Kirtisinghe) Infestation in Snubnose Pompano (Trachinotus blochii Lacepède)” 

Region 7 Ladashia Blessiliza B. Po 

University of San Carlos 

“In vitro Anti-Tyrosinase Activity of Selected Seaweeds of Cebu” 

Region 8 Rian Lorenzo Mascarina and Jeremy D. Serojales 

University of the Philippines Tacloban College 

“Antibacterial Activity of Bark Fungal Endophytes from Aquilaria malaccensis” 

Ma. Eralyn M. Abad and Hannah Mae M. Duenas 

Visayas State University 

“A Comparative Study on the Secondary Metabolites and Biological Activities of Pseudelephantopus spicatus (Juss. Ex Aubl) Rohr and Fatoua villosa (Thunb) Nakai Leaves, Stem and Root Extracts” 

Cash prizes amounting to Php 30,000, Php 22,000, and Php 15,000 were given to the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd place, respectively, while certificates of recognition were awarded to the winners. The rest of the finalists were given certificates of participation. 

Muhammad Bin Abdulazis A. Usman Jr. and Jefferson Shaunrey O. Yu 

Xavier University 

“Uncovering the Medicinal Potential of Artocarpus odoratissimus B. (Marang) Peels: A Phytochemical Analysis, and its Antioxidative and Anti-inflammatory Activity” 

BARMM Aiman O. Abduljabbar, Nora Mina B. Macapanton, Sohaina C. Mackno, and Norhanipa B. Sultan 

Mindanao State University-Main Campus 

“Phytochemical Profiling of Solanum aethiopicum Fruit Cultivated in Binidayan, Lanao del Sur as a Potential Antihypertensive Plant” 

Region 12 Alyssa M. Molino, Mark Lorenz T. Camban, Bailyn S. Reyes, and Sittie H. Andong 

Sultan Kudarat State University 

“Phytochemicals, Antioxidant and Antimicrobial Properties of Tagpo (Ardisia elliptica Thunb.) Stem bark” 

After completion of the project, an oral research presentation competition will be held to recognize as well as disseminate information regarding the students innovative work on natural products. After completion of the 2022 grantees' projects, the oral research presentation competition was conducted during the National Youth Science, Technology, and Innovation Festival (NYSTIF) on 27 October 2023 at The Forum Tent, PICC, Pasay City. Winners are as follows: 

ORAL RESEARCH PAPER PRESENTATION WINNERS The Balik Scientist Program (BSP), established in 1975 and reinforced by the Balik Scientist Act (Republic Act No. 11035) in 2018, is designed to harness the intellectual wealth of scientists abroad by encouraging foreign-based Filipinos to return and contribute their knowledge and expertise to the country's R&D landscape. In a nutshell, Balik Scientists, across diverse priority areas, provide expertise in project development, offer strategic inputs for R&D roadmaps and health policies, introduce new technologies, and lead knowledge-sharing activities. The overarching goal is to maximize opportunities and cultivate a progressive R&D environment within the Philippines. To enable this, Balik Scientists also pave the way for collaborations and networking. The Program thrives on collaborations with local institutions, fostering knowledge transfer and research advancement. Beyond bringing Filipino scientists home, the program acts as a catalyst for international networks, promoting cross-disciplinary innovation. Balik Scientists receive comprehensive benefits, including insurance, allowances, and relocation support, emphasizing DOST’s commitment to a seamless and rewarding engagement in the Program. 

# PhP 17.845 M 

13 short-term 4 medium-term 2 long-term 2023 Balik Scientist Awardees (PCHRD) Continuing and Ongoing Balik Scientists with Completed Engagements Continuing and Ongoing Balik Scientists being monitored 

# 19 10 17 

Status of Balik Scientists 

Total Expenditures 

# Balik Scientist Program 

In 2023, the Council approved and awarded 19 Balik Scientist applications, comprising 2 long-term, 4 medium-term, and 13 short-term awardees. Additionally, the program monitored and assisted 17 continuing Balik Scientists, with 10 completing their engagements during the year. On publications and academic contributions, Balik Scientists submitted six ISI/Scopus publications, with 28 manuscripts in the pipeline. Moreover, five syllabus/modules were also developed in collaboration with their host institutions. One notable impact of Balik Scientists extended to capacity-building efforts and policy review as exemplified by Dr. Fidela L. Moreno's engagement with the DOH-FDA. Dr. Moreno provided strategic inputs and recommendations on revised clinical trial policies, contributing to the competency framework development for clinical trial reviewers. This significantly supported the DOH-FDA's goal of reaching maturity level 3 as a national regulatory authority. On R & D initiatives, the Balik Scientists actively contributed to 77 assisted projects and introduced three non-patent technologies in collaboration with host institutions. Notable projects included Dr. Thaddeus Carvajal's involvement in the NICER Program, focusing on disease modeling and forecasting technology. Dr. Heidie Cabanos contributed to the DOST supported IMMUNE Program, developing a translational research platform for studying immunopathogenic mechanisms related to diseases such as tuberculosis and coronavirus. Dr. Ricardo Guerrero contributed to three other DOST supported projects, which included building open source instrumentation for fermentation and protein purification, development of chemical tools for protein purification, and the development of droplet digital Technologies for Environmental COVID Testing. Dr. Leodevico Ilag’s projects, on the other hand, focused on providing assistance and support in the establishment of the Virology Institute of the Philippines. The Balik Scientists also organized a total of 125 training/seminars/forum/webinars, engaging 8,398 local researchers and stakeholders in various capacity-building activities. PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

83 

> INSTITUTIONAL  STRENGTHENING

84 In September 2023, the BSP 9th Annual Convention highlighted the achievements and significant contributions of 45 engaged Balik Scientists in advancing science, technology, and innovation at the Quest Plus Conference Center in Clark Freeport, Pampanga. With the theme "Balik Scientist: Harnessing Global Science for Sustainable Development and Transformation," the convention covered topics on agriculture, health, and industry, organized by the sectoral councils under the DOST: PCHRD, PCAARRD, and PCIEERD. During the Health Forum, "PH's Health Security and Health System Resilience for Future Emergencies," DOST-PCHRD Executive Director Dr. Jaime C. Montoya led discussions on health security and system resilience for future emergencies. Panelists, including Rev. Fr. Nicanor Austriaco, Dr. Leodevico Ilag, Dr. Romulo De Castro, and Dr. Annabelle Briones, shared pandemic experiences and emphasized the Balik Scientist Program's role in building resilience against health emergencies, disaster management, climate change, and emerging threats. Dr. Montoya concluded that health security and health system resilience are interconnected and essential for responding effectively to future health emergencies. The lessons learned from past crises, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, underscored the need for proactive measures, international cooperation, technological innovation, and a strong emphasis on community preparedness. Other subsequent forums, moderated by Council Executive Directors, delved into topics on "Climate Smart Agriculture for Food Security," and "Artificial Intelligence: From Policy to Practical Application." In addition to plenary sessions and forums, the convention featured poster exhibits by selected Balik Scientists, sparking discussions on climate-smart agriculture, health security, system resilience, and AI policy applications. In June 2023, the BSP Program hosted the Caraga Orientation and Needs Assessment to promote BSP within the Caraga, Region X, and Region XI consortia. The event sought to foster awareness of the program's benefits, privileges, application processes, and potential impacts on research and development (R&D) within the region among researchers from the academe, government agencies, and private organizations, Attended by 39 institutions, with 16 representatives from various sectors, particularly the health sector, including National Government Agencies (NGAs), State Universities and Colleges (SUCs), and Higher Education Institutions (HEIs), the event included a workshop that enabled participants to actively engage in identifying institutional R&D thrusts, specifying ongoing programs and projects, determining lacking specialized expertise, and pinpointing gaps to be addressed by prospective Balik Scientists. The data gathered from the workshop was consolidated and will serve as a short list of institutions with the need for specific expertise in the priority areas of health R&D. 

# BSP 9th Annual Convention Caraga Orientation and Needs Assessment 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

85 

> INSTITUTIONAL  STRENGTHENING

86 REGIONAL HEALTH RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT CONSORTIA (RHRDC) 

Mirroring the PNHRS framework in the regions is the Regional Health Research and Development Consortia (RHRDC), a mechanism that ensures the advancement of health research across the country. The RHRDCs facilitate health research in the regions ensuring that local researchers are well-capacitated to conduct research that will address local health needs. Each RHRDC addresses concerns relating to local health research agenda, human resource, conduct of research, dissemination and utilization of research, resource mobilization, leadership and management. The DOST-PCHRD oversees the operations of the RHRDCs. In 2023, the RHRDC program has disbursed a budget of P 65,456,198.22 for the operational activities in the 17 regions, including BARMM. This budget has been utilized to fund the Institutional Development Activities (IDA) of the consortia. Also this year, the RHRDC program assisted 18 early-career researchers in securing research and development (R&D) funding under the Regional Research Fund (RRF) Initiative. The program provided financial assistance to promising researchers and encouragement to pursue research that addresses the health needs of their respective regions. To enhance the research capacity of researchers and encourage them to conduct high-quality research, the RHRDC program also conducted a total of 94 training sessions in various topics which was participated in by a total 3356 researchers. 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

87 

> INSTITUTIONAL  STRENGTHENING

88 newly-approved ongoing Breakdown of project funds released per cluster 

Luzon - PHP 6,104,820.45 NCR - Php 2,960,951.54 Visayas - Php 1,180,289.00 Mindanao - Php 1,360,874.75 18 48 

TOTAL EXPENDITURES 

# Php 11.607 M Status of RRF projects in the regions Distribution of newly- approved RRF projects in the regions 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

89 90 INSTITUTIONAL  STRENGTHENING 

# REGIONAL RESEARCH FUND 

Through the Consortia, the Council supports early-career researchers by providing research grants of up to 1,000,000 pesos under its Regional Research Fund (RRF) initiative. The RRF aims to encourage early-career researchers to be actively involved in health research activities aligned with their respective Regional Health Research Priorities (RHRP), without having to compete with experienced researchers. This helps them gain experience that will improve their competency in designing, implementing, and managing health research projects. For 2023, a total of 18 new projects by early-career researchers from Regions 1, 3, 4A, 5, NCR, 7, 8, and 9 were approved by the Council, indicating a 157.14% increase in approved proposals from the regions compared from the previous year. Some of the research areas being addressed by the newly-approved projects include mental health, drug discovery and development (Tuklas Lunas), one health, communicable and non-communicable diseases, and health of vulnerable populations. Philippine Health Research Ethics Board (PHREB) 

Integral to generating quality health solutions is the ethical conduct of research. A mechanism in ensuring this throughout all activities involved in research conducted in the country is implemented by the PHREB, a national policy-making body that upholds adherence to the universal principles for the protection of human participants in research. Assisting the PHREB in implementing its policies as well as functions in the regions are the Regional Ethics Monitoring Boards (REMBs). The REMBs, serving as PHREB regional arms, were established in Ilocos (Region 1), Western Visayas (Region VI), and Davao (Region XI) through the DOST Special Order No. 248 series of 2017. The PHREB executes its mandates through the following Committees: Standards and Accreditation, Information Dissemination, Training, and Advocacy, Networking, and Patient, Family, and Community Engagement. In 2023, the composition of the Board 

was reconstituted by virtue of DOST Special Order no. 798 dated 21 July 2023, designating Dr. Sonia E. Bongala as the Chair, and Ms. Carmen V. Auste as the Vice Chair. In charge of monitoring and evaluating the performance and quality of review of Research Ethics Committees (RECs) by implementing the PHREB Accreditation program is the Committee on Standards and Accreditation (CSA). In 2023, the PHREB- and the REMB-CSA accredited a total of 45 RECs (17 - Level 1; 15 - Level 2; 13 - Level 3) in NCR, MIMAROPA, BARMM, and Regions I, II, III, V, VI, VII, VIII, IX, X, XI, and XII. Through its Committee on Information Dissemination, Training, and Advocacy (CIDTA), PHREB conducted a total of 75 online and face-to-face training workshops consisting of Basic Research Ethics Training, Good Research Practice Training, Continuing Research Ethics Training, and Standard Operating Procedure Workshop across the 17 Regions. A total of 1,686 participants attended these training workshops, of which 1,240 were researchers. To develop a cadre of informed, confident, and dedicated research ethics trainers for the PHREB CIDTA and the REMBs, a Training of Trainers was held on 20-21 March 2023, at the Philippine International Convention Center, Pasay City. Atotal of 27 participants endorsed by the PHREB CIDTA and the REMBs in Regions I, VI, and XI were trained while 11 CIDTA trainers from the existing pool attended as observers and provided inputs in the discussions. As the regional arms of the PHREB-CIDTA, REMBs VI and XI conducted in their regions nine (9) and three (3) ethics training, respectively. The two (2) REMBs also conducted four (4) advocacy campaigns and institutional orientations. During the 16th PNHRS Week Celebration, the PHREB-CIDTA also organized a pre-conference session entitled, “Practical Training for Research Ethics Committee Chairs, Member Secretary, and Staff Secretariat.” A total of 50 participants consisting of the chairs, member secretary, and staff secretary from selected institutional RECs attended the training. Guiding the RECs and researchers alike in ensuring the ethical conduct of research, the PHREB leads the crafting of the National Ethics Guidelines. The 2022 National Ethical Guidelines for Research Involving Human Participants (NEGRIHP) was published in the Official Gazette on 27 February 2023, took effect on 14 March 2023, and distributed to RECs and other stakeholders across the country. Aside from PHREB’s participation in public consultations conducted by the Department of Health (DOH), specifically on the National eHealth Program and the Guidelines in the Regulation of Stem Cell Therapies, PHREB also provided inputs in the National Privacy Commission’s draft policy on Consent. The Council works hand in hand with the Philippine Health Research Ethics Board and the National Ethics Committee to ensure the ethical conduct of research in the country. 

# Keeping health research ethical and safe 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

91 

> INSTITUTIONAL  STRENGTHENING

92 In support of the PHREB’s mission, the NEC reviews research protocols to ensure research activities will be conducted ethically. In 2023, the NEC accepted seven (7) Social/Behavioral and Health Operations Research protocols for ethical review, of which two (2) were given ethical clearance. Meanwhile, one (1) protocol accepted for review in 2022 was approved by the NEC this year, and 12 previously approved protocols underwent continuing and monitoring reviews. 

# National Ethics Committee (NEC) “Mainstreaming Ethics in Human-Participant Research: Perspectives and Practices of Social Science Research Organizations and Researchers in the Philippines” 

Dr. Lourdes M. Portus, Philippine Social Science Council 

To address the research gaps on how ethical standards in human participants research are embedded among social science research organization and researchers in the Philippines and how codes of ethics are implemented in research community and affect researchers, Dr. Lourdes M. Portus of the Philippine Social Science Council implemented the project entitled, “Mainstreaming Ethics in Human-Participant Research: Perspectives and Practices of Social Science Research Organizations and Researchers in the Philippines." The project investigated how codes and principles of ethics have been embedded, enforced, and implemented among research organizations and researchers’ ethical mindset and behavior to protect the dignity, rights and wellbeing of participants. Through online surveys, key informant interviews, and focus group discussions, the project determined the following: 1.  presence of an internal code of ethics to participating research organizations, plans and challenges of organizations in creating an internal code of ethics; 2.  effects of the absence of a code of ethics in monitoring compliance with ethical research practice; and 3.  how research organizations implement ethical standards and codes in human-participant research and incorporate data privacy protection in their code of ethics. Completed on 12 August 2023, the project was able to produce a set of infographics containing the rationale of the study, major findings, identified challenges, and policy recommendations. 

“Benchmarking study on comparable standards and ethics review procedures in countries with systems or practices that can serve as models for further improvement” 

Dr. Cristina E. Torres, University of the Philippines Manila 

To cope up with new challenges and demands in reviewing research protocols, Research Ethics Committees (RECs) need to update their systems and practices, hence the implementation of a project entitled, “Benchmarking study on comparable standards and ethics review procedures in countries with systems or practices that can serve as models for further improvement.” Led by Dr. Cristina E. Torres of the University of the Philippines Manila, the project explored the current state of the Philippine RECs including the utilization of tools and approaches in ethical review of research protocols, adoption of ethics oversight system, as well as the identification of best practices in terms of REC review procedures/performance and accreditation processes to support continual quality improvement. In 2023, the project conducted an assessment of the local RECs' performance using the 2023 WHO Global Benchmarking tool. Using the benchmarking scores, the gaps in the REC performance were identified. The study found that there was full implementation in the aspects of REC structure/composition and REC procedures, while only partial implementation was noted for the criteria to wit, legal and regulatory framework, resources, transparency and accountability, monitoring of performances, and responsible research institutions. Focus group discussions among RECs and other research stakeholders in the country were also conducted to obtain opinions on REC practices and accreditation processes. 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

93 

> INSTITUTIONAL  STRENGTHENING

94 

Completed Projects 3Section 4 of Executive Order No. 128, s. of 1987 mandates the Department of Science and Technology (DOST) to formulate and implement policies, plans, programs, and projects for the development of science and technology and for the promotion of scientific and technological activities for both the public and private sectors, and to ensure that the results of scientific and technological activities are properly applied and utilized to accelerate economic and social development. The Council has various programs which aims to support projects and activities on research utilization. 

# RESEARCH UTILIZATION 

PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 96 

PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 95 The Council puts significant emphasis on the translation of research outputs to ensure that they will eventually benefit their target end users. In line with this mission, the Council through its Intellectual Property and Technology Management (IPTM) unit, works to increase IP and technology transfer capabilities among its partner institutions, bridge the gap between laboratories and markets through the provision of funding support for technology translation and pre-commercialization activities, and build stronger government-academe-industry partnerships. Under the Health Research and Technology Innovation or HeaRTnovation umbrella program, the IPTM offers pre-commercialization support services namely: Technology Transformation and Empowerment of Knowledge Generators and Innovators in Health Program (TEKI in Health), Intellectual Property Protection and Management of Health Research Outputs (IPROTECH) Program, Startup Research Grant Program (SGP); and creates a comprehensive portfolio of PCHRD-supported health technologies. 

The PUGAD Project, implemented by the PPS Innovations Inc. under the leadership of Dr. Josefina Goh-Cruz, as an incubation center empowers locals in Puerto Princesa, Palawan by cultivating ideas and generating health technologies that will address the community’s needs. The project concluded in September 2023 and was able to develop three product prototypes namely: a malaria surveillance-automated microscope-based device, a WiSo or wifi controlled socket that will enable control of the environment through a smartphone or a computer, without Internet, and NoNa,a virtual library that is accessible from a smartphone within 20 meters, with no need for Internet or cell signal. The conduct of various startup creation and youth-training activities of the project was also made successful by the partnership forged with Pueblo Science and Impact Centre, both institutions located in Toronto, Canada. Completed on 15 June 2023, the University Innovation Fellows (UIF) for Health was implemented by the UPSCALE Innovation Hub of the University of the Philippines Diliman led by Dr. Luis Sision. The project aims to establish and implement tailored training programs for researchers and project leaders of healthcare-related research projects funded by and/or intending to apply for funding from the Department of Science and Technology. With a total of P 4,995,654.40 project fund, the project accomplished the following: 

PUGAD – a project for community-based nucleation, nurture and incubation of health-related products and services 

PPS Innovations Inc. 

University Innovation Fellows (UIF) for Health 

University of the Philippines Diliman 

• 17 venture teams formed • 34 industries mentored • 12 venture value propositions canvassed • 4 invention disclosures and prior art searches • 2 spin-off teams formed • 2 business model canvases created • 4 ongoing industry partnership negotiations 

TEKI in Health 2 3 2 11,206,688.73 11,235,592.00 

978, 497.79 16,921,074.49 40,341,853.01 IPROTECH 1305614 SGP 0 2 6Other activities TOTAL 

PROGRAM Ongoing New Completed NUMBERS OF PROJECTS FUND RELEASED IN 2023 

# Intellectual Property and Technology Management Completed Projects in HEALTH PROGRAM 

TEKI in Health, or the Technology Transformation and Empowerment of Knowledge Generators and Innovators in Health Program, provides funding support to non-R&D projects focused on pre-commercialization activities for health technologies and innovations that will be utilized through community adoption or creation of spin-off companies. In 2023, the Program expanded its services to provide support to non-academic institutions through the Health Research and Innovation Hubs Program. A total of three new projects were supported, in addition to two ongoing projects. A total of P 11,206,688.73 worth of funding support were provided to new and ongoing projects in 2023. PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

97 

> RESEARCH UTILIZATION

98 Intellectual Property Protection and Management of Health Research Outputs (IPROTECH) Program 

To address the gap in the HIV treatment cascade for people living with HIV, the HerbalRx International Incorporated dba Kalesa Health designed, developed, and field tested the PlusPal, a purpose-built web-based online platform for integrated HIV service delivery. Aside from the online platform developed, the project which ended in December 2023 was awarded with three copyright certificates, forged a partnership with the Pinoy Plus Advocacy Pilipinas Inc. to become its implementing site, and drafted a white paper policy brief entitled, “Institutionalization of a dedicated online service delivery platform for people living with HIV (PLHIV)," that can better allow the integration of PlusPal into various existing health systems in private, public, and non-government organizational levels. 

Design, Development, and Field Testing of a purpose-built online platform for integrated HIV service delivery 

HerbalRx International Incorporated dba Kalesa Health 

HOCLOMAC: Product Enhancement and Market Testing of a Low-Cost On-Site Hypochlorous Acid Generator for Sanitation and Disinfection 

USHER Technologies Inc. 

# STARTUP RESEARCH GRANT PROGRAM 

In line with the Republic Act 11337, or the Innovative Startup Act, the Council provides support to research activities of startups in the health sector. Through the Startup Research Grant Program (SGP), financial support is given to qualified startups to conduct research activities aimed at: overcoming R&D roadblocks; strengthening intellectual property (IP); establishing initial market traction; refining business model; and scaling up production. In total, five startups were supported by the Council with funding allocation amounting to 11,235,592.00 million pesos in 2023. Designed by the team of the USHER Technologies Inc. led by Engr. Febus Reidj G. Cruz, HOCLOMAC was further enhanced in response to the increased demand for disinfectants as regular disinfection of frequently touched surfaces was highly advised to prevent the spread of COVID-19. The project ended on 15 July 2023 and was able to produce 4 product prototypes and filed for patent application. Seven personnel were also trained in developing and using the device. 

Development of the Go-PainFree Integrated Telerehabilitation Services for Pain Management During and After the Pandemic 

PainFree Pain Management and Consulting, Inc. 

With the goal of providing real-time treatment to patients experiencing body aches and pain, the PainFree Pain Management and Consulting, Inc., a startup company founded by Dr. Valentin C. Dones III, developed the Go-PainFree Online Telerehabilitation Platform called Telepainfree. Available via web and mobile application, Telepainfree, allows video conferencing between patient and the Painfree Specialist, viewing of the step-by-step tutorial on applying tape application techniques, permits virtual consultation with doctors and virtual rehabilitation services for patients. This technology not only streamline the treatment process, but also facilitates the meticulous management of records and other pertinent information, guaranteeing the effective implementation of treatments and maintaining comprehensive and organized healthcare documentation. Ended in February 2023, the project was also able to train 126 physical therapists and practitioners on Go-PainFree treatment; apply the online platform for patent, and produced an operational manual for the implementation of the online physical therapy services. IPROTECH is the intellectual property (IP) support program of PCHRD, which provides IP-related services to the Council’s RHRDC members as well as private institutions and startups within the Council’s network that have successfully generated government-funded IPs in the field of health. 

Impacting Every Juan’s Health through Technology Transfer (Phase 2): Building a stronger market-ready IP Portfolio from UP Manila DOST-Funded Technologies 

University of the Philippines Manila - Technology Transfer and Business Development Office (UPM-TTBDO) 

The project aims to strengthen UP Manila’s IP portfolio by filing intellectual property (IP) applications, subjecting market-ready health technologies under IP valuation and freedom-to-operate (FTO) search, and to enhance their respective business plans. These activities contribute to the progress of UPM-TTBDO’s overall plan of bringing UPM-generated health innovations in the market. Through the project, the team was able to accomplish the following: • Filed one (1) National Phase Entry (NPE) application; • Filed three (3) Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) applications; • Filed five (5) local patent applications; • Generated five (5) freedom-to-operate (FTO) reports; • Generated five (5) valuation reports; • Generated ten (10) business plans; and • Published one (1) article. With funding support amounting to PhP 4,950,799.84, the project was completed last March 2023. 

Patent and trademark protection for the online system of SeeYouDoc (SYD) 

SeeYouDoc Corp. 

SeeYouDoc Corp., is a startup company whose project on building an interactive analytics platform to help medical facilities in the country adopt telemedicine is funded by DOST-PCHRD. To protect the intellectual property (IP) generated in the previous project, the Council once again supported the project. Through this support, SYD was able to partner with Pinoy IP Works Inc. (PIWI), which assisted SYD to register trademarks for 5 products, to obtain copyright for a publication (Output 1), and to file a patent application under the DOST’s SciTech Superhighway Program, pending approval. Six of SYD’s personnel were also able to directly work on the patent and trademark application. Concluded on 30 September 2023, the project was able to support SYD in developing its IP Policy and Manual which shall serve as the company's guide in implementing policies, procedures and management practices, and in the conduct of its operations in compliance with intellectual property laws. 

Patent Protection for IP Generated During the Development of a Magnetic Distal Targeting Device (Orthopaedic International, Inc.) 

"Through this support, the project was able to file a Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) application for the device. 

During the implementation of the R&D project entitled, 

"Development of a Magnetic Distal Targeting Device for Intramedullary Nails" funded by the DOST, the proponent was able to design a unique magnetic tracking device with a simplified tracking method. With this, the DOST-PCHRD supported another project which aims to secure intellectual property registration for invention generated during the development of a magnetic distal targeting device. Through this support, the project was able to file a Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) application for the device. Securing an international patent for this new device will allow the Orthopaedic International, Inc. to develop a product line of devices for different applications without infringing on existing patents. The project ended last December 2023. PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

99 

> RESEARCH UTILIZATION

100 

Completed Projects HeaRTNovation Hubs Program 

Launched in 2023, the HeaRTNovation Hubs Program aims to support hospitals and health institutions to establish innovation hubs that will facilitate technology incubation and pre-commercialization of their health research technologies. The Program was developed under the project: “Establishment of PCHRD Health Research and Technology Innovation Hubs (HeaRTNovation Hubs): Expanding the TEKI in Health Program among Health Institutions,” 

which was submitted to the National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA) for initial funding support. Through this project, the Council developed the framework and guidelines and also completed the preparatory phase, policy review, information gathering, mapping of stakeholders and planning for the implementation phase of the program. Among these accomplishments include the review of annual reports and technical papers, consultation meetings with different stakeholders and different actors in the health innovation ecosystem, and identification of the necessary resources needed to establish the innovation hubs. Existing Technology Business Incubators (TBI) guidelines were studied and benchmarking activities were also conducted, both locally and internationally. A Technical Advisory Group (TAG) was also established and convened for the finalization of the program framework, and a legal counsel was consulted on its legal aspects. The PCHRD has already conducted a series of capacity-building activities after a call for applications to orient and equip nominated innovation officers from the hospital or health institution on the key concepts of H-hub establishment and proposal development. Following the 4-month capacity-building activities, all five institutions who participated were able to submit their proposals for the establishment of their respective H-hubs. The Council is currently evaluating received proposals for possible implementation in February 2024. 

# HeaRTNovation Portfolio Assessment and Prioritization Criteria (HPAPC) 

The HeaRTnovation Portfolio Assessment and Prioritization Criteria (HPAPC) is an expert-reviewed and validated set of prioritization criteria that will guide the Council in identifying health technologies that will be prioritized for funding and support in terms of translation and pre-commercialization activities. To craft the HPAPC, a series of consultation meetings were conducted from August to December 2023 with four (4) technical consultants. The final HPAPC is divided into four (4) main categories: (1) Market potential, (2) Impact to society, (3) Technical viability, and (4) Capability to eliminate risks; and is coupled with a scoring matrix. All health technologies that are funded and monitored by the Council will be evaluated using the HPAPC. 

# Philippine Health Research Innovations Matching Event (PHRIME) 

The Philippine Health Research Innovations Matching Event (PHRIME) aims to match health innovations with potential R&D and industry partners, and community adopters. The fourth installment of PHRIME was conducted last 7 December 2023 at the Batangas State University (BSU), with the theme: “From Concept to Community: Revolutionizing Healthcare through Health Innovations.” The event featured the following PCHRD-funded health technologies and innovations for adoption by the community: • Inclusive Innovations for Localized eHealth Platforms: The Smarter and Integrated Local Health Information Systems (SMILHIS) • Malnutrition Reduction Program: Roll out of Complementary Food Processing Facility (Batch 3) • Development of Health Index and Vulnerability Reduction System for Region 4B (D-hive 4B Capital) • POWer App: Mobile Health Application Development for Remote Screening & Early Detection of Children with Mobility Impairment In 2023, the IPTM focused on strengthening and expanding its HeaRTnovation Programs, HeaRTnovation Portfolio, and HeaRTnovation webinar series. Key highlights of IPTM’s accomplishments for 2023 include the launching of the HeaRTnovation Hubs (HHUBS) Program and the creation of the HeaRTnovation Portfolio Assessment and Prioritization Criteria (HPAPC). 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

101 

> RESEARCH UTILIZATION

102 Creating guidelines and tools for improving health research and development involves careful crafting practical suggestions and useful strategies. Hence, the DOST-PCHRD plays an important role in developing effective policy recommendations and instruments for health R&D. In 2023, the Council participated in formulating policy recommendations in support of the following legislations: Participating in congressional hearings for health research is vital to influence legislative decisions, shape health policies, raise public awareness, foster collaborations, advocate for legislative amendments, and address ethical considerations. Active engagement in these forums can have a lasting impact on the trajectory of health research and its contributions to health and well-being. RESEARCH TO POLICY TRANSLATION 

The utilization of health research in policy-making should contribute to policies that may eventually lead to desired outcomes, including health gains. Recognizing this importance, the Council offers the “Health Research Policy Translation, Evaluation, and Engagement (POLISEE) Grant” to provide technical and financial support to researchers who have completed PCHRD-funded studies with policy implications. In 2023, the project entitled “The Development of Policy Instruments and Stakeholder Engagements for OFW Inclusive and Sustainable Mental Health and Well-Being Protection,” led by Dr. Veronica Ramirez of University of Asia and the Pacific, was approved with a total grant amount of P409,618. 

# Health Research Policy Translation, Evaluation, and Engagement (POLISEE) Grants Program 

• Development of the Policy on Mainstreaming Disaster Risk Reduction and Management in Health (DRRM-H) in Local Leadership and Governance • Mandatory Immunization Program • Trans Fatty Acids • Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) Agreement • Salt Iodization • Safe Tourism • Physician’s Act • AMDABiDSS-Health PPASTOL's Policy Briefs • ASEAN Leaders' Declaration on One Health • Establishment of the Center for Disease Prevention and Control • Low Carbon Economy Act of 2022 • Strengthening the National Nutrition Council • SB 2218 and SRN 4 (Tatak Pinoy Strategy) • Tatak Pinoy Strategy • Establishment of the E-Health System • Philippine Gastronomy and Culinary Heritage Bill • Medical Marijuana Compassionate Bill • DOST 1 TBI Program • HB 8525, 8601, 8671, 8709 (Tatak Pinoy) • Amendment to MH Act of 2017 • Enhancement of IKSPs PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

103 

> RESEARCH UTILIZATION

104 Introduction to Evidence-informed Policymaking for Health: 4th DOST-PCHRD Webinar and Workshop Series for Early Career Researchers 

The Council conducted a series of webinars and workshops for early-career researchers to bridge the gap between research and policy by building the capacity and network of health research stakeholders on research to policy translation. 

# 3-Minute Pitch to Policymakers Competition 

Held during the 16th PNHRS Week Celebration at Summit Hotel in Tacloban City, Leyte last 9 August 2023, nominated participants from the different RHRDCs presented their completed research in a three-minute, one-slide presentation to a non-specialist audience. Each was graded and subsequently ranked according to: Comprehension (35%), Communication Style (35%), and Engagement (30%). 

1st Place: Mr. Halid M. Tamano (Region 9) 

2nd Place: Prof. Danica L. Resuello 

(NCR) 

People's Choice Award: 

Dr. Krista Angela M. Muralla 

(Region 5) 

3rd Place: Mr. Eduard Paul P. Paca 

(Region 8) 

• The Role of Local Youth (SK) Leaders in Evidence-informed Health Policymaking 

The goal of this webinar is to equip the participants on the basics of translating research into policy and provide a better understanding of the research and political ecosystem specific to youth leadership at all levels of government. This event was broadcasted live via Zoom with 223 participants and via the DOST-PCHRD’s Facebook page with 837 views last 5 June 2023. 

• Introduction to Evidence-Informed Policymaking for Health: 4th DOST-PCHRD’s Webinar/Virtual Workshop for Early-Career Researchers 

The goal of this workshop is to capacitate early-career researchers to conduct problem and stakeholder analysis in order to properly utilize their research for policy change. Sixteen representatives from the RHRDCs participated in this workshop held on 18-20 October 2023 at Savoy Hotel Manila. Participants were required to prepare a policy brief outline and a policy pitch as their workshop outputs. PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

105 

> RESEARCH UTILIZATION

106 

## Winners The Council aims to increase access to health research information through its Information Products and Services (IPS) unit which offers access to information systems and platforms. This is done through establishing partnerships with research-generating institutions and promotion and enhancements of existing platforms, the Health Research and Development Information Network (HERDIN). It can be accessed through https://www.herdin.ph/. HERDIN Capacity Building Launching of Social Innovation in Health Exchange (InnovEx) 

HERDIN is a health research information management system and collaboration platform that allows Higher Education and Research and Development Institutions to collect, organize, and disseminate their research outputs. To capacitate HERDIN partner institutions in sharing health research through the platform, the Council conducted a series of face-to-face and virtual trainings across the regions. To become a HERDIN Partner, interested institution has to go undergo two phases of training. First, the HERDIN Orientation which showcased how the platform can help institutions in disseminating, managing, and monitoring their health research information. Second, the Research Camp which provided a hands-on experience of using the HERDIN. In 2023, 18 orientations and two research camps were conducted. The Council also signed amemorandum of understanding with nine new HERDIN institutional partners, majority of which came from specialty societies and publishers. Funded by the DOST-PCHRD, the InnovEx, an online platform for the social innovation in health (SIH) ecosystem, was launched in December 2023. From the project, “Development of an Online Social Innovation in Health (SIH) Exchange Platform” by Dr. Meredith Del Pilar-Labarda of the University of the Philippines Manila, the InnovEx is an online venue for learning, sharing, collaborating, and networking among SIH stakeholders in the country. It provides accessible and comprehensive databases of actors, knowledge resources and other open-source materials on SIH and related fields; and facilitates idea exchange and co-creation through online communities of practice and discussion forums. The platform is envisioned to bring together frontline health system practitioners, including implementers and innovators, researchers, and partners such as funders and technical assistance providers, policymakers, and community members, to interact and share resources with each other, thus accelerating social innovations in health. 

# Information Products and Services 

HERDIN website visits 

# 4,412 496,252 1,075 1,697 496,252 20 923

Inquiries served Full-texts served HERDIN Website Visits HERDIN events conducted New partnerships established New projects approved Ongoing projects on platform development 

New records uploaded in HERDIN 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

107 

> RESEARCH UTILIZATION

108 

> September September

fund released 

# 6.5 Million TOTAL NUMBER OF SRD PROJECTS SUPPORTED Scientific events Paper presentation Material development Publication 6929

The DOST-PCHRD through its Grants-In-Aid Program, offers the Support to Research Dissemination (SRD) Program which aims to support projects and activities on research dissemination, including, but not limited to support to publication, paper presentation, and scientific events. In 2023, the Council approved 26 requests for SRD of which nine were requests for publication, six for scientific events, nine for paper presentation, and two for material development. A total of six million five hundred thirty-eight thousand four hundred two pesos and thirty centavos (Php 6,538,402.30) was released under this program. 

# Support to Research Dissemination 26 

# Communications 

109 

> RESEARCH UTILIZATION

110 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

The Talakayang Health Research and Technology (HeaRT) Beat, a press conference series launched in 2019, is one of the platforms used by the HeaRT for the Filipino campaign to further generate awareness about DOST-PCHRD’s initiatives on health research specifically, our local scientists shared exciting developments on their projects and experiences. Through the Talakayang HeaRT Beat, not only the latest updates in health research were shared but dialogues between health research stakeholders, the media, and the greater Filipino community were made possible. 

This year, 10 sessions (8 virtual and 2 hybrid) of THB were organized by PCHRD. 

1st Place & Tuklas Namin, Tuklas Ninyo (University of San Agustin) – USA TLC Phase 2: Early-Stage Development of Antibiotic and Anticancer Leads from Philippine Marine Streptomyces 

3rd Place: PRP: Prompt Return to Play (University of Santo Tomas) – The development of a local technology in the preparation of platelet-rich plasma PCHRD Executive Director’s Choice Award: There is no Public Health without Environmental Health (University of the Philippines Diliman) – Development of Novel Detection Tools for the Integrated Surveillance and Monitoring of Helminthic Neglected Tropical Diseases (NTDs) of Mutual Public Health Importance in the Philippines and China 

Ongoing Projects Category 

1st Place & PCHRD Executive Director’s Choice Award: Solo Guitar Ensemble (UP College of Music) – G.T.A.R.A. (Grip/Grasp Training with Active Range of Motion Activities using Guitar): Guitar Lessons for Restoring Hand Function Among Patients with Unilateral Hand Impairment from Chronic Stroke 

2nd Place: Healthcare in a Box by Filipinos, for Filipinos (UP Manila – College of Medicine) – SIBOL COVID Task Force – Telemetry System for COVID-19 PGH Response Team” (or the RxBox Telemetry System Project) 

3rd Place: Power Me UP! Battling the complexities of HIV (UP Manila – College of Medicine) – HIV Gaming, Engaging, and Testing (G.E.T.) Project 

Completed Projects Category 

To mark the start of the campaign, aphotojournalism contest entitled, “Capture the Heart in Health Research: A Photojournalism Contest 2023 was held from January to March 2023. It aims to highlight the role and contributions of health research and technology in making lives better for the Filipino people through photos. The contest was open to all project leaders and members whose research is supported by the DOST-PCHRD from 2017 to 2023. 

2nd Place: tRAnsforming the World Through Health Research (University of the Philippines Diliman) – Rational Design and Structural Modification of ACE2 inhibitors from Terrestrial Plants 

# CAPTURE THE HEART IN HEALTH RESEARCH PHOTOJOURNALISM CONTEST WINNERS 

People’s Choice Award: Teamwork makes the Dream Work (University of Santo Tomas) – Blood and placental gene expression in gestational diabetes mellitus: potential identification of early biomarkers 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

111 

> RESEARCH UTILIZATION

112 

DATE NUMBER OF VIEWERS/ ATTENDEES NUMBER OF VIEWERS/ ATTENDEES PARTICIPANTS’ RATING TOPIC 

January 27 February 23 March 31 May 24 June 9 July 20 July 31 August 9 September 22 October 26 

Regional Research Fund Projects Health Resilience R&D PNHRS Week Balik Scientist Program TEKI in Health Nutrition and Food Safety R&D PhD in Molecular Biomedicine Scholarship Program PhilHealth STUDIES Mental Health R&D Reach: 6,598 Reach: 2,580 Reach: 1,845 Reach: 3,376 Reach: 2,908 Reach: 4,684 Reach: 11,960 Reach: 2,591 Reach: 1,657 Reach: 2,421 Engagement: 169 Engagement: 44 Engagement: 4 Engagement:62 Engagement: 62 Engagement:6 Engagement: 53 Engagement: 49 Engagement: 39 Engagement: 53 104 103 104 62 38 onsite 8 virtual 72 78 59 85 48 Best Mentor in Health Research Award 183% Excellent 17% Very Satisfactory 13% Excellent 87% Very Satisfactory 73% Excellent 27% Very Satisfactory 90% Excellent 10% Very Satisfactory 87% Excellent 13% Very Satisfactory 82% Excellent 18% Very Satisfactory 79% Excellent 21% Very Satisfactory 83% Excellent 14% Very Satisfactory 3% Satisfactory 94% Excellent 3% Very Satisfactory 3% Satisfactory 70% Excellent 26% Very Satisfactory 4% Satisfactory Another strategy to generate media coverage was the distribution of press releases to media partners. This year, a total of 57 news releases were shared which mileage was tracked and monitored. The Council also utilized the social media platforms: Facebook and Twitter to amplify the campaign. As of December 2023, the DOST-PCHRD Facebook page has over 83,000 followers. We are also able to reach over 2.7 million users and make over three million impressions. As of December 2023, the DOST- PCHRD Twitter page has over 3,100 followers. There are about 58,000 impressions and 3,500 engagements. 

# SOCIAL MEDIA FACEBOOK TWITTER 

TELEVISION coverages Advertising Space Rate 13 16,888,213 RADIO Broadcast 7

PRINT Apperances Advertising Space Rate 49 8,017,159 

Online/ reposts in other online web pages Posts Advertising Space Rate 78 2,220,940 

January 2023 - December 2023 

02000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 Engament Impression 

## 3117 FOLLOWERS 

IMPRESSION ENGAGEMENT 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

113 

> RESEARCH UTILIZATION

114 

## FACEBOOK INSIGHTS 

# 83K FOLLOWERS 

33.3% 61.7% 

6.5% 4.7% 2.5% 2.5% 2.2% 1.7% 1.4% 1.4% 1.4% 1.3% Cities with most number of followers Makati Zamboanga City Pasig Caloocan Cebu City Iloilo City Taguig Davao City Manila Quezon City DOST-PCHRD Facebook page monthly reach, engangement, and impression 2023 Regional Science Technology and Innovation Week Celebration 

13-15 September 2023 Sultan Kudarat Sports Complex Isulan, Sultan Kudarat 

Regional Science, Technology and Innovation Week in Central Visayas 

20-23 September 2023 Robinsons Dumaguete, Dumaguete City, Negros Oriental 

2023 Regional Science Technology and Innovation Week in the Cordillera Administrative Region 

27-29 September 22023 Abra Gymnasium Bangued, Abra 

2023 Caraga Regional Science Technology and Innovation Week 

29 September - 1 October 2023 Surigao del Norte Provincial Gymnasium Surigao City 

2023 Regional Science and Technology Week (RSTW) in Region 1 

16-18 October 2023 Ilocos Norte Centennial Arena, Laoag City, Ilocos Norte 

Zamboanga Peninsula Regional Science Technology and Innovation Week 2023 

6-8 September 2023 Zamboanga Del Norte Cultural and Sports Center Dipolog City 

The campaign was also able to reach regional audiences through the DOST-PCHRD’s participation in the regional exhibits and other national events. The Council participated in 10 Regional Science and Technology Week celebrations, two Regional Health Research Consortia Conferences, and two international events. 

# Regional Science and Technology Week 2023 Regional Science Technology and Innovation Week (RSTW) 

18-20 October 2023 Botolan People’s Plaza Botolan, Zambales 

Regional Science and Technology Week 2023 

9-10 November 2023 The Atrium, City Hall of Tagum, Tagum City, Davao del Norte 

Central Visayas Health Research and Innovation Conference 

10-12 May 2023 Siquijor State University Larena, Siquijor 

2023 International Conference on Emerging Infectious Diseases in the Pacific Rim 

6-10 March 2023 Acacia Hotel, Muntinlupa City 

International Smart City Exposition and Networking Engagement 2023 (iSCENE 2023) 

23-25 March 2023 Cauayan City, Isabela 

Regional Science and Technology Week - Region V 

23-25 October 2023 Sorsogon Provincial Gymnasium Sorsogon City, Bicol 

# Other exhibits and confences 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

115 

> RESEARCH UTILIZATION

116 National Events National Youth Science, Technology and Innovation Festival 2023 HANDA Pilipinas: Bringing DRRM-CCA in Health technologies to the regions 

The DOST-PCHRD showcased its supported technologies addressing issues on disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation in health through its participation in the 2023 HANDA Pilipinas exposition of Innovations in Disaster Risk Reduction and Management (DRRM). The newly-organized expo was brought across Luzon, Visayas, and Mindanao to raise awareness and adoption of DOST-supported technologies in DRRM among local government units (LGUs) in the country. The event featured lectures and exhibits of DOST-supported DRRM technologies that focus on disaster preparedness, response, prevention and mitigation, rehabilitation and recovery. Sharing the thrust of strengthening disaster resilience through health research, the Council showcased six DRRM for health technologies in the Expo exhibits. Under prevention and mitigation, the DOST-PCHRD presented the Community Dengue Early Warning System (C-DEWS) of the Isabela State University, and the Sanipod Self-contained Disinfecting Cubicle and HyPerUV N95 Mask Disinfection device of the University of the Philippines Manila’s Surgical Innovation and Biotechnology Laboratory (UP SIBOL) Program. For disaster response, technologies featured were UP SIBOL’s RxBox Telemetry System along with the UP Manila Disaster Risk Reduction and Management in Health (DRRM-H) Center’s Simulation-based Learning Laboratory virtual reality tool. The UP Manila DRRM-H Center also showcased the DOST-PCHRD-supported e-Ligtas disaster resource mapping and damage assessment software under the disaster rehabilitation and recovery cluster. The expo kicked off on 27-29 July 2023 with its first leg in Luzon and held its first regional leg in Cagayan De Oro City on 04-06 October 2023. Held simultaneously as the 10th year anniversary of Super Typhoon Yolanda, the last leg was held at Tacloban City on 08-10 November 2023, which was graced by the presence of President Ferdinand Marcos, Jr. In his message, the President recognized the abilities of Filipinos in creating world-class technologies that address pressing issues such as DRRM. He also urged technology adoption as well as public-private partnerships to ensure that technologies are able to benefit communities and save lives in the face of disasters. “I implore everyone to maximize the use of these technologies [and] to fast-track the widespread adoption and commercialization,” he said. Other DOST-supported technologies highlighted in the DRRM exhibits are disaster response vehicles, ready-to-eat relief foods, emergency disinfection systems, disaster simulators, early warning systems, and more. 

The 1st National Youth Science, Technology and Innovation Festival (NYSTIF), which was held on 25-28 October 2023 at Philippine International Convention Center Forum Tent in Pasay City, featured four (4) different clusters namely: (1) Land/Water/Air/Nature; (2) Future of Education; (3) Emerging Technologies; and (4) Wellness and Well-being. The DOST-PCHRD is the lead agency of the Wellness and Well-being Cluster Exhibit along with other DOST agencies namely: Food and Nutrition Research Institute (FNRI), Philippine Nuclear Research Institute (PNRI), Industrial Technology Development Institute (ITDI), and Philippine Textile Research Institute (PTRI). Also part of this activity, the Council held the 2023 DOST-PCHRD Undergraduate Thesis Grant in Natural Products Oral Research Paper Presentation on 27 October 2023, which featured research studies of undergraduate students from different institutions. PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

117 

> RESEARCH UTILIZATION

118 Hosted annually by the DOST, the National Science and Technology Week (NSTW) serves as a platform for celebrating the remarkable strides made by science and technology in advancing the country’s development. In 2023, the DOST brought the NSTW outside Metro Manila for the first time. Held at the Iloilo Convention Center, Iloilo City on 19-26 November 2023, the week-long celebration was themed, “Siyensya, Teknolohiya, at Inobasyon sa Kabalikat sa Matatag, Maginhawa, at Panatag na Kinabukasan.” Led by PCHRD, the Health Cluster Exhibit, composed of the Food and Nutrition Research Institute (FNRI), Industrial Technology Development Institute (ITDI), and Philippine Nuclear Research Institute (PNRI), clinched the 1st Place People's Choice Award for Best S&T Exhibit. Featuring a total of 27 health research technologies supported by DOST-attached agencies, the exhibit garnered the most votes from the participants through the NSTW mobile application. Aside from the exhibit, the Council also organized the HeaRT Report forum on 23 November 2023, at Function Room 4, Iloilo Convention Center, Iloilo City. Themed "Empowering regional expertise for sustainable health advancements," the forum featured three PCHRD-supported health research projects implemented in Iloilo: Establishment of the Visayas NMR Laboratory presented by Dr. Jonel P. Saludes from the University of San Agustin; Establishment of Genomics Consortium and Core Facility in Visayas presented by Dr. Victor Marco Emmanuel N. Ferriols of the Philippine Genome Center Visayas; and Development of a Three-dimensional Bioprinted Human Skin Equivalent presented by Ms. Zenith M. Villorente from Pharma GalenX Innovations, Inc. Attended by 55 participants coming from universities and colleges, research institutions, and LGUs, the forum served as a platform to foster collaboration and knowledge exchange among stakeholders, and raise awareness about the role of health research in enhancing the nation’s healthcare system and the well-being of Filipinos. 

By virtue of Presidential Proclamation No. 1414, the National Biotechnology Week (NBW) is celebrated every last week of November. The week-long celebration is implemented by several national agencies, including the Department of Science and Technology (DOST). This year’s celebration was led by the Department of Agriculture (DA), and was held at the SM Seaside City Cebu from November 20 to 24, 2023. Following the theme: “Empowering Innovation for a Sustainable Future with Biotechnology,” the Council participated in the exhibit, showcasing the following technologies: 

Pr oj ect Title Implementing A genc y 

De La Salle University - Manila 2. Hydrogel from pig kidneys: Preparation, characterization, and pre-clinical assessment for kidney tissue regeneration De La Salle University - Manila 3. SkIn PaTCH Project: Treatment of Skin wound Infection by multidrug-resistant pathogens using phage therapy cocktail preparations formulated from bacteriophages in hospital sewage in in vitro 3D-printed skin infection model The Medical City 4. Bacteriophage in Food Safety: Biosensing and Biocontrol of Food Pathogens (Program) University of Santo Tomas 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

119 

> RESEARCH UTILIZATION

120 4The Council is committed to advancing health research in collaboration with local and international partners. 

# COLLABORATIONS 

PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 122 

PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 121 National Collaborations SPECIAL HEALTH RESEARCH 

Staying true to its thrust for partnerships in health research, the DOST-PCHRD has been in close cooperation with the Department of Health (DOH) to support research for evidence-informed health policies. Currently, the Council monitors three programs on special health research projects. 

1. Advancing Health through Evidence-Assisted Decisions with Health Policy and Systems Research (AHEAD-HPSR) 

The AHEAD-HPSR is a program implemented in partnership with the DOH Health Policy Development and Planning Bureau (HPDPB). Running its first cycle in 2017, the program aims to inform the health sector’s global and national administrative and legislative policy agenda, create an equitable and enabling environment for health policy and systems researchers all over the country, and ensure the progressive realization of the envisioned research system. A total of Php 3,949,864.50 funding was utilized for the program in 2023. 

Piloting Primary Care in the country 

Philippine Primary Care Studies 

Antonio Miguel Dans, MD, MSc Sagip Buhay Medical Foundation, Inc. 

The primary care model is a model of care that enables first-contact healthcare to be accessible to patients. Through this study, the group of Dr. Antonio Miguel Dans is piloting the primary care model in corporate, rural, and urban settings in the Philippines by testing the Philippine Health Insurance Corp. (PhilHealth) primary care financing system. Generally, the study aimed to evaluate the effect of shifting to a comprehensive universal social health insurance-funded primary care system across the following outcome areas: • Utilization of benefits; • Patient satisfaction; • Health care provider satisfaction; • Health care worker knowledge; • Quality of care; • Health outcomes; • Financial risk protection; and • Administration and governance .Based on these criteria, the team reported positive results in improving the accessibility and use of primary care. Results of the study may be used as a reference in further establishing a primary care model in the country, which could support the implementation of Universal Health Care. 

Completed Ongoing 

Determining Required Skill Mix to Deliver Primary Care Services: Phase 2 (Validation) 

Prof. Erwin William Leyva University of the Philippines, College of Nursing 

The DOH is committed to improving equity and access to Human Resources for Health (HRH) towards achieving Universal Health Care. In pursuit of this goal, there is a need to determine how many HRHs are needed to deliver primary health care services in the country. Building from the Phase 1 Study which identified issues in delivering primary care to rural, urban, and communities with armed conflict, this study by the team of Dr. Erwin William Leyva will conduct a quantitative analysis of the required skill mix among health human resources in different community settings. Ultimately, the team will determine skill mix recommendations for primary healthcare. In 2023, the team conducted data collection in selected study sites in Manila, Cebu, and Surigao, as well as focus group discussions on the development of HRH interventions. Data gathered by the team is undergoing processing to come up with the skill mix recommendations as output of the project. This project may guide the deployment of sufficient and competent HRH that can address the specific needs of certain community settings. deliver primary health care services in the country. Building from the Phase 1 Study which identified issues in delivering primary care to rural, urban, and communities with armed conflict, this study by the team of Dr. Erwin William Leyva will conduct a quantitative analysis of the required skill mix among health human resources in different community settings. Ultimately, the team will determine skill mix recommendations for primary healthcare. In 2023, the team conducted data collection in selected study sites in Manila, Cebu, and Surigao, as well as focus group discussions on the development of HRH interventions. Data gathered by the team is undergoing processing to come up with the skill mix recommendations as output of the project. This project may guide the deployment of sufficient and competent HRH that can address the specific needs of certain community settings. 

Gearing health human resources for primary care 

Impact Evaluation of the Single Joint Research Ethics Review Process in the Department of Health 

Ms. Edlyn B. Jimenez University of the Philippines, Manila 

The need for fast and efficient review at the national levels of vaccine-related research protocols was underscored during the height of the COVID-19 pandemic. Answering to this need is the DOH-Single Joint Research Ethics Board (SJREB), the body designated as the central research ethics committee to review COVID-19 vaccine-related protocols. With the COVID-19 experience highlighting lessons and gaps in the ethics regulatory system, this study by Ms. Edlyn Jimenez assesses the impact of the single joint ethics review process on the current ethics review system in the country. Site visits were conducted to assess the status of SJREB operational efficiency and readiness for the PHREB Level 3 Accreditation which covers documents in 2021, 2022, 2023. Data is now being completed and cleaned for analysis. Recommendations will be made regarding the current status of SJREB. Results of the study will serve as a guide in ensuring a well-defined regulatory system through the SJREB with functions and scopes of authority properly defined. 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

123 

> COLLABORATIONS

124 2. Research-driven Epidemiological Advancements and Catalysts for Health (REACH) 

The REACH Program was launched in 2023 to undertake activities on all epidemiology-related research and development priorities of the DOH. Through this, the epidemiology and surveillance policies will be informed with different sets of evidence to ensure its relevance, comprehensibility, and sustainability among its end users. The program utilized Php 20,836,304.89 of funding this year. 

Enhancing technologies for disease modeling 

Implementation of the Epidemiological Modeling Project under the Feasibility Analysis of Syndromic Surveillance Using Spatio-Temporal Epidemiological ModeleR (FASSSTER) Modeling Operations and Capacity-Building Engagements 

Dr. Timothy Robin Y. Teng Ateneo de Manila University 

Enhancing the country’s epidemiological and surveillance capacities through innovative digital solutions is among the priorities of the DOH. Collaborating closely with the Ateneo Center for Computing Competency and Research (ACCRE), the DOH- Epidemiology Bureau (EB) developed the Feasibility Analysis of Syndromic Surveillance Using Spatio-Temporal Epidemiological ModeleR (FASSSTER) model. Currently, the FASSSTER serves as a disease modeling and surveillance tool for COVID-19. This project led by Dr. Timothy Robin Teng aims to enhance FASSSTER’s current surveillance of notifiable diseases using epidemiological disease modeling in the country for the use of both national and local governments. Specifically, it aims to generate COVID-19 projections, develop a dengue model, migrate the FASSSTER to the servers of the DOH, and build capacities of DOH staff in disease modeling initiatives. In 2023, the team identified the prerequisites for the development of the enhanced FASSSTER system while gathering further system requirements and inventory of technology resources are ongoing. They were also able to gain feedback and insights for determining the system functional and non-functional requirements. The Design Thinking Workshop and the Stakeholder's Meeting was also conducted where the team submitted capacity building proposals on the FASSSTER training manual, FASSSTER system maintenance manual, MS Program integrating components of FASSSTER, and Executive Program for Use of Modeling in Policy Making. 

Data as a tool in improving the national hepatitis program 

Seroprevalence of Hepatitis B and C in the General Population in 2023: A Study using the 2023 National Nutrition Survey 

Ms. Chona Patalen Food and Nutrition Research Institute (FNRI) 

Chronic Hepatitis B and C remain as the leading causes of liver-related morbidity and mortality from liver cirrhosis and liver cancer among Filipinos. Vital in improving health policy against the disease are updated and accurate data on the burden of disease, particularly, its seroprevalence and disease severity. The 2023 National Nutrition Survey (NNS) is an opportunity to collect this important information exactly 20 years from the last available seroprevalence survey conducted in 2003. Conducting the seroprevalence survey in conjunction with the 2023 NNS will allow time-, personnel-, and cost-efficiency in getting the estimates of HBV and HCV seroprevalence in the general adult population. Deriving the necessary data from the survey will help determine the prevalence and associated clinicodemographic factors of chronic Hepatitis B Virus and Hepatitis CV infection among adults. 

Towards evidence-informed program against youth tobacco consumption 

Implementation of the 2023 Global Youth Tobacco Survey (GYTS) and Global School-based Student Health Survey (GSHS) in the Philippines 

Dr. Agnes Pacho Asia Pacific Management and Research Group, Inc. 

To provide data on youth tobacco consumption and tobacco use initiation, the team of Dr. Agnes Pacho will conduct the 7th Round of the Global Youth Tobacco Survey (GYTS) and 6th round of the Global School-based Student Health Survey (GSHS) for the school year 2023- 2024. The GYTS will assess tobacco use among 13–to 15-year-old students and their knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors toward tobacco use; while, the GSHS aspect aims to assess the behavioral risk and protective factors related to the leading causes of morbidity and mortality among 13–17-year-old students. Data collected from the survey will help inform national tobacco prevention and control programs, and facilitate the comparison of tobacco-related data at the national, regional and global levels. 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

125 

> COLLABORATIONS

126 Long COVID-19 under the lens of research 

"Epidemiology of Post-COVID-19 (Long COVID-19) Conditions in Selected Occupational Groups in the Philippines" 

Dr. John Robert Medina University of the Philippines Manila 

Some individuals who recovered from COVID-19 infection have been reported to experience prolonged symptoms of the disease. Common persisting symptoms include fatigue, loss of smell or taste, depression or anxiety, memory or concentration problems, among many. The condition of experiencing symptoms despite recovery is known as “Long COVID-19.” People suffering from this may have difficulty functioning in everyday life, negatively affecting one’s quality of life, as well as individual and organizational productivity. Due to this, long COVID-19 proves to be an important illness to be investigated. Addressing the lack of epidemiologic data on post-COVID conditions in the Philippines, Dr. John Robert Medina initiated a project to describe the epidemiology of post-COVID symptoms among Filipinos in selected occupational groups. Particularly, the study will focus on occupational health nurses and occupational health physicians, municipal health officers and rural health physicians, and teaching and non-teaching personnel of basic and higher education. This project is envisioned to provide evidence for the government and labor institutions to develop health-promoting policies and programs for Filipino workers. 

3. Pharmaceutical Division (PD) 

The Philippines remains to be one of the lowest spending per capita in healthcare relative to its Southeast Asia (SEA) neighbor countries, and by global standards. This is despite the increased public spending in healthcare and higher reliance on pharmaceutical products. Private payments drive the majority of healthcare spending at approximately 55%, and come as a burden to the population, especially those in the low affordability bands. Consistent with healthcare spending, the pharmaceutical sector is skewed towards out-of-pocket payments and the private sector. The private sector is highly fragmented and has a strong monetary element, leading to uncontrolled and high drug prices. Amid rising inflation, the Maximum Drug Retail Price (MDRP) for drugs and medicines was implemented through EO No 104 s. 2020 and EO No 155 s. 2021 to measure, monitor, and control drug prices in the country. To assess the current implementation of the legislation, a tie-up program between the DOST-PCHRD and the DOH-Pharmaceutical Division (PD) was forged. In 2023, the program utilized Php 711,729.37 from its allocated funds. 

Evaluation of a public health legislation 

Process Evaluation and Implementation Review of Executive Order (EO) No. 104 s.2020 and EO No. 155 s.2021 

Marilyn E. Crisostomo, MPH, MSPH, PhD (Cand) Macro Health Research Organization, Inc. 

Aiming to increase accessibility of quality medicine for Filipinos, the government reduced the retail prices of 204 drug formulations by setting a Maximum Retail Price (MRP) on drugs based on a set criterion. At present, the list of drugs with an MRP covers those addressing leading diseases and catastrophic conditions which include hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, chronic lung diseases, neonatal diseases, and major cancers. Also included are drugs for some respiratory conditions, skin diseases, mental health conditions, digestive conditions, pain management, cholesterol management, seizure disorders, eye disorders, nephrological conditions, and Parkinson’s disease. This project led by Ms. Marilyn Crisostomo documents the implementation of the MRP and assesses the impact and value of the policy. PhilHealth STUDIES 

TOTAL EXPENDITURES IN 2023 

# 9.56 million newly-approved completed ongoing proposals processed 1 3 3 1Accomplishments 

PhilHealth, committed to achieving Universal Health Care (UHC) since its inception in 1995, has actively pursued this goal through the PhilHealth STUDIES project. Established in collaboration with DOST-PCHRD in 2015, the project aims to fortify health research management, efficiently allocate resources, generate pertinent research studies, and enhance research capacity. Under the four main components overseen by the Council—Research Services, Research Dissemination, Capacity Building, and Administrative Support—the project contributed significantly in 2023, supporting seven research projects, organizing a research forum, conducting a Capacity Building activity, and facilitating five research dissemination activities. These efforts are integral to advancing evidence-based policy reforms and fostering informed decision-making within PhilHealth programs and services. In 2023, PhilHealth STUDIES’s research services focused on studying the members' experience, evaluating health policy reforms, and expanding health service coverage. The program yielded three completed projects, including a Client Awareness and Satisfaction Survey conducted by Novo Trends PH, Inc., which revealed improved satisfaction ratings and recommended expansions in coverage and services. Another project, the PhilHealth Share Ratio Study by Health Futures Foundation, Inc., highlighted the reliance of health facilities on PhilHealth funds and proposed strategic changes to address inefficiencies. Additionally, the Policy Research and Development project led by the Ateneo School of Government aimed at creating standards for third-party accreditation mechanisms, producing toolkits recommended for nationwide implementation in 2023. The research findings were disseminated in the 7th PhilHealth STUDIES Forum, on 17 November 2023, at the Philippine International Convention Center, Pasay City which gathered 159 participants both onsite and online to discuss health financing and Universal Health Care. The forum was preceded by the Talakayang HeaRT Beat press conference held in June 2023, amplifying public awareness of PhilHealth's R&D activities in collaboration with DOST-PCHRD and partner institutions. Media coverage included major outlets such as ABS-CBN, GMA News, News5, DOSTv, PTV, and The Manila Times. In terms of capacity building, two Research Associates were appointed to PhilHealth's Corporate Planning Department in 2023, contributing to small-scale studies. These studies addressed issues such as the impact of the 45-day Benefit Rule and the rationalization of the 90-day Single Period of Confinement. 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

127 

> COLLABORATIONS

128 Manila Economic and Cultural Office-Taipei Economic Cultural Office International Collaborations 

The Department of Science and Technology (DOST) has fostered collaborative efforts to advance research and innovation in its partnership with Taiwan, through the National Science and Technology Council (NSTC), called the Manila Economic and Cultural Office-Taipei Economic Cultural Office (MECO-TECO) Joint Research Project (JRP). This collaboration has yielded significant breakthroughs in various scientific domains, furthering the development goals of both countries. MECO-TECO JRP is open to all Filipino researchers who wish to conduct a joint R&D with their identified counterpart Taiwanese collaborator within different scientific disciplines. In 2023, three ongoing projects funded under MECO-TECO JRP monitored by DOST-PCHRD has yielded the following accomplishments: 

SAFeV: Survey of Cross-Reactive AntiFlavivirus Antibodies After Vaccination 

Dr. Sharia Laine de Paz-Silava University of the Philippines Manila 

Led by Dr. Sharia Laine de Paz-Silava, the University of the Philippines Manila spearheads a project that will assess the effectiveness of Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) vaccination in Filipino children. It aims to evaluate antibody responses against JEV, Dengue Virus (DENV), and Zika virus (ZIKV) before and after vaccination. Currently in its second year, it involves 40 Filipino mother-infant pairs as participants. The recruitment process included briefing, eligibility checks, and consent acquisition, followed by immunization and blood collection before and after vaccination. Samples were transferred to the University of the Philippines Manila for processing and later shipped to the National Chung Hsing University (NCHU) in Taiwan for laboratory analysis. With a total support of Php 4,757,836.60 from DOST-GIA Program, the study is now conducting a Plaque Reduction Neutralization Test (PNRT) to assess neutralization activity against JEV, DENV, and ZIKV. Statistical analyses will compare antibody levels pre- and post-vaccination and evaluate differences between children born to JEV-seronegative and JEV-seropositive mothers. 

Project: Innovative Approach in Delivering Syringic Acid using Metal Organic Framework as Drug Carrier 

Dr. Joshua H. Santos, Department of Science and Technology – Industrial Technology Development Institute 

While bioactive compounds with potential as drug candidates are highly abundant and diverse in plant resources, some are limitedly used due to inefficient absorption of the compounds into the body. An example of these underutilized compounds is syringic acid, a compound found in plants that have been shown to prevent chronic diseases such as diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular diseases, cancer, and cerebral ischemia among other health benefits. To enhance absorption in the body, the team of Dr. Joshua Santos of the Department of Science and Technology-Industrial Technology and Development Institute (DOST-ITDI) is exploring the use of metal organic framework or MIL-100(Fe), a material that may be used as a drug carrier, for syringic acid. Under the project, capacity building efforts for the team such as training exchange programs focused on the synthesis of the MIL-100(Fe) and laboratory tours will be conducted. Necessary equipment for the conduct of the research have also been purchased. The successful development of drug carriers for syringic acid will enable the utilization of the compound as a treatment for various diseases. 

Development of Cell Isolation Microfluidic Platform Using Light-Trigger Polymeric Matrix for Cancer Drug Screening 

Dr. Candy C. Mercado, University of the Philippines Diliman 

To develop a specialized tool for studying cancer cells in detail and improving the process of testing potential cancer drugs, Dr. Candy C. Mercado of the University of the Philippines Diliman (UPD) - Department of Mining, Metallurgical, and Materials Engineering (DMMME) lead the project entitled, “Development of Cell Isolation Microfluidic Platform Using Light-Trigger Polymeric Matrix for Cancer Drug Screening.” The project aims to develop a microfluidic chip that will be useful in studying heterogeneous drug resistance (DR) response of tumor specimens. The proposed platform offers a new selection modality using light-triggered stimuli-responsive In 2023, the study achieved the following accomplishments: • Improved Abstract Gold nanoparticles (AuNP) synthesis method by introducing a dilution step using 

different molar ratios; • Synthesized and characterized AuNP-gelatin matrix with different compositions; and • Produced a light-triggered AuNP-gelatin composite film and observed its effectiveness upon light 

application. Moving forward, the research aims to investigate higher percentages of AuNP material added to the composite gel to improve its effectiveness. 

129 

> COLLABORATIONS

130 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

# Newton Agham Cycle 2 

The Newton Agham Programme, a collaboration between the Philippine Council for Health Research and Development (PCHRD) and the UK Medical Research Council (MRC) under the Newton Fund Programme, continues to foster scientific partnerships aimed at advancing research and innovation to advance public health in the Philippines. In 2023, several projects within Newton Agham Cycle Two have successfully concluded, marking significant progress across a range of research domains: 

Surveillance Integrating Phylogenetics and Epidemiology for Elimination of Disease: Evaluation of Rabies Control in the Philippines (SPEEDIER) 

Led by Dr. Mary Elizabeth G. Miranda from the Field Epidemiology Training Program Alumni Foundation, Inc. (FETPAFI) and Dr. Katie Hampson of the University of Glasgow, the study aims to develop a cost-effective, epidemiologically robust and enhanced surveillance and response package to guide and sustain the elimination of rabies in the Philippines. Completed in January 2023, the project’s notable accomplishments include: Conduct of Theory of Change Workshop which delved into the achievements and challenges of the project, its evolution and future directions, particularly regarding mass dog vaccination, rationalized PEP, etc. • Facilitated meetings with Provincial Health Office Rabies Prevention and Control Program with Animal Bite Treatment Centers (ABTC) which covered animal rabies cases in 2022, low ERIG coverage in several ABTCs, and common issues when administering PEP. • Conduct of provincial Rabies Prevention and Control Program Consultative meetings • Process evaluation in Romblon 

Cellular Immunity and Resistance to Schistosomiasis in the Philippines (CRISTAL) 

Led by Dr. Mario Antonio Jiz II from the Research Institute for Tropical Medicine and Dr. Helena Helmby from the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, the CRISTAL project investigated immune responses to 

Schistosoma japonicum by assessing the role of various types of immune cells in the development of resistance or susceptibility to reinfection in the Philippines before and after treatment with Praziquantel, with a long term goal to support vaccine development. Completed in January 2023, the project’s key achievements include: • Completed three study visits to Palo, Leyte, enrollment of participants, sample collection, reinfection assessment, equipment upgrade, and staff training in RITM and its satellite laboratory in Palo, Leyte; • Shipped samples to the collaborators in the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine (LSHTHM) for analysis.; • Developed a heat map of the Schistosoma japonicum hotspots in Brgy. Macanip, Jaro, Leyte using the stool screening data from the study • Completed the purification of Schistosoma eggs and worm antigens. • Conducted the following: • Analysis of available data collected by the project; • Close meeting with the village officials to update them of the current status of parasitic endemicity in their village in order to raise awareness in their community and to protect themselves from getting exposed to infected waters. • Prepared laboratory testing of Schistosomiasis positive-participant antibodies and immunoglobulin subtypes; and, 

Affordable Near-Patient Diagnostics to Distinguish Infectious Diseases in the Philippines (AND2ID in Ph) 

Under the guidance of Dr. Fortunato T. Sevilla III from the University of Santo Tomas and Prof. Elizabeth Hall from the University of Cambridge, the AND2ID project focused on early diagnosis of infectious diseases in the Philippines using dengue and leptospirosis as models, through providing a route to low-cost nucleic acid tests (NATs) in the Philippines with global purchasing price parity. In 2023, the project’s achievements include: •

• Demonstrated the performance of developed diagnostic tools. • Established bioanalytical laboratory in UST and conducted online training workshops in coordination with the University of Cambridge UK collaborators The project’s implementation has been extended until 15 June 2023 in order to accomplish the remaining activities. 

Using Tuberculosis Host-Pathogen Genetic Interactions to Improve Diagnostics in the Philippines (THPR Study) 

Led by Dr. Mari Rose De los Reyes from the Research Institute for Tropical Medicine and Prof. Taane Clark from the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, the study aimed to develop a TB human blood transcriptome response assay risk score that could be used to identify active TB and evaluate treatment response in reducing active disease. Completed in January 2023, the notable achievements of the project include: • Conducted training workshops on patient recruitment, blood collection and data encoding • Completed the target number of patient enrolment for Category I - Adult (33/30), Multi-Drug Resistant (MDR) (31/30), and non-TB patients (51/50). • Started the preliminary steps of DNA Library Preparation for sequencing. • Finalized the Material Transfer Agreement (MTA) with PGC for the transport of RNA extracts for sequencing. 

The UK-Philippines Remote Retinal Evaluation Collaboration in Health: Diabetic Retinopathy (REACH-DR) to bold font to maintain consistency with the format for other projects. 

Led by Dr. Paolo Antonio S. Silva of University of the Philippines- Manila and Dr. Tunde Peto of Queen’s University of Belfast, the study aimed to establish a Diabetic Retinopathy (DR) telemedicine screening program in the Philippines. • Finalized the Philippine Diabetic Retinopathy Screening Program: Grading System and Referral Guidelines manual which is now ready for publication. • Enrolled 3,431 patients from the 228 barangays in Region III • Analyzed retinal imaging datasets from retinal screening in Meycauayan and Bacolor used to formulate abstracts for publication • Datasets were also used to facilitate the pilot study of an artificial intelligence (AI) software for DR Screening in the Philippines. • Produced a total of seven manuscripts that have been prepared and submitted for publication. Attended various virtual and in-person meetings with UK stakeholders to discuss plans on the screening; regular meetings with Optomed to discuss Avenue Archive software and Electronic Medical Record (EMR) Optomed Screen’s updates, improvements and feedback. 

ZooTRIP. Zoonotic transmission of intestinal parasites: implications for control and elimination 

Soil-transmitted helminths (STH) infection, or more commonly known as intenstinal worm infection, remains highly prevalent in the rural and poor urban communities in the Philippines. The infection spreads through contact with water bodies that are contaminated with the worm larvae emerging from snail hosts, which shows that the environment and animals play a significant role in the spread of intestinal helminths to humans. Researchers from the University of Los Banos led by Dr. Vachel Gay Paller, and from the University of Surrey, United Kingdom led by Dr. Martha Betson, collaborated to assess the impact of zoonotic transmission and environmental reservoirs on human intestinal infection in the Philippines. The study shed light on the transmission dynamics of these parasites, specifically in endemic rural communities in Mindanao. Using molecular tools, the investigators gained valuable insights on the associations between intestinal worms in humans and animalals, for helminth control and elimination efforts in these areas. With the shared goal to enhance public health outcomes particulary in underserved areas, this multi-disciplinary initiative fostered collaboration among various stakeholders, including LGUs, DepEd, Dept of Agriculture, Provincial and Rural Health Units in the CARAGA Region of Mindanao. 

131 

> COLLABORATIONS

132 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

# ASEAN Diagnostics Initiative (DxI) 

In 2023, the ASEAN DxI submitted a consolidated proposal at the Senior Officials Meeting for Health Development (SOMHD) Committee on Science and Technology (COSTI) and the Senior Officials Meeting on Health Development (SOMHD) Committee on Disaster Risk Management (SCB) through the ASEAN Secretariat. This proposal, which included initiatives such as the ASSeSS Study Phase 2, the Network for Product Quality Laboratories, and Capacity Building for Technology Transfer and Commercialization, marked a crucial step forward in enhancing regional health preparedness and diagnostic capabilities. The collaboration also resulted in the establishment of quality laboratories across the ASEAN Member States (AMS), aimed at fostering collaboration, information sharing, and data validation. These laboratories will enable more efficient responses to health crises by facilitating resource sharing and promoting standardized practices. The ASEAN DxI aims to continue its initiatives in 2024 with the planned launch of a series of webinars focused on enhancing ASEAN's pandemic readiness. These webinars will serve as platforms for sharing best practices, fostering collaboration among experts, and equipping stakeholders with essential tools and knowledge to navigate future health challenges effectively. PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

133 

> COLLABORATIONS

134 

# Mayo Clinic-School of Graduate Medical Education 

Consistent with the commitment to create opportunities for growth for Filipino researchers, the Council signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the University of the Philippines - Manila, and the Mayo Clinic–School of Graduate Medical Education (SGME) last October 20, 2023. The tripartite partnership was formed to promote cooperation and collaboration in research and development projects on Infectious Diseases. The institutions will work together in developing and implementing a research program that will support qualified fellow(s) for a research training in infectious disease at the Mayo Clinic-SGME, Minnesota, USA. The research of the fellow must fall under the priority research and development areas of the DOST-PCHRD, UPM, and Mayo Clinic-SGME. 

# Collaborative Research call for TB (CoRe TB) 

The Regional Prospective Observational Research for Tuberculosis (RePORT) International was established in 2013 by the U.S. National Institutes of Health - National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIH-NIAID) with the mission of promoting and supporting tuberculosis (TB) research on the regional and global level, and to enhance research capacity in high burden countries. The RePORT International consortium consists of seven member countries including India, Brazil, South Africa, China, Indonesia, South Korea, and the Philippines. Initiated by the Philippine Council for Health Research and Development (PCHRD) in 2017, RePORT Philippines was created to advance clinical research that will contribute to the identification of clinically important TB biomarkers and the development of vaccines, drugs, and diagnostics for the disease. Now on its second phase, the consortium launched the Collaborative Research call for TB or CoRe TB to support research on the disease, including drug-resistant TB and related infections (e.g., COVID-19 and HIV). The following projects were approved for funding last October 2023: • Prevalence and genomic correlates of resistance to new and repurposed anti-tuberculosis drugs from Philippines 

De La Salle Medical and Health Sciences Institute 

• Pre-XDeTech TB: Low Cost TB-Macroarray-AI Detection Technology for the Molecular Diagnosis of MDR and Pre-XDR Tuberculosis 

University of the Philippines Manila 

• Development and Evaluation of a Multiplex Recombinase Polymerase Amplification (RPA) Assay for the detection of M. tuberculosis (Mtb) and Mtb drug-resistance genes in clinical samples 

University of the Philippines Manila 

• TB Pathogenomics Study: Interactions between Mycobacterium tuberculosis genomics and human host susceptibility factors in determining TB infection or disease status and treatment outcomes 

University of the Philippines Manila 

• Single-cell Multi-omic Analysis of Persons Living with HIV (PLHIV) at Risk of Developing Active TB 

Lung Center of the Philippines National Journal Selection Committee APAME 

As the focal institution to the World Health Organization’s Western Pacific Region Index Medicus (WPRIM), the Council assists Philippine journals to be indexed under the WHO WPRIM through its role in the National Journal Selection Committee. The Committee reviewed journal applicants and recommended the Philippine Journal of Pathology to the WHO Regional Journal Selection Committee (RSJC) for inclusion in WPRIM. The journal was approved for WPRIM inclusion during the RJSC Meeting in Vietnam in August 2023. 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

135 

> COLLABORATIONS

136 

Furthering its efforts in strengthening health journal publishing in the country, the DOST-PCHRD participated in the annual meeting and conference of the Asia Pacific Association of Medical Journal Editors (APAME) on 18 August 2023 at Hue City, Vietnam. In the gathering, the Council provided inputs on data contribution, regional information sharing, and its current initiatives on health journal publishing. The Council reported its best practices on health research information dissemination including ongoing HERDIN partnerships with local journals and institutions, HERDIN orientation and learning sessions, conduct of national medical writing workshops in partnership with the Philippine Association of Medical Journal Editors (PAMJE), and funding support given to the project "Enhancing Research Dissemination via the Development of an Efficient Web-based Journal Management System (E-REVIEW)." The project aims to enhance research dissemination by creating an online automated system for the submission of manuscripts, online review process, and timely publication of the PIDSP Journal. 

# Fondazione Italiana Fegato (FIF) 

In 2019, the DOST-PCHRD entered into a partnership with the Fondazione Italiana Fegato (FIF) aimed at advancing liver research and healthcare in the Philippines. This memorandum of understanding (MOU) laid the foundation for various joint initiatives that have since been driving outcomes in the field of liver health. The collaboration between DOST-PCHRD and FIF encompasses several key areas of cooperation: 1.  Establishment of the Philippine Liver Network: The creation of the Philippine Liver Network serves as a significant platform for bringing together experts, researchers, and stakeholders to address liver-related issues comprehensively. This network facilitates knowledge exchange, research collaboration, and the development of strategic interventions to tackle liver diseases effectively. 2.  Graduate Studies Program (PhD in Molecular Biomedicine): Through a partnership with the University of Trieste (UNITS), DOST-PCHRD and FIF are jointly implementing a PhD program in Molecular Biomedicine. This program equips scholars with advanced research training, leveraging FIF's expertise to nurture a new generation of researchers specializing in liver health. 3.  Enhancement of Research Fellowship Program: The collaboration seeks to enhance existing research fellowship programs, providing opportunities for researchers to engage in cutting-edge research projects under the mentorship of experts from both institutions. This initiative aims to build research capacity and foster innovation in liver-related research. 4.  Sandwich Research Training: Under the Sandwich Research Training program, current MD-PhD scholars in Molecular Medicine have the opportunity to undergo specialized training at FIF. This immersive experience enhances their research skills and exposes them to international best practices in liver research and clinical care. In 2023, the collaboration between DOST-PCHRD and FIF resulted in significant milestones as follows: 1.  Two PhD Molecular Biomedicine scholars successfully graduated in 2023, with expertise on liver cancer and Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) 2.  DOST-PCHRD approved five new research projects for 2024 implementation across different Special Interest Groups (SIG) under the Philippine Liver Network Program being established together with UP Manila. 3.  Following the visit of Professor Claudio Tiribelli, Scientific Director of the FIF last 9-11 March 2023, the DOST through PCHRD, has renewed its intention to become a member of the organization, 4.  The FIF, in their decision to accept DOST as a Promoting Member for the three-year period, 2023-2025, has also appointed Secretary, Dr. Renato Solidum, Jr. as the representative of the DOST to the FIF Executive Board. 5.  DOST-PCHRD, and FIF through one of its partner institutions, University of Trieste, continue to support six (6) PhD Molecular Biomedicine scholars. 6.  Expansion of Capacity-Building Programs: Three scholars benefited from the Research Enrichment (Sandwich) Program, providing valuable opportunities for specialized training at FIF and further enhancing research skills and expertise. Moving forward, the collaboration between DOST-PCHRD and FIF is poised to make further strides in liver research and healthcare. Key priorities include: 1.  Capacity Building: Continued support for capacity-building programs to train skilled researchers and hepatologists, elevating the standard of liver-related research and clinical care in the Philippines. 2.  International Linkages: Maintaining and strengthening international linkages for technical collaboration, ensuring access to specialized centers and expertise within the FIF network. 3.  Disease Surveillance and Health Information Systems: Development of robust disease surveillance and health information systems to monitor and address liver-related issues effectively. STATUS OF FUNDS FUNDS FROM OTHER SOURCES Financial overview 5

PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 138 

PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 137 

PCHRD was allotted with Php 916. 9 million budget in 2023, of which 91% came from the GAA while the remaining 9% came from other sources. Out of this budget, PhP 771.1 million was used for general administration, operations and grants-in-aid. For the grants-in-aid, which amounted to over Php 666.5 million, Php 508.6 million was allotted for research and development, Php 87.6 million for capacity building, and Php 70.2 million for science and technology services. 

General Appropriation ( General Appropriations Act (GAA - Republic Act 11936) 6INSIDE PCHRD 

The wealth of human resources is the foundation of the Council's achievements each year. As of 31 December 2023, the Council has employed 149 technical staff, 37 administrative and 13 support staff - 11 with doctorate degrees, 19 with master’s degrees, 154 with bachelor's degrees, two undergraduates, four with post-high school diploma, eight with high school diploma, and one high school undergraduate. PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 140 

PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 139 DOST- PCHRD obtains Maturity Level 2 in PRIME-HRM CES recognizes DOST-PCHRD as 2023 Outstanding Institutional Partner for Learning 

On 19 September 2023, the Civil Service Commission (CSC) issued a certificate of recognition to the DOST-PCHRD for obtaining Maturity Level 2 of the Enhanced Program to Institutionalize Meritocracy and Excellence in Human Resource Management (PRIME-HRM) in Recruitment, Selection and Placement (RSP), and Learning & Development (L&D) as a result of the Council’s determination and invaluable efforts to promote people excellence for efficient and effective public service delivery. For the unwavering support and valuable contribution of the Council to the Career Executive Service (CES) learning and development programs, the DOST-PCHRD received the 2023 Outstanding Institutional Partner for Learning Award during the 2023 Fourth Quarter Human Resource Managers (HRM) Fellowship Meeting and Learning Session last 6 December 2023 at Manila Prince Hotel, San Marcelino St. Ermita Manila. 

# DR. MONTOYA, one of the scientists who authored the 2023 Global SDR 

Appointed by the United Nations, DOST-PCHRD Executive Director Jaime Montoya is one of the 15 scientists from across the world who authored the 2023 Global Sustainable Development Report (GSDR) entitled “Times of crisis, times of change: Science for accelerating transformations to sustainable development.” The Report calls for transformational shifts rooted in science that would urgently reverse course and turbocharge the SDGs. The launching of the 2023 GSDR was attended by Dr. Montoya on 12 September 2023 at the United Nations Headquarters, New York City. PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

141 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

142 PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

143 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

144 

# DOST-PCHRD receives ISO 9001:2015 certification 

The DOST-PCHRD has earned International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 9001:2015 certification from TÜV SUD PSB Philippines, Inc., which signifies an organization’s ability to consistently provide high-quality products and services. PCHRD Staff Office of the Executive Director 

## Institution Development Division 

## Research Information Communication and Utilization Division 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023
> 145
> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023
> 146

## Research and Development Management Division PCHRD Organizational Structure 

## S&T Fellows 

## Finance & Administrative Division 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023
> 147
> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023
> 148

# 7

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

148 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

150 

# ANNEXES Annex 1. List of Supported Projects Completed PCHRD-funded Biomedical Engineering for Health 

POWer: Mobile Biomedical Device Unit to Enhance Access to Prosthesis and Orthosis Devices 

Physicians for Peace Foundation Inc. 

Biomechanical Evaluation of In-House Produced 3D printed Polyetheretherketone (PEEK) Osteosynthesis Plates for Simple Mandibular Fracture sZamboanga City Medical Center 

Development of a Cementless Hip Replacement System 

Orthopaedic International, Inc. 

Digital and Frontier Technologies for Health 

POWer App: Mobile Health Application Development for Remote Screening & Early Detection of Children with Mobility Impairment 

Physicians for Peace Philippines, Inc. 

The Development and Implementation Research of the DOH-PSMID National Antibiotic Guidelines Mobile Application (NAG App) 

Philippine Society for Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Inc. (PSMID) 

Local Government Unit-mandated eHealth Networked Services for Universal Health Care (UHC LeHNS) 

Ateneo de Manila University 

The LISA Robot: Logistic Indoor Service Assistant Telepresence Robot 

University of Santo Tomas 

Requirements for E-Care System (Alz-e-Med) to Support Patients with Dementia (formerly AI-Based E-Care System to Support Patients with Dementia (RODE)) 

Center for Informatics, University of San Agustin 

A Prospective Study on the Accuracy of the CHERISH AI-assisted Diagnosis of COVID-19 Pneumonia (CHERISH2) 

The Medical City - Pasig 

Disaster Risk Reduction - Climate Change Adaptation (DRR-CCA) in Health 

Developing a Geographic Information System to Address Post-Disaster Basic and Health Needs in Temporary Housing Facilities 

EpiMetrics, Inc. 

Diagnostics 

Development and evaluation of simple, affordable, near-patient diagnostic tests for infectious diseases in the Philippines (AND2ID in PH) 

University of Santo Tomas 

Responding to the Philippine HIV Epidemic: An HIV Drug Resistance Surveillance Library and Development of Molecular Diagnostics for Drug-Resistance Detection Part 3: Development of Rapid Diagnostic for Detecting Lamivudine Resistance 

Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, UP Manila 

Functional Foods 

The Effects of Dietary Fiber and Other Non-digestible Carbohydrates in a Pre-identified Low Glycemic Index Rice and Stabilized Brown Rice on Gut Microbiota 

Food and Nutrition Research Institute 

Assessment of Potential Health Benefits and Safety of Wines Produced from Brown, Green, and Red Seaweeds 

Iloilo Science and Technology University 

Mental Health 

Mental Health St atus of Youth and Mental Health Resources in the Province of Tarlac Tarlac Agricultural University 

Identifying and Mapping Safe Havens from Stigma and Discrimination: Towards Elimination of Hepatits B in the Philippines 

National Institutes of Health, UP Manila 

Nutrition and Food Safety 

Bacteriophage in Food Safety: Biosensing and Biocontrol of Food Pathogen Phage-based Electrochemical Impedimetric Biosensing of Salmonella enterica and Listeria monocytogenes in Meat Products 

RCNAS - UST 

Bacteriophage in Food Safety: Biosensing and Biocontrol of Food Pathogen Phage-Based Biocontrol of Food Pathogens 

RCNAS - UST Project 1. Technology Generation for the Production of Fortified Coco-Dairy Milk Blend Food and Nutrition Research Institute 

Omic Technologies for Health 

Using Tuberculosis host-pathogen genetic interactions to improve diagnostics in the Philippines (Newton Agham Cycle 2) Research Institute for Tropical Medicine (RITM) Cellular immunity and resistance to schistosomiasis in the Philippines (Newton Agham Cycle 2) 

Research Institute for Tropical Medicine 

The Predict-XDR Project: Predicting Genetic Markers for Pre-XDR and XDR Tuberculosis 

University of the Philippines Manila 

The Philippine Virome Database Project 

Philippine Genome Center 

Re-emerging and Emerging Diseases 

Modeling a Gender Responsive TB Program in the Community: Validation of Gender Responsiveness Standards in TB Prevention and Management 

Women's Healthcare Foundation, INC. (WHCF) 

Characterization of Inflammatory Markers Among Children with Different TB Status and On Conversion to Active TB 

University of the Philippines - Manila 

Tuklas Lunas 

Microwave-Assisted Synthesis, Characterization and Molecular Docking Studies of Quinoline-4-Carboxylic Acids and Hydrazide Isosteres with Antitubercular Activity 

UST-Research Center for the Natural and Applied Sciences 

Project 5. Lead Optimization of Acrylated Cyclopentenone Derivatives with Anti-Inflammatory and Anti-Cancer Activities: Synthesis, Characterization, SAR and ADMETox Studies 

University of Santo Tomas 

Project 7. In vitro Cardiometabolic Activity and Toxicity Monitoring of Product Development Samples and Screening of New Herbals 

University of San Carlos 

Project 1. Mykopharming of Wild Edible and Poisonous Mushrooms for Their Medicinal Properties 

Central Luzon State University 

ACCELER8: Advancing Antivirals thru Combined Computational Design and Emerging Omics to Leverage Repurposed and Natural Drugs for SARS-CoV-2 Therapeutics 

University of the Philippines Manila 

DOST-funded Biomedical Engineering for Health 

Nanotexturing of Stainless Steel 316L by Electrochemical Etching for Biological Implants 

Industrial Technology Development Institute PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

151 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

152 Microwave-Assisted Synthesis, Characterization and Molecular Docking Studies of Quinoline-4-Carboxylic Acids and Hydrazide Isosteres with Antitubercular Activity 

UST-Research Center for the Natural and Applied Sciences 

Diagnostics 

Aptamer-Based Multiplex Assay for the Early Detection of Leptospirosis 

Institute of Biology, UP Diliman 

Philippines - France Hubert Curien Partnership Science for the People (PHC-SFTP) Researchers' Mobility Program Modeling Gastropod Distribution as Vectors of Schistosomiasis 

Caraga State University 

Functional Foods 

Moringa oleifera-based Developed (MOD) Nutraceutical Product: Nutritional and Metabolome Profiling 

UP Los Baños 

Mental Health 

Depression, Anxiety, Self-Harm and Suicidal Behavior among Students in Higher Education Institutions: Sociocultural Determinants, Detection and Intervention towards Social Emotional Learning - A Collaborative Study 

Mapping of Socio-Cultural Factors and Determinants Associated with Depression, Anxiety, Self-Harm and Suicidality among Students in Higher Education Institutions 

University of Santo Tomas 

Development and Effectiveness of Fully Automated Conversational Agents (Chatbots) for Enhancing Public Mental Health: From Pilot Study to Randomized Controlled Trial 

#MentalHealthPH 

Nutrition and Food Safety 

Healthy Aging Program for Pinoy (HAPPY) Senior Citizens: Promoting Quality of Life Among Older Filipinos Through Food and Nutrition Solutions 

Relationship of body composition to the functional capacity and quality of life of older Filipinos in selected provinces in the Philippines 

Food and Nutrition Research Institute 

Omic Technologies for Health 

Early CANcer Detection in the LivEr of Filipinos with Chronic Hepatitis B Using AI-Driven Integration of Clinical and Genomic Biomarkers (CANDLE Study) Project 1: Establishing a Clinical and Genomic Profile of Filipinos for Early Detection of Liver Cancer 

University of the Philippines Manila 

A Proposal to Establish the Philippine Genome Center - Protein, Proteomics and Metabolomics Facility (PPMF) Installation and Operation of the Philippine Genome Center -Protein Proteomics, and Metabolomics Facility (PPMF) 

University of the Philippines Diliman 

Enhanced Capability Building in R&D in Genomics Establishment of Genomics Consortium and Core Facility in Visayas 

University of the Philippines Visayas 

Enhanced Capability Building in R&D in Genomics Program Management Coordination 

University of the Philippines Diliman 

Clinical Proteomics for Cancer Initiative: A Proteomics-Based Discovery of Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Biomarkers and Drug Targets in the Philippines 

Project 2: Sample Processing for Proteomic Analysis and Functional Characterization and Early Clinical Confirmation of Biomarker Application 

University of the Philippines Diliman 

Center for Applied Modeling, Data Analytics, and Bioinformatics for Decision-Support Systems in Health 

Vulnerability Assessment Tool: A Decision Support System for Pre-Emptive Preparedness on Emerging Infections Among Animal Reservoir in Urban Green Spaces 

University of the Philippines Mindanao 

Re-emerging and Emerging Diseases 

Regional Prospective Observational Research for Tuberculosis (RePORT): Long Term outcomes of Diagnosed Tuberculosis Cases in the Philippines 

National Institutes of Health, University of the Philippines Manila 

Virology and Vaccine Institute of the Philippines (VIP) Program 

Project 8. Development of Antibody Test Kits for COVID-19 using Enzyme Immunoassay 

Research Institute for Tropical Medicine (RITM) 

Development of IoT-Based OL Trap and Community Dengue Early Warning System (C-DEWS) for Cauayan City, Isabela 

Isabela State University 

Persistence of immunological memory to malaria infection in areas of declining transmission 

Research Institute for Tropical Medicine (RITM) 

Tuklas Lunas 

Bridging Efficacy and Safety: IND-enabling Suite of ADMETox Assays 

Project 1. Optimization of Physico-Chemical Drug Properties Project 2. Cell-based ADMET assays Project 3. HPLC and Mass Spectral Studies to Support Various ADMET assays 

University of the Philippines Diliman 

Development of Anti-inflammatory Herbal Products from Iluko Indigenous Plants 

Project 3. Formulation Dosage Forms from Standardized Non-toxic Bioactive Extracts from Indigenous Plants 

Mariano Marcos State University 

Bridging Efficacy and Safey: IND-enabling Suite of ADMETox Assays 

Project 4. Metabolite Profiling Using Imaging Mass Spectrometry University of San Agustin Project 5. Determination of Pharmacokinetic Properties 

Pharmalytics Corporation 

Upgrading of ITDI-Laboratory Animal Facilities in Support for Tuklas Lunas and Other DOST Programs, and Industry Needs 

DOST-ITDI 

Synthesis and Derivatization of Disease-specific Bioactive Hits and Lead Compounds (Phase II) 

Project 1. Lead Optimization, In Silico Prediction, Molecular Docking and Determination of ADMETox Properties of Small Molecules as Antidiabetic Drugs Project 2. Molecular Docking and ADME-Tox–guided Synthesis of Azole-Based Anti-Infective Agents 

University of the Philippines Diliman 

Project 4. Lead Optimization, Molecular Docking and Determination of ADME-Tox Properties of Benzimidazoles with Antihypertensive Activity 

Mindanao State University-Iligan Institute of Technology 

DDHP: Marine Component Phase 2 

Project 1. Anti-Pain and Anti-Neurodegeneration Drug Candidates: Discovery and Development Project 2. Anti-Infective and Anti-Cancer Drug Candidates from Marine Microorganisms and Sponges: Discovery and Development 

University of the Philippines Diliman 

Semi-Purification of Crude Plant Extract: An Essential Step for the Production of Pharmaceutical-Grade Ingredients 

Herbanext Laboratories, Inc. PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

153 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

154 Establishment of the Visayas NMR Laboratory: Enabling the countryside with the power of magnetic resonance for drug discovery and a forward-looking pandemic response 

University of San Agustin 

Multiple (DOST and PCHRD-funded) Omic Technologies for Health 

Clinical Proteomics for Cancer Initiative: A Proteomics-Based Discovery of Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Biomarkers and Drug Targets in the Philippines 

Project 1: Assembly and Archiving of Clinical Samples for Proteomic Analysis 

Lung Center of the Philippines 

Project 3: Proteomic analysis of aberrant protein expression in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) 

University of the Philippines Diliman 

Tuklas Lunas 

Discovery of Cardiometabolic Bioactives from Plants in Central Philippines (USC-TLDC Phase 2) 

Project 3. Chemical Standardization of the Raw Material, Spray-dried Extracts and Dosage Forms from Selected Plants with Antihyperglycemic Activity Project 5. Formulation Studies of Spray-dried Extracts from Plants with Antihyperglycemic Activity 

University of San Carlos 

Synthesis and Derivatization of Disease-specific Bioactive Hits and Lead Compounds (Phase II) 

Project 3. Synthesis of Deguelin, Rotenone, and Small Molecule Derivatives as Anticancer Agents Project 6. Computer-Aided Drug Design of Natural Products-Based, and Synthetic Antidiabetic, Antifungal, and Anticancer Lead Compounds and Derivatives 

University of the Philippines Diliman 

Ongoing PCHRD-funded Biomedical Engineering for Health 

Development of a Magnetic Distal Targeting Device for Intramedullary Nails 

Orthopaedic International, Inc. 

Benchtop and Clinical Validation of an Energized Reusable Laparoscopic Blunt Dissector 

Sacred Heart Hospital of Malolos Inc. 

Hydrogel from pig kidneys: Preparation, characterization, and pre-clinical assessment for kidney tissue regeneration 

De La Salle University Manila 

POWer 2: Mobile Biomedical Device Unit to Enhance Access to Upper and Lower extremity devices 

Physicians for Peace Foundation Inc. 

SMIDERM: Smart Multifunctional and Indigenous Dressings sterilized using the Electron beam as novel wound Repair Matrices - Phase I. Biomedical device development and characterization 

De La Salle University Manila 

AI-assisted Strategy for 3D-printed Ceramic-Clay and Polymer-Nanoclay Composite Scaffolds Towards Cost-Effective Bone Tissue Repair 

Ateneo de Manila University 

Pediatric Abdominal Wall Defect Closure Assistive Device 

University of the Philippines Manila 

Increasing the Rates of Newborn Hearing Screening Through Biomedical Device Research and Development: Pre-Market Development of Locally Manufactured Automated Auditory Brainstem Response Device and Algorithm (HeLe Project) 

University of the Philippines Diliman 

Digital and Frontier Technologies for Health 

Multicenter Implementation of Orthogeriatrics and the Fracture Liaison Service for Elderly Hip Fractures: An Evidence-based Framework for a Sustainable Digital Health Registry 

Department of Orthopedics, UP-PGH 

i-SULAT (Intelligent Stroke Utilization, Learning, Assessment and Testing): A Development of an Intelligent Quantitative Software-Based Handwriting Assessment and Testing System for Early Childhood Handwriting Evaluation 

UST Research Center for Natural and Applied Sciences 

RabDash DC: A rabies data analytics dashboard integrating predictive models and genome informatics to support the rabies control program in Davao City 

University of the Philippines Mindanao 

Developing Immersive Gamification Technology Systems (ImGTS) for the Management of patients with Alzheimer’s Disease with Behavioral and Psychological Symptoms of Dementia (Phase 2 Trial) 

University of the Philippines Manila 

Developing Immersive Gamification Technology System (ImGTS) for Rehabilitation Management of Pediatric Patients with Cerebral Palsy and Mobility Limitations (Phase 2 Trial) 

University of the Philippines Manila 

Disaster Risk Reduction - Climate Change Adaptation (DRR-CCA) in Health 

Seasonal Distribution and Allergenicity of Airborne Pollen in Ilocos Norte, Philippines 

University of Santo Tomas 

Diagnostics 

Enteric Solutions: Development of a Vertical Flow Microarray (VFM) for the Detection of Enteric Viruses 

Biological Research and Services Laboratory - UP Diliman 

Development of aptamer based colorimetric and electrochemical point of care type diagnostic test for pulmonary TB and latent TB infection 

University of the Philippines Los Baños 

Innovative point-of-care diagnostics and environmental surveillance tools for the elimination of Asian schistosomiasis 

Research Institute for Tropical Medicine 

Enhanced Digital Image Analysis System for the Assisted Pathologic Evaluation of Selected Disease Conditions 

University of the Philippines Manila 

Functional Foods 

Analysis of Lauric Acid in Blood Following VCO Consumption 

Ateneo de Manila University 

Bioequivalence of Virgin Coconut Oil among Healthy Filipino Male Adults: An Exploratory Pharmacokinetic Study 

Food and Nutrition Research Institute 

Mental Health 

Follow Up Study on Pilot-Testing a Manualized Tele-Synergistic Aftercare Program for Recovering Drug Dependents among 17 DOH-DATRCs 

Addictus Research and Intervention Center, Inc. 

An Assessment of the Adolescent Telemental Health Services Available in Batangas 

University of Batangas 

Nutrition and Food Safety 

Characterization of Buffalo milk Oligosaccharide Supplement (BMOS) Extracted from Buffalo (Bubalus Bubalis) Kesong Puti Whey by-products and Elucidation of its Growth-Promoting Effects in Stunting Mice Models (C57BL/6) 

University of the Philippines Los Baños 

Project 2: Evaluation on the benefits of coconut milk blended with different types of animal milk on the nutritional status of children aged 3 to 5 years old 

Food and Nutrition Research Institute 

Omic Technologies for Health 

Filipino Genomes Research Program 

Filipino Forensic Genomics (Phase I) Filipino Genomes: History, Evolution, Origins and Applications Filipino Genomes Region for to Help Resolve Child Sexual Abuse Cases 

University of the Philippines Diliman 

Investigating the Epidemiology of X-Linked Dystonia-Parkinsonism 

NIH, University of the Philippines Manila 

Proteomic Analysis of Philippine SARS-CoV2 Patient Plasma by Artificial Intelligence and High-Resolution Mass Spectrometry 

Philippine Genome Center 

Screening for Metabolomic Biomarkers of Diabetic Nephropathy in Filipino adult Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus Patients 

University of the Philippines - Philippine Genome Center 

Re-emerging and Emerging Diseases 

Moleculo-epidemiological study of dengue virus among livestock and domesticated animals as potential zoonotic reservoirs 

Philippine Carabao Center - National Headquarters and Genepool 

Autopsy Evaluations of Pathological and Immunological Events in Fatal Infections Caused by Arboviruses and Emerging Infections 

NIH, University of the Philippines Manila 

The Philippine COPD Profile and Survival Study (CPASS): AMulticenter, Prospective Cohort, Observational Study 

Philippine College of Chest Physicians 

Prospective Urban and Rural Epidemiologic (PURE) Study 

University of the Philippines Manila 

Regional Prospective Observational Research for Tuberculosis (RePORT) Community Approach to Control and Halt Drug-Resistant TB (COACH DRTB) 

De La Salle Medical and Health Sciences Institute (DLSMHSI) 

Metagenomic and genomic surveillance of antimicrobial resistance in hospital wastewater and computational prediction of efficacy of alternative non-antibiotic therapeutics 

De La Salle University - Manila 

Patient-Centered Clinical Decision Support Systems On Endemic Diseases Applying Artificial Intelligence Technology And Operations Research (Pasyente) Project For Dengue 

University of the Philippines Mindanao 

Tuklas Lunas 

Structure identification of Anti-inflammatory and Anti-Diabetic Compounds from Priority Extracts 

University of the Philippines Diliman 

Structure Identification of Anti-inflammatory and Anti-Pain Agents from Priority Extracts (Phase 4) 

University of the Philippines Diliman 

Discovery and Development of Health Products [DDHP]: Formulation, Standardization, and Metabolic Profiling of Disease-Specific Top-Tier Plants for Pre-Clinical and Clinical Development 

Project 1. Standardized dosage forms of biologically active extracts suitable for use in pre-clinical and clinical research: top tier herbs for diabetes and inflammation 

Herbanext Laboratories, Inc. 

Project 2. Standardized Dosage Forms of Biologically Active Extracts Suitable for Use in Preclinical and Clinical Research: Top Tier Herbs for Diabetes, Inflammation and Cancer 

Pharmalytics Corporation 

Project 3. Standardized Dosage Forms of Biologically Active Extracts Suitable for Use in Pre-clinical and Clinical Research: Top Tier Herbs for Cancer 

Pharmalytics Corporation 

Project 4. Chemical standardization of top-tier plant extracts for diabetes, inflammation, and cancer using high performance thin layer chromatography 

Institute of Chemistry - UP Diliman 

Compounds Active Against Cancer Lines (HCT116, MCF7, A549) from Priority Extracts – Phase II 

Pascual Laboratories, Inc. 

USA-TLC: Discovery and Development of Health Products USA-TLC Phase II: Early-Stage Development of Antibiotic and Anticancer Leads from Philippine Marine Streptomyces 

University of the Philippines Diliman 

Pre-Clinical Studies and Scale Up Formulation of Anti-Inflammatory PharmaFern Ointments 

University of San Agustin 

Securing the Health of the Filipino for the Next Millennium: The National Institute of Health 

Project 1: Science-based Clinical Research Hub Management Practices 

Central Mindanao University 

DOST-funded Biomedical Engineering for Health 

Surgical Device Innovation Research and Development (R&D) Infrastructure, Capacity Building and Incubation Program: Proposal for Establishment of the University of the Philippines Manila (UPM) College of Medicine (UPCM) – Philippine General Hospital (PGH) Surgical Innovation and Biotechnology Laboratory (SIBOL) 

1.iFIX: Design and Fabrication of External Fixator 2.Operating Room Programmable Electronically Targeted Active Lighting System (OR PETALS) 3. iBlood: A Compact Device for Measuring Intraoperative Blood Loss in Used Surgical Gauze and Laparotomy Packs 4. Establishment of the University of the Philippines Manila College of Medicine (UPCM) - (PGH) Surgical Innovation and BiOtechnology Laboratory (SIBOL) 

University of the Philippines Manila 

Development of a Three-dimensional Bioprinted Human Skin Equivalent for In Vitro Biocompatibility Studies of Topical Formulations 

Pharma GalenX Innovations, Inc. 

Institute of Biomedical Engineering and Health Technologies (IBEHT): R&D Center for Medical Robotics SELLA Project: EEG-Integrated Wheelchair Power Unit for Patients with Physical Disabilities 

De La Salle University Manila 

i-BALIK: Cognitive and Motor Function Rehabilitation using Neurofeedback Training System for Stroke Patients 

De La Salle Medical and Health Sciences Institute - Cavite 

SIGLA: Depression Recognition and Analysis from EEG: Towards Virtual Reality - based Therapy Program 

De La Salle University- Manila 

REHEAL: Radiation-Engineered HEmostatic Agents as Life-saving devices - Clinical investigations of safety, efficacy, and effectiveness in the prehospital management of traumatic bleeding 

Philippine Nuclear Research Institute 

Digital and Frontier Technologies for Health 

QARE-HHC: Quicker Analytics for ResponsivE Home Health Care 

Asian Institute of Management Diagnostics 

Biomaterials for Diagnostics and Therapeutics Research and Development Center 

Project 1. Development of a Colorimetric POCT Device for Rotavirus (Viral Gastroenteritis) Detection Project 2. Fecal Lactoferrin, Myeloperoxidase, and Calprotectin as Differential Markers of Pediatric Acute Gastroenteritis Project 3. Synthesis of Biocompatible Nanomaterial Conjugated Rabies Peptide Immunogen 

Angeles University Foundation 

SinoPhil CHARRME: China-Philippines Cooperation for Harnessing and Accelerating Research and Resources on Microvesicles and Exosomes (Development of Exosome Probe Chip as Potential Diagnostic for Autoimmune Diseases) 

University of San Agustin 

Development of Novel Detection Tools for the Integrated Surveillance and Monitoring of Helminthic Neglected Tropical Diseases (NTDs) of Mutual Public Health Importance in the Philippines and China 

Institute of Biology, University of the Philippines Diliman 

Functional Foods 

Philippine Program for Diagnostic Biomarkers, Disease Modeling, and Nutriceutical Product Development (Phil-DIAMOND): Initial Focus on HIV-Related Neurocognitive and Metabolic Complications 

Project 3. Development of a Safe Lactic Acid Bacteria (LAB)-based Biofunctional Health-promoting Product as an Adjunct Intervention for the Management of HIV-associated Metabolic Complications 

University of the Philippines Manila 

The Cocoa-loca Project: Development of functional food products and ingredients from cocoa bean shell waste 

Institute of Food Science and Technology - UPLB 

Mental Health 

Novel Approaches to Treatment of Addiction and Depression Using Animal Models 

Cessation of toluene (Rugby) addiction in adolescents: Using a rodent model to test novel pharmacological and behavioral treatments for overcoming withdrawal and craving Assessment of pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic interactions of selected psychobiotic and antidepressant drugs in depression-like rat model 

National Institutes of Health, University of the Philippines Manila 

Depression, Anxiety, Self-Harm and Suicidal Behavior among Students in Higher Education Institutions: Sociocultural Determinants, Detection and Intervention towards Social Emotional Learning - A Collaborative Study 

Adaptation and validation of culturally sensitive Mental Health Scale for Screening and Diagnosis of NON-SUICIDAL SELF-HARM and SUICIDALITY specific for College/University Students Development of a locally relevant and structured educational activities and tools for the tertiary level college students, faculty, staff and guidance counselors 

University of Santo Tomas 

Nutrition and Food Safety 

Research Center for Rehabilitation/Sports Medicine (Oplan Atletang Pinoy) 

Project 1: Integration of Inertial Measurement Unit with Surface Electromyography in the Assessment of Hamstring Injury Project 2: The Development of a Local Technology in the Preparation of Platelet Rich Plasma (PRP) Project 3: Development of Software Measuring Patellar Tendon Displacement in Patellofemoral Pain Syndrome 

University of Santo Tomas 

Healthy Aging Program for Pinoy (HAPPY) Senior Citizens: Promoting Quality of Life Among Older Filipinos Through Food and Nutrition Solutions 

Project 2: Development and Pilot-Scale Production of Innovative Food Products for Older Male and Female Filipinos Project 3: Managing the Nutritional Needs of Older Filipino with Due Attention to Protein Nutrition and Functional Health (MANO PO) Study 

Food and Nutrition Research Institute 

The Eastern Visayas Birth Cohort: Nutrition and Multi-omics Determinants of Children’s Growth and Development Identification of genetic variants associated with children’s growth and development in a Filipino Birth Cohort Nutritional status and maternal lifestyle among pregnant women in Samar and Biliran and its Relation to Pregnancy Outcomes during the First 1000 Days: A Prospective Cohort Study Infant Gut Microbiota and Linear Growth: A Longitudinal Study of the Eastern Visayas Birth Cohort Linking the Metabolome with Genetic Variation, Nutrition, and Gut Microbiome: An Integrative Omics Approach to Understand Child Growth and Development among the Selected Mother-Infant/Child Dyads of the Eastern Visayas Birth Cohort 

Food and Nutrition Research Institute 

Re-emerging and Emerging Diseases 

Epidemiology, Evolutionary Dynamics and Phylogenetic Analysis of Rabies Virus in the Philippines 

Bureau of Animal Industry, Department of Agriculture 

Virology and Vaccine Institute of the Philippines (VIP) Program 

Project 1. Isolation and purification of Philippine Common Viruses with medical importance and pandemic potential for Antigen-Antibody Studies Project 2. Combination Therapy: Lytic Bacteriophages and Plant Extracts against Multidrug-Resistant Bacteria Project 3. Detection of food and water-borne bacterial pathogens using phage-based diagnostics Project 4. De Novo Synthesis of Non-Infective Zika Pseudovirus As Reference for Diagnostics and Vaccines Development 

Industrial Technology Development Institute 

Virology and Vaccine Institute of the Philippines (VIP) Program 

Project 7. Antigenic Peptide VLPs as Potential Candidates for Covid-19 Vaccine Development 

St. Luke's Medical Center 

Center for Vector of Diseases of Public Health Importance in the Philippines for Region IV (CVDPHIL, Region IV) 

Project 1: Establishment of Reference Susceptible Aedes Mosquito Population Project 2: Development of Bio - Mosquitocidal from Local Strain of Bacteria, Bacillus amyloliquefaciens and B. subtilis Project 3: Biological Control of Mosquito Vectors, Aedes spp. Using Natural Organisms 

De La Salle University - Manila 

SAFeV: Survey of cross-reactive Anti-Flavivirus antibodies after Vaccination 

University of the Philippines Manila 

Development of Cell Isolation Microfluidic Platform Using Light-Trigger Polymeric Matrix for Cancer Drug Screening 

University of the Philippines Diliman 

Development of Novel Antiviral Compounds against Arthropod-borne Viruses 

University of the Philippines - Visayas 

Virology and Vaccine Institute of the Philippines (VIP) 

3D-HEP-DD: Local adoption of a robust 3D-bioprinted HEPatic model for antiviral Drug Discovery research 

The Medical City 

SkIn PaTCH Project: Treatment of Skin wound Infection by multidrug-resistant pathogens using phage therapy cocktail preparations formulated from bacteriophages in hospital sewage in in vitro 3D-printed skin infection model 

The Medical City 

Developing a COVID-19 Oral Vaccine for the Philippines Using the Human Probiotic Yeast, Saccharomyces boulardii 

University of Santo Tomas 

Omic Technologies for Health 

Philippine Program for Diagnostic Biomarkers, Disease Modeling and Nutraceutical Product Development (Phil-DIAMOND): Initial Focus on HIV-related Neurocognitive and Metabolic Complications 

Biomarkers of Immune Dysfunction in HIV – associated Metabolic and Neurocognitive Complications 

University of the Philippines Manila 

Development of HIV Disease Models and in vitro Investigation of HIV-related Neurocognitive and Metabolic Complications 

University of the Philippines Diliman 

Breast Cancer in the Philippines: Gene Expression Profiling of Breast Cancer Among Filipinos and Development of Breast Cancer Mammosphere Assay Toward Individualized Cancer Management 

Next Generation Sequencing -based expression profiling of Breast Cancer among Filipinos and Prediction of Response to Neoadjuvant Therapy for Locoregionally-Advanced Breast Cancer in Filipinos 

University of the Philippines Manila 

Generation of Breast Cancer Mammosphere Assay as Potential Approach Towards Individualized Cancer Management 

University of the Philippines Diliman 

Center for Applied Modeling, Data Analytics, and Bioinformatics for Decision-Support Systems in Health 

Risk Management and Enhanced Survival Analysis Integrated through Longitudinal Infectious Disease Data and Statistical Epidemiological Model Using Clinical Risk Factors 

Malayan Colleges Mindanao 

Integrated Wastewater-Based Epidemiology and Data Analytics for Community Level Pathogen Surveillance and Genetic Tracking: Proof-of-Concept 

University of the Philippines Mindanao 

Early CANcer Detection in the LivEr of Filipinos with Chronic Hepatitis B Using AI-Driven Integration of Clinical and Genomic Biomarkers (CANDLE Study) 

Project 2. AI-driven Integration of Genomic, Ultrasound, Serum Biomarkers, and Clinical data for Early Diagnosis of Liver Cancer 

University of the Philippines Los Banos 

Multi-OMICS Research Program for Health (MORPH) 

Monitoring Drug Efficacy through Multi-Omics Research Initiative in Alzheimer’s Disease (MEMORI-AD) Molecular Epidemiology of Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Human Immunodeficiency Virus among Adult Filipino TB/HIV Co-infected Patients Determinants of Acquisition, Persistence, and Clearance of Oncogenic Cervical Human Papillomavirus Infection in a Cohort of Women in Rural and Urban Philippines 

University of the Philippines Manila 

Establishing the Integrated Protein Research and Development Center (IPRDC): A Biotechnology Facility for Health 

Project 2 Scaling Up and Optimization of Protein Production Project 3 Building Open-Source Instrumentation for Fermentation and Protein Purification Project 4 Development of Chemical Tools and Materials for Protein Purification 

Ateneo de Manila University 

Research and Development Center for Maternal and Child Health 

Determinants, Management and Prevention Strategies for Childhood Stunting Among Children 0-59 Months Focusing on Maternal and Child Dyad 

Mother and Child Determinants of Pediatric Dengue and Development of a Risk Assessment Scoring System for Severe Disease among Filipino Children 

Determinants and Risk Assessment Scoring System for Postpartum Depression Among Filipino Mothers 

Davao Medical School Foundation, Inc. 

Inter-Regional Network through One Health Approach to Combat AMR 

Antibiotics And Antibiotic Resistant Bacteria Propagating Amr In Soil (Amr Soil) 

University of the Philippines Diliman 

Cutting-Edge Strategies To Combat Amr Using Biotechnology-Based Interventions 

Central Luzon State University 

Tuklas Lunas 

Formulation Quality Control and Stability Studies on Immediate-Release Tablets of Fixed-Dose Combinations of Cilostazol and Aspirin 

Adamson University 

Discovery and Development of Health Products: Disease-Specific Bioactive Hits from Terrestrial Organisms 

Confirmatory and Orthogonal Assays to Eliminate Artefactual Drug Bioactivities (Phase 3): Continuing Needs of the Tuklas Lunas Program 

University of the Philippines Diliman 

Efficacy and Safety of Orally Administered Fixed-Dose Combination Capsule of RGA02 + JRA01 + ASB02 in the Treatment of Dengue Without Warning Signs Among Adult Filipinos in Cavite: A Randomized, Double-blind, Placebo Controlled Trial 

National Institutes of Health - UP Manila 

Securing the Health of the Filipino for the Next Millennium: The National Institute of Health, National Clinical Trials and Translation Center (NIH NCTTC) 

Project 2: Establishment of Pharmaceutical Sciences Services for Clinical Research 

UPM - NIH NCTTC / UPM College of Pharmacy 

Project 3: Unified Data and Safety Monitoring of Clinical Trials in the Philippines 

UPM - NIH NCTTC 

Project 4: Development and Validation of Clinical Research Teaching Modules 

UPM - NIH NCTTC 

Project 5: Phase II Clinical Trial of Leucaena leucocephala Seed Extract Suspension for the Treatment of Ascariasis, Enterobiasis, and Hookworm Infection 

UPM - NIH 

Multiple (DOST and PCHRD-funded) Omic Technologies for Health 

Intra-island Zoonotic Transmission of Schistosomiasis in Leyte, Philippines 

University of the Philippines Manila 

Newly-implemented PCHRD-funded Biomedical Engineering for Health 

ENSAYO: An Immersive Technology for the Blind and Visually Impaired (BVI) using Virtual-based Orientation and Mobility (O&M) Training Facility Screen reader support enabled 

De La Salle University 

LAPARA Project Stage 3: Live Pig Testing and Human Cadaver 

De La Salle University PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

155 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

156 Disaster Risk Reduction - Climate Change Adaptation (DRR-CCA) in Health 

Developing Resilient Health and Environmental Systems for the Vulnerbale Environment, Small-Scale Mining Areas in T'Boli, South Cotabato 

Project 1: Investigating the Occupational and Environmental Health and Safety of Small-Scale Mining Workers Most Commonly Affected by Environmental Disasters in T'Boli, South Cotabato Project 2: Developing a Software on Disaster Projections and Estimations on Health and Environmental Disasters Relating to Small-Scale Mining in T’boli, South Cotabato Project 3: Developing a Comprehensive Occupational and Environmental Health Mobile System Linked to Climate Risks and Disasters for the Small-Scale Mining Workers of T’boli, South Cotabato 

University of the Philippines Manila- National Institutes of Health 

Post-Pandemic Human Security Map of the Philippines 

National Research Council of the Philippines 

Diagnostics 

PCR-Free and Label-Free DNA Hybridisation and Detection Using a Microcontroller-Based Modified Quartz Resonator (DNA Resonate) 

University of the Philippines Diliman 

Applying novel serological exposure markers to quantify residual malaria transmission in the Philippines (Short title: SMaRT – Serological Markers for Residual malaria Transmission) 

Research Institute for Tropical Medicine 

Digital and Frontier Technologies for Health 

An Online Registry of Carbapenemase Producing Gram Negative Organisms for Evaluating the Clinical Profile, Outcomes, Mechanisms of Resistance and Antimicrobial Stewardship Practices of Two Tertiary Level Hospitals (ORiGiN Study )The Medical City 

Development of the Enhanced National Registry for Skin Diseases of Public Health Concern – Phase 1: Psoriasi sRizal Medical Center 

HealthPH: Intelligent Disease Surveillance for Public Health using Social Media 

National University 

Design, Development, Implementation, and Assessment of a Comprehensive Electronic Disease Registry with Health Data Dashboard for Liver Diseases in the Philippines 

University of the Philippines Diliman 

F&N 4.0 – Maximizing the Application of Industry 4.0 to Food and Nutrition Data and Service Delivery 

Food and Nutrition Research Institute 

Artificial Intelligence Nutrition Assistant (AINA) Project: Development and validation of a deep learning food recognition system for dietary assessment among Filipinos Development of Automated Diet Decoder and Recommender System Software (ADDReSS) Data Visualization and Analytics for Innovation in Food and Nutrition – Development of the Hunger and Malnutrition Heat Map, Philippine Version Development of Mobile Augmented Reality Food Models based on the Food Exchange Lists (MARFEL) as a Nutrition Education Tool Unification of e-LEARNing platforms of DOST-FNRI (U Learn) 

Functional Foods 

Utilization of Philippine White Corn Grits as Staple for Improved Nutrition, Disease Prevention and Management in Claveria, Misamis Oriental 

University of Science and Technology of Southern Philippines 

Strengthening the UP Drugs of Abuse Research Laboratory Capability: Getting a Grip on the Drug Menace in the Philippines 

Project 1. Analysis of Substances of Abuse in Serum and Hair Using Liquid Chromatography-Quadrupole-Time of Flight Mass Spectrometry (LC-QTOF/MS) Project 2. Clinical Validation of the POCT device (E-tox) for Selected New Psychoactive Substances (NPS) Project 3. Phenotypic and Genotypic Characterization of Methamphetamine Metabolism Among Filipino Users Project 4. Cost-effectiveness Analysis of a Validated Non-targeted Drug Testing for Substance Abuse in the Philippines 

University of the Philippines Drugs of Abuse Research Laboratory (UP DARL) 

Functional Foods 

Functional Food Program on Philippine Seaweeds 

Project 1. Evaluation of Nutrient Compositions, Potential Health-Promoting Properties and Harmful Components in Selected Edible Seaweeds in the Philippines 

DOST-Food and Nutrition Research Institute and Cebu Technological University 

Mental Health 

Telepsychiatry Utilization and Mental Health Literacy Among Overseas Filipino Workers in Saudi Arabia 

Southern Philippines Medical Center 

Omic Technologies for Health 

Multi-OMICS Research Program for Health (MORPH) 

Project 4. Identification of Biomarkers to Distinguish Between Follicular Thyroid Carcinoma and Follicular Thyroid Adenoma 

University of the Philippines Manila 

Immunological Models for Medically Useful Novel Entities (IMMUNE) 

1.IMMUNE-Omics 

Lung Center of the Philippines 

2. IMMUNE-Models 

University of the Philippines Diliman 

3. IMMUNE-Biologics 

University of the Philippines Manila 

Re-emerging and Emerging Diseases 

Virology and Vaccine Institute of the Philippines (VIP) 

ResBac MRSA: Restoring antibiotic activity using Bacteriophages against biofilm-forming Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus 

The Medical City 

Inter-Regional Network through One Health Approach to Combat AMR 

Sociocultural Dimensions Of Amr In The Community And Surveillance Of Multidrug Resistant Eskape Pathogens In The Healthcare Setting Antimicrobial Resistance In Water-Fish-Human Nexus: Mapping Of Antibiotic Resistant Escherichia Coli, Salmonella Spp., Shigella Spp. And Vibrio Cholerae Using One Health Approach 

Mindanao State University - Marawi 

Surveillance, Social Dimension And Policy Analysis To Mitigate Antimicrobial Resistance In Swine, Poultry And Aquaculture Farms 

Central Luzon State University 

Multi-Dimensional Landscape Analysis Of Food-Associated Antibiotic Resistance In Selected Areas In The Philippines 

Mindanao State University - General Santos 

Insecticide Resistance Monitoring in Aedes for Sustainable Dengue Vector Control (IRMae) Program 

Project 1: Aedes Insecticide Resistance Status (AIRS) in NCR 

DOH-MMCHD 

Insecticide Resistance Monitoring in Aedes for Sustainable Dengue Vector Control (IRMae) Program 

Project 2: Insecticide Resistance Survey and Tracking in Aedes for Sustainable Dengue Vector Control (IRMae) 

NIMBB-UPD 

Virology and Vaccine Institute of the Philippines (VIP) 

Mycobacterium tuberculosis EAI2-Manila strain-derived Immunogenic Protein Subunits for TB Vaccine Development 

Industrial Technology Development Institute 

Berry Nutri-Licious: Development and Characterization of Syzygium curranii (Lipote) Effervescent Fruit Tablets Supplemented with Fructooligosaccharide and Lactobacillus acidophilus 

University of Science and Technology of Southern Philippines 

Development of Functional Foods from Calabash (Crescentia cujete) Fruit 

Food Processing Innovation Center (FPIC) 

Mental Health 

A Mindfulness-Based Resilience Training for Filipino Frontline Workers 

FriendlyCare Foundation, Inc. 

Omic Technologies for Health 

Investigating regulated necrotic cell death in colorectal cancer using a multi-omics approach 

De La Salle University 

The Philippine Bangungut Program 

The Philippine Bangungut Project 

University of the Philippines Manila 

Re-emerging and Emerging Diseases 

Deciphering The Amr And Hypervirulence In Klebsiella Pneumoniae Infections (Detail-Kp) 

University of the Philippines Manila 

Antiviral Properties Of Mentha Cordifolia Plant Extract On Later Steps Of Virus Production In Hiv Latently Infected Cells 

University of the Philippines Manila 

Development of Sterile Insect Technique Against Dengue Mosquito, Aedes Aegypti 

DOST - Philippine Nuclear Research Institute 

Association of Vitamin D levels and Vitamin D receptor epigenetic changes and TB conversion among children exposed to adult TB household members 

University of the Philippines Manila - National Institutes of Health 

A retrospective and prospective, observational, multicenter, cohort study to follow-up hospitalized patients with confirmed COVID-19 infection in the Philippines 

Philippine Society for Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Inc. (PSMID) 

Characterization and anti-dengue activities of the active component(s) in Mentha arvensis L. (Yerba buena) methanol and ethanol leaf extracts 

Saint Luke's Medical Center 

Molecular Identification of Microbial Flora in Anthropophagic Aedes spp. Mosquitoes in Metro Manila 

University of the Philippines Manila 

DOST-funded Biomedical Engineering for Health 

NEOLIMB: Center for Research on Rehabilitation and Assistive Technologies for Mobility 

Prosthetic Socket Development Using Renewable Materials Development of Printable BioLiner for Prosthetic Devices Utilization of Digital Inclinometer for Gait Measurement Remote Scanning and Fabrication of Prosthetic and Orthotic Devices and Service Delivery Model Development 

University of the East Ramon Magsaysay Memorial Medical Center Inc. 

Disaster Risk Reduction - Climate Change Adaptation (DRR-CCA) Development of the Disaster Risk Reduction and Climate Change Adaptation in Health Research Agenda 2023-2028 

University of the Philippines Manila 

Diagnostics 

Decreasing Leptospirosis Emergence through Prognosis and Treatment Optimization (DeLEPTO) 

Project 1. Preventive strategies for early and late complications of leptospirosis 

National Kidney and Transplant Institute (NKTI) 

Molecular Characterization and Biobanking of Vector-borne and Respiratory Viruses for the Virology and Vaccine Institute of the Philippines (VRV Biobanking) 

Project 1: Biorepository of Human Respiratory Virus with Risk Group Level 2 Infections in selected tertiary hospitals in Luzon Project 2: Molecular profiles and biobanking of vector-borne viruses in selected tertiary hospitals in Luzon 

Industrial Technology Development Institute 

Virology and Vaccine Institute of the Philippines (VIP) 

Development of rapid immunoassay-based multiplex test kits for the simultaneous screening of HIV, HBV and Syphilis 

Davao Medical School Foundation, Inc. (DMSFI) 

One ARM: One Health Approach in the Characterization of Bacterial Antimicrobial Resistance in the Greater Manila Area 

University of the Philippines Manila 

Characterization of Antimicrobial Resistant Bacteria in Samples of Patients Admitted in Tertiary Hospitals in Metro Manila Characterization of Antimicrobial Resistance Genes in Selected Hospital Wastewater, Community Wastewater and Surface Water in Metro Manila Characterization of Antimicrobial Resistance from Nasal, Oropharyngeal, and Fecal Samples Obtained from a Community in Tondo, Manila Characterization of Bacterial Antimicrobial Resistance in Food Handlers and Food Sources in A Community in Tondo, Manila Exploratory Spatial Mapping Of The Occurrence Of Antimicrobial Resistant Bacteria And Genes In Metro Manila And Development Of Rapid Diagnostic Kit Antimicrobial Resistance (Explore) 

Tuklas Lunas 

Innovative approach in delivering syringic acid using Metal Organic Framework as drug carrier 

Industrial Technology Development Institute 

Establishment of Sambong’s (Blumea balsamifera) mechanism of diuretic action and development of a bioactive standardized extract. 

Pascual Pharma Corporation 

Approved for Implementation PCHRD-funded Biomedical Engineering for Health 

ECM/Cellulose/Propolis Patch (ECPatch): Development of an all-natural wound dressing via additive manufacturing technologies 

De La Salle University- Manila 

Sonication-Perfusion Decellularization of Urinary Tract Scaffolds (SPURS): Optimization, characterization, and cytocompatibility evaluation of bioengineered porcine urinary tract tissues 

De La Salle University- Manila 

3D-Bioprinted Wound Dressing Integrated with Pressure Sensor (3DIPS): Development of a bioinspired, green, and smart wound dressing for pressure ulcer (bedsore) monitoring and management 

De La Salle University- Manila 

Development, Application, and Validation Of a Cost-Effective and Reusable Tissue Analogue In Simulation-Based Surgical Training 

Sacred Heart Hospital 

TAYÔ Project – Robotic Rehabilitation for the Trunk and Lower Extremity: STAGE 3 – Phase 2 of the Clinical Trials and Value Engineering 

De La Salle University 

POWer: Mobile Biomedical Device Unit to Enhance Access to Spinal Orthotic Devices 

Physicians for Peace Foundation Inc. PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

157 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

158 Development of metal-doped magnetic nanoparticles as a smart theranostic agent for imaging and radiosensitization of head and neck cancer 

Philippine Nuclear Research Institute 

G.T.A.R.A. (Grip/Grasp Training with Active Range of Motion Activities using Guitar) Phase 2: Guitar Exercises for Restoring Hand Function Among Patients with Unilateral Hand Impairment from Chronic Stroke 

University of the Philippines, Diliman 

Development of a Phantom Model System for Gynecologic and Obstetrics Ultrasound-guided Procedures 

University of the Philippines Diliman 

Disaster Risk Reduction - Climate Change Adaptation (DRR-CCA) in Health 

Ready to Use Therapeutic Food and Indigenous Foods for Disaster Emergencies and DRRM from the IKSPs of the Aytas of Mount Pinatubo: A Follow Through Study 

Addictus Research and Intervention Center, Inc. 

Diagnostics 

Detection of Human Immunodeficiency Virus-1 (HIV-1) Using QUASR-LAMP Assay 

Manila HealthTek, Inc. 

Development of Electrochemical Aptasensor for Clinical Monitoring of Hepatitis B Virus Infection Using Untreated Blood Samples (HBV e-APTASENSE) 

University of the Philippines Los Baños 

Development of Aptamer-based Chromatographic Lateral Flow Assays and Enzyme-linked Aptamer Assay (ELAA) for Detection of Trichomonas vaginalis in Vaginal Specimens 

Mapua University 

Smartphone-based Au NP colorimetric for Visualized Quantification of Soil Transmitted Helminth 

University of Santo Tomas 

The Clinical Utility of HRMS Analysis in the Prognostication of Hereditary Breast 

University of the Philippines Diliman 

Smart Chitosan-Anthocyanin Sensor on Nonwoven Textile Substrate for Rapid H. pylori Detection (SCAN-rHPD) 

DOST - Philippine Textile Research Institute 

Nanotechnology-based MIP sensors for ACS Diagnosis (Nanomacs): Development of epitope-imprinted poly norepinephrine (PNE) and gold nanoparticles-decorated reduced graphene oxide based sensing interface for electrochemical detection of troponin in acute coronary syndrome (ACS) 

Cagayan State University - Carig Campus 

Pre-XDeTech TB: Low-Cost TB-MacroArray-AI Detection Technology for the Molecular Diagnosis of MDR and Pre-XDR Tuberculosis 

University of the Philippines Manila 

Development and Evaluation of a Multiplex Recombinase Polymerase Amplification (RPA) Assay for the Detection of M. tuberculosis (Mtb) and Mtb drug-resistance genes in clinical samples 

University of the Philippines Manila 

Functional Foods 

Developing an Online Platform for Potential Functional Foods in the Philippines 

University of the Immaculate Conception 

Molecular and Phytochemical Characterization of Indigenous Fruits in the Philippines Towards its Development as Potential Functional Foods (MOTIF PH) 

University of the Philippines Los Baños 

Prebiotic Potential of Crude Pili Pulp Pomace Oligosaccharides (C3PO) via Microbial Enzyme Bioconversion 

Bicol University 

Mental Health 

Saltik, Sumpong, at mga Paliwanag sa Sakit ng Loob: Unpacking Mental Health Literacy Levels towards the Development of a Mental Health Literacy Toolkit in Luzon and NCR (National Capital Region) 

Philippine Social Science Council 

NEUROMAP PH - Neuroimaging Technologies for Improved Diagnosis and Treatment of Neurological and Neuropsychiatric Conditions in the Philippines 

St. Luke's Medical Center - Global City 

Epidemiology of Psychological Distress among Adolescents and Mapping Access to Mental Health Support of in Quezon City, the Philippines (PsychEMap Project) 

University of the Philippines Manila - National Institutes of Health 

A Community-Based Inventory and Analysis on the Mental Health Services, Literacy, and Help-Seeking of Filipinos: Bases for Guidelines on Mental Health Literacy and Services at the Barangay Level 

Far Eastern University - Manila 

Social and economic determinants including textual analysis of depression and suicidal ideations in the Cordillera Administrative Region (CAR) 

Saint Louis University 

Assessment of Mental Health Status, Mental Health Literacy, Workplace Factors, and the Implementation of Mental Health Policy in Business Process Outsourcing (BPO) Companies in the Philippines 

University of the Philippines Manila College of Public Health 

Examining the Relationship of Religiosity, Spirituality, and Spiritual Bypass with Mental Health Among Adults of Nueva Ecija 

Central Luzon State University 

Nutrition and Food Safety 

Gut2Brain: Harnessing Food Microbes for Mental Wellness 

Project 1: Harnessing the Psychobiotic Potential of Lactic Acid Bacteria in Philippine Fermented Foods (PsychoLAB) 

Project 2: Nice4Gut™ for mental wellness: Development of a Functional Food Disco very Platform for behavioral modulators using a zebrafish model University of the Philippines-Diliman 

The effects of dietary fiber and other non-digestible carbohydrates in a pre-identified low glycemic index rice and stabilized brown rice on gut microbiota (Phase 2) 

Food and Nutrition Research Institute (FNRI) 

Assessment of Nutrition and Development of Appropriate Food Product Intervention among Children in Flood Prone and Geographically Isolated and Disadvantaged Areas in Davao De Oro, Philippine 

University of the Philippines Mindanao 

Omic Technologies for Health 

Filipino Genomes Research Program Filipino Forensic Genomics (Phase II) 

Filipino Genomes: History, Evolution, Origins and Applications (Phase II) Filipino Genomes Region for to Help Resolve Child Sexual Abuse Cases (Phase II) 

University of the Philippines Diliman 

Clinical Nanopore Sequencing-based DNA Methylation Analysis & Profiling of Pediatric Brain Tumors (CNS-MAPPed) 

University of the Philippines Manila 

Genetic Association Study of Adult Filipino Patients with Advanced Rheumatic Heart Disease (aRHDGEN) and Risk for the Development and Severity of Rheumatic Heart Disease 

Philippine Heart Center 

Profiling the Metabolome of Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitor Response in the Plasma of Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Patients: A Pilot Study 

University of the Philippines Diliman 

Expanding the Gene Expression Profiling of Breast Cancer in the Philippines: Recurrent Breast Cancers, Other Breast Cancers, and Endocrine Tumors (BrCa PH Phase II) 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

159 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

160 Next Generation Sequencing-based Expression Profiling of Recurrent Breast Cancer, Other Breast Cancers, and Endocrine Tumors Among Filipinos 

University of the Philippines - Philippine General Hospital (UP-PGH) 

Expanding the Gene Expression Profiling of Breast Cancer in the Philippines: Recurrent Breast Cancers, Other Breast Cancers, and Endocrine Tumors (BrCa PH Phase II) 

Molecular Characterization and Improved Propagation of Breast Cancer-Derived Organoid Cultures 

University of the Philippines Diliman 

Impact of the Exposome on the Epigenomic Profile of Endometriomas in Filipino Women 

University of the Philippines Manila 

Prevalence and genomic correlates of resistance to new and repurposed anti-tuberculosis drugs from Philippines 

De La Salle Medical and Health Sciences Institute 

TB Pathogenomics Study: Interactions between Mycobacterium tuberculosis Genomics and Human Host Susceptibility Factors in Determining TB Infection or Disease Status and Treatment Outcomes 

University of the Philippines Manila 

Re-emerging and Emerging Diseases 

Single-cell Multi-omic Analysis of Persons Living with HIV (PLHIV) at Risk of Developing of Active TB 

Lung Center of the Philippines 

Tuklas Lunas 

Discovery of Cardiometabolic Bioactives from Plants in Central Philippines (USC-TLDC Phase 2) 

Project 6: Acute, Subchronic, and Chronic Toxicity Evaluation and Antihyperglycemic Activity of Formulated Extracts in Animal model 

University of San Carlos 

Nano VCEx: Development of virgin coconut oil-based nanostructured lipid carriers spray formulations to improve skin tissue delivery of model compounds 

University of San Carlos 

Pre-clinical Evaluation of Mangosteen-derived Xanthones for Prostate Cancer Therapy 

University of the Philippines Diliman 

DOST-funded Biomedical Engineering for Health 

Biomedical Textile Research and Development Program 

Biofunctional and Sustainable Silk-Based Sutures (BioSilktures) 

Biocompatible Electrospun Nanofiber-based Scaffolds for Drug Delivery and Wound Healing (BioNanoScaffolds) 

Philippine Textile Research Institute 

Development of a Biocompatible, Patient-Specific, 3D Printed, Bridging Mandibular Implant for Large Midline Mandibular Defects 

Zamboanga City Medical Center 

Development of surface coatings on 3D-printed polymeric bioactive material for biomedical implant applications 

Mindanao State University-Iligan Institute of Technology (MSU-IIT) 

Diagnostics 

Center for Innovations for Cost Effective Disaster Risk Reduction and Management in Health (DRRM-H) outcomes in NCR and in the Philippines 

Project 1. Enhancing Individual and Community Health Outcomes in Disaster Response through the Establishment of Regional DRRM-H Simulation and Training Centers (Metaverse Environment) in the Visayas and Mindanao Regions Project 2. Developing a Harmonized Disaster Risk Reduction and Management in Health System to Improve Public Utilization through End-to-End Systems Integration Project 3. Improving Disaster Documentation Processes of National Government Agencies and Disaster Response Organizations through the adoption of the Utstein template for Uniform Data Reporting in Acute Medical Response during Disasters 

University of the Philippines Manila 

INTEGRATeD Diagnostics Solutions (IDS): a portfolio-based R&D Program for the efficient development and preliminary validation of protein and molecular diagnostic devices 

Project 1: Integrated Diagnostic Solutions for Cancer Project 2: Integrated Diagnostic Solutions for Metabolic Diseases Project 3: Integrated Diagnostic Solutions for Viral Diseases 

Ateneo de Manila University 

Decreasing Leptospirosis Emergence through Prognosis and Treatment Optimization (DeLEPTO) 

Project 2. In vitro disease modeling of plasma-mediated and genotype-associated mechanisms of severe leptospirosis 

University of the Philippines - Diliman (UPD), Institute of Biology 

Project 3. Therapeutic strategies to mitigate dysregulated host-mediated responses in severe leptospirosis 

University of the Philippines - Manila (UPM), College of Public Health 

Project 4. Quantitative analysis of complement factor I (CFI) as a prognosticator for leptospirosis using a novel digital droplet polymerase chain reaction (ddPCR) biomedical device (LIGTAS Project) 

De La Salle University - Manila (DLSU-Taft), College of Science 

Digital and Frontier Technologies for Health 

Precision Diet Control AI Model Designed for Chronic Disease Patient – Based on Personal Health Record and International Data Exchange 

University of the Philippines Manila 

Functional Foods 

SPC-FUEL for Health: Sugarcane, Pulses, and Cacao Products from FUnctional Food Innovations to Enhance Life 

Project 1: Project ASUCAR: Accelerating Sugarcane products Utilization for Commodity Availability and Reliability Project 2: Project PULSES: Processing and Utilization of Lagundi and Legume via Simple and Economical Strategies Project 3: CHOCO CARE: CHOCOlate Functional Commodities as Products of Academe- Industry Partnership Through Research-based Enterprise 

University of San Agustin 

Mental Health 

eMHPRe UHC - Developing an Electronic Mental Health Program Registry (eMHPRe) for Local Government Units: Synchronizing Mental Health Services Information Systems with Universal Health Care (UHC) 

Ateneo de Manila University - Institute of Philippine Culture 

Molecular and Clinical Approaches in Autism Spectrum Disorder (Phase II) 

The Reliability and Validity of the Childhood Autism Spectrum Test (CAST) in School Age Filipino Children Molecular and Clinical Profile of Children with Autism Compared to their Age-Matched Peers 

Ateneo de Manila University School of Medicine and Public Health 

Nutrition and Food Safety 

Healthy Aging Program for Pinoy (HAPPY) Senior Citizens: Promoting Quality of Life Among Older Filipinos Through Food and Nutrition Solutions 

Project 4. Determination of Effect on Cognition Function of Potential Functional Food for Healthy Aging Among Older Filipinos 

Food and Nutrition Research Institute (FNRI) 

Omic Technologies for Health 

Preempt, Predict, and Treat GTD (Prediction, evaluation, and treatment of gestational trophoblastic diseases [GTD or Hmole and its cancer] among Filipino women) 

1.Predicting and Evaluating Molar Pregnancy Transformation to Gestational Trophoblastic Neoplasia 

University of the Philippines - Manila 

2. Determinants of Treatment Response in GTN 

University of the Philippines - Manila 

3. Predictive protein biomarkers In Cancer Transformation to GTN 

Philippine Genome Center 

Precise Management of Epidermolysis Bullosa and other Genodermatoses in the Philippines: Baseline Profiling of Epidermolysis Bullosa and Genodermatoses of Filipino Patients/ Gen EB 

Southern Philippines Medical Center 

Promoting Healthy FILipino Liver through Interdisciplinary InnoVativE Research (PHIL LIVER) - UPM-NIH Liver Research Program and the Philippine Liver Research Network 

Liquid Biopsy-based BIomOlecular Markers for the PrognoStication of HEpatocEllular Carcinoma in Filipinos (Liquid-BIOPSEE) 

University of the Philippines - Manila 

Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs), Microbiome, and Inflammatory Biomarkers in Filipino patients with Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SMILE Filipino patients) 

University of the Philippines Manila 

Identification of Multi-omics Profiles Affecting Care and Treatment of Colorectal Cancer in the Philippines (IMPACT – CRC) 

University of the Philippines Manila 

AI_PREDICT: Artificial Intelligence-based Exploration and Validation of Dengue Severity Biomarkers through Integration of Transcriptomics and Machine Learning Tools (MECO-TECO) 

University of the Philippines Manila 

Re-emerging and Emerging Diseases 

ddTECT: droplet digital Technologies for Environmental COVID Testing 

Ateneo De Manila University 

Leprosy Antimicrobial Resistance Molecular Surveillance In The Philippines (Leparms) 

Philippine General Hospital 

Genomics surveillance of drug-resistant bacterial pathogens in Mindanao 

University of the Philippines Mindanao - Philippine Genome Center Mindanao 

Promoting Healthy FILipino Liver through Interdisciplinary InnoVativE Researches (PHIL LIVER) 

Project 1: Design, Development, and Implementation of aFunctional Biorepository and Biobank for the Study of Liver Health and Diseases (PHIL LIVER Biobank) 

Project 4: Longitudinal Investigation of LiVer HEalth and Diseases among Filipinos Living with HIV (LIVED-HIV) 

University of the Philippines Manila, National Institutes of Health 

Whole genome sequencing and characterization of HIV in Davao City and Tawi-Tawi province 

Project 1: Genomic characterization of HIV in Davao City Project 2: Prevalence and genomic characterization of HIV-1 in Tawi-Tawi 

PGC Mindanao, UP Mindanao 

Virology and Vaccine Institute of the Philippines (VIP) 

Application of NOvel Strategies To Detect Sexually Transmitted Viruses in the Female Genital Tract (NO STD-Viruses Project) 

University of the Philippines Diliman 

Reston Ebolavirus Serologic and molecular Testing via ONe health approach in the PHilippines (RESTON PH) 

University of the Philippines Manila 

Characterization of Vector-Borne Viruses Using Raman Spectroscopy for Clinical Application for the Virology and Vaccine Institute of the Philippines (VBVRS) 

Industrial Technology Development Institute 

Pandemic Response preparedness for Emerging bat-borne Viruses from rural and peri-urban ENvironmenTs (PREVENT): Bat-borne virus surveillance towards diagnostic and vaccine research 

Project 1: Ecological and anthropogenic investigations at the nexus of bat-human interfaces. Project 2: Unravelling Viruses with Pandemic Potential and Development of Nucleic Acid-Based Detection and Diagnostic Assays: Exploring the Public Health Impacts of Bat Virome Survey Project 4: Establishment of a Biorepository of Philippine Bat Virome and Therapeutics for Clinical and Research-based 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

161 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

162 Applications under the VVIP (PhilBioBaT) 

University of the Philippines Los Banos 

Project 3: Pandemic preparedness for bat-borne viruses through the generation of a vaccine platform using virus-like particles (VLP) and the evaluation of its host range 

BioAssets Corporation 

Tuklas Lunas 

Derisking the Tuklas Lunas Pipeline: ADMET assays for bridging efficacy and safety (ADMET Phase II) 

Project 1. Optimization of physico-chemical drug properties 

UPD-IC 

Project 2. Cell-based ADMET assays 

UPD-NIMBB 

Project 3. HPLC and Mass Spectral Studies to Support Various ADMET assays 

UPD-IC 

Project 4. Metabolite Profiling Using Imaging Mass Spectrometry 

University of San Agustin 

Project 5. In Vivo Analyses- Rapid Assessment of Compound Exposure and Determination of Pharmacokinetic Properties 

Pharmalytics 

VIPER – Anti-Dengue Virus Properties of Euphorbia hirta (Tawa-Tawa/ Snake Weed Plant) standardized extract: a systematic in vitro evaluation 

The Medical City 

Annex 2. Regional Research Fund Newly-approved projects Region 1 

Tissue Repair Progression in Liver and Stomach of Alcohol Fed Male ICR Mice Using Freeze-Dried Pomacea canaliculata Slime and Bovine Milk 

Dr. Doreen Domingo Mariano Marcos State University 

Region 2 

Snail Surveillance and Spot Mapping of Oncomelania hupensis quadrasi in Cagayan: An integrated Approach to One Health for the Control of Schistosomiasis 

Ms. Jay Andrea Vea D. Israel Cagayan State University - Andrews Campus 

The Antimicrobial Activity and the Effects on mecA gene expression of Bangka-Bangkahan (Rhoeo discolor) on Methicillin and Vancomycin -Resistant Staphylococcus aureus 

Dr. Benjamin Jularbal Saint Paul University - Philippines 

Region 3 

Quorum Sensing Inhibition of Endophytic Fungi from Yacon (Smallanthus sonchifolius) against Biofilm and Pyocyanin Production 

Ms. Kristel Grace V. Padilla, Faculty and College Research Coordinator at Nueva Ecija University of Science and Technology 

Reverse Screening and Network Analysis of Metformin and its influences on HIV/AIDS and cancer immunomodulation 

Dr. Aris V. Miclat Pampanga State Agricultural University 

Toxoplasma gondii in Select Irrigation Waters and Agricultural Soils of Central Luzon, Philippines: Implications to Human Health (Toxo-IWAS) 

Ms. Cielo Emar P. Villareal Bulacan State University 

Region 4-A 

The Pioneer Innovation on Resonance Frequency Sterilizing Device System Against Airborne Viruses 

Ms. Iluminada A. Ronio De La Salle Medical and Health Sciences Institute 

Region 5 

Maternal and Child Health Services vis-a-vis Gender-based belief system 

Dr. Bernadette G. Gumba Partido State University 

NCR 

Utility of Alternative Respiratory Specimens for Co-Screening of TB and COVID -19 using Xpert platform in the City of Santa Rosa, Laguna 

Ms. Carolina Capili Research Institute for Tropical Medicine 

Effectiveness of Mobile Diabetes Self- Management Education (M-DSME) for patients with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus in Indonesia and Philippines 

Dr. Josephine De leon Centro Escolar University 

Mental Well-Being of Work-From-Home Teachers amidst COVID-19 

Dr. Alejandro C. Vinalay Trinity University of Asia 

Psychological and Physiological Wellness of GDM Pregnant Women during COVID 19 

Dr. Minerva L. Daya University of Santo Tomas 

Region 7 

Coping with Stresses in Various Learning Modalities and the Well-being of Student-Teachers Amid the Covid-19 Pandemic in Central Visayas 

Dr. Elve O. Nasvik Siliman University 

Region 8 

A Descriptive Study on the Knowledge, Attitudes, Perceived Behaviors toward Suspected or Confirmed HIV/AIDS clients and HIV Stigma of Baranggay Health Workers among Health Facilities in Leyte 

Dr. Janet Alexis De los Santos Visayas State University 

Region 9 

Factors Associated to Coronavirus – 19 (COVID-19) Vaccine Acceptability among High-Risk Group Consulting at Zamboanga City Medical Center Out-Patient Teleconsultation Dr. Fatimah Al-Zahra T. Ditti 

Zamboanga City Medical Center 

Clients’ Satisfaction with Teleconsultation Services at Zamboanga City Medical Center: Descriptive Cross-Sectional Study 

Dr. Kathrina A. Alvia Zamboanga City Medical Center 

The Effect of Hydrogen Peroxide Plasma Sterilization and Chemical Sterilization using Virusolve + EDS Solution on Commonly Used 3D Printing Materials Dr. Maria Monique Theresita Soliven 

Zamboanga City Medical Center 

Perception and Acceptability of Teleconsultation Among Adult Outpatient Clients of Zamboanga City Medical Center: Descriptive Cross-Sectional Study 

Dr. Angelica A. Clariz-Roz Zamboanga City Medical Center 

Ongoing projects Region 1 

Assessment of Organizational Cultures of Health Workforce in DOH- Retained Hospitals, Region 1 

Ilocos Training and Regional Medical Center Dr. Marvin Munar 

Hearing Screening Protocol Among Pupils With Special Healthcare Needs in Ilocos Norte 

Mariano Marcos Memorial Hospital and Medical Center Dr. Joy C. Alvarez 

Serologic SARS CoV 2 Antibody Level and Factors Affecting Its Production After COVID-19 Vaccination Among Employees of Mariano Marcos Memorial Hospital and Medical Center 

Mariano Marcos Memorial Hospital and Medical Center Dr. Sarah Jane G. Tan 

Prevalence and Influencing Risk Factors of Health Conditions Among Tobacco Farmers in Ilocos Norte Mariano Marcos State University 

Dr. Cheryll Didi Nellie N. Obra 

Region 2 

Bioassay-Guided Isolation of Antibacterial Compounds from Mikania cordota Flower against Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) Clinical Isolate 

St. Mary's University Mr. Jason Arnold L. Maslang 

Comprehensive Evaluation of the Molluscicidal Activity of Euphorbia splendens Latex against Oncomelania quadrasi St. Paul University Philippines 

Ms. Eileen A. Molina 

Assessment of Infection Prevention and Control in Different Levels of Health Care Facility in Cagayan Valley (Region II) 

Cagayan State University Dr. Ma. Angelita S. Rabanal 

Extraction, Characterization and Bioactivity Evaluation of the Essential Oils of Fruit Wastes 

Cagayan State University Dr. Julius T. Capili 

Development and Evaluation of Herbal Skincare Products infused with KaPaMa Plant Extracts for Infections 

Cagayan State University Ms. Jinky Marie T. Chua 

Detection of Staphylococcus aureus and its Methicillin-Resistant Strain: A Basis for a Proposed Effective Infection Prevention and Control Program of Selected Government Hospitals in Pampanga 

Pampanga State Agricultural University Dr. Michael Angelo C. Nicdao 

The Anti-oxidant and Histo-protective Potentials of Balakat Tree (Ziziphus talanai (Blanco) Merr.) against Monosodium Glutamate-induced Neurological Aberrations in Male CD-1 Mice 

Pampanga State Agricultural University Dr. Evelyn V. Totaan 

Probiotic Potential of Lactic Acid Bacteria from Fermented Market-Scrapped Fruit and Vegetable Materials and its Antagonistic Activity against Selected Food and Water Borne Pathogens 

Central Luzon State University Dr. Arman M. Parayao 

Green Synthesis of Metal Oxide Cellulose Nanocrystals (MO-CNC) for Health-related Applications Phase 1 

Nueva Ecija University of Science and Technology Prof. Danilet Vi M. Mendoza 

Region 5 

Screening for New Antimicrobials and Antioxidants from Penicillium and Talaromyces Species Isolated from Various Sources in Bicol Region, Philippines 

Bicol University Ms. Jocelyn E. Serrano 

CAR 

Predictive Risk Mapping of Leptospirosis in Benguet using Environmental and Socioeconomic Data 

University of the Philippines Baguio Ms. Kimberly P. Paglingayen 

Bacterial Antibiotic Resistance Pollution in Balili River 

University of the Philippines Baguio PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

163 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

164 Dr. Ronie J. Calugay 

NCR 

Associations of Physical Activity, Screen time and Sleep with Health and Developmental Outcomes among Filipino Preschool Children 

University of Santo Tomas Prof. Paulin Grace M Espino 

Effectiveness of Ultrasound Guided Interfascial Hydrodissection with the use of Saline Anesthetic Solution for Myofascial Pain Syndrome of the Upper Trapezius: A Single Blind Randomized Control Trial 

Our Lady of Lourdes Hospital Dr. Charidy S. Ramos 

Region 6 

FightBac: Virtual Screening for Quorum Quenchers from Natural Product Database and their Synergistic Antibacterial Study 

University of the Philippines Visayas Prof. Sherwin L. Escayo 

Maternal and Child Health Service Utilization in Selected Municipalities in Iloilo Province Before and During the COVID-19 epidemic, Western Visayas, Philippines: A Retrospective Cohort Study 

University of the Philippines Visayas Mr. Serafin Malecosio 

Region 7 

Microplastic and Its Public Health Implications in Select Key Tourist Destinations in Cebu, Philippines 

Cebu Technological University Ms. Marivel B. Go 

Nutritional Composition of Halymenia durvillei and its Potential Use as a Food Ingredient 

University of San Carlos Mr. Jonie C. Yee 

Developing a Tool to Measure the Decision-Making Processes in Sex Practices among Men-who-have-sex-with-men anchored on Protection Motivation Theory (PMT) 

Cebu Technological University Mr. Jonash Durano 

Molecular Detection of Selected Tick-borne Pathogens in dogs, dog owners and veterinary clinicians/technicians in Cebu, Philippines 

Cebu Technological University - Main Campus Dr. Adrian Patalinghug Ybanez 

Region 8 

Clinico-Demographic Profile of Reported Child Injury Cases in Selected Rural Municipalities in N. Samar (2014 - 2016) 

University of Eastern Philippines Ms. Ma. Susan Asejo- Chan 

Chips Consumption as a Risk factor for UTI Among School Children in Tacloban City 

Eastern Visayas State University Dr. Fideliza Cojuangco 

Child Injury Among Patients Seen in All District Hospitals of Leyte 

Leyte Provincial Hospital Dr. Elmer Ayuson 

Prevalence and Nature of Antibiotic Residues in Pork and Poultry Meats Collected from Public Wet Markets and Private Meat Shops in Leyte 

Visayas State University Dr. Santiago T. Peña, Jr. 

TAMBALAN: An Ethno-botanical Study Traditional Healing Practices and Herbal Medicines in Sitio Pena 2, Calbayog City 

Northwest Samar State University Dr. Catherine B. Rodriguez 

Predictors of Clinical Outcomes of COVID-19 Confirmed Adult Patients Hospitalized in Eastern Visayas Medical Center 

Eastern Visayas Medical Center Dr. Jose Carlo K. Del Pilar 

Physical Activity of the Elderly in the 4th District of Leyte amidst COVID-19 Pandemic Palompon Institute of Technology 

Ms. Maria Elisa A. Caberos 

Region 9 

Synergistic Anti-Urolithiatic Activity Of Potassium Citrate and Blumea balsifera Extract On Calcium Oxalate Stones 

Universidad de Zamboanga Mr. Norman Jake C. Mabalot 

Determination of chlortetracycline residue in chicken (Gallus gallus domesticus) meat products from public markets of Zamboanga City 

Universidad de Zamboanga Mr. Ben-Frazier U. Sabtula 

Region 10 

Mathematical Models for Predictions and Preparedness (MMOPREPARE) 

Mindanao State University - Iligan Institute of Technology Dr. Randy L. Caga-anan 

Perceived Effectiveness of Community-based Drug Rehabilitation Program in Valencia City, Bukidnon: Perspectives and Experiences of Drug Responders and other Stakeholders 

Central Mindanao University Dr. Eva N. Mendoza 

Epidemiology of Zoonotic Toxoplasma gondii Infection Among Household Cats in Region X 

Central Mindanao University Dr. Kassey Alsylle Talle Dargantes 

Exploring Antimicrobial Medicinal Plants used by Indigenous Natives in Two Mountain Ecosystems of Bukidnon, Philippines (EXAMINE Bukidnon) Central Mindanao University 

Dr. Mark Lloyd G. Dapar 

Region 11 

Evaluation of the Antibacterial Properties of Cocoa (Theobroma cacao) Husk Extracts 

Davao Doctors College Dr. Reynaldo Abad 

Plant mediated synthesis of silver nanoparticles using mangosteen pericarp and their antimicrobial potential 

University of the Philippines Mindanao Dr. Noreen Fundador 

Evaluation of Philippine Mango pectin as tablet binder for formulated Sambong tablet 

University of Immaculate Conception Prof. Ferlien Baula 

Carotenoid Extraction and Characterization from Davao Carrots as a Potential Pharmaceutical Colorant 

University of Immaculate Conception Dr. Cherrie G. Muaña 

Bacteriocin from Fermented Durian Rinds to Prevent Food Safety Issues 

University of Southeastern Philippines Ms. Judee Nogodula 

Screening and Quantification of Antimicrobial Residues in Chicken Meat and Tissues in Davao City using Microbial Inhibition Assay and Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA) 

San Pedro College Dr. Jasmen S. Pasia and Dr. Aileen Grace L. Ang 

COURAGE: The Correlation between CYP3A5 Gene Polymorphisms and Tacrolimus Concentration-to-Dose Ratio among Kidney Transplant Recipients in Mindanao 

Southern Philippines Medical Center Dr. Maria Theresa L. Bad-ang 

Development of a Cost Effective HPLC-FLD Analytical Method for the Quantification of Residual Fluoroquinolones in Chicken and Pork 

University of the Philippines Mindanao Dr. Erwin Oliver V. Fundador 

LIMPIO: Lessening Infestation of Microbes and Parasites through Interventions in Open-field farms in Marilog District, Davao City 

University of the Philippines Mindanao Dr. Aleyla E. de Cadiz 

CARAGA 

Health Risk Management Practices in Flood-Prone Public Elementary Schools in Caraga Region 

Caraga State University Dr. Ariel U. Cubillas 

BARMM 

Water Quality Assessment and Evaluation of Human Health Risk in Selected Rivers of Lanao del Sur, Philippines 

Mindanao State University - Marawi Dr. Annabella G. Villarino 

Annex 3. List of Scholars Local Scholarships A. MD-PhD in Molecular Medicine, University of the Philippines Manila New (7) PCHRD 

Abellaneda, Iverson Jurey D. Alog, Amizah Coleene B. Carena, Jericho V. Ong, Antonio Lorenzo L. Payo, Hazel Jill T. Rosales, Paul Jimuel S. Yadao, Jeries Dylan T. 

Ongoing (68) PCHRD 

Advincula, Jirov A. Alcazar, Renne Margaret U. Altavas, Patrick D.K. Bacong, Junelle Rey C. Badua, Christian Luke D.C. Baldo, Karol Ann T. Bal-Iyang, Kenworth Bryle A. Barcena, Allan John R Bolinas, Dominic Karl M. Buan, Ara Karizza G. Cabrera, Mary Ann F. Cabungcag, Nica Cadeliña, Joshua Anthony A. Cando, Leslie Faye T. Capistrano, Nhel John L. Catral, Charlene Divine M. Ceriales, Jeremy A. Chua, John Joseph R. Chua, Sean Philippe L. Collantes, Claire Abigail A. Cruz, Joana Marie C. De Galicia, Bryan Paul D. De Sagon, Scott Dean P. Dela Cruz, Ma. Carmela P. De Leon, Von Novi O. Escober, Nicole Jazzmine L. Falcon, Robbi Miguel G. Grecia, Mary Nicole I. Guda, Justin V. Gumaru, Khevin Jade B. Josol, Vivien Joyce D. Llagas, Julia Patricia B. Malaluan, Michael Roy V. Manalo, Rafael Vincent A. Marco, Kitz Paul D. Nakpil, Aurora S. Opiso, Danna Mae S. Paner, Joseph Romeo O. Perias, Glenmarie Angelica S. Pineda, Ryan Nikkole B. Razal, Rozel B. Remucal, Mark Joseph R. Reyes, Michael Sigfrid S. Reyes, Nico Alexander L. Rocha, Anlene Jane B Rodriguez, Harley M. Salvador, Paul Benedic U. Samante, Fred Lawrence D. Sanico, Thea Coleen F. Sianoya, Abraham C. Teh, Treena Rica D. A. 

ASTHRDP 

Asis, Joannes Luke B. Cadacio, Jessa Louise C. Carampel, Ajina C. Cruz, Christian Alfredo K. Dela Rosa, Jared Gabriel L. Fernandez, Natasha Andrea Grecia, Lordom Reno C. Idolor, Maria Isabel C. Lintao, Ryan Cristian V. Ona, Kevin Austin L. Perez, Joy Vanessa D. Rojo, Raniv D. Pollo, Brian Andrich La Valle Relador, Ruth Joy L. Solidum, Jea Giezl N. Velasco, Adrian Jonathan D.A. Vidal, Manuel Jr. S. 

Completed (11) PCHRD 

Vista, Fatima Ericka S. 

Accelerated Science and Technology Human Resource Development Program (ASTHRDP) 

Aquino, Inah Marie C. De Jesus, Federico Cristobal II C. Gampoy, Eloina Faye S. Girasol, Mark John G. Lopez, Ben Anthony A. Ornos, Eric David B. Quebral, Elgin Paul B. Reyes, Jeremiah V. Robles, Joyce Ann H. Severino, Mary Elise L. 

B. MS in Molecular Medicine, St. Luke’s Medical Center College of Medicine William H. Quasha Memorial New (2) 

Binza, Joseph Alex Villanueva, Alea Jasmine B. 

Ongoing (25) PCHRD 

Antalan, David III G. Apostol, K-Anne C. Branzuela, Sandra Mei M. Busog, Aren Maridin M. De Guzman, Raphael Joshua C. Fariñas, Celeste Aleena V. Fernandico, Adrian G. Garcia, Joshua Roberto B. Jacinto, Patrick Ian J. Limbaga, Lorenzo Gabriel C. Lao, Raphaella G. Magan, Bernard Dominic C. Matuloy, Liza S. Realingo, Adeliza Mae L. San Valentin, Erin Marie D. PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

165 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

166 Velasquez, Dethalee Gabrielle R. 

Accelerated Science and Technology Human Resource Development Program (ASTHRDP) 

Delicana, Reuel C. Moria, Francis G. Maynes, Tricia L. Nana, Julie Anne M. Pua, Marvin Adrian R. Romano, Christopher T. Solidum, Andrew James A. Visda, Ann N. Zimmer, Mary Christine G. 

Completed (2) PCHRD 

Dabban, Romar G. 

Accelerated Science and Technology Human Resource Development Program (ASTHRDP) 

Contreras, Patrice Melody C. 

C. PhD in Health Research, University of Santo Tomas Ongoing (4) 

Ang, Maria Grace A. Bacorro, Warren R. Bueno, Mary Monica B. Fidel, Maria Belinda Cristina C. 

D. Accelerated Science and Technology Human Resource Development Program (ASTHRDP) PhD Ongoing (18) 

Ang, Mary Jane C. 

PhD Medical Microbiology, UPM 

Baco, Fortunata L. 

PhD Epidemiology, UPM 

Bacudio, Ana Maria A. 

PhD Medical Microbiology, UPM 

Bonifacio, Julie Charmain O. 

PhD Biology, UPD 

Cruz, Rogelio S. 

PhD Biological Science, UST 

Cuarto, Ceazar Ryan U. 

PhD Chemistry, UST 

Dimaguiba, Justin Rachelle P. 

PhD Biology, SLU 

Encarnacion, Richard I. 

PhD Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, UPD 

Gregorio, Ernesto Ramos Jr. 

PhD Health Promotion and Education, UPM 

Galvez, Eleanor J. 

PhD Health Promotion and Education, UPM 

Lardizaval, Mechelle P. 

PhD Biology, SLU 

Malecosio, Serafin O. Jr 

PhD Epidemiology, UPM 

Maramag, Cherry C. 

PhD Epidemiology, UPM 

Miranda, Sheila De Vera 

PhD Pharmacy, UST 

Ongpoy, Romeo C. Jr. 

PhD Pharmacy, UST 

Sabinay, Stephen G. 

PhD Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, UPLB 

Safra, Sheila Arelli G. 

PhD Health Promotion and Education, UPM 

Sucol, Yusuf A. 

PhD Environmental Science, UPLB 

Varona, Gracia F. 

PhD Parasitology, UPM 

MS Ongoing (55) 

Ang, Imelda C. 

MS Clinical Epidemiology, UPM 

Arvesu, Vermont E. 

MS Pharmacology, UPM 

Balce, Roderick D. 

MS Microbiology, UST 

Banzon, Joseph Joy G. 

MS Medical Technology, UST 

Batongmalaki, Roselle F. 

MS Biology, USC 

Bautista, Felix C. Jr 

MS Environmental Science, UPLB 

Barbas, Lord Ryan D. 

MS PH Epidemiology, UERMMMC 

Bernabe, Enrique-Rene G. 

MS Pharmacy, UST 

Botabara, Isagani B. 

MS Biological Sciences, UST 

Buhain, Rose Mabell C. 

MS PH Epidemiology, UPM 

Cabanilla, Carl Vincent D. 

MS Chemistry, UPD 

Calibjo, Hartzell M. 

MS PH Epidemiology, UPM 

Cauilan, Juan Jhonny M. 

MS Pharmacy, UST 

Chi, Jean Pauline C. 

MS Asian Health Practices, UERMMMC 

Cu, Richel Erin B. 

MS PH Epidemiology, UERMMMC 

Dagohoy, Marites S. 

MS Pharmacy, UST 

David, April Joy G. 

MS PH Epidemiology, UERMMMC 

David, Xenia P. 

MS Pharmacology, UPM 

De Jesus, Christopher C. 

MS Pharmacology, UPM 

De Leon, Rochee M. 

MS PH Epidemiology, UERMMMC 

Del Rosario, Glenn Sandee C. 

MS PH Medical Microbiology, UPM 

Dicdican, Isabel D. 

MS Chemistry, MSU-IIT 

Dimafelix, Paul Raymond S. 

MS PH Epidemiology, UERMMMC 

Galino, Jeffrey R. 

MS Applied Physics, UST 

Givero, Rosemarie L. 

MS Pharmacy, UST 

Hernandez, Maria Christa A. 

MS Pharmacy, UST 

Javier, Anna Katrina A. 

MS PH Epidemiology, UPM 

Ladion, Wendell Lou B. 

MS Biology, MSU-IIT 

Lamac, Maria Ruby L. 

MS PH Epidemiology, UPM 

Landicho, Shenjira A. 

MS PH Epidemiology, UPM 

Mabeza, Gaiselle F. 

MS Chemistry, UPD 

Macatangay, Sheila H. 

MS PH Epidemiology, UERMMMC 

Manansala, Teddy S. 

MS Biochemistry, UPM 

Manuel, Kaycee G. 

MS PH Epidemiology, UERMMMC 

Marzan, Emil G. 

MS PH Epidemiology, UERMMMC 

Morales, Lyndon DC. 

MS Biostatistics, UPM 

Napulan, Roderick M. 

MS Biostatistics, UPM 

Oco-Panganiban, Maria Michelle Joy P. 

MS Family Medicine, UPM 

Ravelo, Celia R. 

MS Pharmacology, UPM 

Resurreccion, Michael M. 

MS Clinical Epidemiology, UPM 

Reyes, Ruth Irene N. 

MS Population Studies, UPD 

Romero, Daryl C. 

MS PH Epidemiology, UERMMMC 

Rosario, Mary Rose D. 

MS Clinical Epidemiology, UPM 

Sayson, Alton John T. 

MS PH Epidemiology, UERMMMC 

Serdiña, Jan Michael B.  .

MS Applied Physics, UST 

Solana, Marikka Thaenia V. 

MS Clinical and Family Medicine, UPM 

Soriano, Simonette C. 

MS PH Epidemiology, UPM 

Tayco, Crimson C. 

MS Molecular Biology And Biotechnology, UPD 

Teh, Davidson B. 

MS PH Epidemiology, UERMMMC 

Toledo, Franklin U. 

MS Applied Physics, UST 

Usman, Lourdes Consolacion R. 

MS Pharmacy, UPM 

Uy, Hilda T. 

MS PH Epidemiology, UERMMMC 

Valenzuela, Madonna M. 

MS Biostatistics, UPM 

William, Karmille-Allyson D. 

MS PH Epidemiology, UERMMMC 

Yap, Kristine Jeanne A. 

MS Medical Microbiology, UPM 

Foreign Graduate Scholarships PhD in Molecular Biomedicine 

Batch 2019 

Cabral, Loraine Kay D. (completed) Salvoza Noel C. (completed) 

Batch 2021 

Laraño, Allen Anthony P. (ongoing) Llido, John Paul S. (ongoing) 

Batch 2022 

Garcia, Clarissa Joy C. (ongoing) Mamerto, Therriz Mae P. (ongoing) 

Batch 2023 

Bernardino, Melvin E. (new) Disoma, Cyrollah R. (new) 

Cohort Doctoral Studies (Batch 2023) 

Ayes, Marc Edsel C. (new) 

PhD in Tropical Medicine (Batch 2023) 

Mercado, Van Jerwin P. (new) 

MSc in Tropical Medicine (Batch 2022) 

Corpuz, Kristal Dale F. (ongoing) Jacob, Beatriz Aira C. (ongoing) 

Annex 4. Publications of PhD in Molecular Biomedicine scholars in various journals 

“Mutational Analysis of the SLC4A11 in A (Filipino) Family with Congenital Hereditary Endothelial Dystrophy” 

Cabahug VLO, Llido JPS, Cabral LKD, Maynes TL, Pinuela CLO, Tayengco-Tiu TL, Siong RLB, Enriquez MLD 2023 January 17, Preprints (https://doi.org/10.20944/ preprints202301.0297.v1) 

“Network Analysis for the Discovery of Common Oncogenic Biomarkers in Liver Cancer Experimental Models” 

Cabral LKD, Giraudi PJ, Giannelli G, Dituri F, Negro R, Tiribelli C, Sukowati CHC 2023 January 25, Biomedicines (https://doi.org/10.3390/ biomedicines11020342) 

“Bilirubin-Induced Transcriptomic Imprinting in Neonatal Hyperbilirubinemia” 

Llido JPS, Fioriti E, Pascut D, Giuffrè M, Bottin C, Zanconati F, Tiribelli C, Gazzin S 2023 June 8, Biology (https://doi.org/10.3390/biology12060834) 

“Bilirubin and Redox Stress in Age-Related Brain Diseases” 

Llido JPS, Jayanti S, Tiribelli C, Gazzin S 2023 July 29, Antioxidants (https://doi.org/10.3390/antiox12081525) PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

167 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

168 “Severe motor dysfunction in Gunn rats, a model for neonatal bilirubin-induced damage, is not due to changes in brain bilirubin and total serum bilirubin (Abstract)” 

Llido JPS, Fioriti E, Dvorák A, Zabetta CC, Vítek L, Tiribelli C, Gazzin S 2023 December 27, Journal of the Neurological Sciences (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jns.2023.121605) 

Annex 5. Participation and presentation of PhD in Molecular Biomedicine scholars at various conferences 

“The potential of combined treatments between Src tyrosine kinase inhibitors and sorafenib in heterogeneous liver cancer cells” 

Loraine Kay Cabral (Poster Presenter) Liver Cancer Summit 2023 of the European Association for the Study of the Liver 20-22 April 2023, Estoril, Portugal 

“Regional and Developmental Perturbation of the Central Nervous System (CNS) in Hyperbilirubinemic Rats” 

The Brain Conference: Establishment and Maintenance of Brain Cell States John Paul Llido (Poster Presenter) 23-26 April 2023, Rungsted Kyst, Denmark 

“Epigenetic reprogramming synergizes with PD-1/PD-L1 inhibition for cell-targeted therapy in hepatocellular carcinoma” 

The International Liver Congress 2023 by The European Association for the Study of the Liver Loraine Kay Cabral (Poster Presenter) 21-24 June 2023, Vienna, Austria 

“The potential role of omentin-1 in metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD): Evidence from translational studies” 

The International Liver Congress 2023 by The European Association for the Study of the Liver Noel Salvoza (Poster Presenter) 21-24 June 2023, Vienna, Austria 

“The potential role of omentin-1 in metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD): Evidence from translational studies” 

9th Paris NASH Meeting Noel Salvoza (Poster Presenter) 7-8 September 2023, Paris, France 

“EFEMP1 identified as a potential biomarker for early fibrosis in metabolic-dysfunction associated steatotic liver disease” 9th Paris NASH Meeting 

Allen Anthony Laraño (Poster Presenter) 7-8 September 2023, Paris, France 

“Evaluation of Src family of tyrosine kinases and their potential as molecular targets in overcoming liver cancer heterogeneity” 

17th Annual Conference of the International Liver Association Loraine Kay Cabral (Poster Presenter) 7-9 September 2023, Amsterdam, The Netherlands 

“In silico strategies and gene expression data indicate EFEMP1 as a potential biomarker for early fibrosis diagnosis in metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease” 

Steatotic Liver Disease Summit 2023 by The European Association for The Study of The Liver Allen Anthony Laraño (Poster Presenter) 21-23 September 2023, Prague, Czechia 

“The potential role of omentin-1 in metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD): Evidence from translational studies” 

Steatotic Liver Disease Summit 2023 by The European Association for The Study of The Liver Noel Salvoza (Poster Presenter), 21-23 September 2023, Prague, Czechia 

“Severe motor dysfunction in Gunn rats, a model for neonatal bilirubin-induced damage, is not due to changes in brain bilirubin and total serum bilirubin” 

XXVII World Congress of Neurology John Paul Llido (Poster Presenter) 2023 October 15-19, Montreal, Canada 

Annex 6. List of 2023 Balik Scientist awardees 

Dr. Myra O. Villareal 

Short-term awardee Hosted by Bicol University 

Dr. Gene P. Ables 

Short-term awardee Hosted by University of the Philippines-Diliman 

Dr. Ailyn F. Fadriquela 

Short-term awardee Hosted by University of the Philippines-Baguio 

Dr. Lowela E. Siarot-Onggo 

Medium-term awardee Hosted by University of the Philippines-Mindanao, Philippine Genome Center-Mindanao 

Dr. Ricardo Jose SM. Guerrero 

Medium-term awardee Hosted by Ateneo Research Institute of Science and Engineering 

Dr. Concepcion A. Remoroza 

Short-term awardee Hosted by University of San Agustin 

Dr. Roy Roberto L. Gerona 

Medium-term awardee Hosted by University of the Philippines-Manila, College of Pharmacy 

Dr. Edwin S. Tecarro 

Short-term awardee Hosted by University of the Philippines-Mindanao 

Dr Leodevico L. Ilag 

Short-term awardee Hosted by DOST- Industrial Technology Development Institute 

Dr. Rizza D. Pua 

Short-term awardee Hosted by De La Salle University, Institute of Biomedical Engineering and Health Technologies 

Dr. Alvin R. Acebedo 

Long-term awardee Hosted by University of the Philippines-Diliman, Institute of Biology 

Rev. Fr. Nicanor Victor R. Austriaco, Jr. 

Long-term awardee Hosted by University of Santo Tomas 

Dr. Annabelle P. Villalobos 

Medium-term awardee Hosted by Central Mindanao University, and DOH-Food and Drug Administration 

Dr. Andrea Roxanne J. Anas 

Short-term awardee University of the Philippines-Visayas 

Dr. Myra DT. Hosmillo 

Short-term awardee Hosted by University of the Philippines-Los Baños 

Dr. Fidela L. Moreno 

Short-term awardee Hosted by DOH-Food and Drug Administration 

Dr. Heidie Frisco-Cabanos 

Short-term awardee Davao Medical School Foundation, Inc. 

Dr. Rachael Uson-Lopez 

Short-term awardee De La Salle University-Laguna Campus Dr. Souvenir D. Tachado Short-term awardee West Visayas State University 

Annex 7. List of 2023 PHREB-Accredited RECs LEVEL 1 

NCR 

Centro Escolar University Institutional Ethics Review Board (IERB) January 16, 2023 Dr. Jose N. Rodriguez Memorial Hospital and Sanitarium Research Ethics Committee (REC) February 24, 2023 University of Santo Tomas Faculty of Pharmacy Research Ethics Committee (REC) March 27, 2023 University of the Philippines Diliman College of Home Economics Research Ethics Committee (REC) October 19, 2023 

Region 1 

Don Mariano Marcos Memorial State University Research Ethics Committee (REC) January 18, 2023 

Region 2 

Southern Isabela Medical Center Research Ethics Committee (REC) May 4, 2023 St. Paul University Philippines Research Ethics Committee (REC) May 12, 2023 Saint Mary's University Research Ethics Board (REB) October 10, 2023 

Region 3 

Angeles University Foundation Ethics Review Committee (ERC) May 17, 2023 

MIMAROPA 

Palawan State University University Research Ethics Review Committee (URERC) April 21, 2023 

Region 6 

West Visayas State University Socio-Behavioral Science Research Ethics Committee (SBSREC) June 30, 2023 Iloilo Doctors' Institutional Research Ethics Committee (IREC) November 15, 2023 Iloilo Mission Hospital Research Ethics Committee (REC) December 11, 2023 

Region 7 

Cebu Technological University Research Ethics Committee (REC) May 31, 2023 

Region 10 

Bukidnon State University Research Ethics Committee (REC) June 5, 2023 

Region 11 

Cor Jesu College, Inc. Research Ethics Committee (REC) December 13, 2023 University of the Philippines Mindanao Research Ethics Committee (REC) December 27, 2023 

LEVEL 2 

NCR 

De La Salle University-Manila University Ethics Research Committee (UERC) January 9, 2023 Our Lady of Fatima University Institutional Ethics Review Committee (IERC) January 11, 2023 National Center for Mental Health Research Ethics Committee (REC) June 26, 2023 University of Santo Tomas Graduate School Research Ethics Committee (REC) September 13, 2023 

Region 1 

Region 1 Health Research and Development Consortium Ethics Review Committee (ERC) July 1, 2023 

Region 2 

Cagayan Valley Medical Center Research Ethics Review Committee (RERC) March 2, 2023 

Region 3 

Jose B. Lingad Memorial General Hospital Research Ethics Committee (REC) January 6, 2023 Dr. Paulino J. Garcia Memorial Research and Medical Center Research Ethics Committee (REC) July 28, 2023 

Region 5 

Bicol Medical Center Research Ethics Committee (REC) December 21, 2023 

Region 8 

Eastern Visayas Health Research and Development Consortium Ethics Review Committee (ERC) October 20, 2023 

Region 9 

Western Mindanao State University Research Ethics Oversight Committee (REOC) October 23, 2023 

Region 11 

Davao Regional Medical Center Research Ethics Committee (REC) July 14, 2023 University of the Immaculate Conception Research Ethics Committee (REC) September 21, 2023 St. Mary’s College of Tagum Inc. Research Ethics Committee (REC) December 27, 2023 BARMM Cotabato Regional and Medical Center Research Ethics Committee (REC) May 8, 2023 

LEVEL 3 

NCR 

National Kidney and Transplant Institute Research Ethics Committee (REC) May 26, 2023 Research Institute for Tropical Medicine Institutional Review Board (IRB) May 31, 2023 Veterans Memorial Medical Center Institutional Review Board (IRB) July 16, 2023 Cardinal Santos Medical Center Research Ethics Review Committee (RERC) July 27, 2023 University of Perpetual Help System Institutional Ethics Review Board (IERB) September 18, 2023 Amang Rodriguez Memorial Medical Center Ethics Review Board (ERB) October 17, 2023 University of Santo Tomas Hospital Research Ethics Committee (REC) November 6, 2023 Single Joint Research Ethics Board (SJREB) December 14, 2023 

Region 5 

Bicol Regional Hospital and Medical Center Institutional Review Board (IRB) December 15, 2023 

Region 7 

Vicente Sotto Memorial Medical Center Research Ethics Committee (REC) July 11, 2023 

Region 8 

Eastern Visayas Medical Center Institutional Ethics Review Committee (IERC) December 22, 2023 

Region 11 

Davao Doctors Hospital Research Ethics Committee (REC) July 28, 2023 San Pedro Hospital Institutional Ethics Review Committee (IERC) September 25, 2023 

ANNEX 8. Policy briefs developed from PHILHEALTH STUDIES 

1.  Enhancing Local Governance and Sustainable Health Financing in the Philippines 2.  Global Budgeting in the Philippines 3.  Policy Research Development of Standards and Requirements for the Recognition of Third Party Accreditation Mechanisms 4.  The Challenges in the Service Provision of Philhealth Konsulta Program of Cebu City Health Office and Cebu City Medical Center 5.  Impact of Immediate Eligibility to the Willingness To Pay of The Self Earning Individuals 6.  Online Payment Gateway, Your Way To Premium Security 7.  Time and Motion Study: Towards Establishing Standards in Frontline Services Time Efficiency in PhilHealth Regional Office VI - Local Health Insurance Office- Iloilo City and Its Relationship to Client Satisfaction and Experience. 8.  Identifying Alternative Documents as Basis of Proof of Income of Direct Contributors-Individuals/ DCIS For a Fair Premium Collection 9.  Support Value of Inpatient COVID-19 Philhealth 10.  Benefit Package in a Tertiary Private Healthcare Facility in Cagayan De Oro City 11.  Promoting Mental Health and Well Being @ Work: Find The Best Coping Strategies at Work 12.  Alternative Work Arrangements in PhilHealth 13.  Konsultasyon Sulit At Tama (Konsulta): A Comparative Analysis of Challenges and Opportunities in its Program Implementation in the Provinces of La Union And Sorsogon 

ANNEX 9. Research Outputs Published from PHILHEALTH STUDIES 

1.  Mental Health and Well-being of PhilHealth Frontline Workers 2.  Function-based Rehabilitation Model: An Initial Step towards Universal Health Coverage 3.  Health Policy Brief: Revitalizing Local Governance in the Philippines through Sustainable Health Financing 

ANNEX 10. List of HERDIN new institutional partners 

1.  Zamboanga City Medical Center 2.  Journal of Medicine - University Santo Tomas 3.  Philippine Society For Reproductive Medicine 4.  Far Eastern University - Nicanor Reyes Medical Foundation 5.  Mariano Marcos State University 6.  Caraga Regional Hospital 7.  Rizal Medical Center 8.  Philippine Family of Physicians 9.  Olivarez College 

ANNEX 11. Media Mileage Teleradyo 

AGAPAY Team from the De La Salle University shares about the AGAPAY device and its recently acquired international patent. 

ABS CBN News, February 18 

Online 

New legacy: A year after IPRDC receives DOST-NICER grant 

The Guidon, January 18 

Guitar lessons to aid in restoring hand function among stroke patients – DOST-PCHRD 

Manila Bulletin, January 20 

Guitar lessons seen to improve hand mobility in stroke patients — study 

Business World, January 25 

DOST invites future innovators in Metro Manila and South Luzon to avail research funding 

PIA, February 1 

DOST-PCHRD, PhilHealth to create new insurance package for patients with heart disease 

Manila Bulletin, February 3 

DLSU’s wearable robot for stroke rehab gets international patent 

The Philippine Star, February 5 

DLSU’s Wearable Robot For Stroke Rehab Gets International Patent 

OneNews, February 5 

DLSU’s wearable robot for stroke rehab gets international patent 

FirstWord HealthTech, February 5 

DOST-supported tech for stroke rehabilitation ‘AGAPAY’ gets first int’l patent 

Manila Bulletin, February 15 

DOST calls for science-based solutions to real problems 

Panay News, February 20 

19 innovation projects worth over P115M approved 

Business World, February 21 

19 innovative projects approved—NEDA 

Manila Bulletin, February 21 

DoST funds studies on treatment of addiction and depression 

The Manila Times, February 23 

DoST-backed program explores medicinal potential of local plants 

Business World, February 22 

DOST offers foreign graduate scholarship for molecular biomedicine 

PTV4, February 25 

DOST opens application for scholarship in Italy 

ABS-CBN News, February 23 

DLSU’s robotic medical aid gets Singapore patent 

inquirer.net, February 27 

St. Paul University Philippines 

Higher Education Digest, February 28 

DOST to improve DOH health technology assessment 

Philippine News Agency, March 6 

DOH turns over HTA operations to DOST 

Manila Bulletin, March 6 

DOH transfers operations of HTAC to DOST 

ABS CBN News, March 6 

In honor of NIH, our country’s pride 

Manila Bulletin, March 7 

RHUs receive new telemed device 

The Manila Times, March 6 

DOST boosts innovation in Mindanao region through R&D funding 

PIA, March 3 

Unboxing the potential: RxBox arms RHUs with better health response 

Manila Bulletin, March 8 

Creation of National Cancer Institute sought in Congress 

Philippine Star, March 10 

Professorial chair awardee holds public lecture on wild edible mushroom 

Manila Times, March 30 

Health Researchers in NorthMin Receive Training in Basic Research Methods 

Journal online, March 30 

DOST-PCHRD features program for nutrition and food safety 

PIA, March 31 

Excellent & compassionate healthcare wins TMC 4 accolades at Healthcare Asia Awards 2023 

Inquirer.net, April 4 

DoST issues call for health research projects 

The Manila Times, April 25 

UP pioneers study, seek cure for 'rugby' abuse 

ABS-CBN News, April 24 

DOST funds development of oral COVID-19 vax 

Philippine Star, April 26 

UP embarks on pioneering study into ‘Rugby’ abuse 

The Mindanao Times, April 27 

Solidum cites genomics research's contribution to PH healthcare 

Manila Bulletin, April 29 

Seaweed wine? Iloilo's new product to generate livelihood for coastal communities - DOST-PCHRD 

Manila Bulletin, April 28 

UP embarks on pioneering study into ‘Rugby’ abuse 

Panay News, May 3 

Isatu pushes seaweed wine project 

The Manila Times, May 4 

PCHRD supports Iloilo's seaweed wine project 

The Manila Times, May 6 

DoST-PCHRD funds UST study on food safety 

The Manila Times, May 5 

PCHRD supports Iloilo's seaweed wines project 

The Manila Times, May 11 

NEDA recognizes DOST-PCHRD for successful implementation of HeaRTNovation Hubs 

Journal online, May 10 

The development of digitized care in the Philippine context 

Business World, May 15 

NEDA recognizes DOST-PCHRD's successful HeaRTNovation Hubs 

Manila Bulletin, May 12 

Local implant research for facial fracture in Zamboanga City seeks cheaper alternative for titanium 

Manila Bulletin, May 12 

Seaweed wines, anyone? 

Negros Daily Bulletin, May 22 

PCHRD supports Iloilo’s seaweed wines project 

Daily Guardian, May 23 

LUZON SCIENTIFIC MEET 

Baguio Midland Courier, May 28 

Research ethics trainings held for 2 universities 

Panay News, June 9 

PGC Mindanao expands services beyond COVID-19 

Mindanao Times, June 18 

New study seeks to develop a gender-responsive program on TB prevention, management - DOST 

Manila Bulletin, June 21 

PGC-Visayas to take part in Filipino Genomes Research Program 

The Daily Guardian, June 26 

Iloilo City included in nat’l genomics project 

The Daily Guardian, July 3 

Iloilo City tapped for national genome study 

Manila Bulletin, July 3 

Health Consortium in NorthMin develops 5-year unified health research agenda 

Journal(www.journal.com.ph), July 4 

Health Consortium in NorthMin develops 5-year unified health PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

169 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

170 PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 

171 

> PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023

172 research agenda 

Sun Star Network(www.sunstar.com.ph), July 4 

DOST launches PHL’s first human skin 3D bioprinting lab in Iloilo 

The Daily Guardian, July 15 

DoST, Pharma GalenX launch cutting-edge bioprinting laboratory 

Manila Times, July 19 

DOST, Pharma GalenX launches first bioprinting lab in Western Visayas 

Manila Bulletin, July 20 

DoST, Pharma GalenX launch cutting-edge bioprinting laboratory 

MSN Philippines (www.news.ph.msn.com), July 20 

Biomedical device ‘BUHAT', dengue health-seeking behavior research commence in E. Visayas 

Manila Bulletin, August 10 

DoST highlights biomedical researches 

Manila Times(manilatimes.net), August 12 

New tech captures 'dengue eggs 

Manila Times(manilatimes.net), August 12 

31 volunteers in Iloilo City needed for genomics study in the Philippines 

Sun Star Network(www.sunstar.com.ph), September 28 

These Balik Scientists opt to be 'stay scientists 

Business Mirror, October 1 

Health practitioners urged to invest in research for better health outcomes 

The Daily Guardian(www.thedailyguardian.net), October 13 

From DOST lab: Healthy drink, snack for seniors 

Philippine Daily Inquirer(www.inquirer.net), October 17 

Consortium eyes more research for health innovation in Western Visayas 

Manila Bulletin(www.mb.com.ph), October 18 

Gov't, academe, medical and research community, biopharma industry eye PH as center of clinical trials in ASEAN 

Philippine Daily Inquirer(www.inquirer.net), October 19 

BOI tackles clinical trial concerns in healthcare 

Manila Bulletin(www.mb.com.ph), October 20 

DOST's ‘Happy Senior Citizens' food program making the elderly healthy 

Business Mirror (www.businessmirror.com.ph), October 22 

Making it happen in the healthcare industry: BOI shares insights in a panel discussion on the PH as Center of Excellence in Clinical Trials 

Diyaryo Milenyo (https://diyaryomilenyonews.com), October 22 

Siyensikat brings new stories of science, innovation, hope 

Journal News Online (www.journalnews.com.ph), November 1 

Neurodevelopmental disorders DoST priority 

Manila Times(manilatimes.net), November 2 

DOST’s “Happy Senior Citizen” Program: Innovating Nutrient-Rich Food for Healthy Aging 

Mnltodayph (www.mnltoday.ph), November 25 

Print 

Guitar lessons seen to improve hand mobility in stroke patients — study 

Business World, January 25 

DoST opens call for proposals for 2025 funding– DOST-PCHRD 

Manila Times, February 2 

DOST invites future innovators in Metro Manila and South Luzon to avail research funding 

The Daily Guardian, February 2 

DOST urges researchers to avail of R&D funding 

PJ Tonight, February 3 

PhilHealth studies new heart attack 'insurance package 

PJ Tonight, February 4 

DLSU’s wearable robot for stroke rehab gets international patent 

The Philippine Star, February 5 

DOST-supported stroke rehabilitation Agapay device gets Singapore patent 

Business Mirror, February 19 

P65.7-M program formulating herbal cures for cancer, diabetes 

Business Mirror, February 26 

DLSU’s robotic medical aid gets Singapore patent 

Philippine Daily Inquirer, February 27 

DOST funds UP NIH studies on addiction, depression treatment 

Business Mirror, March 5 

Out-of-the-box aid for rural health care 

Philippine Daily Inquirer, March 6 

RHUS receive new telemed device 

The Manila Times, March 6 

In honor of NIH, our country’s pride 

Manila Bulletin, March 7 

DOST-PCHRD-supported stroke rehabilitation invention obtains first International Patent 

The Daily Guardian, March 8 

DOST-PCHRD supports program on 'top-tier' plants for treating diseases 

March 17 

The benefits of melatonin for aging and cancer therapy 

Philippine Daily Inquirer, April 4 

DOST digs deep into PHL talents for R&D proposals 

Business Mirror, April 8 

Solidum explores collaboration on innovation, technology 

PJ Tonight, April 11 

PH-Australia collab pushed 

People's Journal, April 11 

Health researchers in NorthMin receive training 

Manila Times, April 13 

UP scientists feted for pioneering genomics work 

The Daily Guardian, April 14 

Dost Ipinakita kung 

PJ Tonight Sunday, April 16 

Improving how robots communicate could advance human-robot collaboration 

Business Mirror, April 16 

UP scientists feted for pioneering genomics work 

The Manila Times, April 19 

DOST opens call for proposals for 2025 funding 

PJ Tonight, April 25 

Foreign expert lauds DOST in PH genomics program 

Business Mirror, April 23 

Science explains the aswang' myth in Panay 

Business Mirror, April 23 

DoST issues call for health research projects 

The Manila Times, April 25 

DOST funds development of oral COVID vax 

Philippine Star, April 26 

UP embarks on pioneering study into 'Rugby1 abuse 

Daily Guardian, April 27 

Support for R and D 

The Philippine Star Sunday, April 30 

Isatu pushes seaweed wine project 

The Manila Times, May 4 

PCHRD supports Iloilo's seaweed wines project 

The Manila Times, May 11 

The development of digitized care in the Philippine context 

Business World, May 11 

Zambo facial fracture researchers seek cheaper alternative for titanium implants 

Manila Bulletin, May 13 

PGC-Visayas to take part in Filipino Genomes Research Program 

The Daily Guardian, June 26 

Iloilo City included in nat’l genomics project 

The Daily Guardian, July 3 

DoST, Pharma GalenX launch cutting-edge bioprinting laboratory 

Manila Times, July 20 

Twin launch: Skin care from 'kadios' 3D bioprinting lab 

Business Mirror, July 20 

DoST highlights biomedical researches 

Manila Times, August 13 

E Visayas embarks on 1st biomedical research on birth concerns, dengue 

Business Mirror, August 13 

New tech captures 'dengue eggs' 

Manila Times, August 26 

These Balik Scientists opt to be 'stay scientists' 

Business Mirror, October 1 

DOST programs boost food, nutrition of senior citizens 

PJ Tonight, October 12 

A Filipino HIV research project wins Innovation of the Year at IDWeek 

Manila Bulletin, October 17 

From DOST lab: Healthy drink, snack for seniors 

Philippine Daily Inquirer, October 17 

DOST's 'Happy Senior Citizens' food program making the elderly healthy 

Business Mirror, October 22 

Neurodevelopmental disorders DoST priority 

Manila Times, November3 

Online Radio 

DOST-PCHRD Information Products and Services Unit represented by Ms. Maria Violeta Intia and Ms. Marie Antoinette Albendia shares about the HERDIN PLUS health research information management platform. 

Radyo Pilipinas, January 27 

DOST-PCHRD Executive Director Dr. Jaime Montoya discusses the upcoming DOST-PCHRD Call for Proposals 

Radyo Pilipinas, February 6 

STEMI PhilHealth STUDIES 

Anghel ng Masa / DWDD AFP Radio Program, February 14 

Radio 

BSP: Dr. Thaddeus Carvajal – as Resource Speaker 

Radyo Pilipinas 738 KHZ, January 11 

BSP: Dr. Arnulfo Rosario, Jr. – as Resource Speaker 

Radyo Pilipinas 738 KHZ, January 12 

BSP: Dr. Julius Lopez as RP 

DWIZ (Isyu ng Bayan), February 25 BSP: Dr. Julius Lopez as RP Radyo Pilipinas (Mabuhay Pilipinas), February 26 

TV 

Ph Science and Techonology Department tells innovators there is funding for your research 

ANC 21 (Mid Day), February 1 

BSP: Dr. Julius Adam Lopez as RP 

ANC News, February 21 

Filipino engineers invent 3D printed wearable robotic device to assist post stroke patients 

ANC 21 (Mid Day), February 23 

Robotic device na makakatulong sa rehabilitasyon ng mga na stroke at may injury, likha ng Pinoy students 

GTV Primetime, February 23 

Malacañang Press Briefing (PTV) – with Dr. Jonel Saludes 

PTV4, February 28 

BSP: Dr. Julius Adam Lopez 

CNN The Final Word, March 3 

Kakaibang anyo at kilos na pinagkamalan noong aswang, epekto ng sakit na XDP 

GTV Primetime, April 14 

Kakaibang anyo at kilos na pinagkamalan noong aswang, epekto ng sakit na XDP 

GMA7, April 14 PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 173 PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 174 ANNEX 12. List of PCHRD Staff Office of the Executive Director 

Dr. Jaime C. Montoya Lian Joie D. Balacanao Renee Louise Casulla Eliza D. Manalo Rizalina M. Metille John Vincent H. Tumlos 

Finance & Administrative Division 

Donna Mae J. Agsaoay Ryan Alvarez Michelle V. Atienza Ric F. Baclas Bonifacio B. Bodo Jr. Arnulfo A. Boltron Jessamyn M. Buclatin Aljon T. Carullo Janneth M. Coleto John Jefferson G. Dayao Benedict Leondro V. Esquejo Kyla Maria Faller Faye A. Flores Arsenia D. Francisco Lorainne M. Go Alec Benjamin M. Gonzales Diego O. Hernandez Kristine N. Inocencio Eric B. Laureano Evelyn A. Lupango Ofelia D. Mabalot Crisel Joie M. Macarilay John Jave D. Marabe Gerlie P. Martinez James Lloyd T. Mercado Earvin James P. Milante Irish G. Milante Christine Marie H. Molavizar Sylvia N. Ocon Franco Ogsimer Kateleen A. Pambid Cirio D. Pangan, Jr. Donna Dominique Paulican Aiza P. Pedir Ronaldo Pedrezuela Desiree S. Quiminales Erving B. Ruga Glaiza D. Sacro Louie Vic N. Sacro Arnold S. Saguin Wilfredo T. Taborda Diodine Love V. Tapiceria Jonavie Tolentino Orlando Zacarias Chezka Stephanie V. Zepeda 

Research and Development Management Division 

Renzo Val G. Agapito Maria Ariane Agatha Andrea Mae L. Almonte Diovelle Anne Eve E. Ambrocio Jemuel Joshua Z. Austria Jay Vee C. Bartolome Raizsa Sharmi E. Buan Korreine A. Buccat Melissa C. Bulao Kamzky Jonas P. Bungalon Georgina Rae C. Cababa Mary Charlene R. Campos Laureanna S. Caoctoy Jules Carl Celebrado Deborah Joy J. Cepria Arnestie F. Dalugdog Victoria B. David Paul Ernest N. De Leon Ana Jessa A. De Jesus Nheka Louise D. De Mesa Patricia Mae T. Decena John Philip Depatillo Louise Nicole N. Dizon Izobelle E. Echaluse John Clarence H. Flores Marfil F. Forteza Guidditta L. Gelera Renmar Joseph I. Gutierrez Jomel B. Herras Joseph D. Insao Angela Joy D. Landingin Elaine Martelino Vanessa Yvonne B. Meclat Ana Veronica C. Mendoza Rachelle C. Mendoza Christine Rae Simone D. Noble Roi Miguel M. Obdosantos Louise Sky T. Olaguer Mary Ann I. Pacho Jiovele O. Pandi Patricia Mae Parilla Marinell Estelle T. Peralta Jason Quirante Christel Leo O. Romano Timothy Jen R. Roxas Chiendy Mae Salaysay Claridel H. Sanchez Lance Ehrold D. Sarmiento Abby Gail T. Solis Meredith Ysabel M. Tag-ulo Maica Ann A. Talag Ma. Hannah Isabel A. Tuballa Pearl Kathleen C. Tumlos Joseph Emmanuel C. Valdez 

Institution Development Division 

Mercy Mae E. Alegrado Joana A. America Fritzhane L. Anthony Eixylaine O. Arenas Renalyn H. Baculina Maria Belen A. Balbuena Rani Isabel R. Cajigas John Marc R. Cambonga Lauren Millen G. Cantos Agape Joy Caro Estelle Kathleen B. Castelo Paula Jane A. De Leon Grenalyn C. Dela Rosa Phoebe R. Diez Charlene A. Escal Audrey John P. Gonzales Ian Hannah C. Gozun Evony C. Gualberto Jannet O. Gutierez Maria Rexie R. Jimenez Ma. Katrina G. Juanite Laila M. Labonite Maria Angelica D. Lanuza Mary Cris T. Manuel Daphne Joyce Maza Pamela Joyce L. Miranda Fatima E. Panganiban Alysya Marie D. Pedraza Rubee Ellaine C. Perez Analyn M. Ravago Reichel Ann P. Refuerzo Lucila E. Roja Jessica Marie R. Suerte Sydney P. Taculog 

Research Information Communication and Utilization Division 

Marie Antoniette S. Albendia Jeremy C. Aliparo Jaobly B. Arcaina Alyana Kaye M. Bacarra Julie Anne G. Balangat Raiza Isabel D.G. Baldoza Mary Joy M. Banal Giselle Gale P. Bigay Alyne Nicole Jake U. Celo Grace Ann A. Cenon Grace Ruth T. Daulat Catherine Joy C. Dimailig Lovely Faith R. Faeldonia Donavie D. Flores Ross Gerald T. Gabriel Alyza A. Ganon Ullyann C. Garcia Christine Jane M. Gonzalez Marc Enrico O. Hasta Joanna Mae Hernandez Samantha Marie A. Hilomen Maria Violeta G. Intia Ana Ciaren H. Itulid Karen Joy A. Labutong Neil Jerome P. Lavapie John Paul G. Limbo Jill Kate R. Lluisma Ronald Ryan D. Lolong Jwynne Gwyneth P. Macan Mylene B. Marco Nowell Mendez April Kristine G. Mendoza Ronel D. Molina Aileen A. Oriane Cris Pantaleon Renzell Ann M. Pariño Geraldine Bea P. Pimentel Shaira Ingrid G. Ramirez Angelique R. Regio Yvonne B. Ricafort Elimel Rome A. Rico Daryl O. Samson John Henry B. Tiamson Kathlin Claire G. Torcelino Allyn I. Villahermosa Christian Anthony Vios 

Assistant Scientists 

Dr. Ruby Anne King Dr. John Carlo Malabad 

S&T Fellows 

Dr. Ma. Neda Alcudia-Catalma Dr. Aimee Yvonne Criselle L. Aman Dr. Karell Jo Angelique C. Calpito Mr. Jakov Ivan S. Dumbrique Dr. Sarah Jane Jimenez Dr. Phoebe Nicole Perez Dr. Albert Remus R. Rosana Dr. Florence Giannina F. San Juan 

ANNEX 13. List of trainings attended by PCHRD staff Foreign Trainings 

2023 China-ASEAN Training Course on Traditional Medicine Development and Protection August 14-20, 2023, Nanning, Guangxi, China 

Paula Jane A. de Leon, Marianne G. Laya, Rachelle C. Mendoza 

Biosafety and Biosecurity Management System for BSL-3 Facilities September 20-27, 2023, National Defense Medical Center Taiwan 

Guidditta L. Gelera 

Driving the Digital Transformation and Capacity Building of Remote Healthcare Systems: Best Practices within the APEC Region November 16-17, 2023, Taipei, Taiwan 

Maria Violeta G. Intia, Vincent John H. Tumlos 

5th Japan SciCom Forum Conference (JSF 2023) November 21-22, 2023, Okinawa Japan 

Ana Ciaren H. Itulid, Jwynne Gwyneth P. Macan 

23rd FERCAP International Conference with the theme: Ethical Research Practices Related to Innovative Research challenges and Opportunities November 26-29, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 

Reichel Ann P. Refuerzo 

Local Trainings 

Training-Workshop on Intermediate IP Enforcement Training February 20, 2023, Taguig City 

Joana A. America, Julie Anne G. Balangat 

DOST-HRDP Planning Workshop CY 2023 February 9-10 2023, Taguig City 

Earvin James P. Milante, Faye A. Flores 

2023 First Quarter Human Resource Managers (HRM) Fellowship Meeting and Learning Session February 15 2023, Diliman Quezon City 

Earvin James P. Milante 

What Scientist Need to know about Tech Transfer March 9-10, 2023, Hotel Kimberly Manila 

Ma. Violeta G. Intia, Joana A. America, Shaira Ingrid G. Ramirez 

Basic Accounting and Internal Control for Non-Accountants February 22-24, Taguig City, 2023 

James Lloyd T. Mercado 

35th MAHLAP National Congress : "Recalibrate or Rebuild: Managing Libraries for Flexible Learning Modalities" March 8-10, 2023, Tagaytay City 

Mylene B. Marco, Grace Ruth T. Daulat 

DOST Orientation on 8888 Citizens' Complaint Center Process Flow March 24, 2023, Taguig City 

Alec Benjamin Gonzales, Maria Belen Balbuena 

SPMS Implementation in Government & Performance Based Bonus Implementation Status March 15, 2023, Taguig City 

Michelle V. Atienza, Earvin James P. Milante, Faye A. Flores 

Government Procurement Reform Act (R.A. 9184) and Its Revised IRR and Updates April 17-19, 2023, Taguig City 

Jonavie M. Tolentino 

2023 PAGBA Quarterly Seminar & Meeting with the Theme: Respond-ing to the Continuing Challenges of Innovations and Technology to Public Financial Management April 26-29, 2023, Baguio City 

Jessamyn M. Buclatin, Glaiza D. Sacro, Donna Mae J. Agsaoay, Sylvia N. Ocon 

Accounting Policies, Guidelines and Procedures for National Govern-ment Agencies (NGAs) May 3-5, 2023, Taguig City 

Jonavie M. Tolentino 

2023 Second Quarter Human Resource Managers (HRM) Fellowship Meeting and Learning Session May 3, 2023, Quezon City 

Michelle V. Atienza, Earvin James P. Milante PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 175 PCHRD ANNUAL REPORT 2023 176 Ethical Leadership May 9 & 11, 2023, Taguig City 

Michelle V. Atienza 

"Disseminating Science and Technology Information through Science Communication Approaches" May 16-18, 2023, Manila City 

Allyana Kaye M. Bacarra 

Government Procurement Reform Act (R.A. 9184) and Its Revised IRR and Updates May 31- June 2, 2023, Taguig City 

Irish G. Milante 

2023 PICE Midyear National Convention and Technical Conference June 9-10, 2023, Taguig City 

John Jave D. Marabe 

Cash Management and Its Internal Control System June 28-30, 2023, Taguig City 

Irish G. Milante 

Asia HR Forum 2023 June 15, 2023, Pasay City 

Crisel Joie M. Macarilay, Kyla Maria O. Faller, Aljon T. Carullo 

"Public Financial Management Competency Program - “Budget-ing and Performance Track (BPT) - Introduction to Budgeting” July 24, 2023 - August 4, 2023, Taguig City 

Jessamyn M. Buclatin 

37th Philippine Chemistry Congress: Chemistry for Agriculture 4.0 and Food Security July 26-28, 2023, Bacolod City, Negros Occidental 

Melissa C. Bulao, Marianne Joy G. Laya, Rachelle C. Mendoza, Raizsa Sharmi E. Buan 

10th National Social Science Congress July 27-29, 2023, Dumaguete City, Negros Oriental 

Mylene B. Marco, Marc Enrico O. Hasta, Elimel Rome A. Rico 

1st HR Summit: “Gearing Towards HR Excellence through HR-PRIME” August 14-16, 2023, Alabang, Muntinlupa City 

Earvin James P. Milante, Faye A. Flores 

The Philippine Budgeting System August 15-18, 2023, Taguig City 

Desiree S. Quiminales, Benedict Leondro V. Esquejo 

Pagduyog 2023: Sharing of Best Practices Congress August 29 - 30, 2023, Araneta City, Quezon City 

Kamzky Jonas P. Bungalon 

PAGBA: " Responding to the Continuing Challenges of Innova-tions and Technology to Public Financial Management" August 30 - September 2, 2023, Davao City 

Earvin James P. Milante, Donna Mae J. Agsaoay, John Jave D. Marabe, Gerlie P. Martinez 

2023 FRO Hangouts August 31, 2023, Araneta City Quezon City 

Alec Benjamin M. Gonzales 

WIPO - Philippines Summer School on Intellectual Property in Emerging Economies September 4 to 15, 2023, Taguig City 

Julie Anne G. Balangat 

“ASEAN Conference on Medicinal Forest Trees (ACMFT)”, Sep-tember 5-7, 2023, Clark Pampanga 

Ana Jessa A. De Jesus, Raizsa Sharmi E. Buan 

"The Current Trends and Approaches on Information and Re-cords Management System" September 6-8, 2023, Davao City 

Irish G. Milante, Lorainne Joy M. Go, Deborah Joy J. Cepria 

"Sustainable Horizons: Cascading DOST Foresight Framework" September 7, 2023, Pasay City 

Ms. Marianne G. Laya, Ms. John Philip P. Depatillo, Ms. Lucila E. Roja, Ms. Maria Violeta G. Intia, Ms. Joana A. America, Ms. Glaiza D. Sacro, Ms. Donna Mae J. Agsaoay 

Accounting Policies, Guidelines and Procedures for National Govern-ment Agencies (NGA) September 19 - 21, 2023, Taguig City 

Desiree S. Quiminales 

2023 Third Quarter Human Resource Managers (HRM) Fellowship Meeting and Learning Session September 21, 2023, Quezon City 

Earvin James P. Milante, Crisel Joie Macarilay 

2023 Public Sector HR Symposium September 26-27, 2023, Pasay City 

Chezka Stephanie V. Zepeda 

Fraud Audit and Forensic Accounting September 26-28, 2023, Quezon City 

Michelle V. Atienza 

Essential of Risk Management In-depth Training Workshop September 27-29, 2023, Taguig City 

John Jave D. Marabe, John Philip P. Depatillo, Julie Anne G. Balangat, Sydney P. Taculog 

Leadership Development System: A Management strategy for the Effectiveness of Leaders October 9, 13, 16 & 17, 2023, Taguig City 

Earvin James P. Milante 

Effective Methods and Enabling Policy of Managing Records Disposi-tion Program in Government Office October 17-19, 2023, Tagaytay City 

Michelle V. Atienza, Janneth M. Coleto, Gerlie P. Martinez, Rizalina M. Metille 

Workforce Planning, Career Development, and Succession Manage-ment (Planning, Developing, and Managing Career) October 18, 19, & 20, 2023, Taguig City 

Earvin James P. Milante, Kyla Maria O. Faller 

DOST GAD Focal Point Assembly 2023 October 18-20, 2023, Cauayan City Isabela 

Faye A. Flores, Daphne Joyce Maza 

2023 Global Research Council (GRC) Asia-Pacific Regional Meeting October 18-20, 2023, Pasay City 

Mr. John Philip P. Depatillo, Ms. Marianne Joy G. Laya, Mr. Jules Carl R. Celebrado, Ms. Maica Ann Eugenio-Talag, Ms. Mary Ann I. Pacho, Ms. Angela Joy D. Landingin, Ms. Paula Jane A. de Leon, Ms. Reichel Ann P. Refuerzo, Ms. Geraldine Bea P. Pimentel, Ms. Joana A. America 

“One-Time Cleansing of the Property, Plant and Equipment Account Balances of Government Agencies" October 26-27, 2023, Quezon City 

James Lloyd T. Mercado 

Training Course on Design and Evaluation of Innovation Policies October 23-27, 2023, Mandaluyong City 

Melissa C. Bulao 

Virtual Regional Seminar-Workshop on Electronic Records Management (ERM) November 13-17, 2023, Taguig City 

Irish G. Milante, Loraine Joy M. Go, Alec Benjamin M. Gonzales, Gerlie P. Martinez 

2023 3rd PAGBA Seminar and Meeting: Responding to the Continu-ing Challenges of Innovations & Technology to the Public Financial Management November 15-18, 2023, Cebu City 

Crisel Joie Macarilay, Aiza P. Pedir 

FOI Summit: Transforming Transparency: Digitalizing Access to Information, Embracing Glocalization, and sustaining a Culture of Openness November 20, 2023, Pasay City 

Mary Joy M. Banal, Alec Benjamin M. Gonzales 

Implementing and Scaling-up Innovation Projects November 21-24, 2023, Alabang Muntinlupa City 

Shaira Ingrid G. Ramirez, Julie Anne G. Balangat 

2023 CES Lifelong Learning for Leadership November 28 & 29, 2023, Manila City 

Michelle V. Atienza 

2023 Fourth Quarter Human Resource Managers (HRM) Fellowship Meeting and Learning Session December 6, 2023, Quezon City 

Earvin James P. Milante, Kyla Maria O. Faller
