Title: State of Bus Safety in the U.S.: Summary of Federal and State Regulations

URL Source: https://www.transit.dot.gov/sites/fta.dot.gov/files/docs/FTA_Report_No._0078.pdf

Published Time: Wed, 30 Sep 2020 21:36:37 GMT

Markdown Content:
State of Bus Safety in the U.S.: 

# Summary of Federal and State 

# Regulations 

FTA Report No. 0078 

Federal Transit Administration 

> PREPARED BY

Jennifer Flynn 

Lisa Staes 

Center for Urban Transportation Research 

University of South Florida 

# JUNE 2014 COVER PHOTO 

Photo courtesy of  istockphoto.com 

DISCLAIMER 

This document is disseminated under the sponsorship of the U.S. Department of Transportation in the interest of information 

exchange. The United States Government assumes no liability for its contents or use thereof. The United States Government 

does not endorse products of manufacturers. Trade or manufacturers’ names appear herein solely because they are considered 

essential to the objective of this report. FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  iJUNE 2014 

FTA Report No. 0078 

> PREPARED BY

Jennifer Flynn 

Lisa Staes 

Center for Urban Transportation Research 

University of South Florida 

> SPONSORED BY

Federal Transit Administration 

Office of Research, Demonstration and Innovation 

U.S. Department of Transportation 

1200 New Jersey Avenue, SE 

Washington, DC 20590 

> AVAILABLE ONLINE

http://www.fta.dot.gov/research 

# State of Bus Safety 

# in the U.S.: 

# Summary of 

# Federal and State 

# Regulations FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  iv 

# Metric Conversion Table 

SYMBOL WHEN YOU KNOW MULTIPLY BY TO FIND SYMBOL 

LENGTH 

in inches 25.4 millimeters mm 

ft feet 0.305 meters m

yd yards 0.914 meters m

mi miles 1.61 kilometers km 

VOLUME 

fl oz fluid ounces 29.57 milliliters mL 

gal gallons 3.785 liters L

ft 3 cubic feet 0.028 cubic meters m 3

yd 3 cubic yards 0.765 cubic meters m 3NOTE: volumes greater than 1000 L shall be shown in m 3

MASS oz ounces 28.35 grams g

lb pounds 0.454 kilograms kg 

T short tons (2000 lb) 0.907 megagrams (or "metric ton") Mg (or "t") 

TEMPERATURE (exact degrees) o F Fahrenheit 5 (F-32)/9 or (F-32)/1.8 Celsius o C 

> FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION ii

Metric Conversion Table Metric Conversion Table FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  v

REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE  Form Approved 

OMB No. 0704-0188 

1. AGENCY USE ONLY  2. REPORT DATE 

June 2014 

3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED 

6/10/2013 – 6/30/2014 

Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instruc -

tions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. 

Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this 

burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, 

Arlington, VA 22202-4302, and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188), Washington, DC 20503. 

4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

State of Bus Safety in the U.S.: Summary of Federal and State Regulations 

5. FUNDING NUMBERS 

FL-26-7117-00 

6. AUTHOR(S) 

Jennifer Flynn, Lisa Staes 

7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESSE(ES) 

Center for Urban Transportation Research 

University of South Florida 

4202 East Fowler Avenue, CUT100, Tampa, FL 33620 

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION REPORT NUMBER 

FTA Report No. 0078 

9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

U.S. Department of Transportation 

Federal Transit Administration 

Office of Research, Demonstration and Innovation 

East Building 

1200 New Jersey Avenue, SE 

Washington, DC 20590 

10. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY REPORT 

NUMBER 

FTA Report No. 0078 

11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES [http://www.fta.dot.gov/research] 

12A. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Available from: National Technical Information Service (NTIS), Springfield, VA 22161. 

Phone 703.605.6000, Fax 703.605.6900, email [ orders@ntis.gov ]

12B. DISTRIBUTION CODE 

TRI-20 

13. ABSTRACT 

This report provides a comprehensive overview of transit bus safety regulations and standards developed by all 50 states, as well as 

information on how state departments of transportation (DOT) regulate the maintenance or operation of transit/paratransit vehicles 

operated by public transit agencies. For quick reference, this document is accompanied by a spreadsheet containing basic information 

on state DOT regulation of transit bus safety, state requirements for annual transit bus inspections, and a list of laws/regulations with 

hyperlinks to each statutory reference. The spreadsheet and map with hyperlinks are available at  www.transitsafetycenter.org . Since 

many of the state laws contain references to federal regulations, this report begins with a summary of federal laws and regulations. 

14. SUBJECT TERMS 

Transit safety law, transit safety regulations, state transit safety regulations 

15. NUMBER OF PAGES 

132 

16. PRICE CODE 

17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 

OF REPORT 

Unclassified 

18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 

OF THIS PAGE 

Unclassified 

19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 

OF ABSTRACT 

Unclassified 

20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  vi 

TABLE OF CONTENTS     

> 1Executive Summary
> 4Section 1: Methodology
> 7Section 2: Federal Safety Laws and Regulations
> 7

49 CFR Part 40 – Procedures for Transportation Workplace Drug and 

Alcohol Testing Programs  

> 7

49 CFR Part 355 – Compatibility of State Laws and Regulations Affecting 

Interstate Motor Carrier Operations  

> 7

49 CFR Part 365 – Rules Governing Applications for Operating Authority  

> 8

49 CFR Part 379 – Preservation of Records  

> 9

49 CFR Part 382 – Controlled Substances and Alcohol Use and Testing  

> 9

49 CFR Part 383 – Commercial Driver’s License Standards; Requirements and 

Penalties  

> 10

49 CFR Part 384 – State Compliance with Commercial Driver’s License 

Program  

> 10

49 CFR Part 385 – Safety Fitness Procedures  

> 10

49 CFR Part 390 – Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations; General  

> 11

49 CFR Part 391 – Qualifications of Drivers and Longer Combination Vehicle 

(LCV) Driver Instructors  

> 12

49 CFR Part 392 – Driving of Commercial Motor Vehicles  

> 13

49 CFR Part 393 – Parts and Accessories Necessary for Safe Operation  

> 13

49 CFR Part 395 – Hours of Service of Drivers  

> 13

49 CFR Part 396 – Inspection, Repair, and Maintenance  

> 14

49 CFR Part 571 – Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards  

> 16

49 CFR Part 614 – Transportation Infrastructure Management  

> 16

49 CFR Part 655 – Prevention of Alcohol Misuse and Prohibited Drug Use in 

Transit Operations  

> 17

49 CFR Part 663 – Pre-Award and Post-Delivery Audits of Rolling Stock 

Purchases  

> 17

49 CFR Part 665 – Bus Testing   

> 19 Section 3: State Safety Laws and Regulations
> 20

Alaska  

> 21

Arizona  

> 23

Arkansas  

> 23

California  

> 28

Colorado  

> 29

Connecticut  

> 31

Delaware  

> 32

Florida  

> 37

Georgia  

> 38

Hawaii  

> 38

Idaho  

> 39

Illinois FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  vii 

41  Indiana 

41  Iowa 

42  Kansas 

43  Kentucky 

44  Louisiana 

45  Maine 

46  Maryland 

47  Massachusetts 

51  Michigan 

52  Minnesota 

56  Mississippi 

56  Missouri 

57  Montana 

58  Nebraska 

60  Nevada 

60  New Hampshire 

62  New Jersey 

71  New Mexico 

73  New York 

82  North Carolina 

84  Ohio 

85  Oklahoma 

87  Oregon 

88  Pennsylvania 

89  Rhode Island 

91  South Carolina 

92  South Dakota 

92  Tennessee 

94  Texas 

95  Utah 

96  Vermont 

98  Virginia 

100  Washington 

101  West Virginia 

103  Wisconsin 

104  Wyoming 

106  Appendix A: Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations for 

Bus Transit 

108  Appendix B: State Safety Laws and Regulations for Bus Transit FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  viii 

ABSTRACT 

This report provides a comprehensive overview of transit bus safety regulations 

and standards developed by all 50 states, as well as information on how state 

departments of transportation (DOT) regulate the maintenance or operation 

of transit/paratransit vehicles operated by public transit agencies. For quick 

reference, this document is accompanied by a spreadsheet containing basic 

information on state DOT regulation of transit bus safety, state requirements 

for annual transit bus inspections, and a list of laws/regulations with hyperlinks to 

each statutory reference. The spreadsheet and map with hyperlinks are available 

at  www.transitsafetycenter.org . Since many of the state laws contain references 

to federal regulations, this report begins with a summary of federal laws and 

regulations. EXECUTIVE 

SUMMARY FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  1

Background 

Bus Safety Study: A Report to Congress  analyzed the safety of public transit buses 

and over-the-road buses (OTRBs) based on a review of accidents that resulted 

in injuries and fatalities when public transit buses were traveling on “highway 

routes” (routes on which 50% or more of the route is provided on a roadway 

with a speed limit of greater than 45 mph). This report specifically builds upon 

Conclusion 2 of the bus safety study: “Based on the examination of state laws 

and regulations, an expanded, comprehensive review of regulations and standards 

developed by all states is warranted. The findings of this examination should be 

used in the development of national transit bus safety standards and vehicle safety 

performance measures.” 

Objectives 

The primary objective of this study was to provide a comprehensive overview 

of transit bus safety regulations and standards developed by all 50 states, as well 

as information on how state departments of transportation (DOTs) regulate 

the maintenance or operation of transit/paratransit vehicles operated by 

public transit agencies. For quick reference, this document is accompanied by a 

spreadsheet containing basic information on state DOT regulation of transit bus 

safety, state requirements for annual transit bus inspections, and a list of laws/ 

regulations with hyperlinks to each statutory reference. 

Methodology 

To identify and document transit bus safety standards developed through 

state statute, the study team conducted a search of state legislative websites 

for statutes, rules, or regulations related to public transit, and collected bus 

standards relating to (1) bus operators, including screening, training, testing, 

licensure, background reporting, and other personnel related regulations 

or requirements, and (2) vehicle operations, equipment, maintenance, and 

procurement standards and guidelines, including frequency of vehicle inspections, 

maintenance inspection thresholds, pre-trip inspections, and procurement 

standards and vehicle specifications. These rules and regulations were then 

organized into the following categories with associated subcategories, as defined 

in the report: 

• Incorporation of Federal Regulations 

• Power to Enforce or Regulate 

• Vehicles 

• Operations 

• Personnel 

• Workplace Policies FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  2EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

Since many of the state laws contain references to federal regulations, the report 

begins with a summary of safety-related federal laws and regulations, including 

Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards (FMVSS), Federal Motor Carrier Safety 

Regulations (FMCSRs), Prevention of Alcohol Misuse and Prohibit Drug Use in 

Transportation Operations, Transportation Workplace Drug and Alcohol Testing 

Programs, Controlled Substances and Alcohol Use and Testing regulations, 

regulations related to transit vehicle procurements and bus testing, and additional 

regulations and laws that fall under the purview of the Federal Motor Carrier 

Safety Administration (FMCSA). 

The report provides a summary by state and corresponding hyperlinks to the 

regulations cited. In addition, a spreadsheet is included that provides a brief 

listing of regulations and laws by specific safety topic areas with the hyperlinks 

that are also provided in the narrative. Both the report and the state laws and 

regulations have been posted on the National Center for Transit Research 

(NCTR) National Transit Safety Research and Assistance Center website at 

www.transitsafetycenter.org .

Summary State Safety Laws and Regulations 

The report provides a comprehensive overview of transit bus safety regulation 

for each of the 50 states, as well as information on the role of each state DOT in 

regulating the maintenance or operation of transit/paratransit vehicles operated 

by public transit agencies. There is wide variety across the states with regard to 

the extent and scope of transit bus safety legislation. While California, Florida, 

Massachusetts, New Jersey, and New York have the most far-reaching bus safety 

laws and regulations, the legislation relating to bus safety is relatively limited 

in Alabama, Alaska, Hawaii, Idaho, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Michigan, Mississippi, 

North Carolina, South Dakota, and Utah. This might be expected, given that 

the states with wider-ranging bus safety laws generally tend to contain more 

densely populated, urban areas with a history of well-established transit systems. 

However, the range of transit bus safety legislation in most states falls somewhere 

in between these two extremes. 

While there are no laws that can be said to apply “across the board,” the 

majority relate to vehicles. Most states (38 of 50) have laws that prescribe 

minimum requirements for basic equipment, such as lamps and reflectors, turn 

signals, safety glazing, mirrors, and rear fender splash guards; 34 states have laws 

prescribing basic requirements for flares and other warning devices; 26 states 

have laws that set forth vehicle size and weight limitations; and 21 states have 

legal requirements for the maintenance and inspection of vehicles. Generally 

speaking, states with more extensive bus safety laws go into much greater detail 

with regard to vehicle equipment requirements, and are more likely to specify 

requirements with regard to safe operating procedures, operator qualifications 

and training, and policies relating to safety and drug and alcohol testing, although FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  3EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

states with more limited legislation sometimes prescribe requirements in these 

areas as well. 

The examination of transit safety-related state laws and regulations exposed 

states that have comprehensive transit bus safety regulations and those with 

few such laws or regulations, as indicated above. While the existence of these 

laws and regulations may impact public transit bus safety within those states, the 

following points must be provided: 

• Without an examination of other related factors, it cannot be concluded 

that there is a direct correlation between the existence of state laws and 

regulations in a state and the relative safety of bus transit within that state. 

• Due to multiple factors that influence bus safety, it cannot be concluded that 

states within which comprehensive bus transit laws and regulations exist have 

transit systems that are safer. 

• In states without any transit safety-related laws and regulations, transit 

agencies may be exposed to more transit safety risk. 

The transit safety-related state laws and regulations may prove to be valuable 

resources for FTA in the establishment of federal regulations related to public 

transit bus safety. SECTION 

# 1FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  4

# Methodology 

To continue the examination of safety factors reflected in FTA’s  Bus Safety Study: 

A Report to Congress , this document provides a comprehensive overview of 

transit bus safety regulations and standards developed by all 50 states, as well 

as information on how state departments of transportation (DOTs) regulate 

the maintenance or operation of transit/paratransit vehicles operated by 

public transit agencies. For quick reference, this document is accompanied by a 

spreadsheet available at  www.transitsafetycenter.org  containing basic information 

on state DOT regulation of transit bus safety, state requirements for annual 

transit bus inspections, and a list of laws/regulations with hyperlinks to each 

statutory reference. Since many of the state laws contain references to federal 

regulations, this report begins with a summary of federal laws and regulations. 

To identify and document transit bus safety standards developed through 

state statute, the study team conducted a search of state legislative websites 

for statutes, rules, or regulations related to public transit and collected bus 

standards relating to (1) bus operators, including screening, training, testing, 

licensure, background reporting, and other personnel related regulations 

or requirements, and (2) vehicle operations, equipment, maintenance, and 

procurement standards and guidelines, including frequency of vehicle inspections, 

maintenance inspection thresholds, pre-trip inspections, and procurement 

standards and vehicle specifications as examples. These rules and regulations 

were then organized into the following categories and subcategories: 

1.  Incorporation of federal regulations 

2.  Power to enforce or regulate 

3.  Vehicles 

– Vehicle condition 

– Size and weight limitations 

– Strength and structural integrity 

– Equipment requirements 

∙ General 

∙ Brake equipment and performance 

∙ Emergency/safety equipment 

∙ Wheelchair equipment 

∙ Seatbelts and child restraints 

– Fuel and exhaust systems SECTION 1: METHODOLOGY FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  5

– Lighting and electrical systems 

– Window transparency 

– Signage 

– Passenger compartment and entrances/exits 

– Driver/passenger seats 

– Maintenance and inspection 

– Vehicle out of service 

4.  Operations 

– General operational requirements 

– Operating speeds 

– Use of mobile electronic device 

– Transportation of passengers 

– Transportation of passengers with special needs 

– Driver securement 

– Rail crossing procedures 

– Attention to duty 

– Fueling/refueling 

– Use of roads and highways 

– Stopping, standing, and parking 

– Prohibited operations 

– Baggage 

– Requirements for larger buses 

5.  Personnel 

– General qualifications 

– Physical/medical qualifications 

– Pre-employment screening, driving record, and criminal history 

– Education, training, and testing 

– Driver hours of duty 

– Driver out of service and return to duty 

– Disciplinary action 

6.  Workplace Policies 

– General policies 

– Safety/substance abuse programs and policies 

– Drug and alcohol testing and policies 

– Accidents and emergencies 

– Policy enforcement 

– Recordkeeping SECTION 1: METHODOLOGY FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  6

Whenever possible, hyperlinks are provided that link directly to official state 

legislative websites. However, due to certain issues that cause broken links, this 

is not always possible. In some cases, official state websites use internal search 

engines that provide only temporary links that expire after a certain amount of 

time has elapsed. In these instances, links to laws/regulations are provided via 

legal information websites such as  Justia.com  and  FindLaw.com . It also should be 

noted that, like all websites, official state websites may be reorganized from time 

to time, causing links to be broken. In the case of broken links, the reader can 

find the law or regulation through a general Internet search using the statutory 

citation and name of the law or regulation provided in the spreadsheet. SECTION 

# 2FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  7

# Federal Safety Laws 

# and Regulations 

49 CFR Part 40 – Procedures for Transportation Workplace Drug 

and Alcohol Testing Programs  contains the federal rules and procedures 

for transportation workplace drug and alcohol testing programs. Part 40 covers 

responsibilities that employers must meet in order to comply with all applicable 

drug and alcohol requirements and procedures; requirements for persons 

authorized to collect urine specimens for DOT drug testing; requirements for 

collection sites, forms, equipment, and supplies used in DOT urine collections; 

rules that must be followed during the urine specimen collection process; 

requirements and testing/reporting procedures for drug testing laboratories; 

qualifications and duties for acting as a medical review officer (MRO) in the 

DOT drug testing program; protocol for split specimen tests; definitions, 

consequences, and procedures concerning problems in drug tests; requirements 

for persons authorized to conduct DOT alcohol tests; requirements for testing 

sites, forms, equipment, and supplies used in DOT alcohol testing; rules that 

must be followed during alcohol screening and confirmation tests; definitions, 

consequences, and procedures concerning problems in alcohol testing; 

requirements for substance abuse professionals and the return-to-duty process; 

rules governing confidentiality and the release of drug/alcohol testing and other 

medical information; roles and responsibilities of service agents; and rules 

and procedures for public interest exclusions of service agents not acting in a 

responsible manner. 

49 CFR Part 355 – Compatibility of State Laws and Regulations 

Affecting Interstate Motor Carrier Operations  contains the Federal 

Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA) rules to ensure that state laws 

and regulations pertaining to commercial motor vehicle safety are compatible 

with appropriate parts of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations. Part 

355 provides guidelines for a continuous regulatory review of state laws and 

regulations and establishes deadlines for states to achieve compatibility with 

appropriate parts of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations (FMCSRs) 

with respect to interstate commerce. The provisions of Part 355 apply to any 

state that adopts or enforces laws or regulations pertaining to commercial motor 

vehicle safety in interstate commerce. 

49 CFR Part 365 – Rules Governing Applications for Operating 

Authority  contains the FMCSA rules governing applications for all individuals 

and businesses requesting authority to operate as motor carriers. All applications SECTION 2: FEDERAL SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  8

must be reviewed for consistency with the FMCSA’s operational safety fitness 

policy and require the finding that the applicant is fit, willing and able to 

perform the involved operations and to comply with all applicable statutory 

and regulatory provisions. Individuals and businesses requesting authority to 

operate as motor passenger common or contract carriers must complete 

the safety certification. Applicants subject to FMCSRs at 49 CFR, Chapter 3, 

Subchapter B (Parts 350-399) must certify as follows: Applicant has access to and 

is familiar with all applicable U.S. DOT regulations relating to the safe operation 

of commercial vehicles and it will comply with these regulations. In so certifying, 

applicant is verifying that, at a minimum, it: 

• Has in place a system and an individual responsible for ensuring overall 

compliance with FMCSRs; 

• Can produce a copy of the FMCSRs and the Hazardous Materials 

Transportation Regulations; 

• Has in place a driver safety training/orientation program; 

• Has prepared and maintains an accident register (49 CFR 390.15); 

• Is familiar with DOT regulations governing driver qualifications and has in 

place a system for overseeing driver qualification requirements (49 CFR Part 

391); 

• Has in place policies and procedures consistent with DOT regulations 

governing driving and operational safety of motor vehicles, including drivers 

hours of service and vehicle inspection, repair, and maintenance (49 CFR 

Parts 392, 395 and 396); and 

• Is familiar with and will have in place on the appropriate effective date, a 

system for complying with U.S. DOT regulations governing alcohol and 

controlled substances testing requirements (49 CFR 382 and 49 CFR Part 

40). 

If applicant operates only vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating under 10,000 

pounds and will not transport hazardous materials, applicant is exempt from the 

U.S. DOT safety fitness regulations; however, applicant must certify as follows: 

Applicant is familiar with and will observe general operational safety guidelines, 

as well as any applicable state and local laws and requirements relating to the 

safe operation of commercial motor vehicles. The rules contained in Part 365 

also cover how to oppose requests for authority; the application process; the 

procedures that enable carriers to merge, transfer, or lease their operating 

rights; and special rules for certain Mexico-domiciled carriers. 

49 CFR Part 379 – Preservation of Records  contains the FMCSA rules that 

govern the retention and preservation of records by motor carriers and brokers, 

water carriers, and household freight forwarders. Part 379 specifies the records 

required to be retained; protection, storage, and preservation of records; rules 

for companies going out of business; and disposition and retention of records. SECTION 2: FEDERAL SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  9

Appendix A to Part 379 (Schedule of Records and Period of Retention) stipulates 

that supporting data for periodical reports of accidents, inspections, tests, hours 

of service, repairs, etc. must be retained for a period of six months. 

49 CFR Part 382 – Controlled Substances and Alcohol Use and 

Testing  establishes programs designed to help prevent accidents and injuries 

resulting from the misuse of alcohol or use of controlled substances by drivers 

of commercial motor vehicles. Subpart A sets forth general procedures that 

must be followed when conducting alcohol or controlled substances testing; 

Subpart B contains (1) specific prohibitions with regard to the use of alcohol 

and controlled substances by drivers who perform safety-sensitive functions, 

and (2) the consequences of a positive drug/alcohol test or the refusal to submit 

to testing; Subpart C outlines requirements with regard to the various types 

of drug and alcohol testing, (e.g., pre-employment, reasonable suspicion, post-

accident, random, return-to-duty, and follow-up testing), Subpart D outlines the 

requirements for handling of test results, records retention, and confidentiality; 

Subpart E specifies the consequences for drivers engaging in substance use-

related conduct; Subpart F describes employer obligations for providing 

information, training, and referral regarding alcohol misuse and controlled 

substances use. 

49 CFR Part 383 – Commercial Driver’s License Standards; 

Requirements and Penalties  contains the FMCSA rules that govern 

commercial motor vehicle driver’s license standards, requirements, and penalties. 

Part 383 is intended to help prevent or reduce truck and bus accidents, fatalities, 

and injuries by requiring drivers to have a single commercial driver’s license and 

by disqualifying drivers who operate commercial motor vehicles in an unsafe 

manner. Part 383: 

• Prohibits a commercial motor vehicle driver from having more than one 

commercial motor vehicle driver’s license; 

• Requires a driver to notify the driver’s current employer and the driver’s 

state of domicile of certain convictions; 

• Requires that a driver provide previous employment information when 

applying for employment as an operator of a commercial motor vehicle; 

• Prohibits an employer from allowing a person with a suspended license to 

operate a commercial motor vehicle; 

• Establishes periods of disqualification and penalties for those persons 

convicted of certain criminal and other offenses and serious traffic violations, 

or subject to any suspensions, revocations, or cancellations of certain driving 

privileges; 

• Establishes testing and licensing requirements for commercial motor vehicle 

operators; SECTION 2: FEDERAL SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  10 

• Requires states to give knowledge and skills tests to all qualified applicants 

for commercial drivers’ licenses which meet the Federal standard; 

• Sets forth commercial motor vehicle groups and endorsements; 

• Sets forth the knowledge and skills test requirements for the motor vehicle 

groups and endorsements; 

• Sets forth the Federal standards for procedures, methods, and minimum 

passing scores for states and others to use in testing and licensing 

commercial motor vehicle operators; and 

• Establishes requirements for the state-issued commercial license 

documentation. 

49 CFR Part 384 – State Compliance with Commercial Driver’s 

License Program  contains the FMCSA rules to ensure states’ compliance 

with the commercial driver’s license provisions of Section 12009(a) of the 

Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1986 ( 49 U.S.C. 31311(a) ). The rules of 

Part 384 include the minimum standards for the actions states must take to be 

in substantial compliance with the requirements of 49 U.S.C. 31311(a), establish 

procedures for determinations to be made of such compliance by states, and 

specify the consequences of state noncompliance. 

49 CFR Part 385 – Safety Fitness Procedures  establishes the FMCSA’s 

procedures to determine the safety fitness of motor carriers, to assign safety 

ratings, to direct motor carriers to take remedial action when required, and 

to prohibit motor carriers receiving a safety rating of “unsatisfactory” from 

operating a CMV. Part 385 also establishes the safety assurance program for a 

new entrant motor carrier initially seeking to register with FMCSA to conduct 

interstate operations. Additionally, Part 385 describes the consequences that 

will occur if the new entrant fails to maintain adequate basic safety management 

controls. 

The next section identifies and briefly discusses the FMCSRs contained within 

Parts 390–399 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations. These regulations 

apply to commercial motor vehicles and their operators that transport property 

or passengers in interstate commerce. Although governmental agencies, including 

public transportation agencies, are exempt from most of the FMCSRs, states and 

individual public transit agencies may adopt these regulations, but they are not 

required to do so. 

49 CFR Part 390 – Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations; General 

establishes general requirements pertaining to FMCSRs. These requirements are 

not intended to preclude the establishment or enforcement of state or local laws 

relating to safety, provided that compliance with such laws would not prevent 

full compliance with these regulations. The rules and information within Part 390 

specify: SECTION 2: FEDERAL SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  11 

• Requirement for motor carrier observance of driver regulations; 

• Prohibition of aiding or abetting the violation of the rules of this chapter; 

• Requirement for motor carrier assistance with accident investigations and 

special studies; 

• Use of additional equipment and accessories; 

• Requirement for filing a motor carrier identification report; 

• Relief from regulations to any motor carrier or driver operating a 

commercial motor vehicle to provide emergency relief during an emergency; 

• Locations of motor carrier service centers; 

• Requirements for location and copies of records or documents required by 

this subchapter; 

• Prohibition of falsification, reproduction, or alteration of certificates, 

reports, and records required by this subchapter; 

• Requirements for using one type of commercial motor vehicle to perform 

the functions normally performed by another type of commercial motor 

vehicle; and 

• Penalties for the violation of the rules set forth in this subchapter. 

For more information on the FMCSRs specific to bus transit, please see 

Appendix A. 

49 CFR Part 391 – Qualifications of Drivers and Longer Combination 

Vehicle (LCV) Driver Instructors  establishes FMCSA rules for (1) minimum 

qualifications for persons who drive commercial motor vehicles as, for, or on 

behalf of motor carriers, and (2) minimum duties of motor carriers with respect 

to the qualifications of their drivers. Under Subpart B, a person shall not drive a 

commercial motor vehicle unless he/she is qualified to drive a commercial motor 

vehicle, and, with limited exceptions (outlined in Subpart G), a motor carrier 

shall not require or permit a person to drive a commercial motor vehicle unless 

that person is qualified to drive a commercial motor vehicle. A person is qualified 

to drive a motor vehicle if he/she: 

• Is at least 21 years old; 

• Can read and speak English; 

• Can, by reason of experience and/or training, safely operate the type of 

commercial motor vehicle he/she drives; 

• Is physically qualified to drive a commercial motor vehicle in accordance with 

the requirements of Subpart E; 

• Has a currently valid commercial motor vehicle operator’s license issued by 

only one state or jurisdiction; 

• Has prepared and furnished the motor carrier that employs him/her with 

a list of violations of motor vehicle traffic laws and ordinances (other than SECTION 2: FEDERAL SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  12 

violations involving only parking) of which the driver has been convicted 

or on account of which he/she has forfeited bond or collateral during the 

preceding 12 months, or has certified that he/she has not been convicted of 

or forfeited bond or collateral on account of any violation which must be 

listed; 

• Is not disqualified to drive a commercial motor vehicle for any of the 

following, as outlined in §391.15: 

– Loss of driving privileges; 

– Criminal and other offenses; 

– Violation of out-of-service orders; 

– Violation of prohibition of texting while driving a commercial motor 

vehicle; or 

– Violation of a restriction on using a hand-held mobile telephone while 

driving a commercial motor vehicle; 

• Has successfully completed a driver’s road test and has been issued a 

certificate of driver’s road test as stipulated in §391.31 of Subpart D, or has 

presented an operator’s license or a certificate of road test which the motor 

carrier that employs him/her has accepted as equivalent to a road test as 

stipulated in §391.33 of Subpart D. 

Subpart C outlines the requirements that must be met by a commercial motor 

vehicle driver’s application for employment, the investigations and inquiries that 

motor carriers must make with respect to the background and character of each 

driver it employs, and the annual inquiry and review of driving record and record 

of motor vehicle traffic violations that motor carriers must perform with respect 

to each driver it employs. Subpart F outlines the general requirements of motor 

carriers with respect to maintaining driver qualification and driver investigation 

history files. Subpart G provides limited exemptions for which certain rules of 

Part 391 do not apply. 

49 CFR Part 392 – Driving of Commercial Motor Vehicles  contains 

FMCSA operating rules with which every motor carrier, its officers, agents, 

representatives, and employees responsible for the management, maintenance, 

operation, or driving of commercial motor vehicles, or the hiring, supervising, 

training, assigning, or dispatching of drivers, must comply. These include general 

rules with respect to ill or fatigued drivers; drugs and other substances; alcohol 

prohibition; conformance of schedules to speed limits; use and inspection 

of equipment; inspection of cargo, cargo securement devices, and systems; 

operating authority; and prohibited transportation. This part also contains the 

requirements for stopping and slowing down at railroad grade crossings; safe 

clearance at highway-rail crossings; cautions to be exercised under hazardous 

conditions; the use of seat belts; the use of emergency signals when commercial 

motor vehicles are stopped; the use of lighted lamps and reflectors; and SECTION 2: FEDERAL SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  13 

fueling precautions. This part also covers prohibited practices with regard to 

the operation of buses; towing or pushing loaded buses; riding within closed 

commercial motor vehicles without proper exits; the use of commercial motor 

vehicles when carbon monoxide is detected; and texting and/or using a hand-held 

mobile telephone while driving. 

49 CFR Part 393 – Parts and Accessories Necessary for Safe Operation 

establishes FMCSA requirements and specifications for parts and accessories 

necessary for the safe operation of commercial motor vehicles. Part 393 covers 

the requirements for lamps, reflective devices, and electrical wiring; brakes; 

glazing and window construction; fuel systems; coupling devices and towing 

methods; miscellaneous parts and accessories; emergency equipment; protection 

against shifting and falling cargo; and frames, cab and body components, wheels, 

steering, and suspensions systems. 

49 CFR Part 395 – Hours of Service of Drivers  establishes FMCSA rules 

and regulations with respect to hours of service of commercial motor vehicle 

drivers. Under §395.5 of this part: 

• No motor carrier shall permit or require any driver of a passenger-carrying 

commercial motor vehicle to drive, nor shall any driver drive a passenger-

carrying commercial motor vehicle: 

– More than 10 hours following 8 consecutive hours off duty; or 

– For any period after having been on duty 15 hours following 8 

consecutive hours off duty. 

• No motor carrier shall permit or require a driver of a passenger-carrying 

commercial motor vehicle to drive, nor shall any driver drive a passenger-

carrying commercial motor vehicle, regardless of the number of motor 

carriers using the driver’s services, for any period after: 

– Having been on duty 60 hours in any 7 consecutive days if the employing 

motor carrier does not operate commercial motor vehicles every day of 

the week; or 

– Having been on duty 70 hours in any period of 8 consecutive days if the 

employing motor carrier operates commercial motor vehicles every day 

of the week. 

This part also contains rules pertaining to driver’s record of duty status, 

declaring drivers out of service, and the use of automatic on-board recording 

devices. 

49 CFR Part 396 – Inspection, Repair, and Maintenance  contains the 

FMCSA rules and regulations governing the inspection, repair, and maintenance 

of commercial motor vehicles. Under this part, every motor carrier is required 

to systematically inspect, repair, and maintain all motor vehicles and intermodal 

equipment subject to its control. Part 396 requires that: SECTION 2: FEDERAL SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  14 

• The parts and accessories detailed in  49 CFR Part 393 , and any additional 

parts and accessories which may affect safety of operation, must be kept in 

safe and proper operating condition at all times; 

• Pushout windows, emergency doors, and emergency door marking lights in 

buses shall be inspected at least every 90 days; 

• Every motor carrier shall ensure that each motor vehicle subject to its 

control is properly lubricated and free of oil and grease leaks; and 

• A motor vehicle shall not be operated in such a condition as to likely cause 

an accident or a breakdown. 

Section 396.9 outlines the rules with respect to personnel authorized to perform 

inspections, prescribed inspection report, motor vehicles declared “out of 

service,” and disposition of the inspection report to the motor carrier provider. 

Under §396.11, every motor carrier shall require its drivers to report, and every 

driver shall prepare a report in writing at the completion of each day’s work on 

each vehicle operated, covering at least the following parts and accessories: 

• Service brakes including trailer brake connections; 

• Parking brake; 

• Steering mechanism; 

• Lighting devices and reflectors; 

• Tires; 

• Horns; 

• Windshield wipers; 

• Rear vision mirrors; 

• Coupling devices; 

• Wheels and rims; and 

• Emergency equipment. 

Section 396.11 also specifies other requirements for driver vehicle inspection 

reports, including report content, corrective action, and retention period for 

reports. 

In addition, Part 396 contains rules with respect to periodic inspection; inspector 

qualification; inspection record-keeping requirements; equivalency to periodic 

inspection; and brake inspector qualifications. 

49 CFR Part 571 – Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards  sets forth 

requirements for motor vehicles and motor vehicle equipment. Parts 571.101 

through 571.500 of Subpart B provide the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety 

Standards (FMVSS). These standards are regulations for the manufacture and 

sale of new vehicles and equipment that reflect minimum safety performance SECTION 2: FEDERAL SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  15 

requirements. They are organized under the general headings of “Crash 

Avoidance, “Crashworthiness,” “Post-Crash Standards,” and “Other 

Regulations.” Those FMVSSs applicable to transit buses and OTRBs include the 

following 

• FMVSS No. 101, Controls and Displays—controls must be operable by driver 

with seat belt fastened, and includes requirements for telltales and warning 

indicators; 

• FMVSS No. 102, Transmission shift lever sequence—vehicles equipped with 

automatic transmissions must have transmission braking at vehicle speeds 

below 40 km/h (25 mph); 

• FMVSS No. 103, Defrosting and defogging systems—must have a system; 

• FMVSS No. 104, Windshield wiping and washing—must meet wiper speed 

and windshield washing area per SAE J942; 

• FMVSS No. 106, Brake hoses—air brake hoses must meet performance 

requirements; 

• FMVSS No. 108, Lamps, reflective devices and associated equipment—must 

meet performance and location on vehicle requirements; 

• FMVSS No. 111, Rearview mirror—must have unit magnification mirrors of 

specified size, may have additional mirrors, i.e., convex; 

• FMVSS No. 119, Tires for vehicles with GVWR > 4,536 kg—tires on vehicle 

must meet performance and labeling requirements; 

• FMVSS No. 120, Tire selection and rims and motor home/recreation vehicle 

trailer load carrying capacity information for motor vehicles with GVWR > 

4,536 kg—sum of load ratings of tires must be equal to or greater than the 

gross axle weight ratings to prevent vehicle overloading; 

• FMVSS No. 121, Air brake systems—specifies stopping distance performance 

and that vehicles be equipped with an antilock brake system; 

• FMVSS No. 124, Accelerator control systems—removing force on 

accelerator requires return to idle in specified time; 

• FMVSS No. 205, Glazing materials—glazing must meet performance 

requirements; 

• FMVSS No. 207, Seating systems—driver’s seat must meet performance 

requirements; 

• FMVSS No. 208, Occupant crash protection—driver’s seat must be equipped 

with Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt assembly; 

• FMVSS No. 209, Seat belt assemblies—driver’s belt must meet performance. 

requirements; 

• FMVSS No. 210, Seat belt assembly anchorages—for driver’s belt, must meet 

strength requirements; SECTION 2: FEDERAL SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  16 

• FMVSS No. 217, Emergency exits and window retention—must have 

emergency exits meeting size and location requirements that meet 

performance and labeling requirements; 

• FMVSS No. 302, Flammability of interior materials—must meet burn 

resistance performance requirements; 

• FMVSS Nos. 403 & 404, Platform lift systems for motor vehicles and 

platform lift installations in motor vehicles—operational metrics for platform 

lifts and safety requirements for vehicles so equipped; 

49 CFR Part 614 – Transportation Infrastructure Management  contains 

the FTA regulations that pertain to transportation infrastructure management. 

These regulations require compliance with  23 CFR Part 500 , subparts A and 

B, which implement  23 U.S.C. 303  for state development, establishment, 

and implementation of systems for managing traffic congestion (CMS), public 

transportation facilities and equipment (PTMS), intermodal transportation 

facilities and systems (IMS), and traffic monitoring for highways and public 

transportation facilities and equipment. 

49 CFR Part 655 – Prevention of Alcohol Misuse and Prohibited Drug 

Use in Transit Operations  contains the drug and alcohol testing regulations 

that are specific to the Federal Transit Administration (FTA). These regulations 

establish programs, to be implemented by employers that receive financial 

assistance from FTA (and by contractors of those employers), that are designed 

to help prevent accidents, injuries, and fatalities resulting from the misuse of 

alcohol and use of prohibited drugs by employees who perform safety-sensitive 

functions. Subpart B requires employers to establish an anti-drug use and alcohol 

misuse program, establish an employee education and training program for all 

covered employees, provide written notice to every covered employee and 

to representatives of employee organizations of the employer’s anti-drug and 

alcohol misuse policies and procedures, and notify a covered employee that a 

drug or alcohol test is required by this part before performing a test. Subpart 

C prohibits consumption of marijuana, cocaine, opiates, amphetamines, and 

phencyclidine at all times, and requires an employer to establish a program that 

provides pre-employment, post-accident, reasonable suspicion, random, and 

return to duty/follow-up testing for these prohibited drugs and their metabolites. 

Subpart D prohibits pre-duty, on-duty, and post-accident use of alcohol by 

covered employees who perform safety-sensitive functions, and requires an 

employer to establish a program that provides post-accident, reasonable 

suspicion, random, and return to duty/follow-up testing for alcohol. An employer 

may also conduct pre-employment alcohol testing. Subparts E, F, and G outline 

requirements with regard to the various types of drug and alcohol testing, (e.g., 

pre-employment, reasonable suspicion, post-accident, and random testing), 

testing procedure requirements, and the consequences of a positive drug/ 

alcohol test or the refusal to submit to testing. Subpart H requires an employer SECTION 2: FEDERAL SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  17 

to maintain records of its anti-drug and alcohol misuse program and report 

program results in a management information system (MIS). Under Subpart I, a 

recipient must annually certify compliance with Part 655 as a condition of FTA 

financial assistance. This part must be read in conjunction with  49 CFR Part 40 ,

which contains  the USDOT regulations that pertain to the procedures for drug 

and alcohol testing in the transportation workplace. These regulations cover all 

USDOT modes and specifically define how testing specimens are collected and 

analyzed, as well as the process for reporting results. 

49 CFR Part 663– Pre-Award and Post-Delivery Audits of Rolling 

Stock Purchases  requires FTA, by delegation from the Secretary of 

Transportation, to issue regulations requiring pre-award and post-delivery 

audits when a recipient of Federal financial assistance purchases revenue service 

rolling stock with funds obligated by FTA. A recipient must ensure that (1) a 

pre-award audit is complete before the recipient enters into a formal contract 

for the purchase of rolling stock, and (2) a post-delivery audit is complete before 

title to the rolling stock is transferred to the recipient. An audit under this part 

is limited to verifying compliance with (1) the solicitation specifications of the 

recipient and (2) applicable Buy America requirements, and includes, where 

appropriate, a copy of a manufacturer’s self certification information that the 

vehicle complies with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards or a certification 

that such standards are inapplicable. 

49 CFR Part 665 – Bus Testing  requires an applicant for Federal financial 

assistance for the purchase or lease of buses with funds obligated by the FTA to 

certify to the FTA that any new bus model or any bus model with a major change 

in configuration or components acquired with such assistance has been tested 

in accordance with this part. Testing requirements under Subpart B stipulate 

that a new bus model to be tested at the bus testing facility must (1) be a single 

model, (2) meet all applicable Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards, as defined 

by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, and (3) be substantially 

fabricated and assembled using the techniques, tooling, and materials that will 

be used in production of subsequent buses of that model. If the new bus model 

has not previously been tested at the bus testing facility, then the new bus 

model shall undergo the full testing requirements for maintainability, reliability, 

safety, performance, structural integrity, fuel economy, noise, and emissions 

(these eight tests are described in general terms in Appendix A of Part 665). If 

the new bus model (1) has not previously been tested at the bus testing facility 

and is being produced on a third-party chassis that has been previously tested 

on another bus model at the bus testing facility, or (2) has previously been 

tested at the bus testing facility, but is subsequently manufactured with a major 

change in chassis or components, then the new bus model may undergo partial 

testing. The recipient shall receive the appropriate full bus testing report and any 

applicable partial testing report(s) before final acceptance of the first vehicle by SECTION 2: FEDERAL SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  18 

the recipient. These regulations also outline the rules that must be followed with 

regard to scheduling, fees, transportation of the vehicle, and procedures during 

testing. SECTION 

# 3FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  19 

# State Safety Laws and 

# Regulations 

This section provides a comprehensive overview of transit bus safety legislation 

for each of the 50 states, as well as information on the role of each state DOT in 

regulating the maintenance or operation of transit/paratransit vehicles operated 

by public transit agencies. Not surprisingly, there is wide variety across the 

states with regard to the extent and scope of transit bus safety legislation. While 

California, Florida, Massachusetts, New Jersey, and New York have the most 

far-reaching bus safety laws and regulations, the legislation relating to bus safety 

is relatively limited in Alabama, Alaska, Hawaii, Idaho, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, 

Michigan, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Dakota, and Utah. This might be 

expected, given that the states with wider-ranging bus safety laws generally 

tend to contain more densely populated, urban areas with a history of well-

established transit systems. However, the range of transit bus safety legislation in 

most states falls somewhere in between these two extremes. 

While there are no laws that can be said to apply “across the board,” the 

majority relate to vehicles. Most states (38 out of 50) have laws that prescribe 

minimum requirements for basic equipment, such as lamps and reflectors, turn 

signals, safety glazing, mirrors, and rear fender splash guards; 34 states have laws 

prescribing basic requirements for flares and other warning devices; 26 states 

have laws that set forth vehicle size and weight limitations, and 21 states have 

legal requirements for the maintenance and inspection of vehicles. Generally 

speaking, states with more extensive bus safety laws go into much greater detail 

with regard to vehicle equipment requirements, and are more likely to specify 

requirements with regard to safe operating procedures, operator qualifications 

and training, and policies relating to safety and drug and alcohol testing, although 

states with more limited legislation sometimes prescribe requirements in these 

areas as well. For a summary table of state safety laws and regulations for bus 

transit, please refer to Appendix B. 

# Alabama 

Vehicle Laws 

General Equipment Requirements 

Alabama Code  Section 32-5-240  (d) prescribes requirements for lighting 

equipment and illuminating devices on buses. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  20 

Emergency/Safety Equipment 

Alabama Code  Section 32-5-220  specifies the requirements for certain vehicles, 

including passenger buses, to carry flares or other warning devices, and  Section 

32-5-221  specifies the requirements for the display of warning devices when 

certain vehicles, including passenger buses, are disabled. 

Operational Laws 

Prohibited Operations 

Alabama Code  Section 32-5A-57  prohibits the driver of a truck or bus when 

traveling upon a down grade from coasting with the clutch disengaged. 

State DOT Regulation 

With regard to State DOT regulation of the maintenance or operation of transit/ 

paratransit vehicles operated by public transit agencies, the Alabama Department 

of Transportation (ALDOT), under its own authority, has developed  Safety, 

Security and Emergency Preparedness Plans  (SSEPP) for all public transportation 

provider agencies. Further, ALDOT requires all sub-recipients to either develop 

written maintenance plans for vehicles and ADA accessibility or adopt those 

recommended by equipment manufacturers. Although ALDOT does not require 

annual bus inspections, transit agencies operating as non-profit organizations 

are subject to annual transit bus inspections as required by the Alabama Public 

Service Commission (APSC). 

# Alaska 

Vehicle Laws 

Size and Weight Limitations 

Alaska Statute  17 AAC 28.010  prescribes maximum size limitations, inclusive 

of equipment, of buses; for the determination of size of buses,  17 AAC 28.012 

describes which items qualify as equipment. 

General Equipment Requirements 

Alaska Statute  17 AAC 28.015  prescribes limitations for the physical placement 

of bus equipment. 

Emergency/Safety Equipment 

Alaska Statute  17 AAC 28.025  requires buses, including articulated buses, 

with length greater than forty feet, including equipment, to carry one blanket, 

measuring at least six feet by three feet, for each seat on the bus, and to carry 

two collapsible stretchers. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  21 

Operational Laws 

> Use of Roads and Highways

Alaska Statute  17 AAC 28.020  designates the highways and roads on which 

buses may operate, based on size and type of bus; Alaska Statute  17 AAC 28.025 

requires buses with length greater than forty feet (including equipment) to, if 

multiple lanes are available, use the far right lane except when passing another 

vehicle or preparing for a left turn. 

> Requirements for Larger Buses

Alaska Statute  17 AAC 28.025  requires buses with length greater than forty feet 

(including equipment) to operate with headlights on at all times, and to allow 

queues of five or more following vehicles to pass at the first opportunity during 

operations on highways with two traveling lanes. 

> State DOT Regulation

With regard to State DOT regulation of the maintenance or operation of transit/ 

paratransit vehicles operated by public transit agencies, transit providers submit 

a vehicle maintenance plan to the Alaska Department of Transportation and 

Public Facilities (DOT&PF) for review and approval, and receive a minimum of 

one monitoring review triennially to verify compliance. Passenger Assistance 

Sensitivity and Security (PASS) and Defensive Driving training is made available 

to all drivers, but is not required. Annual vehicle inspections are not required at 

this time. It should be noted that DOT&PF is in the process of evaluating the best 

methods of procurement, leaning toward a cooperative agreement to purchase 

off another state’s vehicle contracts. This will have a great influence on how the 

Department handles standards and specifications. 

# Arizona 

Vehicle Laws 

> General Equipment Requirements

Arizona Revised Statute  28-928  specifies that the following sections (28-929 

through 28-933), relating to clearance and marker lamps, apply to certain 

vehicles, including passenger buses;  28-929  prescribes requirements for 

additional lighting equipment on certain vehicles, including buses;  28-931 

prescribes requirements for lamp and reflector colors;  28-932  prescribes 

requirements for reflector and lamp mountings;  28-933  prescribes requirements 

for reflector and lamp visibility;  28-958.01  requires rear fender splash guards on 

certain vehicles, including buses; and  28-959  requires certain passenger motor 

vehicles, including passenger buses, to be equipped with an approved type of 

safety glass that meets applicable federal safety standards wherever glass is used 

in doors, windows and windshields. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  22 

> Emergency/Safety Equipment

Arizona Revised Statute  28-960  prescribes requirements for flares and other 

warning devices on certain vehicles, including passenger buses, and  28-961 

prescribes requirements for the display of warning devices for certain vehicles, 

including passenger buses, when disabled on the traveled portion of the highway 

or adjacent shoulder. 

Operational Laws 

> Rail Crossing Procedures

Arizona Revised Statute  28-853  prescribes rules and requirements for drivers of 

motor vehicles carrying passengers for hire to stop, look, and listen at all railroad 

crossings, and, when it is safe to proceed, to cross tracks without shifting gears. 

State DOT Regulation 

With regard to state DOT regulation of the maintenance or operation of transit/ 

paratransit vehicles operated by public transit agencies, ADOT requires 5310 

grantees to maintain vehicles based on the manufacturer’s suggested maintenance 

guidelines and establish a maintenance program that, at a minimum, meets 

those guidelines. As evidence that required maintenance has been performed, 

grantees are required to document all vehicle maintenance activities. Prior to 

vehicles being placed in revenue service, ADOT requires that grantees have 

a pre-trip/post-trip inspection program to ensure that safety and operational 

standards are consistently met for each system vehicle. Section 5311 grantees 

are expected to keep maintenance records on a daily basis and must document 

routine maintenance, i.e., oil change, fluids, and tire condition. The vehicle must 

be maintained in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommended maintenance 

standards. Per ADOT Section 5310 Grant Guidebook, upon award of a vehicle, 

grantees commit to comply with required annual vehicle inspections. ADOT’s 

Equipment Services Division (EQS) staff conducts statewide annual vehicle 

inspections. Annual vehicle inspections are a requirement throughout the entire 

useful life and lien period of the vehicle. 

ADOT expects, at a minimum, a transit program to address the following training 

topics and document staff participation: customer service, Passenger Assistance 

Service and Safety training (PASS), the transit system’s policies and procedures, 

first aid and CPR, safety and security, Americans with Disabilities (ADA), 

emergency preparedness and evacuation planning, effects and consequences of 

prohibited drug use, pre-employment and drug/alcohol testing requirements, 

defensive driving, vehicle pre-trip inspection, vehicle maintenance reporting 

procedures, and at least 24 hours of route introduction with an experienced 

driver. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  23 

# Arkansas 

Vehicle Laws 

Size and Weight Limitations 

Arkansas Statute  §27-35-208  prescribes maximum length limitations for certain 

vehicles, including buses. 

General Equipment Requirements 

Arkansas Statute  §27-36-218  prescribes requirements for additional lamps and 

reflectors on certain vehicles, including buses. 

Emergency/Safety Equipment 

Arkansas Statute  §27-37-205  requires certain vehicles, including buses, to carry 

flares or other warning devices, and  §27-37-206  prescribes rules for the display 

of warning devices when certain vehicles, including buses, are disabled on the 

traveled portion of the highway or the adjacent shoulder. 

Window Transparency 

Arkansas Statute  §27-37-306  (b) (2) prescribes requirements for light 

transmission levels for the tinting of side windows immediately behind the driver 

of certain vehicles, including buses. 

State DOT Regulation 

Beyond the regulations set forth by FTA and FMCSA, the Arkansas State 

Highway and Transportation Department (AHTD), in the State Management 

Plan (SMP) under Program Management Monitoring, specifies that, for each of 

the grant programs offered in Arkansas, all sub-recipients are subject to periodic 

(generally yearly) on-site inspections of vehicles. A fulltime employee of AHTD 

coordinates and performs these on-site inspections to ensure that the vehicle is 

maintained to Departments standards. 

# California 

Vehicle Laws 

Size and Weight Limitations 

California Vehicle Code (CVC), Sections  35400-35400.9  prescribe length 

requirements for certain vehicles, including buses; CVC  Section 35554  prescribes 

weight requirements for buses. 

General Equipment Requirements 

Title 13, California Code of Regulations (CCR)  §1085  (d)(2) and (m) prescribe 

load rating and speed requirements for bus tires; 13 CCR  §1087  prescribes SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  24 

requirements for regrooved and recapped tires on buses; 13 CCR  §1257  requires 

buses to be equipped with interior mirrors that give the driver a clear view of 

the interior of the vehicle and any rear and center entrance or exit doors and 

step wells; 13 CCR  §1259  requires every bus to have a safe, effective defroster 

and heating system, and outlines certain requirements for those defrosters 

and heating systems; 13 CCR  §1260  requires buses to provide ventilation that 

is adequate for passengers in any weather; 13 CCR  §1263  requires all buses 

operated during darkness to be equipped with a sufficient number of interior 

lamps to illuminate the interior of the bus without interfering with the driver’s 

vision; 13 CCR  §1266  requires all buses designed for more than 16 passengers 

and the driver to be equipped with at least one guard or bracket if the drive shaft 

extends under the passenger compartment. 

California Vehicle Code (CVC),  Section 24017  requires a transit bus operated by 

a motor carrier that provides public transportation services to be equipped with 

a speedometer that is maintained in good working order; CVC  Section 24608 

prescribes requirements for reflectors on the front and sides for buses 80 or 

more inches in width; CVC  Section 26700  requires every bus, whether publicly or 

privately owned, to be equipped with an adequate windshield; CVC  Section 26709 

requires buses to be equipped with mirrors on both the left- and right-hand 

sides of the vehicle so located as to reflect to the driver a view of the highway 

through each mirror for a distance of at least 200 feet to the rear of the vehicle; 

CVC  Section 26711  requires every bus engaged in urban and suburban service to 

be equipped with movable eyeshades of sufficient size to shade the eyes of the 

operator of a bus or trolley coach while it is being driven facing the sun. 

> Brake Equipment and Performance

California Vehicle Code (CVC),  Section 26311  (6)(b) prescribes brake equipment 

requirements for buses; CVC  Section 26454  (4) prescribes requirements for 

brake performance ability of buses. 

> Emergency/Safety Equipment

California Vehicle Code,  Section 24018  requires every transit bus operated by a 

motor carrier that provides public transportation services to be equipped with 

a two-way communication device that enables the driver to contact the motor 

carrier in the event of an emergency. 

> Wheelchair Equipment

Title 13, California Code of Regulations (CCR)  §1092  prescribes mechanical 

requirements for wheelchair lifts on buses; 13 CCR  §1093  prescribes durability 

requirements for wheelchair lifts on buses; 13 CCR  §1269.1  prescribes 

requirements for equipment on buses used for transporting handicapped persons 

in wheelchairs. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  25 

> Fuel and Exhaust Systems

Title 13, California Code of Regulations (CCR)  §936  prescribes requirements 

for the installation of compressed and liquefied gas fuel systems; 13 CCR  §1261 

prescribes rules for exhaust systems on buses. 

> Signage

Title 13, California Code of Regulations  §1256  requires buses to display in 

the interior and in clear view of passengers a notice prohibiting smoking in 

the vehicle; California Vehicle Code (CVC),  Section 24617  permits, but does 

not require, a transit bus to be equipped with a yield right-of-way sign on the 

left rear of the bus, and requires the sign to be (1) designed to warn a person 

operating a motor vehicle approaching the rear of the bus that the bus is 

entering traffic, and (2) illuminated by a red flashing light when the bus is signaling 

in preparation for entering a traffic lane after having stopped to receive or 

discharge passengers; CVC  Section 25400  specifies that an internally illuminated 

sign emitting not more than 0.25 candela per square inch and possessing copy 

which does not contain a white background may be displayed on each side, but 

not on the front or rear, of a trolley coach or of a bus being operated in urban or 

suburban service. 

> Passenger Compartment and Entrances/Exits

Title 13, California Code of Regulations (CCR)  §1267  prescribes requirements 

governing the entrances and exits of all buses; 13 CCR  §1268  prescribes 

requirements and specifications for emergency exits on buses; 13 CCR  §1269 

prescribes requirements for side windows used as emergency exits on buses. 

> Driver/Passenger Seats

Title 13, California Code of Regulations  §1270  prescribes requirements governing 

driver and passenger seats on buses. 

> Maintenance and Inspection

California Vehicle Code (CVC),  Section 34501  (4)(c) specifies that the 

Department of the California Highway Patrol, at least every 13 months, shall 

inspect every maintenance facility or terminal of any person who at any time 

operates any bus, and if the bus operation includes more than 100 buses, the 

inspection shall be without prior notice; CVC Section  34501.17  (1) requires all 

paratransit vehicles to be regularly and systematically inspected, maintained, 

and lubricated by the owner or operator in accordance with the manufacturer’s 

recommendations, or more often if necessary to ensure the safe operating 

condition of the vehicle, and (2) specifies which vehicle components must be 

inspected. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  26 

Operational Laws 

> Transportation of Passengers

Title 13, California Code of Regulations  §1217  prescribes rules for the 

transportation of passengers with respect to seating capacity, weight, passengers 

occupying step wells, standing passengers, open doors, emergency exits, and 

interior lighting. 

> Rail Crossing Procedures

California Vehicle Code,  Section 22452  prescribes rules requiring the driver of a 

bus that is carrying passengers to stop, look, and listen at all railroad crossings, 

and to cross tracks without shifting gears. 

> Fueling/Refueling

Title 13, California Code of Regulations  §1218  places certain restrictions on 

fueling and refueling. 

Personnel Laws 

> General Qualifications

California Vehicle Code,  Section 12804.6  (a) prohibits a person from operating a 

transit bus transporting passengers unless that person has received a certificate to 

operate a transit bus or is certified to drive a school bus or school pupil activity 

bus pursuant to CVC  Section 12517 , and (b) requires all transit bus drivers to 

comply with standards established in  Section 40083  of the Education Code. 

> Education, Training, and Testing

California Education Code (CEC),  Section 40083 , prescribes rules requiring an 

original applicant for a certificate to drive any bus defined by Section 546 or 642 

of the Vehicle Code to have successfully completed a minimum 35-hour course 

of instruction, consisting of at least 15 hours of classroom instruction and at least 

20 hours of behind-the-wheel training or driving experience, including driving 

vehicles comparable to those vehicles that will be used to transport passengers; 

CEC  Section 40085.5  prescribes rules requiring applicants seeking to renew a 

certificate to drive a transit bus as defined in Section 642 of the Vehicle Code to 

have successfully completed at least eight hours of original or renewal classroom 

instruction, or behind-the-wheel or in-service training during each 12 months of 

certificate validity. 

> Driver Hours of Service

Title 13, California Code of Regulations (CCR)  §1212  prescribes hours of service 

requirements; 13 CCR  §1212.5  prescribes requirements for maximum driving and 

on-duty time. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  27 

Workplace Policy Laws 

> General Policies

Title 13, California Code of Regulations  §1233  (g)(1) requires a motor carrier 

contracting to transport passengers in a bus to give notice to the user of the 

carrier’s most recent safety compliance rating. 

> Recordkeeping

California Vehicle Code, Section  34501.17  (1) requires all owners or operators 

of paratransit vehicles to document the inspection, maintenance, lubrication, and 

repair performed for each vehicle, and (2) prescribes rules for maintaining and 

furnishing the required records. 

State DOT Regulation 

With regard to State DOT regulation of the maintenance or operation of 

transit/paratransit vehicles operated by public transit agencies, Section 8 of the 

CalTrans State Management Plan  (SMP) provides the maintenance requirements 

for all CalTrans grant programs. In addition, CalTrans’ funding agreement 

(Standard Agreement) details the requirements for federally funded property. 

Specifically, it states: “Property Maintenance and Inspection: While the project 

is in the possession or control of the contractor, the contractor shall operate 

or maintain the project in accordance with detailed maintenance and inspection 

schedules provided by the manufacturer, keeping a written log or record of all 

repairs and maintenance. The State and the FTA shall have the right to conduct 

periodic inspections for the purpose of confirming the existence, condition, and 

proper maintenance of the project. No alterations may be made to the project 

in its as-received condition without first receiving written approval from State.” 

CalTrans’ grant application also requires the applicant to describe their agency’s 

vehicle maintenance program, and asks specific questions related to daily pre-trip 

inspections, preventative and routine maintenance, and the agency’s contingency 

plan for backup in the event of equipment failure. Applicants are also required 

to provide the maintenance and inspection forms used to track and log their 

agency’s maintenance and inspections. Although CalTrans does not require 

annual bus inspections, all federally funded vehicles and equipment are monitored 

regularly via the review of the semi-annual vehicle usage report submitted from 

CalTrans agencies. Caltrans staff conducts on-site inspections at least once every 

three years to verify the condition of the vehicles and equipment. Section 8.3.1 

of the  SMP  details the triennial onsite inspection process. 

With regard to driver training and requirements, Caltrans’ policy follows the 

requirements of the California Department of Motor Vehicles for commercial 

driver’s licenses ( SMP , Section 27) and complies with FTA rules and policies 

related to drug and alcohol testing. Caltrans provides technical assistance SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  28 

and training to our grant sub-recipient agencies in a variety of areas so they 

understand the requirements of receiving federal funds. 

# Colorado 

Incorporation of Federal Regulations 

Code of Colorado Regulation  723-6-6102  prescribes the incorporation by 

reference of certain regulations of 49 CFR;  723-6-6103  specifies modifications to 

the regulations of 49 CFR incorporated by reference. 

Vehicle Laws 

Size and Weight Limitations 

Colorado Statute  42-4-502  prescribes maximum width limitations for buses used 

for the transportation of passengers;  42-4-504  prescribes maximum height and 

length limitations for certain vehicles, including passenger buses. 

General Equipment Requirements 

Colorado Statute  42-4-229  prescribes safety glazing requirements for passenger-

type motor vehicles, including passenger buses. 

Emergency/Safety Equipment 

Colorado Statute  42-4-230  (4) prescribes requirements for emergency lighting 

equipment for certain vehicles, including passenger buses. 

Operational Laws 

Rail Crossing Procedures 

Colorado Statute  42-4-707  prescribes rules requiring the driver of a commercial 

vehicle that is transporting passengers to stop, look, and listen at all railroad 

crossings, and to cross tracks without shifting gears. 

Prohibited Operations 

Colorado Statute  42-4-1009  prohibits the driver of a truck or bus from coasting 

with the clutch disengaged when traveling upon a downgrade. 

Personnel Laws 

Pre-employment Screening, Driving Record, 

and Criminal History 

Code of Colorado Regulation  723-6-6105  prescribes rules and requirements for 

fingerprint-based criminal history background checks of passenger carriers. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  29 

State DOT Regulation 

To comply with FTA requirements, the Colorado Department of Transportation 

(CDOT) specifies in its contracts that the grantee must follow the 

manufacturer’s recommended maintenance intervals/activities. CDOT has also 

put together a booklet of examples of preventative maintenance activities and 

schedules for grantees. Annual vehicle inspections are not required; however, 

CDOT  encourages grantees to inspect on a regular basis .

# Connecticut 

Incorporation of Federal Regulations 

Connecticut Statute Sec.  14-163c  stipulates the incorporation by reference, with 

variations and exemptions, of certain regulations of 49 CFR. 

Vehicle Laws 

Vehicle Condition 

Connecticut Statute Sec.  14-26  stipulates that no registration will be issued to 

the owner or lessee of a motor bus unless it is in suitable condition for carrying 

passengers and is equipped as required by law. 

Size and Weight Limitations 

Connecticut Statute Sec.  14-267b  specifies weight restrictions for motor buses. 

General Equipment Requirements 

Connecticut Statute Sec.  14-96f  specifies the requirements for clearance lamps, 

side marker lamps, and reflectors on buses eighty inches or more in overall 

width;  14-97  requires each motor vehicle used to transport passengers for hire 

to be equipped with a defrosting device, in good working order and adequate to 

prevent the accumulation of snow, ice, frost or condensation on the windshield; 

14-104  (b) prescribes requirements for fenders and other wheel protectors on 

certain vehicles, including buses. 

Emergency/Safety Equipment 

Connecticut Statute Sec.  14-97a  (1) requires motor vehicles used to transport 

passengers, when operated on any highway during the period from one-half 

hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise, to carry flares, flaring 

candles, torches, lanterns or other lighting or light reflecting devices designed 

for emergency use, which shall be ready for immediate use, and (2) prescribes 

requirements for the display of such emergency lighting equipment when 

such motor vehicle has become stalled or is in such condition that it cannot 

be operated on the highway; and under  29-313 , no fire extinguisher or fire 

extinguishing device containing an active agent having a level of toxicity equal to 

or greater than the vapors of carbon tetrachloride or chlorobromomethane or SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  30 

the resulting thermal decomposition products shall be used or installed for use 

in any school bus or motor vehicle used for the transportation of passengers for 

hire. 

> Wheelchair Equipment

Connecticut Statute Sec.  14-100a  (e) (2) requires motor buses registered for the 

first time on or after October 1, 2007, that transport individuals who remain 

in wheelchairs while being transported, to install or provide and require the 

use of a device that secures the wheelchair to the motor vehicle’s mechanical 

lift or otherwise prevents an individual in a wheelchair from falling from such 

mechanical lift or motor vehicle. 

> Passenger Compartment and Entrances/Exits

Connecticut Statute Sec.  14-102  requires (1) the passenger compartment in any 

motor vehicle used to transport passengers for hire to give an unobstructed view 

of the interior of the same from any point within the vehicle, and (2) each such 

motor vehicle with a seating capacity of more than seven to have exits on more 

than one side of the vehicle. 

> Maintenance and Inspection

Connecticut Statute Sec.  14-163e  prohibits any motor vehicle or motor carrier 

that is designed or used to transport more than eight passengers, including the 

driver, for compensation, from operating on the highways of Connecticut unless 

it has had a periodic inspection as required under  49 CFR Section 396.17 , during 

the preceding twelve months. 

Operational Laws 

> Transportation of Passengers

Connecticut Statute Sec.  14-273  (a) prohibits a person operating a motor vehicle 

requiring a passenger endorsement from carrying passengers upon the running 

board, mudguard, hood, roof or any exterior portion of such vehicle, and 

prohibits motor buses from carrying more passengers than the seating capacity 

thereof, without a license from the Department of Transportation to carry such 

number of passengers;  14-257  (b) prohibits a person operating a motor vehicle 

used for the transportation of passengers for hire from having seats placed in any 

aisle. 

> Transportation of Passengers with Special Needs

Connecticut Statute Sec.  14-100a  (e) (1) requires any person who transports an 

individual who remains in a wheelchair while being transferred into and out of a 

vehicle to provide and require the use of a device designed to secure individuals 

in wheelchairs while transferring such individuals from the ground to the vehicle 

and from the time the motor vehicle is brought to a stop until such individuals 

are transferred from the vehicle to the ground. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  31 

Rail Crossing Procedures 

Connecticut Statute Sec.  14-250  prescribes rules requiring the driver of a 

commercial vehicle that is transporting passengers to stop, look, and listen at all 

railroad crossings, and to cross tracks without shifting gears. 

Use of Roads and Highways 

Connecticut Statute Sec.  14-230a  prescribes restrictions on use of the left-hand 

lane by motor buses on divided, limited access highways. 

Personnel Laws 

General Qualifications 

Connecticut Statute Sec.  14-44  prescribes general requirements for persons 

operating commercial motor vehicles for passenger transportation, including 

requirements pertaining to age .

Physical/Medical Qualifications 

Connecticut Statute Sec.  14-44  prescribes requirements for persons operating 

commercial motor vehicles for passenger transportation, including requirements 

pertaining to physical examination and medical qualifications. 

Pre-employment Screening, Driving Record, 

and Criminal History 

Connecticut Statute Sec.  14-44  prescribes requirements for persons operating 

commercial motor vehicles for passenger transportation, including requirements 

pertaining to criminal record, fingerprinting, and moral character. 

Driver Hours of Duty 

Connecticut Statute Sec.  14-274  prescribes rules for hours of duty of operators 

of motor vehicles requiring a passenger endorsement. 

# Delaware 

Incorporation of Federal Regulations 

Delaware Code  §4702 - §4708  incorporate, with certain modifications, the 

Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations contained in 49 CFR Parts 387, 390-

393, and 395-397. 

Vehicle Laws 

Size and Weight Limitations 

Under Delaware Code  §4502 , buses operating on roads, streets, and highways 

shall not exceed 45 feet in length. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  32 

> General Equipment Requirements

Delaware Code  §4317  prescribes requirements for metal protectors or 

substantial flexible flaps behind the rearmost wheels of buses and other 

commercial motor vehicles;  §4337  specifies that the following sections 

(4338 through 4342), relating to clearance and marker lamps, reflectors, and 

stoplights, apply to certain vehicles, including passenger buses;  §4338  prescribes 

requirements for additional lighting/reflective equipment on certain vehicles, 

including buses;  §4339  prescribes requirements for the color of clearance lamps, 

side marker lamps, backup lamps, and reflectors on certain vehicles, including 

buses;  §4340  prescribes requirements for the mounting of reflectors, clearance 

lamps, and side marker lamps on certain vehicles, including buses; and  §4341 

prescribes requirements for the visibility of reflectors, clearance lamps, and side 

marker lamps on certain vehicles, including buses. 

Operational Laws 

> Rail Crossing Procedures

Delaware Code  §4163  prescribes rules requiring a driver transporting passengers 

for hire to stop, look, and listen at all railroad crossings, and to cross tracks 

without shifting gears. 

State DOT Regulation 

With regard to State DOT regulation of the maintenance or operation of 

transit/paratransit vehicles operated by public transit agencies, Delaware Transit 

Corporation is a self-regulated, self-inspected entity not regulated by the 

Delaware DOT. It is federally regulated and does report to the FTA. Annual 

vehicle inspections are not required. 

# Florida 

Power to Enforce or Regulate 

Florida Administrative Code, Rules  14-90.012  (2) and (3) require FDOT to 

conduct safety and security reviews of any bus transit system the Department 

believes to be in noncompliance with its System Safety Program Plan (SSPP) or 

Security Program Plan (SPP), or providing passenger service operations in an 

unsafe manner, or if there is evidence of an immediate danger to public safety, 

and to suspend the affected bus transit system service if any deficiency or unsafe 

condition exists, to the extent that the continued operation of the system poses 

an immediate danger or threat to public safety. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  33 

Vehicle Laws 

Strength and Structural Integrity 

Florida Administrative Code, Rules  14-90.007  (1) and (2) prescribe minimum 

standards for bus strength and structural integrity that must be met by every 

bus transit system, and requires manufacturers or bus transit systems to submit 

proof of strength and structural integrity tests on newly procured buses to 

FDOT. 

General Equipment Requirements 

Florida Administrative Code, Rule  14-90.007  prescribes equipment requirements 

with respect to mirrors, wiring and batteries, standee line and warning, handrails 

and stanchions, flooring and steps, tires and wheels, suspension, and steering and 

front axle. 

Brake Equipment and Performance 

Florida Administrative Code, Rule  14-90.007  (3)(c) prescribes rules requiring all 

buses over 22 feet in length (including bumpers) that have a rear exit door to 

be equipped with a rear exit door/brake interlock that automatically applies the 

brake upon driver activation of the rear exit door to the open position. 

Emergency/Safety Equipment 

Florida Administrative Code, Rule  14-90.007  (13) prescribes equipment 

requirements with respect to fire extinguishers and warning devices. 

Wheelchair Equipment 

Florida Administrative Code, Rules  14-90.007  (14) and (15) prescribe 

requirements for buses that transport individuals with disabilities, including safety 

requirements for the installation of the wheelchair lift or ramp and its controls 

and the method of attachment in the bus body or chassis. 

Seatbelts and Child Restraints 

Florida Administrative Code, Rule  14-90.007  (12) requires every bus to be 

equipped with an adjustable driver’s restraining belt in compliance with the 

requirements of FMVSS 209, “Seat Belt Assemblies” 49 C.F.R. 571.209, Rev. 

10/09, and FMVSS 210, “Seat Belt Assembly Anchorages” 49 C.F.R. 571.210, Rev. 

10/09. 

Passenger Compartment and Entrances/Exits 

Florida Administrative Code, Rule  14-90.007  (8) prescribes rules requiring all 

buses to have an emergency exit door, or in lieu thereof, emergency escape 

push-out windows. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  34 

> Maintenance and Inspection

Florida Administrative Code, Rule  14-90.004  (4) requires every bus transit 

system to establish a maintenance plan providing specific assurances, for all 

buses operated;  14-90.009  requires all buses operated by bus transit systems 

and private contract transit providers to be inspected at least annually, and sets 

forth specific requirements with respect to bus safety inspector qualifications, 

safety devices and equipment that must be inspected, safety inspection reports, 

and retention of records of annual safety inspections and documentation of 

any required corrective actions;  14-90.010  requires each bus transit system 

to annually submit a safety and security certification to FDOT for the prior 

calendar year period, attesting to the performance of safety inspections on all 

buses operated by the system; and  14-90.012  requires FDOT (1) to conduct 

inspections of bus transit systems to ascertain compliance with the provisions 

of Chapter 14-90, and (2) to conduct safety and security reviews of any bus 

transit system the Department believes to be in noncompliance with its SSPP 

or SPP, or providing passenger service operations in an unsafe manner, or if 

there is evidence of an immediate danger to public safety;  14-90.004  requires 

every bus transit system to (3)(i) mandate that drivers write and submit a 

daily bus inspection report pursuant to Rule 14-90.006;  14-90.006  prescribes 

requirements with respect to pre-operational or daily inspection and reporting 

of defects and deficiencies likely to affect safe operation or cause mechanical 

malfunctions. 

Operational Laws 

> Transportation of Passengers

Florida Administrative Code, Rule  14-90.006  prescribes requirements with 

respect to operation when any passenger door is in the open position; interior 

lighting during darkness; passengers occupying the stepwells or area forward of 

the standee line; standees, and buses left unattended. 

> Driver Securement

Florida Administrative Code, Rule  14-90.006  requires bus transit systems to 

require the driver to be properly secured to the driver’s seat with a restraining 

belt at all times while the bus is in motion. 

> Fueling/Refueling

Florida Administrative Code, Rule  14-90.006  prescribes requirements with 

respect to fueling in closed buildings and when passengers are being carried. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  35 

Personnel Laws 

General Qualifications 

Florida Administrative Code, Rule  14-90.004  (3) requires every bus transit 

system to establish certain criteria and procedures for the selection and 

qualification of all drivers, including verification and documentation of valid driver 

licenses for all employees who drive buses. 

Physical/Medical Qualifications 

Florida Administrative Code, Rule  14-90.0041  requires bus transit systems to 

establish medical examination requirements for existing drivers and all applicants 

to driver positions (including a pre-employment examination for applicants, an 

examination at least once every two years for existing drivers, and a return to 

duty examination for any driver prior to returning to duty after having been off 

duty for 30 or more days due to an illness, medical condition, or injury), and 

prescribes rules and requirements for the performance and documentation of 

medical examinations. 

Pre-employment Screening, Driving Record, 

and Criminal History 

Florida Administrative Code, Rule  14-90.004  (3) requires every bus transit 

system to establish certain criteria and procedures for the selection, 

qualification, and training of all drivers, including driving and criminal background 

checks meeting minimum hiring standards for all new drivers;  14-90.0041 

requires bus transit systems to establish pre-employment medical examination 

requirements for all applicants to driver positions. 

Education, Training, and Testing 

Florida Administrative Code, Rule  14-90.004  (3) requires every bus transit 

system to provide written operational and safety procedures that address a 

number of specified elements, to all bus drivers before driving on streets or 

highways unsupervised. 

Driver Hours of Duty 

Florida Administrative Code, Rule  14-90.006  prescribes requirements with 

respect to hours of service and impaired driving ability due to fatigue, illness, or 

other causes. 

Disciplinary Action 

Florida Administrative Code, Rule  14-90.006  prescribes requirements with respect 

to suspension, cancellation, or revokation of a driver’s license. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  36 

Workplace Policy Laws 

> Safety/Substance Abuse Programs and Policies

Florida Administrative Code, Rule  14-90.004  (1) requires every bus transit 

system to develop and adopt a System Safety Program Plan (SSPP) that addresses 

specific safety elements, and prescribes specific rules for how the SSPP must 

be developed and adopted;  14-90.004  (1) also requires every bus transit system 

to develop and adopt a Security Program Plan (SPP), adopted separately from 

the SSPP, and prescribes specific rules for how the SPP must be developed and 

adopted;  14-90.004  (3) requires every bus transit system to establish a drug-free 

workplace policy statement in accordance with 49CFR Part 32 and a substance 

abuse management and testing program in accordance with 49 CFR Parts 40 and 

655, October 1, 2009. 

> Accidents and Emergencies

Florida Administrative Code, Rules  14-90.004  (5) and (6) require every bus 

transit system to investigate any event involving a bus or taking place on bus 

transit system property resulting in specific types of fatalities, injuries, or 

property damage, and to document each investigation in a final report that 

includes a description of investigation activities, identified causal factors, and any 

identified corrective action plan. 

> Policy Enforcement

Florida Administrative Code, Rule  14-90.010  requires each bus transit system to 

annually submit a safety and security certification to FDOT for the prior calendar 

year period, attesting to the adoption of and compliance with an SSPP and an SPP 

and reviews of the SSPP and SPP to ensure they are up to date. 

> Recordkeeping

Florida Administrative Code, Rule  14-90.004  (1) requires every bus transit 

system to maintain specific types of records for at least four years; Florida 

Administrative Code,  14-90.004  (7) requires every bus transit system to maintain 

event investigation reports, corrective action plans, and related supporting 

documentation for a minimum of four years from the date of completion of the 

investigation. 

State DOT Regulation 

In addition to the minimum criteria established under the FMVSS, the Florida 

Department of Transportation (FDOT) prescribes standards with regard 

to the following for all transit equipment purchased through Florida Vehicle 

Procurement Program contracts: brake performance; emergency/park brake 

performance; alternator output performance; and air conditioning pull-down 

test standard for leak detection. FDOT will test one or more vehicles from 

each contract within the first year of a contract agreement. If a vehicle fails to SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  37 

meet the performance test, FDOT reserves the right to suspend placement 

of further orders or terminate the contract. Additionally, FDOT reserves the 

right to randomly test new vehicles at any time during the contract period to 

ensure compliance. FDOT also requires body structure prequalification for all 

paratransit buses purchased through Transit Research Inspection Procurement 

Services (TRIPS) Program contracts (including drawing review, frame evaluation, 

material and tubing tests, connection test, and sidewall panel test). All tests 

must be successfully passed before a manufacturer is considered pre-qualified. 

Successful crash and safety performance during side impact and rollover tests is 

also required for the approval of the paratransit vehicles acquired by the State of 

Florida, and an uncompromised residual space concept standard is adopted as a 

pass/fail criterion. These specifications are discussed in greater detail in Section 2 

of the  General Requirements, Conditions, and Contractual Provisions .

# Georgia 

Vehicle Laws 

General Equipment Requirements 

Georgia Statute  §40-8-74  stipulates that retreaded tires shall not be used on the 

front wheels of buses;  §40-8-75  prescribes requirements for certain vehicles, 

including buses, to be equipped with suitable metal protectors or substantial 

flexible flaps on the rearmost wheels to prevent the throwing of dirt, gravel, 

rocks, water, or other materials on the windshields of following vehicles. 

Operational Laws 

Rail Crossing Procedures 

Georgia Statute  §40-6-142  prescribes rules requiring the driver of a bus, whether 

or not operated for hire, to stop, look, and listen at all railroad crossings, and to 

cross tracks without shifting gears. 

Stopping, Standing, and Parking 

Georgia Statute  §40-6-208  prescribes rules for stopping, standing, or parking 

a vehicle in parking lots, parking decks, and other such facilities owned or 

operated by any public transit authority or established for the exclusive purpose 

of providing parking for passengers of rapid rail or public transit buses. 

Prohibited Operations 

Georgia Statute  §40-6-246  prohibits the driver of a truck or bus, when traveling 

upon a downgrade, from coasting with the clutch disengaged. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  38 

State DOT Regulation 

Section 2.3.3 of the 2013  State Management Plan  (SMP) Section 5311 Procedures 

Guide requires all drivers of Section 5311 vehicles to have successfully completed 

Passenger Assistance Sensitivity and Security (PASS) training. Section 2.3.3 also 

states “Vehicle Inspection: GDOT requires that all Section 5311-funded vehicles 

be inspected by the District Public Transportation Coordinators (PTCs) once 

a year, using the Vehicle Inspection Form and process. Vehicles used to provide 

client transportation for their programs are also to be inspected by GDOT 

staff. In preparation of the annual inspection, sub-recipients will complete a 

draft version of the checklist to be presented to the PTC on the date of the 

inspection.” The Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) has no 

maintenance or operational requirements of transit/paratransit vehicles operated 

by public transit agencies; however, language in GDOT contracts with sub-

recipients has general statements dealing with proper maintenance of equipment 

purchased with Federal/State funds. 

# Hawaii 

Incorporation of Federal Regulations 

Hawaii Administrative Rules,  Chapter 19-141  ensures that the State of Hawaii 

complies with the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations as they existed on 

October 1, 2009. 

State DOT Regulation 

Beyond overseeing transit agencies to ensure compliance with FTA rules and 

regulations, the Hawaii Department of Transportation (HDOT) does not 

regulate the maintenance or operation of transit/paratransit vehicles operated by 

public transit agencies. Annual bus inspections are not required; however, HDOT 

conducts random bus inspections annually as prescribed under the FTA Section 

5310/5311 programs. It should be noted that Hawaii is in the early stages of 

addressing the requirements of the bus safety oversight program required under 

MAP 21. 

# Idaho 

Vehicle Laws 

General Equipment Requirements 

Idaho Statute  49-909  prescribes requirements for additional lighting equipment 

on buses;  49-949  prescribes requirements for fenders or covers over the rear 

wheels of buses. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  39 

Emergency/Safety Equipment 

Idaho Statute  49-952  prescribes requirements for certain vehicles, including 

buses, to carry flares or other warning devices;  49-953  specifies the 

requirements for display of warning devices when certain vehicles, including 

passenger buses, are disabled. 

State DOT Regulation 

Beyond federal requirements, the Idaho Department of Transportation (IDOT) 

does not regulate the maintenance or operation of transit/paratransit vehicles 

operated by public transit agencies. Annual bus inspections are not required. 

# Illinois 

Incorporation of Federal Regulations 

Illinois Administrative Code, Title 92,  Part 382  incorporates certain sections of 

49 CFR Part 382  as they were in effect on October 1, 2006 in order to establish 

programs designed to help prevent accidents and injuries resulting from the 

misuse of alcohol or use of controlled substances by drivers. 

Vehicle Laws 

General Equipment Requirements 

Illinois Administrative Code, Title 92,  Part 393  stipulates the incorporation by 

reference, with certain exceptions, of the regulations of  49 CFR 393  to prescribe 

the requirements for the parts and accessories necessary for safe operation of a 

commercial motor vehicle in Illinois. 

Emergency/Safety Equipment 

Illinois Compiled Statutes 625 ILCS 5 Illinois Vehicle Code,  Section 12-605.1 

requires buses operated as a part of any local mass transit system in Illinois to be 

equipped with radio facilities permitting two-way vocal communications between 

the bus and a local transit control office. 

Maintenance and Inspection 

Illinois Administrative Code  Section 396.2010  prescribes the requirements 

for the inspection, repair and maintenance of commercial motor vehicles in 

Illinois; Illinois Compiled Statutes 625 ILCS 5 Illinois Vehicle Code,  Section 

13-101  requires every owner of a second division vehicle (defined in  Section 

1-217  to include vehicles designed for carrying more than 10 persons), before 

operating the vehicle upon the highways of Illinois, to submit it to a “safety test” 

as set forth in  Section 13-109 , which sets forth that (a) safety tests must be 

conducted at an official testing station within 6 months prior to application for 

registration and subsequently at least every 6 months, and according to schedules SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  40 

established by rules and regulations promulgated by the Department, and that 

any component subject to regular inspection which is damaged in a reportable 

accident must be reinspected before the bus is returned to service, (g) if a test 

shows that a second division vehicle is not in safe mechanical condition, it shall 

not be operated until it has been repaired and submitted to a retest at an official 

testing station. 

Operational Laws 

> Operating Speeds

Illinois Compiled Statutes 625 ILCS 5 Illinois Vehicle Code,  Section 11-601  (f) 

prescribes maximum speed limits for buses operating outside an urban district. 

> Prohibited Operations

Illinois Compiled Statutes 625 ILCS 5 Illinois Vehicle Code,  Section 11-1410  (b) 

prohibits the driver of a truck or bus when traveling upon a downgrade from 

coasting with the clutch disengaged. 

Personnel Laws 

> General Qualifications

Illinois Administrative Code  Part 383  stipulates the incorporation by reference, 

with certain exceptions, of the regulations of  49 CFR 383  to help reduce or 

prevent truck and bus accidents, fatalities, and injuries by requiring drivers to 

have a single commercial motor vehicle driver’s license and by disqualifying 

drivers who operate commercial motor vehicles in an unsafe manner. 

> Driver Hours of Duty

Illinois Administrative Code  Part 395  stipulates the incorporation by reference, 

with certain exceptions, of the regulations of  49 CFR 395  to prescribe the hours-

of-service requirements for drivers of commercial motor vehicles in Illinois. 

Workplace Policy Laws 

> Safety/Substance Abuse Programs and Policies

Illinois Administrative Code  Part 340  stipulates the incorporation by reference, 

with certain exceptions, of the regulations of  49 CFR 40  to prescribe the 

procedures for transportation workplace drug and alcohol testing programs. 

State DOT Regulation 

The Illinois Department of Transportation (IDOT) regulates rural public transit 

providers via annual site visits and periodic in-depth program reviews. The 

authorization to impose guidelines and requirements is found in IDOT’s sub-

recipient grant contract agreement. IDOT requires rural transit providers to SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  41 

have their vehicles tested at the state safety lane every 6 months. During the 

annual site visit, a sample of vehicles are inspected for overall exterior and 

interior condition, lights, horn, lift, lift interlock, and safety equipment. 

# Indiana 

Vehicle Laws 

Size and Weight Limitations 

Indiana Codes  9-20-8-1  and and  9-20-8-2  contain special size and weight 

restrictions for buses. 

General Equipment Requirements 

Indiana Code  9-19-6-7  specifies the requirements for lights, reflectors, and 

turn signals on passenger buses;  IC 9-21-7-3  requires certain vehicles, including 

passenger buses, to display clearance and marker lamps, reflectors, and stop 

lights as required under  IC 9-19-6-7  when operated upon a highway, and specifies 

times during which the required lamp equipment must be lighted. 

Emergency/Safety Equipment 

Indiana Code  9-19-5-6  specifies the requirements for emergency warning 

equipment on passenger buses. 

State DOT Regulation 

Through Indiana’s  State Management Plan , INDOT requires grantees to perform 

preventive maintenance as recommended by the equipment manufacturer. 

As part of INDOT’s compliance review process, intervals for preventive 

maintenance are reviewed and calculated to ensure that a minimum 80% are 

performed on time (within +/- 10 percent of the established mileage interval for 

a given vehicle). As a condition of accepting Section 5311 vehicles, grantees must 

maintain in operative condition those features of vehicles that are required to 

make the vehicles readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities. 

Annual vehicle inspections are not required. 

# Iowa 

Vehicle Laws 

Size and Weight Limitations 

Iowa Code  321.457  prescribes maximum length limitations for buses .SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  42 

Operational Laws 

Rail Crossing Procedures 

Iowa Code  321.343  prescribes rules requiring the driver of a motor vehicle 

carrying passengers for hire to stop, look, and listen at all railroad crossings 

before proceeding. 

State DOT Regulation 

Beyond federal requirements, the Iowa Department of Transportation (IDOT) 

does not regulate the maintenance or operation of transit/paratransit vehicles 

operated by public transit agencies. Annual vehicle inspections are not required. 

# Kansas 

Vehicle Laws 

General Equipment Requirements 

Statute 8-1710  of the Kansas Statutes Annotated (K.S.A.) prescribes 

requirements for additional lighting equipment on certain vehicles, including 

buses. 

Emergency/Safety Equipment 

Statute 8-1722 K.S.A.  contains requirements for  vehicular hazard warning lamps 

on certain vehicles, including buses. 

Operational Laws 

Rail Crossing Procedures 

Article 36-26  of the Kansas Administrative Regulations (K.A.R.) prescribes rules 

requiring certain vehicles, including commercial buses, to stop at all railroad 

grade crossings. 

State DOT Regulation 

Beyond the regulations set forth by 49 CFR, the Kansas Department of 

Transportation (KDOT) does not regulate the maintenance or operation of 

transit/paratransit vehicles operated by public transit agencies. Annual vehicle 

inspections are not required. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  43 

# Kentucky 

Vehicle Laws 

Vehicle Condition 

Section 4 of  601 Kentucky Administrative Regulations (KAR) 1:005  requires that 

(1) buses be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition so that the health of 

passengers will not be impaired. 

Size and Weight Limitations 

603 KAR 5:071  sets the maximum dimension limits for buses; Kentucky Revised 

Statute  (KRS) 189.265  contains height, length, and weight limits for motor buses 

on designated highways. 

Maintenance and Inspection 

603 KAR 5:072  sets forth the requirement that buses undergo a safety inspection 

at least once each year;  KRS 281.755  states that the Department of Kentucky 

State Police, or any other peace officer designated by the department, may at 

any time or place make an inspection of any motor vehicle operating under the 

provisions of  Chapter 281  to ascertain whether or not any provision of Chapter 

281 or any order or rule or regulation of the Department relating to such motor 

vehicles has been violated. 

Operational Laws 

General Operational Requirements 

Section 4 of  601 KAR 1:005  requires  bus operators to take into consideration 

the health and welfare of passengers and control operations in the public 

interest. 

Transportation of Passengers 

KRS 281.735  prescribes rules prohibiting overcrowding in the various types of 

motor vehicles carrying passengers for hire. 

Transportation of Passengers with Special Needs 

603 KAR 7:080 establishes procedures governing the human service delivery 

program on behalf of the Coordinated Transportation Advisory Committee 

(CTAC) and the procedures required to provide efficient, safe, and coordinated 

transportation delivery to clients of the human service transportation delivery 

program. 

Rail Crossing Procedures 

KRS 281.745  prescribes rules requiring motor vehicles used in the transportation 

of passengers for hire to stop at all railroad grade crossings. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  44 

Baggage 

Section 4 of  601 KAR 1:005  requires baggage to be placed so as not to interfere 

with the driver or with the safety and comfort of passengers. 

# Louisiana 

Vehicle Laws 

General Equipment Requirements 

Louisiana Revised Statutes (RS)  32:308  prescribes rules for additional equipment 

required on certain vehicles, including buses. 

Brake Equipment and Performance 

RS 32:342  contains the requirements for the performance ability of brakes for 

various vehicle classifications, including buses. 

Emergency/Safety Equipment 

RS 32:367  specifies  the requirements for certain vehicles, including passenger 

buses, to carry flares or other warning  devices;  RS 32:368  specifies  the 

requirements for display of warning devices when certain vehicles, including 

passenger buses, are disabled. 

Operational Laws 

Rail Crossing Procedures 

RS 32:173.1  prescribes rules requiring buses transporting passengers to stop at all 

railroad grade crossings. 

Stopping, Standing, and Parking 

RS 32:369  specifies requirements for the use of red flags in parking certain 

vehicles, including passenger buses. 

State DOT Regulation 

Beyond the regulations set forth by 49 CFR, the Kansas Department of 

Transportation (KDOT) has no maintenance or operational requirements 

of transit/paratransit vehicles operated by public transit agencies. Per the 

Louisiana State Management Plan, transit buses must be inspected in January of 

every year and all providers are required to provide monthly maintenance and 

ridership reports, which are reviewed by program managers. Any other bus 

safety/operational/maintenance standards are per provider and/or manufacturer 

requirements. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  45 

# Maine 

Incorporation of Federal Regulations 

Maine Revised Statutes, Title 29-A  §555  stipulates the incorporation by 

reference, with variations and exemptions, of certain regulations of 49 CFR. 

Vehicle Laws 

General Equipment Requirements 

Maine Revised Statutes, Title 29-A  §2390  (2) sets forth equipment-related 

conditions that must be met in order for articulated buses to be operated. 

Operational Laws 

Rail Crossing Procedures 

Maine Revised Statutes, Title 29-A  §2076  prescribes rules requiring the driver of 

a bus carrying passengers for hire to stop, look, and listen at all railroad crossings 

for an approaching train and proceed cautiously after ascertaining that no train is 

approaching. 

Personnel Laws 

General Qualifications 

Maine Revised Statutes, Title 29-A  §1304  (3) requires that applicants for learner’s 

permits for the operation of a bus must be at least 21 years of age and must pass 

a knowledge test on the safe operation of a bus. 

Physical/Medical Qualifications 

Maine Revised Statutes, Title 29-A  §1304  (3) requires that applicants for learner’s 

permits for the operation of a bus must pass a vision test. 

Education, Training, and Testing 

Maine Revised Statutes, Title 29-A  §1304  (3) requires that applicants for learner’s 

permits for the operation of a bus must pass a knowledge test on the safe 

operation of a bus, and, while operating a bus on a public way, must not carry 

passengers and must be accompanied by a licensed bus operator who has at least 

one year of bus driving experience, is at least 22 years of age, and occupies a seat 

in the immediate vicinity of the driver. 

Workplace Policy Laws 

Accidents and Emergencies 

Maine Revised Statutes, Title 29-A  §2251  (4) stipulates that a law enforcement 

officer who investigates an accident involving a bus or truck with a gross vehicle SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  46 

weight rating or a registered weight in excess of 10,000 pounds that results in 

the death of any person shall request a certified accident reconstructionist and 

the Bureau of State Police Commercial Vehicle Enforcement Unit to assist in the 

investigation of the accident. The Attorney General shall designate an assistant 

attorney general familiar with federal commercial vehicle laws and regulations to 

serve as a resource to any district attorney who initiates a prosecution arising 

from an accident involving a bus or truck with a gross vehicle weight rating or 

a registered weight in excess of 10,000 pounds that results in the death of any 

person. 

State DOT Regulation 

Through Maine’s  State Management Plan , MaineDOT requires sub-recipients 

and direct recipients that receive FTA funds to maintain buses to manufacturer 

specifications and keep them in good running order for their useful life. 

MaineDOT performs maintenance reviews every three years and random 

inspections as necessary, and requires transit agencies to provide driver training, 

use certified mechanics, and perform pre & post trip inspections. MaineDOT 

develops vehicle specifications & purchases all vehicles using best value bidding. 

All vehicles are required to undergo annual inspections, per contractual 

agreements between MaineDOT and the sub-recipients. 

# Maryland 

Incorporation of Federal Regulations 

Code of Maryland Regulations  (COMAR) 11.21.01  incorporates, with certain 

amendments and exemptions, the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations 

contained in 49 CFR 40, 382, 383, 387, 390–393, 395–399, and 1572. 

Vehicle Laws 

> General Equipment Requirements

COMAR 11.14.04  prescribes equipment safety standards for certain vehicles, 

including commercial buses. These include standards for steering, alignment, 

and suspension; wheels and tires; bumpers and rear metal frame; rear wheel 

protector flaps; fenders; body and sheet metal; interior equipment; mirrors; 

vehicle glazing; windshield wipers and washers; hood and catches; doors, handles, 

and latches; floor and trunk pans; speedometer and odometer; and load covers. 

> Brake Equipment and Performance

COMAR 11.14.04  prescribes brake equipment and performance standards for 

certain vehicles, including commercial buses. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  47 

Emergency/Safety Equipment 

COMAR 11.14.04  prescribes emergency equipment safety standards for certain 

vehicles, including commercial buses. 

Fuel and Exhaust Systems 

COMAR 11.14.04  prescribes safety standards for fuel and exhaust systems on 

certain vehicles, including commercial buses. 

Lighting and Electrical Systems 

COMAR 11.14.04  prescribes safety standards for lighting and electrical systems 

on certain vehicles, including commercial buses. 

Maintenance and Inspection 

COMAR 11.22.03  prescribes preventive maintenance standards for certain 

vehicles, including passenger buses. These include standards for alignment; 

suspension; steering; brake systems; tires; wheels, rims, lock rings, studs, 

and nuts; accelerator pedal and air throttle; fuel storage and delivery system; 

exhaust system; universal joints and u-clamps; frame, body, and sheet metal; 

lighting; electrical equipment; emergency equipment; seats and seat belts; sun 

visor; mirrors; glazing; windshield wipers and washers; defroster; automatic 

transmission gear selector/neutral safety switch; speedometer and odometer; 

brake and clutch pedal; and horn. 

State DOT Regulation 

The Maryland Transit Administration (MTA), which is not regulated by Maryland 

DOT, does not regulate the maintenance or operation of transit/paratransit 

vehicles operated by public transit agencies; however, MTA has developed fleet 

management plans and standard operating procedures (SOP) based on APTA 

standards, Federal Motor Carrier Standards, and best practices. Although annual 

vehicle inspections are not required, MTA has a preventive maintenance plan and 

SOPs for inspections. 

# Massachusetts 

Incorporation of Federal Regulations 

Under  220 CMR Section 155.04 , the Department of Public Utilities adopts the 

federal regulations, 49 CFR 390-397, including Sub-chapter B, Appendix G, as 

related to the inspection of Commercial Motor Vehicles or any related activity. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  48 

Vehicle Laws 

> Vehicle Condition

220 CMR Section 155.02  (21) requires every motor bus to be constructed and 

maintained as to have ample strength in the judgment of the Department of 

Public Utilities to safely carry its maximum load, and grants the Department the 

authority to require that proof of certain strength tests be submitted by the 

carrier of manufacturer. 

> Size and Weight Limitations

220 CMR Section 155.02  (20) prescribes maximum limitations on the dimensions 

and weight of buses. 

> General Equipment Requirements

Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 90,  Section 13  requires that buses having 

a seating capacity of more than seven passengers, except those that are equipped 

with positive spring-loaded air parking brakes, to be equipped with one pair of 

approved wheel safety chock blocks. 

> Emergency/Safety Equipment

220 CMR Section 155.02  (24) requires every motor bus to be provided with 

a ignition lock and key, or other safety device, to prevent it from being set in 

motion by unauthorized persons. 

> Window Transparency

220 CMR Section 155.02  (29) prohibits owners/operators from displaying ad 

wrap material on the passenger side windows of a bus. 

> Driver/Passenger Seats

220 CMR Section 155.02  (25) prescribes requirements for seats and aisles. 

> Maintenance and Inspection

220 Code of Massachusetts Regulations  (CMR) Section 155.02  (1) prescribes 

preliminary requirements for operation, including the condition that motor 

buses, in order to obtain the permit necessary to operate, must first undergo an 

inspection;  220 CMR Section 155.02  (22) stipulates that every motor bus shall 

be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition and, along with all maintenance 

and repair records, shall be subject to inspection at any time by the Department 

or its representatives;  220 CMR Section 155.03  contains the required protocol 

for the inspection of commercial passenger motor vehicles, and specifies the 

equipment and features that must be examined; under  M.G.L. 161B Section 6 

(i), the Massachusetts Department of Public Utilities is the designated safety 

oversight agency for all MA regional transit authorities; this program includes 

comprehensive vehicle inspections. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  49 

> Vehicle Out of Service

220 CMR Section 155.05  prescribes out-of-service criteria for commercial 

passenger motor vehicles, including the steps that will be taken if a Department 

inspector finds a vehicle to be unsafe according to the current North American 

Uniform Vehicle Out-of-service Criteria. 

Operational Laws 

> Use of Mobile Electronic Devices

Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 90,  Section 12A  prescribes rules 

prohibiting the operator of a vehicle used in public transportation, including a 

passenger bus, from using a mobile telephone, hands-free mobile telephone, or 

other mobile electronic device while operating such vehicle;  220 CMR Section 

155.02  (12)(b) prohibits Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority (MBTA) 

operators from any use of any electronic device while on duty. 

> Transportation of Passengers

220 CMR Section 155.02  (14) requires drivers to always stop at the right side 

of a highway or in an area provided for receiving and discharging passengers, or 

the best possible location where passengers may depart safely from the bus; 

220 CMR Section 155.02  (16) prohibits any person from riding on the bumpers, 

fenders, or steps of the bus;  220 CMR Section 155.02  (17) stipulates that the 

driver of a bus must not allow passengers to occupy positions which obstruct his 

clear view ahead or on either side;  220 CMR Section 155.02  (26) prescribes rules 

for carrying standees. 

> Rail Crossing Procedures

220 CMR Section 155.02  (19) prescribes rules requiring the driver of a motor 

bus to stop, look, and listen at all railroad crossings, and to cross tracks without 

shifting gears. 

> Attention to Duty

220 CMR Section 155.02  (12)(a) prescribes attention-to-duty requirements that 

prohibit drivers from (1) collecting fares, making change, or receiving/discharging 

passengers while the bus is in motion, (2) having a lighted cigarette, cigar, or pipe 

in possession while passengers are being carried, and (3) drinking intoxicating 

beverages or taking any drug or medication which would adversely affect driving 

ability. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  50 

Stopping, Standing, and Parking 

Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 90,  Section 13  requires safety chock 

blocks to be securely placed around the rear wheel of the vehicle whenever 

the bus is left unattended by the operator and is parked on a way, on a grade 

sufficient to cause it to move of its own momentum;  220 CMR Section 155.02 

(18) requires drivers to lock the ignition and set the ratchet or other holding 

brake device before leaving the bus. 

Prohibited Operations 

220 CMR Section 155.02  (2) stipulates that no motor bus shall be operated over 

any bridge or culvert after a determination that such bridge or culvert is unsafe; 

220 CMR Section 155.02  (15) stipulates that before descending a long steep 

grade, a bus driver must first test the brakes and then downshift to the proper 

gear to keep the bus in safe control while descending;  220 CMR Section 155.02 

(27) states that no motor bus shall be operated with a trailer. 

Baggage 

220 CMR Section 155.02  (28) prohibits the carrying of express or baggage 

matter which would interfere with the safety of operation. 

Requirements for Larger Buses 

Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 90,  Section 19  prohibits a motor bus with 

an outside width greater than 45 feet, or in the case of an articulated bus, sixty 

feet, from operating on any way without a special permit from the board or 

officer in charge of such way. 

Personnel Laws 

General Qualifications 

220 CMR Section 155.02  (10)(a) prescribes general requirements for bus drivers’ 

certificates, including age requirements, driver’s license requirements, and 

certificate renewal. 

Physical/Medical Qualifications 

220 CMR Section 155.02  (10) prescribes requirements for bus drivers’ 

certificates with regard to physical examinations. 

Pre-employment Screening, Driving Record, 

and Criminal History 

220 CMR Section 155.02  (10) prescribes requirements for bus drivers’ 

certificates with regard to review of driving records. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  51 

Education, Training, and Testing 

220 CMR Section 155.02  (10) prescribes requirements for bus drivers’ 

certificates with regard to operating examinations. 

Driver Hours of Duty 

220 CMR Section 155.02  (11) prescribes hours of service requirements. 

Workplace Policy Laws 

Accidents and Emergencies 

220 CMR Section 155.02  (9) prescribes requirements for accident reporting. 

State DOT Regulation 

While the Massachusetts Department of Transportation (MassDOT) requests 

information about maintenance procedures and provides general guidance, 

MassDOT does not regulate the maintenance or operation of transit or 

paratransit vehicles operated by public agencies; this responsibility usually falls 

to the Department of Public Utilities (DPU). The DPU is the designated safety 

oversight agency for all Massachusetts regional transit authorities as stipulated 

in Massachusetts General Law  (M.G.L.) 161B Section 6  (i). This program 

includes comprehensive inspections of each transit bus in an authority’s fleet 

at least annually. In addition, the Department investigates accidents, offers 

recommendations where necessary, and reviews equipment and driver training 

records. 

# Michigan 

Vehicle Laws 

Maintenance and Inspection 

Michigan Administrative Code  R 474.103  requires an applicant for certificate of 

authority to permit a safety inspection of motor buses to be used in the provision 

of proposed services;  R 474.105  requires satisfactory completion of a safety in -

spection for renewal of certificate of authority. 

Personnel Laws 

Physical/Medical Qualifications 

Michigan Administrative Code  R 257.854  prescribes the rules for endorsement 

to operate a bus for applicants or licensees who have experienced episodic and 

other conditions. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  52 

Workplace Policy Laws 

Accidents and Emergencies 

Michigan Administrative Code  R 474.106  requires an applicant for certificate of 

authority to provide the Michigan Department of Transportation (MDOT) with 

notice of any vehicle accident involving the applicant’s services. 

State DOT Regulation 

With regard to State DOT regulation of the maintenance or operation of transit/ 

paratransit vehicles operated by public transit agencies, MDOT’s Office of 

Passenger Transport (OPT) creates bus specifications, by contract, for a series 

of classes which include small, medium, and medium heavy buses. Within the 

specifications are safety items that shall be included with each bus from the 

dealer. Transit agencies are required by contract to maintain vehicles throughout 

their useful life. This maintenance must conform to the manufacturers’ 

recommendations for service and service intervals. In addition, agencies are 

required to submit a vehicle maintenance plan (maintenance policy statement, 

daily inspections, safety inspections, record keeping, routine service and 

maintenance schedules) to the MDOT for review and approval. Project managers 

from MDOT OPT conduct on-site reviews of each agency’s vehicle maintenance 

program. During this review, the project manager selects a random sample (20 

percent up to ten vehicles) of the agency’s vehicle fleet and conducts a visual 

vehicle inspection along with a review of the vehicle’s maintenance records. 

Findings are compared with the agency’s maintenance plan, as approved by 

MDOT, to confirm proper maintenance of federal- and state-funded vehicles. 

# Minnesota 

Vehicle Laws 

Vehicle Condition 

Minnesota Rule  8840.5940*  (Subpart 3) stipulates that Special Transportation 

Service (STS) vehicles must not have holes that admit exhaust gases; (Subpart 

4) requires that doors and windows on STS vehicles must open and close as 

intended by the manufacturer. 

Size and Weight Limitations 

Minnesota Statute  169.80  (d) prescribes maximum width limitations for 

passenger motor buses operated exclusively in a city or contiguous cities in 

Minnesota;  169.81  prescribes height and length limitations for double-deck and 

articulated buses. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  53 

Strength and Structural Integrity 

Minnesota Rule  8840.5940*  (Subpart 1) prescribes construction standards for 

STS vehicles with regard to rollover protection and roof crush resistance. 

General Equipment Requirements 

Minnesota Rule  8840.5940*  (Subpart 5) requires that the door height of STS 

vehicles must conform to the requirements of Code of Federal Regulations, title 

49, section 38.25, paragraph (c). 

Brake Equipment and Performance 

Minnesota Statute  169.67  prescribes brake performance standards for different 

vehicle classifications, including buses. 

Emergency/Safety Equipment 

Minnesota Statute  169.75  prescribes requirements for the provision and use of 

flares, flags, or reflectors on certain vehicles, including buses. 

Wheelchair Equipment 

Any vehicle with a wheelchair securement device must meet the standards 

outlined in Minnesota Rules  Chapter 7450 , regardless of size. Minnesota Rule 

8840.5925*  contains requirements for STS vehicle safety equipment, seats, 

ramps, wheelchair lifts, and securement devices;  8840.5975*  contains standards 

for STS vehicle and wheelchair lift maintenance. 

Passenger Compartment and Entrances/Exits 

Minnesota Rule  8840.5940*  (Subpart 2) prescribes requirements for emergency 

exits in STS vehicles. 

Maintenance and Inspection 

Under Minnesota Statutes  §169.781 , all commercial motor vehicles, including 

buses, must undergo annual inspection either by the Minnesota State Patrol or 

a duly certified mechanic. Inspection of vehicles with a wheelchair securement 

device must ensure compliance with the standards outlined in Minnesota Rules 

Chapter 7450 , regardless of size. Minnesota Rule  8840.5975*  contains standards 

for STS vehicle and wheelchair lift maintenance. 

Minnesota Rule  8840.5400*  contains requirements, including vehicle inspection, 

for certification of compliance for STS providers; Minnesota Administrative Rule 

8840.5650*  requires inspection of vehicles as part of the mandatory annual 

evaluation of Special Transportation Services (STS) providers; Minnesota Statute 

§174.30*  contains operating standards for STS, including rules for provider 

responsibilities regarding safety and inspection of vehicles and equipment. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  54 

Operational Laws 

Rail Crossing Procedures 

Minnesota Statute  169.28  prescribes rules requiring the driver of a motor vehicle 

carrying passengers for hire to stop, look, and listen at all railroad crossings, and 

to cross tracks without shifting gears. 

Transportation of Passengers with Special Needs 

Minnesota Statute  §174.30*  contains operating standards for STS, including rules 

for wheelchair securement. Minnesota Rule  8840.5950*  contains standards for 

STS vehicle operation. 

Personnel Laws 

General Qualifications 

Minnesota Rule  8840.5900*  prescribes rules for STS driver qualifications, 

including ability to inspect vehicle and assist passengers, driver’s license, age and 

experience, and provider responsibilities. 

Physical/Medical Qualifications 

Minnesota Rule  8840.5900*  prescribes rules for STS driver qualifications, 

including physical qualifications. 

Pre-employment Screening, Driving Record, 

and Criminal History 

Minnesota Rule  8840.5900*  prescribes rules for STS driver qualifications, 

including driving record and criminal record requirements. 

Education, Training, and Testing 

Minnesota Statute  169.306  (b) and (c) require drivers of buses being operated 

on the shoulder to have adequate training so as to comply with the operating 

requirement that buses being operated on the shoulder may not exceed the 

speed of main-line traffic by more than 15 miles per hour and may never exceed 

35 miles per hour, and that buses being operated on the shoulder must yield 

to merging, entering, and exiting traffic and must yield to other vehicles on the 

shoulder. Minnesota Statute  §174.30*  contains operating standards for STS, 

including rules certification of special transportation providers. Minnesota 

Rule  8840.5640*  prescribes rules for initial STS provider education, including 

requirements for sources and topics;  8840.5650*  and  8840.5700*  outline the 

requirements for annual evaluation of STS providers;  8840.5910*  contains 

requirements for STS driver and attendant training;  8840.6200*  prescribes rules 

for the certification of STS training courses and instructors; and  8840.6250* 

prescribes rules for audit of STS training courses. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  55 

Workplace Policy Laws 

> Policy Enforcement

Minnesota Rule  8840.5800*  prescribes the procedures for enforcement of STS 

requirements, including violations, suspensions, revocations, and cancellations. 

> Recordkeeping

Minnesota Rule  8840.6100*  prescribes rules for STS provider recordkeeping. 

*In addition to the requirements for the maintenance and inspection of 

vehicles under commercial motor vehicle requirements, Minnesota has 

a unique set of statutes and rules that pertain to Special Transportation 

Services (STS). STS certification is required for operators who primarily 

serve elderly and disabled passengers in a private setting, not necessarily 

public transit, using vehicles equipped with wheelchair lifts or ramps. 

Rural public transit operators are not contractually required to obtain 

STS certification unless they choose to. Some do choose to go through 

a formal STS certification process, but almost all generally observe 

the STS rules and regulations as they are viewed as a good set of risk 

management policies. 

State DOT Regulation 

With regard to State DOT regulation of the maintenance or operation of 

transit/paratransit vehicles operated by public transit agencies, Minnesota 

Department of Transportation (MnDOT) sub-recipients receive both FTA and 

state funding to operate transit systems; as such, they are obligated to conform 

to federal and state requirements. Minnesota Rules Part  8835.0260  enumerates 

the contents of the Management Plan which asks for a description of how a 

transit agency’s program is operated. The Management Plan is incorporated 

into the Annual Grant Contract which creates the contractual obligation to 

adhere to the Plan. For more details, please see the  Annual Management Plan 

Instruction Workbook . Rural public transit vehicles are purchased through the 

Minnesota Cooperative Vehicle Program. The State issues RFPs for vehicles 

with specifications that meet the needs of rural public operators. Any proposal 

deemed responsive is available for transit operators to choose vehicles. The 

entire process is managed through the State of Minnesota to ensure compliance 

with both state and federal procurement policies, as well as the required vehicle 

standards. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  56 

# Mississippi 

Vehicle Laws 

General Equipment Requirements 

Mississippi Code  §63-7-15  contains additional lighting requirements for certain 

vehicles, including buses;  §63-7-23  prescribes requirements for the color of 

lighting devices on certain vehicles, including buses;  §63-7-29  (4) prescribes 

requirements for the color of reflectors on certain vehicles, including buses. 

Emergency/Safety Equipment 

Mississippi Code  §63-7-69  contains requirements and standards for warning 

and safety appliances for trucks and buses; and  §63-7-71  prescribes rules for the 

display of warning and safety appliances for trucks and buses. 

State DOT Regulation 

Although the Mississippi Department of Transportation (MDOT) has no 

maintenance or operational requirements of transit/paratransit vehicles operated 

by public transit agencies, the MDOT Public Transit Division (PTD) sets forth 

recommendations of maintenance programs for our federal grant sub-recipients. 

Annual vehicle inspections are not required; however, the PTD requires vehicle/ 

equipment inspections every two years as cited through FTA guidelines. The 

PTD maintains an automated inventory of all FTA funded vehicles. PTD staff 

conducts a general inspection of portions of the in-service fleet vehicles as a part 

of the annual on-site monitoring, noting safety equipment, adherence with pre-

and post-trip inspection procedures, vehicle maintenance records, state required 

inspection stickers, and damage. To the extent required by FTA guidance, 

every two years, the PTD takes or causes to be taken, a physical inventory 

of sub-recipient equipment authorized or purchased with capital grant funds. 

The inventory is conducted in accordance with PTD policies and equipment 

management guidance contained in the latest FTA Circulars. This physical 

inventory does not include a detailed safety inspection. 

# Missouri 

Vehicle Laws 

Size and Weight Limitations 

Missouri Revised Statute  304.170  (4) prescribes maximum length limitations for 

buses;  304.181  prescribes maximum axle weight limits for buses. 

General Equipment Requirements 

Missouri Revised Statute  307.140  requires motor vehicles designed or used for 

the purpose of carrying passengers for hire to equip all doors, windows, and 

windshields with safety glass. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  57 

Operational Laws 

Rail Crossing Procedures 

Missouri Revised Statute  304.030  prescribes rules requiring vehicles transporting 

passengers for hire to stop at all railroad grade crossings and to take due caution 

to ascertain that the course is clear before proceeding. 

Stopping, Standing, and Parking 

Missouri Revised Statute  300.510  prescribes rules for the stopping, standing, and 

parking of buses and taxicabs. 

Prohibited Operations 

Missouri Revised Statute  304.044  prohibits the driver of any truck or bus, when 

traveling upon a public highway outside of a business or residential district, from 

following within three hundred feet of another such vehicle. 

State DOT Regulation 

The Missouri Department of Transportation (MoDOT) does not regulate the 

maintenance or operational requirements of transit or paratransit vehicles 

beyond FMCSA requirements. From a contractual standpoint, those FTA sub-

recipients with vehicles funded with MoDOT-administered transit grants are 

required to maintain their vehicles in good working order, and by virtue of that 

provision MoDOT will be able to pass through MAP-21 requirements for bus 

safety as well as transit asset management to those sub-recipients once FTA 

develops final rules. Missouri does not require annual inspections of vehicles less 

than 5 years old. The Missouri Department of Revenue is responsible for vehicle 

registration and licensing. Information on vehicle inspections can be found at 

http://dor.mo.gov/motorv/help.php#safety .

# Montana 

Incorporation of Federal Regulations 

Montana Code  61-10-154  prescribes rules requiring the Montana Department of 

Transportation (MDT) to adopt and enforce safety standards that substantially 

comply, within allowed tolerance guidelines, with the Federal Motor Carrier 

Safety Regulations. 

Vehicle Laws 

Size and Weight Limitations 

Montana Code  61-10-102  prescribes width standard definitions for buses;  61-10-

104  prescribes length standard definitions for buses. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  58 

General Equipment Requirements 

Montana Code  61-9-208  contains additional equipment requirements for certain 

vehicles, including buses. 

Brake Equipment and Performance 

Montana Code  61-9-310  prescribes requirements for reservoir capacity and 

check valve on buses with air-operated brakes;  61-9-312  contains requirements 

for brake performance ability of buses. 

Emergency/Safety Equipment 

Montana Code  61-9-311  contains requirements for warning devices on buses that 

use compressed air brakes;  61-9-411  contains requirements for certain vehicles, 

including buses, to carry flares or other warning devices;  61-9-412  contains rules 

for the display of warning devices on certain vehicles, including buses, when the 

vehicle is disabled. 

State DOT Regulation 

With regard to State DOT requirements for transit/paratransit vehicles 

operated by public transit agencies, MDT requires that each recipient manage 

a maintenance program with an approved plan. MDT offers templates for 

maintenance plans and pre-trips. Recipients are required to comply with 

maintenance improvement requests if determined by MDT’s Motor Carriers 

Services (MCS) Division. MDT procures all vehicles for its recipients on an 

annual basis. Specifications are custom written per each application. Pre-trip 

inspections are required and are reviewed during triennial compliance reviews. 

MDT sets a useful life and requires MCS Division staff to inspect vehicles 

annually; however, they inspect only one of the three regions each year. 

# Nebraska 

Incorporation of Federal Regulations 

Nebraska Revised Statute  75-363  incorporates, with certain modifications, the 

Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations contained in 49 CFR. 

Power to Enforce or Regulate 

Nebraska Revised Statute  75-109 , charges the Public Service Commission with 

regulating all common and contract carriers engaged in the transportation of 

freight or passengers for hire. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  59 

Vehicle Laws 

Size and Weight Limitations 

Nebraska Revised Statute  60-6,290  prescribes vehicle length limitations for 

buses. 

Brake Equipment and Performance 

Nebraska Revised Statute  60-6,247  contains brake requirements for trucks and 

buses. 

Maintenance and Inspection 

Nebraska Revised Statute  75-115  (1) grants the Public Service Commission the 

power to periodically examine and inspect each motor carrier’s equipment 

and the manner of the carrier’s conduct and management, and (2) specifies the 

powers of the Commission and duties of the carrier regarding any equipment 

found in an unsafe and dangerous condition;  75-366  grants any officer of the 

Nebraska State Patrol the authority to enforce the Federal Motor Carrier Safety 

Regulations, as such regulations existed on January 1, 2013, and to enter upon, 

inspect, and examine any and all lands, buildings, and equipment of any motor 

carrier. 

Operational Laws 

Rail Crossing Procedures 

Nebraska Revised Statute  60-6,172  prescribes rules requiring buses and school 

buses to stop at all railroad grade crossings. 

Personnel Laws 

Pre-employment Screening, Driving Record, 

and Criminal History 

Nebraska Revised Statute  81-6,120  contains requirements for criminal history 

background checks and criminal history-related restrictions on individuals 

providing transportation services  under contract with the Department of Health 

and Human Services. 

State DOT Regulation 

The Nebraska Department of Roads (NDOR) does not regulate the maintenance 

or operational requirements of transit or paratransit vehicles beyond FTA and 

FMCSA requirements. Annual vehicle inspections are not required. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  60 

# Nevada 

Vehicle Laws 

Size and Weight Limitations 

Nevada Revised Statute  484D.615  prescribes vehicle length limitations for buses 

and other vehicles; NRS  484D.690  prescribes width limitations for buses .

General Equipment Requirements 

Nevada Revised Statute  484D.140  prescribes requirements for additional 

equipment and lighting on certain vehicles, including buses;  484D.460  prescribes 

requirements for pot torches, lanterns or reflectors on buses and trucks. 

Brake Equipment and Performance 

Nevada Revised Statute  484D.275  prescribes requirements for bus brake 

reservoirs. 

Emergency/Safety Equipment 

Nevada Revised Statute  484D.280  prescribes requirements for warning signals 

and devices for certain buses and trucks. 

State DOT Regulation 

Through agreement, Nevada Department of Transportation (NDOT) sub-

recipients are required to comply with applicable federal regulations. Annual 

vehicle inspections are not required. 

# New Hampshire 

Vehicle Laws 

Size and Weight Limitations 

New Hampshire Revised Statutes,  Section 266:11  prescribes vehicle length 

limitations for buses and other vehicles. 

General Equipment Requirements 

New Hampshire Revised Statutes,  Section 266:40  specifies the requirements for 

clearance lamps on buses having a width in excess of 80 inches;  Section 266:45 

specifies the requirements for additional reflectors on certain vehicles, including 

buses .

Emergency/Safety Equipment 

New Hampshire Revised Statutes,  Section 265:113  prescribes requirements for 

reflective warning devices on certain vehicles, including buses .SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  61 

Operational Laws 

> Rail Crossing Procedures

New Hampshire Revised Statutes,  Section 265:50  prescribes rules and 

requirements for drivers of motor vehicles carrying passengers for hire to stop, 

look, and listen at all railroad crossings, and, when it is safe to proceed, to cross 

tracks without shifting gears. 

> Prohibited Operations

New Hampshire Revised Statutes,  Section 265:99  prohibits the driver of a 

truck or bus when traveling upon a downgrade from coasting with the clutch 

disengaged. 

State DOT Regulation 

The New Hampshire Department of Transportation (NHDOT) includes the 

following in sub-recipient contracts: Equipment Maintenance: Contractor shall be 

responsible for the maintenance and repair of all equipment used in the provision 

of service. Contractor shall maintain all such equipment at a high level of 

cleanliness, safety, and mechanical soundness. The contractor shall certify proper 

maintenance procedures, i.e. strict compliance with the vehicle preventive 

maintenance guidelines, on vehicle reports. All maintenance, repair and physical 

improvement activities on equipment shall be conducted by the Contractor 

and at a location specified by the Contractor. The Contractor further agrees to 

maintain, repair, or make any physical improvement to equipment as requested 

by the State. The State, FTA and/or their designees shall have the right to 

conduct periodic inspections for the purpose of confirming proper maintenance 

and repair. Training and Driver Review: The State may require participation in 

training courses determined to be essential to FTA program management in this 

contract period and may require participation in such training programs as it 

deems necessary by drivers and other employees involved in the transportation 

of the public. Training includes defensive driving, passenger assistance, emergency 

procedures and periodic refresher training every three years. The Contractor 

agrees that the State shall have the right to review the performance of all drivers 

who are employed in connection with this Agreement, and to disallow the use 

of any driver whose performance as a driver is determined to be unsatisfactory 

by the State. Safety Requirements: All project equipment shall be inspected 

and certified by the Department of Safety, and shall meet all applicable Federal 

Motor Vehicle Safety Standards and Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations 

as required by the United States Department of Transportation, and by the 

New Hampshire Department of Safety under RSA 266:72 a, in the purchase 

and operation of all project equipment. The Contractor shall provide the State 

with full and prompt written notification of any accident involving any vehicle 

used in its services. In addition, the Contractor shall be responsible to report SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  62 

any accident in compliance with State law. The Contractor shall submit to the 

State by February 15 of each year a report covering the previous year (January 1 

through December 31), summarizing the results of its alcohol misuse prevention 

and anti-drug programs on FTA approved forms. This shall be in compliance with 

49 CFR Part 655 .

NHDOT conducts compliance reviews (every two years) for its FTA Section 

5311 Rural Public Transit Providers and FTA Section 5310 sub-recipients that have 

federally-funded buses. During that review, maintenance reviews are conducted, 

which include a review of pre & post trip inspections that drivers are supposed 

to conduct on a daily basis. NHDOT examines follow-up paperwork to verify 

that the loop has been closed on any noted vehicle issues. NHDOT reviews the 

service intervals (oil changes) to ensure the vehicle is maintained in accordance 

with the OEM guidelines & the agency’s written maintenance plan. NHDOT also 

cycles the wheelchair lift and, when possible, notes how many times the lift has 

been cycled (via the counter on newer lifts) to gauge if the agency has actually 

been cycling the lift daily as required in the pre-trip inspection. Transit vehicles 

in New Hampshire are inspected annually by a licensed state of NH inspector, 

of which the agency has to schedule directly; NHDOT does not conduct these 

annual inspections. 

# New Jersey 

Vehicle Laws 

> Vehicle Condition

Under New Jersey Revised Statute (NJ Rev Stat)  §39:3-4.1 , with certain 

exceptions, no motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire shall be licensed 

by the commissioner without first obtaining a certificate from the Board of 

Public Utilities, that such motor vehicle conforms to the rules, regulations, 

and specifications of the Board of Public Utilities as to construction and safety 

devices of the vehicle; under NJ Rev Stat  NJ Rev Stat §39:3-5  the Director of 

the Division of Motor Vehicle may refuse registration in the case of any omnibus 

(defined as all motor vehicles used for the transportation of passengers for hire, 

except commuter vans and vehicles used in ridesharing arrangements and school 

buses, if the same are not otherwise used in the transportation of passengers for 

hire) that does not comply with the requirements of this title or that seems to 

the Director unsuitable for use on the roads and highways of New Jersey. 

> Strength and Structural Integrity

New Jersey Administrative Code (N.J.A.C.)  §16:53-1  prescribes requirements 

and specifications for the chassis, body construction, and body overhang of van-

type autobuses;  N.J.A.C. §16:53-3  prescribes requirements and specifications 

for the chassis, body construction, relation of body and chassis frame, and SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  63 

body overhang of autobuses;  N.J.A.C. §16:53-6  prescribes requirements and 

specifications for the chassis, body construction, and body overhang of small 

autobuses;  N.J.A.C. §16:53-8  prescribes requirements and specifications for the 

chassis and body construction of sedan-type autobuses. 

> Size and Weight Limitations

New Jersey Revised Statute (NJ Rev Stat)  §39:3-84  prescribes dimensional and 

weight limitations for omnibuses and other vehicles; New Jersey Administrative 

Code (N.J.A.C.)  §16:53-1  prescribes dimensional limitations for van-type 

autobuses;  N.J.A.C. §16:53-3  prescribes dimensional limitations for autobuses; 

N.J.A.C. §16:53-6  prescribes dimensional limitations for small autobuses;  N.J.A.C. 

§16:53-8  prescribes dimensional limitations for sedan-type autobuses. 

> General Equipment Requirements

New Jersey Revised Statute (NJ Rev Stat)  §39:3-79.1  prescribes requirements for 

metal protectors, substantial flexible flaps, or other protective means behind 

the rearmost wheels of buses and other commercial motor vehicles in order 

to prevent the throwing of dirt, water, or other materials on the windshields 

of following vehicles; New Jersey Administrative Code (N.J.A.C.)  §16:53-1 

prescribes equipment requirements and specifications for doors, equipment unit, 

glazing, lights and reflectors, mirrors, tires and wheels, heaters and defrosters, 

windshield wipers/washers, steps, sun visors, baggage racks/compartments, 

drive shaft, and speedometer and odometer on van-type autobuses;  N.J.A.C. 

§16:53-3  prescribes equipment requirements and specifications for window 

openings; guardrails; partitions to the rear of the driver’s seat; service doors; 

entrance handles for passenger use; handles for standing passengers; passenger 

signal systems; bumpers; equipment unit; tires and wheels; windshield wipers/ 

washers; drive shaft; glazing and window construction; exterior lights and 

reflectors; speedometer and odometer; heating, ventilation, and air conditioning; 

turntable and turntable area enclosure; mirrors and rear-view video cameras; 

installation of video monitors and/or television receivers for passenger use; steps; 

sun visors; and baggage racks/compartments on autobuses;  N.J.A.C.  §16:53-6 

prescribes equipment requirements and specifications for the equipment unit; 

glazing; lights and reflectors; mirrors; tires and wheels; heating, ventilation, 

and air conditioning; windshield wipers/washers; steps; sun visors; drive 

shaft; speedometer and odometer; partitions to the rear of the driver’s seat; 

bumpers; and window openings on small autobuses;  N.J.A.C. §16:53-8  prescribes 

equipment requirements and specifications for doors; lights; mirrors; tires and 

wheels; windshield wipers/washers; heaters and defrosters; drive shaft; glazing; 

directional signals; speedometer and odometer; and baggage racks on sedan-type 

autobuses, and prohibits the use of any type of trailer on sedan-type autobuses. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  64 

> Brake Equipment and Performance

New Jersey Administrative Code (N.J.A.C.)  §16:53-1  prescribes brake equipment 

requirements and specifications for van-type autobuses;  N.J.A.C. §16:53-3 

prescribes brake equipment requirements and specifications for autobuses; 

N.J.A.C. §16:53-6  prescribes brake equipment requirements and specifications 

for small autobuses;  N.J.A.C. §16:53-8  prescribes brake equipment requirements 

and specifications for sedan-type autobuses. 

> Emergency/Safety Equipment

New Jersey Revised Statute (NJ Rev Stat)  §39:3-54  (b) (1) states that an omnibus 

may be equipped with two flashing devices for the purpose of warning operators 

of other vehicles and law enforcement officials that an emergency situation exists 

within the omnibus, and (2) sets forth requirements for the type of flashing 

devices that are permitted;  NJ Rev Stat §39:3-64  requires certain vehicles, 

including omnibuses, to be equipped with flares and other warning devices during 

the times when lighted lamps are required;  NJ Rev Stat §39:3-68.2  (g) prescribes 

emergency stopping system performance requirements for vehicles built on a 

bus chassis and having a manufacturer’s Gross Vehicle Weight Rating of 10,000 

pounds or less; New Jersey Administrative Code (N.J.A.C.)  §16:53-1  prescribes 

equipment requirements and specifications for horns, audible warning devices for 

activation when the vehicle is in reverse, grounding devices, warning devices for 

use during roadside emergencies, and fire extinguishers on van-type autobuses; 

N.J.A.C. §16:53-3  prescribes equipment requirements and specifications for 

horns, audible warning devices for activation when the vehicle is in reverse, 

grounding devices, fire extinguishers, and anti-jackknifing devices on autobuses; 

N.J.A.C. §16:53-3.6  (d) prescribes safety equipment requirements for autobuses 

with a kneeling feature;  N.J.A.C. §16:53-6  prescribes equipment requirements 

and specifications for horns, audible warning devices for activation when the 

vehicle is in reverse, grounding devices, and fire extinguishers on small autobuses; 

N.J.A.C. §16:53-8  prescribes equipment requirements and specifications for 

horns and fire extinguishers on sedan-type autobuses. 

> Wheelchair Equipment

New Jersey Administrative Code (N.J.A.C.)  §16:53-2  prescribes special 

equipment specifications for vehicles used to transport passengers in 

wheelchairs, including specifications for doors, steps, and thresholds; ramps; 

power lifts; wheelchair securement devices; aisles and aisle armrests; fuel tanks; 

seat/shoulder belts; and handrails and stanchions. 

> Fuel and Exhaust Systems

New Jersey Administrative Code (N.J.A.C.)  §16:53-1  prescribes requirements 

and specifications for fuel and exhaust system equipment on van-type autobuses; 

N.J.A.C. §16:53-3  prescribes requirements and specifications for fuel and exhaust SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  65 

system equipment on autobuses;  N.J.A.C. §16:53-6  prescribes requirements 

and specifications for fuel and exhaust system equipment on small autobuses; 

N.J.A.C. §16:53-8  prescribes requirements and specifications for fuel and exhaust 

system equipment on sedan-type autobuses. 

> Lighting and Electrical Systems

New Jersey Administrative Code (N.J.A.C.),  §16:53-1  prescribes lighting and 

electrical system equipment specifications for van-type autobuses;  N.J.A.C. 

§16:53-3  prescribes requirements and specifications for interior lighting systems 

on autobuses. 

> Window Transparency

New Jersey Administrative Code (N.J.A.C.)  §16:53-3.5  requires partitions to 

the rear of the driver’s seat in autobuses to be tinted or covered by a curtain, if 

necessary, to shield the driver from the glare of inside lights;  N.J.A.C. §16:53-6.29 

requires partitions to the rear of the driver’s seat in small autobuses to be tinted 

or covered by a curtain, if necessary, to shield the driver from the glare of inside 

lights. 

> Signage

New Jersey Administrative Code (N.J.A.C.)  §16:53-1.33  requires van-type 

autobuses to display a sign in the front interior of the vehicle indicating that 

smoking in the vehicle is prohibited by law;  N.J.A.C. §16:53-3.15  prescribes 

requirements for the display of signs on autobuses indicating (a) route and 

destination, (c) that smoking on autobuses is prohibited by law, (d) that it is 

a violation of federal regulations for an autobus to be operated with persons 

occupying the prohibited area as provided in  49 CFR §393.90 , and (e) the 

location of the fire extinguisher, if the fire extinguisher is not readily visible; 

under  N.J.A.C. §16:53-3.12  (e), autobuses carrying passengers must have the 

permitted standing passenger capacity of the vehicle displayed on the exterior 

of the vehicle adjacent to the area of the service door and clearly visible to all 

boarding passengers, while an autobus not permitting standees must display 

on the exterior of the vehicle the words “No standees”;  N.J.A.C. § 16:53-6.24 

prescribes requirements for the display of signs on small autobuses indicating (a) 

route and destination, (c) that smoking on autobuses is prohibited by law, (d) that 

it is a violation of federal regulations for an autobus to be operated with persons 

occupying the prohibited area as provided in  49 CFR §393.90 , and (e) the location 

of the fire extinguisher, if the fire extinguisher is not readily visible. 

> Passenger Compartment and Entrances/Exits

New Jersey Administrative Code (N.J.A.C.)  §16:53-1  prescribes equipment 

requirements and specifications for van-type autobuses with respect to the 

interior and component parts of the vehicle body, aisles, and emergency 

doors and exits;  N.J.A.C. §16:53-3  prescribes requirements and specifications SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  66 

for autobuses with respect to aisles and emergency exits;  N.J.A.C. §16:53-6 

prescribes requirements and specifications for small autobuses with respect to 

aisles and the interior and component parts of the vehicle body. 

> Driver/Passenger Seats

New Jersey Administrative Code (N.J.A.C.)  §16:53-1  prescribes requirements 

and specifications for passenger seating equipment on van-type autobuses; 

N.J.A.C. §16:53-3  prescribes requirements and specifications for passenger 

seating equipment on autobuses;  N.J.A.C. §16:53-6  prescribes requirements 

and specifications for passenger seating equipment on small autobuses;  N.J.A.C. 

§16:53-8  prescribes requirements and specifications for passenger seating 

equipment on sedan-type autobuses. 

> Maintenance and Inspection

New Jersey Administrative Code (N.J.A.C.)  §13:20-7.2  requires that certain 

vehicles undergo annual inspection, including buses that have been issued 

passenger, governmental, no fee, or commercial vehicle license plates by the 

Motor Vehicle Commission;  N.J.A.C. §16:53-1.29  requires that (a) the body, 

chassis, engine and all equipment of van-type autobuses be maintained in proper 

adjustment and safe operating condition, (b, c) van-type autobuses undergo 

specification inspections at least twice annually, (e) autobuses receive a complete 

inspection at regular time and/or mileage intervals for mechanical or structural 

defects, and (h) van-type autobuses directly operated by the New Jersey Transit 

Corporation be on a six-month full New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission 

inspection program in accordance with the August 2000 Memorandum of 

Understanding between the New Jersey Transit Corporation and the New Jersey 

Department of Transportation, and van-type autobuses operated by private 

operators receive an in-terminal inspection at six-month intervals, once by 

New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission personnel during the first six months, 

and then a self-inspection by the private operator once during the second six-

month period;  N.J.A.C. §16:53-3.24  requires that (a) the body, chassis, engine 

and all equipment of autobuses be maintained in proper adjustment and safe 

operating condition, (b, c) autobuses undergo specification inspections at least 

twice annually, (e) autobuses receive a complete inspection at regular time and/ 

or mileage intervals for mechanical or structural defects, and (i) autobuses 

directly operated by the New Jersey Transit Corporation be on a six-month 

full New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission inspection program in accordance 

with the August 2000 Memorandum of Understanding between the New Jersey 

Transit Corporation and the New Jersey Department of Transportation, and 

autobuses operated by private operators receive an in-terminal inspection at 

six-month intervals, once by New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission personnel 

during the first six months, and then a self-inspection by the private operator 

once during the second six-month period;  N.J.A.C. §16:53-6.31  requires that 

(a) the body, chassis, engine and all equipment of small autobuses be maintained SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  67 

in proper adjustment and safe operating condition, (b, c) small autobuses 

undergo specification inspections at least twice annually, (e) small autobuses 

receive a complete inspection at regular time and/or mileage intervals for 

mechanical or structural defects, and (i) small autobuses directly operated by 

the New Jersey Transit Corporation be on a six-month full New Jersey Motor 

Vehicle Commission inspection program in accordance with the August 2000 

Memorandum of Understanding between the New Jersey Transit Corporation 

and the New Jersey Department of Transportation, and small autobuses 

operated by private operators receive an in-terminal inspection at six-month 

intervals, once by New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission personnel during 

the first six months, and then a self-inspection by the private operator once 

during the second six-month period;  N.J.A.C. §16:53-8.25  requires that (a) the 

body, chassis, engine and all equipment of sedan-type autobuses be maintained 

in proper adjustment and safe operating condition, (b, c) sedan-type autobuses 

undergo specification inspections at least twice annually, (e) sedan-type 

autobuses receive a complete inspection at regular time and/or mileage intervals 

for mechanical or structural defects, and (i) sedan-type autobuses directly 

operated by the New Jersey Transit Corporation be on a six-month full New 

Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission inspection program in accordance with the 

August 2000 Memorandum of Understanding between the New Jersey Transit 

Corporation and the New Jersey Department of Transportation, and sedan-type 

autobuses operated by private operators receive an in-terminal inspection at 

six-month intervals, once by New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission personnel 

during the first six months, and then a self-inspection by the private operator 

once during the second six-month period; under  N.J.A.C. § 16:53-8.26  (e), sedan-

type autobuses having an altered chassis are subject to quarterly inspection by 

New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission personnel. 

> Vehicle Out of Service

New Jersey Administrative Code (N.J.A.C.)  §16:53A  establishes a schedule of bus 

safety out-of-service violations and applicable sanctions and penalties for buses 

operating with bus safety out-of-service violations. 

Operational Laws 

> Transportation of Passengers

Under New Jersey Revised Statute (NJ Rev Stat)  §39:4-68 , an operator of a 

street car or autobus must not knowingly operate the vehicle while any vehicle 

door is open; New Jersey Administrative Code (N.J.A.C.)  §16:53-3.12  prescribes 

limitations for the carrying of standing passengers, and prohibits passengers from 

standing forward of the crowd gate, guardrail, or marking set forth in  49 CFR 

§393.90 ; under  N.J.A.C. §16:52-1.7 , autobus and trolley utilities must keep the 

doors of vehicles closed when the vehicles are in motion; under  N.J.A.C. §16:65-SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  68 

8.6 , transportation utility vehicle drivers or operators must keep the doors of 

the vehicle closed when the vehicle is in motion. 

> Use of Mobile Electronic Devices

New Jersey Revised Statute (NJ Rev Stat)  §27:25-5.18  prescribes rules 

and exceptions prohibiting the use of a wireless telephone or electronic 

communication device by an operator of a moving vehicle involved in the 

provision of public transportation service provided by the New Jersey Transit 

Corporation, any public or private entity under contract to the corporation, 

or any private entity operating under the authority of a certificate of public 

convenience and necessity. 

> Rail Crossing Procedures

New Jersey Revised Statute (NJ Rev Stat)  §39:4-128  prescribes rules requiring 

the driver of an omnibus designed for carrying more than six passengers, before 

crossing at grade any track or tracks of a railroad, to stop, look, and listen 

in both directions along the track; and, when it is safe to proceed, to cross 

the tracks without manually shifting gears; New Jersey Administrative Code 

(N.J.A.C.)  §16:52-1.6  prescribes rules that require all autobus and trolley utilities 

to have their vehicles come to a full stop before crossing the tracks of any 

railroad at grade. 

> Attention to Duty

Under New Jersey Administrative Code (N.J.A.C.)  §16:52-1.8 , autobus and 

trolley utilities shall not allow the drivers of any autobus or trolley to engage in 

any unnecessary conversation with the passengers;  N.J.A.C. §16:65-8.7  stipulates 

that transportation utility vehicle drivers or operators shall not engage in 

unnecessary conversation with passengers. 

> Fueling/Refueling

Under New Jersey Administrative Code (N.J.A.C.)  §16:52-1.9 , fuel tanks on 

autobuses must be filled from outside the autobus and must not be filled or 

replenished while the motor is running or while passengers are in the autobus. 

Personnel Laws 

> General Qualifications

New Jersey Revised Statute (NJ Rev Stat)  §39:3-10.1  requires that (1) a person 

who drives a motor vehicle or trackless trolley with a capacity of more than 

six passengers for the transportation of passengers for hire must be specially 

licensed to drive buses by the Chief Administrator of the New Jersey Motor 

Vehicle Commission or in the case of a nonresident, licensed pursuant to the 

laws of his or her resident state with respect to the licensing of bus drivers, and 

(2) for such a license to be granted, an applicant must be at least 18 years of age SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  69 

and must have presented satisfactory evidence of his or her previous experience 

(including proof that he or she has had at least three years of driving experience). 

> Physical/Medical Qualifications

New Jersey Revised Statute (NJ Rev Stat)  §39:3-10.1  requires (1) a bus driver 

license applicant to present evidence, satisfactory to the Chief Administrator 

of the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission of his or her physical fitness, and 

(2) every holder of a special bus driver license issued pursuant to this section to 

furnish to the Chief Administrator satisfactory evidence of continuing physical 

fitness at the time of application renewal or such other time as the Chief 

Administrator may require. 

> Pre-employment Screening, Driving Record,
> and Criminal History

New Jersey Revised Statute (NJ Rev Stat)  §39:3-10.1  requires (1) a bus driver 

license applicant to present evidence, satisfactory to the Chief Administrator of 

the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission of his or her good character, and 

(2) every holder of a special bus driver license issued pursuant to this section 

to furnish to the Chief Administrator satisfactory evidence of continuing good 

character at the time of application renewal or such other time as the Chief 

Administrator may require; New Jersey Administrative Code (N.J.A.C.)  §16:79-2 

specifies criminal history information that the New Jersey Transit Corporation 

and its subsidiaries may require of prospective employees or commissioned 

ticket agents as a condition of application, employment, or contract execution, 

and prescribes procedures for requesting a criminal history record background 

check prior to hiring or contracting with such individuals. 

> Education, Training, and Testing

New Jersey Revised Statute (NJ Rev Stat)  §39:3-10.1  requires that an applicant 

for a bus driver’s license must have passed a satisfactory examination in 

ascertainment of his or her driving ability and familiarity with the mechanism of 

a motor vehicle or trackless trolley with a capacity of more than six passengers 

used for the transportation of passengers for hire. 

> Disciplinary Action

Under New Jersey Revised Statute (NJ Rev Stat)  §39:3-10.1 , The Chief 

Administrator of the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission may suspend 

or revoke a bus driver’s license for a violation of any of the provisions of this 

subtitle, or on other reasonable grounds, or where, in his opinion, the licensee is 

either physically or morally unfit to retain the license. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  70 

Workplace Policy Laws 

> Accidents and Emergencies

New Jersey Administrative Code (N.J.A.C.)  §16:65-7.1  prescribes requirements 

and procedures for reporting accidents resulting from the operations, use, 

or maintenance of transportation utility vehicles under the jurisdiction of the 

Department of Transportation;  N.J.A.C. §16:65-9  requires transportation utilities 

to provide the Division of Intermodal Services in the New Jersey Department 

of Transportation a list of names, addresses, and telephone numbers of officials 

who may be contacted in event of emergency during other than normal working 

hours, and to maintain a listed emergency number in appropriate telephone 

directories, and file this number with police departments, fire departments, 

municipal clerks and other appropriate governmental agencies. 

> Recordkeeping

New Jersey Administrative Code (N.J.A.C.)  §16:53-1.29  (d) requires a systematic 

maintenance record to be retained by the operator for at least 12 months for 

each van-type autobus, showing the vehicle identification number, driver, dates of 

breakdowns, defects reported, and corrective measures taken, and (e) requires 

an itemized record of each inspection, signed by the inspector, showing the date, 

vehicle identification number, lubrication record, adjustments and repairs, and 

to be available at the inspection site at the time of inspection and for at least 

12 months thereafter, and to be available for review by the New Jersey Motor 

Vehicle Commission;  N.J.A.C. §16:53-3.24  (d) requires a systematic maintenance 

record to be retained by the operator for at least 12 months for each autobus, 

showing the vehicle identification number, driver, dates of breakdowns, defects 

reported, and corrective measures taken, and (e) requires an itemized record of 

each inspection, signed by the inspector, showing the date, vehicle identification 

number, lubrication record, adjustments and repairs, and to be available at the 

inspection site at the time of inspection and for at least 12 months thereafter, 

and to be available for review by the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission; 

N.J.A.C. §16:53-6.31  (d) requires a systematic maintenance record to be retained 

by the operator for at least 12 months for each small autobus, showing the 

vehicle identification number, driver, dates of breakdowns, defects reported, 

and corrective measures taken, and (e) requires an itemized record of each 

inspection, signed by the inspector, showing the date, vehicle identification 

number, lubrication record, adjustments and repairs, and to be available at the 

inspection site at the time of inspection and for at least 12 months thereafter, 

and to be available for review by the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission; 

N.J.A.C. §16:65-10.3  requires each utility to keep a record of and report all 

accidents to the New Jersey Department of Transportation, as set forth in 

N.J.A.C. 16:65-7 .SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  71 

# New Mexico 

Incorporation of Federal Regulations 

New Mexico Administrative Code  18.2.3  incorporates by reference, with 

certain exemptions and amendments, the regulations contained in 49 CFR 

regarding qualification of drivers; driving of motor vehicles; parts and accessories 

necessary for safe operation; hours of service of drivers; and inspection, repair, 

and maintenance;  18.3.4  incorporates by reference, with certain exemptions 

and amendments, the regulations contained in 49 CFR regarding drug and 

alcohol testing; hours of service of drivers; commercial driver licenses; driving of 

commercial motor vehicles; parts and accessories necessary for safe operation; 

and inspection, repair, and maintenance. 

Vehicle Laws 

Vehicle Condition 

New Mexico Administrative Code  18.3.2.24  requires that all motor carriers of 

persons must use motor vehicles that are maintained in good mechanical and 

operating condition and that are safe, dependable, and suitable for the service 

rendered. 

General Equipment Requirements 

New Mexico Administrative Code  18.3.2.24  requires that all motor carriers of 

persons must provide safe and adequate service, equipment, and facilities, and 

must ensure that every motor vehicle it operates is equipped with adequate 

heating and ventilation systems. 

Seatbelts and Child Restraints 

New Mexico Administrative Code  18.3.2.25  requires all motor carriers of 

persons to ensure that each motor vehicle it uses that is capable of transporting 

fifteen or fewer persons (1) is equipped with a separate seat belt assembly 

for each passenger, and (2) complies with all federal and state requirements 

regarding child restraint systems. 

Operational Laws 

General Operational Requirements 

New Mexico Administrative Code  18.3.2.24  requires that all motor carriers of 

persons must conduct their operations in a businesslike, ethical and courteous 

manner;  18.3.2.26  requires motor carriers of persons to make reasonable efforts 

to keep the station area safe for the public. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  72 

> Use of Roads and Highways

New Mexico Administrative Code  18.3.2.24  specifies that all motor carriers 

of persons must use only those highways that are authorized by its operating 

authority but may deviate from its authorized routes where the condition of the 

highway or street necessitates a detour. 

> Prohibited Operations

New Mexico Administrative Code  18.3.2.24  prohibits motor carriers of persons 

from transporting any property in any quantity or manner that interferes with 

the comfort or safety of passengers. 

State DOT Regulation 

With regard to State DOT regulation of the maintenance or operation of 

transit/paratransit vehicles operated by public transit agencies, the New Mexico 

Department of Transportation (NMDOT) requires every transit agency to 

have a current written bus maintenance plan that includes procedures for 

both preventive and defect maintenance on file with NMDOT. Each vehicle 

must have an identified preventive maintenance schedule at least as aggressive 

as the one provided by the manufacturer. Agencies must maintain equipment 

in a clean, safe, and mechanically sound condition and follow manufacturers’ 

minimum requirements. NMDOT provides agencies with vehicle maintenance 

procedures, documented in Appendix K of the  New Mexico State Management 

Plan . Annual vehicle inspections are not required; however, NMDOT requires 

agencies to complete and maintain daily pre- and post-trip inspection records, 

and examines the maintenance history of a sample of buses during the bi-annual 

site visit. NMDOT’s  Transit Operating Procedures for Safety and Security 

(TOPSS) provides guidance on vehicle safety procedures and reports. Regarding 

procurement standards and guidelines, NMDOT’s yearly contract with agencies 

stipulates that sub-grantees shall purchase equipment in accordance with U.S. 

and New Mexico State law. 

With regard to personnel standards, at each site visit, NMDOT asks if agencies 

use a formal employment application and follow a standardized procedure for 

screening applicants; if not, the agency receives a recommendation that they 

do. NMDOT requires in the contract with the agency that all transit drivers 

be trained in first aid, cardiopulmonary resuscitation, blood borne pathogens, 

defensive driving, use of wheelchairs, passenger safety, sensitivity, and crisis 

management. All new drivers must be trained and certified in the above listed 

areas within six months of their date of hire. All full time, part time, substitute/ 

fill in, or volunteer vehicle operators shall have in their possession valid 

certifications while operating a public transportation vehicle. Should the provider 

fail to comply with these training standards, the contract may be terminated. 

DOT physicals are required for commercial driver’s license (CDL) drivers. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  73 

TOPSS recommends using the physical qualifications for CDL drivers for driver 

positions not requiring a CDL, and provides a form to be completed by the 

examining physician. A drug and alcohol testing program which complies with 49 

C.F.R. Parts 40 and 655 is also required, and an agency must agree to annually 

certify its compliance with 49 C.F.R. Parts 40 and 655 and to submit for review 

and approval a copy of its policy statement developed to implement its drug 

and alcohol testing program. In addition, the agency must agree to participate in 

NMDOT’s drug consortium. TOPSS provides guidance on licensure, background 

reporting, and employee evaluations. 

# New York 

Incorporation of Federal Regulations 

Under Title 17, Codes, Rules, and Regulations of New York (CCR-NY),  Section 

721.3 , drivers of passenger carrying vehicles that carry more than 15 passengers, 

including the driver, or with a gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds shall 

comply with the applicable Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations. 

Power to Enforce or Regulate 

New York Vehicle and Traffic Law (VAT)  §509 J  prescribes rules requiring every 

motor carrier to be instructed in and comply with  VAT Article 19-A  and to 

annually submit an affidavit to the commissioner of transportation attesting to 

such compliance, and prescribes rules granting the commissioner the authority 

(1) to suspend, deny, or revoke vehicle registrations of vehicles owned or 

operated by the motor carrier or to suspend the motor carrier’s privilege of 

operation when an affidavit of compliance is not submitted, and (2) to require 

motor carriers to pay a civil penalty if the commissioner finds that the motor 

carrier has violated any provision of Article 19-A or has made any false statement 

or misrepresentation on an affidavit of compliance;  VAT §509 M  requires the 

Department of Motor Vehicles to review the bus driver files of every motor 

carrier at least every three years, to establish procedures to conduct curbside 

verification of bus driver and motor carrier identity, and to establish any other 

necessary regulations or forms to ensure the orderly administration of and 

compliance with  VAT Article 19-A ; New York Transportation Law (TRA) 

Article 9-B  establishes and delineates the powers and duties of the State Public 

Transportation Safety Board (PTSB) as an independent body responsible for 

investigating accidents involving public transportation in the state of New 

York, including commuter rail, subways, rapid transit and buses, and for making 

recommendations to all public transportation operators and carriers to prevent 

the occurrence of future accidents. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  74 

Vehicle Laws 

> Vehicle Condition

Under Title 17, Codes, Rules, and Regulations of New York (CCR-NY),  Section 

721.4  (D) the body, chassis, engine, and all safety-related equipment shall be in 

proper adjustment and safe operating condition at all times the vehicle is driven 

on the public roadways. 

> Size and Weight Limitations

New York Vehicle and Traffic Law (VAT)  §385  prescribes dimensional limitations 

for buses and other vehicles. 

> Strength and Structural Integrity

Title 17, Codes, Rules, and Regulations of New York (CCR-NY),  Section 720.4 

prescribes requirements and specifications for the body construction and 

chassis construction of buses and other passenger vehicles providing regulated 

or municipal passenger transportation in New York State;  Section 720.9  (D) 

prescribes requirements with regard to crash worthiness for batteries and 

battery compartments on all electric or hybrid buses. 

> General Equipment Requirements

Title 17, Codes, Rules, and Regulations of New York (CCR-NY),  Section 720.4 

prescribes requirements and specifications for defrosters; doors; grab handles; 

guard rails; glazing/window construction; heaters; lamps, signals, and reflectors; 

mirrors; speedometer; stepwell; tool compartment; ventilation; wheel housings; 

windshield wipers/washers; and tires and wheels of buses and other passenger 

vehicles providing regulated or municipal passenger transportation in New 

York State;  Section 720.9  (F) prescribes requirements and specifications for 

range selectors on all electric or hybrid buses;  Section 721.4  (B)(3) requires 

for handrails, handholds or stanchions, and grab-handles on cross seats on 

every passenger vehicle on which passengers are permitted to stand, and (M) 

prescribes requirements and specifications for tires. 

> Brake Equipment and Performance

Title 17, Codes, Rules, and Regulations of New York (CCR-NY),  Section 720.4 

prescribes brake equipment requirements and specifications for buses and other 

passenger vehicles providing regulated or municipal passenger transportation 

in New York State;  Section 720.9  requires regenerative braking systems on all 

electric or hybrid buses to be equipped with a master “on-off” switch or control 

which is operable from the normal driving position;  Section 721.4  (E) prescribes 

requirements and specifications for the maintenance and performance of service 

and emergency brakes. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  75 

> Emergency/Safety Equipment

Title 17, Codes, Rules, and Regulations of New York (CCR-NY),  Section 720.4 

prescribes equipment requirements and specifications for horns and engine fire 

warning/protection devices on buses and other passenger vehicles providing 

regulated or municipal passenger transportation in New York State;  CCR-NY 

720.7  requires buses and other passenger vehicles providing regulated or 

municipal passenger transportation in New York State to be equipped with 

fire extinguishers, road reflectors, and reflective triangles, and prescribes 

specifications for such equipment;  Section 720.9  (G) prescribes requirements 

and specifications for electrical overload protection devices and warning lights 

on all electric or hybrid buses;  Section 720.9  (I) prescribes requirements and 

specifications for equipping electric buses with back-up alarms;  Section 721.4 

(K) prescribes requirements for the display of of emergency warning signals if 

gasoline or any other flammable or combustible liquid or gas seeps or leaks from 

a fuel container or vehicle stopped on a highway. 

> Wheelchair Equipment

Title 17, Codes, Rules, and Regulations of New York (CCR-NY),  Section 720.8 

prescribes criteria for special equipment on ambulettes (ambulettes are specially 

equipped vehicles used to provide certificated transit disabled service to 

passengers in mobility aid devices or wheelchairs);  Section 721.4  (J) recommends 

dry cell or jelly type batteries if electric wheelchairs are carried on the vehicle, 

and requires that if wet cell type batteries are used, provisions must be made to 

contain battery and battery acid in the event of an accident. 

> Seatbelts and Child Restraints

New York Vehicle and Traffic Law (VAT)  §383  (4-a) requires the driver’s seat 

on buses manufactured on or after January 1, 1965 to be equipped with a seat 

safety belt of a type and specifications as approved by the Commissioner of 

Motor Vehicles;  CCR-NY 720.4  requires buses and other passenger vehicles 

providing regulated or municipal passenger transportation in New York State to 

be equipped with seat belts in accordance with FMVSS and DMV regulations. 

> Fuel and Exhaust Systems

Title 17, Codes, Rules, and Regulations of New York (CCR-NY),  Section 

720.4  prescribes requirements and specifications for fuel and exhaust system 

equipment on buses and other passenger vehicles providing regulated or 

municipal passenger transportation in New York State, including requirements 

for fuel systems that use liquefied petroleum gas (LPG), compressed natural gas 

(CNG), or liquefied natural gas (LNG);  Section 721.4  (A)(8) requires that reserve 

fuel may only be carried in a properly mounted fuel tank, and (L) prescribes rules 

requiring that the exhaust system shall not emit unnecessary smoke or offensive 

vapors and shall be maintained in good working order in conformity with SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  76 

standards promulgated by the New York State Department of Environmental 

Conversation (DEC). 

> Lighting and Electrical Systems

Title 17, Codes, Rules, and Regulations of New York (CCR-NY),  Section 720.9 

(E) prescribes requirements and specifications for the electric propulsion circuit 

of all electric or hybrid buses. 

> Signage

Title 17, Codes, Rules, and Regulations of New York (CCR-NY),  Section 720.9 

(B) prescribes rules requiring that all electric or hybrid buses to be clearly 

marked with the words “Electric Powered,” and that each door, cover, or 

other panel that affords access to any high voltage area to be marked with a 

hazard warning label;  Section 721.4  specifies (B)(2) that every vehicle in which 

passengers are permitted to stand shall have a conspicuous sign displayed on the 

front interior which states that passengers are not permitted to stand forward of 

the marking, gate, or turnstile while the bus is in motion;  Section 723.7  requires 

every owner, lessee, bailee, and operator of any motor bus and every employer 

of a driver who operates a motor bus to prominently display a copy of  Article 

9-A  of the Transportation Law and this Part in each garage, terminal, or office 

used by him within the State of New York. 

> Passenger Compartment and Entrances/Exits

Title 17, Codes, Rules, and Regulations of New York (CCR-NY),  Section 720.4 

prescribes requirements and specifications for aisles, stanchions, and door access 

on buses and other passenger vehicles providing regulated or municipal passenger 

transportation in New York State;  CCR-NY 720.5  prescribes requirements 

and specifications for emergency exits on buses and other passenger vehicles 

providing regulated or municipal passenger transportation in New York State; 

Title 17, Codes, Rules, and Regulations of New York (CCR-NY),  Section 721.4 

specifies that (A)(1) the passenger section shall be kept in a clean, sanitary 

condition and aisles shall not be obstructed while the vehicle is in service, and 

(B)(1) that every vehicle in which passengers are permitted to stand shall have 

a gate of the type approved by NYSDOT at the entrance to the main aisle or a 

permanent marking extending across the main aisle. 

> Driver/Passenger Seats

Title 17, Codes, Rules, and Regulations of New York (CCR-NY),  Section 

720.4  prescribes requirements and specifications for seating equipment on 

buses and other passenger vehicles providing regulated or municipal passenger 

transportation in New York State. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  77 

> Maintenance and Inspection

New York Transportation Law (TRA)  §140 , prohibits a motor vehicle carrying 

passengers from being operated within the state unless it prominently displays 

the name of the operator and certificate evidencing an inspection in accordance 

with the rules and regulations of the commissioner within a period of the 

preceding six months; Title 17, Codes, Rules, and Regulations of New York 

(CCR-NY),  Section 721.1  (a) requires passenger vehicle operators to ensure that 

buses and other passenger vehicles providing regulated or municipal passenger 

transportation in New York State are examined and serviced at regular 

maintenance intervals, (b) prescribes requirements for regular maintenance 

reviews, including items to be included in vehicle examinations, (c) prescribes 

requirements for method of repair, and (d) prescribes requirements for 

maintenance facilities;  Section 721.2  (a) requires operators of buses and other 

passenger vehicles providing regulated or municipal passenger transportation in 

New York State to certify to the New York State Department of Transportation 

(NYSDOT) the time or mileage intervals when vehicle examinations and 

preventive maintenance will occur, and prescribes rules for determining 

and certifying such intervals, (b) prescribes rules that require operators of 

more than one passenger vehicle providing regulated or municipal passenger 

transportation in New York State to require each on-duty driver to complete 

pre-trip inspection and post-trip review reports, (c) requires that when a driver 

is relieved while en route and passengers remain onboard the vehicle, the 

new driver shall be provided with information of any potential safety defect(s) 

identified by the driver being relieved, (d) prescribes rules requiring operators 

to keep records of vehicle maintenance examinations, (e) requires vehicle 

maintenance and driver file/records to be presented at the time of inspection, 

and (f) specifies documentation that operators must provide to NYSDOT 

inspectors or other authorized representatives in the event of an accident 

investigation, compliance review, or regulatory proceeding;  Section 721.3 

prescribes rules and requirements for pre-trip inspection and post-trip review; 

Section 721.4  (C) prescribes rules and requirements for pre-service brake tests. 

> Vehicle Out of Service

Title 17, Codes, Rules, and Regulations of New York (CCR-NY),  Section 

720.11  prescribes out-of-service criteria for buses and other passenger vehicles 

providing regulated or municipal passenger transportation in New York State. 

Operational Laws 

> General Operational Requirements

New York Vehicle and Traffic Law (VAT)  §509 H  prohibits motor carriers from 

knowingly permitting any person to operate a bus carrying passengers unless the 

driver meets all of the requirements of  VAT Article 19-A .SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  78 

> Transportation of Passengers

Title 17, Codes, Rules, and Regulations of New York (CCR-NY),  Section 721.4 

prescribes requirements for driver assurance of passenger protection with 

regard to pre-trip inspection; reporting of vehicle safety defects; secure closure 

of all doors, rear tailgates, and rear transom windows; condition of glass and 

windows to ensure visibility and prevent injury; securing of the emergency brake 

when the vehicle is left unattended; and standee location while vehicle is in 

motion. 

> Driver Securement

Title 17, Codes, Rules, and Regulations of New York (CCR-NY),  Section 721.3 

prescribes rules requiring drivers of passenger carrying vehicles to wear a seat 

belt while operating such a vehicle on a public highway. 

> Rail Crossing Procedures

New York Vehicle and Traffic Law (VAT)  §1171  prescribes rules and requirements 

for drivers of buses carrying passengers to stop, look, and listen at all railroad 

crossings, and, when it is safe to proceed, to cross tracks without shifting gears. 

> Attention to Duty

Under Title 17, Codes, Rules, and Regulations of New York (CCR-NY),  Section 

721.4 , no driver shall engage in any unnecessary conversation or other activities 

during the transporting of passengers that could distract his/her attention from 

the operation of the vehicle. 

> Fueling/Refueling

Under Title 17, Codes, Rules, and Regulations of New York (CCR-NY),  Section 

721.4 , prior to or during the transportation of passengers, a vehicle shall not be 

fueled while the engine is running and no smoking or flames shall be permitted in 

or about the vehicle during fueling operations and until all fumes have dissipated. 

> Prohibited Operations

Under Title 17, Codes, Rules, and Regulations of New York (CCR-NY),  Section 

721.4 , (A)(6) drivers must ensure that no vehicle carrying passengers is pushed, 

towed, or used to push or tow any other vehicle, and (I) under no circumstances 

shall a trailer be attached to a vehicle being used in the transportation of 

passengers. 

> Baggage

Under Title 17, Codes, Rules, and Regulations of New York (CCR-NY),  Section 

721.4 , baggage or other property shall not be carried in the aisle or so as to 

interfere with passenger seating space, safety, or comfort; such property may be 

carried in suitable baggage compartments or racks. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  79 

Personnel Laws 

> General Qualifications

New York Vehicle and Traffic Law (VAT)  §509 B  prescribes general qualifications 

for bus drivers, including age and driver’s license requirements; Title 17, Codes, 

Rules, and Regulations of New York (CCR-NY),  Section 721.3  (a) prescribes 

general qualifications for drivers, including licensing and passenger endorsement, 

mandatory registration with the Bus Driver Unit of the New York State 

Department of Motor Vehicles, and the requirement that all drivers of buses 

and passenger carrying vehicles have general knowledge of NYSDOT’s applicable 

safety rules and regulations governing motor carriers of passengers. 

> Physical/Medical Qualifications

New York Vehicle and Traffic Law (VAT)  §509 G  (1) prescribes rules requiring all 

bus drivers to have a biennial medical examination. 

> Pre-employment Screening, Driving Record,
> and Criminal History

New York Vehicle and Traffic Law (VAT)  §509 D  (1) prescribes pre-employment 

requirements for new bus drivers, including requirements pertaining to driving 

record, medical exam, and employment record;  §509 E  requires each motor 

carrier to, at least once every twelve months, review the driving record of each 

bus driver it employs to determine whether that driver meets the minimum 

requirements for safe driving and is qualified to drive a bus;  §509 F  requires each 

motor carrier to, at least once every twelve months, require each bus driver it 

employs to furnish it with a list of all violations of motor vehicle traffic laws and 

ordinances of which the driver has been convicted and all accidents in which the 

driver was involved during the preceding twelve months;  §509 I  prescribes rules 

requiring drivers to notify the motor carrier that employs the driver of license 

revocation and/or convictions resulting from a violation of this chapter in New 

York or a motor vehicle conviction in another state. 

> Education, Training, and Testing

New York Vehicle and Traffic Law (VAT)  §509 BB  prescribes rules requiring any 

person employed as a bus driver who has been the operator of a motor vehicle 

involved in an accident on three occasions within an eighteen-month period, 

shall be subject to reexamination, including a road test;  §509 G  (2-5) mandates 

that all bus drivers must submit to an annual driving record check and a personal 

interview, regular observation of the driver’s defensive driving performance 

while operating the vehicle with passengers, a biennial behind-the-wheel driving 

test, and a written or oral examination of the rules of the road, defensive driving 

practices, and the laws regulating the driving of a bus in the state of New York. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  80 

> Driver Hours of Duty

New York Transportation Law (TRA)  §211  prescribes hours of service rules and 

requirements for drivers of motor buses; Title 17, Codes, Rules, and Regulations 

of New York (CCR-NY),  Section 723.3  prescribes maximum driving and 

on-duty time rules and requirements for the owner, lessee, bailee, and operator 

of any motor bus, except a motor bus operated exclusively in a city and/or 

incorporated village;  Section 723.9  provides practical applications to ensure 

uniform interpretation of hours-of-labor regulations in a manner which would 

not unduly burden interstate commerce;  Section 723.10  provides exceptions to 

the applicability of the hours-of-labor provisions of Part 723 to exempt and non-

exempt local buses. 

> Driver Out of Service and Return to Duty

New York Vehicle and Traffic Law (VAT)  §509 K  prohibits a driver from 

operating a bus and a motor carrier from permitting a driver to operate a bus 

while the driver’s ability or alertness is so impaired through fatigue, illness, or any 

other cause as to make it unsafe to continue to operate the bus; Title 17, Codes, 

Rules, and Regulations of New York (CCR-NY),  Section 721.4  (F) requires 

operators placed “out of service” by a NYSDOT inspector or law enforcement 

official to abide by the specific conditions of any such order issued pursuant to  17 

NYCRR 720 ; Section 723.8  prescribes rules and requirements for declaring “out 

of service” any driver found to have been or duty or to have driven or operated 

longer than the maximum time permitted. 

> Disciplinary Action

New York Vehicle and Traffic Law (VAT)  §509 C  sets forth the criteria that 

disqualify a bus driver from operating a bus. 

Workplace Policy Laws 

> Drug and Alcohol Testing and Policies

New York Vehicle and Traffic Law (VAT)  §509 L  prescribes rules and prohibitions 

regarding a driver’s possession and/or consumption of a drug, controlled 

substance, or intoxicating liquor during or before going on duty or operating a 

bus. 

> Accidents and Emergencies

Under Title 17, Codes, Rules, and Regulations of New York (CCR-NY),  Section 

721.5 , in case of an emergency, a certified operator may, for a period not to 

exceed a total of 30 days in any one calendar year, use a bus in certified service 

which complies with all of the requirements of 17NYCRR Parts  720  and  721 

applicable to buses in other than certified service;  Section 722.1  prescribes rules 

and requirements for the types of accidents that must be reported to NYSDOT, 

and specifies that no work shall be performed on and no passengers shall be SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  81 

transported in the vehicle involved until it is released by NYSDOT;  Section 

722.2  prescribes rules and requirements for the types of accidents that must be 

reported in writing to NYSDOT;  Section 722.3  prescribes reporting procedures 

for accidents requiring immediate notification to NYSDOT. 

> Recordkeeping

New York Vehicle and Traffic Law (VAT)  §509 D  (1) requires certain driver 

records to be retained in each driver’s file for a period of three years, in 

accordance with regulations established by the commissioner of transportation; 

New York Transportation Law (TRA)  §212  prescribes requirements for 

drivers of motor trucks and motor buses to keep and carry on the vehicle 

hours-of-service records;  Section 723.4  prescribes driver’s log requirements 

for the owner, lessee, bailee, and operator of any motor bus, except a motor 

bus operated exclusively in a city and/or incorporated village;  Section 723.5 

prescribes requirements the filing and preservation of the driver’s log for the 

owner, lessee, bailee, and operator of any motor bus, except a motor bus 

operated exclusively in a city and/or incorporated village;  Section 723.6  requires 

the owner, lessee, bailee, and operator of any motor bus, except a motor bus 

operated exclusively in a city and/or incorporated village, to produce driver 

logs and records upon demand of the Commissioner of Transportation, the 

Commissioner’s representatives, the State Police, or any peace officer who 

demands to see them. 

State DOT Regulation 

The New York State Department of Transportation’s (NYSDOT) Public 

Transportation Safety Board (PTSB) was created by legislative mandate in 1984 

Under Article 9-B of the Transportation Law of the State of New York, and 

was the first state board of its kind in the nation, modeled after the National 

Transportation Safety Board (NTSB). The PTSB is statutorily responsible 

for the safety oversight of public transportation systems throughout New 

York State, including bus systems. The PTSB’s powers and duties include 

establishing accident reporting, investigation and analysis procedures; conducting 

comprehensive accident investigations involving public transportation systems, 

whether publicly or privately owned; taking a proactive role in public safety by 

reviewing, approving and monitoring system safety program plans submitted 

by each transportation system eligible for Statewide Mass Transportation 

Operating Assistance Program (STOA) funding; analyzing critical safety issues and 

concerns; and recommending the establishment of new safety legislation, rules 

and regulations and transportation system procedures, based on findings from 

accident investigations, special studies and comprehensive audits. Also, course 

certification in NYSDOT/PTSB’s training effort, Bus Accident Investigation 

Training for Identifying Safety Hazards (known as “BAITFISH”) is required for 

all New York bus systems that receive STOA funding support. Annual vehicle SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  82 

inspections are a requirement of NYSDOT’s  Performance Based Bus Safety 

Program Plan . Under this program, NYSDOT performs comprehensive safety 

inspections of motor coaches, transit, ambulettes (transit disabled vehicles), and 

large passenger vans/limousines every six months. This semi-annual inspection 

requirement exceeds the annual federal inspection requirement. Additionally, 

the State of New York requires a brake performance test as a component of this 

program, which is not a federal requirement. 

# North Carolina 

Vehicle Laws 

General Equipment Requirements 

North Carolina General Statutes  §20-117.1  prescribes requirements for rear-view 

mirrors and fuel containers on buses with a GVWR of 10,001 pounds or more; 

§20-129.1  prescribes requirements for additional lighting equipment on certain 

vehicles, including buses. 

Maintenance and Inspection 

Under  19A NCAC 03E .0509 , carriers transporting property or passengers over 

the public highways of North Carolina must permit authorized representatives 

of the Division of Motor Vehicles at any time to inspect the records, vehicles, 

terminals, buildings, or other equipment used by the carrier for such 

transportation business. 

Operational Laws 

Rail Crossing Procedures 

North Carolina General Statutes  §20-142.3  prescribes rules and requirements 

for drivers of motor vehicles carrying passengers for hire to stop, look, and listen 

at all railroad crossings, and, when it is safe to proceed, to cross tracks without 

shifting gears. 

State DOT Regulation 

Beyond the regulations set forth by FTA and FMCSA, the North Carolina 

Department of Transportation (NCDOT) has no maintenance or operational 

requirements for transit/paratransit vehicles operated by public transit agencies. 

The NCDOT Safety and Training Unit is waiting for further instructions from 

FTA based on MAP-21 before adopting or developing any policies for bus safety 

standards. Annual vehicle inspections are not required at this time. Regarding 

procurement, vehicles must conform to all applicable North Carolina Motor 

Vehicle Laws and comply with all Federal Motor Carrier Safety Standards. The 

vendor must be certified by Ford QVM program (Quality Vehicle Manufacture 

Program). Upon delivery, the vehicles are required to have a North Carolina SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  83 

state inspection. Finally, all vehicles that are funded with federal funds and that 

are 20’ LTVs or more (this excludes vans) must be Altoona tested; therefore, 

there must be a Bus Testing Certification with the bid package for receipt of 

award. Annual inspections are not required. 

North Dakota 

Incorporation of Federal Regulations 

North Dakota Administrative Code,  Chapter 38-04-01  incorporates by 

reference, without substantial modification, the regulations contained in 49 CFR 

regarding safe operating practices for motor carriers. 

Vehicle Laws 

Maintenance and Inspection 

North Dakota Administrative Code,  Chapter 38-09-01  contains passenger 

contract carrier safety standards regarding motor vehicle inspection; 

maintenance, and repair; annual vehicle inspections are required under  Chapter 

38-09-01-03 , which stipulates that contract carriers may not use a commercial 

motor vehicle unless the vehicle has passed an inspection at least once during the 

preceding 12 months. 

Operational Laws 

Hours of Service 

North Dakota Administrative Code,  Chapter 38-09-01  contains passenger 

contract carrier safety standards regarding driver hours of service. 

Personnel Laws 

General Qualifications 

North Dakota Administrative Code,  Chapter 38-09-01  contains passenger 

contract carrier safety standards regarding driver qualifications. 

Pre-employment Screening, Driving Record, 

and Criminal History 

North Dakota Administrative Code,  Chapter 38-09-01  contains passenger 

contract carrier safety standards regarding pre-employment alcohol and drug 

testing. 

Driver Out of Service and Return to Duty 

North Dakota Administrative Code  37-10-01  prescribes out-of-service order 

regulations. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  84 

Workplace Policy Laws 

Drug and Alcohol Testing and Policies 

North Dakota Administrative Code  37-10-01  sets forth prohibited alcohol 

offenses for commercial motor vehicle drivers;  38-09-01  contains passenger 

contract carrier safety standards regarding random and reasonable suspicion 

testing. 

Accidents and Emergencies 

North Dakota Administrative Code  Chapter 38-09-01  contains passenger 

contract carrier safety standards regarding post-accident testing. 

Recordkeeping 

North Dakota Administrative Code  Chapter 38-09-01  contains passenger 

contract carrier safety standards regarding retention of records. 

State DOT Regulation 

While the North Dakota Department of Transportation (NDDOT) reviews 

the maintenance procedures of all transit vehicles paid for with Idaho funds, the 

Department does not have maintenance or operational requirements for transit/ 

paratransit vehicles beyond those mandated by FTA and FMCSA. 

# Ohio 

Incorporation of Federal Regulations 

Ohio Revised Code  4901:2-5-02  adopts, with certain amendments and 

exemptions, the provisions of the Motor Carrier Safety Regulations contained in 

49 CFR. 

Power to Enforce or Regulate 

Ohio Revised Code  4901:2-5-14  grants the Public Utilities Commission of Ohio 

the power to order a carrier to cease all or part of the carrier’s commercial 

motor vehicle operations whenever it is determined that a violation of this 

chapter poses an imminent hazard to safety. 

Vehicle Laws 

Maintenance and Inspection 

Ohio Revised Code  4513.52  contains requirements for the adoption and 

enforcement of rules relating to the inspection of buses, including the 

requirement that bus safety inspections be conducted at least on an annual basis; 

4901:2-5-11  contains requirements for submitting to a vehicle inspection and 

correcting violations or defects noted in the inspection report. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  85 

Vehicle Out of Service 

Ohio Revised Code  4901:2-5-07  prescribes rules for out-of-service vehicles and 

drivers. 

Personnel Laws 

General Qualifications 

Ohio Revised Code  4901:2-5-04  (A) prescribes general driver qualification 

requirements. 

Physical/Medical Qualifications 

Ohio Revised Code  4901:2-5-04  (C) prescribes driver qualification requirements 

with regard to medical certification and physical examinations. 

Driver Out of Service and Return to Duty 

Ohio Revised Code  4901:2-5-07  prescribes rules for out-of-service vehicles and 

drivers. 

State DOT Regulation 

Beyond ensuring that grant program sub-recipients are following all federal 

and state laws and requirements, ODOT does not regulate transit/paratransit 

vehicles operated by public transit agencies. However, sub-recipients may have 

their own requirements regarding bus safety policies and procedures. ODOT 

enters into transit vehicle contracts on a two-year term, with all term contract 

buses being safety tested as required by FTA. ODOT is currently implementing 

a system safety and emergency preparedness plan (SSEPP) that is not mandatory 

but highly recommended for sub-recipients. That will change with MAP-21, as 

ODOT is currently reviewing FTA’s requirements regarding transit safety plans. 

ODOT requires each sub-recipient to follow a preventive maintenance plan that 

is documented, verifiable, and at least as strict as the manufacturer’s preventive 

maintenance plan. 

# Oklahoma 

Vehicle Laws 

Size and Weight Limitations 

Oklahoma Statute  §14-103  states that no single bus, with or without load, shall 

have an overall length, inclusive of front and rear bumpers, in excess of 45 feet. 

Brake Equipment and Performance 

Oklahoma Statute  §12-301  (G) contains reservoir equipment requirements for 

buses equipped with an air or vacuum brake system, and (H) requires buses to 

be equipped with service brake warning devices and signals as required by 49 SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  86 

CFR, Part 393.51;  §12-302  prescribes requirements for the performance ability of 

brakes. 

> Emergency/Safety Equipment

Oklahoma Statute  §12-407  requires certain vehicles, including buses, to carry 

flares or other warning devices;  §12-408  prescribes requirements for the display 

of warning devices for certain vehicles, including passenger buses, when disabled 

on the traveled portion of the highway or adjacent shoulder. 

> Passenger Compartment and Entrances/Exits

Oklahoma Statute  §12-405.2  (A) prohibits the fuel tank or fuel intake pipe on any 

bus from being located within or above the passenger-carrying portion of the 

bus. 

Operational Laws 

> Rail Crossing Procedures

Oklahoma Statute  §11-702  prescribes rules requiring the driver of a bus, whether 

the bus is occupied or unoccupied, to stop, look, and listen at all railroad 

crossings, and to cross tracks without shifting gears .

State DOT Regulation 

The Oklahoma Department of Transportation’s (OKDOT) Transit Programs 

Division (TPD) is responsible for the administration of federal Section 5311 

Program funds as promulgated under Title 730, Chapter 45 of the Oklahoma 

Administrative Rules. FTA’s Circular 9040.1, as revised, provides guidance to 

the states on the administration and management of the Section 5311 Program 

and requires each state to develop a State Management Plan (SMP) outlining its 

policies and procedures for management of the Section 5311 Program. Section 

2.7 of TPD’s SMP outlines vehicle/equipment maintenance requirements. The 

Division conducts on-site project evaluations and compliance reviews of each 

sub-recipient’s management and operations, which includes a random review of 

vehicle maintenance documents. Annual vehicle inspections are not required; 

however, TPD conducts an on-site inventory of equipment purchased using 

FTA funds on a biennial basis. Operator safety training is provided through 

the Oklahoma’s RTAP program, as well as through state and regional transit 

associations. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  87 

# Oregon 

Vehicle Laws 

General Equipment Requirements 

Oregon Revised Statute  §815.182  contains requirements for fenders or 

mudguards for certain types of vehicles, including buses;  §816.260  contains 

requirements for bus safety lights;  §816.320  contains lighting equipment 

requirements for certain vehicles, including commercial buses. 

Operational Laws 

Rail Crossing Procedures 

Oregon Revised Statute  §811.460  contains rail crossing procedures for certain 

vehicles, including commercial buses. 

Personnel Laws 

General Qualifications 

Oregon Revised Statute  §820.200  requires transit drivers to be 21 years of age 

or older. 

Pre-employment Screening, Driving Record, 

and Criminal History 

Oregon Revised Statute  §267.237  requires some, but not all, operators to have 

background check policies and procedures that include fingerprinting. Specifically, 

the law requires transit districts organized under ORS 267 to follow this 

requirement, but not cities, counties, tribes, or for-/non-profit transit providers. 

Workplace Policy Laws 

Safety/Substance Abuse Programs and Policies 

Oregon Revised Statute  §825.410  requires every motor carrier to (a) have an 

in-house drug and alcohol testing program that meets the federal requirements 

of 49 C.F.R. part 382; or (b) be a member of a consortium that provides testing 

that meets the federal requirements. 

State DOT Regulation 

Per grant agreement, the Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT) 

requires that operators of transit vehicles funded by transit grants maintain 

vehicles at least to the manufacturer’s recommendations or other policy 

adopted by the governing board. ODOT also requires annual vehicle inspections, 

defensive driver training, and minimum $1,000,000 vehicle insurance per grant 

agreement. Procurement follows the federal common rule, which is that public SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  88 

bodies must follow Oregon law, with the additional requirements of the FTA 

regulations for procurement; non-profits follow FTA requirements. Vehicle 

specifications are not regulated, except by federal law. 

# Pennsylvania 

Incorporation of Federal Regulations 

Pennsylvania Code  §37.205  generally incorporates, with certain amendments and 

exemptions, 49 CFR Parts 382 and 390-396. 

Vehicle Laws 

General Equipment Requirements 

Pennsylvania Code  §153.4  (a) prescribes requirements for lighting equipment 

on certain vehicles, including buses;  §161.5  prescribes requirements for 

materials on certain motor vehicle components, including standee windows, in 

buses;  Subchapter F  of Pennsylvania Code Chapter 175 prescribes equipment 

standards with regard to suspension; steering; tires and wheels; lighting and 

electrical systems; glazing; mirrors; windshield defrosters, washers, and wipers; 

speedometers; and odometers. 

Brake Equipment and Performance 

Pennsylvania Code  §175.94  contains requirements for braking systems; 

Subchapter F  of Pennsylvania Code Chapter 175 prescribes equipment standards 

for braking systems. 

Emergency/Safety Equipment 

Subchapter F  of Pennsylvania Code Chapter 175 prescribes equipment standards 

with regard to horns and warning devices. 

Fuel and Exhaust Systems 

Pennsylvania Code  §175.241  prescribes rules for compressed and liquefied 

gas fuel systems;  Subchapter F  of Pennsylvania Code Chapter 175 prescribes 

equipment standards with regard to fuel and exhaust systems. 

Lighting and Electrical Systems 

Pennsylvania Code  §175.96  contains requirements for lighting and electrical 

systems. 

Maintenance and Inspection 

Subchapter F  of Chapter 175 prescribes equipment standards with regard to 

with regard to inspections for suspension; steering; braking systems; tires and 

wheels; lighting and electrical systems; glazing; mirrors; windshield defrosters, 

washers, and wipers; fuel systems; speedometers; odometers; exhaust systems; SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  89 

horns and warning devices; body; and chassis; and sets forth requirements for 

inspection procedure; under  75 Pa.C.S. §4702 , mass transit vehicles are subject 

to semiannual safety inspection. 

State DOT Regulation 

Beyond compliance with federal requirements, the Pennsylvania Department 

of Transportation (PennDOT) does not regulate transit/paratransit vehicles 

operated by public transit agencies. Annual vehicle inspections are not required; 

however, under  75 Pa.C.S. § 4702 , mass transit vehicles are subject to semiannual 

safety inspections. 

# Rhode Island 

Power to Enforce or Regulate 

Rhode Island General Law  §31-22-12  grants the Rhode Island Division of 

Motor Vehicles (DMV) jurisdiction over the lighting, equipment, safety, and 

sanitary condition of all taxicabs, buses, jitneys, and other vehicles used for the 

transportation of passengers for hire;  §31-25-15  stipulates that the administrator 

of the DMV, upon registering any bus for the transportation of ten or more 

persons, may require any information and may make any investigation or test as 

necessary to determine whether the vehicle may safely be operated upon the 

highways in compliance with all the provisions of  Chapters 1 – 27 of Title 31 ; and 

§39-13-11  grants the DMV jurisdiction over the licensing of any jitney (defined 

under  §39-13-1  to include any motor bus) and its operator and over its lighting, 

safety, and sanitary conditions. 

Vehicle Laws 

Size and Weight Limitations 

Rhode Island General Law  §31-25-5  prescribes maximum length limits for buses. 

General Equipment Requirements 

Rhode Island General Law  §31-23-27  prescribes requirements for rear wheel 

mud flaps on buses;  §31-23-43  requires buses having a seat capacity of more than 

seven passengers, except those that are equipped with positive spring-loaded air 

parking brakes, to be equipped with one pair of approved wheel safety chock 

blocks;  §31-24-37  prescribes requirements for clearance and marker lamps and 

reflectors on buses. 

Emergency/Safety Equipment 

Rhode Island General Law  §31-23-29  prescribes requirements for flares and 

warning devices on passenger buses. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  90 

> Seatbelts and Child Restraints

Rhode Island General Law  §31-23-41  prescribes requirements for driver safety 

belts in public service vehicles, including buses. 

> Maintenance and Inspection

Rhode Island General Law  §31-22-12  requires that an inspection be made of 

all taxicabs, buses, jitneys, and other vehicles used for the transportation of 

passengers for hire before registering the vehicles, and from time to time 

thereafter as the Rhode Island Division of Motor Vehicles (DMV) deems 

necessary for the convenience, protection, and safety of passengers and the 

public. 

Operational Laws 

> Stopping, Standing, and Parking

Rhode Island General Law  §31-23-43  requires that, for buses having a seating 

capacity of more than seven passengers (except those that are equipped with 

positive spring-loaded air parking brakes), safety chock blocks must be securely 

placed around the rear wheel of the vehicle whenever the bus is left unattended 

by the operator and is parked on a highway on a grade sufficient to cause it to 

move of its own momentum. 

Personnel Laws 

> Education, Training, and Testing

Rhode Island General Law  §39-13-11  requires satisfactory completion of a CPR 

training program for issuance of all new jitney (defined under  §39-13-1  to include 

any motor bus) licenses. 

State DOT Regulation 

The state DOT has no role in regulating the maintenance or operation of 

transit/paratransit vehicles in Rhode Island. The Rhode Island Public Transit 

Authority (RIPTA), which operates all the bus service in the state, has extensive 

prescreening, training, and background requirements through company policy but 

not required under state law. Regarding vehicle requirements, RIPTA use its own 

maintenance schedules and inspection requirements based on industry standards 

and OEM suggestions. The Rhode Island DMV requires all buses and motor 

coach carriers to have two annual vehicle inspections. State employed inspectors 

are the only certified persons that can conduct these inspections. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  91 

# South Carolina 

Incorporation of Federal Regulations 

South Carolina Code  §56-1-2005  requires the rules adopted by and regulations 

promulgated by the United States Department of Transportation (USDOT) 

relating to safety of operation and to equipment (49 CFR Parts 380, 382-385, 

and 390-399 and amendments thereto) to be adopted and enforced in South 

Carolina. 

Vehicle Laws 

Size and Weight Limitations 

South Carolina Code  §56-5-4040  prescribes maximum width limitations for 

motor buses and trolley coaches. 

General Equipment Requirements 

South Carolina Code  §56-5-4580  prescribes requirements for additional lighting 

equipment on buses;  §56-5-4590  prescribes requirements for the color of 

clearance lamps, side-marker lamps, reflectors, stop lights, and back-up lamps; 

§56-5-4600  prescribes requirements for the mounting of reflectors, clearance 

lamps, and side-marker lamps;  §56-5-4610  prescribes requirements for visibility 

of reflectors, clearance lamps, and marker lamps. 

Brake Equipment and Performance 

Sections i(1) and j(1) of South Carolina Code  §56-5-4850  prescribe requirements 

for brake equipment on buses with air-operated and compressed air brakes, 

respectively;  §56-5-4860  prescribes requirements for the performance ability of 

brakes. 

Emergency/Safety Equipment 

South Carolina Code  §56-5-5060  requires certain vehicles, including buses, to 

carry flares and other warning devices; and  §56-5-5090  prescribes requirements 

for the display of warning devices when certain vehicles, including buses, are 

disabled. 

State DOT Regulation 

While the South Carolina Department of Transportation (SCDOT) does not 

set regulation, the Department does oversee compliance with maintenance 

standards as set forth by manufacturer/state policy for assets in which the 

Department has federal or state interest. Annual vehicle inspections are not 

required. SCDOT staff inspect vehicles upon delivery (in order to process for 

payment/reimbursement) and conduct random inspections throughout the 

year. Additionally, SCDOT has implemented triennial oversight and compliance SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  92 

reviews on public providers that are conducted by SCDOT staff. During the 

site visit/review, vehicle maintenance records are reviewed to confirm that 

maintenance is being accomplished as required by the agency. 

# South Dakota 

Vehicle Laws 

General Equipment Requirements 

South Dakota Codified Law  32-17-14  prescribes clearance lamp requirements for 

buses with a capacity of ten or more passengers. 

Brake Equipment and Performance 

South Dakota Codified Law  32-18-8  contains the requirements for the 

performance ability of brakes for various vehicle classifications, including buses; 

32-18-19  contains reservoir equipment requirements for buses and trucks with 

air-operated brakes;  32-18-20  prescribes pressure gauge and low pressure 

warning signal requirements for buses with air-operated brakes. 

Operational Laws 

Rail Crossing Procedures 

South Dakota Codified Law  32-29-5  prescribes railroad grade crossing 

requirements for motor vehicles carrying passengers for hire. 

State DOT Regulation 

With regard to State DOT regulation of the maintenance or operation of transit/ 

paratransit vehicles operated by public transit agencies, the South Dakota 

Department of Transportation (SDDOT) requires vehicle maintenance to be 

performed as per the manufacturers recommended schedule, and requires 

vehicles to be inspected annually. The only additional requirement is that every 

transit bus driver must complete PASS training within 6 months of hire; all other 

driver requirements are federal. Procurement requirements follow federal law as 

well. 

# Tennessee 

Vehicle Laws 

Size and Weight Limitations 

Tennessee Statute  55-7-204  prescribes bus length limitations;  55-7-207  excepts 

buses owned and/or operated by public transit agencies from length and weight 

requirements, provided that the width and weight limitations of 23 U.S.C. §127, 

as amended, shall not be exceeded, and provided that the public transit agency SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  93 

is itself an agency of a metropolitan government or county or municipality 

whose population according to the 1970 census exceeds 400,000 but is less than 

800,000. 

> Emergency/Safety Equipment

Tennessee Statute  55-9-102  prescribes requirements for emergency parts and 

accessories to be carried on certain types of motor vehicles, including buses; 

55-9-103  specifies the requirements for display of warning devices when certain 

vehicles, including buses, are disabled;  55-9-104  prescribes requirements for the 

display of warning devices for certain vehicles, including buses, when stopped for 

causes other than disablement upon the traveled portion of the highway or the 

adjacent shoulder. 

> Maintenance and Inspection

Tennessee Statute  65-15-128  (a)(4) requires each for-hire motor carrier providing 

passenger transportation service in a motor vehicle designed or constructed to 

accommodate and transport eight or more passengers to submit each motor 

vehicle operated in the capacity as a passenger transportation service to an 

annual safety examination, to be conducted by the Department of Safety. 

Personnel Laws 

> Physical/Medical Qualifications

Tennessee Statute  65-15-128  (a)(3) requires each for-hire motor carrier providing 

passenger transportation service in a motor vehicle designed or constructed to 

accommodate and transport eight or more passengers to require the operators 

of its motor vehicles to submit to physical examination every two years, in 

accordance with regulations promulgated by the United States Department of 

Transportation. 

Workplace Policy Laws 

> General Policies

Tennessee Statute  65-15-128  (a)(5) requires each for-hire motor carrier 

providing passenger transportation service in a motor vehicle designed or 

constructed to accommodate and transport eight or more passengers to 

comply with all requirements deemed necessary to protect the public safety and 

welfare as specified by the Department of Safety in its promulgation of rules and 

regulations. 

> Drug and Alcohol Testing and Policies

Tennessee Statute  65-15-128  (a)(2) requires each for-hire motor carrier providing 

passenger transportation service in a motor vehicle designed or constructed to SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  94 

accommodate and transport eight or more passengers to conduct a program 

of mandatory random drug testing for the operators of its motor vehicles in 

accordance with regulations promulgated by the United States Department of 

Transportation. 

State DOT Regulation 

Although the Tennessee Department of Transportation (TDOT) does not have 

specific bus safety requirements that must be met, the Department provides 

oversight for FTA funds that pass through the state. Generally, sub-grantees 

are rural or small urban agencies. TDOT requires all sub-recipients who utilize 

assets purchased with federal and/or state funds to submit a comprehensive 

maintenance plan that will include, at a minimum, procedures for maintaining 

vehicles, facilities and ADA accessibility features, and to provide documentation 

of maintenance and inspections performed. Agencies must operate under safety 

standards of the Department of Safety. Also, many of the rural agencies provide 

services under contract for human service agencies that have very specific 

requirements. Per the Tennessee State Management Plan, vehicles funded under 

Section 5311 must be inspected annually at the sub-recipient’s agency by a staff 

member or designee of the Division of Multimodal Transportation Resources. 

The inspection covers tires, glass, engine, transmission, brakes, steering, exterior 

and interior conditions, as well as an inspection of the wheelchair lift if the 

vehicles are lift-equipped. The main purpose of the inspection is to determine if 

the vehicle has been properly maintained and is in safe operating condition. 

# Texas 

Vehicle Laws 

> Size and Weight Limitations

Texas Statute  §621.203  (b) prescribes maximum length limitations for motor 

buses. 

> General Equipment Requirements

Texas Statute  §547.608  requires a person who sells or registers a new passenger 

bus to equip the vehicle doors, windows, and windshield with an approved safety 

glazing material;  §547.352  (1) requires buses that are at least eighty inches wide 

to be equipped with clearance lamps, side marker lamps, hazard lamps, and 

reflectors, and (2) prescribes specifications for hazard lamps on buses that are at 

least 30 feet in length. 

> Brake Equipment and Performance

Texas Statute  §547.406  prescribes brake reservoir or reserve requirements 

for certain vehicles equipped with air-operated brakes, including buses; 

§547.407  prescribes brake warning devices requirements for certain vehicles SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  95 

equipped with air-operated brakes, including buses;  §547.408  prescribes brake 

performance requirements for various vehicle classifications, including buses. 

Emergency/Safety Equipment 

Texas Statute  §547.502  specifies the types of visible warning devices that must be 

carried on trucks and buses during daytime and nighttime;  §547.503  prescribes 

requirements for hazard warning lamps that must be displayed on vehicles, 

including buses, when stopped on a roadway or shoulder;  §547.7011  prescribes 

additional equipment requirements for hazard lamps on buses acquired on or 

after September 1, 1997 that provide public transportation, requires the hazard 

lamps to be activated if the bus stops to load or unload a person under 18 

years of age, and requires buses to bear a sign on the rear of the bus stating: 

“Caution—children may be exiting.” 

Operational Laws 

Use of Mobile Electronic Device 

Texas Statute  §545.425  prohibits a person from using a wireless communication 

device while operating a passenger bus with a minor passenger on the bus except 

in case of emergency or if the passenger bus is not in motion. 

Rail Crossing Procedures 

Texas Statute  §545.253  specifies the requirements for buses to stop at all 

railroad grade crossings. 

Prohibited Operations 

Texas Statute  §545.406  prohibits an operator of a truck, tractor, or bus moving 

on a downgrade from coasting with the clutch disengaged. 

State DOT Regulation 

Beyond compliance with federal requirements, the Texas Department of 

Transportation (TxDOT) does not regulate the maintenance or operation of 

transit/paratransit vehicles operated by public transit agencies. Annual vehicle 

inspections are not required. 

# Utah 

Vehicle Laws 

Emergency/Safety Equipment 

Utah Code  41-6a-1611  contains hazard warning lamp requirements for certain 

vehicles, including buses;  41-6a-1637  prescribes requirements for flares, fusees, 

electric lanterns, and flags on certain vehicles, including buses;  41-6a-1638 

requires the operator to immediately actuate vehicular hazard warning signal SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  96 

lamps when a bus 80 inches or more in overall width or 30 feet or more in over-

all length is stopped on a roadway or adjacent shoulder. 

Operational Laws 

Prohibited Operations 

Utah Code  41-6a-1709  prohibits the operator of a truck or bus moving on a 

downgrade from coasting with the clutch disengaged .

State DOT Regulation 

The Utah Department of Transportation (UDOT) Public Transit Team is only 

involved with FTA grants for specialized transit, serving elderly, disadvantaged 

and rural transit operations. The Public Transit Team does not deal with state 

regulations for bus safety. The Team conducts bi-annual compliance inspections 

on specialized transit vehicles that have been funded for procurement using 

federal funds. As a part of that compliance, UDOT reminds the vehicle owner to 

adhere to scheduled maintenance to ensure warranty satisfaction. UDOT does 

not regulate the maintenance or operation of transit/paratransit vehicles. Annual 

vehicle inspections are not required; however the UDOT Public Transit Team 

conducts bi-annual compliance inspections on specialized transit vehicles that 

have been funded for procurement using federal funds. 

# Vermont 

Power to Enforce or Regulate 

Vermont Statutes Annotated (V.S.A.), Title Five,  §1822  stipulates that a common 

carrier shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the transportation board and, while 

so operating, to all reasonable rules as the board prescribes with respect to the 

convenience and safety of passengers and the public. 

Vehicle Laws 

Vehicle Condition 

Vermont Statutes Annotated (V.S.A.), Title Five,  §1828  requires common carriers 

to furnish motor buses and operate them in a manner that will afford safety and 

protection to their passengers and to the public. 

General Equipment Requirements 

Vermont Statutes Annotated (V.S.A.), Title 23,  §1249  prescribes requirements 

for directional signal lamps on certain vehicles, including buses;  §1306  prescribes 

requirements for rear wheel flaps on certain vehicles, including buses. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  97 

Emergency/Safety Equipment 

Vermont Statutes Annotated (V.S.A.), Title 23,  §1006c  prescribes chain and tire 

requirements for buses; 23 V.S.A.  §1303  prescribes requirements for electric 

flares or reflector type flares on certain vehicles, including buses. 

Passenger Compartment and Entrances/Exits 

Vermont Statutes Annotated (V.S.A.), Title 23,  §1301  prescribes requirements 

for emergency exits on motor buses. 

Maintenance and Inspection 

Vermont Statutes Annotated (V.S.A.), Title 23,  §1222  (a) requires motor buses to 

be inspected twice during the calendar year at six-month intervals. 

Operational Laws 

Rail Crossing Procedures 

Vermont Statutes Annotated (V.S.A.), Title 23,  §1072  prescribes rules and 

requirements for drivers of motor vehicles carrying passengers for hire to stop, 

look, and listen at all railroad crossings, and, when it is safe to proceed, to cross 

tracks without shifting gears. 

Prohibited Operations 

Vermont Statutes Annotated (V.S.A.), Title 23,  §1121  prohibits the driver of a 

motor bus when traveling upon a down grade from coasting with the clutch 

disengaged. 

Workplace Policy Laws 

Accidents and Emergencies 

Under  §1806 , Title Five of the Vermont Statutes Annotated (V.S.A.), the 

superintendent or manager of any transportation company owning or 

operating motor vehicles used as common carriers shall notify the Agency of 

Transportation by telephone or wire and subsequently in writing of any accident 

within Vermont, immediately after its occurrence, which results in loss of life or 

injury to any person which shall incapacitate him or her from engaging in his or 

her usual vocations. 

State DOT Regulation 

The Vermont Agency of Transportation (VTrans) administers the FTA- and 

state-sponsored public transit programs, and follows the federal law, program 

rules, and requirements associated with each of the funding programs used 

to purchase, maintain, and operate the vehicles used in the program; general 

commercial drivers license laws are enforced where applicable. For vehicles, SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  98 

VTtans requires that grant sub-recipients follow manufacturer’s maintenance 

schedules. 

# Virginia 

Vehicle Laws 

Size and Weight Limitations 

Virginia Code  §46.2-1105  prescribes maximum width limitations for certain 

vehicles, including buses;  §46.2-1107  states that the Commissioner of Highways, 

upon application by the governing body of any county, may permit within that 

county the operation of passenger buses wider than 96 inches but no wider 

than 102 inches;  §46.2-1108  states that if federal law permits the operation 

of passenger buses wider than 96 inches on the interstate highway system, 

the Commissioner of Highways may permit the operation of passenger buses 

wider than 96 inches but no wider than 102 inches, on interstate and defense 

highways or any other four lane divided highways under the jurisdiction of the 

Commonwealth Transportation Board;  §46.2-1112  prescribes maximum length 

limitations for buses;  §46.2-1113  provides exceptions to length limitations for 

buses. 

Brake Equipment and Performance 

Virginia Code  §46.2-1067  prescribes brake performance standards for certain 

vehicles, including buses. 

Seatbelts and Child Restraints 

Virginia Code  §46.2-1092  states that no bus with a gross vehicle weight rating 

of 10,000 pounds or less, registered in Virginia and manufactured on or after 

September 1, 1991, shall be operated on the highways in Virginia unless the 

forward-facing rear outboard seats are equipped with rear seat lap/shoulder 

belts of types required to be installed at the time of manufacture by the United 

States Department of Transportation, and that buses shall not be operated on 

the highways of Virginia unless equipped with rear seat lap/shoulder belts of 

types required to be installed at the time of manufacture by the United States 

Department of Transportation for each forward-facing rear outboard seating 

position on a readily removable seat. 

Maintenance and Inspection 

Virginia Code  §46.2-1157  requires annual inspection of motor vehicles, including 

buses;  §46.2-1175  requires operators of commuter buses to allow employees 

of the Department of State Police to inspect maintenance records and buses 

to determine the safe condition of the buses or to verify the accuracy of the 

maintenance logs. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  99 

Operational Laws 

Operating Speeds 

Under Virginia Code  §46.2-870 , the maximum speed limit on all highways other 

than interstate highways or other limited access highways with divided roadways, 

non-limited access highways having four or more lanes, and all state primary 

highways shall be 55 miles per hour if the vehicle is a passenger motor vehicle, 

bus, or pickup or panel truck. 

Rail Crossing Procedures 

Virginia Code  §46.2-886  prescribes rules requiring drivers of motor vehicles 

carrying passenger for hire to stop, look, and listen at all railroad crossings, and 

to cross tracks without shifting gears. 

Prohibited Operations 

Virginia Code  §46.2-893  prohibits buses from stopping wholly or partially on the 

traveled portion of any highway outside of cities and towns for the purpose of 

taking on or discharging passengers unless the operator cannot leave the traveled 

portion of the highway with safety. 

Requirements for Larger Buses 

Virginia Code  §46.2-1108  prescribes rules for the operation of passenger buses 

wider than 96 inches on the interstate highway system, if federal law permits; 

§46.2-1147  requires a written permit authorizing the operation of articulated 

buses on the highways. 

Workplace Policy Laws 

Recordkeeping 

Virginia Code  §46.2-1175  requires operators of commuter buses to maintain 

records of all maintenance performed on such buses. 

State DOT Regulation 

The Virginia Department of Transportation (VDOT) requires that Section 5311 

and Section 5310 vehicles be properly maintained throughout their useful life, and 

checks maintenance records as a part of its on-site review program and process. 

Virginia has a Commercial Driver’s license program; in addition, FTA requires a 

drug and alcohol testing program for all federal transit funding recipients. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  100 

# Washington 

Vehicle Laws 

General Equipment Requirements 

Revised Code of Washington (RCW), Section  46.37.080  specifies that the 

following sections (46.37.090-46.37.120), relating to clearance, marker lamps, and 

reflectors, apply to certain vehicles, including passenger buses;  RCW 46.37.090 

prescribes requirements for additional lighting equipment on certain vehicles, 

including buses;  RCW 46.37.100  prescribes requirements for the color of lamps 

and reflectors;  RCW 46.37.110  prescribes requirements for reflector and lamp 

mountings;  RCW 46.37.120  prescribes requirements for reflector and lamp 

visibility;  RCW 46.37.215  requires buses eighty inches or more in overall width 

or thirty feet or more in overall length to be equipped with hazard warning 

lamps that meet certain requirements;  RCW 46.37.430  prescribes safety glazing 

requirements for passenger-type motor vehicles, including passenger buses. 

Brake Equipment and Performance 

Revised Code of Washington (RCW), Section  46.37.340  9(a) prescribes 

requirements for reservoir capacity and check valve on buses with air-operated 

brakes;  RCW 46.37.340  10(a) prescribes requirements for pressure gauge and 

low pressure warning signals on buses with air-operated brakes;  RCW 46.37.351 

prescribes requirements for the performance ability of brakes for various vehicle 

classifications, including buses. 

Emergency/Safety Equipment 

Revised Code of Washington (RCW), Section  46.37.440  prescribes requirements 

for flares and other warning devices on certain vehicles, including passenger 

buses;  RCW 46.37.450  prescribes requirements for the display of warning 

devices for certain vehicles, including passenger buses, when disabled on the 

traveled portion of the highway or adjacent shoulder. 

Window Transparency 

Revised Code of Washington (RCW), Section  46.37.430  prescribes standards for 

light transmission levels for the tinting of side windows immediately behind the 

driver of certain vehicles, including buses. 

State DOT Regulation 

The Washington State Department of Transportation (WSDOT) requires all 

organizations awarded federal or state grants through WSDOT to develop 

and implement Vehicle Maintenance Plans (VMP) for transportation program 

vehicles of which WSDOT maintains legal ownership. For specific safety policies, 

including vehicle inspections, maintenance thresholds, pre-trip inspections, etc., SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  101 

refer to Appendix D of the  Guide to Preparing your VMP . Additionally, WSDOT 

staff conducts site visits at least once every two years to inspect the facilities, 

equipment, and vehicles of grantees who receive capital project grants. The site 

visit includes visual inspection of vehicles and review of maintenance records to 

ensure that the agency is following its maintenance schedules as outlines in its 

VMP or Asset Management Plan (AMP). If any discrepancy is found, staff issues 

site visit deficiencies and requests the agency to develop a corrective action plan 

within 30 days. If a critical safety deficiency is found, staff will immediately seize 

the vehicle from service operation and request the agency to perform corrective 

repair. The agency will have to submit to WSDOT certification that the repair 

has been conducted, and verify that the vehicle has been inspected and is in 

a state of good repair for operation. With regard to personnel-related safety 

standards, such as screening, training, testing, licensure, background reporting, 

etc., individual transit agencies have their own policies. It should be noted that, 

pending FTA guidance, WSDOT is working with partners to develop new public 

transportation safety policies responding to MAP-21 requirement. 

# West Virginia 

Power to Enforce or Regulate 

West Virginia Code  §17-16C-2  designates the Department of Transportation, 

through the Division of Public Transit, as the agency responsible for administering 

all federal and state programs relating to public transportation;  §17-16C-3  grants 

the Division the power to (n) implement rules necessary to administer all federal 

and state programs relating to public transportation. 

Vehicle Laws 

> Size and Weight Limitations

West Virginia Code  §17C-17-2  prescribes width requirements for certain 

vehicles, including buses .

> General Equipment Requirements

West Virginia Code  §17C-15-8  specifies that the following sections (§§17C-15-9 

to 17C-15-13), relating to clearance and marker lamps, reflectors, and stop 

lights, apply to certain vehicles, including passenger buses;  §17C-15-9  prescribes 

requirements for additional lighting equipment on certain vehicles, including 

buses;  §17C-15-10  prescribes requirements for lamp and reflector colors;  §17C-

15-11  prescribes requirements for reflector and lamp mountings;  §17C-15-12 

prescribes requirements for reflector and lamp visibility. 

> Emergency/Safety Equipment

West Virginia Code  §17C-15-39  requires certain vehicles, including buses, to 

carry flares or other warning devices;  §17C-15-40  prescribes requirements for SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  102 

the display of warning devices for certain vehicles, including buses, when disabled 

on  the traveled portion of the highway or adjacent shoulder. 

Operational Laws 

> Rail Crossing Procedures

West Virginia Code  §17C-12-3  prescribes rules requiring the driver of a bus 

transporting passengers to stop, look, and listen at all railroad crossings, and, 

when it is safe to proceed, to cross tracks without shifting gears. 

Personnel Laws 

> General Qualifications

Under West Virginia Code  §17B-2-4 , no person may drive a motor vehicle for 

the transportation of persons or property for compensation until the person has 

been licensed as a Class A, B, C or D driver and until he or she is in compliance 

with the  Uniform Commercial Driver’s License Act .

State DOT Regulation 

Maintenance/operational requirements of transit vehicles are addressed by 

the West Virginia Department of Transportation (WVDOT) through West 

Virginia’s Division of Public Transit (DPT) observations from yearly onsite visits; 

requirement of maintenance records, including pre- and post-trip inspections, 

PM, and breakdowns; and PASS training, drug and alcohol screenings, and hiring 

practices, which may differ on a system to system basis. Also, when taking 

delivery of vehicles procured by the West Virginia Division of Public Transit 

(DPT), recipients sign an agreement which addresses their responsibilities 

with regard to vehicle care and maintenance. With regard to procurement, 

DPT mentions in multiple locations within the vehicle specifications that the 

assembled buses/vans and their components must comply with state and federal 

standards. Specifically, the following equipment is described with standard or 

additional safety features: emergency windows/exits/roof escape hatch and 

emergency releases for the ambulatory passenger and lift doors; specifics 

on bus frame and roof construction; additional drive shaft guard; standard 

additional traffic alert brake light, back up cameras, door ajar and reverse 

alarms; treads and flooring to minimize slips and tripping hazards; inclusion of 

interlocking Intermotive gateway for lift deployment; safe seating and securement 

requirements, placement of required passenger assists, and standards of glazing; 

onboard safety equipment, exterior reflective tape for increased visibility, 

interior and exterior signage, and availability of cameras for the buses. In addition 

to the FTA required bus testing and inspection, DPT hires online inspectors 

to complement the manufacturer’s inspection process through production, as 

outlined in DPT specifications. Annual inspections are not required. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  103 

# Wisconsin 

Vehicle Laws 

Size and Weight Limitations 

Wisconsin Statute  348.05  (2) prescribes width requirements for certain vehicles, 

including buses;  348.06  (2m) prescribes height requirements for double-decked 

buses; and  348.07  (h) stipulates that articulated buses in excess of 66 feet may 

not operate on urban highways without a permit .

General Equipment Requirements 

Wisconsin Statute  347.26  (5) prescribes requirements for identification lamps on 

buses;  347.40  (3) prescribes requirements for outside rearview mirrors on motor 

buses .

Emergency/Safety Equipment 

Wisconsin Statute  347.145  prescribes rules for deceleration warning lights on 

motor buses;  347.28  requires certain vehicles, including buses, to carry flares or 

other warning devices;  347.29  prescribes requirements for the display of warning 

devices for certain vehicles, including buses, when standing on  the traveled 

portion of the highway or adjacent shoulder. 

Maintenance and Inspection 

Wisconsin Statute  110.05  (2) requires annual inspections of specialized transit 

Human Service Vehicles. Additionally, Wisconsin statute  110.063  (2)(c) requires 

urban transit systems to self-inspect their vehicles annually and to submit the 

results to the State. 

Operational Laws 

Prohibited Operations 

Wisconsin Statute  194.32  prohibits the operation of any passenger-carrying 

vehicle over the public highways of Wisconsin with any trailer or semitrailer 

attached except for an articulated bus as defined in  340.01  (2m), and prohibits 

the operation of interurban motor buses of a double-decked open-roof design 

over the public highways of Wisconsin. 

State DOT Regulation 

Through enforcement of federal safety and asset management standards, transit 

systems are required to have vehicle maintenance plans. Plans must address 

certain elements such as vehicle inspections, service intervals, etc., and are 

reviewed and approved by WisDOT. Additionally, WisDOT’s capital grant 

agreements require transit agencies to meet or exceed manufacturer-specified 

maintenance schedules for equipment funded through the grant. While the State SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  104 

requires each agency to develop and adhere to a maintenance plan, maintenance 

plan formats are not prescribed by the State; local transit properties are required 

to follow inspection and service schedules established therein. WisDOT reviews 

and approves the maintenance plans and also reviews transit systems for which 

it has oversight (Section 5311 fund recipients) on a regular basis to verify that 

they are satisfying elements of their plan. Screening, training, testing, background 

reporting, and other personnel requirements are addressed according to 

policies established at the local public transit system level. Regarding vehicle 

procurement, vendors participating in the contract must bid vehicles that comply 

with FTA bus testing requirements (49 C.F.R., Part 665) and State of Wisconsin 

equipment and safety standards for the vehicles. 

# Wyoming 

Vehicle Laws 

General Equipment Requirements 

Wyoming Statute  §31-5-923  prescribes requirements for hazard lamps on buses 

and other vehicles eighty inches or more in over-all width or thirty feet or more 

in over-all length;  §31-5-956  (f)  prohibits a person from operating a bus when 

one or more of the tires which are used on the front wheels of that vehicle has a 

tread depth less than four thirty-seconds (4/32) inch. 

Emergency/Safety Equipment 

Wyoming Statute  §31-5-957  requires certain vehicles, including buses, to carry 

flares, lanterns, or reflectors;  §31-5-958  prescribes requirements for the display 

of warning devices for certain vehicles, including buses, when  stopped upon a 

roadway or adjacent shoulder. 

Operational Laws 

Rail Crossing Procedures 

Wyoming Statute  §31-5-511  prescribes rules requiring the driver of a motor 

vehicle carrying passengers for hire, before crossing at grade any track or tracks 

of a railroad, to actuate the vehicle’s four-way hazard flashers prior to stopping 

at the grade crossing; stop, look, and listen in both directions along the track; 

and, when it is safe to proceed, to cross the tracks without manually shifting 

gears. 

Prohibited Operations 

Wyoming Statute  §31-5-230  prohibits the driver of a truck or bus when traveling 

upon a down grade from coasting with the clutch disengaged. SECTION 3: STATE SAFETY LAWS AND REGULATIONS FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  105 

State DOT Regulation 

The Wyoming Department of Transportation (WYDOT) incorporates safety 

standards for transit operators and vehicles through contracting mechanisms. 

Driver Safety and Passenger Assistance Training, ADA compliance training, and 

other technical training programs are required on a regular basis (as specified 

by the State Management Plan). If safety violations are found and a recipient fails 

to correct them or fails to comply with the training mandate, further financial 

assistance may be withheld. Vehicles must comply with the Motor Vehicle Safety 

Standards established by the United States Department of Transportation. When 

new motor vehicles are purchased, there shall be obtained from each vendor a 

certification in writing that: “The horsepower of the vehicle is adequate for the 

speed, range and terrain in which it will be required to operate and also to meet 

the demands of all auxiliary power equipment.” WYDOT requires all agencies 

with transit rolling stock purchased with FTA funds to follow manufacturer’s 

service guidelines and recommendations. Pre- and post-trip inspections are 

required of all sub-recipient transit agencies. 

WYDOT or an accepted designee does a pre-delivery inspection of all  transit 

vehicles prior to acceptance by the recipient. WYDOT does not specify the 

requirement for an annual inspection, but rather relies on the operators to 

perform daily vehicle inspections prior to that vehicle being put into service 

for that day. All public transit agencies have a vehicle inspection list provided by 

WYDOT listing the safety-critical vehicle components that must be checked 

every day. Those reports are to be filled out by the vehicle operator and stored 

by the agency in the individual vehicle files. APPENDIX FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  106 A

# Federal Motor Carrier 

# Safety Regulations for 

# Bus Transit APPENDIX A: FEDERAL MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY REGULATIONS FOR BUS TRANSIT FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  107 

# Regulation  Link 

374.317  Identification – bus and driver  http://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/rules-regulations/administration/fmcsr/ 

fmcsrruletext.aspx?reg=374.317 

390.40 

What responsibilities do intermodal equip -

ment providers have under the Federal 

Motor Carrier Safety Regulations (49 CFR 

parts 350-399)? 

http://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/rules-regulations/administration/fmcsr/ 

fmcsrruletext.aspx?reg=390.40 

392.3  Ill or fatigued operator  http://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/rules-regulations/administration/fmcsr/ 

fmcsrruletext.aspx?reg=392.3 

392.7  Equipment, inspection and use  http://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/rules-regulations/administration/fmcsr/ 

fmcsrruletext.aspx?reg=392.7 

393.95  Emergency equipment  http://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/rules-regulations/administration/fmcsr/ 

fmcsrruletext.aspx?reg=393.95 

392.10  Railroad grade crossings; stopping required  http://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/rules-regulations/administration/fmcsr/ 

fmcsrruletext.aspx?reg=392.10 

392.11  Railroad grade crossings; slowing down 

required 

http://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/rules-regulations/administration/fmcsr/ 

fmcsrruletext.aspx?reg=392.11 

392.14  Hazardous conditions; extreme caution.  http://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/rules-regulations/administration/fmcsr/ 

fmcsrruletext.aspx?reg=392.14 

392.16  Use of seat belts  http://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/rules-regulations/administration/fmcsr/ 

fmcsrruletext.aspx?reg=392.16 

392.22  Emergency signals; stopped commercial 

motor vehicles 

http://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/rules-regulations/administration/fmcsr/ 

fmcsrruletext.aspx?reg=392.22 

392.24  Emergency signals; flame-producing  http://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/rules-regulations/administration/fmcsr/ 

fmcsrruletext.aspx?reg=392.24 

392.25  Flame producing devices  http://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/rules-regulations/administration/fmcsr/ 

fmcsrruletext.aspx?reg=392.25 

392.33  Obscured lamps or reflective devices/ 

material 

http://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/rules-regulations/administration/fmcsr/ 

fmcsrruletext.aspx?reg=392.33 

392.50  Ignition of fuel; prevention  http://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/rules-regulations/administration/fmcsr/ 

fmcsrruletext.aspx?reg=392.50 

392.62  Safe operation, buses  http://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/rules-regulations/administration/fmcsr/ 

fmcsrruletext.aspx?reg=392.62 

392.64  Riding within closed commercial motor 

vehicles without proper exits 

http://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/rules-regulations/administration/fmcsr/ 

fmcsrruletext.aspx?reg=392.64 

392.66  Carbon monoxide; use of commercial 

motor vehicle when detected 

http://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/rules-regulations/administration/fmcsr/ 

fmcsrruletext.aspx?reg=392.66 

392.80  Prohibition against texting  http://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/rules-regulations/administration/fmcsr/ 

fmcsrruletext.aspx?reg=392.80 

392.82  Using a hand-held mobile telephone  http://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/rules-regulations/administration/fmcsr/ 

fmcsrruletext.aspx?reg=392.82 

393  Parts and accessories necessary for safe 

operation 

http://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/rules-regulations/administration / 

fmcsr/FmcsrGuideDetails.aspx?menukey=393 

396  Inspection, repair, and maintenance  http://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/rules-regulations/administration / 

fmcsr/FmcsrGuideDetails.aspx?menukey=396 

App G  Minimum periodic inspection standards  http://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/rules-regulations/administration / 

fmcsr/Fmcsrruletext.aspx?contentid=3702 APPENDIX FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION  108 B

# State Safety Laws and 

# Regulations for 

# Bus Transit Category  State  Regulation 

Incorporation of Federal Regulations 

N/A  Colorado  723 -6-6102 . Regulations incorporated by reference 

723 -6-6103 . Modification of regulations incorporated by reference 

Connecticut 

Sec. 14 -163c . Motor carrier safet y regulations for intrastate or interstate 

commerce. Variations or exemptions. Enforcement powers of police 

officers and motor vehicle inspectors 

Delaware  §4702 - §4708 . Adoption of fede ral requirements 

Hawaii  Chapter 19 -141 . Motor carrier safety regulations 

Illinois  Part 382 . Controlled substance and alcohol use and testing 

Maine  §555 . Bureau of State Police enforcement 

Maryland  11.21.01 . Motor carrier safety 

Massachusetts  220 CMR Section 155.04 . Procedures for inspection pursuant to federal 

regulations 

Monta na  61 -10 -154 . Department of transportation to adopt motor carrier safety 

standards 

Nebraska  75 -363 . Federal mo tor carrier safety regulations provisions adopted 

exceptions 

New Mexico  18.2.3 NMAC . Motor carrier safety 

18.3.4 NMAC . Safety requirements 

New York  17 CRR -NY 721.3 . Driver requirements 

North Dakota  NDAC 38 -04 -01 . Motor carrier safety regulations 

Ohio  4901:2 -5-02 . Adoption of U.S. department of transportation safety standards 

Pennsylvania  §37.205 . Additions or modifications to 49 CFR 

South Carolina  §56 -1-2005 . Administration of Sou th Carolina commercial driver's license 

program 

Power to Enforce or Regulate 

N/A  Florida  Rule 14 -90.012 . Safety and security inspections and reviews 

Nebraska  75 -109 . Commission regulatory powers scope 

New York 

VAT §509 J . Compliance required 

VAT §509 M . Duties of the department 

TRA Article 9 -B. State Public Transportation Safety Board 

Ohio  4901:2 -5-14 . Imminent hazard 

Rhode Island 

§31 -22 -12 . Supervision inspection of vehicles transporting passengers for 

hire 

§31 -25 -15 . Investigations as to safety of buses, trucks, and trailers 

§39 -13 -11 . Registration and licensing of vehicles and operators – CPR 

training requirement 

Vermont  5 V.S.A. §1822 . Jurisdiction of transportation board over common carriers 

West Virginia  §17 -16C -2. Designation of department 

§17 -16C -3. Powers and duties of the division 

Vehicles 

Vehicle Condition  Connecticut  Sec. 14 -26 . Motor or service buses, taxicabs, school buses, motor vehicles in 

livery service and school buses used in part in livery service 

Kentucky  601 KAR 1:005 . Safety administrative regulation 

Massachusetts  220 CMR Section 155.02 . General regulations 

Minnesota  8840.5940 . Vehicle construction standards 

New Jersey 

NJ Rev Stat §39:3 -4.1 . Licensing motor vehicles for transportation of 

passengers for hire 

NJ Rev St at §39:3 -5. Denial of registration, reciprocity 

New Mexico  18.3.2.24 NMAC . Requirements Applicable to all Motor Carriers of Persons 

New York  17 CRR -NY 721.4 . Safety Precautions 

Vermont  5 V.S.A. §1828 . Safe operation of motor buses Size and 

Weight 

Limitations 

Alaska  17 AAC 28.010 . Maximum size limi tation of buses 

17 AAC 28.012 . Equipment described 

Arkansas  27 -35 -208 . Length of vehicles 

California  Vehicle Code Sections 35400 -35400.9 . Length 

Vehicle Code Sections 35554 . Weight 

Colorado  42 -4-502 . Width of vehicles 

42 -4-504 . Height and length of vehicles 

Connecticut  Sec. 14 -267b . Weight restrictions for motor buses. Penalties 

Delaware  §4502 . Size and weight of vehicles except on interstate highways and United 

States numbered routes 

Indiana  IC 9 -20 -8-1. Buses in excess of eight feet wide operation limitations 

IC 9 -20 -8-2. Maximum length limitations 

Iowa  321.457 . Maximum length 

Kentucky 

603 KAR 5:071 . Bus dimension limits 

KRS 189.265 . Motor buses – Height, length and weight limits on designated 

highways 

Massachusetts  220 CMR Section 155.02 . General regulations 

Minnesota  169.80 . Size, weight, load 

169.81 . Heigh t and length limitations 

Missouri 

304.170 . Regulations as to width, height and length of vehicles – tractor 

parades permitted 

304.181 . Buses, axle weight limits 

Montana  61 -10 -102 . Width – definitions 

61 -10 -104 . Length – definitions 

Nebraska  60 -6,290 . Vehicles length limit exceptions 

Nevada  NRS 484D. 615 . Length of vehicle: restrictions special permit exceptions 

NRS 484D.690 . Maximum width of bus 

New Hampshire  266:11 . Length 

New Jersey 

NJ Rev Stat §39:3 -84 . Vehicles, dimensional, weight limitations routes, 

certain prohibited 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -1. Specifications for van -type autobuses 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -3. Autobus specifications 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -6. Specifications for small autobuses 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -8. Specifications for sedan -type autobuses 

New York  VAT §385 . Dimensions and weights of vehicles 

Oklahoma  §14 -103 . Width, height, and length of vehicle and load 

Rhode Island  §31 -25 -5. Maximum length of single vehicle and load 

South Carolina  §56 -5-4040 . Width of motor buses and trolley coaches local ordinances 

Tennessee 

55 -7-204 . Buses – Length limitations 

55 -7-207 . Exception from length and weight requirements for public transit 

systems 

Texas  Sec. 621.203 . Maximum length of motor vehicle 

Virginia 

§46.2 -1105 . Width of vehicles generally exceptions 

§46.2 -1107 . Bus widths in certain counties 

§46.2 -1108 . Bus widths to comply with federal law 

§46.2 -1112 . Length of vehicles, generally special permits tractor truck 

semitrailer combinations, etc., operating on certain highways penalty 

§46.2 -1113 . Length exceptions for certain passenger buses and motor homes 

West Virginia  §17C -17 -2. Width of vehicles 

Wisconsin 

348.05 . Width of vehicles 

348.06 . Height of vehicles 

348.07 . Length of vehicles Strength/ 

Structural 

Integrity 

Florida  Rule 14 -90.007 . Vehicle Equipment Standards and Procurement Criteria 

Minnesota  8840.5940 . Vehicle construction standards 

New Jersey 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -1. Specificati ons for van -type autobuses 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -3. Autobus specifications 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -6. Specifications for small autobuses 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -8. Specifications for sedan -type autobuses 

New York  17 CRR -NY 720.4 . Vehicle safety requirements 

17 CRR -NY 720.9 . Electric powered motor vehicles 

Equipment 

Requirements –

General 

Alabama  32 -5-240 . Required lighting equipment and illuminating devices of vehicles 

Alaska  17 AAC 28.015 . Limitations on bus equipment 

Arizona 

28 -928 . Applicability of lighting laws 

28 -929 . Additional lighting equipment required on certain vehicles 

28 -931 . Lamp colors 

28 -932 . Reflector and lamp mountings 

28 -933 . Reflector and lamp visibility 

28 -958.01 . Rear fender splash guards 

28 -959 . Safety glass required applicability denial or suspension of registration 

definition 

Arkansas  27 -36 -218 . Additional lamps and reflectors on buses, trucks, tractors, and 

trailers 

California 

13 CCR §1085 . Tire and rim size and capacity 

13 CCR §1087 . Tire condition and use 

13 CCR §1257 . Mirrors 

13 CCR §1259 . Heaters and defrosters 

13 CCR §1260 . Ventilation 

13 CCR §1263 . Interior lamps 

13 CCR §1266 . Drive shaft protection 

Vehicle Code Section 24017 . Transit buses: speedometer requirements 

Vehicle Code S ection 24608 . Reflectors on front and sides 

Vehicle Code Section 26700 . Windshields 

Vehicle Code Section 26709 . Mirrors 

Vehicle Code Section 26711 . Eyeshades 

Colorado  42 -4-229 . Safety glazing material in motor vehicles 

Connecticut 

Sec. 14 -96f . Special requiremen ts for buses, trucks, trailers, truck tractors 

Sec. 14 -97 . Defrosting devices on school buses and motor vehicles used to 

transport passengers for hire 

Sec. 14 -104 . Fenders and other wheel protectors 

Delaware 

§4317 . Protectors or flaps behi nd rear wheels of vehicles 

§4337 . Application of succeeding sections 

§4338 . Additional equipment required on certain vehicles 

§4339 . Color of clearance lamps, side marker lamps, backup lamps and 

reflectors 

§4340 . Mounting of reflectors, clearance lamps and side marker lamps 

§4341 . Visibility of reflectors, clearance lamps and marker lamps 

Florida  Rule 14 -90.007 . Vehicle Equipment Standards and Procurement Criteria 

Georgia  §40 -8-74 . Tires 

§40 -8-75 . Tire covers 

Idaho 

49 -909 . Additional equipment required on certain vehicles 

49 -949 . Requirement as to fender or covers over all wheels on motor 

vehicles 

Illinois  Part 393 . Parts and accessories necessary for safe operation 

Indiana  IC 9 -19 -6-7. Buses, trucks, truck -trac tors, trailers, and semitrailers 

IC 9 -21 -7-3. Lights requirements and restrictions Kansas  8-1710 K.S.A. . Additional lighting equipment required on certain vehicles 

Louisiana  32 §308 . Additional equipment required on buses, trucks, truck tractors, 

trailers, semi -trailer s and pole trailers 

Maine  Title 29 -A, §2390 . Maximum length limits 

Maryland  11.14.04 . Safety Standards for Trucks, Truck Tractors, Commercial Buses, 

and Type I School Vehicles 

Massachusetts  MGL 90 §13 . Safety precautions for proper ope ration and parking of vehicles 

and buses 

Mississippi 

SEC. 63 -7-15 . Additional lighting requirements for certain vehicles 

SEC. 63 -7-23 . Color of lighting devices 

SEC. 63 -7-29 . Mounting, visibility and color of reflectors 

Minnesota  8840.5940 . Vehicle construction standards 

Missouri  307.140 . Safety glass on vehicles for hire and school buses 

Montana  61 -9-208 . Additional equipment required on certain vehicles 

Nevada 

NRS 484D.140 . Additional equipment for lighting required on certain 

vehicles 

NRS 484D.460 . Certa in vehicles to carry pot torches, lanterns or reflectors 

display of devices when vehicle is disabled 

New Hampshire  266:40 . Clearance Lamps 

266:45 . Additional Reflectors 

New Jersey 

NJ Rev Stat §39:3 -79.1 . Devices to prevent throwing of dirt on windshields 

of following vehicles 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -1. Specifications for van -type autobuses 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -3. Autobus specifications 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -6. Specifications for small autobuses 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -8. Specifications for sedan -type autobuses 

New Mexico  18.3.2.24 . Requirements Applicable to all Motor Carriers of Persons 

New York 

17 CRR -NY 720.4 . Vehicle safety requireme nts 

17 CRR -NY 720.9 . Electric powered motor vehicles 

17 CRR -NY 721.4 . Sa fety Precautions 

North Carolina  §20 -117.1 . Requirements for mirrors and fuel container 

§20 -129.1 . Additional lighting equipment required on certain vehicles 

Oregon 

815.182 . Kinds of fenders or mudguards required for specified vehicles 

pla cement 

816.260 . Bus safety lights  816.320 . Lighting equipment required for motor 

vehicles 

Pennsylvania 

§153.4(a) . Requirements 

§161.5 . Requirements 

Subchapter F . M edium and Heavy Trucks and Buses 

Rhode Island 

§31 -23 -27 . Rear wheel flaps on buses, trucks, and trailers 

§31 -23 -43 . Wheel safety chocks 

§31 -24 -37 . Clearance and marker lamps and reflectors 

South Carolina 

§56 -5-4580 . Additional lighting equipment required on buses, trucks, trailers, 

semitrailers and pole trailers 

§56 -5-4590 . Color of clearance lamps, side -marker lamps, reflectors, stop 

lights and back -up lamps 

§56 -5-4600 . Mounting of reflectors, clearance lamps and side -marker lamps 

§56 -5-4610 . Visibility of reflectors, clearance lamps and marker lamp 

South Dakota  32 -17 -14 . Vehicles requiring clearance lamps – Location and visibility of 

clearance lamps 

Texas  Sec. 547.608 . Safety glazing material required 

Sec. 547.352 . Additional lighting equipment requirements 

Vermont  23 V.S.A. §1249 . Directional signal lamps 

23 V.S.A. §1306 . Rear wheel flaps Washington 

RCW 46.37.080 . Application of succeeding sections 

RCW 46.37.090 . Additional equipmen t required on certain vehicles 

RCW 46.37.100 . Color of clearance lamps, side marker lamps, back -up 

lamps, and reflectors 

RCW 46.37.110 . Mounting of reflectors, clearance lamps, identification 

lamps, and side marker lamps 

RCW 46.37.120 . Visibility of reflectors, clearance lamps, identification lamp s, 

and side marker lamp 

RCW 46.37.215 . Hazard warning lamps 

RCW 46.37.430 . Safety glazing – Sunscreening or colo ring 

West Virginia 

§17C -15 -8. Application of § 

§17C -15 -9 to 17C -15 -13 

§17C -15 -9. A dditional lighting and reflector equipment required on certain 

vehicles 

§17C -15 -10 . Color of clearance lamps, side marker lamps and reflectors 

§17C -15 -11 . Mounting of reflectors, clearance lamps and side marker lamps 

§17C -15 -12 . Visibility of reflec tors, clearance lamps and marker lamp 

Wisconsin  347.26 . Restrictions on certain optional lighting equipment 

347.40 . Mirrors 

Wyoming 

WY Stat §31 -5-923 . Vehicular traffic hazard lamps 

WY Stat §31 -5-956 . Tires restriction of travel under hazardous conditions 

penalties 

Equipment 

Requirements –

Brake Equipment 

and Performance 

California  Vehicle Code Section 26311 . Service Brakes on All Wheels 

Vehicle Code Section 26454 . Control and Stopping Requirements 

Florida  Rule 14 -90.007 . Vehicle Equipment Standards and Procuremen t Criteria 

Louisiana  32 §342 . Performance ability of brakes 

Maryland  11.14.04 . Safety Standards for Tr ucks, Truck Tractors, Commercial Buses, 

and Type I School Vehicles 

Minnesota  169.67 . Brakes 

Montana  61 -9-310 . Reservoir capacit y and check valve 

61 -9-312 . Performance ability of brake 

Nebraska  60 -6,247 . Trucks and buses brake requireme nts violation penalty 

Nevada  NRS 484D.275 . Reservoirs 

New Jersey 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -1. Sp ecifications for van -type autobuses 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -3. Autobus specifications 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -6. Specifications for small autobuses 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -8. Specifications for sedan -type autobuses 

New York 

17 CRR -NY 720.4 . Vehicle safety requ irements 

17 CRR -NY 720.9 . Electric powered motor vehicles 

17 CRR -NY 721.4 . Safety Precautions 

Oklahoma  §12 -301 . Brake Equipment Required 

§12 -302 . Perf ormance Ability of Brake 

Pennsylvania  §175.94 . Braking systems 

Subchapter F . Medium and Heav y Trucks and Buses 

South Carolina 

§56 -5-4850 . Brake equipment 

§56 -5-4860 . Performance ability of brakes tests for deceleration and stopping 

distances 

South Dakota 

32 -18 -8. Capabilities of service brakes – Brakin g force –Stopping distance –

Classification of particular vehicles 

32 -18 -19 . Buses and trucks with air brakes 

32 -18 -20 . Buses and trucks with air brakes –Warning signal for low air 

pr essure 

Texas 

Sec. 547.406 . Brake reservoir or reserve capacity required 

Sec. 547.407 . Brake warning de vices required 

Sec. 547.408 . Performance requirements for brake Virginia  §46.2 -1067 . Within what di stances brakes should stop vehicle 

Washington  RCW 46.37.340 . Braking equipment required 

RCW 46.37.351 . Perform ance ability of brakes 

Equipment 

Requirements –

Emergency and 

Safety Equipment 

Alabama 

32 -5-220 . Flares or other warning devices - Carrying required by certain 

ve hicles specifications 

32 -5-221 . Flares or other warning devices - Display 

Alaska  17 AAC 28.025 . Operating requirements for longer buses 

Arizona  28 -960. Flares  warning devices requirements 

28 -961 . Display of warning devices disabled vehicle 

Arkansas 

27 -37 -205 . Certain vehicles required to carry flares or other warning 

devices 

27 -37 -206 . Display of warning devices when vehicle disabled 

California  Vehicle Code Section 24018 . Transit Bus Requirement fo r Two way 

Communication Device 

Colorado  42 -4-230 . Emergency lighting equipment - who must carry 

Connecticut 

Sec. 14 -97a . Emergency lighting or reflecting devices on motor vehicles used 

to transport passengers for hire and motor vehicles with commercial 

registration 

Sec. 29 -313 . Fire extinguishers. Regulations 

Florida  Rule 14 -90.007 . Vehicl e Equipment Standards and Procurement Criteria 

Idaho  49 -952 . Certain vehicles to carry flares or other warning devices 

49 -953 . Display of warning devices when vehicle disables 

Illinois  62 5 ILCS 5, Section 12 -605.1 . Two -way Radio Equipment 

Indiana  IC 9 -19 -5-6. Emergency warning signals 

Kansas  8-1722 K.S.A. . Vehicular hazard warning lamps warning lamps on police 

vehicles trash trucks 

Louisiana  32 §367 . Certain vehicles to carry flares or other warning d evices 

32 §368 . Display of warning devices when vehicle disabled 

Maryland  11.14.04 . Safety Standards fo r Trucks, Truck Tractors, Commercial Buses, 

and Type I School Vehicles 

Massachusetts  220 CMR Section 155.02 . General regulations 

Minnesota  169.75 . Flares, Flags, or Reflectors Required 

Mississippi 

SEC. 63 -7-69 . Warning and safety appliances for trucks and buses 

requirement standards 

SEC. 63 -7-71 . Warning and safety appliances for trucks and buses display 

Montana 

61 -9-311 . Warning devices 

61 -9-411 . Certain vehicles to carry flares or other warning devices 

61 -9-412 . Display of warning devices when vehicle disabled 

Nevada  NRS 484D.280 . Warning signals and devices for certain buses, trucks and 

truck -tractors 

Ne w Hampshire  265:113 . Reflective Warning Devices 

New Jersey 

NJ Rev Stat §39:3 -54 . Warning li ghts on vehicles 

NJ Rev Stat §39:3 -64 . Vehicular traffic hazard warning signals 

NJ Rev Stat §39:3 -68.2 . Emergency stopping system 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -1. Specifications for van -type autobuses 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -3. Autobus sp ecifications 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -3. Autobus specifications 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -6. Specifications for small autobuses 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -8. Specifications for sedan -type autobuses New York 

17 CRR -NY 720.4 . Vehicle safety requirements 

17 CRR -NY 720.7 . Emergency equipment 

17 CRR -NY 720.9 . Electric powered motor vehicles 

17 CRR -NY 721.4 . Safety Precautions 

Oklahoma 

§12 -407 . Certain Vehicles to Carry Flares or Other Warning Devices -

Exceptions 

§12 -408 . Display of Warning Devices When Vehicle Disabled 

Pennsylvania  Subchapter F . Medium and Heavy Trucks and Buses 

Rhode Island  §31 -23 -29 . Flares and warning device 

South Carolina  §56 -5-5060 . Certain vehicles shall carry flares and other warning devices 

§56 -5-5090 . Display of warning devices when vehicle disabled 

Tennessee 

55 -9-102 . Emergency parts and accessories to be carried by various type 

motor vehicles 

55 -9-103 . Display of warning devices during period of disablement of certain 

vehicles 

55 -9-104 . Vehicles stopping for causes other than disablement – Display of 

warning devices 

Texas 

Sec. 547.502 . Visible warning devices required 

Sec. 547.503 . Display of hazard lamps 

Sec. 547.7011 . Additional equipment requirements for other buses 

Utah 

41 -6a -1611 . Hazard warning lamps 

41 -6a -1637 . Flares, fus es, or electric lanterns and flags 

41 -6a -1638 . Warning signal around disabled vehicle – Time and place 

Vermont  23 V.S.A. §1006c . Trucks and buses chains and tir e requirements 

23 V.S.A. §1303 . Flares required 

Washington 

RCW 46.37.440 . Flar es or other warning devices required on certain 

vehicles 

RCW  46.37.450 . Disabled vehicle – Display of warning devices 

West Virginia 

§17C -15 -39 . Flares and other warning devices to be carried in certain 

vehicles 

§17C -15 -40 . Display of warning devices when vehicle is disabled 

Wisconsin 

347.145 . Deceleration warning lights for motorcycles, motor bicycles, 

mopeds or motor buses 

347.28 . Certain vehicles to carry flares or other warning devices 

347.29 . Display of warning devices for certain vehicles when standing on 

highway 

Wyoming 

WY Stat §31 -5-957 . Required flares, lanterns or reflectors for certain 

vehicles 

WY Stat §31 -5-958 . Display of warning devices when vehicle disabled 

Equipment 

Requirements –

Wheelchair 

Equipment 

California 

13 CCR §1092 . M echanical requirements 

13 CCR §1093 . Durability requirements 

13 CCR §1269.1 . Equipment for transporting wheelchairs 

Connecticut  Sec. 14 -100a . Seat safety belts. Child restraint systems. Wheelchair 

transportation devices 

Florida  Rule 14 -90.007 . Vehicle equipment standards and procurement criteria 

Minnesota 

Chapter 7450 . Wheelchair safety devices 

8840.5925 . Vehicle equipment 

8840.5975 . Standa rds for maintenance 

New Jersey  N.J.A.C. §16:53 -2. Special equipment for vehicles used to transport 

passengers in wheelchairs 

New York  17 CRR -NY 720.8 . Specially equipped vehicles to transport the disabled 

17 CRR -NY 721.4 . Safety Precautions Equipment 

Requiremen ts –

Seatbelts and 

Child Restraints 

Florida  Rule 14 -90.007 . Vehicle equipment standards and pro curement criteria 

New Mexico  18.3.2.25 NMAC . Requirements applicable to all motor carriers of persons 

except ambulance services 

New York  VAT §383 . Safety belts and anchorage assemblies 

17 CRR -NY 720.4 . Vehicle safety requirements 

Rhode Island  §31 -23 -41 . Safety belts in public service vehicles 

Virginia  §46.2 -1092 . Safety lap belts or a combination of lap belts and shoulder 

harnesses to be installed in certain motor vehicles 

Fuel and Exhaust 

Systems 

California  13 CCR §936 . Installation  13 CCR §1261 . Exhaust systems 

Maryland  11.14.04 . Safety standards for trucks, truck tractors, commercial buses, and 

type I school vehicles 

New Jersey 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -1. Specifications for van -type autobuse s

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -3. Autobus specifications 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -6. Specifications for small autobuses 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -8. Specifications for sedan -type autobuses 

New York  17 CRR -NY 720.4 . Vehicle safety requirements 

Pennsylvania  §175.241 . Compressed and liquefied gas fuel systems Subchapter F . Medium 

and heavy trucks and buses 

Light ing and 

Electrical Systems  Maryland  11.14.04 . Safety standards for trucks, truck tractors, commercial buses, and 

type I school vehicles 

New Jersey  N.J.A.C. §16:53 -1. Specifications for van -type autobuses 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -3. Autobus specifications 

New York  17 CRR -NY 720.9 . Electric powered motor vehicles 

Pennsylvania  §175.96 . Lighting and electrical systems 

Window 

Transparency 

Arkan sas  27 -37 -306 . Light transmission levels for the tinting of motor vehicle windows 

Massachusetts  220 CMR Section 155.02 . General Regulations 

New Jersey  N.J.A.C. §16:53 -3. Autobus specifications 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -6. Speci fications for small autobuses 

Washington  RCW 46.37.430 . Safety glazing – Sunscreening or coloring 

Signage 

California 

13 CCR §1256 . Identification. (d) Passenger stage service 

Vehicle Code Section 24617 . Yield right of way sign transit b us 

Vehicle Code Section 25400 . Diffused lighting requirements 

New Jersey 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -1. Specifications for van -type autobuses 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -3. Autobus specifications 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -6. Specifications for small autobuses 

New York 

17 CRR -NY 720.9 . Electric powered motor vehicles 

17 CRR -NY 721.4 . Safety Precautions 

17 CRR -NY 723.7 . Display of Regulations 

Passenger 

Compartment 

and 

Entrances/Exits 

California 

13 CCR §1267 . Bus entrances and exits 

13 CCR §1268 . Emergency exits 

13 CCR §1269 . Side windows as emergency exits 

Connecticut  Sec. 14 -102 . View in and exits from motor vehicles used to transport 

passengers for hire 

Florida  Rule 14 -90.007 . Vehicle equipment standards and procurement criteria 

Minnesota  8840.5940 . Vehicle construction standards 

New Jerse y

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -1. Specifications for van -type autobuses 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -3. Autobus specifications 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -6. Specifications for small autobuses 

New York 

17 CRR -NY 720.4 . Vehicle safety requirements 

17 CRR -NY 720.5 . Emergency exits 

17 CRR -NY 721.4 . Safety Precautions 

Oklahoma  §12 -405.2 . Fuel Tank or Intake Pipe 

Vermont  23 V.S.A. §1301 . Emergency exits Dri ver/ Passenger 

Seats 

California  13 CCR §1270 . Seats 

Massachusetts  220 CMR Section 155.02 . General regulations 

New Jersey 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -1. Specifications for van -type autobuses 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -3. Autobus specifications 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -6. Specifications for small autobuses 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -8. Specifications for sedan -type autobuses 

New York  17 CRR -NY 720.4 . Vehicle safety requirements 

Maintenance and 

Inspection  California 

Vehicle Code Section 34501 . Inspection of Maintenance Facilities 

Vehicle Code Section 34501.17 . Inspection, maintenance, lubricati on of 

paratransit vehicles 

Connecticut  Sec. 14 -163e . Periodic inspection of certain vehicles or combination 

Florida 

Rule 14 -90.004 . Bus transit system operational standards 

Rule 14 -90.006 . Operational and driving requirements 

Rule 14 -90.009 . Bus safety inspections 

Rule 14 -90.010 . Certification 

Rule 14 -90.012 . Safety and security inspections and reviews 

Illinois 

Section 396.2010 . Inspection of vehicles in operation 

625 ILCS 5, Section 13 -101 . Submission to safe ty test Certificate of safety 

625 ILCS 5, Section 13 -109 . Safety test pr ior to application for license –

Subsequent tests - Repairs - Retest. 

Kentucky  603 KAR 5:072 . Mandatory annual bus inspection 

KRS 281.755 . Inspection of motor vehicles 

Maryland  11.22.03 . Preventive maintenance standards for multipurpose passenger 

vehicles and passenger buses 

Massachusetts 

220 CMR Section 155.02 . General regulations 

220 CMR Section 155.03 . Inspection of commercial passenger motor 

vehicles 

M.G.L. c.161B Section 6 . Powers of authority 

Michigan 

R 474.103 . Application for certificate safety inspection insurance payment 

filing 

R 474.105 . Certificate renewal safety inspection application annual report 

Minnesota 

169.781 . Annual commercial vehicle inspection inspectors, fee, penalty 

Chapter 7450 . Wheelchair Safety Devices 

174.30 . Operating Standards for Special Transportation Service 

8840.5400 . Certificate of compliance, general requirements 

8840.5650 . Annual evaluation 8840 .5975 . Standards for maintenance 

Nebraska 

75 -115 . Examinations and inspections authorized duty and power to repair 

notice injunctions carrier enforcement division powers 

75 -366 . Enforcement powers 

New Jersey 

N.J.A.C. §13:20 -7.2 . Inspection of motor vehicles test frequency exempt 

vehicl es 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -1.29 . Maintenance and inspection 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -3.24 . Maintenance and inspection 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -6.31 . Maintenance and inspection 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -8.25 . Maintenance and inspection 

N.J.A.C. §16:5 3-8.26 . Inspection and certificate of inspection 

New York 

TRA §140 . Safety Requirement s

17 CRR -NY 721.1 . Maintenance 

17 CRR -NY 721.2 . Maintenance/driver docum entation 

17 CRR -NY 721.3 . Driver requirements 

17 CRR -NY 721.4 . Safety Pr ecautions 

North Carolina  19A NCAC 03E .0509 . Inspection of vehicles: boo ks: records: etc. North Dakota  NDAC 38 -09 -01 . Safety standards for passenger contract carriers 

NDAC 38 -09 -01 -03 . Annual motor vehicle inspection 

Ohio  4513.52 . Bus safety inspections 

4901:2 -5-11 . Inspection of vehicles r eports 

Pennsylvania  Subchapter F . Medium and heavy trucks and buses 

75 Pa.C.S. §4702 . Retirement for periodic inspection of vehicles 

Rhode Island  §31 -22 -12 . Supervision and inspection of vehicles transporting passengers for 

hire 

Tennessee  65 -15 -128 . Passenger transportation services 

Vermont  23 V.S.A. §1222 . Inspe ction of registered vehicles. 

Virginia 

§46.2 -1157 . Inspection of motor vehicles required 

§46.2 -117 5. Operators of certain commuter buses to maintain certain 

records inspection of records and buses by employees of Department of 

State Police 

Wisconsin  110.05 . Inspection of human service vehicles 

110.063 . Inspection of motor buses 

Vehicle Out of 

Service 

Massachusetts  220 CMR Section 155.05 . Out -of -Service Criteria 

New Jersey  N.J.A.C. §16:53A . Bus safety compliance oversight, enforcement, out -of -

servic e violations and penalties 

New York  17 CRR -NY 720.11 . Out -of -service and defect criteria 

Ohio  4901:2 -5-07 . Out -of -service vehicles and drivers 

Operations 

General 

Operational 

Requirements 

Kentucky  601 KAR 1:005 . Safety administrative regulation 

New Mexico 

18.3.2.24 NMAC . Requirements Applicable to all Motor Carriers of Persons 

18.3.2.26 NMAC . Requirements Applicable to all Motor Carriers of P ersons 

Except Ambulance, Charter, and Commuter Services 

New York  VAT §509 H . Oper ation by person not licensed to drive a bus 

Operating Speeds  Illinois  625 ILCS 5, Section 11 -601 (f) . General Speed Restrictions 

Virginia  §46.2 -870 . Maximum speed limits generally 

Use of Mobile 

Electronic Devices  Massachusetts 

MGL 90 §12A . Use of mobile telephone, hands -free mobile telephone or 

other mobile electronic device by operator of vehicle or vessel used in 

public transportation prohibited penalties affirmative defenses 

220 CMR Section 155.02 . General regulations 

New Jersey 

NJ Rev Stat §27:25 -5.18 . Use of wireless te lephone, electronic 

communication devices by operator of public transportation service 

prohibited exceptions 

Texas  Sec. 545.425 . Use of wireless communication device by certain m otorists 

Transportation of 

Passengers 

California  13 CCR §1217 . Transportation of Passengers 

Connecticut 

Sec. 14 -257 . Crowded seats. Riders on outside of vehicle. Aisle seats 

Sec. 14 -273 . Operation of motor vehicles requiri ng a passenger 

endorsement or passenger and school endorsement 

Florida  Rule 14 -90.006 . Operat ional and Driving Requirements 

Kentucky  KRS 281.735 . Overcrowding of vehicles – Maximum width 

Massachusetts  220 CMR S ection 155.02 . General regulations 

New Jersey 

NJ Rev Stat §39:4 -68 . Doors of street car or autobus closed 

N. J.A.C. §16:52 -1. Service 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -3. Autobus specifications 

N.J.A.C. §16:65 -8. Service and operations 

New York  17 CRR -NY 721.4 . Safety Precautions 

Transportation of 

Passengers with 

Special Needs 

Connecticut  Sec. 14 -100a . Seat safety belts. Child restraint systems. Wheelchair 

transportation device 

Kentucky  603 KAR 7:080 . Human service transportation delivery 

Minnesota  174.30 . Operating Standards for Special Transportation Service 

8840.5950 . Standards for Operation of Vehicles Driver Securement  Flori da  Rule 14 -90.006 . Operational and Driving Requirements 

New York  17 CRR -NY 721.3 . Driver requirements 

Rail Crossing 

Procedures  Arizona  28 -853 . Rail road grade crossing stop required of certain vehicles other 

requirements 

California  Vehicle Code Section 22452 . Stop required at railroad gra de crossing 

Colorado  42 -4-707 . Certain vehicles must stop at railroad grade crossings 

Connecticut  Sec. 14 -250 . Certain motor vehicles to stop at railroad crossing. Regulations. 

Penalty 

Delaware  §4163 . Certain vehicles must stop at all railroad grade crossings 

Georgia  §40 -6-142 . Certain vehicles to stop at all railroad crossings 

Iowa  321.343 . Certain vehicles must stop 

Kansas  Article 36 -26 K.A.R. . Railroad grade crossings 

Kentucky  KRS 281.745 . Passenger vehicles required to stop at railroad crossings 

Louisiana  32 §173.1 . Railroad grade crossings stopping req uired 

Maine  Title 29 -A, §2076 . Railroad or grade crossings 

Massachusetts  220 CMR Section 155.02 . General regulations 

Minnesota  169.28 . Certain vehicles to stop at railroad crossing 

Missouri  304.030 . Certain buses and trucks to stop at railroad crossing, when –

exception, requirements 

Nebraska  60 -6,172 . Buses and school buses required to stop at all railroad grade 

crossings exceptions 

New 

Hampshire  265:50 . Certain vehicles must stop at all railroad grade crossings 

New Jersey 

NJ Rev Stat §39:4 -128 . Vehicles required to stop at grade crossings method 

of crossing exceptions 

N.J.A.C. §16:52 -1.6 . Stops before passing over grade crossings 

New York  VAT §1171 . Certain vehicles must stop at all railroad grade crossings 

North Carolina  §20 -142.3 . Certain vehicles must stop at railroad grade crossing 

Oklahoma  §11 -702 . Bus or Commercial Motor Vehicle - Railroad Crossing 

Oregon  811.460 . Failure to follow rail crossing procedures for high -risk vehicles 

South Dakota  32 -29 -5. Vehicles required to stop at all grade crossings –Shifting gears while 

crossing –Misdemeanor 

Texas  Sec. 545.253 . Buses to stop at all railr oad grade crossings 

Vermont  23 V.S.A. §1072 . Certain vehicles must stop 

Virginia  §46.2 -886 . When drivers of certain vehicles to stop, look, and listen at 

railroad crossings crossing tracks without shifting gears 

West Virginia  §17C -12 -3. Cer tain vehicles must stop at all railroad grade crossings 

Wyoming  WY Stat §31 -5-511 . Stopping requirements for certain vehicles at railroad 

crossings 

Attention to Duty  Massachusetts  220 CMR Section 155.02 . General regulations 

New Jersey  N.J.A.C. §16:52 -1.8 . Drivers conversing 

N.J.A.C. §16:65 -8.7 . Drivers conversing 

New York  17 CRR -NY 721.4 . Safety Precautions 

Fueling/ Refuelin g California  13 CCR §1218 . Fueling Restrictions 

Florida  Rule 14 -90.006 . Operational and Driving Requirements 

New Jersey  N.J.A.C. §16:52 -1.9 . Filling fuel tanks 

Use of Roads and 

Highways  Alaska  17 AAC 28.020 . Restrictions on buses by size or type 

17 AAC 28.025 . Operating requirements for longer buses 

Connecticut  Sec. 14 -230a . Restricted use of left -hand lane on divided limited access 

highways 

New Mexico  18.3 .2.24 NMAC . Requirements Applicable to all Motor Carriers of Persons Stopping, Standing, 

and Parking 

Georgia  §40 -6-208 . Parking areas for passengers of rapi d rail or public transit buses 

Louisiana  32 §369 . Red flags, use in parking certain vehicles 

Massachusetts 

MGL 90 §13 . Safety precautions for proper operation and parking of vehicles 

and buses 

220 CMR Section 155.02 . General Regulations 

Missouri  300.510 . Stopping, standing and parking of buses and taxicabs regulated 

Rhode Island  §31 -23 -43 . Wheel safety chocks 

Prohibited 

Ope rations 

Alabama  32 -5A -57 . Coasting prohibited 

Colorado  42 -4-1009 . Coasting prohibited 

Georgia  §40 -6-246 . Coasting 

Illinois  625 ILCS 5, Section 11 -1410 . Coasting Prohibited 

Massachusetts  220 CMR Section 155.02 . General Regulations 

Missouri  304.044 . Buses and trucks not to follow within three hundred feet –penalty 

New 

Hampshire  265:99 . Coasting Prohibited 

New Mexico  18.3.2.24 NMAC . Requirements Applicable to all Motor Carriers of Persons 

New York  17 CRR -NY 721.4 . Safety Precautions 

Texas  Sec. 545.406 . Coasting 

Utah  41 -6a -1709 . Coasting prohibited 

Vermont  23 V.S.A. §1121 . Coasting prohibited 

Virginia  §46.2 -893 . Stopping on highways to discharge c argo or passengers school 

buses 

Wisconsin  194.32 . Buses, restrictions 

Wyoming  WY Stat §31 -5-230 . Coasting 

Baggage  Kentucky  601 KAR 1:005 . Safety administrative regulation 

Massachusetts  220 CMR Section 155 .02 . General Regulations 

New York  17 CRR -NY 721.4 . Safety Precautions 

Requirements for 

Larger Buses 

Alaska  17 AAC 28.025 . Operating requirements for longer buses 

Massachusetts  MGL 90 §19 . Dimensions and weights of motor vehicles, trucks and trailers 

Virginia  §46.2 -1108 . Bus widths to comply with federal law 

§46.2 -1147 . Permits for excessive size and weight for articulated buses 

Perso nnel 

General 

Qualifications 

California  Vehicle Code Section 12804.6 . Transit Bus drivers certificate 

Connecticut  Sec. 14 -44 . License endo rsement for operators of commercial motor 

vehicles used for passenger transportation... 

Florida  Rule 14 -90.004 . Bus Transit System Operational Standards 

Illinois  Part 383 . Commercial driver's license standards requirements and penalties 

Maine  Title 29 -A, §1304 . Learner's permits 

Massachusetts  220 CMR Section 155.02 . General regulations 

Minnesota  8840.5900 . Driver qualifications 

New Jersey  NJ Rev Stat §39:3 -10.1 . Licensing of bus drivers, exemptions 

New York  VAT §509 B . Qualifications of bus drivers 

17 CRR -NY 721.3 . Driver requirements 

North Dakota  NDAC 38 -09 -01 . Safety Standards for Passenger Contract Carriers 

Ohio  4901:2 -5-04 . Qualifications of drivers 

Oregon  820.200 . Minor operating public passenger vehicle 

West Virginia  §17B -2-4. Persons prohibited from driving school buses or transporting 

persons or property for compensation Physical/Medical 

Qualifications  Connecticut  Sec. 14 -44 . License endorsement for operators of commercial motor 

vehicles used for passenger transportation... 

Florida  Rule 14 -90.0041 . Medical Examinations for Bus Transit System Drivers 

Maine  Title 29 -A, §1304 . Learner's permits 

Massachusetts  220 CMR Section 155.02 . General regulations 

Michigan  R 257.854 . Episodic and other conditions 

Minnesota  8840.5900 . Driver qualifications 

New Jersey  NJ Rev Stat §39:3 -10.1 . Licensing of bus drivers, exemptions 

New York  VAT §509 G . Examinations and tests 

Ohio  4901:2 -5-04 . Qualifications of drivers 

Tennessee  65 -15 -128 . Passenger transporta tion services 

Pre -Employment 

Screening, Driving 

Record, and 

Criminal History 

Colorado  723 -6-6105 . Fingerprint -Based Criminal History Background Checks 

Connecticut  Sec. 14 -44 . License endorsement for operators of commercial motor 

vehicles used for passenger transportation... 

Florida  Rule 14 -90.004 . Bus Transit System Operational Standards 

Rule 14 -90.0041 . Medical Examinations for Bus Transit System Drivers 

Massachusetts  220 CMR Section 155.0 2. General regulations 

Minnesota  8840.5900 . Driver qualifications 

Nebraska 

81 -6,120 . Transportation servic es restrictions on providers criminal history 

record information check required fingerprinting costs release of results 

violation penalty 

New Jersey  NJ Rev Stat §39:3 -10.1 . Licensing of bus drivers, exemptions 

N.J.A.C. §16:79 . Background checks for non -criminal matters 

New York 

VAT §509 D . Qualification procedures for bus drivers 

VAT §509 E . Annual review of driving record 

VAT §509 F . Record of violations 

VAT §509 I . Notification of a co nviction resulting from a violation of this 

chapter in this state or a motor vehicle conviction in another state and 

license revocation 

North Dakota  NDAC 38 -09 -01 . Safety Standards for Passenger Contract Carriers 

Oregon  267.237 . Criminal records check 

Education, 

Training, and 

Testing 

California 

Education Code Section 40083 . Specialized Vehicle Driver Training Courses 

Education Code Secti on 40085.5 . Specialized Vehicle Driver Training 

Courses 

Florida  Rule 14 -90.004 . Bus Transit System Operational Standards 

Maine  Title 29 -A, §1304 . Learner's permits 

Massachusetts  220 CMR S ection 155.02 . General regulations 

Minnesota 

169.306 . Use of shoulders by buses 

174.30 . Operating standards for spec ial transportation service 

8840.5640 . Initial special transportation service provider education 

8840.5650 . Annual evaluation 

8840.5700 . Inspection and audit 

8840.5910 . Driver and attendant training requirements 

8840.6200 . Certification of training courses and instructors 

8840.6250 . Audit of courses 

New Jersey  NJ Rev Stat §39:3 -10.1 . Licensing of bus drivers, exemptions 

New York  VAT §509 BB . Reexamination of bus drivers 

VAT §509 G . Examinations and tests 

Rho de Island  §39 -13 -11 . Registration and licensing of vehicles and operators – CPR 

training requirement Driver Hours of 

Duty  California  13 CCR §1212 . Driver hours of service 

13 CCR §1212.5 . Maximum driving and on -duty time 

Connecticut 

Sec. 14 -274 . Hours of operators of motor vehicles with commercial 

registration or requiring a passenger endorsement or a passenger and 

school endorsement 

Florida  Rule 14 -90.006 . Operational and Driving Requirements 

Illinois  Part 395 . Hours -of -service of drivers 

Massachusetts  220 CMR Section 155.02 . General regulations 

New York 

TRA §211 . General provisions 

17 CRR -NY 723.3 . Maximum Driving and On -duty Time 

17 CRR -NY 723.9 . Practical Application 

17 CRR -NY 723.10 . Driving of School Buses and Exempt and Non -exempt 

Local Buses 

Driver Out of 

Service and Return 

to Duty 

New York 

VAT §509 K . Ill or fatigued operator 

17 CRR -NY 721.4 . Safety Precautions 

17 CRR -NY 723.8 . Drivers Declared "Out of Service" 

North Dakota  NDAC 37 -10 -01 . Out -of -Service Order Violations 

Ohio  4901:2 -5-07 . Out -of -service vehicles and drivers 

Disciplinary Action  Florida  Rule 14 -90.004 . Bus Transit System Operational Standards 

New Jersey  NJ Rev Stat §39:3 -10.1 . Licensing of bus drivers, exemptions 

New York  VAT §509 C . Disqualification of bus drivers generally 

Workplace Policies 

General Poli cies  California  13 CCR §1233 . Safety Compliance Ratings 

Tennessee  65 -15 -128 . Passenger transportation services 

Safety/Substance 

Abuse Programs 

and Policies 

Florida  Rule 14 -90.004 . Bus Transit System Operational Standards 

Illinois  Part 340 . Procedures for transportation workplace drug and alcohol testing 

programs 

Oregon  825.410 . Drug and alcohol testing program 

Drug and Alcohol 

Testing and 

Policies 

New York  VAT §509 L . Drugs, controlled substance and intoxicating liquor 

North Dakota  NDAC 37 -10 -01 . Out -of -Service Order Viola tions 

NDAC 38 -09 -01 . Safety Standards for Passenger Contract Carriers 

Tennessee  65 -15 -128 . Passenger transportation services 

Accidents and 

Emergencies 

Florida  Rule 14 -90 .004 . Bus Transit System Operational Standards 

Maine  Title 29 -A, §2251 . Accident reports 

Massachusetts  220 CMR Section 155.02 . General regulations 

Michigan  R 474.106 . Notice of motor bus accident 

New Jersey  N.J.A.C. §16:65 -7.1 . Procedures 

N.J.A.C. §16:65 -9. Offices 

New York 

17 CRR -NY 721.5 . Temporary Emergency Operation 

17 CRR -NY 722.1 . Reportable Accidents 

17 CRR -NY 722.2 . Accident Report Forms 

17 CRR -NY 722.3 . Where to File Reports 

North Dakota  NDAC 38 -09 -01 . Safety Standards for Passenger Contract Carriers 

Vermont  5 V.S.A. §1806 . Report of accidents investigation 

Policy Enforcement  Flo rida  Rule 14 -90.010 . Certification 

Minnesota  8840.5800 . Enforcement: violations, suspensions, revocations, and 

cancellations Recordkeeping  California  Vehicle Code Secti on 34501.17 . Inspection, maintenance, lubrication of 

paratransit vehicles 

Florida  Rule 14 -90. 004 . Bus Transit System Operational Standards 

Minnesota  8840.6100 . Records 

New Jersey 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -1.29 . Maintenance and insp ection 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -3.24 . Maintenance and inspection 

N.J.A.C. §16:53 -6.31 . Maintenance and inspection 

N.J.A.C. §16:65 -10.3 . Accidents 

New York 

VAT §509 D . Q ualification procedures for bus drivers 

TRA §212 . Records 

17 CRR -NY 723.4 . Driver's Daily Log 

17 CRR -NY 723.5 . Filing and Preservation of Driver's Log 

17 CRR -NY 723.6 . Production of Records 

North Dakota  NDAC 38 -09 -01 . Safety Standar ds for Passenger Contract Carriers 

Virginia 

§46.2 -1175 . Operators of certain commuter buses to maintain certain 

records inspection of records and buses by employees of Departm ent of 

State Police U.S. Department of Transportation 

Federal Transit Administration 

East Building 

1200 New Jersey Avenue, SE 

Washington, DC 20590 

http://www.fta.dot.gov/research
