Title: Drone Laws in South American Countries

URL Source: https://drone-laws.com/drone-laws-in-south-american-countries-2/

Published Time: 2021-08-01T21:25:21-04:00

Markdown Content:
Interested in flying Drones in South America? Summary of drone regulations by country in South America - Regulations for recreational and commercial drone operators with official links to regulators

LAST UPDATED ON

August 5, 2025

If you are flying drones in South America, then you need to know the drone rules. On this page we list the drone laws in South American Countries: Each South American Country is listed showing a summary of drone regulation by country – Follow links to the desired Country Drone Regulations where you will find Official links and Drone Laws explained for residents and visitors, hobbyists, recreational, commercial and government drone flyers.

NOTE: Countries are grouped into Continents using Wikipedia List of countries by continents. Some countries may be listed on multiple continents.

*    Argentina Drone Laws
--------------------

Drones are allowed in Argentina for recreational and commercial use, subject to ANAC regulations. Official links and Argentina Drone Laws explained for residents and visitors, hobbyists, recreational, commercial and government drone flyers.  
*    Aruba Drone Laws
----------------

Drones are allowed in Aruba for recreational and commercial use, subject to DCAA regulations. Official links and Aruba Drone Laws explained for residents and visitors, hobbyists, recreational, commercial and government drone flyers.  
*    Bolivia Drone Laws
------------------

Drone use is allowed in Bolivia, subject to DGAC regulations. Official links and Bolivia Drone Laws explained for residents and visitors, hobbyists, recreational, commercial and government drone flyers.  
*    Brazil Drone Laws
-----------------

Drone use is allowed in Brazil, subject to ANAC regulations. Official links and Brazil Drone Laws explained for residents and visitors, hobbyists, recreational, commercial and government drone flyers.  
*    Chile Drone Laws
----------------

Drone use is allowed in Chile, subject to DGAC regulations. Official links and Chile Drone Laws explained for residents and visitors, hobbyists, recreational, commercial and government drone flyers.  
*    Colombia Drone Laws
-------------------

Drone use is allowed in Colombia, subject to CAAC regulations. Official links and Colombia Drone Laws explained for residents and visitors, hobbyists, recreational, commercial and government drone flyers.  
*    Ecuador Drone Laws
------------------

Drone use is allowed in Ecuador, subject to GDCAE regulations. Official links and Ecuador Drone Laws explained for residents and visitors, hobbyists, recreational, commercial and government drone flyers.  
*    Guyana Drone Laws
-----------------

Drone use is allowed in Guyana, subject to GCAA regulations. Official links and Guyana Drone Laws explained for residents and visitors, hobbyists, recreational, commercial and government drone flyers.  
*    Panama Drone Laws
-----------------

Drones are allowed in Panama, subject to AAC regulations. Official links and Panama Drone Laws explained for residents and visitors, hobbyists, recreational, commercial and government drone flyers.  
*    Paraguay Drone Laws
-------------------

Drones are allowed in Paraguay, subject to DINAC regulations. Official links and Paraguay Drone Laws explained for residents and visitors, hobbyists, recreational, commercial and government drone flyers.  
*    Peru Drone Laws
---------------

Drones are allowed in Peru, subject to DGAC regulations. Official links and Peru Drone Laws explained for residents and visitors, hobbyists, recreational, commercial and government drone flyers.  
*    Suriname Drone Laws
-------------------

Drones are allowed in Suriname, subject to CASAS regulations. Official links and Suriname Drone Laws explained for residents and visitors, hobbyists, recreational, commercial and government drone flyers.  
*    Uruguay Drone Laws
------------------

Drones are allowed in Uruguay, subject to DINACIA regulations. Official links and Uruguay Drone Laws explained for residents and visitors, hobbyists, recreational, commercial and government drone flyers.  
*    Venezuela Drone Laws
--------------------

Drones are allowed in Venezuela, subject to INAC regulations. Official links and Venezuela Drone Laws explained for residents and visitors, hobbyists, recreational, commercial and government drone flyers.
