Title: CNN International

URL Source: https://www.facebook.com/cnninternational/posts/common-preservatives-used-to-keep-food-safe-and-extend-shelf-life-may-be-linked-/1249032860425096/

Markdown Content:
Brittany LeeAnn Miller

We’ve known this. This is why it’s a culture shock to people who visit to US when they see the sizes of our fridges and the size of food we put in there. We overly preserve things to last much longer than it should vs making frequent trips. And unfortunately even doing things from scratch isn’t the healthiest unless you’re actually raising your own meat, eggs, milling your own flour, etc.

732

View all 11 replies

Vivienne Luke

And if it’s in a big grocery store, it’s probably got preservatives in it

I’m not afraid to pay extra for organic

1. ….(I’m lucky enough to be able to afford it )

2. ….it’s cheaper than cancer. ￼

192

View all 9 replies

Denise Daniels

We’ve known this. That’s why I check with other countries to see what’s banned. I have an app that tells me which foods have dangerous preservatives in them.

96

View all 7 replies

Renee Coad

I cook everything from scratch. No preservatives, no palm oil or palm kernel oil, no prepackaging.

152

View all 13 replies

Debbie Mazurek

Try to only buy food from the outside aisles, that won’t eliminate it, but will surely lessen the amount.

160

View all 2 replies

Gail Womack

The first step of removing dyes, additives from commercially produced foods. Plain frozen Fruits and Vegetables last longer than Fresh and canned vegetables are budget friendly. There are quick and easy free recipes that can be Googled for busy families.

21

View 1 reply

Haydee Piodos Puentenegra

Eating food with preservatives cannot be avoided as we rely on grocery food mostly these days, but we should try to balance it with healthy home-cooked meals using organic (if available) or ingredients with as little preservatives as possible.

25

View all 2 replies

Mary Antoinette

Wait until you start looking up the ingredients of your vitamins and supplements lol

70

View all 5 replies

Top fan

Stephanie Stratmann

Nothing processed that means cans or boxes. Make everything fresh from fresh ingredients.

28

View all 3 replies

Charlene Gracie

If you cannot pronounce what’s on the label then don’t buy it.

78

View all 2 replies
