Title: Criminalized Survivors: 
Today’s Abuse to Prison 
Pipeline for Girls

URL Source: https://rights4girls.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/04/Criminalized-Survivors_Todays-Abuse-to-Prison-Pipeline.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 17 Apr 2023 21:17:25 GMT

Markdown Content:
CRIMINALIZED SURVIVORS: 

# TODAY’S ABUSE TO PRISON 

# PIPELINE FOR GIRLS  Yasmin Vafa & 

# Rebecca Epstein We are indebted to many who contributed their time, resources, and expertise to 

this report: 

• Annie Balck , Annie Balck Consulting, who provided invaluable research; 

• The law firm  Baker McKenzie , which, through the efforts of Colin Murray, 

William Devaney, and JeanMarie Campbell, generously supported Law Associate 

Chehak Gogia  in providing us critical assistance in completing the report; 

• And the dedicated staff of the Georgetown Center on Gender Justice & 

Opportunity, all of whom are students at (or, by time of publication, alumnae 

of) Georgetown University: 

• Research Assistants (Georgetown University Law Center): 

Sierra Campbell, Nabintou Doumbia, Elizabeth Hadley, 

Natalie Jean, Eva Niedmeyer, Kaitlyn Powell ; and  Rhea Shinde 

• Interns (Georgetown undergraduate programs): 

Emily Gorny  and  Maddi Larmore ; and 

• Youth Engagement Coordinator  Toella Pliakas .

We also extend special gratitude to the  Ms. Foundation for Women , whose support made 

this report possible, as well as the Skoll Foundation for providing additional 

resources; and to  Richard Ross  for providing such powerful photos. 

AUTHORS 

Yasmin Vafa, Rights4Girls and Rebecca Epstein, Georgetown Center on Gender Justice 

& Opportunity 

ABOUT THE AUTHORS’ ORGANIZATIONS 

The Center on Gender Justice & Opportunity  works to uncover and eliminate gender and 

racial disparities across public systems — including education, healthcare, and the legal 

system. Their work starts with the root causes of injustice and is directly informed by girls 

and women—ensuring that the Center’s groundbreaking research and innovative policy 

recommendations are rooted in lived experiences. The Center’s work is in service of a just 

world where all girls experience a childhood that is truly free. In 2022, the Center was hon -

ored to be named as a champion of gender equity by Prince Harry and Meghan’s Archewell 

Foundation. See more at  www.genderjusticeandopportunity.georgetown.edu .

Rights4Girls  is a national human rights organization that advocates for the dignity and 

rights of young women and girls so that every girl can be safe and live a life free of 

violence and exploitation. We work to change the narrative and policies that allow girls to 

be criminalized when they experience violence and advocate for approaches that provide 

girls and young women with safety, justice, and support. Our work includes policy devel -

opment and advocacy at the federal and state levels as well as public education cam -

paigns, coalition building, research, and training and technical assistance. We center the 

voices and needs of our most marginalized girls to ensure that all of our work is far-reach -

ing and intersectional. See more at  www.rights4girls.org .

Suggested citation:  Yasmin V afa & Rebecca  epstein , cRiminalized  suRV iVoRs: toda Y’ s abuse to 

pRison  pipeline fo R Gi Rls  (2023). 

# Acknowledgments 3

Introduction  4

State of the Pipeline: Girls who Survive Abuse Are 

Still Pushed Into the Legal  System  7

• Girls are Blamed and Criminalized for Being Sex Trafficked  8

• Girls are Criminalized for Acting in Self-Defense Against Abusers  9

• Girls are Criminalized for Reporting Abuse  13 

Disrupting the Abuse to Prison Pipeline: Progress in 

Policy and Legislation Since 2015  17 

• The White House and Federal Agencies  18 

• Federal Policy and Leadership  18 

• States’ Safe Harbor Laws: Eliminating Prostitution 

Charges for Children  21 

• Survivor Justice in the States: Protecting Survivors Who Commit 

Offenses in Connection with Sexual Abuse  22 

Recommendations  24 

Endnotes  28 

# Table of Contents Introduction 5 “My spirit has been burned but still glows through 

## the flames. Hear me roar, see me glow, and watch me 

## grow. ”

# These are the words of Pieper Lewis, who, at 15 years old, was sold to a 37-year-old man. 

Pieper’s statement was made in court; not as a plaintiff, a complainant, a survivor, or 

even a victim, but as a defendant. She was charged with first-degree murder of the man 

she killed after he drugged and repeatedly raped her over the course of three days while she 

faded in and out of consciousness. 1

Pieper’s criminalization is just one example of the abuse to prison pipeline for girls, a cycle we 

identified in 2015—and, as this report establishes, still persists. In this cycle, girls—especially 

girls of color—are punished for the gender-based violence they endure, sent into the prison 

system without access to critical support. 

The roots of this cycle reach far and run deep. Public systems, entrusted with authority over 

girls’ lives, not only fail to protect the safety of survivors; they affirmatively criminalize them. 

This injustice is particularly egregious when viewed against the backdrop of the sheer scale 

of sexual violence against girls in the US: girls aged 16-19 are four times more likely than the 

general population to be victims of rape, attempted rape, or sexual assault. 2 And according to 

data released by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in 2022, one in four women 

in the United States (26.8 percent, or 33.5 million) reported “completed” or attempted rape at 

some point in their lifetime. 3 The Covid pandemic has served as an exacerbating factor, caus -

ing marked increases in domestic violence 4 and severity of child abuse. 5

These rates are even higher for women and girls of color, 6 resulting in inequitable patterns of 

impact. 7 According to the Rape, Abuse, Incest National Network (RAINN), the nation’s largest 

anti-sexual violence organization, Native girls run the highest risk of sexual violence of all 

girls. On average, Native people aged 12 and older experience 5,900 sexual assaults per year. 

They are twice as likely to be raped and/or sexually assaulted compared to all other races/ 

ethnicities. 8 Meanwhile, the Youth Risk Behavior Survey (YRBS) revealed that 13.9 percent of 

Native Hawaiian high schoolers in that state reported that they had been forced to engage in 

sexual acts by someone they were dating within the past 12 months, compared to 6.8 percent 

of white high schoolers. 9 Black girls also face extremely high rates of sexual violence. Ujima, 

the National Center on Violence Against Women in the Black Community, reported that one in 

four Black girls are sexually abused before the age of 18. In a study Ujima conducted on a na -

tional sample of high school students, 11 percent of Black girls reported having been raped. 10 

One cause of the high rates of sexual violence against girls of color—as well as the dispropor -

tionate degree of punishment imposed on them in response to that violence—is the adults 

who dehumanize them. In previous reports, we have documented the distorted lens through 

which adults view Black girls, perceiving them as older than white girls of the same age, more 

promiscuous, and undeserving of the same protection. 11  Further, we have exposed a pattern 

of disproportionate sexual exploitation of girls of color by white men, as well as inequitable 

rates of arrests on prostitution charges. 12 

To elevate awareness of the criminalization of survivors, our organizations, together with 

the Ms. Foundation, published  The Sexual Abuse to Prison Pipeline: The Girls’ Story  in 

2015, 13  which highlighted the hidden pattern that routes survivors like Pieper—who are often 

girls of color—into the legal system despite the fact that they present little, if any, risk to 

public safety. 14 

Since that time, the concept of the abuse 15  to prison pipeline for girls has spread widely, 

influencing policy, research, and the public narrative—most notably championed by 

President Obama in 2015. The  Sexual Abuse to Prison Pipeline  report has been cited in 

hundreds of peer-reviewed journals, law review articles, and reports; and it has been refer -

enced in support of legislation and policies designed to decriminalize survivors and increase 

the use of trauma-informed practices and community-based programs for survivors of 

gender-based violence. 16 6 Subsequent research, too, has produced findings that substantiate the correlation between 

girls’ and women’s experience of sexual violence and their involvement in the legal system. 17 

This body of work points to the need for a range of further studies, including examinations of 

the specific factors at play in the cycle, as well as the pipeline’s effects on subgroups of girls 

and women. 18 

The press has also widely recognized the abuse to prison pipeline in the wake of our report. 

Articles about gender-based violence have increasingly questioned why girls who have histo -

ries of sexual victimization are sent into the prison system 19  and shined a light on the harms 

of incarcerating survivors. 20 

These developments have taken place against a cultural backdrop that has changed con -

siderably since our report was published. Seismic points of inflection include the rise of the 

Black Lives Matter movement, the Covid pandemic, the #MeToo movement, and the Supreme 

Court’s decision in  Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization ,21  which eliminated the 

constitutional right to abortion. 

Of these touchpoints, the rise of the #MeToo movement has been uniquely influential in 

expanding mainstream recognition of the prevalence of sexual violence against women and 

girls, challenging conventional biases against claims of sexual abuse and prompting us to do 

better in hearing, believing, and supporting survivors. As more and more women and girls 

have publicly acknowledged their survivorship, the hashtag #MeToo has stood for a move -

ment to end the nation’s complicity in perpetuating sexual harassment and abuse. 22 

Although the #MeToo movement continues to evolve, its focus has changed from the original 

intent, which was to provide safe spaces for women and girls of color to connect and heal 

from sexual violence. 23  Its explosion into the mainstream was marked by increased attention 

to the experiences of affluent white women—a focus that persisted despite the disproportion -

ately higher rates of sexual violence against girls and young women of color. 24  Tarana Burke, 

the founder of #MeToo, recognized this phenomenon as part of a historical pattern, noting 

that “sexual violence knows no race, class, or gender—but the response to it does.” 25 

In light of the changes that have taken place since the publication of our 2015 report, we set 

out to examine the current state of the pipeline for girls. Here, we provide new analyses of the 

most significant paths that funnel survivors into the system, points of progress made in law 

and policy reform, and the challenges that persist. Finally, we offer a set of principles to guide 

systemic change. 

Solutions are possible, if only we choose to act. The top priority must be the prevention of 

gender-based violence itself. But as long as that violence persists, we must end the criminal -

ization of victims. Through systemic, structural change, we can achieve justice for survivors. State of the Pipeline: 

# Girls who Survive 

# Abuse Are  Still Pushed 

# Into the Legal  System 8

# Despite clear evidence and increasing awareness of the prevalence of gender-based 

violence, girls are still pushed into the legal system in three main ways as a direct result 

of the violence they experience: 

Girls are blamed and criminalized for being sex trafficked; 

Girls are criminalized for acting in self-defense against abusers; and 

Girls are punished or criminalized for reporting abuse. 

These categories are not intended to represent an exhaustive list of all routes into the system 

for survivors of gender-based violence. As we highlighted in our original report, there are 

many other unique pathways into the system for girls, such as the criminalization of status of -

fenders who run away from home to escape abuse or are forced to be truant because they are 

being sex trafficked. We highlight the three paths above as among the most urgent to address. 

Girls are Blamed and Criminalized for Being Sex Trafficked 

Awareness of the prevalence of child sex trafficking and the injustice of criminalizing survivors 

has grown tremendously in recent years. Arrests of children on charges related to prostitution 

and “commercialized vice” 26  have declined at rates that exceed the decline in total juvenile 

arrest rates. 27  In addition, thanks to the leadership of survivors, use of the term child pros -

titute—itself a legal oxymoron, since children cannot legally consent to sex—has begun to 

wane in recent years. 28  In an influential development, the Associated Press revised its Style -

book—the foundational guideline for journalists and other writers on language, usage, style, 

spelling, and punctuation—to discourage use of the term when referring to child victims of 

sexual exploitation. 29  This trend, as well as the legal reforms we detail in the next section, are 

helping re-shape perceptions of child survivors in ways that are more legally accurate and 

ethically just. 

Yet the criminalization of child survivors continues. The US Department of Justice has report -

ed that 110 children were arrested nationwide on prostitution charges and commercialized vice 

in 2020, 30  but local reports indicate that number is a vast underestimate. 31  In states that report 

a reduction in arrests of children related that to prostitution, survivors may simply be arrested 

on different charges—a practice known as proxy or masking charges 32 —including loitering; 

trespass; drug possession; or status offenses, such as truancy or running away. 33  These arrests 

are overwhelmingly of girls: in 2019, 71 percent of youth arrested on charges of prostitution 

and commercialized vice were girls, far exceeding their proportion of the population. 34  The 

arrests are also disproportionately of Black youth: According to the US Department of Jus -

tice, in 2019—the latest year for which data has been released—Black children were over five 

times more likely to be arrested for prostitution and commercialized vice than white children. 

Overall, children of color were over three and a half times more likely to be arrested on these 

charges than white children. 35 

As we emphasized in our original report, the arrest and criminalization of child sex trafficking 

victims, whether on prostitution charges or other charges related to their exploitation, is both 

ethically and legally wrong. Under federal law, any child under the age of 18 engaged in a 

commercial sex act 36  is a victim of a “severe form” of human trafficking. 37  Criminalizing child 

victims as if they were offenders undermines that legally protected status; it also perpetuates 

abuse by directing focus away from adult exploiters and masking structural, systemic failures 

to provide community safety and accountability. And the failure to screen youth who come 

into contact with the system upon intake to identify whether they are victims of trafficking—a 

common failure in many states—is inconsistent with federal guidance set forth in the Juvenile 

Justice Reform Act. 38  As a result, many child trafficking victims remain unidentified, without 

critical services or support, and without the benefit of context when placement and treatment 

options are assessed. 

Still deeper criminalization occurs when more serious charges are brought against survivors. 

One example: child sex trafficking victims who are charged with recruiting other victims. 39 

This practice, which holds child victims liable as traffickers traffickers or co-conspirators, fails 

to recognize the broader circumstances: that is, the violence, coercion, threats, manipulation, 

and other forms of control that traffickers use to force their victims to exploit other children. It 

also discounts the harmful effect of survivors’ ongoing trauma on their sense of agency and 

decision-making. 9 An example in Florida provides a case in point: 

Multiple traffickers were recently arrested and tried for running a drug and human 

trafficking ring. At trial, prosecutors identified one witness as a victim.  40  Yet to 

force that survivor to cooperate, they charged her as a co-conspirator, offering her 

a plea deal that required her to testify against her exploiters and attend a program 

for victims. 41 

Treating survivors as offenders—even if they are simultaneously acknowledged 

as victims—reveals a fundamental disregard of the effects of being charged as a 

criminal after surviving a human rights violation, as well as the burden of living 

with a criminal record. 

Girls are Criminalized for Acting in Self-Defense Against Abusers 

Despite the emergence of reforms, samples of which we discuss in the next section, girls 

continue to be funneled into the youth—and sometimes adult—legal system for acts that 

are rooted in attempts to escape the men who rape, sell, and abuse them, including acts of 

self-defense that sometimes require violence. In these cases, police, prosecutors, and 

judges often fail to consider the role of underlying victimization. As a result, victims often 

face a catch-22: they can comply with their exploiter and run the risk of arrest on prostitution 

or related offenses, or they can use the force necessary to escape, which risks criminal 

punishment for harming their abusers. 

Sentencing girls to years, even decades, of imprisonment for acting in self-defense against 

abusers is common across the country. But punishing survivors for acting against their 

exploiters without considering the trauma they have endured or the context of traffickers’ 

coercion is not only unjust; it deprives girls of their freedom and the treatment and support 

needed to heal and end cycles of violence and harm. 

## abuse to prison pipeline  

> SEXUAL ABUSE
> ENTRY INTO
> YOUTH/ADULT
> LEGAL SYSTEM
> Child Sex Trafficking &
> Related Behaviors
> (e.g. loitering)
> Reporting Abuse
> (credibility discounted)
> Coerced Criminal Acts
> (e.g. forced to recruit)
> Violence Against Abusers
> (e.g. self-defense)
> Status Offenses (e.g.
> truancy, running away)

10 

INCREASING PROTECTIONS FOR CRIMINALIZED CHILDREN 

Until the 21st century, American children could be sentenced to die or spend the rest of their 

lives behind bars. Through a series of holdings over the last two decades, the US Supreme 

Court has gradually increased legal protections for children accused of serious crimes: 

• In 2005, the Court ruled that sentencing children to death for crimes they committed be -

fore the age of 18 violates the Eighth Amendment’s prohibition against cruel and unusual 

punishment. 42 

• In 2010, the Court abolished the sentence of life without the possibility of parole for chil -

dren convicted of crimes other than homicide. 43 

• In 2012,  Miller v. Alabama  held that mandatory sentences of life without parole for chil -

dren convicted of homicide are unconstitutional. 44  While life sentences could be imposed, 

Justice Kagan wrote: “Although we do not foreclose a sentencer’s ability to make that 

judgment in homicide cases, we require it to take into account how children are different, 

and how those differences counsel against irrevocably sentencing them to a lifetime in 

prison. ”45  The decision invalidated mandatory life sentencing provisions in 29 states. 46 

• In 2016,  Montgomery v. Louisiana  held that  Miller  applies retroactively, requiring states to 

allow individuals to be considered for parole for cri mes  they committed as children. 47 

According to the Equal Justice Initiative, which argued the  Miller  case before the Supreme 

Court, more than one thousand people who had been sentenced to die behind bars for 

acts committed as children have been resentenced pursuant to that holding, and hundreds 

released. 48 

These cases represent important progress. However, children—including, as demonstrated 

by the case studies outlined in this report, child survivors of exploitation—are still being tried 

as adults and sentenced to  decades  in adult prison for acts of self-defense against exploiters. 

The federal government and states have the authority—and, we would argue, the duty—to 

enact legislation that provides greater protection to children than the standard established by 

the Constitution, as the Supreme Court has noted. 49  Yet, as this report makes clear, bills have 

often failed to pass even when they prohibit sentences of life without parole for children only 

after youth have served at least 20 years. 50 

> SIDEBAR

11  CASE STUDIES OF PROSECUTED SURVIVORS: 

## THE PIPELINE IN THE REAL WORLD 

Below, we describe a handful of representative cases of the criminalization of girls who act in 

self-defense. Significantly, the defendant in every incident is a girl of color. What makes these 

cases unusual is that they are known at all. Only the most egregious cases garner national 

attention and outrage, 51  and even then, awareness is raised only because of heroic efforts by 

families, friends, lawyers, advocates, and journalists—and, in some cases, the extraordinary 

involvement of public figures. 52  Although most of these survivors were ultimately released, 

far more often, survivors—especially girls of color—stay in the shadows of the system. 

CYNTOIA BROWN (TENNESSEE) 

Cyntoia Brown was 16 years old when she was imprisoned for killing a 43-year-old 

man who paid to rape her. 53  According to a court opinion in her case, “the victim 

showed [Cyntoia] some guns, and they got into bed together. The victim whispered to 

and touched [Cyntoia] and reached underneath the bed. [Cyntoia] thought the victim 

was reaching for a gun, so she pulled a ... handgun out of her purse and shot him. ”54 

Cyntoia was tried as an adult; the jury rejected her claim of self-defense. She was 

found guilty of first-degree premeditated murder, first-degree felony murder, and 

aggravated robbery, and she was sentenced to 51 years to life in prison. 55 

After a documentary was aired about her case, Cyntoia was granted clemency by 

Governor Bill Haslam and released, having served 15 years. 56 

CHRYSTUL KIZER (WISCONSIN) 

At 17, Chrystul Kizer shot and killed Randall Volar, who had previously been charged— 

then released without bail—for sexually exploiting numerous Black girls. Accord -

ing to the  Washington Post , police had seized videos in Volar’s home showing him 

abusing several underage Black girls, including Chrystul, and “hundreds” of other 

videos of child sexual abuse. 57  According to Chrystul, after a year of complying with 

his demands, she finally rejected Volar, and he tried to rape her. She shot him with a 

gun her boyfriend had given her. Chrystul was charged with first-degree intentional 

homicide, which carries a mandatory sentence of life in prison. 58 

In July 2022, the state Supreme Court ruled that Wisconsin’s affirmative defense law, 

which applies to victims of sex trafficking for any offense committed as a direct result 

of trafficking, 59  could provide a complete defense to Chrystul’s charge of first-degree 

homicide. 60  Now, after the delay that stretched on for years as her case made its way 

through the courts, Chrystul may present evidence to support the application of this 

defense to her case, which would allow her to be released. 61 

PIEPER LEWIS (IOWA) 

Pieper Lewis, a 15-year-old girl, was trafficked by a 28-year-old man claiming to be her 

boyfriend. In 2020, her trafficker forced her to go home with a 37-year-old sex buyer 

who drugged and raped her multiple times over a three-day period. She used a knife 

on the nightstand to kill him. 

Charged with his murder, she faced 20 years in prison. She pled guilty to voluntary 

manslaughter and willful injury. After being held in a juvenile detention facility for 

two years, prosecutors recommended probation. Pieper was sentenced to five years’ 

probation in women’s transitional facility without the possibility of early release and 

was required to wear an ankle monitor. The court warned her: “[T]his is the second 

chance you asked for. You don’t get a third. ” The judge ordered her to serve 200 hours 

of community service, pay more than $4,000 in civil penalties, and pay $150,000 in 

restitution to the rapist’s estate. 62  But Pieper, who has said that she plans to become 

a youth justice advocate, 63  broke her ankle monitor and fled the center soon after her 

trial. She was returned to jail; in March 2023, she pled guilty to an escape charge. A 

hearing to determine if she will be forced to go to prison is pending. 64 

ALEXIS MARTIN (OHIO) 

Alexis Martin, 15, helped plan a robbery of her 36-year-old trafficker, Angelo Kerney, 

who had forbidden her from attending school. According to news reports, Martin said 12  she had agreed to participate in the robbery to escape Kerney and go to school: 

“[Education] was my only hope that I ever would leave behind the ghettos—that 

abuse. ”65  Things went wrong, and the robbery turned into a homicide. 

Alexis was charged with felony murder, despite her status as a child victim. Prose -

cutors argued that Alexis was a “manipulator;” that she had played a key role in the 

robbery; and that she should be tried as an adult. Her lawyer, three years out of law 

school, was unaware of the safe harbor law that had been enacted 17 months earli -

er. 66  As a result, the availability of safe harbor protections was not raised. 

The judge characterized Alexis as “working” for Kerney, stating: “It is almost beyond 

comprehension to think that a 15-year-old child would be involved in that kind of 

work. ”67  Tried and convicted, Alexis was sentenced to 21 years to life in adult prison. 68 

Governor Mike DeWine later commuted Alexis’ sentence—after advocates raised 

awareness about her case—as part of a broader effort to limit the spread of Covid in 

prisons. In a statement about his decision, the governor noted: “Alexis was 15 years 

of age when she committed the crime; 17 when she went to prison. She is a child sex 

trafficking survivor. She will be sent to an appropriate group home and she will be 

under supervision for an extensive period of time. ”69  Alexis had already served seven 

years. As a condition of the commutation, she was required to wear an ankle monitor, 

forbidden from leaving the state, and placed on parole—which included being sub -

jected to random checks by parole officers—for the remainder of her sentence: 

14 years. 70 

In 2021, a parole officer conducted an unscheduled visit of Alexis’ apartment and 

found drugs and weapons in moving boxes belonging to her boyfriend. Although 

her lawyers argued that Alexis was not aware of them, she was held to have violated 

the terms of her parole. In response, the parole board chose the harshest punishment 

possible: it revoked Alexis’ commutation and reinstated her prior sentence in its 

entirety. The governor did not intervene. Alexis is now scheduled to be released in 

November 2034. 71 

BRESHA MEADOWS (OHIO) 

Bresha Meadows ran away twice to escape her home, where she had witnessed her 

father repeatedly and violently abusing her mother and threatening the rest of the 

family. At the age of 14, after she was forced to return home, she shot him, and was 

charged with aggravated murder. She pled guilty to involuntary manslaughter. She 

served a year in a juvenile detention center, then another six months in a residential 

treatment center. Amid public outcry and with the support of advocates, Bresha was 

released under her family’s supervision for two more years. 72 

PATRICE SMITH (NEW YORK) 

Patrice Smith was a 15-year-old girl when, according to court records, she was re -

peatedly raped by a 71-year-old man in exchange for money and gifts. In an incident 

in which she refused his demand for sex, he threatened to kill her and began pushing 

her toward the bedroom. A physical fight ensued in which Patrice feared she would 

be killed. She fought back, ultimately killing him. She was charged with homicide 

and robbery. 73  She was convicted and sentenced to concurrent indeterminate terms 

of 25 years to life on two second-degree murder counts and 10 years on a robbery 

count. The conviction was unanimously affirmed on appeal. 74 

Decades later, while Patrice was still incarcerated, New York enacted the Domestic 

Violence Survivors Justice Act. 75  The law provides discretion to judges to depart from 

mandatory minimum sentences in cases of domestic violence if those sentences 

would be “unduly harsh” in light of the nature and circumstances of the crime and 

the defendant’s history, character, and condition. The law defines domestic violence 

broadly to include acts committed by anyone in an “intimate relationship” with the 

victim. 76  A related provision of criminal procedure establishes that the law can serve 

as a basis for resentencing survivors who are serving at least eight years for offens -

es committed before the effective date of the law. 77  Patrice requested resentencing 

under this provision, which the district attorney opposed. The court held that the 

law applied to Patrice’s case, based on its finding that Patrice had been subjected to 

substantial physical, sexual, and psychological abuse that significantly contributed to 

her committing the offense. Patrice had served over 20 years before her sentence was 

vacated; she was released in 2020. 78 13  Girls are Criminalized for Reporting Abuse 

Law enforcement officers are charged with protecting victims of crime; but they, themselves, 

perpetuate the abuse to prison pipeline when they file false reporting charges against girls 

who report assault or trafficking. 79  Charging survivors with false reporting reflects the lack 

of credibility often afforded to victims of gender-based violence. 80  A recent ethnographic 

study found that detectives’ determination that a survivor has filed a false report involves a 

complex combination of factors, including “the institutional frames of the department and the 

individual-level attitudes of the detective including adherence to rape myths. ” It concluded: 

[W]e found that detectives’ construction of false reports is not only an individual-

level phenomenon, but speak[s] to wider structural issues such as policing culture 

and societal views about rape.… 

The findings do not suggest that detectives believe all sexual assault cases are false 

reports, but they do hold the belief that false reporting occurs more frequently than 

the statistics indicate, suggesting that the rape myth of the lying victim/false report 

continues to be salient in [the jurisdiction], and potentially policing culture. Adher -

ence to the myth of the lying victim continues to shape how detectives view, under -

stand, and respond to sexual assault and victims. 81 

Despite guidance issued by the FBI and the International Association of Chiefs of Police 

recommending against filing false reporting charges in these cases, 82  women and girls are 

significantly vulnerable to this form of criminalization. According to Deborah Tuerkheimer, 

former assistant district attorney and author of  Credible: Why We Doubt Accusers and Protect 

Abusers :

Most women who come forward with an abuse allegation against a man will confront 

the credibility discount. Judging credibility is a mighty power—because credibility is 

itself a form of power. Whenever we judge credibility, we are in a position to value, 

or to devalue, the speaker. … The most vulnerable women experience credibility 

discounting at its most extreme, while men who are protected by greater status or 

position are the beneficiaries of massive credibility boosts. 83 

A leading researcher on the prosecution of rape victims has observed that “the 

vulnerability of the complainant is a key factor in determining who gets charged with 

falsely reporting a rape. Vulnerable complainants are easier targets because they 

have fewer resources—both social and financial—with which to challenge the police’s 

treatment of them. ”84 14 

> SIDEBAR

Girls are a particular target of the “credibility discount. ” Research shows that interviewers 

often engage in “characterological victim blaming” of girls. 85  In fact, adolescent girls, who 

experience particularly high rates of sexual assault, paradoxically are also more likely to be 

discredited than  both  older and younger victims. Research has shown that adults view teen -

agers who allege sex abuse as less credible than younger children “in part because … adults 

view children as losing their sexual naiveté, and thus become capable of instigating lies about 

sexual abuse, at around 12 years old. ”86  At the same time, adolescents are viewed as less 

credible than adult survivors: “Adult stereotypes of adolescents may lead them to perceive 

adolescents’ stories as less credible than adults’, particularly when the victim was involved in 

illegal or experimental adolescent behavior (e.g., drinking alcohol). ”87  According to the authors 

of a study on police refusal to submit sexual assault kits: 

Adolescents are often singled out by police as being particularly less credible, as 

law enforcement believe that their claims of rape are fabricated to cover up for “bad 

behavior” (being out late, drinking) and to try to avoid getting into trouble with their 

parents for those behaviors. 88 

Treating victims with undue skepticism and hostility creates disincentives for victims to report 

abuse which, in turn, reduces opportunities for them to receive critical forms of support. 89  It 

can also bias investigations and thwart the investigation of gender violence—and, by exten -

sion, place more women and girls in the community at risk of harm. 90 

In addition, disbelieving survivors can traumatize them as victims 91  in what has been de -

scribed as “‘secondary victimization’: insensitive, victim-blaming treatment that makes sur -

vivors feel as though they are being [re-victimized] by the systems that are supposed to help 

them. ”92  This treatment can exacerbate girls’ culturally imposed tendency to blame themselves 

for the abuse they experience, which, studies show, can lead to anxiety, depression, PTSD, 

and suicidal ideation. 93 

MARIE’S STORY 

The story of Marie, an 18-year-old resident of Washington State, illustrates police officers’ ten -

dency to doubt the accounts of young people who report sexual assault and investigate cases 

in ways that confirm their bias. 

Marie reported that she had been bound, gagged, and raped at knifepoint by a man who had 

secretly surveilled her. Within a week, police picked her up and took her to the station, where 

they confronted her with inconsistencies in her story—a common occurrence among victims 

who experience trauma. 94  Marie recanted her claim under pressure by the detectives. She 

then reinstated it, and again recanted, in circumstances that she later characterized as duress. 

She was charged and pled guilty to filing a false report. 95  After agreeing to a sentence of a 

year of probation and $500 in court costs, the charges were dropped. 96 

In the next several years, the same person raped five other women. 97 

The police chief later requested reviews of the investigation. These reviews determined that 

the detectives had “bullied, ” “hounded, ” and “coerced” Marie; ignored evidence of the crime; 

and focused on “minor inconsistencies” in her story, despite the well-established frequency 

of such inconsistencies among sexual assault survivors. The conclusion: the detectives had 

purposely elicited a confession of false reporting. According to a sex-crimes unit supervisor, 

their actions amounted to “nothing short of the victim being coerced into admitting that she 

lied about the rape, ” which compounded the trauma of her assault. 98 

The case gained national attention when a Pulitzer Prize-winning article was published in 2015 

by Pro Publica and The Marshall Project; it also became the subject of a Netflix documentary. 99 

As of the time of this publication, the detectives have not been disciplined.  100 15  Many survivors have attested to the profound harm inflicted by authorities’ hostile respons -

es to their pursuit of accountability. 101  Chanel Miller describes her decision to press charges 

against Brock Turner, who raped her behind a dumpster while she was unconscious, as naive: 

I didn’t know that if a woman was drunk when the violence occurred, she wouldn’t be 

taken seriously. I didn’t know that if he was drunk when the violence occurred, people 

would offer him sympathy…. I didn’t know that being a victim was synonymous with 

not being believed. 102 

Women and girls who are viewed as promiscuous—a common gender stereotype that is often 

levied against marginalized girls—are even less likely to be perceived as credible. One study, 

for example, found that detectives “dismissed rape allegations by women they believed were 

involved in [the sex trade] as ‘economic crimes’. ” In other words, they believed that the wom -

en only “alleged rape when they were not paid. ”103 

Discrediting survivors is especially common for girls with intersectional identities. 104  Accord -

ing to Tuerkheimer: 

When women belong to groups that are marginalized, subordinated, or otherwise 

vulnerable, their allegations are even less likely to be credited. Class matters. 

Line of work matters. Immigration status matters. Drug and alcohol use matters. 

Sexual history matters. Sexual orientation matters. Nowhere are the particulars more 

important than when it comes to race, which is ‘inextricable from gender’…. 105 

Black girls, in particular, are targeted by stereotypes that portray them as hypersexualized, 

seductive, and exploitative of men’s weaknesses. 106  These deeply racist perceptions are firmly 

ingrained in American culture. Anita Hill described her experience testifying before the Senate 

Judiciary Committee in 1991 about being sexually harassed by now-Justice Clarence Thomas: 

“Falsely casting me as an erotomaniac … fit neatly within the myth of [B]lack women’s 

sexuality.’ 107 

Age matters too. Stereotypes of Black girls warp adults’ perception of them; they tend to 

view Black girls as young as 5-9 years old as more adult-like and more knowledgeable about 

sex than their white peers. 108  In the context of sexual abuse, this adultification bias may 

translate into authorities’ dismissal of Black girls’ reports. In fact, one study showed that in 

some circumstances, “even 6-year-old Black girls are perceived as less credible (and perhaps 

more sexual) than 6-year-old [w]hite girls, ” and less traumatized by their victimization than 

white girls. 109 

[I]nterrogators fail to recognize [Black girls] as … [victims], but instead see them as 

mature, competent, and self-reliant … [because] of adultification bias. The dominant 

narrative depicting [Black girls] as mature women, competent about sex and capable 

of consent, provides a readily available explanation for their traumatic experience. 110 

Ultimately, the practice of retaliating against women and girls who report sexual abuse excus -

es—and in so doing, perpetuates—gender-based violence. 111  In the words of Chanel Miller: 

Victims are often, automatically, accused of lying. … Why is it that we’re wary of 

victims making false accusations, but rarely consider how many men have blatantly 

lied about, downplayed, or manipulated others to cover their own actions? 112 16 

> SIDEBAR

GIRLS ARE CRIMINALIZED OR PUNISHED AT SCHOOL FOR REPORTING SEXUAL HARASS -

MENT AND ABUSE 

Schools should function as safe havens that nurture and protect youth; but they contribute to 

the abuse to prison pipeline for girls when they punish students who report sexual abuse and 

harassment. In an echo of police officers’ discounting of girls’ claims of sexual abuse, schools 

sometimes discipline girls who report harassment or abuse despite the protections offered by 

Title IX, the federal law that bans sex discrimination in federally funded schools. Schools have 

been shown to have suspended, expelled, and otherwise disciplined girls who have reported 

sexual assault, turning blame for the abuse onto the victims. 113  And exclusion increases survi -

vors’ risk of involvement in the legal system. 114 

This pattern ripples across the country. In Georgia, for example, a 16-year-old Black girl was 

suspended and then expelled in 2017 for “sexual impropriety” after reporting sexual assault.  

> 115

That same year, a 14-year-old Latina girl was suspended in Florida for “inappropriate sexual 

behavior” after reporting that she was raped. In New Jersey, a Black high-school girl was sus -

pended for “disorderly conduct” in 2016 after reporting she was sexually assaulted on a bus. 116 

Racial bias further increases the risk of punishment for students of color who report abuse. 

According to Shiwali Patel of the National Women’s Law Center, 

[D]iscriminatory responses from schools are far too common, particularly towards 

girls of color and especially [B]lack girls, who—because of harmful race and sex 

stereotypes—are too often disbelieved, misperceived as the initial aggressor when 

they defend themselves against harassment, face minimization of their harm, or are 

blamed for their victimization. 117 

The role of schools in the sexual abuse to prison pipeline points to the need for policies that 

end school pushout for girls who experience sexual violence and harassment. Instead, schools 

must meet their obligation to students by investigating claims fairly; providing support to 

young people who experience sex discrimination, harassment, and abuse; and providing 

opportunities for healing and safety to girls and youth. 118 Disrupting the Abuse to 

# Prison Pipeline: Progress 

# in Policy and Legislation 

# Since 2015 18 

# Progress in developing systemic reform to end the criminalization of survivors has been 

slow. 119  Still, in the last several years, policies and laws adopted at both the federal 

and state level have begun to meaningfully reduce the criminalization of sexual abuse 

survivors. 

The White House and Federal Agencies 

In 2015, the White House adopted the language of the abuse to prison pipeline report and 

called for reducing its harms. In President Obama’s speech to the Congressional Black Caucus 

that year, for example, which showcased his administration’s commitment to expanding its 

youth-justice work, he recognized that work to reduce youth pipelines into the prison system 

should not focus only on Black boys: 

[A]lthough in these discussions a lot of my focus has been on African American men 

and the work we’re doing with My Brother’s Keeper [an initiative launched in 2014 to 

support boys and young men of color], we can’t forget the impact that the system has 

on women, as well. The incarceration rate for [B]lack women is twice as high as the 

rate for white women. Many women in prison … have been sexually assaulted, both 

before they got to prison and then after they go to prison. …  [W]hile boys face the 

school-to-prison pipeline, a lot of girls are facing a more sinister sexual abuse-to-pris -

on pipeline. . ..  So we’re focusing on boys, but we’re also investing in ways to change 

the odds for at-risk girls—to make sure that they are loved and valued. 120 

President Obama later emphasized his administration’s prioritization of disrupting the pipeline 

for girls when he proclaimed January as National Slavery and Human Trafficking Prevention 

Month, noting, “[W]e have worked to address the sexual abuse to prison pipeline that dispro -

portionately affects those especially vulnerable to sex trafficking—including young women 

and girls of color. ”121  His administration convened a meeting entitled “Girls of Color and Inter -

vening Public Systems: Interrupting the Sexual Abuse to Prison Pipeline, ” which invited young 

women and girls and national experts to discuss strategies to dismantle the sexual abuse to 

prison pipeline and promote better outcomes for girls of color. 122  Further, in 2015, the White 

House Council on Women and Girls acknowledged the role that status offenses—violations 

that often are indicators of underlying abuse—play in increasing girls’ routes into the system: 

The most common offenses for which girls are arrested include running away and 

truancy. These behaviors are also the most common symptoms or outcomes of 

trauma and abuse. Once in the system, girls may be treated as offenders rather than 

girls in need of support, perpetuating a vicious cycle that is increasingly known as the 

‘sexual abuse to prison pipeline.’ 123 

Other federal agencies, including the US Department of Justice’s Office on Violence Against 

Women 124 ; its Office of Justice Programs; 125  and its Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquen -

cy Prevention (OJJDP), 126  as well as the Federal Interagency Reentry Council, 127  have also 

recognized the pipeline and taken action to break the cycle. In discussing funding directed 

at increasing the availability of programs focused on girls in the youth legal system, OJJDP 

highlighted that trafficked girls often become caught up in the system and that 73 percent of 

girls in the system “had past histories of physical and sexual abuse. ”128 

Federal Policy and Leadership 

Federal lawmakers have addressed—and continue to address—the pipeline through 

legislation and leadership. We describe below some of the most promising and noteworthy 

examples. 

In 2015, former Congresswoman and current Los Angeles Mayor Karen Bass hosted a con -

gressional briefing on Capitol Hill on legislative strategies to help curb the abuse to prison 

pipeline and better protect survivors of violence and exploitation. 129  Several current and 

former Members of Congress made remarks at the briefing, including Representatives Bar -

bara Lee, Bonnie Watson Coleman, Judy Chu, Hank Johnson, Bobby Scott, and Ted Poe. 130  In 

2017, the Senate Judiciary Committee held a hearing in which formerly incarcerated girls and 

experts on the abuse to prison pipeline testified about the need for federal and state reform 

to dismantle the harmful cycle for girls. 131  The hearing contributed to the introduction and 

eventual passage of bipartisan legislation explicitly addressing the criminalization of girls and 

survivors of abuse and exploitation: the  Juvenile Justice Reform Act of 2018 (JJRA). 132 19  The JJRA includes several provisions that align with recommendations in our 2015 report. For 

example, it requires states to develop policies and procedures to screen all youth upon intake 

at juvenile justice facilities for human trafficking, document the number identified, and refer 

those children to appropriate services. 133  The law also follows two of our recommendations 

to reduce inappropriate treatment of pregnant girls in the system. First, it requires facilities to 

collect data on the number of pregnant girls in secure detention and, perhaps most critically, 

it requires states to implement plans to eliminate the use of restraints on pregnant girls in 

correctional facilities during labor, delivery, and post-partum recovery, barring evidence of an 

immediate and serious threat to hurting herself or others. 134  In addition, the law echoes our 

report’s call for states to create“a plan to provide alternatives to detention for status offend -

ers [and] survivors of commercial sexual exploitation . . . such as home-based or commu -

nity-based services or treatment. ”135  Finally, the JJRA follows our recommendation that at 

least one member of each State Advisory Group have expertise in sexual abuse and sexual 

exploitation. 136 

More recently, in 2022, President Biden signed the  Violence Against Women Reauthorization 

Act (VAWA)  into law, which includes several important provisions that will help prevent the 

pipeline for survivors. After years of advocacy, the law expands tribal courts’ jurisdiction over 

non-Natives who commit crimes—including sexual assault, child abuse, sex trafficking, and 

stalking—against Native people. 137  The law also increases support and services to survivors of 

gender-based violence from marginalized communities, among other important updates. 138 

Also of note, the Senate passed a resolution in 2015 to promote the principle that trafficked 

children should not be viewed as prostitutes. Senate Resolution 81 expresses “the sense of 

the Senate that children trafficked for sex in the United States should not be treated or regard -

ed as child prostitutes because there is no such thing as a ‘child prostitute’— only children 

who are victims or survivors of rape and sex trafficking” and encourages federal agencies to 

treat them as such. 139 

Other bills related to the pipeline have been introduced but have not passed. For example, the 

First Step Implementation Act of 2021  sought to retroactively end juvenile life sentences and 

de facto  life sentences without parole. The legislation would have allowed individuals who 

## GIRL S OF 

## COLOR 

## the credibility discount for girls of color 

* Girls of color stand at the intersection 

of anti-credibility bias against youth, 

women, and people of color. 

## GENDER  AGE 

## RACE 20  were convicted of crimes as minors to petition the court for sentencing review after serving at 

least 20 years. 140  The bill also outlined a process for sealing and expunging certain nonviolent 

juvenile records. 141  When deciding whether to reduce prison terms, the bill instructed courts 

to consider “the family and community circumstances of the defendant at the time of the 

offense, including any history of abuse, trauma, or involvement in the child welfare system. ”142 

In addition, the  Childhood Offenders Rehabilitation & Safety Act  was introduced in 2021 to 

limit the transfer of youth into the adult legal system. 143  The legislation established a mini -

mum age of 12 to hold children criminally liable and the minimum age for a child to be tried 

as an adult to 16. 144  The bill also sought to eliminate the felony murder rule—which allows 

defendants accused of committing a violent felony to be charged with murder if the felo -

ny resulted in death—for minors, and it forbid placing children in federal adult correctional 

facilities. 145  The legislation also required data to be collected on children who are adjudicated 

in federal criminal courts or detained in federal custody. 146  Finally, the bill established a grant 

program to promote greater collaboration between child welfare and juvenile justice systems 

to improve outcomes for at-risk youth, including victims of commercial sexual exploitation. 147 

Also in 2021, legislation was introduced in Congress that would allow trauma-informed 

sentencing for young survivors accused of harming their abusers. The bill provided discre -

tion to federal judges to deviate from mandatory minimum sentencing guidelines to reduce 

sentences in cases where the defendant was under 18. 148  This bill, known as  Sara’s Law and 

the Preventing Unfair Sentencing Act , sought to provide important protections for child sex 

crime survivors by allowing judges to take into account a defendant’s age, trauma history, and 

reduced culpability in sentencing. 149  It was named in honor of Sara Kruzan, who was 16 years 

old when she shot and killed a man 20 years her senior who began sexually abusing and 

exploiting her at the age of 13. 150  She was tried as an adult and was prohibited from present -

ing evidence about her abuse. Sara was sentenced to life without parole. After a campaign 

was launched in her behalf, Sara was released after serving 18 years and later pardoned. 151  If 

passed, the bill would represent significant progress at the federal level for survivors of sexu -

al abuse. In Sara’s words: 

## I was an 11-year-old child when I was approached by a 

## man I thought was safe. He exploited my innocence, 

## and he set into motion a two-year process of grooming 

## defined by repeated physical, psychological and sexu -

## al violence. When I turned 13, he began sex-trafficking 

## me. Three years later, I shot and killed my abuser while 

## he was again attempting to rape me in a hotel room. I 

## was only 16. I was arrested and prosecuted, and by the 

## time I was 17, I had been sentenced to life without the 

## possibility of parole plus four years. I was wounded by 

## an abusive system, incarcerated for almost 20 years 

## and relegated to the shadows of our society. 152 

Finally, the  Prohibiting Detention of Youth Status Offenders Act of 2022  was designed to ban 

the “valid court order” (VCO) exception, a legal loophole that allows children who commit 

noncriminal status offenses, like running away or truancy, to be incarcerated in juvenile de -

tention facilities. 153  The bill included the finding that the VCO has led to “thousands of youth 

being placed in secure detention” for these nonviolent violations. 154  It further found that girls 

are more often sent into the legal system for these acts than boys, and that girls often commit 

these offenses in response to abuse or trauma. 155 21  States’ Safe Harbor Laws: Eliminating Prostitution Charges for Children 

In recent years, more states have enacted “safe harbor” laws, which protect youth from arrest 

or prosecution on prostitution and related charges. While approximately 12 states had safe 

harbor laws in 2015, a majority of states have some form of this legislation today. 156  The pro -

visions of these laws range from prohibiting the arrest of any minor on a charge of prostitu -

tion—the most protective mechanism 157 —to permitting youth to assert an affirmative defense 

to a prostitution charge, to proscribing or mandating diversion for children prosecuted on 

charges of prostitution in lieu of adjudication. 158 

Some state laws go further, protecting survivors from a broad array of charges so long as 

the acts was committed while the child was being trafficked or was directly related to their 

exploitation. Ohio, for example, enacted a series of protections for child victims charged with 

crimes during the period of exploitation. The Ohio Supreme Court has directed juvenile courts 

to interpret these protections broadly regardless of the child’s criminal history or the charges 

filed against them. 159 

Despite the progress that safe harbor statutes represent, they offer little practical protection 

from criminalization if unaccompanied by mechanisms that support implementation. Data 

on safe harbor implementation is limited, but studies have found limited improvement in the 

rates of arrests of trafficked children after many of these laws have gone into effect. 160  Accord -

ing to the  Washington Post , for example, in Nevada alone, at least 110 children were arrested 

on prostitution-related offenses in 2019, despite the state’s safe harbor law. 161 

Robust implementation of safe harbor laws can be limited by many factors, such as failure to 

commit to enforcement or lack of awareness, cross-system communication, training, or ef -

fective screening tools for first responders and other system actors. 162  Minnesota provides an 

example: according to a 2017 evaluation of the implementation of its safe harbor law, the leg -

islation increased awareness of sexual exploitation among service providers, school officials, 

and law enforcement, resulting in greater understanding of what constitutes child sex traffick -

ing and how to identify and respond to victims. 163  The law also led to expansion in available 

services, including housing beds. Despite these gains, however, enforcement varied widely, 164 

in part due to communications challenges when coordinating services across agencies. 165 

Limited resources and intervention options can also undermine enforcement of safe harbor 

laws. Often, authorities decide to detain survivors because they believe it is the only means 

of keeping them safe. This approach sacrifices victims’ freedom in the name of “protection, ”

despite their status as crime victims. 166  To create grounds to justify locking them up, sexually 22  exploited children are brought into the system on prostitution or proxy charges. 167  The injus -

tice inherent in this treatment of child survivors was recognized by the Nevada Supreme Court 

in 2016, when it decried the practice of charging youth with offenses “just to get the child off 

the street. ”168 

In addition to depriving young people of their liberty, this approach also operates on the false 

premise that detention necessarily offers children safety. Detention is far from safe, especially 

for girls who have experienced abuse: according to one study, children who had experienced 

prior abuse were 52 percent more likely to experience sexual violence in detention. Mean -

while, those who have been previously abused in another detention center were 697 percent 

more likely to experience sexual abuse in subsequent facilities. 169 

Enforcement and application of safe harbor laws are also vulnerable to authorities’ race 

and gender bias, 170  which can contribute to the disproportionate punishment of exploited 

Black girls as criminals rather than victims of sexual violence. 171  Studies show that Black girls 

are more likely to be arrested for prostitution, more likely to be adjudicated, and more likely 

to be detained in a locked facility than white girls, even after being identified as victims of 

trafficking. 172 

Survivor Justice in the States: Protecting Survivors Who Commit Offenses in 

Connection with Sexual Abuse 

Growing recognition of the injustice of criminalizing trafficking survivors for coerced crim -

inal acts has led to the adoption of vacatur and expungement laws in almost every state. 173 

Though most states provide some degree of criminal-record relief for trafficking survivors, the 

extent of the support they provide varies widely. In some states, for example, vacatur laws 

only apply to minor victims of trafficking. 174  Despite the variance among these statutes, their 

widespread adoption across the country is a promising step toward addressing the harms of 

the pipeline for survivors of trafficking by clearing criminal records and allowing victims the 

chance to move forward with their lives. Of course, vacatur laws represent a limited form of 

justice because they are premised on victims’ having entered the legal system; ideally, survi -

vors would not have a criminal record in the first place. 

More “upstream” protection has come in the form of state laws that protect child survivors of 

sexual abuse from being charged, sentenced, or incarcerated for extreme periods for crimes 

stemming from their exploitation, including for harming their abusers. Below, we highlight 

four examples of state approaches to reduce the criminalization of child survivors: 

• In California, the  Justice for Survivors Act  175  went into effect on January 1, 2022. This 

law provides an affirmative defense to defendants charged with non-violent offens -

es 176  for actions that were committed as a direct result of trafficking and sexual vio -

lence. 177  The law requires prosecutors to consider the impact of sexual violence and 

trafficking on victims and their age in plea negotiations. It also encourages judges 

to consider whether trauma, age, or sex trafficking contributed to the offenses when 

sentencing and re-sentencing. 

The law was inspired by a Black teenage girl who was sentenced as an adult to 

almost 10 years for offenses committed while she was being trafficked. According 

to State Assemblywoman Sydney Kamlager, who introduced the bill, the legisla -

tion represents “an opportunity to correct unjust outcomes of the past and provide 

full context of the experiences that might impact a person’s actions and use a more 

humanizing and trauma-informed response to criminal adjudication. ”178  When the bill 

passed committee, Assemblywoman Kamlager stated: “[T]oday brings us closer to 

acknowledging the role sexual abuse plays in criminal behavior and ending the abuse 

to prison pipeline. ”179 23  • In Virginia, a child sex-crime victims protection act was passed in 2020 that prohib -

its all mandatory minimum sentences for children and requires judges to consider 

adverse childhood experiences, childhood trauma, child welfare involvement, and 

the differences between children and adults in sentencing youth. 180  The legislation’s 

lead sponsor, Delegate Vivian Watts, explained the drive behind the legislation: “A life 

sentence for a young girl who kills her sex trafficker is anything but trauma-informed 

or age-appropriate. Under our new law, after the judge considers the child’s exposure 

to trauma, he or she can depart from any mandatory minimum and suspend any 

sentence that would otherwise be required for an adult….[W]e’ve created a paradigm 

shift that should prevent tragic injustices…from ever happening in Virginia. ”181 

• In New York, the  Domestic Violence Survivors Justice Act (DVSJA) ,182  passed in 

2019, authorizes courts to impose alternative sentences for survivors of domestic 

violence—broadly defined to include any intimate relationship—if the underlying of -

fense was committed against the abuser and was influenced by abuse when offense 

was committed. 183  Though the law does not specifically mention youth, courts have 

applied the law to adults who were convicted as minors: Patrice Smith, for example, 

whose case is detailed above, was released in 2020 pursuant to the law. 184 

• In Wisconsin, an affirmative defense law enacted in 2018 protects trafficking survivors 

from being prosecuted for “any offense” committed as a direct result of trafficking. 185 

Child trafficking survivor Chrystul Kizer, whose story is outlined above, successfully 

argued before the Wisconsin State Supreme Court that this statute can apply to her 

case and provide a complete affirmative defense to the murder charges pending 

against her. 186 

These efforts represent significant progress in reducing the abuse to prison pipeline for girls; 

but much work remains to end it. Whenever a child is charged with offenses against his or her 

abuser, courts should have the information, resources, and authority to respond in a manner 

that is trauma-informed and developmentally appropriate for youth survivors. Recommendations 25 

# Below, we offer a set of principles to guide action to end the pipeline. In all cases, reform 

must be informed by survivors’ own experiences, perspectives, and input. We hope 

these concepts will move researchers, policymakers, and others to engage in the critical 

systems change needed to build a world where all girls can live their lives to their full poten -

tial without fear of violence or exploitation. 

1.  Prevent Gender-Based Violence.  Gender-based violence in the US remains perva -

sive. In fact, a recent survey by Thomson Reuters revealed that the US was the only 

Western nation to rank in the top ten most dangerous countries for women, mea -

sured by the risk of sexual violence and harassment. 187  And violence starts early for 

many. Childhood abuse, in turn, increases the risk of poorer long-term health and 

wellness. 188  We must invest in preventing gender-based violence so that all girls and 

young women can live in freedom and safety. 

## “The abuse of women and girls is the most pervasive 

## and unaddressed human rights violation on earth. ”

## —President Jimmy Carter 189 

2.  End the Credibility Discount Against Girls and Hold Law Enforcement Accountable 

for Disregard of Abuse Claims.  In light of the evidence that unambiguously shows the 

pervasiveness of sexual violence against young women and girls, 190  it is time to end 

the discrediting of girls who report sexual abuse. This cultural change must be an -

chored in structural, systemic reform that treats claims fairly and provides girls with 

safety, accountability, and healing. 

This means ending the practice of filing false reporting charges against survivors who 

report abuse. Unwarranted suspicion of girls who report abuse creates disincentives 

to seek justice, interferes with fair investigations, sows mistrust in the legal system, 

and perpetuates a culture in which rape is normalized. Most importantly, it exacer -

bates survivors’ existing trauma, compounding the harm they have already experi -

enced and depriving them of the resources needed to heal. 

## “[O]ne of the most overlooked yet effective ways to 

## create social change is to just believe the stories that 

## girls and young women of color tell us. ”

## — Salamishah Tillet & Scheherazade Tillet 191 

3.  Decriminalize and Support Girls who have been Sexually Abused and End the 

Punishment of Children Who Act Against Abusers in Self-Defense.  The abuse to prison 

pipeline is driven by behavior that is rooted in responses to sexual violence—includ -

ing violent or defensive behaviors to protect against sexual violence or exploitation. 

Girls who survive gender-based violence should be recognized as victims of crime 

and protected from prosecution and harsh sentences for acts related to their victim -

ization. Punishing victims reinforces the message that survivors receive from their 

abusers: that they are responsible for what has happened to them; that no one will 

believe them if they try to escape or seek help; that they will be punished for the 

abuse they survived; that their lives do not matter. Reforms must be enacted to 

expressly ban the arrest and incarceration of victims for offenses related to the 

gender-based violence they have survived; to educate and train authorities about 

the pipeline; and to build systems of support to address the trauma inflicted by 

sexual abuse. 192 26  “I can’t tell you how many times I was arrested. And 

## I’m standing there in handcuffs and the ‘john’... has a 

## little talk with the police and they say, ‘Go on home 

## now, let’s not see you out here anymore tonight.’ And 

## I go to jail. You know, as a young person, I’m standing 

## there with handcuffs on looking at the situation think -

## ing, ‘Why am I the criminal? Why isn’t he getting in 

## trouble?’” 

## —Noel 193 

4.  Address the Disproportionately High Rates of Sexual Abuse Against Girls with Inter -

secting Identities.  Girls of color, girls with disabilities, LGBTQI+ and gender expan -

sive youth, immigrant girls, and other girls who experience adversity continue to 

experience violence at disproportionate rates and are more likely to be blamed and 

punished for the abuse they have survived. While all youth who experience violence 

deserve to be supported as child victims of crime, inequities rooted in discrimination 

and bias merit special consideration. 

## “Everybody loves to throw around the term intersec -

## tionality. And for valid reason…we need to have an in -

## tersectional approach and an intersectional lens when 

## we talk about any form of gender-based violence, es -

## pecially when it’s on the premise of race. But what I 

## want people to understand is that many of our current, 

## what I call the injustice systems, they don’t have that 

## intersectional lens. And if you don’t understand the 

## intersectionality between race, between capitalism, 

## between patriarchy and misogyny, specifically when it 

## comes to sexual violence, you’re not going to under -

## stand why our system isn’t working. ”

## —Melanie Thompson 194 

5.  Ensure that Efforts to Address Gender-Based Violence Account for the Unique Expe -

riences and Vulnerabilities of Adolescent Girls.  Gender-based violence is committed 

against even the youngest girls. 195  According to the CDC, nearly 35 percent of female 

rape victims were first victimized between ages 11 and 17; 14 percent were age 10 or 

younger. 196  The impact is long lasting and generational, tending to repeat in future 

patterns of adversity. 197  Yet despite the unique factor of age, children, and particular -

ly adolescent girls—who experience the highest rates of sexual violence—are often 

grouped with women in research, reports, and policy reform. Young girls and adoles -

cents must be recognized as distinct and explicitly protected against sexual abuse. 27  “My stepdad was an abusive person. Both to my mom 

## and to me and my sister. Physically and sexually to 

## me and my sister. I would say when I look back now 

## there was a pattern going on. Little patterns, you know, 

## starting out with the bathing at six; ‘Don’t worry I have 

## the kids, you can go to the store’. At eight, there were 

## road trips that my mom didn’t come on. So the pattern 

## started building. I know that my sister protected me a 

## lot of the times, and she endured more than I did just 

## to protect me. So, growing up in it, I assumed 

## it was normal. ”

## —Bobette 198 

Acting on these principles can help bridge remaining gaps in ending the abuse to prison pipe -

line. It is our hope that this report will illuminate harmful patterns of unjust criminalization 

and provide guidelines that promote action in eliminating this inequitable treatment of girls. 

# GIRLS ARE RAPED AT YOUNG AGES 

* Kathleen  c. basile et al .,  ctRs. foR disease  cont Rol & pReVention , the  national  intimate  paRtne R and  sexual Violence  suRV eY: 2016/2017 

Repo Rt on  sexual Violence 3-5 (2022). 

# 35%  14% 35% of female 

rape victims 

were first 

victimized 

between 

ages 11-17 

14% of female 

rape victims 

were first 

victimized at 

10 or younger 

First Victimization of Female Rape Victims by Age 28  ENDNOTES  

> 1

Vanessa Romo,  A Teen Ordered to Pay $150,000 to the Family of Her Rapist is Flooded With Donations ,

NPR (Sept. 16, 2022, 7:41 AM), https://www.npr.org/2022/09/16/1123354393/pieper-lewis-gofundme-iowa-hu -

man-trafficking.  

> 2

Rape , abuse & I ncest  nat ’ l netwo Rk, V Ict Ims of  sexual VIolence : stat Ist Ics , https://www.rainn.org/statistics/vic -

tims-sexual-violence (last visited Jan. 5, 2023).  

> 3

ctRs. foR DIsease  cont Rol an D pReVent Ion , fast  facts : pReVent Ing  sexual VIolence , https://www.cdc.gov/violen -

ceprevention/sexualviolence/fastfact.html.  

> 4

Miriam Berger,  The Pandemic Caused a Global Surge in Domestic Violence. For Victims with Few Options, 

Abuse Has Become the New Normal,  wash . post  (Dec. 29, 2021, 11:48 AM), https://www.washingtonpost.com/ 

world/2021/12/29/coronavirus-domestic-violence/.  

> 5

Sarah D. Sparks,  Child Abuse Cases Got More Severe During COVID-19. Could Teachers Have Prevented It? ,

eDuc . week  (June 1, 2021), https://www.edweek.org/leadership/child-abuse-cases-got-more-severe-during-covid-

19-could-teachers-have-prevented-it/2021/06.  

> 6

kathleen  c. bas Ile et al .,  ctRs. foR DIsease  cont Rol & pReVent Ion , the  nat Ional Int Imate  paRtne R an D sexual 

VIolence  suRV ey : 2016/2017 R epo Rt on  sexual VIolence  3-5 (2022).  

> 7

mal Ika  saa Da saa R, R ebecca  epste In, lInDsay Rosenthal , an D yasm In Vafa , the  sexual  abuse to  pRI son  pIpel Ine : the 

gIR ls ’ sto Ry (2015).  

> 8

Rape , abuse & I ncest  nat ’ l netwo Rk, supra  note 2.  

> 9

asIan  pac IfIc I nst . on  gen DeR-base D VIolence , fact  sheet : D omest Ic VIolence , sexual VIolence , &  human  tRaff Ick -  

> Ing In

nat IV e hawa II an  commun ItIes  (2020), https://www.niwrc.org/sites/default/files/images/resource/factsheet_vio -

lence_native_hawaiians-2020.pdf.  

> 10

the  nat ’l  ctR. on VIolence  aga Inst  women  In the  black  cmty .,  black  women & sexual  assault  (2018), https:// 

ujimacommunity.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/Ujima-Womens-Violence-Stats-v7.4-1.pdf.  

> 11

See generally  Rebecca  epste In, J am IlIa J.  blake & thal Ia gonzález , geo Rgetown  l.,  ctR. on  poVeRty & I nequal Ity ,

gIR lhoo D I nte RR upte D: the  eRasu Re of  black  gIR ls ’ chIlDhoo D (2017), https://genderjusticeandopportunity.george -

town.edu/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/girlhood-interrupted.pdf.  

> 12

RIghts 4gIR ls , Rac Ial & gen DeR DIspa RI tIes  In the  sex  tRaDe (2019), https://rights4girls.org/wp-content/up -

loads/2019/05/Racial-Disparties-FactSheet-_Jan-2021.pdf.  

> 13

saa R et al .,  supra  note 7. Because we do not view the juvenile justice system as just, and because we seek to 

humanize young people rather than label them as “juveniles,” we do not use the term juvenile justice system except 

where strictly necessary. Instead, we use the term youth legal system.  

> 14

See , e.g. , Nina Papalia, James R. P. Ogloff, Margaret Cutajar & Paul E. Mullen,  Child Sexual Abuse and Crim -

inal Offending: Gender-Specific Effects and the Role of Abuse Characteristics and Other Adverse Outcomes , 23 

chIlD mIst Reatment  399 (2018); Terri Lewis, Erika McElroy, Nicole Harlaar & Desmond Runyan,  Does the Impact of 

Child Sexual Abuse Differ from Maltreated but Non-Sexually Abused Children? A Prospective Examination of the 

Impact of Child Sexual Abuse on Internalizing and Externalizing Behavior Problems , 51  chIlD abuse & neglect  31 

(2016); Jessica J. Asscher, Claudia E. Van der Put & Geert Jan J. M. Stams,  Gender Differences in the Impact of 

Abuse and Neglect Victimization on Adolescent Offending Behavior , 30  J.  fam . V Iolence  215 (2015); Nicole Tra -

bold, Marc T. Swogger, Zach Walsh & Catherine Cerulli,  Childhood Sexual Abuse and Perpetration of Violence: The 

Moderating Role of Gender , 24  J.  agg Ress Ion , malt Reatment & tRauma  381 (2015), https://doi.org/10.1080/109267 

71.2015.1022288. Shortly after  the Sexual Abuse to Prison Pipeline  report was published in 2015, the Department 

of Justice Office on Violence Against Women convened a roundtable meeting of “survivors, scholars, advocates, and 

community activists who focus on sexual assault and intimate partner violence against women” to “examine how 

criminalization policies impact the lives of African American women and girls . . . [because] they are disproportionate -

ly survivors of gender-based violence and also are over-represented among women in criminal and juvenile carceral 

facilities.”  u.s. D ep ’t of Just . off . on VIolence  aga Inst  women , the Impact of I nca Rce Rat Ion an D man Dato Ry mInImums  

> on

suRVIV oRs: explo RI ng the Impact of  cRI mInal IzIng  pol IcIes on  afRI can  ame RI can  women an D gIR ls  (2017), https:// 

www.justice.gov/ovw/page/file/926631/download.  

> 15

We use the word “abuse” throughout this report to refer to the spectrum of violence that girls experience at 

disproportionately high rates, including sexual violence, gender-based violence, and sexual abuse.  

> 16

See, e.g.,  DeAnna Baumle,  Creating the Trauma-to-Prison Pipeline: How the U.S. Justice System Criminaliz -

es Structural and Interpersonal Trauma Experienced by Girls of Color , 56  fam . ct. R eV. 695, 695-708 (Oct. 2018); 

Jeremy Thompson & Chanelle Artiles, Note,  Dismantling the Sexual-Abuse-to-Prison Pipeline: Texas’s Approach, 

41  t. maRshall  l. R eV. 239 (2016); Marjory Anne Henderson Marquardt, Note,  Fallacious Reasoning: Revisiting 

the Roper Trilogy in Light of the Sexual-Abuse-to-Prison Pipeline,  72  stan . l. R eV. 749 (2020); Lisa Rapp,  Delin -

quent-Victim Youth—Adapting a Trauma-Informed Approach for the Juvenile Justice System , 13  J.  eVID ence -In - 

> fo Rme D

soc . woRk 492 (2016); Mekeila C. Cook, Ryan D. Talbert & Breanna Thomas,  A Longitudinal Study of 

Justice Characteristics among Girls Participating in a Sex Trafficking Court Program , 9  health an D J ust . 1 (2021).  

> 17

See , e.g ., Cook et al.,  supra  note 16 (finding that the younger the age of the first citation received significant -

ly increases the amount of bench warrants and citations while youth participate in specialty, anti-trafficking court 

programs); Patricia K. Kerig,  Polyvictimization and Girls’ Involvement in the Juvenile Justice System: Investigating 

Gender-Differentiated Patterns of Risk, Recidivism, and Resilience , 33  J. of Inte Rpe Rsonal VIolence  5, 789-809 

(2018) (identifying gender differences related to polyvictimization as girls may have higher sources of risks and youth 

outcomes); Veena Subramanian, Beyond Detention-as-Protection for Child Sex Trafficking Victims, 35  u.c. beRkeley 

J.  gen DeR, l. & J ust . 1, 137-167 (2020) (arguing that detaining child sex trafficking victims as a method of protection 

from outside harms exacerbates trauma and imposes lasting consequences; instead, a public health approach can 

target the cause of child trafficking and prevent court involvement); Jessica J. Asscher, Claudia E. Van der Put, and 

Geert Jan J. M. Stams,  Gender Differences in the Impact of Abuse and Neglect Victimization on Adolescent Of -

fending Behavior , 30  J. of  fam . V Iolence  2, 215-225 (2015) (finding a relationship between sexual abuse and sexual 29  offenses and physical abuse to violent offenses); Krystel Tossone, Madison Wheeler, Fredrick Butcher & Jeff Kret -

schmar,  The Role of Sexual Abuse in Trauma Symptoms, Delinquent and Suicidal Behaviors, and Criminal Justice 

Outcomes among Females in a Juvenile Justice Diversion Program , 24  VIolence  aga Inst  women  8 973-993 (2018) 

(finding that female juvenile justice-involved youth experience more sexual abuse than non-juvenile justice-involved 

youth and their male juvenile justice-involved youth counterparts, yet despite this, sexually abused females have the 

same odds of successfully completing behavioral health diversions than non-sexually abused females); Shannon 

D. Chaplo, Patricia K. Kerig, et al.,  Gender Differences in the Associations Among Sexual Abuse, Posttraumatic 

Stress Symptoms, and Delinquent Behaviors in a Sample of Detained Adolescents , 10  J. of  chIlD & aDolescent 

tRauma  1 29-39 (2017), https://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1007/s40653-016-0122-z (studying the effects of post-trau -

matic stress symptoms in detained youth with histories of sexual abuse); Jasmyn Sanders, Alexandra R. Hershberg -

er, et al.,  PTSD  Symptoms Mediate the Relationship between Sexual Abuse and Substance Use Risk in Juvenile 

Justice-Involved Youth , 23  chIlD malt Reatment  3 226-233 (2018) (determining that high sexual abuse rates in juve -

nile justice involved youth increases the risk of post-traumatic stress disorder and substance abuse, which decreas -

es long-term outcomes); DeAnna Baumle,  Creating the Trauma-to-Prison Pipeline: How the U.S. Justice System 

Criminalizes Structural and Interpersonal Trauma Experienced by Girls of Color , 56  fam . ct. R eV. 4 695-708 (2018) 

(describing how the juvenile justice system criminalizes girls because of their experiences with trauma, including 

racism and poverty related trauma); Jeremy Thompson & Chanelle Artiles,  Dismantling the Sexual-Abuse-to-Prison 

Pipeline: Texas’s Approach , Note, 41  t. maRshall  l. R eV. 2, 239-269 (2016) (analyzing Texas’s reduction in prostitu -

tion related arrests after implementing alternatives for sex trafficked juveniles); Marjory Anne Henderson Marquardt, 

Note,  Fallacious Reasoning: Revisiting the Roper Trilogy in Light of the Sexual-Abuse-to-Prison Pipeline , 72  stan .

l. R eV. 749, 749-790 (2020) (arguing that criminal culpability standards should be altered to better account for girls 

with histories of sexual abuse); Valerie R. Anderson & Brinn M. Walerych,  Contextualizing the Nature of Trauma in 

the Juvenile Justice Trajectories of Girls , 47  J.  pReVent Ion & I nte RV ent Ion  In the  cmty . 2, 138-153 (2019), https:// 

doi.org/10.1080/10852352.2019.1582141 (indicating that trauma, family violence, neglect, and sexual abuse are 

connected to juvenile justice trajectories).  

> 18

See, e.g., Cook et al., supra note 16.  

> 19

Hannah Critchfield,  Raped, Then Thrown in Jail: A Teen’s ‘Abuse-to-Prison Pipeline , phoen Ix new  tImes  (Sept. 

26. 2019, 10:34 AM), https://www.phoenixnewtimes.com/news/raped-then-thrown-in-jail-a-teens-abuse-to-prison-

pipeline-11357497.  

> 20

See e.g ., Char Adams,  These Women Survived Abuse and Assault. Now They’re Behind Bars. Should They 

Be? , Vox  (Aug. 30, 2019, 11:36 AM), https://www.vox.com/the-highlight/2019/8/23/20828367/cyntoia-brown-sexu -

al-domestic-abuse-prison-pipeline.  

> 21

142 S. Ct. 2228 (2022).  

> 22

See  stephan Ie R.  laRson , what I t feels  lIke : V Isce Ral Rheto RI c an D the  pol ItIcs of Rape  cultu Re 136-54 (2021).  

> 23

Tarana Burke,  #MeToo Was Started for Black and Brown Women and Girls. They’re Still Being Ignored ., 

wash . post  (Nov. 9, 2017, 8:04 PM), https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-nation/wp/2017/11/09/the-

waitress-who-works-in-the-diner-needs-to-know-that-the-issue-of-sexual-harassment-is-about-her-too/ (“I founded 

the “me too” movement in 2006 because I wanted to find a way to connect with the black and brown girls in the 

program I ran.” (citing to  me too ., https://metoomvmt.org/).  

> 24

Jamillah Bowman Williams,  Maximizing #MeToo: Intersectionality & The Movement , 62  b.c. l. R eV. 1797, 

1836 (2021) (“[T]he phrase ‘Me Too’ went from having an intersectional focus on the unique issues facing women of 

color to becoming mainstream, more elite, and overwhelmingly white.”); Gillian B. White,  The Glaring Blind Spot of 

the ‘Me Too’ Movement , the  atlant Ic (Nov. 22, 2017), https://www.theatlantic.com/entertainment/archive/2017/11/ 

the-glaring-blind-spot-of-the-me-too-movement/546458/.  

> 25

Burke,  supra  note 23 (“What history has shown us time and again is that if marginalized voices—those of 

people of color, queer people, disabled people, poor people—aren’t centered in our movements then they tend to 

become no more than a footnote.”).  

> 26

The Department of Justice’s Office of Juvenile Justice & Delinquency Prevention defines prostitution and 

commercialized vice as “sex offenses of a commercialized nature, such as prostitution, keeping a bawdy house, pro -

curing, or transporting women for immoral purposes. Attempts are included.”  u.s. D ep ’ t of Just . off . of JuV. J ust . & 

Del Inq . pReVent Ion , glossa Ry, https://www.ojjdp.gov/ojstatbb/glossary.html.  

> 27

Youth arrest rates on these charges declined 51 percent overall between 2015 and 2019.  cha Rles  puzzanche Ra,

u.s. D ep ’ t of J ust . off . of Ju V. J ust . & D el Inq . pReVent Ion , Ju Ven Ile  aRR ests  2019, 3 (2021). https://ojjdp.ojp.gov/ 

publications/juvenile-arrests-2019.pdf.  

> 28

Yasmin Vafa,  We Changed The Language, Now Let’s Change the Laws! , huff Ington  post  (Apr. 6, 2016, 12:37 

PM), https://www.huffpost.com/entry/we-changed-the-language-n_b_9624534 (advocating to eliminate the phrase 

“child prostitute” and “child sex worker” in both language and law as it unfairly implies children are able to consent to 

sell sex).  

> 29

Merrill Perlman,  A Matter of  AP  Style , colum . J. Re V. (Apr. 4, 2016), http://www.cjr.org/language_cor -

ner/a_matter_of_ap_style.php (announcing that the AP Stylebook recommends avoiding using phrases like “child 

prostitute” and “teenage prostitute” as it implies a child is voluntarily trading sex for money, which a child cannot 

do);  see also  assoc Iate D pRess  stylebook  (56th ed. 2002) (“Avoid terms like child prostitute, underage prostitute or 

teenage prostitute . . . [t]he phrasing can suggest that a child is voluntarily trading sex for money. Minors are not able 

to consent.”).  

> 30

Estimated Number of Juvenile Arrests, 2020,  OJJDP  Statistical Briefing Book , u.s. D ep ’ t of J ust . off . of 

Ju V. Just . & D el Inq . pReVent Ion  (2022), https://www.ojjdp.gov/ojstatbb/crime/qa05101.asp.  

> 31

See, e.g.  Jessica Contrera,  Sex-Trafficked Kids Are Crime Victims. In Las Vegas They Still Go to Jail .,  wash .

post  (Aug. 26, 2021),  https://www.washingtonpost.com/dc-md-va/interactive/2021/vegas-child-sex-trafficking-vic -

tims-jailed/?itid=ap_jessicacontrera . 

> 32

See  Brendan M. Conner,  In Loco Aequitatis: The Dangers of ‘Safe Harbor’ Laws for Youth in the Sex Trades ,

12  stan . J.  cIV . R Ights & cIV . lIbe RtIes  43 (2016). 30  

> 33

According to OJJDP, “[t]rafficked girls also become involved in the juvenile justice system for offenses other 

than prostitution that are committed as a direct result of their exploitation, such as trespass or loitering or for status 

offenses such as truancy and running away.”  u.s. D ep ’t of Just . off . of Ju V. Just . & D el Inq . pReVent Ion , OJJDP FY 

2019  spec Ial Ize D seRVI ces & mento RI ng fo R chIlD & youth VIct Ims of  sex  tRaff Ick Ing & sexual  explo Itat Ion , FY 2019 

compet ItIV e gRant  sol IcItat Ion  11 (2019), https://ojjdp.ojp.gov/sites/g/files/xyckuh176/files/media/document/OJJ -

DP-2019-14988.PDF.  

> 34

See  puzzanche Ra, supra  note 27;  kID s count Data  ctR.,  chIlD populat Ion by  gen DeR In the  u. s., 2019 

(2021), https://datacenter.kidscount.org/data/tables/102-child-population-by-gender#detailed/1/any/ 

false/1729/14,15,65/421,422.  

> 35

u.s. D ep ’ t of J ust . off . of Ju V. J ust . & D el Inq . pReVent Ion , Ju Ven Ile  aRR est Rates by  offense & R ace , 2019 

2020, https://www.ojjdp.gov/ojstatbb/special_topics/qa11501.asp?qaDate=2019&text=yes.  

> 36

Under the definition of “commercial sex act” in 22 U.S.C. § 7102(4), sex trafficking does not require proof of a 

third-party exploiter; nor proof of force, fraud or coercion; nor proof of monetary transaction.  

> 37

22 U.S.C. § 7102 (11)(a).  

> 38

Juvenile Justice Reform Act of 2018, Pub. L. No. 115-385, 132 Stat. 5123 (2018) (aiming to assist govern -

ments in reducing juvenile crime rates through research, training, and enacting evidence-based programming).  

> 39

Thomas Kika,  Teen Girl Charged with Kidnapping, Trafficking of 13-Year-Old: Police , newsweek  (June 25, 2022, 

12:13 PM), https://www.newsweek.com/teen-girl-charged-kidnapping-trafficking-13-year-old-police-1719184.  

> 40

Spencer Norris & Brittany Wallman,  Innocence Sold: Florida’s Legal System Blurs The Line Between Sex 

Trafficking Survivor And Criminal, Leaving Lives Ruined,  south  flo RID a sun  sent Inel , (Dec. 4, 2022, 6:00 a.m.), 

https://www.sun-sentinel.com/local/trafficking-investigation/fl-ne-sex-trafficking-investigation-revictimizing-vic -

tims-20221204-ut7qpypgpfderbqn4vax3o6ahi-story.html  

> 41

Id . 

> 42

Roper v. Simmons, 543 U.S. 551, 578 (2005).  

> 43

Graham v. Florida, 560 U.S. 48, 82 (2010).  

> 44

Miller v. Alabama, 567 U.S. 460, 479 (2012).  

> 45

Id . at 480.  

> 46

Id.  at 486.  

> 47

Montgomery v. Louisiana, 577 U.S. 190, 197-98 (2016).  

> 48

See  Equal Justice Initiative,  Ten Years After Miller v. Alabama , (Jun. 24, 2022),  https://eji.org/news/ten-years-

after-miller-v-alabama/ . 

> 49

Jones v. Mississippi, 593 U.S. ____ , 21 (2021).  

> 50

See, e.g.,  First Step Implementation Act of 2021, H.R. 3510, 117th Cong. (2021);  see also  H.R. 2858, 117th 

Cong. (2021).  

> 51

A series of articles in  The Washington Post , for example, has examined the criminalization of girls who are 

sex trafficked and cases in which girls have been criminally charged for acts of violence committed in self-defense 

against sexual abusers.  See, e.g ., Jessica Contrera,  He Was Sexually Abusing Underage Girls. Then, Police Said, 

One of Them Killed Him , wash . post  (Dec. 17, 2019), https://www.washingtonpost.com/graphics/2019/local/ 

child-sex-trafficking-murder/; Contrera,  supra  note 31; Jessica Contrera,  The State of Ohio vs. a Sex-Trafficked 

Teenager , wash . post  (June 1, 2021), https://www.washingtonpost.com/dc-md-va/interactive/2021/child-sex-traf -

ficking-alexis-martin-ohio/.  

> 52

Me Facing Life: Cyntoia’s Story  (PBS television broadcast Mar. 1, 2011);  see also  muRD eR to  meRcy : the 

cynto Ia bRown  sto Ry (Netflix 2020);  Kim Kardashian West: The Justice Project  (Oxygen television broadcast Apr. 

5, 2020); Survived & Punished, a national coalition formed in 2016 comprised of survivors, formerly incarcerated 

people, advocates, and others, organizes to support and free criminalized survivors and abolish gender violence, 

policing, prisons, and deportations.  

> 53

Ron Allen,  Cyntoia Brown, Sentenced at 16 to Life in Prison, to Plead for Leniency in Federal Court , NBC 

news  (June 10, 2018, 4:49 PM), https://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/cyntoia-brown-sentenced-16-life-pris -

on-plea-leniency-federal-court-n881586.  

> 54

Brown v. Tennessee, 2014 Tenn. Crim. App. LEXIS 1014*, No. M2103-00825-CCA-R3-PC, at *2 (Nov. 6, 

2014).  

> 55

See  Michel Martin,  Advocates Say Cyntoia Brown’s Case is Part of the ‘Sexual Abuse-to-Prison’ Pipeline ,

NPR (Dec. 3, 2017, 6:53 PM), https://www.npr.org/2017/12/03/567850542/advocates-say-cyntoia-browns-case-

is-part-of-the-sexual-abuse-to-prison-pipeline; Daniel Victor,  Why Celebrities Have Rallied Behind Cyntoia Brown, 

a Woman Spending Life in Prison , N.Y. Times (Nov. 22, 2017), https://www.nytimes.com/2017/11/22/us/cyn -

toia-brown-sex-trafficking.html.  

> 56

Bobby Allyn,  Cyntoia Brown Released after 15 Years in Prison for Murder , NPR (Aug. 7, 2019), https://www. 

npr.org/2019/08/07/749025458/cyntoia-brown-released-after-15-years-in-prison-for-murder?t=1649842293691; 

Christine Hauser,  Cyntoia Brown Is Freed from Prison in Tennessee,  n.y. tImes  Aug. 7, 2019, 12:24 PM), https:// 

www.nytimes.com/2019/08/07/us/cyntoia-brown-release.html.  

> 57

Jessica Contrera,  Sex Trafficking Victim Chrystul Kizer Wins Key Wisconsin Court Ruling , wash . post  (July 6, 

2022, 11:53 AM), https://www.washingtonpost.com/dc-md-va/2022/07/06/kizer-wisconsin-supreme-court-sex-traf -

ficking.  

> 58

Jessica Contrera,  Kenosha Police Under Scrutiny for 2018 Case of Chrystul Kizer, Black Teen Jailed for Killing 

Abuser , Democ Racy  now  (Sept. 1, 2020), https://www.democracynow.org/2020/9/1/chrystul_kizer_kenosha_po -

lice_district_attorney;  see also , Contrera,  supra  note 31.  

> 59

wIs. stat . § 939.46(1m) (2019-20).  

> 60

Id.  

> 61

Wisconsin v. Kizer, 963  n.w.2d 136 (Wis. 2022). 31  

> 62

Rekha Basu,  Rekha Basu: The Justice System Should Punish Child Sex Trafficking, Not Victimize Pieper 

Lewis Again , Des  moInes Reg . (Dec. 3, 2021, 10:34 AM), https://www.desmoinesregister.com/story/opinion/col -

umnists/rekha-basu/2021/12/03/child-sex-trafficking-teen-guilty-plea-underage-victim-racial-disparity-pieper-lew -

is/8835758002/; Remy Tumin,  Trafficked Teenager Who Killed One of Her Abusers Ordered to Pay Restitution ,

n.y. tImes  (Sept. 13, 2022) https://www.nytimes.com/2022/09/13/us/pieper-lewis-sex-trafficking-iowa.html; Dakin 

Andone,  What We Know About Pieper Lewis and Her Escape From an Iowa Residential Corrections Facility , CNN 

(Nov. 7, 2022), https://www.cnn.com/2022/11/07/us/iowa-pieper-lewis-what-we-know/index.html; Romo,  supra 

note 1.  

> 63

Philip Joens,  Des Moines Teen Pieper Lewis, Who Killed Alleged Rapist, Gets Probation, Deferred Judg -

ment , Des  moInes Reg . (Sept. 13, 2022, 1:46 PM), https://www.desmoinesregister.com/story/news/crime-and-

courts/2022/09/13/pieper-lewis-speaks-sentencing-killing-alleged-rapist-des-moines-sex-trafficking/10358999002/.  

> 64

Andone,  supra  note 62.  

> 65

Aaron Rasmussen,  Child Sex-Trafficking Survivor Recently Freed From Prison Vows to Help Other At-Risk 

Youth , I nVest Igat IV e DIsco VeRy cRI mefee D (July 28, 2021), https://www.investigationdiscovery.com/crimefeed/sur -

vivor-stories/child-sex-trafficking-survivor-recently-freed-from-prison-vows-to-help-other-at-risk-youth;  see also 

Contrera,  The State of Ohio vs. a Sex-Trafficked Teenager , supra  note 51.  

> 66

Contrera,  The State of Ohio vs. a Sex-Trafficked Teenager , supra note 51;  see also  Jessica Contrera, Alexis 

Martin,  Sex Trafficking Survivor and Activist, is Back in Prison , wash . post  (Apr. 6, 2022, 8:30 AM), https://www. 

washingtonpost.com/dc-md-va/2022/04/06/alexis-martin-prison-sex-trafficking-kardashian/; Adam Ferrise,  Girl 

Faces Life Sentence After Guilty Plea in Fatal Home Invasion , cle Velan D.com  (Feb. 17, 2015, 7:17 PM), https:// 

www.cleveland.com/akron/2015/02/girl_16_faces_life_in_prison_a.html.  

> 67

Id.  

> 68

Id.  

> 69

Natasha Anderson,  DeWine Commutes Sentence of Child Sex Trafficking Victim Alexis Martin, Whose 

Release Was Championed by Kim Kardashian West , NBC4  ohIo (Apr. 17, 2020, 5:36 PM), https://www.nbc4i.com/ 

news/state-news/dewine-commutes-sentence-of-child-sex-trafficking-victim-alexis-martin-convicted-in-the-murder-

of-her-pimp/.  

> 70

Jessica Contrera,  Alexis Martin, Sex Trafficking Survivor and Activist, is Back in Prison , supra  note 66.  

> 71

Contrera,  The State of Ohio vs. a Sex-Trafficked Teenager , supra  note 51.  

> 72

mel Issa Jeltsen , Bresha Meadows Thought You’d Understand , huff Ington  post  (Oct. 17, 2019)  https://www. 

huffpost.com/entry/bresha-meadows-thought-youd-understand_n_5da48081e4b087efdbb23973 ; Jonah  engel 

bRomw Ich , Bresha Meadows, Ohio Teenager Who Fatally Shot Her Father, Accepts Plea Deal , n.y. tImes , (May 

23, 2017)  https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/23/us/bresha-meadows-father-killing.html ; mel Issa Jeltsen , Bresha 

Meadows,  Teen Who Killed Allegedly Abusive Father, Is Finally Free , huff Ington  post , (Feb. 6, 2018)  https://www. 

huffpost.com/entry/bresha-meadows-home_n_5a794b8be4b00f94fe945e10 . 

> 73

People v. Smith, 132 N.Y.S.3d 251 (Erie Cnty. Ct. 2020).  

> 74

People v. Smith, 808 N.E.2d 333 (N.Y. 2004).  

> 75

n.y. penal  law  § 60.12 (Consol. 2019).  

> 76

n.y. cRI m. pRoc . law  § 530.11(1)(e) (Consol. 2020).  

> 77

n.y. cRI m. pRoc . law  § 440.47 (Consol. 2019).  

> 78

Smith , 132 N.Y.S.3d at 257.  

> 79

See, e.g ., Shannon Malone Gonzalez,  Making it Home: An Intersectional Analysis of the Police Talk , 33 

gen DeR & soc ’ y 3 (2017) (an intersectional analysis of interviews with Black mothers discussing role of policing and 

socialization and determining the need for structural reform to combat police violence against Black women and 

girls);  Joanne  aRchambault , kImbe Rly  a. lonsway & lIsa  aValos , enD VIolence  aga Inst  women I nt ’l , Rape D, then Ja Ile D:

the RIsks of  pRosecut Ion fo R falsely Repo RtIng  assault  (2022), https://evawintl.org/wp-content/uploads/2019-5_TB_ 

Raped-Then-Jailed.pdf; Megan R. Greeson, Rebecca Campbell, and Giannina Fehler-Cabral,  ’Nobody Deserves 

This’: Adolescent Sexual Assault Victims’ Perceptions of Disbelief and Blame from Police , 44  J. of  cmty . psych .

90 (2016) (finding that negative treatment by police when reporting rape leads to feelings of skepticism, blame, judg -

ment, and disbelief).  

> 80

See  Deborah Epstein,  Discounting Credibility: Doubting the Stories of Women Survivors of Sexual Harass -

ment , 51  seton  hall  l. R eV. 2, 289, 305 (2020) (“Our assessment of women’s personal trustworthiness suffers 

from skepticism rooted in (1) uneducated expectations regarding a survivor’s “appropriate” demeanor; (2) prejudicial 

stereotypes regarding the false motives of women seeking material assistance; and (3) the long-standing cultural ten -

dency to disbelieve women simply because they are women.”). Rates of charges of false reports of abuse are likely 

undercounted because the underlying reported offense is rarely tracked. Lisa R. Avalos,  Policing Rape Complain -

ants: When Reporting Rape Becomes a Crime , 20  J.  gen DeR, R ace & J ust . 459, 459-508 (2017).  

> 81

stacey Dewal D, kathe RI ne  loRenz , Lying About Sexual Assault: A Qualitative Study Of Detective Perspectives 

On False Reporting,  179—199 at 179, 193, 194 (Mar. 5, 2021) https://doi.org/10.1080/10439463.2021.1893725.  

> 82

I nt ’l  assoc . of  chIefs of  pol Ice , nat ’ l law  enf . lea DeRsh Ip In It. on VIolence  aga Inst  women , sexual  assault 

Response  pol Icy & tRaInIng  content  guID el Ines  (2015), https://evawintl.org/wp-content/uploads/IACP-Sexual-As -

sault-Response-Policy-and-Training-Content-Guidelines.2017.3.23.pdf.  

> 83

Debo Rah  tue Rkhe Ime R, cReDI ble : why  we Doubt  accuse Rs an D pRotect  Abusers  3, 11 (2021).  

> 84

Avalos,  supra  note 80, at 486.  

> 85

See generally  Megan R. Greeson, Rebecca Campbell & Giannina Fehler-Cabral,  Cold or Caring? Adolescent 

Sexual Assault Victims’ Perceptions of their Interactions with Police , 29  VIolence an D VIct Ims  4, 636-51 (2014);  see 

also  Jessica Shaw and Rebecca Campbell,  Predicting Sexual Assault Kit Submission Among Adolescent Rape 

Cases Treated in Forensic Nurse Examiner Programs , 28  J. of Inte Rpe Rsonal VIolence  3400 (2013), http://dx.doi. 

org/10.1177/0886260513504496; Avalos,  supra  note 80, at 486.;  u.s. D ep ’t of Just . cIV . R Ights . D IV ., In Vest Igat Ion   

> of the

balt Imo Re cIty  pol Ice Dep ’t  (2016), https://www.justice.gov/opa/file/883366/download.  

> 86

Deborah Alley, Gent Silberkleit, Daniel Bederian-Gardner & Gail S. Goodman,  Race-Based Sexual Stereotypes 32  Influence Ratings of Child Victims in Sexual Abuse Cases , 2  Int ’l J. on  chIlD malt Reatment : R esea Rch , pol Icy &

pRact Ice  287, 300 (2019).  

> 87

Greeson et al.,  supra  note 85 (showing how police interact with youths after sexual assault cases impacts 

adolescents’ emotional well-being and engagement in the criminal justice system).  

> 88

Rebecca Campbell & Giannina Fehler-Cabral,  Why Police “Couldn’t or Wouldn’t” Submit Sexual Assault Kits 

for Forensic  DNA  Testing: A Focal Concerns Theory Analysis of Untested Rape Kits , 52  l. &  soc ’y Re V. 73, 78 

(2018).  

> 89

See  Greeson et al.,  supra  note 85 (revealing that interpersonal interaction with police directly impacts emotional 

well-being and criminal justice system engagement amongst adolescent sexual assault victims); Avalos,  supra  note 

80, at 503-506 (explaining that charging victims with false reporting discourages victims from reporting, focuses 

police efforts elsewhere, and contributes to poor investigatory practices).  

> 90

Id.  

> 91

See  Deborah Epstein & Lisa Goodman,  Discounting Women: Doubting Domestic Violence Survivors’ Credi -

bility And Dismissing Their Experiences , 167  u. penn  law ReV. 399-461, at 446-453 (2019) (outlining the psycho -

logical harms and harms related to access to justice and safety created by the credibility discount); T. Christian Miller 

and Ken Armstrong,  An Unbelievable Story of Rape , pRopubl Ica & the  maRshall  pRoJect  (Dec. 16, 2015), https:// 

www.propublica.org/article/false-rape-accusations-an-unbelievable-story; Catalina Carpan,  The Adultification of 

Black Girls as Identity-Prejudicial Credibility Excess , 25  eth Ical  theo Ry & moRal  pRac . 793, 1 (2022), https://doi. 

org/10.1007/s10677-022-10324-6 (“The identity-prejudicial credibility excess denies the victims a meaningful oppor -

tunity to make sense of their traumatic experiences of sexual assault.”).  

> 92

Campbell & Fehler-Cabral,  supra  note 88 at 79.  

> 93

See  Stephanie Alix, Louise Cossette, Martine Hebert, Mireille Cur, and Jean-Yves Frappier,  Posttraumatic 

Stress Disorder and Suicidal Ideation Among Sexually Abused Adolescent Girls: The Mediating Role of Shame ,

26  J.  chIlD sex  abuse  158 (2017) (stating that show that child sex abuse leads to depressive symptoms, PTSD, 

and suicidal ideation, especially during adolescence);  see also  Rochelle F. Hanson et al.,  Relations Among Gender, 

Violence Exposure, & Mental Health: The National Survey of Adolescents , 78  am J.  oRthopsych Iat Ry 313 (2008) 

(stating that sexual abuse was significantly associated with a Major Depressive Episode or PTSD, with adolescents 

at greater risk for both).  

> 94

See  Epstein & Goodman,  supra  note 91, at 410 (“Psychological trauma can operate similarly to neurological 

trauma in undermining the internal consistency of a survivor’s story…it commonly produces memory lapses or disso -

ciative states. Research shows that a majority of survivors meet diagnostic criteria for Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder 

(PTSD), and many more women exhibit serious symptoms of psychological trauma, though not enough to reach the 

threshold of a formal diagnosis.”) (internal citations omitted). 

95 Marie’s case and the five subsequent rapes of other women took place between 2008 and 2011; however, the 

case didn’t gain national attention until a Pulitzer Prize-winning article was published in late 2015 by  ProPublica and 

The Marshall Project . Miller and Armstrong,  supra  note 91.  

> 96

Id . 

> 97

Id.  

> 98

Id. ; t. chRI st Ian  mIlle R an D ken  aRmst Rong , a false Repo Rt: a tRue  sto Ry of Rape  In ame RI ca  (2018);  unbel IeVable 

(Netflix 2019).  

> 99

unbel IeVable  (Netflix 2019); Miller and Armstrong,  supra  note 91.  

> 100

Id.  

> 101

See , e.g. , chanel  mIlle R, know  my name : a memo IR , 170-74 (2019).  

> 102

Id.  at 167, 171.  

> 103

Campbell & Fehler-Cabral,  supra  note 88, at 78 (2018).  

> 104

Laura L. Rubino, Valerie R. Anderson & Nicole C. McKenna,  Examining the Disconnect in Youth Pathways and 

Court Responses: How Bias Invades Across Gender, Race/Ethnicity, and Sexual Orientation , 16  fem InIst  cRI mI- 

> nology

4, 480-503 (2021) (finding that biases affect ways courts respond to girls with intersectional identities); Kim 

Taylor-Thompson,  Girl Talk—Examining Racial and Gender Lines in Juvenile Justice , 6  neV. l. J.  1137, 1137-1164 

(2006) finding that girls of color make up nearly two thirds of the juvenile justice population and receive the most se -

vere sentences);  fRanc Ine  t. she Rman & ann Ie balck , gen DeR In Just Ice : system -leVel Ju Ven Ile Just Ice Refo Rms fo R gIR ls 

(2015) (advocating for the importance of reforming the juvenile justice system to account for gender justice); Francine 

T. Sherman,  Justice for Girls: Are We Making Progress? , 59 UCLA  l. Re V. 1584, 1584-1628 (2012) (noting that 

policymakers must better account for intersectionality’s effect on why girls enter the juvenile justice system);  baRba Ra

m. bRenzel , D aughte Rs of the  state : a soc Ial  poRtRaIt of the  fIR st Refo Rm school fo R gIR ls  In noRth  ame RI ca , 1856-

1905 (1983) (exploring institutional biases towards young, poor women in nineteenth century Massachusetts);  anne 

meIs knupfe R, R efo Rm & R es Istance : gen DeR, D el Inquency , an D ame RI ca ’s  fIR st Ju Ven Ile  cou Rt (2001); Jill Leslie Rosen -

baum & Meda Chesney-Lind,  Appearance and Delinquency: A Research Note , 40  cRI me & D el Inquency  2, 250-261 

(1994) (finding that appearance, physical attractiveness, and masculine or racialized characteristics affect judges and 

juvenile courts’ perception of girls); Mary E. Odem & Steven Schlossman,  Guardians of Virtue: The Juvenile Court 

and Female Delinquency in Early 20th Century Los Angeles , 37  cRI me & D el Inquency  2, 186-203 (1991) (finding 

that girls with intersectional backgrounds were not adequately protected by 20th century laws surrounding “sexual 

deviancy”); Meda Chesney-Lind,  Girls’ Crime and Woman’s Place: Toward a Feminist Model of Female Delinquen -

cy , 35  cRI me & D el Inquency  1, 5-29 (1989) (arguing that existing delinquency theories inadequately address girls’ 

victimization in a class and race context, thereby reinforcing historical oppression).  

> 105

tue Rkhe Ime R, supra  note 83, at 15.  

> 106

epste In, supra  note 11, at 5.  

> 107

tue Rkhe Ime R, supra  note 83, at 19.  

> 108

epste In, supra  note 11, at 8; Alley, et al.,  supra  note 86, at 300 (“Our results … shed light on how a negative 

sexual stereotype that is generally associated with Black adult females may be generalized to young Black girls.”).  

> 109

Alley et al.,  supra  note 86, at 300-01. 33  

> 110

Carpan,  supra  note 91.  

> 111

See  tue Rkhe Ime R, supra  note 83, at 11 (“In a patriarchal society where male sexual prerogatives are at stake, 

discounting operates with special potency.”)  

> 112

mIlle R, supra  note 101, at 191.  

> 113

See, e.g. , Caroline Kitchener,  She Reported Her Sexual Assault. Her High School Suspended Her for 

‘Sexual Impropriety.’  the  lIly & wash . post  (Aug. 26, 2019), https://www.thelily.com/she-reported-her-sexual-as -

sault-her-high-school-suspended-her-for-sexual-impropriety/; Press Release,  nat ’ l women ’s  l. ctR.,  NWLC Sues 

Georgia High School for Expelling Student Who Reported She Was Sexually Assaulted After School, (Aug. 23, 2019), 

https://nwlc.org/press-release/nwlc-sues-georgia-high-school-for-expelling-student-who-reported-she-was-sexual -

ly-assaulted-after-school/. Some school districts have tackled this problem; Seattle Public Schools and the Seattle 

Police Department agreed to an MOU in 2018 supporting “effective, timely, and cooperative response to incidents 

of sexual abuse and assault.” The MOU recognizes “the severity and impact that an incident of sexual abuse and/ 

or assault can have on the life of a student and the school community, and the need for an effective, timely, and 

cooperative response in these situations.” The MOU includes a “response protocol” to be followed by the district 

Title IX coordinator upon receipt of information about a possible sexual assault involving a student.  seattle  sch . D Ist .

no. 1 &  seattle  pol Ice Dep ’ t,  memo Ran Dum of  unDeRstan DI ng  (2021), https://www.seattleschools.org/wp-content/ 

uploads/2021/07/4-Memorandum-of-Understanding-SPS-and-SPD_Sexual-Assault-Investigations.pdf.  

> 114

mIne R p. maRchbanks III, J am IlIa J.  blake , u.s. D ep ’ t of J ust . off . of Ju V. J ust . & D el Inq . pReVent Ion , assess Ing  

> the

Role of  school DIsc Ipl Ine  In DIsp Ropo RtIonate  mIno RI ty  contact wIth the Ju Ven Ile Just Ice  system : fInal  techn Ical 

Repo Rt 34 (2018), https://ojjdp.ojp.gov/library/publications/assessing-role-school-discipline-disproportionate-minori -

ty-contact-juvenile (noting research that shows that “school discipline is associated with both higher juvenile justice 

encounters”).  

> 115

Kitchener,  supra  note 113 (detailing how a girl who was sexually assaulted and coerced into performing oral sex 

on a male classmate was expelled after reporting the incident to administrators).  

> 116

Tyler Kingkade,  Schools Keep Punishing Girls—Especially Students of Color—Who Report Sexual Assaults, 

and the Trump Administrations Title IX Reforms Won’t Stop It , 74  mIll Ion  (Aug. 6, 2019), https://www.the74million. 

org/article/schools-keep-punishing-girls-especially-students-of-color-who-report-sexual-assaults-and-the-trump-ad -

ministrations-title-ix-reforms-wont-stop-it/.  

> 117

Id.  

> 118

kayla  pat RI ck & neena  chau DhRy, nat ’l  women ’ s l. ctR.,  let  heR lea Rn: stopp Ing  school  pushout fo R gIR ls 

I nVol VeD In the Ju Ven Ile J ust Ice  system  (2017), https://nwlc.org/resource/stopping-school-pushout-for-girls-involved-

in-the-juvenile-justice-sytem/# (highlighting that girls in the juvenile justice system face additional barriers, how lack 

of access to education effects girls, and how to help them receive necessary educational services);  kayla  pat RI ck 

& neena  chau DhRy, nat ’l  women ’s  l. ctR.,  let  heR lea Rn: stopp Ing  school  pushout fo R gIR ls  who  haVe suffe ReD

haRassment an D sexual VIolence  (2017), https://nwlc.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/final_nwlc_Gates_Harass -

mentViolence-1.pdf (examining how higher rates of sexual harassment and violence in girls impacts their education).  

> 119

tue Rkhe Ime R, supra  at note 83 (explaining how hidden biases distort perceptions of credibility, which harms 

survivors by continuing to marginalize them);  see also  bRI ttany DaVI s, ctR. fo R ct. I nno Vat Ion , cRI mInal Izat Ion of  black 

gIR ls  In the Ju Ven Ile  legal  system : oVeRVI ew of  pathways to  conf Inement an D stRateg Ies fo R suppo RtIng  successful 

Reent Ry (2020), https://www.courtinnovation.org/sites/default/files/media/documents/2020-11/Monograph_Crimi -

nalization_Black_Girls_09092020.pdf (noting that Black girls are the fastest growing population in the juvenile justice 

system).  

> 120

President Barack Obama,  Remarks by the President at the Congressional Black Caucus 45th Annual Phoenix 

Awards Dinner , (Sept. 20, 2015), (transcript available at https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/the-press-of -

fice/2015/09/21/remarks-president-congressional-black-caucus-45th-annual-phoenix-awards).  

> 121

Proclamation No. 9561, 82 Fed. Reg. 3 (Jan. 5, 2017).  

> 122

Press Release,  u.s. D ep ’t of Just . off . of Ju V. Just . & D el Inq . pReVent Ion , OJJDP Releases Policy Guidance 

on Girls and the Juvenile Justice System (Oct. 2015), https://ojjdp.ojp.gov/sites/g/files/xyckuh176/files/newsletter/ 

archives/249506/sf_1.html.  

> 123

whIte  house  counc Il on  women an D gIR ls , aDV anc Ing  equ Ity fo R women an D gIR ls of  colo R (2015), https:// 

obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/documents/ADVANCING_EQUITY_FOR_WOMEN_AND_ 

GIRLS_OF_COLOR_REPORT.pdf.  

> 124

u.s. D ep ’ t of J ust . off . on VIolence  aga Inst  women , supra  note 14, at 11 (“[A]nalysis also needs to consider the 

victimization that occurs prior to adulthood that places many girls and young women on pathways to detention and 

incarceration, such as the heightened risks of commercial sexual exploitation.”).  

> 125

From Child Welfare to the Juvenile Justice System: Disrupting the Abuse to Prison Pipeline for Girls (Webi -

nar) , u.s. D ep ’t of Just . off . of Just . pRog Rams  (Oct. 3, 2019), https://www.ojp.gov/events/child-welfare-juvenile-jus -

tice-system-disrupting-abuse-prison-pipeline-girls-webinar.  

> 126

u.s. D ep ’ t of J ust . off . of Ju V. J ust . & D el Inq . pReVent Ion , supra  note 122.  

> 127

feD. I nte Ragency Reent Ry counc Il, a Reco RD  of  pRog Ress an D a Roa Dmap fo R the  futu Re (2016), https://www. 

cdfifund.gov/sites/cdfi/files/documents/firc-reentry-report.pdf (“[M]any justice-involved women struggle with both 

mental health and substance use disorders—often linked to histories of physical or sexual abuse that may start in 

childhood and continue through adolescence into adulthood, and trauma histories that often played a significant role 

in the pathway to the criminal or juvenile justice system.”).  

> 128

The OJJDP noted that “[g]irls and young women constitute a majority of youth arrested for prostitution and 

commercialized vice. In 2016, 73 percent of the estimated 500 juveniles arrested for prostitution and commercialized 

vice were girls. Trafficked girls also become involved in the juvenile justice system for offenses other than prostitution 

that are committed as a direct result of their exploitation, such as trespass or loitering or for status offenses such as 

truancy and running away.”  u.s. D ep ’ t of Just . off . of Ju V. J ust . & D el Inq . pReVent Ion , supra  note 122.  

> 129

Congressmember Karen Bass,  Justice for Girls, October 8, 2015 , you tube  (Oct. 8, 2015), https://www.you -

tube.com/playlist?list=PL2rWKKCMFOOOFZs2aZrgqPiafnepvQAOx. 34  

> 130

Id.  

> 131

Improving Outcomes for Youth in the Juvenile Justice System: Hearing on H.R. 6964 Before the S. Comm. 

On the Judiciary , 115th Cong. (2017).  

> 132

The Juvenile Justice Reform Act of 2018 was sponsored by Rep. Jason Lewis (R-MN-2) and Rep. Robert Scott 

(D-VA-3) and enacted on December 21, 2018. H.R. 6964, 115th Cong. (2018) (codified as Pub. L. No. 115-385).  

> 133

saa R et al ., supra  note 7, at 16; Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act Reauthorization of 2018, Pub. 

L. No. 93-415, §26, 88 Stat. 1109.  

> 134

saa R et al .,  supra  note 7, at 16, 17; the JJRA provides: ‘‘(K) the number of juveniles in the custody of secure 

detention and correctional facilities operated by a State or unit of local or tribal government who report being preg -

nant.’’ Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act Reauthorization of 2018,  supra  note 132, § 207(1)(G). 

Further, the JJRA provides that ‘(ix) not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of the Juvenile Justice Reform 

Act of 2018, a plan which shall be implemented not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of the Juvenile 

Justice Reform Act of 2018, to— ‘‘(I) eliminate the use of restraints of known pregnant juveniles housed in secure ju -

venile detention and correction facilities, during labor, delivery, and post-partum recovery, unless credible, reasonable 

grounds exist to believe the detainee presents an immediate and serious threat of hurting herself, staff, or others; 

and ‘‘(II) eliminate the use of abdominal restraints, leg and ankle restraints, wrist restraints behind the back, and 

four-point restraints on known pregnant juveniles, unless— ‘‘(aa) credible, reasonable grounds exist to believe the 

detainee presents an immediate and serious threat of hurting herself, staff, or others; or ‘‘(bb) reasonable grounds 

exist to believe the detainee presents an immediate and credible risk of escape that cannot be reasonably minimized 

through any other method;’’; (F) in paragraph (8), by striking ‘‘existing’’ and inserting ‘‘evidence-based and promis -

ing’’); Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act Reauthorization of 2018,  supra  note 133, § 204(2)(B)(5).  

> 135

See  saa R et al ., supra  note 7, at 20; see also Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act Reauthorization, 

supra  note 133, § 7(A)(iv).  

> 136

See  saa R et al ., supra  note 7, at 15;  see also  Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act Reauthorization, 

supra  note 133, § 223(5).  

> 137

S. 3623, 117th Cong. § 813 (2022).  

> 138

Id.  § 201.  

> 139

S. Res. 81, 114th Cong. (2015).  

> 140

First Step Implementation Act of 2021, H.R. 3510, 117th Cong. (2021).  

> 141

Id.  

> 142

Id.  

> 143

H.R. 2908, 117th Cong. (2021).  

> 144

Id.  

> 145

Id.  

> 146

Id.  

> 147

Id.  

> 148

H.R. 2858, 117th Cong. (2021).  

> 149

The bill would also codify the prohibition on life without parole for minors as decided in  Miller v. Alabama , 567 

U.S. 460 (2012).  Id.  The bill was referred to the Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security in Octo -

ber of 2021.  Id.  

> 150

Sara Kruzan, Woman Who Killed Pimp in 1994 When She Was a Teen, Pardoned By California Gov. Gavin 

Newsom , CBS  news  (July 4, 2022, 7:01 AM), https://www.cbsnews.com/news/sara-kruzan-pardoned-woman-

killed-pimp-1994-california/.  

> 151

Advocates brought attention to her case, and in 2011, then-Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger commuted her 

prison term to 25 years with the possibility of parole. In 2013, after Sara had served over 18 years, Governor Jerry 

Brown allowed her to be released from prison. In July 2022, Governor Gavin Newson issued a formal pardon of 

Sara. Libor Jany,  Newsom Pardons Sara Kruzan, Imprisoned as a Teen for Killing Man Who Trafficked Her , l.a.

tImes  (July 2, 2022, 8:03 PM), https://www.latimes.com/california/story/2022-07-02/newsom-pardons-sara-kru -

zan-woman-sent-to-prison-for-killing-man-who-sex-trafficked-her; Johnny Diaz,  California Woman Pardoned 27 

Years After Killing Abuser as a Teen , n.y. tImes  (July 5, 2022), https://www.nytimes.com/2022/07/05/us/gavin-new -

som-pardons-kruzan.html?smtyp=cur&smid=tw-nytimes.  

> 152

Sara Kruzan,  Opinion: Why Wisconsin Should Drop Murder Charges Against a Sex Trafficking Victim , wash .

post  (Aug. 1, 2022, 1:49 PM), https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2022/08/01/chrystul-kizer-wiscon -

sin-sex-trafficking-victims/.  

> 153

S. 4362, 117th Cong. (2022).  

> 154

Id.  at § 2(2).  

> 155

Id.  at § 2(6)-(7).  

> 156

chRI st Ine RaIno , saRah Robe Rts , saRah  ben Dtsen & samantha  healy Va RD aman , sha ReD hope Int ’l , R epo Rt

caRD s on  chIlD an D youth  sex  tRaff Ick Ing : 2021  toolk It (2021), https://reportcards.sharedhope.org/wp-content/up -

loads/2021/10/2021Toolkit.pdf.  

> 157

See, e.g. , ALA . coDe § 13A-12-123 (2019) (providing that a “sexually exploited child” alleged to have commit -

ted a violation of prostitution or solicitation may not be prosecuted); 720  Ill . comp . stat . 5/11-14 (2015).(providing 

that a child under age eighteen is immune from a charge of prostitution and will be subject to temporary protective 

custody and an investigation into potential child abuse or neglect must occur within 24 hours from when an officer 

takes the minor into custody). See generally Safe Harbor Laws: What is Safe Harbor?,  sha ReD hope I nt ’l , https:// 

reportcards.sharedhope.org/safeharbor/.  

> 158

RaIno et al ., supra  note 156.  

> 159

sup . ct. of  ohIo, J uVen Ile  human  tRaff Ick Ing , ohIo laws & safe  haRbo R Response  (2017), https://www.supreme -

court.ohio.gov/JCS/CFC/resources/juvenileHumanTrafficking.pdf. 35  

> 160

Priscila Borges Marques dos Santos, Thesis,  “Safer” Harbor: The Impact of Different Models of Safe Harbor 

Laws on the Criminalization of Commercially Sexually Exploited Children in the United States , maRshall  u. (Aug. 

2016) (finding in an analysis of juvenile arrest data between 1995 and 2014 after the implementation of safe harbor 

laws in 18 states that the laws had little to no discernible effect on juvenile arrest rates for prostitution-related offens -

es); Kimberly B. Mehlman-Orozco,  Safe Harbor Legislation for Juvenile Victims of Sex Trafficking: A Myopic View 

of Improvements in Practice , 3  soc . I nclus Ion  52, 58 (2015).  See also  Brendan M. Conner,  In Loco Aequitatis: The 

Dangers of ‘Safe Harbor’ Laws for Youth in the Sex Trades , 12  stanfo RD  J.  c.R. &  c.l. 43, 52 (2016), https://schol -

arship.law.wm.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2968&context=facpubs (noting that arrests of children for prostitu -

tion-related offenses increased almost tenfold in the first year of the law’s implementation, from 14 arrests in 2010 

to 136 arrests in 2011). This study also found a small reduction in the number of children arrested for prostitution 

after the bill was signed into law in 2008 but before it went into effect in 2010, suggesting a possible “announcement 

effect.”  Id. ; Alexa Bejinariu et al.,  “They said they were going to help us get through this …”: Documenting Inter -

actions Between Police and Commercially Sexually Exploited Youth , J.  cRI me & J ust . 2, 59 (2020); Jennifer Cole 

& Ginny Sprang,  Post-Implementation of a Safe Harbor Law in the U.S.: Review of State Administrative Data ,

101  chIlD abuse & neglect  4-5 (2020) (finding that fewer children were charged with prostitution-related offenses 

in the years immediately after Kentucky enacted its first anti-human trafficking law in 2007, but declines did not 

follow the enactment of the state’s safe harbor law in 2013), https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/ 

S014521341930496X.  

> 161

Bejinariu et al.,  supra  note 160.  

> 162

Id.  

> 163

lau Ren  schauben et al .,  wIlDeR Rsch .,  safe  haRbo R: eValuat Ion Repo Rt 13-20 (2017), https://www.wilder.org/ 

sites/default/files/imports/SafeHarbor_EvaluationReport_10-17.pdf.  

> 164

Id.  

> 165

Id.  

> 166

E.g.  Elizabeth S. Barnert et al.,  Identifying Best Practices for ‘Safe Harbor’ Legislation to Protect Child Sex 

Trafficking Victims: Decriminalization Alone is Not Sufficient , 51  chIlD abuse & neglect  249, 251, 258 (2016) (in 

study of jurisdictions with limited placement, diversion programs, or service options, 32 experts were interviewed; 

findings revealed the common perception that the only means of keeping child sex trafficking victims safe was to 

detain them).  

> 167

Id.  at 258.  

> 168

A.J. v. Eighth Jud. Dist. Ct., 394 P.3d 1209, 1214 (Nev. 2017).  

> 169

Eileen M. Ahlin,  Risk Factors of Sexual Assault and Victimization Among Youth in Custody , 36  J. I nte Rpe Rsonal 

VIolence  2164 (2021).  See also  u.s. D ep ’t of Just .,  buReau of Just . stats .,  pRI son Rape  elImInat Ion  act of 2003: 

pRea  Data  collect Ion  act IVI tIes , 2022  (2022), https://bjs.ojp.gov/content/pub/pdf/pdca22.pdf;  see also  u.s. D ep ’t  

> of

J ust .,  buReau of J ust . stats .,  nat Ional  suRV ey of  youth  In custo Dy, 2018:  sexual VIct ImIzat Ion Repo Rte D by  youth  In

Ju Ven Ile  fac IlItIes , 2018  (2019), https://bjs.ojp.gov/content/pub/pdf/svryjf18.pdf (finding that 6.6% of incarcerated 

girls reported sexual victimization in juvenile facilities within the prior 12 months.).  

> 170

See e.g. , State v. Martin, 116 N.E.3d 127, 134 (Ohio 2018) (affirming a lower court’s conviction and sentence of 

a juvenile and holding that the juvenile court did not commit plain error by failing to appoint a guardian ad litem to the 

juvenile who experienced childhood abuse and was involved in the child welfare system, attempted suicide at age 

12, was trafficked around age 14, and pled guilty in adult court to aggravated murder related to a burglary she was 

part of at age 15, after finding that the juvenile failed to raise an objection in juvenile court and failed to show that 

her aggravated murder charge was related to her status as a human trafficking victim);  In re Bobby P ., 907 N.Y.S.2d 

540, 545-49 (N.Y. Fam. Ct. 2010) (denying motion to substitute a PINS petition for a juvenile delinquency petition 

filed by a juvenile in the foster care system who was forced into the sex trade beginning at age 12 and charged with 

committing acts which would have constituted crimes of prostitution and other charges at age 15, relying on the 

lower court’s finding that the child expressed a current unwillingness to cooperate with specialized services for sex -

ually exploited youth, and finding the court was within its discretion under Family Court Act § 311.4, which provides 

that courts have discretion to proceed with delinquency proceedings rather than PINS petition when the respondent 

“expresses a current unwillingness to cooperate with specialized services for sexually exploited youth”);  cf.  ohIo

ReV. coDe ann . § 2152.021(F)(1)-(4) (2021) (requiring the appointment of a guardian ad litem when a juvenile court 

has reason to believe that the child is a victim of trafficking and that the charge is related to the child’s victimization 

and permitting the juvenile court to “make any orders regarding placement, services, supervision, diversion actions, 

and conditions of abeyance, including, but not limited to, engagement in trauma-based behavioral health services or 

education activities, that the court considers appropriate and in the best interest of the child”).  

> 171

Priscilla A. Ocen,  (E)racing Childhood: Examining the Racialized Construction of Childhood and Innocence in 

the Treatment of Sexually Exploited Minors , 62  ucla  l. R eV. 1586, 1639 (2015);  see also , epste In, supra  note 11, 

at 8.  

> 172

sentenc Ing  pRoJect , I nca Rce Rate D women an D gIR ls  (2022), https://www.sentencingproject.org/app/up -

loads/2022/11/Incarcerated-Women-and-Girls.pdf (finding Black girls are more than three times likely as their white 

peers to be incarcerated).  

> 173

eRI n maRsh , bRI ttany  anthony , J ess Ica  eme Rson , kate  mogulescu , State Report Cards: Grading Criminal 

Record Relief Laws for Survivors Of Human Trafficking  (Mar. 2019), 10  https://polarisproject.org/wp-content/up -

loads/2019/03/Grading-Criminal-Record-Relief-Laws-for-Survivors-of-Human-Trafficking.pdf . 

> 174

Id.  

> 175

assemb . bIll  124, 2021-2022 Reg. Sess. (Cal. 2021).  

> 176

The original bill would have allowed affirmative defenses for violent acts committed as a direct result of traffick -

ing and/or sexual violence as well as non-violent acts, but it was amended to apply only to non-violent offenses.  

> 177

Id.  

> 178

Katie Licari,  New Bill Protects Abuse Survivors Who Fight Back —— But Experts Warn It’s Not Enough ,

black VoIce news  (Jan. 23, 2022), https://blackvoicenews.com/2022/01/23/new-bill-protects-abuse-survivors-who-

fight-back-but-experts-warn-its-not-enough/. 36  

> 179

Sydney Kaplan and Genesis Guzman,  California Senator Creates Reform Legislation to Aid Those Childhood 

Trauma Victims , DaVI s Vangua RD  (Aug. 5, 2021), https://www.davisvanguard.org/2021/08/california-senator-cre -

ates-reform-legislation-to-aid-those-childhood-trauma-victims/.  

> 180

Va. coDe ann . § 16.1-272 (2020).  

> 181

Del. Vivian Watts,  Justice System Reforms Will Protect Children , the VIR gInIan  pIlot  (May 6, 2020),  https:// 

www.pilotonline.com/opinion/columns/vp-ed-column-watts-0506-20200506-huanalzapfehxfyfiyk3rakou4-story.html . 

> 182

S. 1077, 2021-2022 Reg. Session (N.Y. 2021).  

> 183

n.y. cRI m. pRoc . law  § 530.11(1)(e) (Consol. 2020).  

> 184

Smith , 132 N.Y.S.3d at 257. Smith was 37 years old when resentencing was requested and served over 20 

years upon her release in 2020. Ashley Rowe,  Judge Grants Patrice Smith Freedom After Serving 21 Years for Mur -

der, Thanks to New Law , ABC 7  buffalo  (Sept. 17, 2020, 11:23 AM), https://www.wkbw.com/news/local-news/ 

judge-grants-patrice-smith-freedom-after-serving-21-years-for-murder-thanks-to-new-law.  

> 185

wIs. stat . § 939.46(1m) (2018) (“A victim of a violation of [human trafficking or child trafficking] has an affirma -

tive defense for any offense committed as a direct result of the violation of [human trafficking or child trafficking] with -

out regard to whether anyone was prosecuted or convicted for the violation of [human trafficking or child traffick -

ing]”).  

> 186

Kizer , 963 N.W.2d at 136;  see also  Contrera,  supra  note 51 (detailing Wisconsin Supreme Court ruling).  

> 187

Ellen Wulfhorst,  Exclusive: U.S. Among 10 Most Dangerous Countries for Women Amid #MeToo Campaign 

- Poll , Reute Rs (June 25, 2018, 8:39 PM), https://www.reuters.com/article/us-women-dangerous-poll-usa-exclusive/ 

exclusive-u-s-among-10-most-dangerous-countries-for-women-amid-metoo-campaign-poll-idUSKBN1JM02G.  

> 188

See generally  VJ Felitti et al.,  Relationship of Childhood Abuse and Household Dysfunction to Many of the 

Leading Causes of Death in Adults. The Adverse Child Experiences ( ACE ) Study , 14  am. J.  pReV. meD. 245 (1998).  

> 189

The Elders,  Women live in a profoundly different, more dangerous world , (Nov. 25, 2013),  https://theelders. 

org/news/women-live-profoundly-different-more-dangerous-world . 

> 190

“More than 80% of female victims (83.4%, or nearly 49.5 million victims) of unwanted sexual contact reported 

that it first occurred before age 25, including 1 in 2 (56.9% or 33.8 million) who first experienced unwanted sexual 

contact before turning 18.”  bas Ile et al ., supra  note 6.  

> 191

Salamishah Tillet & Scheherazade Tillet,  After the ‘Surviving R. Kelly’ Documentary, #MeToo Has Finally 

Returned to Black Girls. Let’s Keep It There. , n.y. tImes  (Jan. 10, 2019), https://www.nytimes.com/2019/01/10/ 

opinion/r-kelly-documentary-metoo.html.  

> 192

E.g. , alIsa  bIeRRI a et al .,  suRVIV eD & pun Ishe D, D efen DI ng  self -D efense : a call to  act Ion by  suRVIV eD an D pun Ishe D

(2022), https://survivedandpunished.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/03/DSD-Report-Mar-21-final.pdf (identifying 

problems in criminalizing survivors in self-defense cases, providing recommendations to end the practice, and shar -

ing legal resources for survivors).  

> 193

Noel,  Law Enforcement , lIfe  sto Ry, https://thelifestory.org/law-enforcement.  

> 194

Skoll.org,  Melanie Thompson - The Importance of an Intersectional Approach to Gender Based Violence ,

you tube  (May 11, 2021), https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XYipBjAdhBo.  

> 195

bas Ile et al ., supra  note 6.  

> 196

bas Ile et al ., supra  note 6, at 11.  

> 197

Ayanna Runcie,  #MeToo for Youth: #GirlsToo Focuses on Teens’ Sexual Trauma , CBS  news  (Apr. 2, 2019, 4:43 

PM), https://www.cbsnews.com/news/girlstoo-movement-metoo-for-young-women-girls-inc/ (“There hasn’t been a 

lot of discussion in the media about how this really affects our kids and how young this starts, and what we can do 

as a society to change that trajectory so we don’t end up repeating these cycles over and over again” (quoting Laura 

Kaufmann, Girls Inc.)).  

> 198

Bobette,  Child Sexual Abuse: Childhood Sexual Abuse Can Prime Girls for Future Exploitation , lIfe  sto Ry,

https://thelifestory.org/child-sexual-abuse. To learn more about our organizations, please visit 

www. genderjusticeandopportunity.georgetown.edu 

and www.rights4girls.org
