Title: Trump Slams 'Stupid' Fed Chair Jerome Powell Ahead Of Key Meeting On Interest Rates | Watch

URL Source: https://www.timesnownews.com/world/us/us-news/trump-slams-stupid-fed-chair-jerome-powell-ahead-of-key-meeting-on-interestrateswatch-article-152100018

Published Time: 2025-06-18T23:50:13+05:30

Markdown Content:
Trump

Photo : AP

President Donald Trump unleashed another fierce attack on Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell on Wednesday, calling him “stupid” and accusing him of costing the country “a fortune.” Speaking just hours before the Federal Open Market Committee’s highly anticipated decision on interest rates, Trump said Powell “just refuses to lower the Fed rate” and questioned his intelligence and political motives.

“So we have a stupid person. Frankly, you probably won’t cut today,” Trump said outside the White House. “Europe had 10 cuts, and we had none. And I guess he’s a political guy, I don’t know. He’s a political guy who’s not a smart person, but he’s costing the country a fortune.” Trump also suggested Powell’s actions may be driven by personal animosity: “I don’t even think he’s that political. I think he hates me, but that’s OK.”

Turning to the broader economic picture, the Federal Reserve currently holds the overnight borrowing rate between 4.25% and 4.50%, with market expectations indicating no cut at this meeting. The Fed has expressed caution about adjusting rates amid ongoing uncertainty, particularly over the long-term effects of Trump’s tariffs. Inflation indicators have remained relatively stable since the tariffs were implemented in April, dampening calls for immediate rate changes.

Trump criticized the higher interest rates, claiming they are costing the US “hundreds of billions” in financing costs that could be saved if the Fed eased monetary policy. “If he’s worried about inflation, that’s OK. I understand that. I don’t think there’s going to be any. So far there hasn’t,” he said.

Despite recent meetings between Trump and Powell at the White House, little is known about their discussions. Powell and the Fed have vowed to remain independent and resist political pressure, even as it intensifies from Trump and other administration officials, including Vice President JD Vance.

Trump even mused about taking over the Fed chairmanship himself, declaring, “I’d do a much better job than these people.” With Powell’s term set to expire in May 2026, Trump has indicated he plans to name a successor soon.

Get Latest News Live on Times Now along with Breaking News and Top Headlines from US News and around the World.
