Title: 

URL Source: https://www.cia.gov/static/Tradecraft-Review-2016-ICA-on-Election-Interference-062625.pdf

Published Time: Tue, 07 Oct 2025 11:46:05 GMT

Markdown Content:
> S E C R E T / / N O F O R N S E C R E T / / N O F O R N

(U) Memo To: Director of the Central Intelligence Agency 

(U) From: Deputy Director of CIA for Analysis 

(U) Subject: Tradecraft Review of the 2016 Intelligence Community Assessment on Russian Election Interference 

(U) Reference: Intelligence Community Assessment (ICA), Russia’s Influence Campaign Targeting the 2016 US Presidential Election , 30 December 2016 

(U) In May 2025, Director of the Central Intelligence Agency (DCIA) John Ratcliffe tasked CIA's Directorate of Analysis (DA) to conduct a lessons-learned review of the procedures and analytic tradecraft employed in the highest classified version of the Intelligence Community Assessment (ICA) Russia's Influence Campaign Targeting the 2016 US Presidential Election , dated 30 December 2016. The review focused particular attention on the ICA's most debated judgment— that Russian President Vladimir Putin "aspired" to help then-candidate Donald Trump win the election. Drawing on CIA materials provided to congressional oversight investigations, the DA examined whether any procedural anomalies or tradecraft weaknesses may have affected the soundness and objectivity of this key judgment and the overall assessment. 

## (U) ICA Origins and Context 

(U) To understand the procedural and tradecraft issues identified in this review, it is essential to examine the politically charged environment and unique circumstances that led to the ICA's development in late 2016. During this period, conflicting public and private statements by Intelligence Community (IC) officials about Russia's role in the US presidential election created confusion about the IC's actual assessment. These contradictory messages prompted President Obama on 6 December to direct then-Director of National Intelligence (DNI) James Clapper to conduct a comprehensive review of all available intelligence and provide the IC’s best assessment of Russian activities related to the election. 

 (U) However, before work on the assessment even began, media leaks suggesting that the IC had already reached definitive conclusions risked creating an anchoring bias. 

 (U) On 9 December, both the Washington Post and New York Times reported the IC had concluded with high confidence that Russia had intervened specifically to help Trump win the election. The Post cited an unnamed US official describing this as the IC’s “consensus view.” 

(U) Procedural Concerns 

(U) The DA Review identified multiple procedural anomalies in the preparation of the ICA. These included a highly compressed production timeline, stringent compartmentation, and excessive involvement of agency heads, all of which led to 

> (U//FOUO) This product reflects a CIA perspective and was not coordinated within the Intelligence Community. It was produced under the auspices of the Deputy Director of CIA for Analysis.
> Classified By: Derived From: CIA NSCG Declassify On: 20501231 CIA-DA-CN-2025-20625

26 June 2025 S E C R E T / / N O F O R N 

> 2
> S E C R E T / / N O F O R N

departures from standard practices in the drafting, 

coordination, and review ing of the ICA. These 

departures impeded efforts to apply rigorous 

tradecraft, particularly to the assessment's most 

contentious judgment . 

> (U)

Timeline Impact : The highly compressed 

timeline was atypical for a formal IC assessment, 

which ordinarily can ta ke months to prepare ,

especially for assessments of such length, 

complexity, and political sensitivity. CIA’s primary 

authors had less than a week to draft the 

assessment and less than two days to formally 

coordinate it with IC peers before it entered the 

formal review process at CIA on 20 December. 

• (U) Multiple IC stakeholders said they felt 

“jammed” by the compressed timeline. Most 

got their first look at the hardcopy draft and 

underlying sensitive reporting just before or at 

the only in -person coordina tion meeting that 

was held on 19 December to conduct a line -by -

line review .

• (S//NF) Following the coordination meeting, 

then -Director of the National Security Agency 

Mike Rogers wrote to then -DCIA John Brennan 

to say that his analysts were not “fully 

comfortable ” with the time they had been 

given to “review all of the intelligence ” and “ be 

absolutely confident in their assessments.”  

> (U)

Compressing review of the draft by multiple 

stakeholders to just a handful of days during a 

holiday week also created numerous challenges. 

This was further complicated by the need to 

conduct the review in hardcopy, with drafts having 

to be hand -carried between various IC offices and 

buildings. The pressing timeline and limitations of 

hardcopy review likely biased the overall review 

process to focus more on precision of language 

and sourcing rather than on more substantial, 

time -consuming edits to refine the overall 

presentation of the draft —which , w ith the benefit 

of hindsight , might have improved the 

argumentatio n in some areas. 

• (S//NF) One of CIA’s lead author s expressed 

surprise that the review process had resulted in 

so few changes, which was “unusual” for such a 

lengthy , complex , and high -profile assessment. 

• (S//NF) The NIO for Russia, who on ly received th e

final draft for review hours before it was 

published, noted that with more time, “they 

could have done more” to bolster the judgments 

and “make the presentation more elegant.” 

(U) Rushed Timeline Justified?  

> (U)

ICD 203 stipulates that analysis be 

“independent of political consideration” 

and “must not be dis torted by, nor shaped 

for, advocacy of a particular audience, 

agenda, or policy viewpoint.” The election 

had concluded, and the ICA was essentially 

a post -mortem analysis. Therefore, the 

rushed timeline to publish both classified 

and unclassified versions before the 

presidential transition raised questions 

about a potential political motiv e behind 

the White House tasking and timeline .

• (U) Without a clear operational need 

for urgency, this accelerated process 

created vulnerabilities and opened 

lines of inqu iry about potential bias. 

• (U) A more measured approach with 

expanded time for review and wider 

input would have better adhered to 

standard intelligence tradecraft 

practices and potentially deflected 

questions about White House 

motivations. S E C R E T / / N O F O R N  

> 3
> S E C R E T / / N O F O R N
> (U)

Compartment ation Challenges : Uneven access 

to highly compartmented information further 

complicated coordination and review and 

contributed to analytic differences on the ICA’s 

most contentious point. The product spanned 

multiple CIA and NSA compartments, and included 

restricted access FBI information, with some 

reporting touching on US Persons. Multiple ICA 

participants had access to intelligence that others 

did not. This restricted authors’ ability to 

collaborate with a large pool of colleagues. 

• (S//NF) Central to the judgment that Putin 

“aspired” to help Trump win was one highly 

classified CIA report. Brennan had tightly 

restricted access to th is information within CIA; 

it had been collected in July but not 

disseminated in CIA serialized reporting until 

the week of 19 December. 

• (S//NF) The CIA drafters had enjoyed privileged 

access to this information through participation 

in a highly compartmented analytic effort —

known as the “Fusion Cell” —which Brennan 

had created in July to focus on the IC’s growing 

concern about Russian election interference. 

However, m ost ICA contributors, coordinators, 

and reviewers were only “read -in” to th e

sensitive reporting at the 19 December 

coordination meeting. 

• (S//NF) One CIA manager stated that uneven 

access to compartmen ted information among 

ICA coordinators and reviewers contributed to 

an already “chaotic” process . He said some key 

analysts and managers were not cleared to 

review the ICA’s most controversial aspects, 

and were only able to see portions of the draft 

out of context.  

> (U)

Broader access to reporting —both prior to and 

throughout the preparation of the ICA —almost 

certainly would have led to more robust analytic 

debate. Even within the small circle of 

collaborators cleared for the most sensitive 

information, the judgment that Putin “aspired ” to 

help Trump win prompted healthy and protracted 

debate. Including more voices with more time to 

weigh in undoubtedly would have refined, 

challenged, or surfaced analytic differences on 

that question or on other aspects of the ICA .

• (S//NF ) A DNI report in 2017 indicated that the 

highest classified version of the ICA had been 

shared with more than 200 US officials. This is 

unusually high for such a highly 

compartmented product and calls into 

question whether the extreme limitations on 

acces s to underlying intelligence with in the IC 

during the ICA’s preparation was justifiable.  

> (S//NF)

Ag ency Head Involvement : While agency 

heads sometimes review controversial analytic 

assessments before publication, their direct 

engagement in the ICA's develo pment was highly 

unusual in both scope and intensity. This 

exceptional level of senior involvement likely 

influenced participants, altered normal review 

processes, and ultimately compromised analytic 

rigor. On e CIA analytic manager involved in the 

process said other analytic managers —who would 

typically have been part of the review chain —

opted out due to the politically charged 

environment and the atypical prominence of 

agency leadership in the process .

• (U) From the outset, agency heads chose to 

marginalize the National Intelligence Council 

(NIC), departing significantly from standard 

procedures for formal IC assessments. 

Typically, the NIC maintains control over 

drafting assignments, coordination, and review 

processes. In his book Undaunted , Brennan 

reveals that he established crucial elements of 

the process with the White House before NIC 

involvement, stating he informed them that 

CIA would “take the lead drafting the report ”S E C R E T / / N O F O R N 

> 4
> S E C R E T / / N O F O R N

and that coordination would be l imited to 

“ODNI, CIA, FBI, and NSA. ”

• (U) These departures from standard procedure 

not only limited opportunities for coordination 

and thorough tradecraft review, but also 

resulted in the complete exclusion of key 

intelligence agencies from the process. Wh ile 

sensitive counterintelligence information in 

community assessments often requires 

restricted access, the decision to entirely shut 

out the Defense Intelligence Agency and the 

Department of State ’s Bureau of Intelligence 

and Research from any participat ion in such a 

high -profile assessment about an adversary ’s

plans and intentions was a significant deviation 

from typical IC practices.  

> (U)

It also was markedly unconventional to have 

Agency heads review and sign off on a draft before 

it was submitted to the NIC for review. The NIC did 

not receive or even see the final draft until just 

hours before the ICA was due to be published .

• (S//NF) In an email exchange on 20 December, 

then -DDCIA David Cohen informed Brennan 

that t he Principal Deputy Director for Nat ional 

Intelligence (PDDNI) had called to register a

concern with the process. According to Cohen, 

the PDDNI characterized CIA’s plan to deliver a 

final draft to the NIC on the day it was to be 

published as a “fait accompli that would jam 

them, both substantively and temporally.” 

• (S//NF) Brennan downplayed the concern, 

responding to Cohen that the “big three ”—

referring to CIA, FBI, and NSA —“have every 

right to agree on language that will be included 

verbatim in the final ve rsion of the paper. ”

Acknowledging that the NIC would still have a

“right to differ,” he stated , “I very much hope 

that doesn’t happen.” 

(U) Prejudicial Workforce Message  

> (S//NF)

One business day before IC analysts 

convened for the only coordination 

ses sion on the ICA, Brennan sent a note to 

the CIA workforce stating he had met with 

the DNI and FBI Director and that “there is 

strong consensus among us on the scope, 

nature, and intent of Russian interference 

in our recent Presidential election. ” While 

off icers involved in drafting the ICA 

consistently said they did not feel 

pressured to reach specific conclusions, 

Brennan ’s premature signaling that agency 

heads had already reached consensus 

before the ICA was even coordinated 

risked stifling analytic debat e.  

> (S//NF)

The decision by agency heads to include 

the Steele Dossier in the ICA ran counter to 

fundamental tradecraft principles and ultimately 

undermined the credibility of a key judgment. The 

ICA authors first learned of the Dossier, and FBI 

leadership ’s insistence on its inclusion, on 20 

December —the same day the largely coordinated 

draft was entering the review process at CIA. FBI 

leadership made it clear that their participation in 

the ICA hinged on the Dossier ’s inclusion and , over 

the next few days, repeatedly pushed to weave 

references to it throughout the main body of the 

ICA. 

• (S//NF) The ICA authors and multiple senior CIA 

managers —including the two senior leaders of 

the CIA mission center responsible for Russia —

strongly opposed including the Dossier, 

asserting that it did not meet even the most 

basic tradecraft standards. CIA ’s Deputy 

Director for Analysis (DDA) warned in an email 

to Brennan on 29 December that including it in S E C R E T / / N O F O R N 

> 5
> S E C R E T / / N O F O R N

any form risked “the credibility of the entir e

paper. ”

• (S//NF) Despite these objections, Brennan 

showed a preference for narrative consistency 

over analytical soundness. When confronted 

with specific flaws in the Dossier by the two 

mission center leaders —one with extensive 

operational experience and the other with a 

strong analytic background —he appeared 

more swayed by the Dossier's general 

conformity with existing theories than by 

legitimate tradecraft concerns. Brennan 

ultimately formalized his position in writing, 

stating that “my bottomline is tha t I believe 

that the information warrants inclusion in the 

report .”

• (S//NF) Ultimately, agency heads decided to 

include a two -page summary of the Dossier as 

an annex to the ICA, with a disclaimer that the 

material was not used “to reach the analytic 

conclu sions. ” However, by placing a reference 

to the annex material in the main body of the 

ICA as the fourth supporting bullet for the 

judgment that Putin “aspired ” to help Trump 

win, the ICA implicitly elevated 

unsubstantiated claims to the status of credible 

supporting evidence, compromising the 

analytical integrity of th e judgment. 

(U) Tradecraft Concerns  

> (U)

The procedural anomalies that characterized 

the ICA ’s development had a direct impact on the 

tradecraft applied to its most contentious finding. 

With analysts operating under severe time 

constraints, limited information sharing, and 

heightened senior -level scrutiny, several aspects 

of tradecraft rigor were compromised —

particularly in supporting the judgment that Putin 

“aspired ” to help Trump win. 

(U) Strong Tradecraft Examples  

> (U)

Even with the benefit of hindsight, the 

DA Review found much of the ICA's 

tradecraft to be robust and consistent 

with Intelligen ce Community Directive 

(ICD) 203, “Analytic Standards, ” the 

primary guiding document for evaluation 

of analytic products for the IC. The 

assessment's analytic rigor was evident in 

its extensive sourcing: 173 separate 

reports from CIA, NSA, and FBI, 

supplem ented by 74 citations from open 

sources. 

• (U) The ICA also demonstrated strong 

adherence to tradecraft standards 

through frequent use of attributive 

language, explicit identification of 

intelligence gaps, and clear statements 

of confidence levels. This lev el of 

analytic rigor exceeded that of most IC 

assessments. 

• (U) While the DA Review identified 

specific procedural and tradecraft 

issues with the one judgment, these 

issues should not be interpreted as 

indicative of broader systemic 

problems in the IC's ana lytic processes 

or standards. 

• (U) The DA Review identified multiple specific 

concerns, including : a higher confidence level 

than was justified ; insufficient exploration of 

alternative scenarios ; lack of transparency on 

source uncertainty ; uneven argumenta tion ;

and the inclusion of unsubstantiated Steele 

Dossier material. S E C R E T / / N O F O R N  

> 6
> S E C R E T / / N O F O R N
> (S//NF)

Confidence Level s: The “aspired” judgment 

did not merit the “high confidence” level that CIA 

and FBI attached to it . As explained in the ICA’s 

Annex H – Estimative Langua ge, “high confidence 

generally ind ic ates that judgments are based on 

high -quality information from multiple sources. ”

The ICA emphasized only the one highly classified 

CIA serialized report to support this judgment. 

• (S//NF) In the ICA’s first draft that was reviewed 

at the 19 December meeting , t he authors had 

included the “aspired” judgment in a broader 

finding on all three assessed goals of the 

Russian influence campaign. With respect to 

the first two goals —undermining public faith in 

the US democratic proce ss and denigrating 

Secretary Clinton to harm her potential 

presidency —the finding was underpinned by 

multiple high -quality sources . A ll meeting 

participants were comfortable with attaching 

“high confidence” to these two goals .

• (S//NF) However, NSA and a few other 

participants were not comfortable with 

ascribing “high confidence” to the “aspired” 

judgment . They cited the limited source base, 

lack of corroborating intelligence , and “the 

possibility for an alternative judgment” as 

driving their discomfort .

• (S//NF) As a result, the authors agreed to 

separate out the “aspired” judgment, and NSA 

eventually settled on ascribing it a “moderate 

confidence” level —which the DA Review found 

more consistent with ICD 203 standards. As 

explained in Annex H , “moderate confidence 

generally means that the information is 

credibly sourced and plausible but not . . . 

corroborated sufficiently.”  

> (S//NF)

Alternative Analysis : The ICA did not 

highlight outlier reporting or present alternative 

scenarios. Although N SA had cited “the possibility 

of an alternative judgment” as a reason for its 

lower confidence level , no alternative scenario s

were identified or explored in the ICA —due in part 

to the highly compressed timeline. When asked 

how additional time would have a ffected the 

quality of the ICA, the NIO for Russia responded 

that it would have allowed the opportunity to 

“explore alternative scenarios or disconfirming 

evidence in a more fulsome way .” 

• (S//NF) In one instance, the authors cited part 

of a credibly sour ced report that supported the 

“high confidence” assessment on the first two 

goals of the Putin -directed campaign —

undermining the US democratic process and 

denigrating Clinton —but omitted information 

that conflicted with the “aspired” judgment. 

The omitted information, as well as a small 

body of other credibly sourced reporting that 

also was not cited in the ICA, suggested Putin 

was more ambivalent about which candidate 

won the election. 

• (U) The ICA would have benefitted from 

including this reporting. Doing so would have 

shown that analysts were aware of it and that 

they had considered multiple scenarios. Even if 

analysts ultimately concluded the larger body 

of reporting was more compelling, a nalysts 

could have strengthened their argument by 

showing their analytic homework more 

methodically.  

> (S//NF)

Source Transparency : The DA Review does 

not dispute the quality and credibility of the highly 

classified CIA serialized report that the ICA autho rs 

relied on to drive the “aspired” judgment. 

Consistent with ICD 203 standards, t he Scope and 

Sourcing note attached to the ICA’s highest 

classified version provided a holistic assessment of 

the strengths and weaknesse s in the paper’s 

overall source base and explained which sources 

were most important to the paper’s key analytic 

judgments. S E C R E T / / N O F O R N 

> 7
> S E C R E T / / N O F O R N

• (S//NF) Ho wever , given the centrality of this 

singular report to the “aspire d” judgment, the 

authors probably sh ould have more clearly 

addressed the uncertainty with how th e cited 

information on Putin’s intentions was acquired .  

> •(S//NF)

The placement of a key clause in the 

serialized report also left room for differing 

interpretations , adding another element of 

ambiguity . Referring to the clause, a senior CIA 

operations officer observed , “We don’t know 

what was meant by that” and “five people read 

it five ways.” 

• (S//NF) The DA Review examined the underlying 

raw intelligence and confirmed that the clause 

was accurately represented in the serialized 

report, and that the ICA authors’ interpretation 

of its meaning was most consistent with the 

raw intelligence.  

> (S//NF)

Argument ation : In intelligence analysis, 

presenting a judgment effectively and logically 

requires clarity, structure, and a robust founda tion 

of evidence and reasoning. Without the highly 

classified CIA report, the “aspired ” judgment 

essentially rested on an assessment of the public 

behavior of senior Russian officials and state -

controlled media, and on logic. Most analysts 

judged that deni grating Clinton equaled 

supporting Trump; they reasoned that in a two -

person race the tradeoff was zero -sum. This logic 

train was plausible and sensible, but was an 

inference rather than fact sourced to multiple 

reporting streams. 

• (S//NF) Once the “aspire ” judgment was 

separated from the other two findings on 

Putin's intentions, it struggled to stand on its 

own. As noted earlier, the subsequent decision 

to bolster this judgment by referencing the 

unsubstantiated Steele Dossier material only 

further weakened its analytic foundation. This 

raised the question of whether the “aspire ”

judgment was even needed, as its inclusion 

risked distracting readers from the more well -

documented findings on Putin ’s strategic 

objectives. 

• (U) The risks of including weakly suppo rted 

judgments are well known to analysts, who are 

trained that readers —especially skeptical 

ones —may reject an entire analysis if a single 

judgment appears exaggerated, biased, or 

unsupported. This is particularly true in high -

stakes contexts like electio n interference, 

where political sensitivities amplify scrutiny 

and where poorly supported judgments can 

muddle the overall narrative. 

• (S//NF) The two senior leaders of the CIA 

mission center responsible for Russia argued 

jointly against including the “aspire” judgment .

In an email to Brennan on 30 December , they 

stated the judgment should be removed 

because it was both weakly supported and 

unnec essary , given the strength and logic of 

the paper’s other findings on intent . They 

warned that including it would only “open up a 

line of very politicized inquiry .” 

(U) Lessons Learned  

> (U)

The review of the 2016 ICA revealed how 

departures from established processes and 

tradecraft standards can affect even 

fundamentally sound analysis. While the overall 

assessment was deemed defensible, the identified 

procedural anomalies and tradecraft issues 

highlight critical lessons for handling controversial 

or politically charged t opics. Adhering to 

established analytic processes and rigorous 

tradecraft is essential to ensure credibility, 

objectivity, and accuracy —particularly when time 

pressures, sensitive information, and high -level 

attention create risks of compromising standard 

practices. S E C R E T / / N O F O R N 

> 8
> S E C R E T / / N O F O R N

• (U) Timeline Impact: Rapid assessments often 

are necessary, but sacrificing analytic rigor and 

tradecraft standards for speed can lead to long -

term credibility issues. Sufficient time should 

be provided for thorough coordination, review, 

and debate of analytic judgments. 

• (U) Compartmentation Challenges: Uneven 

access to compartmented information can lead 

to conflicting assessments and hinder effective 

collaboration. When possible, ensuring all key 

stakeholders have access to the sa me 

information base enhances analytic rigor. 

• (U) Agency Head Involvement: Excessive 

involvement of agency heads in the analytic 

process can intimidate analysts and undermine 

analytic integrity. A more independent and 

transparent process allows for freer de bate 

and consideration of alternatives .

• (U) Confidence Levels: High confidence 

judgments should only be made when 

supported by multiple high -quality sources. 

Single -source judgments, even from credible 

sources, warrant lower confidence levels. 

• (U) Alternat ive Analysis: Exploring and 

presenting alternative scenarios or conflicting 

information strengthens the overall analysis. 

This demonstrates thorough consideration of 

all possibilities and potential biases. 

• (U) Source Transparency : Analysts should have 

acce ss to the details they need to understand 

the limitations and un certainties regarding 

sourcing. When relying heavily on a single 

source, analysts should clearly address such 

ambiguity to maintain credibility. 

• (U) Argument ation : Weak or poorly supported 

judgments can undermine the credibility of an 

entire assessment, especially on politically 

sensitive topics. Analysts should carefully 

consider whether including such judgments 

adds value.  

> (U)

The DA routinely conducts internal af ter -action 

reviews (AAR) of its work on controversial and 

high -profile intelligence topics. Such AARs are 

crucial tools for improving DA analytic processes 

and tradecraft, and are often used as case studies 

to support foundational training at the DA’s 

Sher man Kent School (SKS). 

• (U) No such AAR was conducted in the 

immediate wake of the ICA’s publication 

because it was considered too politically 

sensitive, according to DA officers involved in 

the process at the time. 

• (U) The DA will incorporate this AAR an d

lessons learned into its SKS curriculum.  

> (U)

CIA also will apply these lessons learned to 

continue to drive improvements to its standard 

operating procedures for assessing foreign 

interference in US elections, providing greater 

transparency and rigor. CI A took multiple steps 

leading up to the 2024 presidential election to 

minimize or avoid the sorts of problems analysts 

faced in 2016. This included: 

• (U) Communicating clear expectations and 

guidelines for conceptualizing, coordinating, 

and reviewing electi on security products, and 

for disseminating them to a standardized list of 

policymakers. 

• (U) Ensuring consistent access for designated 

analysts across the IC to highly compartmented 

election -related intelligence and products. 

• (U) Establishing appropriate parameters and 

clear protocols for the role of the DCIA and 

DDCIA in the production of election -related 

assessments.
