Title: Tianjin to limit new car plates to 100,000 each year

URL Source: https://www.todayonline.com/chinaindia/china/tianjin-limit-new-car-plates-100000-each-year

Published Time: 2013-12-23T04:02:40+08:00

Markdown Content:
BEIJING — China’s northern city of Tianjin yesterday said it will issue up to 100,000 new licence plates a year through an auction and lottery system, as part of a move to clamp down on car ownership in a bid to ease traffic congestion and combat air pollution, the Xinhua news agency reported.

The details of the plan, which were released yesterday, followed an announcement last week that it would restrict issuance of new car licences. Although the move came into effect hours after the announcement, it did not make available at that time the exact number of car licence plates it would issue under the plan.

Under the plan, some 60,000 plates will be awarded by lottery — including 10,000 which are allocated to fuel-efficient cars — and the remaining 40,000 will be auctioned.

The plan also includes a quota system similar to Beijing’s traffic restriction scheme. Effective from March 1, new rules will block cars from streets depending on the last digit on their plates, the Tianjin government said last week. It said the measure could help to take a fifth of the city’s private cars off the roads on workdays.

Tianjin, a city with a population of more than 14 million, has seen the rapid growth of car ownership, which has been cited as a culprit for its worsening air quality. In the period from 2006 to 2012, the number of vehicles in Tianjin almost doubled to 2.36 million.

The city now joins the ranks of major cities on the mainland to restrict car growth in the face of worsening traffic and air pollution. The capital Beijing, infamous for its choking smog, announced last month it will slash the city’s quota on new car sales by almost 40 per cent next year. Other major cities have also implemented measures to restrict car ownership.

As public dissatisfaction rises in China over the country’s smoggy skies, more cities are likely to limit car purchases. The ruling Communist Party said earlier this month it would take environmental issues into account when reviewing officials’ performance.

The government has announced plans to fight pollution over the years, but the country’s manufacturing base and heavy dependency on coal for energy continue to dog efforts to clean up smog in many cities.

Vehicles are a major contributor to China’s air pollution. Auto emissions account for about a quarter of Beijing’s PM2.5 — particulate matter measuring less than 2.5 micrometres in diameter that is considered particularly hazardous to human health. AGENCIES
