Title: 2024 Drone and AAM Symposium Panelists

URL Source: https://www.faa.gov/uas/events/drone-symposium/2024-drone-and-aam-symposium-panelists

Published Time: Sun, 26 Oct 2025 21:59:25 GMT

Markdown Content:
Welcome to the panelist directory for the upcoming 2024 FAA Drone and AAM Symposium. This page features a list of our esteemed speakers, organized alphabetically for your convenience. Explore their profiles to learn more about the experts who will be sharing their insights on the latest advancements in drones and Advanced Air Mobility (AAM).

Speaker’s Name Photo Professional Biography
Adrian Doko CEO, Imperial Aerial. FAA Safety Team North Texas, Lead "Drone Pro". President, AUVSI Lone Star Chapter. Director of UAS Safety & Integration, North Central Texas Council of Governments. Certified UAS thermographer with a demonstrated history of working in the drone and robotics industry. Skilled in Remotely Piloted and Multimodal Autonomous Vehicles/Robotics.
Adrienne B. Vanek Adrienne has over 25 years of regulatory, policy and legislative experience. She recently returned to her position as the Director-International Division, UAS Integration Office, having completed a 9-month detail with the Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Committee (CST-Minority) supporting FAA reauthorization and cUAS legislative efforts. Previous FAA positions include supporting global aviation policy issues in the FAA’s Office of Environment and Energy and International Aviation Policy Office. She managed the Global Corporate Affairs portfolio for AB-InBev in Washington, D.C. and the Government Affairs-Asia portfolio for Apple in Tokyo. She served as a Maureen and Mike Mansfield Fellow working in the Japanese government on international trade issues; and, also served as an economist on the United States Senate Banking Committee for then-Chairman Phil Gramm (R-TX) working on international trade and finance issues. Adrienne obtained her M.A. in U.S. Foreign Policy, International Trade and Economics with French Proficiency, and both Italian and Spanish language studies from the Johns Hopkins University’s School of Advanced International Studies (SAIS), having studied in both Bologna, Italy and Washington, D.C. She received her B.A. in International Affairs and French, with a Spanish minor, from Agnes Scott College in Decatur, GA. Adrienne lives in Virginia with her husband and extended family.
Akbar Sultan Mr. Sultan is Director of the Airspace Operations and Safety Program at NASA’s Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate. He is responsible for senior executive leadership of NASA’s research portfolio across four NASA research centers for current and emergent users. The program conducts cutting edge research in autonomy, airspace operations, vehicle command and control, and safety technologies on commercial aviation, Advanced Air Mobility, UAS, Autonomous Vehicles, Emergency Response Operations for Wildfire Management, and sustainability for low emissions, fuel, noise, and contrails. He is also responsible for aviation safety research in areas of aircraft state awareness, prevention of aircraft loss of control, verification and validation of complex systems, prognostic safety through data mining, and in-time system wide safety assurance. He is leading the development of the mid-century NASA Sky For All vision to further the transition to a digital service-oriented architecture that is prognostic, collaborative, scalable, and dynamically adaptive for all future users. He is the co-lead for the NASA and FAA Research Transition Teams which have resulted in transfer of major technology transfer to FAA for implementation through TBFM, TFDM, TFMS, and UTM. He is also the NASA executive representative on the Aviation Safety Team (AST), Commercial Aviation Safety Team (CAST) ExCom, Aviation Safety Information Analysis and Sharing (ASIAS) ExCom, FAA NextGen Advisory Committee Subcommittee, and FAA Research Engineering Development Advisory Committee NAS Operations and Safety and Aircraft Safety Subcommittees. As the Director for NASA’s Airspace Operations and Safety Program, Mr. Sultan has championed the advancement Air Traffic Management and Aviation Safety for more than two decades. He holds a Master of Science Degree in Aerospace Engineering, and Dual Bachelor of Science Degrees in Mechanical Engineering and Aeronautical Science and Engineering. He led the transformation of NASA’s CNS, ATM, and Safety technologies towards addressing the NextGen 2025 vision, which led to several successful technology transfers to FAA and industry for enhanced safety, efficiency, and reductions in emissions and fuel for aviation operations. Beginning in 2020, Mr. Sultan has been leading the NASA R&D plan for FAA’s NAS2040 vision, and is leading the development of the mid-century NASA Sky For All vision to further the transition to a digital service-oriented architecture that is prognostic, collaborative, scalable, and dynamically adaptive for all future users.
Amit Ganjoo Amit Ganjoo is the Founder and CEO of ANRA Technologies with offices in London, Washington DC, Tallinn and New Delhi. ANRA is a global provider of end-to-end uncrewed airspace and mission management solutions for operators and airspace managers. He is a serial entrepreneur and has almost 25 years of aviation, telecom, robotic, and wireless experience in both the federal and the commercial space. He is an Engineer and licensed private pilot, Co-Chair ASTM Standards Working Group for UTM, Co-Chair ASTM UAM Interoperability Working Group as well as a former Board Member of GUTMA, . He was also appointed by the U.S. Secretary of Transportation to the FAA Advanced Aviation Advisory Committee (AAAC) and is also a member of EASA AI trustworthiness Rulemaking working group.
Andrew Ward Andrew Ward – Biography Andrew Ward is the Manager Emerging Technologies at the Civil Aviation Safety Authority - Australia. He is responsible for the organisation’s readiness for the wide range of emerging aviation technologies that are faced by the aviation community including AAM, future RPAS, UTM, electrification, new aviation fuels and more. Andrew has worked in various roles in CASA for more than 23 years. Mr Ward has represented CASA in its international engagement since 2016 on the ICAO RPAS Panel having served as rapporteur of the RPAS Safety Management Taskforce from 2017-19 and has been the co-rapporteur for the RPAS operations working group since 2021. Recently the work that he co-leads received its final endorsement by the ICAO Council becoming Annex 6 — Operation of Aircraft Part IV — International Operations — Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems. This document was recognised by the President of the ICAO Air Navigation Commission as the most significant body of new work presented to ICAO in more than 20 years. In 2020 Andrew took leave of absence from CASA to move to Canada and work for ICAO in the RPAS field. Like many people’s plans for 2020 this was significantly amended by the effects of the global pandemic, and he returned to Australia and CASA after one year in 2021. Andrew began his more than 40 years in aviation as a glider pilot in 1981 before obtaining a private pilot’s licence (aeroplanes) in 1990. Mr. Ward holds a master’s degree in aviation management from Griffith University, and an Australian Remote Pilot Licence (rotorcraft).
Angela McCullough Angela McCullough serves as the Deputy Executive Director of the Federal Aviation Administration’s (FAA) Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) Integration Office, which is the FAA’s principal organization responsible for facilitating the safe integration of drones into the National Airspace System (NAS). She collaborates with internal and external stakeholders to influence today’s drone operational deployment for the safe evolution of an integrated airspace, in alignment with the Agency’s overarching mission. As a servant leader, Angela realizes the importance of community and encourages collaboration and engagement across organizational boundaries to foster inclusivity and embrace diverse perspectives. Angela previously served as the Director of the Office of Aviation Policy and Plans, Office of Policy, International Affairs and Environment, where she streamlined the Agency’s strategic planning process. She also held executive roles in the FAA’s Air Traffic Organization. As the Deputy Chief Operating Officer and early, the Vice President of Mission Support Services, she increased efficiencies and accelerated modernization efforts to ensure the safety and integrity of the NAS. She led the organizational restructuring of Mission Support Services and established the fundamental philosophy of Alignment, Integration, and Communication (AIC), to serve as a guidepost during daily business. The tenants of AIC have become the fabric of the organization’s shared-services model. Angela is an expert at reinventing programs and processes to optimize their outcomes, charting the course to modernize the NAS. She oversaw the successful completion of the Metroplex Program, which was a large-scale effort to optimize the NAS using performance-based navigation procedures and time-based flow management to make the airspace more efficient and improve access to airports. She redesigned the UAS Leadership Team to alleviate stovepipes and create a dynamic, well-rounded steering group to integrate UAS safety into the NAS and helped reimagine the Community Engagement processes to improve the quality of interactions with the public and provide a platform for productive exchanges. With over three decades in the public sector, Angela started her career as an electronics technician in the United States Air Force, which set the trajectory of her aviation career. She holds a Master of Science in Administration from Central Michigan University and has continued a lifelong commitment to service by becoming a certified professional coach. People are her passion, and Angela is deeply committed to helping others reach their full potential in professional and personal leadership and paving the way for the aviation workforce of the future.
Ashley Ferguson Ashley Ferguson is the Vice President of Business Operations at Merlin. Prior to Merlin, Ashley served in the United States Navy for 11 years as an FA-18F Weapons Systems Officer. She deployed in 2011 and 2017 aboard the USS George H.W. Bush in support of Operations Enduring Freedom (Afghanistan), New Dawn (Iraq), and Inherent Resolve (Syria/Iraq). She graduated from the U.S. Navy’s Strike Fighter Weapons School (better known as TOPGUN) in 2012 and spent five years as a Strike Fighter Tactics Instructor before separating from the service in 2017. Ashley graduated from the MIT Sloan School of Management in 2019 with her M.B.A., and worked as an Associate Consultant at the McKinsey & Company Boston office until August 2020.
Basil Yap Basil Yap is an investor, engineer and consultant with a passion for aviation. With over 20 years of experience, he is nationally recognized as a leader in unmanned aircraft systems (UAS) and advanced air mobility (AAM). His journey in aviation is marked by a curious and innovative mindset, driving him to continually design and build groundbreaking solutions in the aerospace field. As the former UAS Program Manager for NCDOT, Yap led an award-winning initiative that pioneered routine medical package delivery operations across the nation, the first BVLOS infrastructure waiver, and first public eVTOL demonstration. As a founding member and the current President of the non-profit AeroX, he plays a pivotal role in building a low altitude aircraft detection with radars to enable routine BVLOS operations. In addition, he helped establish North Carolina’s first Drone as First Responder program and the nation’s first integrated AED drone delivery program. In addition to his entrepreneurial ventures as a Partner at Aero X Ventures, Yap serves as Vice President of Hovecon Consulting, where he provides expertise in emerging aviation technologies. His strategic insights are recognized on a national scale through his appointments to NASA’s Aeronautics Research and Technology Roundtable and the Smith Reynold’s Airport Board, where he contributes to shaping the future of UAS, eVTOL technology, and Urban Air Mobility. Yap holds a bachelor's degree in Civil Engineering from North Carolina State University. He resides in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, with his family.
Ben Berlin Ben currently serves as aviation regulatory counsel at Zipline - the only drone logistics company operating at a national scale. His work focuses on airspace integration and obtaining the regulatory approvals necessary to unlock drone delivery at scale. In addition to his role at Zipline, Ben brings more than a decade of experience providing legal and policy advice to the aviation industry.
Billy Nolen Captain Billy Nolen Bio Billy Nolen is the Chief Regulatory Affairs Officer at Archer Aviation. In this position, he plays a leadership role to help Archer more effectively collaborate with industry stakeholders and help ensure eVTOL’s safe entry into service as it prepares for planned commercialization in 2025. Before joining Archer, Nolen served as the acting administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration where he led certification reform and new safety management systems for airports. Prior to that, he was the associate administrator of aviation safety for the FAA, which covers more than one million registered aircraft, more than one million active pilots, thousands of approved manufacturers, and over 50,000 flights every day. During his time with the FAA, Nolen led the agency’s efforts to enable the safe entry of eVTOL aircraft into the national airspace and has been a strong advocate for the eVTOL aircraft industry and its role in changing the way the world moves. Billy Nolen is an experienced aviation safety professional with more than 37 years of experience in corporate safety, regulatory affairs, and flight operations. He began his career in 1989 as a pilot for American Airlines, flying Boeing 757 and 767 aircraft as well as the then-McDonnell Douglas MD-80. He was later promoted to manage the carrier's Aviation Safety Action Program. His passion for operation and safety led him to continue rising through the management ranks to become the airline's managing director for corporate safety and regulatory affairs. Nolen subsequently worked in safety leadership positions at numerous other airlines, including Qantas Airways, where he played a key role in the Qantas Group Safety Governance Framework, and WestJet in Calgary, Alberta where he was the Vice President of Safety, Security and Quality. In addition to his professional aviation experience, Nolen served tours of duty in the U.S. Army as an airplane and helicopter pilot and safety officer. Nolen graduated from Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University with a Bachelor of Science degree in Aviation Management and has certificates in aviation safety from the U.S. Naval Postgraduate School, U.S. Army Safety Center, and the University of Southern California. He is a Fellow of the Royal Aeronautical Society (FRAeS) and has traveled extensively across the globe.
Blain Newton Blain is the Chief Operating Officer (COO) at BETA Technologies, a Vermont-based company that is developing an electric transportation system to make aviation greener, safer and more accessible. At BETA, Blain leads the company’s commercialization strategy and approach, ensuring the business is well-supported to execute its ambitions. He brings extensive experience, having previously held executive leadership posts at several high-growth, global healthcare technology companies including HIMSS Analytics, CapSite and Allscripts. In these roles, he oversaw multiple global product launches, opened new operations on 4 continents, and led multiple M&A transactions valued collectively at more than $1bn. Blain holds his degree in Business and Accounting from SUNY Geneseo and has been a long-time fan of aviation, having grown up around the 174th [Attack Wing] in Syracuse, NY. When he’s not at work, Blain is an avid fly fisherman and enjoys spending time in the mountains with his wife as they chase their young kids around.
Bradford Drake Since joining the FAA in 2012, Brad Drake has been a pivotal force in the agency’s Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) Integration Office, Implementation Branch (AUS-440). As a Project Manager, he has led multiple key Advanced Air Mobility (AAM) and UAS initiatives over the past 4 years, ensuring their safe integration into the United States National Airspace System (NAS). His responsibilities include keeping FAA executive leadership informed about both internal and external activities and spearheading the integration of UAS Remote ID in the U.S. Brad collaborates with the DoD, DOJ, and DHS to share critical security information with law enforcement regarding drones through Remote ID serial numbers. Also, he has contributed expert insights to several high-level AAM documents, including the U.S.-Japan Declaration of Cooperation on AAM and the FAA’s AAM Study Group working paper, presented at the ICAO’s 41st Assembly in September 2022. Brad has also reviewed various working papers and information papers related to AAM, providing AUS positions on technical issues to support a globally harmonized approach to AAM. Throughout his career at the FAA, Brad has held various technical roles, including Instrument Landing System (ILS) technician positions at San Francisco International Airport (SFO), San Antonio International Airport (SAT), and Providence International Airport (PVD). Before joining the FAA, he worked for Boeing’s Core Engineering team at the Charleston, South Carolina production facility. Brad began his aviation career in the United States Air Force in 1999 and later served in the United States Navy, concluding his military career in the Reserves in California in 2015. Brad holds a Federal Communications Commission General Radiotelephone Operator license and numerous FAA ATO NAS equipment certifications. He is also a certified Contracting Officer Representative. Brad earned a Bachelor of Science in Professional Aeronautics/Aviation Management with a minor in Aviation Safety from Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University and a Master of Business Administration from Webster University with a concentration in IT Management. A member of the Muskogee Tribe, Brad enjoys spending time in church, with his children, reading, lifting weights, skiing, deep sea fishing, and scuba diving. His diverse background and dedication to aviation safety and integration make him a valuable asset to the FAA and the broader aviation community.
Brandon Karr Brandon Karr is from Pearland, Texas. Brandon started his interest in aviation in 2006 where he earned his Commercial and Certified Flight Instructor licenses for manned fixed wing single-engine, multi-engine, and instrument ratings. Brandon worked to integrate drones into the Pearland Police Department's patrol, K9, SWAT, crash reconstruction, and crime scene functions. Through his experience has developed several courses involving utilizing UAS in public safety including Part 107 Ground School, Basic to Advanced Flight Scenarios, Night Operations, Crime and Crash Scene Mapping, and Legal Concerns for UAS. Brandon is also a board member for multiple public safety drone organizations and working groups. Brandon is an internationally recognized subject matter expert for starting and developing the Pearland Police Department drone team and is one of the nation's leaders in DFR and BVLOS operations. Brandon has also been a guest speaker for multiple conferences including Interpol Drone Expert Summit, International Emergency Drone Organization Conference, Law Enforcement Drone Association Conference, AUVSI Exponential, and Commercial UAV Expo.
Brandon Roberts Brandon Roberts is the Executive Director of the Federal Aviation Administration’s Office of Rulemaking, which manages the regulatory portfolio, exemptions, and Aviation Rulemaking Committees. He also serves as the Designated Federal Officer for the Aviation Rulemaking Advisory Committee. Brandon earned a degree in aeronautical engineering from the US Air Force Academy and a graduate certificate in sustainability from Harvard. He served as a fighter pilot flying the F-15C for the US Air Force, but now enjoys flying experimental aircraft on the weekend.
Brandon Youngblood Brandon has been working within the UAS industry for 22 years. He started his career in the United States Air Force (USAF) working on several UAS programs. During his time with the USAF, he participated in military UAS operations, instruction and evaluation, research and development, and developmental and operational testing. Following this time with the military, Brandon started his career with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to focus on balancing the nation’s need to integrate UAS into the National Airspace System (NAS) while simultaneously enabling interagency to secure our most sensitive assets.
Brannon Anthony Brannon Anthony is the General Counsel for Tyler Perry Studios and in this role he oversees the legal function for the dynamically growing Atlanta-based entertainment enterprise. Brannon and his team provide legal guidance and support to empower the Studio's development and production of films, programming, and creative content. The team also has responsibility for legal issues encountered in connection with the operation of one of the largest production facilities in the United States. Brannon regularly provides counsel and strategy across all aspects of the TPS entertainment business. Prior to joining Tyler Perry Studios, Brannon was part of the Turner Broadcasting in-house legal department where he advised Turner’s emerging platforms distribution businesses, broadcast engineering teams, and digital media operations. Before his in-house career, he was in private practice for a number of years advising clients across technology, intellectual property, media and entertainment industries.
Brett Oakleaf Brett Oakleaf has over 25 years of experience in the energy industry across a broad range of roles (e.g., long range generation planning; transmission & distribution; natural gas operations). Brett is currently a strategic partnership manager for NREL, leading the lab’s sustainable aviation initiative and aviation collaborations.
Brittney Kohler Brittney Kohler is the Legislative Director of Transportation and Infrastructure for the National League of Cities, advocating on behalf of the transportation networks of 19,000 cities, towns and villages across the U.S. With more than a decade of experience in infrastructure policy, Ms. Kohler leads NLC’s strategy and engagement with Congress and the Administration to modernize our nation’s infrastructure in partnership with America’s local governments and to advance the integration of air mobility alongside traditional transportation. Advancing drone and urban air mobility is an aviation priority for America’s urban, suburban, and rural cities, and she serves on the FAA’s Aviation Rulemaking Committee for Unmanned Aircraft Systems Beyond Visual Line-of-Sight Operations and previously as part of the FAA Drone Advisory Committee efforts. She previously served in policy and deployment roles at the U.S. Department of Transportation, Amtrak, American Society of Civil Engineers, and Infrastructure Management Group.
Captain Mike Leo Captain Michael Leo has been a firefighter with the New York City Fire Department (FDNY) for 22 years, serving 13 years in the special operations command. While earning a B.A. in Fire and Emergency Management at John Jay College, Michael studied the expanding role of remotely piloted aircraft systems for use in emergency management. As the program administrator for FDNY Robotics, Michael’s responsibilities include all aspects of remotely operated robotics in addition to emerging technologies to support command tactics. Michael served as a member of the Federal Aviation Administration’s advanced aviation advisory committee, National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) small unmanned aircraft committee, ASTM International small aircraft committee.
Carl Blando I have 25 years of experience with the Boston Police Department. I was in patrol for 11 years and then 5 years with the Crime Scene Response Unit. I was promoted to Sergeant in 2016 and stationed in East Boston . I returned to CSRU in 2017 and then transitioned over to overseeing our officers in the field as a Sergeant Detective at the end of August, 2018. At the time we were the only unit in the Department to incorporate drones. We used them to assist with photography and video at our crime scenes. In 2019 I took over CSR’s drones and changed our operations from 107 to Public Aircraft Operations (PAO). I set up our Jurisdictional COA and started our relationship with the FAA. After receiving assistance with our process, I have assisted other departments whenever possible. In September of 2021 I was made the UAS manager for the Department and the Liaison to the FAA. I am a Sergeant Detective overseeing cases in South Boston. I also chair the Aviation component of The Department of Homeland Security’s, Boston Region, Securing the Cities initiative and am a member of the IACP’s Aviation Committee.
Caryn Moore Lund Caryn Moore Lund is Vice President of Public Policy, Regulatory and Government Affairs for Ferrovial Vertiports. Backed by Ferrovial’s 70 years of transportation infrastructure experience, Ferrovial Vertiports is developing a series of vertiport networks in the United States and Europe. Ferrovial Vertiports will be the safe, secure and efficient landing facilities that will enable the introduction and scaling of Advanced Air Mobility. In her role, Carlyn leads the Federal, State, local, and community partnerships to support the development of zero-emission aviation networks. Prior to joining Ferrovial in 2023, Mrs. Lund led North American partnerships for aircraft manufacturer Lilium, and served in leadership roles at the US Department of Transportation and on the US House of Representatives Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure. She is a graduate of UCLA.
Caspar Wang Caspar Wang is the Product Policy Manager for Emerging Aircraft, GA, and Rotorcraft in the Federal Aviation Administration’s (FAA) Aircraft Certification Service (AIR). He works within the Policy & Standards Division where he manages the policy for emerging products including Advanced Air Mobility (AAM), Uncrewed Aircraft Systems (UAS), and other new and novel technologies. This includes outreach to industry and harmonization with foreign authorities as well as responding to legislative mandates and safety recommendations. Prior to his current time at the FAA, Caspar worked in industry at AeroVironment working on a high-altitude solar-powered UAS supporting the integrated ground testing and initial stages of FAA certification. He led the airworthiness approval for the prototype flight test at NASA’s Armstrong Flight Research Center and oversaw the flight test campaign at Spaceport America including coordinating with the test range and managing both frequency and airspace approvals. Caspar first stint with the FAA began in the Boston Aircraft Certification Office as a flight controls and mechanical systems engineer working on certification for rotorcraft, transport category and small airplanes before transitioning to the Seattle Aircraft Certification Office where he was responsible for certification and operational safety for Boeing aircraft and various suppliers. Caspar holds a Bachelor of Science in Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering from Rutgers University and a Project Management Professional (PMP) certification. In his spare time, Caspar enjoys hiking, playing tennis, golf, and traveling with his family. He resides in Seattle with his wife, two sons, and dog.
Charles Werner Chief Charles L. Werner (Ret.) has served 50 years in public safety. Charles served 37 years with the Charlottesville VA Fire Dept., serving the last ten years as fire chief. Charles has served in numerous leadership roles at the local, state, national and international level. Presently serves as Founder/Director, DRONERESPONDERS. DRONERESPONDERS has become the largest and leading nonprofit program to advance public safety UAS with over 9800 members with participation from 89 countries and focused on drones for good, countering UAS, UTM and AAM. Charles serves as a public safety representative on the Virginia Advanced Air Mobility Alliance. In 2023, Charles joined the Virginia Department of Aviation as aviation technology advisor to work in the public safety areas of UAS, CUAS and AAM.
Chris Rocheleau Chris Rocheleau serves as NBAA's Chief Operating Officer, overseeing all activities relating to aircraft and flight department operations, as well as the administrative, financial and human resources functions. Prior to joining NBAA, Rocheleau served the FAA with distinction for over 20 years in multiple roles including acting associate administrator for aviation safety, chief of staff, assistant administrator for policy, international affairs and environment, executive director for international affairs and director of the office of emergency operations and investigations. Before joining the agency, he served as an officer and special agent with the United States Air Force, retiring from the USAF Reserve in 2010 as a lieutenant colonel. He was also among the first leaders of the Transportation Security Administration. Rocheleau holds a bachelor’s degree from Central Connecticut State University and a Master of Public Administration from City University of Seattle. He has completed the Executive National Security Program at Harvard’s Kennedy School of Government, USAF Air Command and Staff College, and the Corporate Aviation Program at the University of Virginia’s Darden School of Business.
Chris Sharp Christine (Chris) Sharp is the Manager, Aviation Workforce and Education Division at the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). In this role, she oversees the agency’s efforts to introduce students of all backgrounds to aerospace careers and provide them with pathways to ensure a diverse and robust aerospace workforce of the future. Previously, Chris served as the Staff Director in the FAA’s Office of Aviation Workforce Outreach, where she worked with senior executives and staff from across the agency to build strong collaborative networks of stakeholders focused on all aspects of aerospace workforce issues. During that time, Chris also co-led the development of the FAA’s Strategic “People Pillar” where she and her team identified high level initiatives to maximize the agency’s most important resources, its employees. Prior to focusing on aerospace workforce issues, Chris was the Manager for Social Collaboration and Engagement in the Office of Communications at the FAA, where she focused on engaging employees in finding innovative solutions to challenges facing the FAA and the aviation industry. Chris also spent 20 years in the FAA’s Office of International Affairs, where she held a variety of positions, including Desk Officer for Russia and the CIS and Manager for the Europe/Africa/MidEast Staff. She also led agency international efforts as the Program Manager for the Global Leadership Initiative where she focused on bringing together stakeholders from around the FAA to collaborate on the FAA’s international strategy and programs. Chris has a degree from Colgate University in International Relations and a Master’s Degree in Organizational Communication from George Mason University. In her spare time, she trains for Strongman/Strongwoman competitions, along with son/coach and teenage daughter.
Chris Theisen Chris Theisen is the Director of Research and Development for the Northern Plains UAS Test Site. He graduated from the University of North Dakota with a B.S. and M.S. in Atmospheric Sciences. He became a full-time research staff member at UND in 2007 working primarily in UAS focused on ground based detect and avoid systems. Mr. Theisen contributed to North Dakota’s efforts to become one of the now seven FAA designated UAS Test Sites. He works closely with clients interested in utilizing the test site to help shape research projects and ensures research addresses goals and objectives to safely integrate UAS into the National Airspace System. Mr. Theisen leads and participates in research efforts regarding Detect and Avoid, cooperative airspace, UAS support infrastructure, UAS Traffic Management, counter-UAS, advanced air mobility, and other topics leading to advancements in UAS.
Christopher Sadler Chris Sadler retired as the Deputy Chief/Deputy Director of the York County (VA) Department of Fire and Life Safety after a rewarding 35-year career. He is now the Director of the Public Safety Innovation Center for the Virginia Innovation Partnership Corporation. In this position, he works with technology developers and public safety entities in Virginia, the Department of Homeland Security, and other federal partners to develop and integrate the latest and most advantageous technology resources into the response capabilities of first responders. Chris is a graduate of the National Fire Academy Executive Fire Officer Program, a Nationally Registered Paramedic, a Hazmat Specialist, and former Safety Officer with FEMA Urban Search and Rescue - Virginia Task Force 2. He is very involved in the Public Safety use and integration of Unmanned Aircraft Systems to include representing the International Association of Fire Chief’s as a Principal on the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 2400 Standards Committee on sUAS Used for Public Safety Operations and the FAA UAS Detection and Mitigation Advisory Rulemaking Committee, the Fire Service representative to the Virginia Governors’ Secure Commonwealth Sub-panel for UAS, served on the ASTM/NFPA Joint Working Group for Public Safety UAS, past member of the ANSI UAS Standardization Collaborative, and the Advisory Board for DroneResponders. He has assisted many public safety and government agencies around the Country with the establishment of their UAS teams, COA applications, waivers and standard operating procedures development.
Christopher Senn Chris Senn is a policy and regulatory attorney in Holland & Knight's Washington, D.C., office. Mr. Senn's practice focuses on matters related to public policy development, legislative advocacy and regulatory compliance, with an emphasis on aviation and autonomous vehicles. He has extensive experience in aerospace and the unmanned aircraft systems field, and his comprehensive background in policy and regulatory affairs positions him as a trusted advisor for clients navigating complex and evolving legal and policy landscapes. Prior to joining Holland & Knight, Mr. Senn worked as an attorney in the U.S. House of Representatives, where he served as counsel on the Aviation Subcommittee of the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure. During his tenure on Capitol Hill, Mr. Senn played a pivotal role in shaping key legislation, notably as one of the principal drafters of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Reauthorization Act that was fully passed and signed into law in 2024. Leading up to his career in law and policy, Mr. Senn served as an assistant professor of aviation at Kansas State University, where he not only imparted knowledge to his students but also fostered practical skills by teaching students the intricacies of building and operating unmanned aircraft systems. Additionally, Mr. Senn's tenure at a major defense contractor further enriched his knowledge in the aerospace and defense sectors. Additionally, Mr. Senn served on active duty in the U.S. Marine Corps, where he piloted unmanned aircraft systems as an operator and instructor. His experience in the Marine Corps provided him with firsthand knowledge of the operational aspects of unmanned aircraft systems and their applications in various environments. In addition to his professional achievements, Mr. Senn holds an instrument-rated private pilot license, bringing a distinct perspective to his work grounded in hands-on aviation experience. This practical understanding enhances his ability to understand and address the diverse needs of clients in the aviation and autonomous vehicle industries, offering innovative solutions and steadfast advocacy.
Christopher Todd Christopher Todd is the Executive Director of the Airborne International Response Team (AIRT), the leading 501(c)3 non-profit organization advancing the use of Drones For Good® and AAM For Good?. AIRT is the official home of the DRONERESPONDERS program, supporting over 10,000 public safety and emergency services organization members representing more than 75 countries around the globe. An innovator, entrepreneur, and technologist who helps people in need through the deployment of mission-critical uncrewed systems and security solutions when time is of the essence, Chris has served as a strategic business adviser to Fortune 500 companies and major sporting leagues. He is the Founder and President of Airborne Response, overseeing the company's strategic partnerships and business operations and acquisition by Safe Pro Group, Inc., in 2022. Chris’s focus includes emergency management, disaster operations, public safety, homeland security, critical infrastructure protection, counter-UAS (C-UAS), and their combined intersection with uncrewed and autonomous systems across the air, ground, and maritime domains. He holds several certifications, including the International Association of Emergency Managers (IAEM) Certified Emergency Manager (CEM®), FAA-certified Part 107 Remote Pilot, and a U.S. Coast Guard License Master for vessels up to 100 gross tons. Mr. Todd is a command staff member of the Southeast Florida All-Hazards Incident Management Team (SE FL-AHIMT), a State of Florida IMT based at the Palm Beach County Fire Rescue Department. Mr. Todd is the President of the Florida Peninsula Chapter of the Association for Uncrewed Vehicle Systems International (AUVSI), overseeing its four satellite chapters in Jacksonville, Miami, the Space Coast, and Tampa. He also serves on the Advisory Board for Commercial UAV Expo. Chris holds an Executive Master of Professional Studies in Emergency and Disaster Management from Georgetown University in Washington, D.C., and a Bachelor of Arts in Journalism and Mass Communication from Drake University. He earned an Infrastructure Protection certificate from Texas A&M Engineering Extension Service. He has also completed graduate work on crisis communications and integrated marketing communications at Northwestern University’s Medill School.
Chuma Ogunwole Chuma Ogunwole is the Chief Operating Officer and a Co-Founder of Pyka Inc. He is responsible for providing strategic leadership for the company and management to establish long-term goals, initiatives, plans, and policies that advance Pyka’s mission of enabling the future of autonomous electric aviation. In addition to his corporate responsibilities, Chuma oversees Pyka's policy, finance, operations, and legal functions and leads some of Pyka's most challenging projects, including establishing major partnerships across the company’s agricultural and cargo product lines, securing precedent-setting FAA approvals for Pyka's aircraft, and engaging a wide range of industry and community stakeholders, partners, and customers.
Colleen D'Alessandro Ms. D'Alessandro was appointed as Regional Administrator in August 2019, serving as the senior agency official in the New England region providing cross-functional oversight and leadership for the FAA Administrator and coordination across FAA lines of business. Ms. D'Alessandro is the principal FAA representative for the six New England states - Massachusetts, Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, Rhode Island, and Connecticut. Ms. D'Alessandro joined the FAA in 2006 holding various leadership roles within the Aircraft Certification Service. In addition to her many years in the New England Region, she spent time at FAA headquarters in Washington, DC working as a Technical Special Assistant to the Associate Administrator for Aviation Safety. Prior to joining the FAA Ms. D'Alessandro spent 18 years at General Electric. Ms. D'Alessandro earned her Bachelor of Science degree in electrical engineering from Worcester Polytechnic Institute in Worcester, MA and a Master of Science degree in electrical engineering and control systems from Northeastern University in Boston, MA.
Conor French Conor leads legal, regulatory, and public affairs for Zipline, a company with a mission to transform the logistics system to serve all humans equally—no matter where they are. Zipline designs, manufactures and operates the world’s largest on-demand and instant logistics system, which includes fully-electric, autonomous drones. We started off delivering blood to hospitals and health facilities in Rwanda in 2016, and have since grown to operate in eight countries on three continents. We have flown over 80 million autonomous miles and completed more than 1.1 million deliveries to our customers to date. On average, someone receives a Zipline delivery every 70 seconds. Prior to Zipline, Conor lead US legal, compliance and government relations for Funding Circle, the leading global small business lending platform, on its journey from startup to IPO and before that served as CEO of Indego Africa, a social enterprise and lifestyle brand that supports artisan women through economic empowerment and education. Conor began his career as a corporate attorney at Latham & Watkins. Conor is a Presidential Leadership Scholar, a Truman National Security Fellow and a co-founder of several influential public policy organizations including the American Fintech Council, the Responsible Business Lending Coalition and the Alliance for Artisan Enterprise. He has been recognized as the Bay Area’s top private company lawyer, on the US General Counsel Powerlist, and most recently by the Financial Times and National Law Journal for innovation and crisis leadership in COVID-19 pandemic response. Conor graduated from NYU Law and Georgetown and is admitted to the CA, DC, MA and NY bars.
Craig Bloch-Hansen Craig is the Acting Program Manager of RPAS Engineering at Transport Canada. They have been working with the RPAS team since 2017 developing Canadian RPAS product regulations and policies, engaging with SDOs, and supporting the RPAS R&D program. Craig is also Canada's member to the ICAO RPAS Panel, and previous JARUS Vice-Chair (Americas), they continue to help translate Canada's R&D outputs into Consensus Standards and regulatory Means of Compliance.
Dan Ngo As Branch Manager, my team manages the life cycle of an exemption, from intake to transmitting the decision document to the petitioner. With UAS exemptions, I work closely with my colleagues in Flight Standards to expeditiously respond to petitions with a comprehensive response, while ensuring alignment on agency policy and no adverse safety impact. These require an agile and creative approach, such as establishing a streamlined process to address the thousands of requests for agricultural UAS operations. Previously, I held roles in the FAA's Legislative Counsel, Air Traffic Organization, and Office of Rulemaking, where I led the FAA's Section 333 Tiger Team to process and respond to thousands of UAS exemptions prior to the finalization of Part 107. I was also detailed to the House T&I Committee, Aviation Subcommittee, where I managed a diverse aviation portfolio with topics such as UAS integration, aircraft certification and oversight, workforce planning, and oversight of foreign repair stations.
Danda Rawat Dr. Danda B. Rawat is an Associate Dean for Research & Graduate Studies, a Full Professor in the Department of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science (EECS), Founding Director of the Howard University Data Science & Cybersecurity Center, Founding Director of DoD Center of Excellence in Artificial Intelligence & Machine Learning (CoE-AIML), Director of Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence (TruAI) Research Lab, Director of Cyber-security and Wireless Networking Innovations (CWiNs) Research Lab, Graduate Program Director of Howard CS Graduate Programs and Director of Graduate Cybersecurity Certificate Program at Howard University, Washington, DC, USA. Dr. Danda B. Rawat successfully led and established the Research Institute for Tactical Autonomy (RITA), the 15th University Affiliated Research Center (UARC) of the US Department of Defense as the PI/Founding Executive Director at Howard University, Washington, DC, USA. Dr. Rawat is engaged in research and teaching in the areas of cybersecurity, machine learning, big data analytics and wireless networking for emerging networked systems including cyber-physical systems (eHealth, energy, transportation), Internet-of-Things, multi domain operations, smart cities, software defined systems and vehicular networks. Dr. Rawat has secured over $110 million as a PI and over $18 million as a Co-PI in research funding from the US National Science Foundation (NSF), US Department of Homeland Security (DHS), US National Security Agency (NSA), US Department of Energy, National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA), National Institute of Health (NIH), US Department of Defense (DoD) and DoD Research Labs, Industry (Microsoft, Intel, VMware, PayPal, Mastercard, Meta, BAE, Raytheon etc.) and private Foundations. Dr. Rawat is the recipient of the US NSF CAREER Award, the US Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Scientific Leadership Award, Presidents’ Medal of Achievement Award (2023) at Howard University, Provost's Distinguished Service Award 2021, ?Researcher Exemplar Award 2019 and Graduate Faculty Exemplar Award 2019 from Howard University, the US Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) Summer Faculty Visiting Fellowship 2017, Outstanding Research Faculty Award (Award for Excellence in Scholarly Activity) at GSU in 2015, the Best Paper Awards (IEEE CCNC, IEEE ICII, IEEE DroneCom and BWCA) and Outstanding PhD Researcher Award in 2009. He has delivered over 100 Keynotes and invited speeches at international conferences and workshops. Dr. Rawat has published over 300 scientific/technical articles and 11 books. Dr. Rawat has successfully supervised and graduated 33 PhD students (out of which 27 under-represented PhD students including 12 female PhD students and others), successfully supervised 20+ MS students and mentored 4 postdocs, and has been supervising 25 PhD students and mentoring 4 postdocs. He has been serving as an Editor/Guest Editor for over 100 international journals including the Associate Editor of IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics & Security, Associate Editor of Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking, Associate Editor of IEEE Transactions of Service Computing, Editor of IEEE Internet of Things Journal, Editor of IEEE Communications Letters, Associate Editor of IEEE Transactions of Network Science and Engineering and Technical Editors of IEEE Network. He has been in Organizing Committees for several IEEE flagship conferences such as IEEE INFOCOM, IEEE CNS, IEEE ICC, IEEE GLOBECOM and so on. He served as a technical program committee (TPC) member for several international conferences including IEEE INFOCOM, IEEE GLOBECOM, IEEE CCNC, IEEE GreenCom, IEEE ICC, IEEE WCNC and IEEE VTC conferences. He served as a Vice Chair of the Executive Committee of the IEEE Savannah Section from 2013 to 2017. Dr. Rawat received the Ph.D. degree from Old Dominion University, Norfolk, Virginia. Dr. Rawat is a Senior Member of IEEE and a Lifetime Professional Senior Member of ACM, a Lifetime Member of Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), a lifetime member of SPIE, a member of ASEE and AAAS, and a Fellow of ??the Institution of Engineering and Technology (IET). He is an ACM Distinguished Speaker and an IEEE Distinguished Lecturer (FNTC and VTS).
David Zahn David Zahn is a NASA Ames Research Pilot and Principal Investigator for NASA's Advanced Air Mobility research located at the Mike Monroney Aeronautical Center, Oklahoma City, OK. David served as a UH-60 Blackhawk pilot in the U.S. Army and is an Air Medal recipient for MEDEVAC missions flown in Iraq with previous experience in airfield operations, terminal procedures (TERPS), accident investigation and international flight instruction. David’s background in low-level Air Assault, MEDEVAC and aerial firefighting operations combined with his TERPS experience helped NASA research revolutionary approach/departure procedures and airspace infrastructure models for AAM research, certification, and integration. David previously led the NASA-Joby partnership and is currently assigned as a project pilot flight testing experimental eVTOL capabilities with DARPA, NRC Canada, Artemis Human Landing System and AFWERX programs. In addition to his NASA duties, David is also developing curriculum for Oklahoma State University’s aerospace engineering program as well as partnering with the Cherokee Nation for research and STEM engagement. David Zahn graduated from Oral Roberts University in Tulsa, OK where he was also an NCAA Division I athlete.
David Oord David Oord is the Policy Director at Wisk. In his position, he leads the development and execution of strategies to shape legislation, regulation, and other public policies – focused on autonomy and its safe integration into the National Airspace System (NAS). An active pilot, David holds a commercial pilot certificate – with single- and multi-engine airplane land and instrument ratings. Oord obtained a Bachelor of Business Administration in Aviation Management from the University of North Dakota and a Master of Business Administration from Boise State University. Prior to Wisk, David headed regulatory affairs for Lilium, a German eVTOL manufacturer; led regulatory affairs for the Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association (AOPA) in Washington, D.C.; managed government affairs at the Experimental Aircraft Association (EAA) in Oshkosh, Wisconsin; and worked in airport management, operations, security, and firefighting at Westchester County airport (HPN), in Westchester, New York. David currently chairs the FAA’s Aviation Rulemaking Advisory Committee (ARAC), chairs the ARAC Airman Certification System working group (ACS WG), and leads several industry engagements.
Dawn Zoldi Dawn M.K. Zoldi (Colonel, USAF, Retired) is a licensed attorney with 28 years of combined active duty military and federal civil service to the U.S. Air Force and a Part 107 certified drone pilot. She is the CEO & Founder of P3 Tech Consulting and an internationally recognized expert on uncrewed aircraft system law and policy, featured in CNN, Forbes and Newsweek and on the Public Broadcasting Service television network (show host Emmy-nominated series). Her Dawn of Autonomy podcast (formerly the Dawn of Drones) was recognized as one of the “Top 7 Drone Podcasts 2024 (The Drone Girl) and the “Best Drone Podcast of the Year 2023” (The Droning Company). She has also been recognized by the Great Companies in the consulting category for the 6th International Women Entrepreneur 2024 Awards. Among other accolades, she has been listed as one of the Top Women in Aerospace & Aviation to Follow on LinkedIn for several years. Ms. Zoldi is the author of the book Unmanned Aircraft Systems Legal and Business Considerations: A Modern Primer for U.S. Drone Programs. For more information, follow her on social media and visit her website at: https://www.p3techconsulting.com.
Deb Sanning Debra Sanning is the Deputy Regional Administrator for FAA's Central Region in Kansas City, Missouri. Debra provides leadership in a variety of cross organizational matters and initiatives directly with aviation stakeholders, airport authorities, congressional officials and the general public. Ms. Sanning leads the Regional Administrator’s Outreach Team in Unmanned Aircraft Systems and serves on the Kansas State University, Masters in Aeronautics Advisory Board. In Ms. Sanning’s prior FAA experience, she has served as the Senior Advisor to the Regional Administrator’s Office, Special Programs Integrator, Facility Manager of the DOT Regional Headquarters, and began with the FAA as a Senior Realty Specialist (contractor) in the Logistics Division. Prior to her career with FAA, Debra specialized in public health nursing, later expanding to certifications in a variety of public safety initiatives.
Derek Hufty Derek Hufty is the manager of the General Aviation and Commercial Branch (AFS-750) within the FAA’s Emerging Technologies Division (AFS-700). AFS-750 is office of primary responsibility for Part 107, UAS policy and regulations under Part 61, 91, 133, and 137. 750 is also responsible for Part 107 waiver requests, petitions for Part 61, 91, 133 and 137 UAS exemptions, policy related to 44809 Recreational Flyers, NEPA compliance for UAS, and 363 authorizations. Prior to joining the FAA, Mr. Hufty served 4 years in the United States Army as a tactical unmanned aerial vehicle operator. His background in 20 years of UAS work include weight and balance, human factors, hardware/software integration, safety analysis, data analysis, project management, and flight tests. Mr. Hufty holds private pilot (rotorcraft–helicopter) and remote pilot certifications
Derek Morgan Derek Morgan is a senior scientist at the USDOT Highly Automated Systems Safety Center of Excellence, where he focuses on advanced aviation, safety system modernization, and modal integration. He is currently on detail from the Federal Aviation Administration's Aircraft Certification Service, where he leads the FAA Innovate28 Certification Innovation Team and serves as a member of the Department of Transportation's Advanced Air Mobility Interagency Work Group. With a career spanning 27 years as an aerospace professional, Derek has held multiple technical and leadership roles. His work has led to innovative solutions to challenging problems, enhanced partnerships, and the successful integration of policy systems for which he earned several notable awards and recognitions. Derek’s fascination with space flight and aviation began in his childhood, propelling him into a career as a flight test engineer for Cessna Aircraft Company while earning a degree in aerospace engineering from Wichita State University. His tenure at the FAA included logging hundreds of test hours in various aircraft before transitioning to program management where he advised two pivotal Army and Air Force aircraft acquisition programs. A graduate of the Federal Executive Institute, he has been invited to numerous senior leadership special assignments across conventional and uncrewed aircraft divisions. Most recently, he held roles as deputy executive director and executive advisor for the Aircraft Certification Service. Derek is also dedicated to his community where he has served as an advisor to his alma mater and was a founding officer, board president, and mentor for a non-profit youth mentoring organization. He remains active supporting efforts aimed at improving the well-being of youth and professionals in the Wichita community.
Diana Robinson Diana Robinson is a Project Manager with the FAA in the Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) Integration Office. Her focus is on outreach and engagement and she leads the UAS-Collegiate Training Initiative. Prior to the FAA, Diana worked as the Energy and Sustainability Manager for a local government in Florida and implemented a UAS program during her time there. She has a B.S. in Alternative and Renewable Energy Management, an MBA, and is a Part 107 certified remote pilot. Diana’s other experience includes a full career at Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) where she was an Environmental, Safety and Health Compliance trainer during her last few years with ORNL.
Dipasis Bhadra Dipasis is a senior quantitative economist at the Office of Aviation Policy and Plans (APO). In that capacity, Dipasis is an active participant in the Agency's small unmanned aerial systems (sUAS) and advanced air mobility (AAM) Integration activities in the NAS. Dipasis is an active member of monthly UAS Roundtable meetings, prepares and participates in applied research activities, guides and sponsors ASSURE research and actively participates in annual UAS/AAM Integration Research Plans. Along with other members from APO, Dipasis publishes annual forecasts of sUAS and AAM activities in the US. In the recent past, Dipasis researched, designed and implemented FAA's Modernized Terminal Area Forecast (TAF-M) for commercial service airports incorporating both domestic and international passenger and cargo movements using detailed market, segment, route and aircraft flows.
Dirk Giles Dirk Giles has served as a wildland firefighter, land manager, and an aviation management specialist for twenty-five years with the Department of Interior and now the US Forest Service. Dirks’ career in operations started on a Hotshot crew in Nevada and then Alaska with the Midnight Sun and Chena Hotshots. He moved into management at the Alaska Fire Service as Chief of the Fire Specialist Section and then Assistant Fire Management Officer for the Military Zone where he was introduced to unmanned technologies. Dirk was appointed as the National UAS Program Manager in 2018 and was tasked with the responsibility of building the Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) program for the US Forest Service. The US Forest Service has made significant UAS programmatic investments internally and externally. Additionally, a substantial amount of time has been dedicated to formalizing operational standards, UAS airworthiness requirements leveraging ASTM standards, as well as publishing Remote Pilot Certification Standards for the agency that clearly identify minimum requirements to industry, our partners, and our cooperators. Dirk, his staff, and the US Forest Service are passionate about leveraging UAS and emerging technologies through standardized processes to ensure mission safety through effective coordination, communication, and deconfliction. These standardized systems fundamentally introduce a new conversation within risk management and ultimately risk acceptance for the normalized hazardous activities that employees face on a routine basis.
DJ Smith DJ Smith has worked in the area of Covert Technical/Tactical Surveillance for over 30 years and currently serves as a Senior Technical Surveillance Agent for the Virginia State Police. A few areas of specialty are Title III Intercepts, GPS Installs, Video-Audio Clarification, Technical Surveillance Counter Measures (TSCM), Mesh-Node Deployments, Surreptitious Lock Bypass & Safe Penetration including GSA locks & containers, Technical Response to Hostage/Barricade Situations, Cellular Tracking and Geo-locating (DF), Covert Surreptitious Audio/Video deployments, and sUAS & Counter UAS deployment operations. In the area of sUAS and Counter UAS Operations: o He is the Unmanned Aerial Systems & Counter UAS Program Coordinator for the Virginia State Police. o Currently serves on the Federal Aviation Administration Counter UAS aviation rule-making committee. o Currently serves on the DHS NUSTL Blue UAS assessment for Public Safety. o 2024 Keynote Presenter on CUAS for SLTT at the World Police Summitt in Dubai. o Deputy Director/ CUAS SME for Droneresponders Public Safety UAS Alliance. o Virginia Safe and Secure Commonwealth Sub-Panel dealing with UAS/Counter UAS implementation and legislation. o (SME) on various technologies for the DHS S&T, Law Enforcement Technology Board (SPAWARS Atlantic & Saver program). o VSP stakeholder on the Mid-Atlantic UAS Partnership group (Google Wing) at Virginia Tech. o Served on DHS S&T First Responder Robotic Operational System Test (FFROST) assessment & evaluations of sUAS for Public Safety. o Annual Presenter or Moderator at the Security Summit in Norway, Global Counter UAS Summit in Washington DC, AUVSI Xponential, Commercial UAV Expo, Homeland Security Conference, Global Military and Defense CUAS Conference, and the National Congress on Counter UAS Technology. o Serves as a technical advisor to several legislative working groups in Washington. o He is also a licensed part 107 pilot and has been flying sUAS for over 13 years.
D'Lorah Small Ms. D’Lorah Small is currently serving as Office of Airports Safety and Standards (AAS), Airports Design and Construction Branch Manager (AAS-110) within the Airports Engineering Division (AAS-100). She was formerly an APP-540 Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL) Branch Management and Program Analyst, prior Office of Airports (ARP), Western Pacific Region (AWP) Airports Planning and Programming Branch (AWP-610) Management and Financial Analyst/Regional BIL Lead. D’Lorah has served in various program management functions responsible for financial, administrative, and compliance aspects of federally funded grants including AIP and BIL eligibility, application, competition, programming, obligation, award, execution, and compliance. She also served for over two years within the AWP-620 Safety and Standards Branch as the AWP Regional Engineer and previously as a Civil Engineer and Project Manager for the ARP Chicago Airports District Office in the Great Lakes Region, in support of the Airport Improvement Program (AIP). She is a civil engineering graduate of Old Dominion University with an MBA in Finance and Entrepreneurial Leadership from Regent University, and PhD candidate, and brings over 20 years of civil engineering, design, construction, quality assurance and compliance, contract administration, project and program management, and leadership experience in various federal, state, and private sectors. She enjoys international travel, nautical activities and community/charitable works.
Don Berchoff Don Berchoff is the co-founder and CEO of TruWeather Solutions with 40 years in the aviation, logistics and weather industry solving impactful weather problems for the government and businesses. Don has a B.S degree in Meteorology and M.S degree in National Military Strategy from National Defense University. Don built and led a regional weather center that supported worldwide tanker and airlift weather operations and the provision of weather warnings and forecasts at 138 Army and Air Force installations. He was the base commander at Manas AB, Kyrgyzstan, responsible for all ground operations at the Air Force’s main staging base for Afghan operations. Don was a Senior Executive Service member at the National Weather Service where he led the complex transition of $500M in science and technology projects overseeing a multi-disciplinary team of scientists, data scientists, and software engineers. At TruWeather, he brought V360 to market, an advanced micro-weather data and analytics platform producing custom weather insights to serve the emerging autonomous drone industry. Don led the development of a new aviation weather standard under ASTM F38 with the FAA, opening the door for Internet-of-Thing weather reports to support aviation operations for Part 135 and 91 operations. Don started TruWeather in 2015 to unlock the power of science and technology in the Nation's labs and universities and accelerate new capabilities into commercial and defense operations to better serve businesses and US National Security.
Dr. La'Quata Sumter Dr. La’Quata Sumter is a technology enthusiast and educator passionate about teaching about technology, drones, coding, web development, and engineering. Hailing from the small town of Red Top, SC, and now residing in Southwest Georgia, as a STEM/STEAM philanthropist, she is dedicated to encouraging careers and education in these fields for the next generation. With over 15 years of experience in teaching technology, La’Quata holds a PhD in Learning Technologies & is an Engineering Professor. She is the CEO and Founder of Focusing On Me, Inc., a 501(c)(3) organization with a program that focuses on supporting organizations in their goals for STEM excellence. The STEAM thru Drones is program concentrates on designing and delivering educational programs that cater to various audiences, from students to professionals. The program covers drone operation, safety, regulations, and aerial technology advancements, with the main focus of teaching students about Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, and Mathematics using drone technology. Dr. Sumter has obtained numerous technical certifications and obtained Part 107 as well. She is the author of three children’s books, one focusing on her as a computer engineer and the other being an introduction to drone technology. Her Dronology book can supplement her online Introduction to Drone Technology course. Dr. Sumter has conducted drone and engineering summer camps and shows all over the USA. Partnering with schools such as Albany State University and organizations such as the Boys and Girls Club and GearUP Doughtery. Favorite Quote: Technology can become the “wings” that will allow the educational world to fly farther and faster than ever before—if we allow it. – Jenny Arledge
Earl Lawrence Earl Lawrence is an Aviation Policy Lead for Advanced Projects at Joby. He undertook this role when Joby acquired Xwing where he was the Chief Compliance and Quality Officer where he led all aspects of Xwing’s certification efforts. Prior to Xwing, Lawrence spent nearly 12 years at the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) where he held several leadership positions. Known primarily for his role as the FAA’s Executive Director of Aircraft Certification, Lawrence oversaw an organization of over 1,400 employees working across FAA Headquarters, 35 U.S. field offices, and 2 international offices. Before his work in aircraft certification, Lawrence was the Executive Director of the UAS Integration Office, responsible for the facilitation of all regulations, policies and procedures required to support the safe integration of uncrewed aircraft systems (UAS) into the National Airspace System. Lawrence played a fundamental role in establishing, leading, and operationalizing the new UAS organization. As the FAA’s Small Airplane Directorate Manager, Lawrence managed airworthiness standards, continued operational safety, policy and guidance for small aircraft, gliders, light sport aircraft, airships, and balloons. This work included the rewriting of Part 23 and the acceptance of industry consensus standards for small aircraft certification. Before joining the FAA, Lawrence was the Vice President of Industry and Regulatory Affairs for the Experimental Aircraft Association (EAA) in Oshkosh, Wisconsin. Lawrence got his start in aviation working for Rockwell Rocketdyne as a rocket engine mechanic first, then later, as a manufacturing engineer on the International Space Station. Lawrence is a graduate of Northrop University, with a B.S. in Aerospace Engineering Technology. A pilot since 1987, Lawrence holds a commercial multi-engine pilot certificate as well as an airframe and powerplant mechanic certificate with an Inspection Authorization. He currently owns and flies a Piper Twin Comanche.
Eric Bergesen Eric J Bergesen is the Director of Operations for UPS Flight Forward Inc (UPSFF). Eric led the operations team through the Part 135 Certification effort, resulting in the FAA awarding UPSFF with the first Standard Part 135 Air Carrier Operating Certificate for Unmanned Aircraft Operations. Eric has over 30 years of airline experience in roles ranging from line pilot to Director of Operations and COO. He is focused on a Safe Integration of UAS and AAM into our National Airspace System. Eric is also the first UPSFF pilot to fly the BETA Alia aircraft, during a Qualitative Evaluation. UPSFF has been performing sUAS commercial deliveries under Part 135 since September 2019.
eric schwartz Eric Schwartz is the senior manager of Smart Grid & Innovation for Florida Power & Light Company’s (FPL) Power Delivery organization. He has worked at the company for thirteen years. He is responsible for forecasting, piloting and implementing cutting-edge technology in the uncrewed and artificial intelligence spaces, while also leading the company’s data science, machine learning and LiDAR collection divisions. He has served in other roles at the company, including quality deployment lead, Smart Grid & Innovation manager, reliability program manager and delivery assurance lead. Prior to joining FPL, Mr. Schwartz was an engineer for Emergency One, a leading fire apparatus manufacturer, where he designed aircraft rescue fire-fighting trucks; and K-Rain, where he designed irrigation sprinklers. Mr. Schwartz holds seventeen work patents and six personal patents. Mr. Schwartz earned a bachelor’s degree from the University of Central Florida, an MBA from Florida Atlantic University and is a certified Six Sigma Master Black Belt. He is a member of the Association for Uncrewed Vehicle Systems International (AUVSI), and the Vice President of the Florida AUVSI chapter. He sits on the Board of Directors for the Commerical Drone Alliance.
Erick Corona Erick Corona is the Director of ConOps & Airspace at Wisk Aero LLC., a company focused on developing a remotely supervised, highly automated electric vertical-take-off and landing (eVTOL) aircraft. Working at the intersection of aeronautics, automation, telecommunications, and battery technology, the company aims to deliver a safe, sustainable, affordable, and beyond-cool novel urban transportation solution. Before Wisk, as Director of Products at C3.ai, Erick led the development of now-deployed AI-capable Predictive Maintenance solutions within DoD. Prior assignments include management, flight test, and engineering design positions at Boeing and GE Aircraft Engines. Erick also led the adoption of data-driven infrastructure asset management efforts at Pacific Gas & Electric. Erick holds a B.S. in Mechanical Electrical Engineering from the ITESM (Mexico) and an M.S. in Aeronautical Engineering from the University of Washington. He is also a graduate of the MIT Leaders for Global Operations (LGO) Program, where he earned an S.M. in Engineering Systems and an MBA from the Sloan School of Business.
Garrett Wright Garrett Wright serves as the Director for the Trade Modernization Division, within CBP’s Office of Trade. Mr. Wright has over 14 years’ experience with CBP. He is currently responsible for leading efforts to modernize the Agency’s trade legislative framework, executing the Global Business Identifier Test to facilitate supply chain traceability, strengthening CBP’s response to supply chain disruptions impacting the trade environment, and establishing requirements for the cross-border movement of Unmanned Aircraft Systems. Prior to assuming his current role, Mr. Wright led numerous high-profile, broad impact initiatives within CBP’s Office of Trade, Office of Field Operations, and Enterprise Services. Notably, Mr. Wright stood up and matured CBP’s public-private partnership capabilities to address unfunded Land Port of Entry infrastructure needs and support intellectual property right enforcement efforts. Mr. Wright also developed and executed CBP’s Section 321 Data Pilot as well as spearheaded other related initiatives to modernize the Agency’s e-commerce enforcement and facilitation posture.
George Rey R. George Rey Sr. President LCDR USN (Ret) Lieutenant Commander Rey retired from the U.S. Navy after completing 33 years of active duty in the United States Navy’s Submarine Service. During that period he served on 5 submarines, 3 major staffs, and two tours in the Pentagon. He started COTS Technology, a consulting company, supporting industry, academic, and government entities in operational and research endeavors with a focus on Robotic systems. Commander Rey was a key member that development and implemented Tulane University’s Long-term Estuary Assessment Group (LEAG) developing biosensors for Autonomous Underwater Vehicles. Commander Rey’s most recent activities he established the Unmanned Aircraft System (UAS) program at Nicholls State University’s Geomatics’ program. This program was the first in Louisiana to receive an FAA approved Certificate Of waiver Authorization (COA) to fly in the National Air Space (NAS) in 2005. Commander Rey established the Louisiana Pelican Chapter of the Association of Unmanned Vehicle Systems International (AUVSI) and Leads this statewide organization as the founding president. Commander Rey Continues to work with companies to develop their UAS programs that meet the FAA’s Part 107 requirements. He is The Vice Chair of Louisiana’s Drone Advisory Committee (DAC). He established a UAS SIG (Special Interest Group), aviation Sector Chief, and Serves as the President of InfraGard Louisiana Member's Alliance.
Gerald Pilj Gerald Pilj has a Masters in Physics from Kansas State University and has worked in aviation as an avionics technician, Software Engineer, Systems Safety Engineer and taught at the FAA academy for 10 years. Since joining Air Traffic he has been a facilitator and case manager for Safety Risk Management panels and is currently serving as a subject matter expert for software development assurance and operational safety analysis for drone operations. He is also a former FAA Software DER and Transport Canada Software DAD. Outside aviation he is a grandfather, author, ordained minister, amateur farmer and has been seen wearing a red suit in the December time frame.
Grady Stone Grady Stone is the Regional Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration's (FAA) Northwest Mountain Region. In this capacity, he serves as the principal executive representative of the FAA Administrator in the region. He provides corporate leadership in cross?organizational matters and represents the FAA before industry, the public and governmental organizations. The Northwest Mountain Region encompasses the states of Colorado, Idaho, Montana, Oregon, Utah, Washington, and Wyoming. Immediately prior to his current role, he served as the Deputy Regional Administrator of the Northwest Mountain Region. Prior to that, Grady served at the American Embassy?Dakar as the FAA’s Senior Representative in Africa. Grady was responsible for advancing FAA’s civil aviation goals in Africa by promoting safety and efficiency through harmonization of global standards and ensuring cooperation through international alliances. Grady’s primary role was to liaise with the leadership of the International Civil Aviation Organization’s (ICAO) regional offices in Dakar and Nairobi, African Civil Aviation Commission (AFCAC), International Air Transport Association (IATA), Airports Council International (ACI), Sub?Saharan Regional Safety Oversight Organizations (RSOO), and the Directors General of 49 Civil Aviation Authorities throughout Sub?Saharan Africa. Grady began his career in government 20 years ago in the Office of the Secretary of Transportation’s Competition Policy Division where he focused on global airline anti?trust immunity cases and domestic and international airport slot policies and regulations. Prior to moving to Dakar, Grady served in the FAA’s Office of Airports as the compliance specialist for the Southern Region. Prior to entering government service, Grady worked for 18 years in the private sector for two major U.S. airlines and two European aircraft manufacturers where he directed network and strategic planning initiatives. Grady is a licensed commercial pilot (SEL). Grady holds a Bachelor of Science in Industrial Management from Georgia Institute of Technology and a Master of Science in Marketing from Georgia State University. FAA Biography
Heath McLemore Heath McLemore is the UAS Flight Operations Manager for Florida Power & Light’s AIR (Aerial Intelligent Response) program. In this role, he is responsible for the safety, training, and oversight of daily flight operations within the company’s footprint as well as regulatory oversight for part 107 operations. The FP&L AIR team currently conducts up to 300 UAS flights each day to maintain inspections of over 75,00 miles of power lines within the state of Florida. Heath has extensive knowledge in Waivers, COA’s, and SGI submissions to the FAA supporting blue sky and emergency UAS operations. Prior to his current role, Mr. McLemore has held various roles throughout different business units over his 13 years within the company including Power Generation Division where he managed Wind and Solar operations across the NextEra energy renewable portfolio as well as data and applications supporting the Renewable Operations Control Center. Mr. McLemore is a graduate of Mississippi State University. He is also a member of the board for the Miami chapter of AUVIS (Association for Unmanned Vehicle Systems International) and is an advocate of promoting STEM education around unmanned technologies to local schools.
James Grimsley James Grimsley serves as the Executive Director for Advanced Technology Initiatives with the Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma and also serves as an Oklahoma Transportation Commissioner with oversight and governance responsibilities for the Oklahoma Department of Transportation. Mr. Grimsley currently serves on the Board of Directors for the Commercial Drone Alliance (CDA) as well as a variety of other boards and advisory groups. As part of Mr. Grimsley’s Choctaw Nation duties, he currently manages the FAA BEYOND Program (the Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma is the only tribal lead participant in the BEYOND program), and previously managed the FAA Integration Pilot Program (IPP) for the Choctaw Nation. In October 2022 U.S. Secretary of Transportation Pete Buttigieg appointed Mr. Grimsley to the FAA’s Advanced Aviation Advisory Council (AAAC). Mr. Grimsley has also served on multiple FAA Aviation Rulemaking Committees (ARCs) including the Beyond Visual Line of Sight ARC. Mr. Grimsley’s undergraduate and graduate degrees are in aerospace and mechanical engineering, and Mr. Grimsley has more than 32 years of professional experience in the aviation and defense industries including corporate executive experience as well as being an Associate Vice President for Research at the University of Oklahoma. Most of Mr. Grimsley’s career has involved uncrewed aerial systems (UAS). Mr. Grimsley has published papers in both peer-reviewed engineering journals and law journals on issues related to drones and emerging aviation. Mr. Grimsley has also testified before Congress on aerospace innovation topics and has appeared multiple times before the Oklahoma legislature to discuss aerospace and aviation policy issues. Mr Grimsley was a speaker at the White House Advanced Air Mobility (AAM) Summit in August 2022. Mr. Grimsley has been a regular speaker at industry conferences and a commentator in the press since 2007 for drone and emerging aviation topics.
Jarrett Larrow Jarrett Larrow is a member of the Federal Aviation Administration’s (FAA) Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) Integration Office, Safety and Integration Division, Implementation Branch. He is leading FAA efforts for UAS Beyond Visual Line of Sight (BVLOS) rulemaking. Additionally, he supports FAA developments in UAS Traffic Management (UTM), having worked the project since initial concept development. Before joining the UAS Integration Office, Jarrett led similar efforts in Flight Standards focusing on Communication, Navigation, and Surveillance capabilities. Jarrett also has spent roughly a decade in avionics standards and policy development within FAA’s Aircraft Certification Service where he led Trajectory Based Operations (TBO) initiatives. Prior to his federal service, he worked for Sikorsky Aircraft on the S-92 medium-lift helicopter.
Jay Carrigan Jay Carrigan joined TSA in December 2013 and now serves as the TSA Senior Liaison Officer to the US Department of Transportation. Prior to this role, she served with TSA’s intelligence office as Director of the Transportation Analysis Division—responsible for warning and analysis of threats to transportation, Director of the Field Intelligence Division—responsible for direct intelligence support to TSA components and industry stakeholders in the field, and as Director of the Vetting Analysis Division—responsible for vetting of people with sensitive access to the transportation sector and analysis of known or suspected terrorists. She established TSA’s counterintelligence program and previously served as co-chair of TSA’s Insider Threat Advisory Group. Jay began her career in May 2000 as a US Navy Surface Warfare Officer. She was assigned as the First Lieutenant onboard USS LEYTE GULF (CG 55) out of Naval Operating Base, Norfolk. Following the 9/11 terrorist attacks, she deployed to the Arabian Gulf in support of Operations Enduring Freedom and Southern Watch. She transferred to Naval Intelligence and was assigned to the Naval Criminal Investigative Service in April 2003, where she provided threat warning and force protection of Department of the Navy assets from terrorist, criminal, foreign intelligence, and cyber threats. In 2011, Jay was selected as a Senior Intelligence Officer to synchronize threat analysis across the naval intelligence enterprise, while also overseeing intelligence staff at NCIS field offices providing intelligence support to operations and investigations worldwide. Jay graduated with distinction from Cornell University with a Bachelor of Arts in Asian Studies and International Relations and completed her Master of Public Policy Management at Georgetown University. She has been awarded the Navy and Marine Corps Commendation and Achievement Medals, the Search and Rescue Excellence Award, and the DHS Intelligence Leadership Award.
Jean Wolfers-Lawrence Jean manages the Environmental Branch within FAA’s Office of Airports (ARP), Airport Planning and Programming Division. The Environmental Branch is responsible for reviewing environmental policy and providing advice and assistance to ARP’s Environmental Specialists on interpreting and implementing the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and special purpose laws. Other key responsibilities include providing training to FAA ARP staff on environmental initiatives, regulations, policies and guidance, providing input and advice on technical matters, contributing to many Environmental Impact Statements and Environmental Assessments, managing the Airport Noise Compatibility Program, the Voluntary Airport Low Emissions program, and the Zero Emissions Vehicles program and implementing current Federal initiatives. Additionally, the Environmental Branch conducts research on topics such as airport sustainability and resiliency and environmental impacts of airport operations to inform the ongoing development of policies and guidance.
Jeannie Stewart-Smith Jeannie Stewart-Smith has been working on federal transportation policy for more than 14 years and has found herself on small fishing boats in Eastern Canada, hiking trails with colleagues in Yellowknife, and talking to scientists about the impacts of shipping noise on endangered whales. In 2017, when Transport Canada created a team to respond to the growing use of drones, Jeannie jumped on board (or behind the control station…) and is the Manager and Senior Policy Advisor for Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems Policy, Regulations and Outreach. In 2023, Jeannie was asked to take on the challenge of developing Transport Canada’s strategic approach to Advanced Air Mobility, including serving as the Canadian member on the International Civil Aviation Organization’s Advanced Air Mobility Study Group. Jeannie leads Canada’s engagement with the US on RPAS and AAM, including co-chairing the Canada-US UAS/RPAS Cross-Border Working Group. Jeannie completed a Master’s in Public Policy and Public Administration at Concordia University in Montréal, Québec, where she grew up.
Jeff Causey Jeff is the founder and CEO of Causey Aviation Unmanned, one of the first five certificated Part 135 UAS Air Carriers in the U.S. and a participant in the FAA BEYOND Program. Jeff is an Airline Transport Pilot and has served as Chief Operating Officer, Director of Operations and Director of Safety for Causey Aviation Service, a traditional Part 135 Air Carrier and Part 145 Repair Station. Jeff has engineering degrees from Duke University and Carnegie Mellon University and serves on the board of Children’s Flight of Hope.
Jeff Luckett Jeff Luckett is President and one of the founding members of UPS Flight Forward Inc., a whole owned UPS subsidiary incorporated on June 14, 2019, established to work with regulators and OEMs to move the UAS/AAM industry forward. On September 27, 2019, UPSFF became the first company to receive a Standard Part 135 Air Carrier Certificate approved by the FAA for UAS operations and has continued to be an industry leader accomplishing many of the industry firsts occurring in the US including the first Part 135 UAS revenue delivery in 2019 and the first Part 135 UAS revenue BVLOS delivery in 2023. Jeff’s responsibilities also include oversight of the UPS Airline Technology Support Group. Prior to his current leadership roles, Jeff’s 34+ year career at UPS has covered several areas including UPS Airline Flight Operations, Engineering, Network Planning, Long Range Planning, and Aircraft Acquisitions. Jeff has also held supporting roles with the UPS Airline Emergency Response Team, DOD CRAF Program and Humanitarian Air Relief Charters. Jeff graduated from the University of Louisville and has an MBA in Aviation from Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University. He also served two tours of duty in the US Navy during the first Gulf War.
Jeff Singer Jeff’s deep-rooted expertise in the UAS industry, coupled with his aviation background and technical skills, has enabled him to serve the Federal Government during emergency incidents, utilizing a wide range of UAS. His extensive experience includes flying multiple missions, such as Search and Rescue, reconnaissance for illicit drug grows, incident investigations (Rapid Lesson Sharing), and aerial ignition operations, showcasing his unparalleled proficiency in the field. Jeff is the State of Colorado Department of Public Safety as the UAS Project Manager. The position requires him to train other UAS pilots, engage in policy-making, and test new unmanned robotics equipment for the betterment of all first responders.
Jeffrey Vincent Jeffrey Vincent serves as the Executive Director of the Federal Aviation Administration’s Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) Integration Office, which is the FAA’s principal organization responsible for facilitating the FAA’s safe integration of drones into the National Airspace System (NAS). He collaborates with internal and external stakeholders to influence today’s drone operational deployment for the safe evolution of an integrated airspace, in alignment with the Agency’s overarching mission.? As a transformational leader, Jeffrey envisions a harmonized NAS where emerging entrants enhance the societal and economic benefits that enrich the quality of life for the communities we serve.? Jeffrey previously served in executive roles in the FAA’s Air Traffic Organization (ATO), including as the Vice President for Air Traffic Services (AJT), where he collaborated across the organization to safely, efficiently, and securely lead the safest and most complex air traffic control system in the world.? He was responsible for leading over 18,000 personnel that deployed safe and efficient air navigation services for more than 42,000 flights and 2.5 million airline passengers across more than 29 million square miles of airspace. Jeffrey successfully led AJT during significant events and interruptions, ensuring effective continuity of air traffic operations.? Before leading AJT, he served as Vice President for Safety and Technical Training, Director of Air Traffic Operations, Eastern Service Area, and Certified Professional Controller at the Boston Logan and Charlotte Douglas International Airports.? Throughout his career, Jeffrey built and maintained strong coalitions, partnerships, and an inclusive workplace to achieve results and contributions that support the FAA mission. Over 40 years ago, Jeffrey started his career in aviation as an Air Traffic Controller in the United States Army, which set the trajectory of his career. Since joining the FAA in 1986, he held various safety, technical, and leadership roles across the ATO, driving the mission to ensure a safe and efficient NAS through the effective management of air navigation services and infrastructure. He joined the FAA’s UAS Integration office in 2023, and in just over a year, his leadership and influence have contributed to the advancement of enabling autonomous operations in a safe and scalable manner.
Jenn Player Jenn Player is Vice President of Global Aviation Regulatory Affairs at Skydio. Jenn collaborates with customers, regulators, and standards development organizations to advance autonomy and beyond visual line of sight drone operations. Jenn participates in international technical standards development and advisory working groups on detect and avoid technology, remote ID, airworthiness, and autonomy. She served as an industry working group lead on the FAA’s UAS BVLOS Aviation Rulemaking Committee and also participated in the FAA UAS Detection and Mitigation Rulemaking Committee. Jenn has over 20 years of aviation industry experience with technical roles at Naval Air Systems Command, Cessna, and NASA Langley. She has more than 10 years of experience in uncrewed aircraft systems research, testing, and operations. Her early work to integrate drones into the National Airspace System through the FAA’s Pathfinder Program with BNSF Railway led to the first long-range BVLOS civil flight in the continental United States. Prior to joining Skydio, Jenn founded Avineer LLC, a consulting firm helping manufacturers in the drone delivery space navigate the type certification process and helping enterprises gain approvals for BVLOS and other complex operations. Jenn received a Bachelor of Science degree in Aerospace Engineering from The Pennsylvania State University. She holds an FAA Remote Pilot certificate and a Private Pilot certificate with ratings in single-engine airplanes and gliders.
Jeremy Casey Jeremy Casey has worked with the FAA’s Aircraft Rescue and Fire Fighting (ARFF) Research Program for 9 years. Jeremy is currently a General Engineer within the FAA’s Airport Technology Research and Development Branch with a focus on ARFF research. Previously, Jeremy was the Lead Mechanical Engineer under Battelle for the FAA’s ARFF Research Program. Jeremy has a Bachelors of Science in Mechanical Engineering from Drexel University.
Jessica Brightman Jessica Brightman is the Manager of the Implementation Branch in the Safety and Integration Division of the FAA’s Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) Integration Office. The Implementation Branch leads strategic and tactical implementation of innovation and integration objectives. This branch is working on the strategic implementation planning for UAS Traffic Management System (UTM), Beyond Visual Line of Sight (BVLOS) rulemaking, and implementation efforts associated with remote identification (RID). Jessica joined the FAA in 2018 and served as an Acting Manager and Lead Communications Specialist in the Executive Office of the UAS Integration Office prior to her current role. Previously, Jessica worked at the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency as the Director of Web Communications, the Internal Revenue Service, and in private industry. Jessica is a former U.S. Air Force Officer and Pilot where she flew C-5 Galaxy aircraft. In addition, she is a FAA Certified Airline Transport Pilot and Flight Engineer and flew for American Airlines throughout North America, the Caribbean, Central America, and Europe. Jessica earned a Bachelor of Science in mathematics from Fitchburg State College in 1994 and a Master of Business Administration from the University of San Francisco in 2008.
Jessica Sypniewski As the Deputy Assistant Administrator for NextGen, Jessica Sypniewski [sip-nyef-ski] provides executive leadership for the modernization of the National Airspace System. Her organization performs enterprise-level strategic planning for FAA programs and the integration of new entrants into the operation. ANG develops the technical architecture of the National Airspace System and performs scientific research and development activities on airspace operations, advanced aviation materials and propulsion, data integration and many more areas of innovation, all in partnership with stakeholders and international organizations. This work is conducted at FAA headquarters, at test sites around the country, and at the FAA’s William J. Hughes Technical Center, the country’s premier aviation research facility. Ms. Sypniewski served as the FAA’s Chief of Staff in the Office of the Administrator, where she provided leadership and coordination on the agency’s strategic, policy, operational and technical priorities. She also served as Chief of Staff for the FAA’s Air Traffic Organization (ATO), with similar responsibilities for the agency’s largest line of business. Ms. Sypniewski started her FAA career in the Office of NextGen focused on providing public updates on the progress and operational impact at the start of the NextGen program, and she is happy to be back to plan the next era in aviation.
Jim Price Jim has been with the FAA for almost 25 years and is currently an Aircraft Rescue Firefighting Specialist with the Office of Airports in FAA Headquarters He was an Airport Certification Safety Inspector for the FAA for over 23 years. He has conducted more than 450 airport inspections during his time with the Agency. During his time with the FAA, he has deployed to Iraq, Senegal and South Africa to support the FAA global outreach program. He is a veteran of the USMC having served active and reserve from 1974 until 2001, retiring with the rank of Chief Warrant Officer 3. He was the Public Safety Chief for the Wilmington International airport from 1986 to 1999, and a Deputy Sheriff with the New Hanover County Sheriff’s Department from 1980-1986. Jim has an Associate’s degree in Fire Science from Barstow College, and is a 1993 graduate of the FBI National Academy, 174th session.
Jimmy Smith Jimmy Smith was hired by the FAA in 2010 and was an air traffic controller assigned to Southern California Terminal Radar Approach Control for 10 years. Before joining the FAA, he served as an air traffic controller in the U.S. Air Force and Department of Defense. Jimmy has been the full-time National Air Traffic Controllers Association (NATCA) representative for Unmanned Aircraft Systems since August 2020. He participates in all aspects of UAS integration, from developing future technologies and requirements to working with individual facilities on their specific UAS operations.
Jodi Baker Jodi Baker was appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for Aviation Safety at the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) in June 2022. In this capacity, she co-leads the organization responsible for setting, overseeing and enforcing safety standards for all aspects of the aviation industry—airlines, manufacturers, repair stations, advanced air mobility, uncrewed aircraft systems, and aviation professionals. Aviation Safety (AVS) programs have a direct impact on every facet of domestic and international civil aviation safety, and are carried out by over 7,500 employees located throughout the world. The organization's annual budget is more than $1.6 billion. During her 23-year career with the FAA, Ms. Baker served as acting Deputy Associate Administrator for Aviation Safety on three separate occasions from 2020 to 2022. Previously, she was Deputy Executive Director for Strategic Initiatives in the AVS Aircraft Certification Service. She also served as one of the Deputy Directors for the Office of Air Carrier Safety Assurance, as well as the acting Deputy Director for the Office of Safety Standards in the AVS Flight Standards Service. Prior to her most recent executive leadership roles, Ms. Baker served in various management positions in the Air Transportation Division of the AVS Aircraft Certification Service. She started with the Air Transportation Division in 2006 as an Aviation Safety Inspector assigned to the Part 121 Air Carrier Operations Branch. In this role, she worked primarily on issues of cabin safety and pilot fatigue, including ultra-long range operations. Prior to her assignment to the Air Transportation Division, she managed air carrier certificates in the Indianapolis Flight Standards District Office and the Portland Flight Standards District Office.?Earlier in her FAA career, Ms. Baker worked on various assignments in the Office of Policy, Planning and International Aviation. Before joining the FAA, Ms. Baker worked for Northwest Airlines.? She holds a Bachelor’s degree in International Relations - Political Economy from the College of William and Mary in Virginia, with a minor in Russian Studies. She is also a graduate of Leadership for a Democratic Society from the Federal Executive Institute. Jodi is a proud Army spouse to Tony, mother of Will and Katy and volunteers “one hour a week” with Scouts BSA Troops 350B/G in Arlington, VA.
Joe Galushka Joe Galushka is the Program Manager for Emerging Operations in the Office of Science and Technology Integration at the FAA William J. Hughes Technical Center for Advanced Aerospace. Joe is a recognized human-systems integration professional with over 35 years’ experience evolving and refining mission-critical aviation systems within DoD, industry, and FAA. In his current capacity, he leads a multi-disciplinary team of FAA technical professionals and experts who conduct AAM research and testing to support the safe integration of AAM in the NAS. He holds a Bachelor’s degree from Pennsylvania State University in Industrial Psychology and a Master’s degree in Human Factors Applied Behavioral Science from Wright State University.
Joe Morra Joe Morra is the inaugural Division Manager of AFS-700, the Emerging Technologies Division focused on implementing efficiencies related to drone integration. Prior to that he served as the Director for the Federal Aviation Administration’s (FAA) Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) Integration Office’s, Safety & Integration Division (AUS-400). Before joining the UAS Integration Office, Mr. Morra served as a Subject Matter Expert in the Flight Standards, General Aviation and Commercial Division and started his FAA career as a General Aviation Operations Inspector for the Flight Standards District Office (FSDO) in Teterboro, New Jersey. Prior to working for the FAA, Mr. Morra owned and managed flight training and other small businesses for over 10 years. Mr. Morra is a flight instructor and maintains his airline transport pilot (ATP) Certificate.
Joel Buettner Joel Buettner is a leader in innovation and new technology integration for mosquito and vector control operations. As General Manager at the Placer Mosquito and Vector Control District since 2009, he leads a talented team to prevent and manage risks of vector-borne disease and evaluate new innovations to protect public health. Joel currently serves as the American Mosquito Control Legislative and Regulatory Committee UAS subcommittee chair and leads development of the AMCA Drone Program. Joel holds a Master of Science Degree in Integrated Pest Management from the University of California Davis and a Bachelor of Science degree in Biology from the University of Washington.
Joel Siegel Joel Siegel is a meteorologist and the UTM/AAM Integration Lead for Technical Operations in the FAA’s Air Traffic Organization. Joel's aviation journey began on his 10th birthday with his first flight lesson, leading to earning his private pilot’s license at 17 and his instrument rating in 2020. He received his B.S. in Atmospheric Sciences from the University of North Carolina Asheville in 2008 and his M.S. in Atmospheric Sciences from the University of North Dakota in 2015. During his time at UND, Joel indulged his passion for storm chasing across the Great Plains while continuing to pilot both fixed-wing aircraft and sUAS. Joel initiated his professional career in 2012 at Rockwell Collins (now Collins Aerospace), where he obtained his aircraft dispatcher license and served as both a dispatcher and meteorologist for global business and general aviation operations. In 2018, he transitioned to Booz Allen Hamilton as a Sr. Lead Aviation Environmental Specialist, applying his thorough expertise in meteorology and aviation to support critical FAA and U.S. Navy aviation weather programs. This role not only honed his skills but also perfectly positioned him for his current role with the FAA, where he leads integration efforts for UTM/AAM within the National Airspace System, focusing on innovative infrastructure solutions to accommodate the evolving demands of novel aircraft types. Joel's dedication to aviation safety and education is evident through his involvement in the aviation community, including his ongoing support for events such as the Air Race Classic, pilot training sessions, and seminars. These initiatives highlight his leadership and dedication to enhancing aviation weather safety and education.
John Illson John Illson is Senior Director of Safety and Regulatory Operations at Merlin Labs. Merlin is a developer of advanced aviation technologies including artificial intelligence applications to enhance operational safety. Merlin is headquartered in Boston with flight test operations in Mojave, CA. The company also has divisions located in New Zealand to put its technologies into operation, including a Part 135 operation and a Part 145 repair station that is currently going through the certification process. John is responsible for the development and implementation of Merlin’s Safety and Quality management systems that support both the company’s flight test and commercial operations. John began his career in 1979 as a Part 121 pilot, accumulating over 18,000 hours of experience on multiple aircraft types until he transitioned to non-flying roles in 2005. Since leaving the airline, he has led the development of safety management programs at the International Civil Aviation Organization, the International Air Transport Association, and Airlines 4 America. Over the past 9 years, John has held leadership positions at companies developing Advanced Air Mobility products and services including Uber, Joby, and Supernal - a division of the Hyundai Motor Group. John holds a Bachelor's degree in Public Administration from Georgetown University as well as Master’s degrees in Business and International Affairs from the University of Pittsburgh. He is also a Fellow of the Royal Aeronautical Society.
John Maffei Mr. John Maffei is the Director of the Portfolio Management and Technology Development directorate in the Federal Aviation Administration’s NextGen Organization. He leads the FAA enterprise planning effort in collaboration with aviation stakeholders; identifies strategies, develops integrated solutions, and coordinates investments to evolve and sustain a world class aviation system; and establishes NextGen integration goals, strategies, budgets and priorities. His office provides a conduit between NextGen and the operations community to ensure NextGen implementation efforts are harmonized with operations and stakeholder priorities and risks are addressed collaboratively to facilitate delivery of NextGen operational capabilities and benefits. Mr. Maffei is also responsible for the formulation, management, and coordination of the agency's research and advanced technology development program in human factors, communications, navigation, surveillance and air traffic management. He provides management oversight for integration of NextGen initiatives, activities, and capabilities and ensures National Airspace System (NAS) improvement and sustainment efforts are executed in a comprehensive, integrated environment. Mr. Maffei is the previous deputy director of the Portfolio Management and Technology Development directorate. Prior to that, he served as division manager of the NAS Lifecycle Planning Division responsible for budget development and execution of the NextGen Portfolio Mr. Maffei has 35 years of FAA and aviation industry experience, including as a commercial and military pilot. He holds type rating in the B757/767, A320 and L382 (Military C-130), and he also held military qualification in the L188 (Navy P-3). He holds a Bachelor of Science in General Engineering from the United States Naval academy, is Project Management Institute qualified, and holds FAA Project Manager Level III qualification.
John Page Mr. John Page has been with the Federal Aviation Administration for 17 years. He currently serves as an Air Traffic Specialist on the FAA UAS Policy Team. He is responsible for development and coordinating of Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) policy as it pertains to air traffic operations involving UAS. In addition to those responsibilities, Mr. Page serves on several international groups related to UAS integration with both CANSO as the Co-Chair for the Operational Systems Integration Working Group and as a technical advisor to the U.S. Member of the ICAO RPAS Panel. Previously, he served as the FAA’s Obstruction Evaluation Group Manager, as the Acting Manager of the Emerging Technologies Team and as an Air Traffic Specialist in the Air Traffic Unmanned Aircraft Systems Office. Prior to his tenure with the FAA, Mr. Page was an air traffic controller in the United States Army for 22 years. He served in numerous leadership positions including multiple tours as an air traffic control facility manager; Chief of Aviation Enlisted Operations Instruction at the Army Aviation Leadership Academy, and as an Army Regional Representative to the FAA. Mr. Page is a 2011 graduate of Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University with a Masters degree with a dual specialization in Aviation Management and Aviation Operations. He is currently pursuing an additional Masters degree in International Relations from Webster University. He also holds an undergraduate degree from Troy University in Technology and Resource Management.
John Sawyer John Sawyer began his aviation career in March of 1990 as an Air Traffic Controller in the U.S. Air Force where he served for 30 years and achieved the Rank of Chief Master Sergeant. During his Air Force Service, John filled numerous roles in the Air Traffic Career Field to include serving as Air Traffic Manager at 2 Control Towers and 6 Approach Control Facilities. John also led three range control facilities at Major Range and Test Facility Bases and specialized in integrating new technology and aircraft into the mission. Following John’s active-duty career, he continued to serve as a contractor in the Air Force and Special Operations Command UAS Integration office where he coordinated, drafted and processed Airspace Authorizations for DoD operations. In 2021, John was joined the FAA as a UAS Program Manager leading partnership agreements with multiple companies to include Amazon Prime Air, Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railway, Chevron Pipeline and Power, Manna Drone Delivery, and Guardian Agriculture to help them successfully integrate their complex UAS operations into the National Airspace System (NAS). John also served as the Branch Manager of the Technology Programs Branch of the FAA’s UAS Integration Office and led the FAA’s Flight Plan 21 initiative to develop an enterprise solution to enable emerging entrants to gain access to the NAS. In addition, he served on the U.S.-Canada UAS Cross Border Working Group as the U.S. lead to develop the procedural changes needed to enable routine civil UAS operations between the U.S. and Canada. John also represented the FAA as the Southern Region representative to FEMA, Region IV providing UAS expertise during several disaster response operations. John began his current role as a Sr. Analyst for Airspace Integration for AFWERX Prime in March of 2023 and helped conceptualize, coordinate & author the FAA-AFWERX MOU enabling integrated AAM testing and data sharing. He was also a leading member of DoT AAM IWG-Air Traffic Federation where he helped develop ATC recommendations to AAM national strategy. Moreover, John led AFWERX collaboration with OUSD A&S, the DoD Policy Board for Federal Aviation and NASA focused on increasing interagency collaboration on emerging technology airspace integration.
Jon Damush Jon is uAvionix’s Chief Executive Officer and is passionate about bringing advanced technologies to market that improve aviation safety. He was a member of the FAA’s Beyond Visual Line of Sight Aviation Rulemaking Committee (BVLOS ARC), and a leader in the Integration Pilot Programs (IPP) and BEYOND program – all of which were focused on integrating UAS into our national airspace. He is also a member of NBAA’s Emerging Technology Committee. Jon came to uAvionix through the acquisition of Iris Automation, where he was CEO. Iris Automation was a pioneering firm providing non-cooperative aircraft detection through advanced computer vision and machine learning. Before Iris Automation, he was a Senior Director at Boeing (New Business Ventures in Boeing NeXT), working on everything from small parcel delivery drones, X-wing fighters at Disneyworld, to air-taxis and unpiloted airliners. He was the Chief Growth Officer at Insitu (makers of the ScanEagle and Integrator UAS), one of America’s premier UAS companies with more than 2 million flight hours. Jon pivoted and sold a computer vision software company (2d3 Sensing, Inc) to Boeing in 2015. He has also been involved in the special effects production business bringing optical motion capture into mainstream VFX production for video games, film and TV at Vicon Motion Systems and House of Moves. In his early career he was credited for aerodynamics and artificial intelligence programming for both location-based and home PC flight simulation titles. Jon holds a BS in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering from the University of California, Irvine and an MBA from the University of California Irvine, Paul Merage School of Business and also played shortstop for the Anteater (scary name, huh?) baseball team between 1988 and 1992. Jon is a seasoned aviation professional with a commercial pilot license with instrument and multi-engine ratings as well as a certified flight instructor. He has been involved in all aspects of aviation, engineering, regulation, operation and business. He is a devoted father of three, husband to one.
Jon Stowe Jon is currently the Air Traffic Services Manager for Air Traffic Service’s Technical Advisory Group. The Technical Advisory Group collaborates across the Air Traffic Organization to advance emerging technologies, support air traffic programs, and interface with external stakeholders regarding air traffic operations and policies. During his 16 years within the Air Traffic Organization, Jon has previously served in various capacities including Manger for UAS & Commercial Space, Acting Group Manager for Integration, Acting Team Manager for En Route Standards and Procedures, Airspace Rules and Regulations Specialist, Operations Supervisor, and Air Traffic Controller. His operational experience includes time at Airport Traffic Control Towers, Terminal Radar Approach Control facilities, and an Air Route Traffic Control Center. Prior to his time at the Federal Aviation Administration, Jon spent 2 years working as an Industrial Engineer. He has a Bachelor of Science degree from the College of Charleston, and a Master of Public Administration from Old Dominion University.
Joseph Marshall Joseph is the Director of Flight Operations for Zipline and responsible for certificated operations across the U.S. He focuses on advancing, implementing, and evolving autonomous flight operations in the national airspace. Joseph holds commercial pilot certificates and is a certified flight instructor. His expertise spans traditional aviation and unmanned aircraft systems, with a background in airline operations, training, and safety program management.
Joseph Block Joseph Block is the Advanced Air Mobility (AAM) Program Manager the Minnesota Department of Transportation (MnDOT) Office of Aeronautics. Mr. Block leads MnDOT's planning and integration of AAM technologies for Minnesota's aviation system. Prior to MnDOT, Joseph worked for Deloitte Consulting and Crown Consulting working on uncrewed aircraft system (UAS) integration and AAM strategic planning projects. He has worked at the intersection of aviation technology, policy, and economics to support both commercial and government markets.
Josh Ogden Josh Ogden is the CEO and Co-founder of AVSS. Before helping start AVSS in 2017, he worked as a technology and regulatory management consultant with a diverse group of early and mid-stage technology companies. At AVSS, Josh is responsible for leading the company's long-term vision and assisting the engineering team with building products that meet current and future regulatory needs. In the drone industry, Josh is an active member of ASTM F38, the Technical Lead for ASTM F3322 parachute recovery system standard, and a member of the British Standards Institute Advisory Group.
Josh Olds Josh Olds is the President, CEO, and Co-Founder of the Unmanned Safety Institute (USI). Over the past decade, Josh has amassed extensive experience in both commercial and civil operations, specializing in the deployment and maintenance of remotely piloted technology worldwide. His diverse career includes operating and maintaining helicopters for anti-piracy missions in the Indian Ocean, spearheading advanced commercial agricultural initiatives in the Asia-Pacific region, and training government contractors for deployed Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (ISR) operations. In recent years, Josh has played a pivotal role in formalizing various UAS organizational and operational standards through industry groups, supporting corporate standardization efforts for risk mitigation and Return on Investment initiatives. He currently leads USI, which has directed advanced, standards-based education and training initiatives for remotely piloted aircraft systems to over 25,000 learners globally. Josh holds FAA multi-commercial-instrument ratings and is a certified airframe and powerplant mechanic. He earned a master’s degree in aeronautics with a specialization in educational technology from Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University. His contributions to the UAS industry have been recognized with the 1st place honor in the individual Airmanship and Contribution to the UAS Industry category of the XCELLENCE Awards by AUVSI in 2018, and the National Business Aviation Association’s (NBAA) 2020 Top 40 Under 40 award.
June Green June Green serves as the Director, Office of Management Services, in the Office of NextGen (ANG), providing strategic direction in support of current and future Next Generation Air Transportation System (NextGen) initiatives. Ms. Green is also leading the transformation of Management Services through culture change to deliver customer-first, customer-focused, customer-centric results. Ms. Green’s multi-faceted organization comprises financial services, procurement, business planning, stakeholder engagement (U.S. and international), agency collaboration and communications, and employee services. Ms. Green oversees the provision of more than $7B in vendor contracts for engineering resources and the awarding of approximately $100M in research and workforce development grants. Her directorate, which includes about 100 employees, administers a budget of $243M and provides oversight of nearly $1B for ANG overall. Previously, Ms. Green served in leadership in the Air Traffic Organization as the Integration Lead/Technical Advisor for Mission Support Services, initiating and achieving notable improvements in organizational effectiveness and accountability. She also served as Division Manager for Procurement Services, where she managed the MITRE CAASD FFRDC contract, and was the Operations Manager for the Human Factors Group. Ms. Green joined the FAA in 2010 and was on contract to the FAA for 14 years prior, including during her college career. She holds a Bachelor of Science degree in from George Mason University. A graduate of the Federal Executive Institute’s Leadership for a Democratic Society, she is also PMP-Certified (Project Management Professional Certification) by the Project Management Institute.
Karen DiMeo Karen DiMeo, AERODiMEO LLC As CEO of AERODiMEO LLC., Karen DiMeo advises clients on uncrewed and emerging technologies such as UAS/drones, eVTOL, and UTM in the commercial airspace ecosystem. She specializes in policy insight, regulatory strategies, and industry expertise. With 30+ years of experience in the aviation industry from both government and industry, Karen recently served as the Head of Policy and Government Affairs for AiRXOS Inc., GE Aviation’s drone technology-focused company. There, she managed strategic policy positions for emerging regulatory issues and liaised with executive government stakeholders, key industry partners, and external customers. Previously, Karen was the Senior Technical UAS Advisor at the FAA’s Office of the Deputy Administrator, where she supported strategic plans for the agency’s enterprise-level UAS initiatives, integration progress, and scientific research activities. She also served as a leading expert in applied aviation and UAS research at the FAA Technical Center in New Jersey. For the last 17 years, Karen has dedicated her professional passion to advancing uncrewed and emerging aviation technologies. In recognition of her contributions to the industry, Karen was honored with the Women & Drones 2021 Woman to Watch Leadership Award. Karen holds an MS in Statistics and BA in Biomathematics from Rutgers University.
Kenji Sugahara An attorney and a national expert on uncrewed systems, Kenji Sugahara is the director of the Oregon Department of Aviation. Kenji was a member of the FAA’s Advanced Aviation Advisory Committee and has served on several AAAC task groups as well as a number of FAA Aviation Rulemaking Committees including the Remote ID and BVLOS ARCs. He is a regional director for the National Association of State Aviation Officials and recently was accepted to be a member of the Drone Safety Team. Prior to the Oregon Department of Aviation, he served as Chief Pilot for A-Cam Aerials, a media company, as well as the CEO for the Drone Service Providers Alliance, a 501(c)6 that represents over 35,000 small and medium sized drone businesses throughout the United States.
Kelsey Muka Kelsey Muka brings over 13 years of experience in the aviation and aerospace industry, specializing in developing, implementing, and refining federal safety risk management policies. Her expertise includes collaborating with stakeholder groups to shape consensus-driven policies that advance the FAA and AVS Safety Management Systems (SMS). She is adept at navigating complex regulatory landscapes and promoting data-driven safety strategies.
Keri Lyons Ms. Keri Lyons has served over 22 years with the Federal Government in numerous roles. In October 2022, she was named Manager of the Federal Aviation Administration’s Office of Airports (ARP) Emerging Entrants Division. The division facilitates the safe integration of new and emerging entrants on the nation’s airports, heliports, and vertiports. Ms. Lyons leads a multi-disciplined team of specialists, providing support for emerging entrants including Unmanned Aircraft Systems, commercial space transportation, supersonic, and Advanced Air Mobility. Using her extensive experience coordinating and collaborating on complex projects, as well as serving as Technical Advisor from 2020-2022, Ms. Lyons and her team work closely with internal and external stakeholders to enable new and emerging entrant operations in the National Airspace System. From 2018 through 2020, Ms. Lyons served as ARP’s Chief of Staff where she represented the Associate and Deputy Associate Administrators in the management, direction, and evaluation of activities that support ARP goals and objectives. Ms. Lyons spent 10 years as an Airport Certification Safety Specialist in the FAA’s Airport Safety and Operations Division. She was the subject matter expert on airport Safety Management Systems (SMS) and led the agency’s SMS rulemaking effort for airports. Her other positions in government include Airport Compliance Specialist at FAA Headquarters and Management and Program Analyst with the Department of Transportation’s Office of Inspector General. She instructed at the FAA Academy and taught undergraduate airport and public administration-related courses for Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University’s Worldwide Campus at Joint Base Andrews and Naval Air Station Patuxent River. Ms. Lyons received a Bachelor of Science degree in Aviation Business Administration from Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University and a Master of Public Administration degree in Aviation Administration from the University of Nebraska at Omaha. She is a 2007 recipient of the Alumni Excellence in Public Service Award from the University of Nebraska and was featured in Airport Business Magazine’s 2017 Top 40 Under 40 edition.
Kerry Fleming Kerry Fleming has been employed at the Federal Aviation Administration for thirty-eight years. The first twenty as an air traffic controller in New England and the last eighteen in the airspace security directorate in Washington DC. Mr. Fleming’s experience and unique skillset was recognized when he was selected to become the first manager of the stand-alone System Operations Support Center. Mr. Fleming recently provided the keynote speech at the Unmanned Nordic Conference 2024 in Oslo, Norway. He has served on numerous aviation related conference panels as the preeminent authority for all airspace restrictions in the United States. His oversight of the System Operations Support Center (SOSC) is crucial in navigating the requirements of the National Airspace System’s safe and efficient movement of air traffic with the requirements necessary in managing events that require restricting aircraft access to the effected airspace. His elite team of highly experienced airspace specialists are specifically responsible for issuing Temporary Flight Restrictions (TFRs); in the vicinity of the President and Vice President, National Security Events, Counter UAS Equipment activations, Law Enforcement incidents, and Space Launches. They are the sole approving authority for all Special Governmental Interest (SGI) airspace authorizations into controlled, restricted, and prohibited areas airspace for real time life-saving emergency situations or in the aftermath of a natural or man-made disaster.
Kevin Schmidt Dr. Kevin D. Schmidt is the Senior Neuroscientist on AFRL/ACT3, providing near-term Air Force operational application of Artificial Intelligence to human performance while translating principles of biological learning and memory to artificial implementations. Dr. Schmidt is an avid rock and mountain climber, which he pursues passionately in parallel to the quest for artificial consciousness. Graduating with Honors in Behavioral Neuroscience from Wright State University Bachelor of Science program in 2011, Kevin was awarded a Science, Mathematics, and Research for Transformation (SMART) fellowship to pursue a Master of Arts in the George Mason University Cognitive and Behavioral Neuroscience Program. Matriculating to civil service at AFRL in 2014, Kevin worked as a Principal Investigator, being elected President of AFRL Corporate Board Junior Force Council, and awarded AFRL Civilian of the Year in 2017. Kevin then won a second SMART fellowship, ultimately graduating with a Cognitive Neuroscience Doctorate of Philosophy in 2022 from Northwestern University.
Kevin Stork Kevin Stork is a Technology Manager in the U.S. Department of Energy’s Vehicle Technologies Office where he has worked since 2001. His work at VTO has focused on fuel effects on combustion and transportation systems analysis. Previously he worked as a research engineer at Argonne National Laboratory and Occidental Petroleum. He holds a B.A. in History from Reed College and a B.S. in Chemical Engineering from the University of Virginia.
Kevin Thibault Kevin J. Thibault, P.E., is the Chief Executive Officer of the Greater Orlando Aviation Authority. As CEO, he is responsible for the operation and management of both Orlando International Airport and Orlando Executive Airport. Orlando International Airport is one of the busiest airports in the State of Florida with more than 55 million annual passengers, and recently opened the $2.8 billion Terminal C complex to handle the growing transportation needs of the region. Prior to joining the Aviation Authority, Mr. Thibault served as Secretary of the Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT), where he was responsible for coordinating the planning and development of a safe, viable, and balanced transportation system, including multimodal facilities. Throughout his 19 years with FDOT, Mr. Thibault consistently focused on the importance of partnerships to deliver the transportation needs of the state. Mr. Thibault has spent half of his professional career in the private sector, providing transportation consulting services throughout the United States, and in many Canadian provinces as well. Passionate about mentorship and building a diverse workforce, Mr. Thibault is an active member of several organizations. He was recently named to the Space Florida Board of Directors by Governor Ron DeSantis and to the U.S. Travel Association’s Governance Committee. He serves on the Florida A&M University-Florida State University College of Engineering Dean’s Advisory Council, University of Florida Transportation Institute’s External Advisory Board, University of South Florida Center for Urban Transportation Research, and the University of Central Florida/Rosen College of Hospitality Management. He also serves on the University of Massachusetts Dartmouth Dean’s Advisory Council for the College of Engineering. Mr. Thibault received his Bachelor of Science Degree in Civil Engineering from the University of Massachusetts Dartmouth.
Kimberly Luu I'm part of the FAA team that reviews and determines acceptability of submitted MOC's for Operations Over People. We provide comments and guidance to applicants and standards organizations in developing an MOC that we find acceptable. I graduated from the University of Washington with a degree in Aeronautical and Astronautical Engineering in 2020, and have been working for the FAA's Aircraft Certification Service ever since.
Kuldeep Rawat Dr. Kuldeep Rawat is the Thorpe Endowed Professor and Dean of the School of Science, Aviation, Health, and Technology at Elizabeth City State University (ECSU), Elizabeth City, North Carolina. He also serves as the Director of ECSU’s signature/flagship program in Aviation Science. Dr. Rawat holds an MS in Computer Science, MS in Computer Engineering, and a Ph.D. in Computer Engineering from Center for Advanced Computer Studies, University of Louisiana-Lafayette (ULL). He has also received professional certifications in Aviation Safety Management and Unmanned Aircraft Systems Operations from Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University, Data Analyst from IBM, Applied Data Science from MIT, and Deep Learning from Carnegie Melon University. Dr. Rawat received the 2023 Governor James E. Holshouser, Jr. Award for Excellence in Public Service, conferred by the University of North Carolina Board of Governors. He has led multiple initiatives that serve the university, the surrounding community and the state. These include his work on the NASA Aerospace Academy Program, FAA Aviation Workforce Development, Connecting Minority Communities Broadband, COVID-19 Mitigation, and on a Mobile STEM Lab program, reaching K-12 students from 21 county school districts in some of North Carolina’s most economically disadvantaged, underserved and rural regions. Dr. Rawat has served as Principal Investigator/Project Director on multiple federally funded grants, including the U.S. Department of Commerce, National Institute of Justice (NIJ), US Department of Energy, the US Department of Transportation/FAA/FHWA, and NASA. He has secured over $12 Million in external funding to support research, teaching, program development/enhancement, and outreach projects at ECSU. His areas of interest include applied data science, machine learning, PC-based instrumentation, civilian applications of unmanned aerial systems, AI/ML in Higher Education, workforce development, and innovative uses of educational technologies.
L. Scott Parker L. Scott Parker is the UAS Security Branch Chief for Infrastructure Security within the Department of Homeland Security’s Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA). In this role, he leads efforts to enhance the security and resilience of the nation’s critical infrastructure against cyber and physical threats from uncrewed aircraft systems. Prior to this position, he served as the Advanced Threats Security Branch Chief where he advised critical infrastructure partners in mitigating risk posed by cyber-physical system convergence and autonomous vehicles. He also managed the DHS Soft Targets and Crowded Places Executive Steering Committee that was responsible for coordinating and communicating Department-wide efforts to protect public gatherings. Before joining CISA, he served 27 years in the U.S. Army and held several leadership positions in airborne, intelligence and special operations organizations.
Lisa Bee Lisa Bee brings more than 30 years of experience in air traffic management to her present position as Director of Air Traffic Services at Viasat. Ms. Bee’s career includes over 20 years with the United States Federal Aviation Administration in air traffic control, air traffic management, system requirements development, air traffic procedures development, test and evaluation, safety management, and strategic planning. Since 2016, when she joined Inmarsat, now Viasat, Ms. Bee has been responsible for developing concepts, strategies, and requirements to support air navigation services and integration of uncrewed aircraft using satellite communications and data link capabilities. Her work involves direct engagement with air traffic service providers, regulatory bodies, regional air traffic coordination groups, and industry organizations. In addition to serving as Chair of the Informal South Pacific Air Traffic Services Coordinating Group (ISPACG) FANS 1/A Interoperability Team (FIT), Ms. Bee participates in a number of International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) and informal regional ATS coordinating groups and ICAO panels and working groups as an advisor to ICCAIA, including the Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems Panel (RPASP) and the Separation and Airspace Safety Panel (SASP). Ms. Bee also Chairs the Civil Air Navigation Services Organization (CANSO) Communications, Navigation, and Surveillance (CNS) Working Group, and she serves as the CANSO Member to the ICAO Operational Data Link Working Group (OPDLWG).
Lisa Ellman Lisa Ellman serves as Executive Director of the Commercial Drone Alliance, an independent non-profit organization led by key figures of the commercial drone industry. She also chairs the Global Uncrewed Aircraft Systems (UAS) Group at the global law firm Hogan Lovells, where she’s a leading public policy lawyer focusing on domestic drones, advanced air mobility (AAM) and other emerging technologies. Lisa is widely recognized as one of the “world’s foremost authorities on drones and law.” Lisa’s focus is safely expanding the commercial drone and AAM industries. She also focuses on UAS security efforts. Throughout her career, Lisa has worked to bridge government policymaking and business innovation. Lisa has held a variety of positions at top levels of the executive branch at the White House and the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ). Lisa's opinions are often featured in publications and news broadcasts such as The New York Times, The Washington Post, Associated Press, Fortune Magazine and others. She also regularly testifies to Congress on UAS-related legislation and policy. Lisa was featured in Fortune magazine's "Most Powerful Women" series for her efforts to develop policy to govern drone use in the United States. Lisa was also named Financial Times’ Most Innovative Practitioner of 2022 for North America.
Liz Forro Liz is currently the Senior Advisor in the FAA's Office of Rulemaking, returning to the FAA after supporting the U.S. House of Representatives in passing the FAA Reauthorization Act of 2024. Liz previously worked in the FAA's UAS Integration Office as a policy advisor and communications specialist.
Lorrie Fussell Ms. Lorrie Fussell is the Team Lead for the International Division in the Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) Integration Office of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). Ms. Fussell first joined the UAS Integration Office in 2020 and supports the facilitation of UAS policies required to promote the FAA’s international work. In addition, she also Co-Chairs the U.S.-Canada UAS Cross-Border Working Group. Ms. Fussell joined the FAA in 2014, joining the Western Hemisphere division of the International Affairs Office. Her recent work included leading the Mexico portfolio and ICAO’s North American, Central American and Caribbean Regional Office portfolios. She previously managed the Brazil and Southern Cone portfolio, including leading the U.S.-Brazil Aviation Partnership. Prior to joining the FAA, Ms. Fussell worked at the U.S. Department of Commerce where she held several positions in the Western Hemisphere Office, including Brazil Desk Officer. Ms. Fussell joined Commerce in 2006, as a Presidential Management Fellow in the International Trade Administration. While on the Brazil Desk, Ms. Fussell worked to advance policy recommendations as the Department’s lead for the U.S.-Brazil Chief Executive Officer (CEO) Forum, a joint White House and Commerce initiative which brought together business leaders to identify ways to strengthen economic ties. During her Commerce tenure, Ms. Fussell worked closely with the FAA and led efforts to establish the U.S.-Brazil Aviation Partnership. In 2014, under the auspices of the Brookings Institution, Ms. Fussell was selected to participate in the Legis Congressional Fellowship with the 113th United States Congress. As Policy Advisor to the Chairman of the House Trade Subcommittee, Ms. Fussell worked closely on the Trade Priorities Act of 2014. Ms. Fussell has a Bachelor of Arts in Philosophy, Politics, and Economics from the University of Pennsylvania and a Master of Arts in International Commerce and Policy from George Mason University. She is a native Portuguese and Spanish speaker.
Mack Martinez Mack Martinez is a Product Policy Advisor within the FAA Aircraft Certification Service Office Policy and Standards Division. As a policy advisor, Mack is a lead focal for new and emerging aircraft, which includes coordination with rulemaking and means of compliance standards development activities. Before joining Aircraft Certification, Mack was part of the FAA's Office of Unmanned Aircraft Systems where he supported local, tribal and state governments as part of the BEYOND program's mission to enable the advancement of UAS Beyond Visual Line of Site (BVLOS) operations. Prior to the FAA, Mack spent over 20 years working in the aviation industry as a mechanical systems/structures project engineer and FAA certification programs manager for Gogo (now Intelsat) and B/E Aerospace (now Collins Aerospace). Mack Currently resides with his wife and two kids in Chicago, Illinois. He is a graduate of The University of Alabama with a Bachelor’s Degree in Mechanical Engineering.
Marcus Cunningham Marcus Cunningham works in the Emerging Technologies Division (AFS-700) in the Office of Safety Standards (FS) in the Federal Aviation Administration. He has been working in UAS policy since 2017. During his tenure at the FAA, he has had responsibility for many different policy areas, including designees, import/export issues, airmen, general aviation maintenance, and inspection programs. Prior to the FAA, Mr. Cunningham spent 5 years working in the quality assurance department of a Part 121 airline and 6 years in Part 135 and repair station environments. Marcus holds an FAA Airframe and Powerplant license as well as a Commercial Pilot’s License. His interests include aviation as well as computers and electronics.
Marcy Wolf Marcy Wolf is the LAANC and B4UFLY Program Manager in the Project Management Office in the Air Traffic Organization at the FAA. She holds a Bachelor’s degree in Aerospace Engineering, a Master’s degree in Mechanical Engineering from Georgia Tech, and another Master’s degree in Aerospace and Aviation Management from Purdue University. Prior to joining the FAA, Marcy worked as a Flight Test Engineer at Lockheed Martin testing C-130Js, worked in Mission Control at NASA’s Johnson Space Center for the International Space Station, and owned and managed her own business.?
Margaret Stewart Nagle Margaret is the Vice President of Policy, Regulatory and Community Affairs at Wing where she leverages extensive private sector and government experience to pioneer new aviation use cases and improve opportunities for communities around the world. Prior to her time at Wing, Margaret was the Head of Americas Government Affairs at X: the Moonshot Factory and Yahoo! where she set public policy priorities and worked to advance and protect their business interests with governments. Margaret also served as the Assistant to the Vice President for Legislative Affairs where she was the Vice President’s top liaison to Congress and as the Director of Legislative Affairs at the Office of Management and Budget, where she led the Administration’s legislative efforts on budget and appropriation bills.
Mark Bathrick Mark Bathrick is the former Director of the U.S. Department of the Interior’s (DOI) Office of Aviation Services (OAS) and current President of Bathrick Aviation Consulting. As Director, Mark was responsible for the safety, compliance, and performance of over 2,000 contracted and government-owned crewed and uncrewed aircraft and pilots. Mark was also instrumental in affecting some of the greatest modernization of wildland firefighting aircraft in the last 30-years. He led efforts to test and integrate new platforms like the Very Large Air Tanker, the amphibious single engine air tanker, NextGen air tankers, and drones for aerial ignition, precision mapping, hotspot detection, and other applications. Mark was a recipient of the 2017 Commercial Drone Alliance Industry Heroes Award, was selected by Commercial UAV News as a Top 7 Drone Visionary in 2018, and received the DroneResponders.org Public Safety Drone Leadership Award in 2022. Prior to DOI, Mark completed a distinguished career as a Navy carrier-based, TOPGUN-trained fighter pilot and experimental test pilot, retiring as a Captain. He has piloted over 40 different types of fixed wing, rotary wing, and lighter-than-air aircraft and holds an FAA commercial instrument, multi-engine pilot rating. Mark holds a Bachelor of Science degree in Aerospace Engineering from the U.S. Naval Academy and a Master of Business Administration from Boise State University. He is a member of the Society of Experimental Test Pilots, Tau Beta Pi National Engineering Honor Society and was inducted into the University of Idaho Academy of Engineers in 2017. Mark also serves as a Fellow at the UC Berkeley Disaster Lab and holds advisory board positions with numerous companies and nonprofits.
Mark Blanks Mark Blanks is the Head of Global Flight Operations for Wing where he leads the teams operating and providing aviation support for the Wing drone delivery system around the globe. He has an extensive background in aircraft maintenance, flight test, and certification. Mark also serves as the current Chair of ASTM International’s F38 Committee on Unmanned Aircraft Systems, where he provides strategic direction for the committee’s 500+ members developing industry consensus standards for drones. Mark has held numerous leadership positions within F38 since 2010, also serving for three years on ASTM’s Committee on Technical Committee Operations. Prior to Wing, Mark led the FAA’s UAS test site at Virginia Tech and held roles leading UAS research and testing at multiple universities, including serving as a founding faculty member of the FAA’s ASSURE UAS Center of Excellence while at Kansas State University.
Martha Christie Martha Christie is an engineer with 30 years of program management and engineering experience in the private and public sector. She is the Deputy Director of the Safety & Integration Division in the UAS Integration Office. Prior to that, she was a State, Local, Tribal Program Manager with the UAS Integration Pilot Program (IPP) working with the North Dakota DOT and Virginia’s Innovation and Entrepreneurship Investment Authority. Ms. Christie served as the Group Manager for the Air Traffic Control Facilities and Engineering Services Strategic Management Group under the Air Traffic Organization (ATO). She spearheaded the data analysis efforts that inform critical decision-making at all levels of the organization including overseeing the Facilities Infrastructure Portfolio to ensure the FAA is investing in the most mission-critical infrastructure while also enhancing employee safety, improving environmental responsibility, and protecting operations. As the Senior Advisor to the Vice President of ATO Technical Operations, Ms. Christie oversaw several large-scale projects focused on FAA facilities, systems, safety, and equipment. A native of Potomac, Maryland, Ms. Christie received a B.S. in Industrial and Systems Engineering from Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, and a M.S. in Engineering Management from the University of Maryland, University College. She is a certified Project Management Professional (PMP).
Mary Carol "MC" Chruscicki Mary Carol “MC” Chruscicki is co-owner of AX Enterprize (AX), a New York (NY) State Certified Women-Owned Business Enterprise and ISO 9001 Certified small business. Ms. Chruscicki has more than 40 years of experience leading and managing the development of distributed information and communications systems for government and commercial customers. Ms. Chruscicki provides technical leadership for AX’s diverse research and development portfolio, which includes UAS Traffic Management (UTM) and Advanced Air Mobility (AAM), Counter UAS, Cyber Security, Mission-Resilience, and Advanced Sensors & Communications. Ms. Chruscicki also manages AX operations of the FAA-designated NY UAS Test Site (NYUASTS) and Skydome, the largest instrumented indoor/outdoor UAS test facility in the US, at Griffiss International Airport, Rome, NY. The NYUASTS and SkyDome attract companies from across the US and beyond, providing a unique fully instrumented testing environment at a towered airport integrated with commercial, general aviation, and military aircraft. AX’s diverse and integrated team includes Software, System, Electrical, Mechanical, and Aeronautical Engineers as well as both Private and Commercial Pilots.
Matthew Land Matthew Land leads Government Relations and Public Policy for Eve Air Mobility focused on issues at the federal, state, and local level throughout the United States while providing strategic political support globally. Eve is an independent company that recently spun off from Embraer and dedicated to accelerating the Urban Air Mobility (UAM) ecosystem through an advanced electric vertical takeoff and landing vehicle (eVTOL) project, a comprehensive global services and support network, and a unique air traffic management solution. He has worked in various capacities in politics for almost two decades including working on campaigns and as a lobbyist before municipalities throughout Florida and before the Florida Legislature.
Melissa McCaffrey Melissa McCaffrey is Archer’s Head of Government Affairs. In this role, she leads Archer’s government relations and policy efforts that support advanced air mobility at all levels of government. Prior to joining Archer, Melissa led Overair’s Government Affairs division, where she developed and executed strategies to engage with governments globally. Before Overair, Melissa spent over 10 years at the Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association, the world’s largest aviation association, where she held positions of increasing responsibility over her tenure. Her last role focused on managing government affairs policy and advocacy. Mrs. McCaffrey holds a B.S. in Air Traffic Management from Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University and has been a licensed pilot for over 20 years.
Micah Campbell Micah Campbell serves as the Executive Director (A) of the Federal Aviation Administration’s (FAA) Office of Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) and Emerging Entrants Security, which is the FAA’s lead organization responsible for drone and Advanced Air Mobility (AAM) security in U.S. airspace. Mr. Campbell leads FAA’s efforts to safely integrate detection and mitigation systems for drones and AAM operations in the National Airspace System (NAS) and supports UAS security-related rulemaking, research and development, policy formulation, education and outreach, and data management. Prior to joining the Office of UAS & Emerging Entrants Security, Mr. Campbell served as the Deputy Director for Aircraft Certification Service (AIR) Enterprise Business Operations in the FAA’s Aviation Safety (AVS) Line of Business where he was responsible for administrative and technical direction of business program activities supporting 1,500 personnel across nine AIR divisions and offices conducting aircraft certification and manufacturing oversight activities. Mr. Campbell began his public service as an airman in the U.S. Air Force. After serving on active duty, he transitioned to the Air National Guard and later retired from the Air Force Reserve. Following his active-duty commitment, Mr. Campbell joined the FAA as an Electronics Technician at the Mike Monroney Aeronautical Center and later became an Electronic Engineer Instructor at the FAA Academy. Mr. Campbell has held multiple positions including, FAA Academy Environmental Section Manager, Air Traffic Organization (ATO) Navigation and Communications Training Team Manager, ATO Technical Operations Training Group Manager, ATO Safety and Technical Training Service Unit Senior Technical Advisor, and AVS Office of Accident Investigation and Prevention Senior Advisor. Mr. Campbell holds a Bachelor of Science in Technical Management and a Master of Science in Engineering Management with a concentration in Project Management from Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University. Additionally, he completed senior leadership development through the Office of Personnel Management, Federal Executive Institute.
Michael Hardin Michael Hardin is a policy analyst at the Department of Transportation where he focuses on aviation competition and emerging aviation technology policy issues. Prior to coming to DOT, he served as Director of Aviation at the White House National Security Council (NSC) where he led an interagency team consisting of over 20 different federal departments and agencies to complete a National Action Plan for Counter-Uncrewed Air Systems (C-UAS) and planned and led the first-ever White House summit on Advanced Air Mobility in August 2022. Mr. Hardin has over 25 years of experience in government working on issues related to aviation, travel and tourism, transportation, immigration, biometrics, and counterterrorism. He also has served in a variety of roles within the Department of Homeland Security at DHS headquarters and at Customs and Border Protection (CBP), and the Transportation Security Administration (TSA). On assignment from DHS, he also served in Canberra, Australia from 2008-2009 assisting the Australian government in development of their security and cross-border travel programs. Throughout his career, Mr. Hardin has spoken at the International Civil Aviation Organization multiple times and at a variety of travel-related conferences in the United States and around the world. He has a bachelor’s degree from Villanova University and a law degree from George Washington University Law School.
Michael Whitaker Michael G. Whitaker became FAA Administrator in October 2023. He is responsible for helping to ensure the safe and efficient operation of the largest aerospace system in the world. Whitaker served as Deputy Administrator at the FAA from 2013–2016, and was also the Chief NextGen Officer. He was responsible for the implementation of FAA's NextGen modernization of the air traffic control system, moving from radar to a satellite-enabled surveillance technology. Before becoming FAA Administrator, Whitaker was chief operating officer of Supernal, a Hyundai Motor Group company designing an electric advanced air mobility (AAM) vehicle. Prior to Supernal and his tenure at the FAA, Whitaker served as Group CEO of InterGlobe Enterprises, India’s largest travel conglomerate and operator of its largest airline, IndiGo. There, he oversaw strategy and operations for four affiliate travel companies. Whitaker also spent 15 years at United Airlines in a variety of roles as Director, Vice President and Senior Vice President. His broad portfolio at the airline included commercial alliances and joint ventures, international and regulatory affairs, and strategic counsel to the Chairman and CEO on international matters. Whitaker began his more than three-decade aviation career as a litigator, then as Assistant General Counsel of international and regulatory affairs at Trans World Airlines (TWA). Whitaker is a private pilot, holds bachelor’s degrees in political science and French from the University of Louisville and a juris doctorate degree from Georgetown University Law Center.
Michael Beckles Michael Beckles is the Director of Policy for Mission Support Services (AJV). He oversees developing, evaluating, and maintaining regulations, policies, and procedures for the Air Traffic Organization and the greater FAA. Mike provides executive leadership supporting aviation stakeholders both domestically and globally. On behalf of the ATO, Mike oversees the processing of FAA agency rulemaking activities, air traffic procedural development, air traffic environmental policy, UAS policy and integration, and standards for airspace structure, design, and allocation. Mike has over 39 years of federal government experience between DOD and FAA in air traffic management, quality assurance, unmanned aircraft systems, safety management systems, international collaboration, and regulatory oversight. Mike began his FAA career in 2007 as an Air Traffic Safety Inspector within Aviation Safety. Later in 2009, Mike joined ATO Safety and Technical Training where he worked in Operational Services, Quality Assurance, and Event Investigations. He later served as Manager, of ATC Audits and Assessments. In 2013, Mike returned to Aviation Safety as Manager, Safety Management and Future Systems Branch. He was responsible for oversight of policy, standards, and requirements relating to the ATO’s operations and safety management system. Mike also participated in the AVS SMS Coordination Group, FAA SMS Committee, and FAA Space Leadership Team. In addition, Mike worked with our international partners on the Safety Management International Collaboration Group. In 2020, Mike joined ATO Mission Support Services as manager of the UAS Policy Team responsible for policy covering the processing of UAS waivers and authorizations. In 2021, Mike became the manager of the Airspace and Regulations Group where he oversaw ATO airspace and procedural interests in rulemaking, environmental, and ATO emerging entrant initiatives and programs. Mike also served as a U.S. member to the ICAO Air Traffic Management Operations Panel at ICAO, Montreal. Mike is a native of Brooklyn, N.Y., and a 23-year veteran of the United States Air Force. There, Mike held several operational, senior staff, and managerial leadership positions. His assignments included numerous stateside and overseas locations including contingency deployments finally finishing his military career with an assignment to the Pentagon, Headquarters USAF as Chief, Air Traffic System Evaluations Program.
Michael O'Hare In September 2022, Michael O’Hare was appointed as Regional Administrator of the Alaskan Region. In this role, he serves as the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) senior agency official in providing cross-functional oversight and leadership for the FAA Administrator and continuous coordination across lines of business to include Aviation Safety (AVS), Airports (ARP) and Air Traffic Organization (ATO). Mike is the principal FAA representative and is responsible for outreach activities to stakeholders and local communities regarding environmental impacts, air safety concerns, and protection measures for the NAS. Prior to joining the FAA, Mike served as the Deputy Executive Director for the Alaska Housing Finance Corporation working with local agency and business partners to provide Alaskans access to safe, quality, affordable housing. He also supported the Alaska Statewide Rent and Mortgage Relief Programs. In 2017, Mike was appointed to serve as Regional Administrator for the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Region 10. He was responsible for the direction and leadership of FEMA’s emergency management efforts in support of the states of Alaska, Idaho, Oregon, Washington and the 271 Federally Recognized Tribes and Alaska Native Villages. These efforts included delivering FEMA’s preparedness, response, recovery and mitigation programs in collaboration with partners from all levels of government, volunteer organizations, faith-based groups and the private sector. Mike served nearly 10 years with the Alaska Department of Military and Veterans Affairs. As the director of the Division of Homeland Security and Emergency Management, he determined policies and response operations with the governor, adjutant general, legislature, congressional delegation, and local jurisdictions. He also led crisis management roles serving as the coordinating officer for several state and federal disasters and directed multiple full-scale and functional exercises of national significance. Mike also served as acting deputy commissioner for the Alaska Department of Military and Veterans Affairs. His earlier career with the state includes serving as a legislative aide in the Alaska State Legislature and managing information technology in the Alaska Legislative Affairs Agency. Mike brings a strong knowledge base of the importance of air safety as well as the challenging weather conditions and geography in Alaska. Together with his affiliations to local military command, legislative affiliates, and emergency management personnel throughout the state and across the country he is able to provide strong FAA representation. Mike holds a bachelor’s degree from Long Island University, graduating from Southampton College in 1984, and completed the National Preparedness Leadership Initiative Executive Education Program from the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University in 2012.
Michael Robbins Michael Robbins is President & Chief Executive Officer at the Association for Uncrewed Vehicle Systems International (AUVSI), the world’s largest trade association for uncrewed systems, autonomy, and robotics, in both the commercial and defense sectors. He joined AUVSI in 2020 and previously served as Chief Advocacy Officer and an Executive Vice President. In 2015, he co-founded a business consulting firm, Intrepid, and served as its Chief Operating Officer. AUVSI was an Intrepid client. Before starting Intrepid, Michael was Managing Director of Government and Public Affairs at the Air Line Pilot Association, International (ALPA). Before ALPA, Michael spent a decade in the office of the late U.S. Congressman John Dingell (Michigan), where he served as the Chief of Staff. Michael serves on the MITRE Corporation’s Aviation Advisory Committee, the board of the Greater Washington Aviation Open, and the National Advanced Mobility Consortium’s Advisory Committee. He recently served as co-chair of the Federal Aviation Administration’s UAS Detection and Mitigation Aviation Rulemaking Committee and currently serves on the U.S. Department of Transportation’s Aviation Supply Chain Risk Task Force and the Cybersecurity & Infrastructure Security Agency’s Critical Infrastructure Partnership Advisory Council sUAS Security Working Group. Michael holds a bachelor’s degree from the University of Michigan and a master’s degree from Georgetown University and is an Officer in the United States Navy (Reserve).
Michael Sanders Mike Sanders is the Executive Director of the Lone Star UAS Center of Excellence and Innovation (LSUASC), one of seven FAA designated UAS Test Sites. In this role, he leads efforts to advance the integration of Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) and Autonomous Aviation (AAV) technologies across educational, public, and commercial agency interests; seamlessly integrating AAV systems supporting Advanced Air Mobility (AAM) concepts; and supporting evaluations and demonstrations supporting the FAA’s Next Generation (NextGen) office. This includes assisting State and Federal Public Safety agencies UAS and AAV capabilities. From 2014 to 2019, LSUASC participated in NASA’s UAS Traffic Management (UTM) developmental efforts, culminating in August 2019, supporting the most complex small UTM in an urban environment, including 216 live and 644 simulated flights, 233 separate test events, and generated over 9 million discrete data elements. Since April 2020, Mike led LSUASC’s efforts to support six separate FAA NextGen office evaluations and demonstrations implementation concepts for AAM, including Urban Air Mobility. Mike also serves as the Vice Chair of the Texas Department of Transportation AAM Committee, which is charged with developing recommendation for implementing AAM within the state for the Texas Legislature. Prior to joining the staff at TAMUCC, Mike served as an Infantry Officer in the US Army for 30 years in a variety of Command and leadership positions. Throughout his Army career, Mike was an early adopter of transformational technology both as an experimentation lead for the Army’s Objective Force Task Force and while serving as Deputy Director for both the Army and Department of Defense modeling and simulation offices.
Michelle Duquette Michelle is a federal integrator, collaborative leader, aviation systems and operational expert, and strategist. She leads uncrewed and space portfolios at The MITRE Corporation’s Center for Advanced Aviation System Development—the federally funded research and development center sponsored by the Federal Aviation Administration. As such, Michelle engages leadership across FAA lines of business to facilitate enterprise “solutioneering”, tracks regulatory and operational impacts of emerging disruptive aviation technologies, and provides strategic positioning and planning assistance. She also serves as the Department of Defense Co-Chair of the UAS Science And Research Panel (SARP) where she represents DoD interests in federal unmanned integration research and leads the US Executive Branches in research sharing workshops. Her background as an FAA certificated airline dispatcher coupled with the deep science and research environment of the FFRDC have afforded Michelle a unique understanding of the aviation ecosystem that blends complex operational mission needs with practical enabling technical solutions for the government.
Mike Ralich Mike Ralich is the Chief Pilot for UPS Flight Forward overseeing the organization’s part 135 flight operations. Prior to joining Flight Forward in 2020 Mike spent 20 years on active duty in the US Coast Guard conducting maritime law enforcement and search and rescue missions. Some of Mike’s significant milestones in the UAS industry include participation in the initial stand-up of the US Coast Guard's small UAS program, the establishment of UPS Flight Forward's Remote Operations Center, and conducting the nation’s first-ever Part 135 UAS package delivery flight without the use of visual observers.
Mike Branum Mike began his FAA career in the Office of Airports Southwest Region (ASW), where he served as Community Planner for the Arkansas/Oklahoma Airports District Office (ADO) followed by his selection as Regional Planner for the ASW Planning & Programming Branch. For over two years, while assigned to headquarters, he worked in the Airports Safety and Standards Directorate as Program Manager for the Emerging Entrants Division. Currently Mike is the Deputy Manager for the Southwest Region’s Louisiana/New Mexico ADO. His 16 years of aviation experience spans the regional, state, and federal levels through positions at a metropolitan planning organization, the Department of Defense, and the FAA. His collaborative leadership style helps advance safety of the NAS by building consensus across multiple disciplines towards the successful planning and implementation of federally funded projects on public use airports. Mike has demonstrated success in creation of innovative strategic planning products, coordination of intergovernmental policy and legislation, and operationalizing complex data and analytics to create organizational efficiencies. Mike earned a Bachelor of Science in Aviation from the University of Oklahoma and a Master’s in City and Regional Planning from the University of Texas at Arlington along with a certificate in Geographic Information Systems (GIS). He is a long-time Texas resident, a credentialed commercial pilot and co-author of the peer-reviewed article “Unmanned Aircraft Systems and Technologies: Challenges and Opportunities for States and Local Governments.” At a young age, Mike was exposed to the thrill of flying an aircraft with a modernized cockpit. This launched his passion for aviation and he is frequently “geeked-out” by breakthrough technologies and next-generation innovations.
Mike Hines Mike Hines has over 35 years of aviation planning experience. He joined the FAA as the Manager of the Planning and Environmental Division in the Office of Planning and Programming in 2015. Mr. Hines Division provides comprehensive guidance on airport planning including issuing Airport Layout Plan policy and guidance, coordinating forecast review, managing the NPIAS, airport-airspace capacity analysis, and supporting the FAA’s NextGen initiatives. The Division also helps airports implement the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and other Federal environmental laws and regulations including airport noise compatibility planning (Part 150). Prior to joining the FAA Mr. Hines held several positions at the Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority (operator of Washington Dulles International and Ronald Reagan National Airports) including airport planner, environmental planner and Manager of the Authority’s Planning Department. Mike also spent more than 20 years as an aviation consultant where he prepared airport master plans and conducted a variety of comprehensive planning studies and technical analysis for a diverse aviation customer base consisting primarily of large and medium size commercial service airports.
Mike Minnix Bryant, AR (20 miles Southwest of Little Rock) Retired Air Force Former repair station manager and chief inspector for Audio International; aircraft entertainment systems design and manufacturing. FAA Avionics Safety Inspector (ASI) since 2007 and Little Rock Flight Standards District Office UAS Focal Point from 2015 – 2021. AFS751 Emerging Technologies waiver analyst and special programs member since 2021. 2023 AUVSI Symposium panel member Eastern New Mexico University Bachelor of Applied Arts and Sciences in Aviation Science (Magna Cum Laude)
Miranda Haywood Miranda Haywood is the Manager of the Procurement Services and Grants Management Division at the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Office of NextGen. Her division supports the NextGen mission in establishing and administrating a portfolio of contract vehicles which provides grant management administration to secure services and financial assistance opportunities for the FAA and the public. She leads a cross-functional team of contracts, grants, and technical professionals responsible for awarding approximately $420M in grants and administering over $7B in technical and support service contracts at the FAA. Ms. Haywood joined the FAA in 2000 and has served in several leadership positions. She is the Chief Grant Officer for the FAA Office of NextGen. Her leadership passion for grant management and outreach has forged opportunities to educate the aviation industry through training and workshops. Ms. Haywood holds a Bachelor’s degree from Howard University and a Master's degree with a concentration in Public Administration from Bowie State University. She is certified as a Project Manager by the Project Management Institute and a graduate of the distinguished Federal Executive Institute.
Mirna Meyer Mirna Meyer, an Air Traffic Control Specialist in the System Operations Support Center (SOSC) at the Federal Aviation Administration, plays a crucial role in managing airspace security tasks. With over 17 years of aviation experience, she is responsible for issuing Temporary Flight Restrictions (TFRs) in the vicinity of the President and Vice President, National Security Events, Counter UAS Equipment activations, Law Enforcement incidents, and Space Launches. Her team is the sole approving authority for all Special Governmental Interest (SGI) airspace authorizations into controlled, restricted, and prohibited airspace for real-time life-saving emergencies or in the aftermath of a natural or man-made disaster. In her previous role, Mirna served as the Front-Line Manager for the United States NOTAM Office (USNOF) in the Air Traffic Control System Command Center. There, she supervised the group's day-to-day operations and played a key role in ensuring the integrity of NOTAM content and database, thereby providing uninterrupted access to NOTAMs for all National Air Space users. Mirna obtained her Bachelor of Science dual degree in Aviation Management and Business Management from Dowling College. This solid educational foundation allowed her to land an Air Traffic Specialist role at Lockheed Martin Corporation in the Flight Service program, setting the stage for her successful career in the aviation industry.
Mitchell Bernstein As manager (A) of NextGen’s New Entrants Strategy & Integration Branch, Mitchell leads Research and Development (R&D) programs that help modernize the National Airspace System (NAS) while improving its safety and efficiency. He currently leads the integration of Advanced Air Mobility (AAM) through the Innovate28 program which aims to operationalize AAM at one or more sites by 2028. Previously, Mitchell has led a wide array of programs including Performance Based Navigation (PBN) Initiatives such as Established on Required Navigation Performance (EoR) and Multiple Airport Route Separation (MARS), as well as the standardization effort for Remote Towers. With experience in leading the development of new aviation technologies spanning communications, navigation, surveillance, and information sharing, Mitchell prides himself in driving concepts from their early stages all the way to implementation.
Nancy Mendonca Nancy Mendonca, is currently the NASA Deputy in ARMD’s Mission Integration Office (AMIO). The AMIO integrates ARMD’s AAM efforts across the four ARMD Programs and with the AAM ecosystem. She served 24 years in the Navy flying H-46 helicopters. Between the Navy and NASA, she worked at the Missile Defense Agency, on the Marine Corps MRAP Program and at NTIA working on the Federal Strategic Spectrum Plan. She graduated from the U.S. Naval Academy with a B.S. in Aeronautical Engineering and subsequently eared M.S. degrees in Aeronautical Engineering and National Security and Strategic Studies. She is also a Certified Public Accountant and has currently prioritized rescuing Great Danes and riding horses over flying helicopters.
Nate Ward Nate Ward is the head of Network Development at BETA Technologies, a Vermont-based aerospace company developing electric aircraft to serve both cargo and passenger missions. In this role, Nate manages the development of BETA’s multimodal aircraft charging network, working to deploy charging stations and vertiports - both of which are products developed in-house by the BETA team - across the U.S. In his role, Nate also supports BETA’s broader business development efforts and partners with several AAM government engagement groups across the industry. Before joining BETA, Nate worked for nearly two decades as a commercial and residential real-estate broker and has experience leading large teams across many disciplines. He graduated magna cum laude from St. Lawrence University with a degree in Economics, and is also an active student pilot.
Nathan Ruff As President of AirWise Solutions, Nathan brings 10 years of experience in the UAS industry and over 20 years of management consulting experience in strategy and operations at Fortune 500 companies globally. Nathan co-founded UASidekick to meet the needs of early-adopter drone pilots to fly safely and to obtain controlled airspace authorizations quickly and easily. The overall vision of UASidekick is to improve transparency in the national airspace system by showing both UAS and crewed aircraft operations on one, easily understandable, airspace map. AirWise Solutions continues this mission through a comprehensive common operational picture that integrates real-time airborne and terrestrial vectors, ADS-B, radar feeds, multicast video, weather, and IoT data streams – all overlaid on a holistic and interactive 3-D map of the operational area. Nathan was educated at Brown University, Georgetown University and the Institute of d’Etudes Politiques in France. He is certified in as an FAA Part 61 Private Pilot, FAA Part 107 Remote Pilot, USPA Skydiver and USPPA Power Paraglider. He is an original member of the FAA Unmanned Aircraft Safety Team (Drone Safety Team), NASA’s UTM Data Exchange Working Group, the FAA UAS in Controlled Airspace Aviation Rulemaking Committee (ARC), and SIA Public Safety and Autonomous Security Robotics Working Groups. Nathan lives in Boulder, Colorado where he enjoys skiing, camping and lacrosse with his family.
Nathan Trail Nathan Trail is the Senior Director of International State & Local Policy at Supernal, a Hyundai company. He is responsible for working with international, state, and local legislators, regulators, community stakeholders, to develop policies and regulations that will foster the Advanced Air Mobility (AAM) industry and drive public acceptance. Nathan serves as an industry resource and expert for the AAM industry to governments and lawmakers throughout the US and internationally. Nathan previously served as the Director of Technology Policy and State Legislative Affairs at the Consumer Technology Association (CTA), North America’s largest technology trade association. During his time at CTA, Nathan grew the association’s state and local government affairs presence and managed a portfolio of policy issues including unmanned aerial vehicles (UAS), sharing economy, micromobility, blockchain, and fintech. Nathan has testified on behalf of the technology industry in over 30 state legislatures and municipalities and frequently speaks at industry panels and events. He has also authored op-eds for legislative publications for some of the leading state and local policy organizations in the country. Nathan holds a BA in Government and Politics from the University of Maryland, College Park.
Nicholas Matlock Currently work for Flight Standards (AFS-752) Emerging Technologies Division (3 years) Previously worked for 10 years in a local Flight Standards District Office (FSDO) Prior to the FAA worked as a Part 121 and Part 135 pilot
Nick Devereux Nick Devereux joined Wing in 2019 and serves as Federal Affairs Lead on Wing’s Policy & Government Affairs team. He leads Wing’s work on congressional relations and advocacy, and coordinates Wing’s engagement and government relations work with federal agencies as well as multiple trade associations. He played an instrumental role in successfully advocating for numerous drone-related provisions included in the recently-passed FAA Reauthorization Act of 2024. Upon initially joining Wing, Nick led state, local and community engagement efforts leading up to Wing’s 2019 launch of service in Christiansburg, Virginia - the first on-demand residential drone package delivery service in the U.S. Prior to Wing, Nick spent ten years on Capitol Hill, serving as Legislative Counsel and senior policy advisor to U.S. Senator Mark R. Warner. In that capacity, Nick covered a broad portfolio of issues including judiciary, labor, transportation/infrastructure, and NASA policy, and developed major legislative initiatives ranging from infrastructure financing to accelerating drone/UAS integration to reestablishing American leadership in aeronautics research. Nick received a B.A. from The Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, MD as well as a J.D. from Washington and Lee University School of Law in Lexington, VA.
Nils Thorjussen Nils Thorjussen is the CEO of Verge Aero, a developer and supplier of advanced drone show technologies. Mr. Thorjussen has over thirty years’ experience as a serial entrepreneur developing pioneering products for the entertainment industry. In 2016 he combined his love of aviation with his entertainment expertise to co-found Verge Aero and develop a fully integrated hardware and software platform that makes shows straightforward to design and operate. The company has been on the forefront of the commercial evolution of drone shows, flying shows around the world on events ranging from President Biden’s victory celebration to music festivals like Lollapalooza, as well as appearing as the talent on America’s Got Talent: Extreme. This month, Verge Aero flew the first public show in the USA featuring drones flying with pyrotechnics for the University of Texas at Austin. Mr Thorjussen is a FAA certified private pilot and commercial drone operator, and holds a BA and BBA with highest honors from the University of Texas at Austin and an MBA from Stanford University.
Okeoma Moronu Okeoma Moronu is an emerging leader in developing regulatory frameworks that enable high-volume drone operations in national airspaces across the globe. She currently serves as the Head of Global Aviation Regulatory Affairs at Zipline International – the only drone logistics company operating at a national scale. At Zipline, Ms. Moronu works alongside regulators, policymakers, and experts in emerging technologies to unlock safe and reliable autonomous operations that will benefit the communities Zipline serves around the world. Additionally, Ms. Moronu serves as the Vice Chair on the Board of the Commercial Drone Alliance (CDA). Previously, she served on the U.S. Department of Transportation Advanced Aviation Advisory Committee (AAAC) as well as an Industry Lead on the FAA’s Beyond Visual Line of Sight (BVLOS) Aviation Rulemaking Committee (ARC). In addition to her work at Zipline, Ms. Moronu brings more than a decade of experience providing strategic advice and legal counsel in the aviation industry.
Pamela Gomez Pamela has spent her career in Aviation, which began as an Aerospace Engineer in the FAA Air Traffic Organization Program Management Office working in ground-based and space-based navigation programs, then through 10 years in the FAA’s NextGen office where she served as the NextGen Advisory Committee Liaison. After leaving NextGen, she served as the Senior Technical Advisor to the Vice President of Mission Support to ensure operational readiness for the ADS-B rule and led the ATO’s Strategy Enterprise Planning Group developing UAS and Space Integration strategies. In 2023 Pamela was named the FAA Fellow and Senior Policy Advisor for Senator Tammy Duckworth, Chair of the Commerce, Science, and Transportation Aviation Subcommittee on Aviation Safety, Operations, and Innovation supporting the development of the FAA Reauthorization Act of 2024. She now serves as the FAA Director of the UAS Safety and Integration in the Aviation Safety Organization.
Parimal Kopardekar Parimal Kopardekar (PK) serves as the Advanced Air Mobility (AAM) Mission Integration Manager to coordinate Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate (ARMD) activities enabling progress of AAM ecosystem. In addition to this strategic role, PK serves as the Director of NASA Aeronautics Research Institute (NARI) and a senior leader and advisor for ARMD. In this capacity, he is responsible for exploring new trends, research areas, collaborations, and partnerships relevant to aeronautics enterprise. His focus is on uncrewed aircraft systems, advanced air mobility, wildland fire management, autonomy, and future airspace operations. Recently, he co-led a comprehensive needs assessment study for wildfire mitigations. In the past, he served as the NASA senior technologist for Air Transportation Systems. He invented Uncrewed Aircraft Systems Traffic Management (UTM) to safely enable large-scale drone operations at lower altitudes, which is now being globally adopted. He also chairs International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)’s uncrewed aircraft system advisory group. He is a recipient of many awards, including American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics’ Hap Arnold Award for Programmatic Excellence, NASA Government Invention of the Year, NASA Exceptional Technology Achievement Medal, NASA Outstanding Leadership Award, NASA Engineer of the Year Award, and the prestigious Samuel J. Heyman Service to America’s Promising Innovation Award. PK was named among 25 most influential people in drone industry. He serves as Co-Editor-in-Chief of Journal of Aerospace Operations and is a Fellow of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics as well as Fellow of the Royal Aeronautical Society. He also serves as an adjunct faculty and teaches undergraduate and graduate-level courses related to operations management, supply chain management, and innovation. He holds a Doctor of Philosophy from University of Cincinnati and a Master of Science degree from University at Buffalo in Industrial Engineering, and a Bachelor of Engineering degree from University of Bombay in Production Engineering.
Patrick Niven A military Aviator and professional pilot, Mr. Niven has accumulated over 15,000 accident-free hours over a 40+ year flying career, including 2000 hours in Attack Helicopters and a combat tour in Afghanistan. He holds an FAA ATP, CFII, Part 107 RPC, TOP Level 2 UAS Certification, and is a Certified Aviation Lead Auditor and Accident Investigator with extensive SMS training and experience. Now in his 35th year with Chevron USA, Inc., Mr. Niven serves as the Uncrewed Aircraft Systems Manager, overseeing 46 third-party and Company-internal UAS/RPAS teams located around the globe, including over 150 Company employee Remote Pilots.
Paul Brooks As the Regulatory Affairs Manager for the Americas, Paul Brooks helps lead Skyports’ development of Advanced Air Mobility (AMM) infrastructure and operational capabilities. Paul oversees Skyports’ policy, regulatory, and governmental affairs efforts while also representing Skyports as a member of many professional organizations and governmental committees to include serving as Co-Chair of the National Air Transportation Association Advanced Air Mobility Committee. Prior to joining Skyports, Paul spent a short time in the public sector after serving 26 years in the U.S. Coast Guard, where earned the rank of Captain while serving as a Commanding Officer, Presidential staff member, Coast Guard Aviator, aeronautical engineer, and acquisition professional. Paul holds a MS in Systems Engineering from Johns Hopkins University, a MS in Operations Research from Southern Methodist University, and a BS in Mathematics and Computer Science from the US Coast Guard Academy. He is a certified Project Management and Systems Engineering Professional and is an ATP-MEL rated pilot.
Paul Fontaine Mr. Paul Fontaine is the Assistant Administrator for NextGen and is responsible for championing the evolution of the National Airspace System (NAS). He provides strategic direction and executive oversight to more than 800 federal employees in the Office of NextGen (ANG) and is responsible for implementing the air transportation system modernization, executing the aviation research portfolio, and delivering results to support the overall advancement of aviation. Mr. Fontaine has experience harmonizing the implementation of aviation technologies with stakeholder priorities and ensuring risks are collaboratively addressed to facilitate delivery of Next Generation Air Transportation System (NextGen) capabilities and benefits.
Paul Litke Paul Litke leads United’s strategy for Air Traffic Control, Surface Operations, and air routes in the domestic and international arenas. Paul joined United in February 2020 as the Director of Surface Operations where he worked to optimize our airport surface strategy. Prior to working at United, Paul worked for the FAA for 32 years including 23 years at the Air Traffic Control Tower at ORD. In his last FAA position prior to retirement, Paul served as the Director of National Airspace System Operations.
Peter Irvine Peter D. Irvine serves as SES Deputy Director, U.S. DOT Office of Aviation Analysis, directing daily operations across six program areas to promote economic competitiveness in the U.S. aviation industry. Leveraging the analytical capabilities of the Office, Peter also serves as Executive Lead for Aviation Policy for the USDOT. The Aviation Policy Team works collaboratively with the Federal Aviation Administration and other organizations to develop and coordinate United States aviation policy, especially with respect to cutting-edge or cross-cutting issues affecting multiple offices and programs. In this regard, Peter and the team lead the implementation of the Advanced Air Mobility Coordination & Leadership Act. The Office of Aviation Analysis is part of the broader USDOT Office of the Assistant Secretary for Aviation & International Affairs.
Phillip Lozano Phillip Lozano is Program Manager for FAA UTM Implementation. He is supporting standards, regulations and technical evaluation for UTM integration efforts. He is the UTM SDSP and USS Near Term Approval Process Program Lead. Prior, he was the Program Manager of the Technical Operations UAS Operations Team, developing UAS operations supporting maintenance of FAA facilities and Systems. Additionally, serviced as an Operational Implementation Lead, where he worked with deploying new enterprise NAS Systems, such as Data Communication Program, SWIM, Identify and Access Management (IAM.)
Phillip Wallace Phillip J. Wallace is a senior government affairs leader with extensive experience as a trusted political advisor to Fortune #1 executives, venture capitalists, and accomplished entrepreneurs. For the second consecutive year, Washingtonian Magazine recently named him one of the 500 Most Influential People Shaping Policy, recognizing Phillip for his significant understanding of how the nation’s capital works, with the goal of getting things done. Phillip currently serves as Director of Federal Government Affairs at Walmart, Inc. (NYSE: WMT), where he is responsible for representing the company’s public policy priorities before Congress, the Administration, media, business community, and external stakeholders. He also leads Walmart’s engagement with the National Democratic Party, Democratic Caucuses in both chambers, and their respective political organizations. Originally from Louisiana, Phillip started his public policy career as a US Senate staffer for the Committee on Small Business & Entrepreneurship immediately after the BP Oil Spill devastated the southeast Gulf Coast. Under the leadership of Senator Mary Landrieu, he was proud to have connected over 500 distressed small business owners to federal government resources and worked through final passage of the Small Business Jobs Act of 2010, which created the Small Business Lending Fund Program administered by the US Treasury Department. After his public service, Phillip went on to hold lobbyist management roles at venture capital firm Intellectual Ventures, Hyundai Motor Company, and AHRI (a global trade association representing all major HVAC manufacturers) before joining Walmart in October 2019. Phillip serves on several boards, including the Corporate Advisory Committee at the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation, the Asian Pacific American Institute for Congressional Studies, the North Carolina A&T University MEA Center of Excellence, and is Chair of the Washington Government Relations Group Foundation. He earned a B.A. degree in Political Science and Economics from the Nelson Mandela School of Public Policy & Urban Affairs at Southern University and a master’s degree from the Graduate School of Political Management at The George Washington University.
Rachel Carlstrom Rachel Carlstrom holds a degree in aeronautical science and aviation management and is an Airline Transport Pilot with multi-engine rating. She is a Gold Seal flight instructor with instrument and multi-engine ratings and holds a remote pilot certificate. Rachel has experience as a corporate and 135 on-demand charter pilot and Part 141 chief pilot and instructor. Rachel started working for the FAA in 2011 as an Aviation Safety Inspector at the Des Moines, IA Flight Standards District Office. Rachel held positions in the Central Region as the FAASTeam POC and the Assistance manager for ACE-230, which transitioned to an assistant manager position in the Air Carrier Transportation Division (AFS-200). She started working with a primary focus on all UAS and new entrant activities for the Air Carrier Transportation Division and as the Integration Pilot Program (IPP) team lead for Part 135 Air Carrier Certifications in January of 2018. In February 2019-2021 she worked in the UAS Integration Office (AUS) as the State Local Tribal Program Manager for the IPP North Carolina and Memphis portfolios. After the conclusion of the IPP Rachel took a position as the branch manager in the Air Transportation Division Part 135 Flight operations branch. Rachel has most recently joined the new Emerging Technologies Division as the Air Transportation Branch manager.
Randall Bass Mr. Randy Bass is the Manager of the Aviation Weather Division (ANG-C6) within the Portfolio Management and Technology Development directorate (ANG-C) of the Assistant Administrator for NextGen Office (ANG). He leads a division that conducts research to mitigate the impacts of weather on aviation, with the mission of assuring the development, enhancement, dissemination, and integration of productive weather information into Air Traffic Management decisions by pilots, controllers, flight operations and airport operators. Randy Bass has over 35 years of weather experience spanning the military, private and commercial industry, and government. Since 2012, he has worked for the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), starting as the manager of the Convective Weather Research Program and then manager of the Weather Research Branch within ANG-C6. He became the Aviation Weather Division Manager in 2023. Mr. Bass has broad experience in operational weather forecasting, including weather support for aviation and satellite operations. Randy retired from the Air Force in 2008 after 20 years as a weather officer. During his career, he provided weather support to bases throughout the US and to a variety of aircraft such as the B-1, KC-135, A-10, U-2 and C-5. He deployed three times to the Middle East in support of various contingencies, cumulatively spending over a year in Oman, Egypt and Saudi Arabia. He spent almost half his career supporting the Intelligence Community and satellite operations. Randy earned his MS in Meteorology from Texas A&M University (1996), and his BS in Meteorology from North Carolina State University (1987). He is also a Certified Consulting Meteorologist, certified by the American Meteorological Society in 2014. Mr. Bass holds membership in the American Meteorological Society, the National Weather Association, and the Association of Certified Meteorologists, and has served on various boards for all three organizations.
Randy Willis Randy Willis is a Senior Policy Advisor at Northrop Grumman and 40-year aerospace professional with a technical background in air traffic control service provision and management, airspace regulations, international and domestic Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) policy, standards development, and implementation. Randy currently leads several international and domestic airspace integration and air traffic management efforts within the ICAO Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems (RPAS) Panel, ICAO AAM Study Group, and Aerospace Industries Association Airspace Working Group. Prior to joining Northrop Grumman, Randy worked as Manager, Emerging Technologies Office in the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Headquarters before retiring in September 2019. Additionally, Randy also served as the United States Member and Chairman/Vice Chairman of the ICAO RPAS Panel (2014-2019). During his tenure he led 35 ICAO Member States and international aviation organizations working under eight working groups to create Standards and Recommended Practices (SARPS) and Procedures for Air Navigation Services (PANS) for the integration of RPAS worldwide. Prior to joining the FAA, Randy served in the United States Navy as an Air Traffic Controller. During his Naval career, Randy held many positions with varying levels of responsibility before retiring after 23 years of service. Randy has a Bachelor of Science Degree in Business Administration from the University of Maryland Global Campus and Project Management Graduate Certificate from St. Mary’s College of Maryland.
Rob Robertson With 16 years in law enforcement, Rob supervises a team of 40 public safety pilots for the city of Arlington. His responsibilities extend to the integration of UAS for major stadium operations for the Texas Rangers and Dallas Cowboys. Rob achieved a significant milestone by becoming the first in the nation to secure NFL endorsement for public safety UAS operations during stadium Temporary Flight Restrictions (TFRs). He also received the Gunderson Award for significant contributions to interior UAS for tactical applications. At the forefront of innovation, Rob spearheads Arlington’s UASFR (UAS as a First Responder) initiative. This groundbreaking program leverages uncrewed aircraft systems as a de-escalation tool when seconds matter. He also serves as a public safety pathfinder, working alongside NASA and the FAA for the DFW UTM Key Site Project. Rob’s impact extends beyond his local jurisdiction. He is extremely active in the UAS community, serving as a committee member and instructor for the Law Enforcement Drone Association (LEDA). Additionally, he holds the position of Vice President of Public Safety for the FPV Freedom Coalition, the second largest Community-Based Organization (CBO) recognized by the Federal Aviation Administration. Rob also serves as an FAA FAAST team Drone Pro representative, actively contributing to UAS safety and education initiatives. He is also obtaining a Master of Science in Unmanned Aviation, holds an FCC Radio Technician License, and is a certified Thermographer. Beyond his professional involvements, Rob finds fulfillment in his faith, his wife and 3 children, and building and piloting FPV aircraft. His multifaceted involvement across public safety, commercial, and recreational UAS sectors reflects his commitment to advancing the industry through innovative solutions, safety advocacy, and education.
Robert Dooley Sergeant Robert Dooley is the Statewide UAV Coordinator and has 22 years with the Florida Highway Patrol (FHP). Sergeant Dooley is the Director of Public Safety for the AUVSI Florida Peninsula Chapter, CoFounder and LEO Lead for the AIRT/DroneResponders Florida Public Safety Coordination Group (FLOGRU), a member of the FAA FAASTeam and sits on the IACP Aviation Committee.
Robert Briggs Robert Briggs is the chief engineer at Virginia Tech Mid-Atlantic Aviation Partnership (MAAP), an FAA-designated UAS test site and the lead of Virginia’s team in the BEYOND program. At MAAP, Robert leads engineering efforts including research in detect and avoid, uncrewed aircraft (UA) traffic management, and other enabling technologies for widespread UA operations. Robert led the development of MAAP’s operations over people (OOP) means of compliance (MOC) which became the first FAA-accepted OOP MOC in December 2021. In January of 2024 this MOC was updated to a new version that allows aircraft that utilize a parachute recovery system (PRS) to be assessed. Robert joined MAAP in 2018, after working at the Naval Surface Warfare Center, Dahlgren Division as an uncrewed systems test engineer. Robert’s experience with research and testing covers a variety of uncrewed systems including, aerial, surface, ground and underwater vehicles. Before his work with the Navy, Briggs earned his master’s degree in Aerospace Engineering at Virginia Tech, where his thesis research focused on the novel design of a self-mooring autonomous underwater vehicle. Robert is a member of the Association for Uncrewed Vehicle Systems International and contributor to several standards organizations, including ASTM and RTCA.
Robert Goldman Robert Goldman is a 757/767 captain and a senior manager of Air Traffic Management and Industry Affairs at Delta Air Lines. Robert’s primary focus is on optimizing throughput, capacity, and access throughout the National Airspace System, with an emphasis on Delta’s NYC and Northeast corridor hubs. Rob’s work directly supports Delta’s operational performance commitment while also serving it’s sustainability and community noise goals as well. Captain Goldman has over 28 years of aviation experience that includes traffic flow management, airspace and procedure design, airport operations and integration efforts, including AAM and UAM. He leads and serves on numerous industry organizations and committees including the NextGen Advisory Committee (NAC), Collaborative Decision Making (CDM) and Airlines for America (A4A) Air Traffic Management Council (ATMC). Mr. Goldman has a Bachelor of Science Degree in Engineering from The University of Michigan and a master’s in business administration from Syracuse University.
Roxana Kennedy Chief Kennedy began her law enforcement career in 1992. She rose through the ranks to become the first female Chief of Police for the City of Chula Vista and the first internal Chief of Police in 67 years. Chief Kennedy has established a reputation for an outstanding work ethic, professionalism, commitment to the community, and dedication to compassionate policing. Her passion for police work and providing the highest quality of service to the community quickly propelled her through the ranks to become Chula Vista’s first female Police Lieutenant and then in 2013, Police Captain. Chief Kennedy is committed to implementing the six pillars of 21st Century Policing by providing the highest level of professional law enforcement services to the Chula Vista community. This is achieved by building trust and legitimacy, creating policies that reflect the community values and oversight to ensure the community has a voice, increasing the use of technology, implementing community policing strategies, expanding officer training and education, and enhancing officer safety and wellness. Under her leadership, the Chula Vista Police Department (CVPD) has embraced innovative initiatives focused on using technology to enhance community safety, increase situational awareness and officer safety, and reduce response times. CVPD is proud to be the first and only police department to work under the Federal Aviation Administration’s UAS Integrated Pilot Program “Drone as First Responder (DFR)” concept which provides real-time data to officers and supervisors and allows officers to make better tactical decisions in the field providing safer outcomes for all parties involved. Chief Kennedy’s goal is to share CVPD’s story with law enforcement partners nationally and internationally to help standardize and expand to any agency interested in the benefits. CVPD is also leading another pilot project called Live911. Live911 allows the officers in the field to hear incoming 911 calls and respond before critical calls are processed and dispatched. Other programs of importance include: • Body Worn Cameras - issued to all uniformed patrol • Open Data Initiative - To provide greater transparency, build trust, and enhance community engagement, the Chula Vista Police Department is proud to be one of the first law enforcement agencies in the United States to participate in the White House Open Data Initiative • Cell phone deployment to all sworn officers • DeX- pilot program replacing MDC’s with officers’ hand-held smartphones docked in the vehicle • Speakwrite- Application-based report writing dictation program • State of the Art Communication Center and Realtime Operations Center Chief Kennedy has a bachelor’s degree in business management from California Coast University. She is a graduate of the FBI National Academy, Class #243, and served on the FBI National Academy California Chapter Board of Directors for six years. She is a founding member of the San Diego Chapter of Woman Leaders in Law Enforcement Foundation and served as President of the Chapter for 3 years. Chief Kennedy is currently the President of the San Diego County Chiefs’ and Sheriff’s Association and is on the Board of Directors for Girls Scouts San Diego and Promise 2Kids Foundation. Yet, what is most important to her, is spending time with her family and friends, and volunteering with non-profit organizations. Chief Kennedy serves as the President of Project Compassion and leads medical mission teams throughout the world helping those in need. She has traveled and led teams on more than 20 international trips to Uganda, Kenya, Cameroon, Mozambique, Malawi, Kenya, Madagascar, Mexico, Ecuador, and Ethiopia. Helping others is her passion and motivation. ,
Russell Kline Russell Kline, has over 15 years of experience in various aviation and government roles. He currently serves as the Chief Regulatory Officer at Drone Express, where he leads a team of aviation professionals and the company through the Part 135 Air Carrier Certification and airworthiness efforts.
Ryan Steinbach Ryan Steinbach is an Aviation Policy Coordinator in the DOT Secretary’s Office of Aviation Analysis. He represents the Secretary and senior DOT officials on matters of aviation policy, and works collaboratively with the FAA and other stakeholders for safe, economically sound operations in American airspace. Prior to his time at the Department of Transportation, Ryan served as the Senior Technical Advisor to the Director of Flight Standards on Unmanned Aircraft Systems for the Federal Aviation Administration. As part of his role, he served on multiple rulemaking teams, the pilot qualifications Joint Authorities for Rulemaking on Unmanned Systems (JARUS) working group, and International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Task Forces and Panels. Ryan is a veteran of the Air Force and the Army, where he served as a public affairs officer for the B-2 Spirit (Stealth) Bomber, and as a Blackhawk crew chief. He has also served in health communications and policy for the Department of Veterans Affairs as a Veterans Service Organization Liaison. Ryan is currently a resident of Manassas, Virginia with his wife, Julie, and their six children ages 19 to 6.
Sabrina Saunders-Hodge Sabrina Saunders-Hodge is the Director of the Research, Engineering and Analysis Division within the FAA’s UAS Integration Office. In this role she serves as the FAA’s focal point for Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) and Advanced Air Mobility (AAM) integration research with responsibility for leading the evolution of the agency’s strategic framework and innovative planning for foundational research required to yield the data necessary to support the safe and efficient integration of emerging entrants into the National Airspace System. In this capacity, Ms. Saunders-Hodge collaborates with industry, U.S. federal agencies, tribal nations and international civil aviation authorities (CAA) as well as manages FAA’s UAS Test Site Program. Prior to joining the UAS Integration Office, Ms. Saunders-Hodge was the program manager responsible for standing up and managing the FAA’s first UAS Center of Excellence. Over the past thirty plus years Ms. Saunders-Hodge has worked in the field of satellite communications, contributed to the development of ICAO’s global plan for transitioning to future communications, navigation, surveillance and air traffic management (CNS/ATM) systems for civil aviation, co-managed the oversight of FAA/European cooperative research and development initiatives, and worked on the development of operational concepts for technology enhancements within the NAS. Ms. Saunders-Hodge holds a B.S. and M.S. in Computer Science from The University of Maryland and Johns Hopkins University respectively. Ms. Saunders-Hodge is a certified Project Management Professional and a graduate of the Federal Executive Institute. Additionally, Ms. Saunders-Hodge was one of twelve women from around the world inducted into the inaugural class of the Women And Drones, LLC - Women in Emerging Aviation Technologies Hall of Fame in January 2023.
Scott Shtofman Scott Shtofman is a policy and operations advocate with a focus on uncrewed systems and is the Director of Government Affairs at the Association for Uncrewed Vehicle System International (AUVSI). His work at AUVSI, the largest nonprofit dedicated to the advancement of uncrewed systems and robotics, is focused on advocacy at the state and federal levels through management of their vast member and chapter network. Scott knows how to navigate the complexities of advanced drone operations from inception to implementation while gaining public acceptance along the way and simultaneously considering sales and go-to market strategies. This experience stems from his drone service and consulting business, Quad Axis LLC, which he founded and ran for more than 6 years. Scott has passionately advocated for the safe integration of drones into the National Airspace System (NAS) through his work on the Beyond Visual Line of Sight (BVLOS) Aviation Rulemaking Committee (ARC) and various state committees. That work has ranged from small systems to traditional aviation and to Advanced Air Mobility (AAM) and electric Vertical Takeoff and Landing (eVTOL) platforms. Scott’s state specific work is seen in two national campaigns focused on industry vetted, common sense model legislation, to enable the future of advanced aviation technology around the country. These efforts, Drone Prepared and AAM Prepared, have garnered interest and collaborative discussions with lawmakers and transportation officials around the country. Scott is a licensed attorney in Texas, a Part 107 certificated remote pilot, OSHA 30 certified, and a member of multiple standards setting organizations in the uncrewed space. Scott provides insightful industry commentary and analysis through participation in conference programs, publishing articles, and working directly with regulators on crafting new legislation. Scott holds a JD from the University of Texas, an MBA from Indiana University, and a BSBA from Indiana University
Sean Cassidy Sean Cassidy is Vice President of Regulatory and Government Affairs at Aibot, a pioneer in the development of the next generation of uncrewed eVTOL solutions for high performance air mobility needs. In this regard he will lead Aibot’s efforts to realize airworthiness, certification and operating permission goals and drive regulatory and government affairs strategy in support of the commercial deployment of Aibot’s systems. Prior to joining Aibot, Sean Cassidy was Director of Safety, Flight Operations and Regulatory Affairs with Amazon Prime Air, Amazon’s drone delivery program. As Director of Operations he led Prime Air’s efforts to achieve their first Part 135 commercial air carrier certificate and launch commercial delivery operations. Before joining Amazon, Mr. Cassidy was the First Vice President of the Air Line Pilots Association International, and was the senior accountable executive in charge of all safety and technical programs in support of over 52,000 commercial airline pilots at 32 different airlines in the United States and Canada. His aviation career began in 1986 when he was commissioned as an officer in the United States Navy and subsequently received his wings as a Naval Aviator. He flew carrier-based missions as an EA-6B pilot/mission commander and instructor pilot. Later he joined Alaska Airlines where he went on to accrue nearly 20 years of commercial aviation experience as an airline captain and industry advocate. Mr. Cassidy has extensive experience with international aviation standards and regulatory organizations. Most recently he was the industry co-chair for the FAA’s Beyond Visual Line of Sight Aviation Rulemaking Committee (BVLOS ARC) and the Flight Safety Foundation’s Autonomous and Remotely Piloted Aviation Capabilities (ARPAC) Advisory Committee. Prior to that he was the industry chair for the FAA Unmanned Aircraft Safety Team (UAST) and Drone Advisory Committee (DAC) subcommittee. He has collaborated globally with aviation authorities on the development of drone specific operating guidelines and regulations, has testified multiple times before the US Congress, and has served in a number of senior aviation industry advisory positions.
Shanetta Griffin Shannetta R. Griffin, P.E., was appointed Associate Administrator of Airports for the Federal Aviation Administration on June 7, 2021, by U.S. President Joseph R. Biden, Jr. and U.S. Secretary of Transportation Pete Buttigieg. Griffin has close to 40 years of experience as a professional engineer and small business advocate within the private and public sectors of the transportation industry with an emphasis on aviation. She is a leader with expertise in operational performance, project engineering and client relationship management. She leads a team of more than 600 employees around the country and manages an annual budget of $3.35 billion, which includes an operating budget of about $112 million. She is responsible for the Airport Improvement Program grants, which total around $8 billion annually, as well as two major research programs. She is also responsible for administering national airport safety and standards, planning, engineering, environmental processing, financial assistance and compliance programs for more than 3,300 public-use airports nationwide. Griffin has received numerous professional accolades and awards by transportation and civic organizations to include Woman in Aviation Excellence – Legacy Award by the Airport Minority Advisory Council, Women Who Move the Nation by the Conference of Minority Transportation Officials, Distinguished Alumni by the University of Toledo College of Civil Engineering, Corporate Professional of the Year by the National Forum for Black Public Administrators, Achievement in Business and Industry Award by the Indianapolis Center for Leadership Development and Strathmore Who's Who. A graduate of the University of Toledo, Griffin was the first African-American woman to graduate from the College of Civil Engineering. She is also a proud member of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc. She is proud to serve not only as the first African American, but as the first African-American woman to hold the position of Associate Administrator of Airports. Griffin continues to be a trailblazer and model of diversity, equity and inclusion at its best.
Shawn Kozica Shawn Kozica is the Acting Deputy Director in the FAA’s Office of NextGen, Advanced Concepts and Technologies Directorate. An Air Force veteran with an extensive aviation background, Shawn previously worked as an Air Traffic Controller in the Air Force and the FAA; Operations Manager and Airspace and Procedures Manager at Southern California TRACON; Operations Support Group Manager at the Western Service Center; and Airspace Modernization Manager, Acting Strategy Director, and Chief Strategist at FAA/ATO HQ. Shawn is deeply involved in the strategic planning and integration of emerging entrants, including Advanced Air Mobility. Shawn studied Aviation Management as an undergraduate at Wayland Baptist University and Aeronautical Science as a graduate student at Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University.
Shawna Barry Shawna Barry manages the Environmental Policy Division of the FAA’s Office of Environment and Energy. In this role, she oversees the development and interpretation of agency-wide environmental policy and guidance and represents the agency in meetings with federal partners, including the Department of Transportation, the White House Council on Environmental Quality, and other agencies. She provides strategic support for complex or novel environmental reviews, such as those prepared for new entrants. She has a background in ecology and compliance with the Endangered Species Act and serves as the FAA’s Permitting Dashboard Coordinator. She graduated from the George Washington University with an M.A. in Environmental and Resource Policy and holds a B.S. with Honors in Biology from the Pennsylvania State University.
Skylar Howell Skylar Howell Drone Division Executive, Cinemoves | Above Ground Level Skylar Howell leads the drone division of Cinemoves, recently rebranded as Above Ground Level (AGL). With a decade of experience in the movie industry, Skylar has played a major role in integrating advanced drone technology into high-profile film productions. A private pilot with certifications in both fixed wing and rotary wing aircraft, Skylar brings a unique blend of aviation expertise and cinematic vision to the field. The creation of Above Ground Level marks a new chapter in their commitment to providing cutting-edge drone services that enhance the art of filmmaking.
Steve "Lux" Luxion Colonel (Retired) Stephen P. Luxion is the Executive Director of ASSURE (Alliance for System Safety of UAS through Research Excellence) led by Mississippi State University. Steve is responsible for leading the alliance of 27 of the world’s leading research universities and its industry partners. ASSURE is the Federal Aviation Administration’s (FAA) Center of Excellence for Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS). ASSURE provides the FAA a wide-ranging UAS research portfolio and conducts specific research funded by the FAA to help inform and address the key challenges to safely and efficiently integrating UAS into the National Airspace System. ASSURE also leverages its expertise, experience, and knowledge to serve others outside the FAA including current research for NASA the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the National Institute for Standards and Technology. Lux is a 34 year US Air Force veteran with over 2,500 hours flying time in the F-111 Aardvark, MQ-1B Predator UAV; and the F-14A Tomcat and EA-6B Prowler while on exchange with the US Navy; including 700 hours combat time in operations over Iraq, Bosnia, and Afghanistan. For his combat efforts, Colonel Luxion was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross for Valor, 4 Air Medals, and 7 Aerial Achievement Medals.
Steve Bradford Steve Bradford is the Chair of the Technical Review Board that monitors technical decisions related to investments and the Enterprise Architecture. He is the FAA lead for the FAA/NASA Research Transition Team process that supports collaboration between the FAA and NAS on ATM related activities. A current focus of the RTT process is collaboration on Higher Airspace Operations, UAS Traffic Management supporting operations in uncontrolled airspace, and AAM. The RTT’s depend on direct partnership with the UAS industry and provide many opportunities to look at new technology options for both new entrants and traditional manned aircraft operations. He has a leading role in NextGen’s International engagement activities with SESAR Joint Undertaking and has led several co-operative international efforts with EUROCONTROL He is also actively engaged in the bi-lateral cooperation with Japan and Singapore. He is the Chair of the ICAO GANP Study Group and an active contributor to the GANP ASBUs. He is a past US panel member to the ICAO Air Traffic Management Requirements and Performance Panel where he continues as a US technical advisor.
Steven Willoughby Steven A. Willoughby currently serves as the Deputy Director for the Department of Homeland Security’s Counter-UAS Program, where he focuses on strategic planning for air domain awareness, threat discrimination, threat mitigation, and interagency information sharing. Steve previously served as the Director for Aviation and Surface Transportation for the White House’s National Security Council where he advised leadership and coordinated multiple interagency workgroups on various issues including unmanned systems, international transport agreements, and incident response. Prior to these roles, Steve worked for the Transportation Security Administration, conducting red team vulnerability assessments across the transportation sector, and for TSA’s Office of Security Operations, supporting the National Explosives Detection Canine Team Program. Steve began his federal career as a Transportation Security Officer at Washington-Dulles International Airport after graduating from Florida Atlantic University with a Bachelor’s Degree in Political Science.
Tim Arel As Chief Operating Officer of the FAA’s Air Traffic Organization, Mr. Timothy L. Arel is responsible for ensuring safe, efficient and secure air traffic services for approximately 50,000 aircraft operating every day over nearly 30 million square miles across the National Airspace System (NAS). Mr. Arel provides leadership and guidance to more than 35,000 employees and oversees the daily operation of the ATO, an organization made up of air traffic controllers, technicians, engineers, pilots and a host of other technical and support personnel who provide services as part of eight service units: Air Traffic Services, Technical Operations,?System Operations, Safety and Technical Training, Mission Support Services, Management Services, Flight Programs Operations and the Program Management Organization. The organization is also responsible for operationalizing airspace modernization initiatives and integrating unmanned aircraft systems and commercial space operations into the NAS.? Throughout his 33-year career with the FAA, Mr. Arel has developed expertise in airspace security, air traffic safety, resource management and labor relations.? Prior to being named ATO Chief Operating Officer in October 2022, he served as Deputy COO from 2017-2022, overseeing domestic air traffic operations and managing the ATO Officers Group, the organization’s executive leadership team.? Mr. Arel’s previous leadership roles in the ATO include Director of Safety, Deputy Vice President of Safety and Technical Training and Vice President of Air Traffic Services.? Earlier in his career, Arel managed the ATC Investigations Team, the Compliance Services Group, the Quality Assurance Group and the Runway Safety Group.? He began his FAA career as an air traffic controller in 1989. Mr. Arel currently serves as chair of the Civil Air Navigation Services Organization (CANSO) Latin America and Caribbean CEO Committee, an organizational committee that works to harmonize regional air traffic policies and procedures to ensure safe and efficient operations with regional partners. As committee chair, he is a member of the CANSO Executive Committee, which serves as the organization’s board of directors.? Mr. Arel is a veteran of the U.S. Air Force and has a background in public safety, having worked as an emergency medical technician, firefighter, 911 operator and police officer.? He is a graduate of the Federal Executive Institute’s?Leadership for a Democratic Society?and the Harvard John F. Kennedy School of Government’s?Driving Government Performance.
Tim Beglau Tim Beglau obtained an Associate of Applied Science degree in Professional Pilot from Lenoir Community College and a Bachelor of Science in Aviation from Liberty University. Beglau has done flight instructing at both 61 and 141 flight schools before transitioning to a role as a pilot for Part 135 operations. In 2000, Beglau joined the FAA and spent nine years at the Atlanta Flight Standards District Office (FSDO) as a Principal Operations Inspector. Since 2009, Beglau has been working at FAA Headquarters, specializing in Part 135 operations and Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS).
Timothy Adams Tim is a senior thought leader with more than 20 years of expertise in all facets of aviation safety, international policy development, and regulatory compliance. As the Deputy Director (A) of Safety Standards, Flight Standards Service he is responsible for the people, leadership, strategic direction, and oversight of the 1,100 aviation safety professionals across the country who develop and implement regulations, guidance, and directives relating to aircraft maintenance and operations, airmen, and delegation. Further, he is responsible for improving consistency and standardization in Flight Standards policies affecting domestic and foreign safety oversight and certification activities. Tim graduated from George Mason University with a degree in Political Science and a minor in legal studies. He also holds a Master of Science in Aviation and Aerospace Sustainability with a specialization in Aviation Safety from Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University.
Tombo Jones Tombo Jones is the director of the Virginia Tech Mid-Atlantic Aviation Partnership (MAAP), an FAA designated UAS Test Site. Here he oversees a growing portfolio of major federal drone-integration initiatives and technical research projects including leading his team in participation in the FAA BEYOND and ASSURE programs. He serves on the Governor’s Aerospace Advisory Council and the Virginia Advanced Air Mobility Alliance where he supports the state's focus on supporting UAS technologies and preparation for Advanced Air Mobility. He joined MAAP in 2017 following more than a decade in progressively larger leadership roles in the U.S. Coast Guard, where he served as a sector chief of administration and logistics, aviation operations officer and chief pilot, and safety management systems and standardization instructor, developing extensive expertise in managing and mitigating risk in advanced aviation. Before joining the Coast Guard, Tombo served for twelve years in the U.S. Army as an aviator and infantry paratrooper. His awards include a Meritorious Service Medal, Bronze Star and Air Medal. He holds an Airline Transport Pilot and Flight Instructor certification with helicopter and instrument rating as well as a Private Pilot certification with airplane single engine and instrument rating and a Remote Pilot certification for UAS.
Travis Mason Travis Mason is the Chief Policy and Regulatory Officer at Merlin, where he leads a team of engineers focused on certification, policy, product safety assurance, and human factors. Before joining Merlin, Travis served as the Vice President of Certification and Regulatory Affairs at Airbus, overseeing the company's efforts to scale advanced air mobility, eVTOLs, and high-altitude platforms. At Alphabet's Google and X, he helped solve policy and regulatory challenges for autonomous and life science technologies. Most recently, Mason served as a founding operating partner at Seven Seven Six, a software-enabled venture capital fund investing in space tech, prop-tech, food tech, fintech, cleantech, and Web3 industries. Travis is a board member at Destiny.xyz and Maxwell School of Citizenship, the country’s number one ranked program in public policy.
Trevor Woods Trevor Woods is a graduate of the University of North Dakota earning a Bachelor of Business Administration in Aviation Management (2008) and a Master of Business Administration (2017). He is a Commercial Pilot and holds a CFII. Trevor has been with the Northern Plains UAS Test Site since its inception and has an extensive history interfacing with the FAA for much of his career. Trevor was instrumental to North Dakota being selected as one of ten participants in the UAS Integration Pilot Program, now the BEYOND program, and played a pivotal role in the inception of Vantis, North Dakota’s beyond visual line of sight (BVLOS) initiative. In 2022, he took over as executive director to lead the Northern Plains UAS Test Site.
Vic Moss Vic is the CEO & Co-Founder of DSPA. As a commercial photographer, he has owned Moss Photography since 1988, and has been offering drone services since 2014. Vic is a nationally recognized voice for drone safety and an advocate for reasonable drone regulation. On social media, he serves as the administrator for the largest UAS specific legal forum, the UAV Law News & Discussion Group, and one of the largest commercial UAS pilot forums. Vic also serves as the Director of Legislative Affairs for UAS Colorado where he worked with numerous municipalities to help create reasonable drone regulations. Vic works with the FAA as one of five FAA Safety Team Drone Pros for the Denver FSDO, encompassing all of Colorado and Wyoming. Vic was also appointed to the Drone Advisory Committee in January, 2021 as a Citizen UAS Operator.
Wayne Cummings Wayne Cummings is the FAA’s Flight Standards Advanced Air Mobility (AAM) Integration Lead and Manager of the Emerging Technologies Branch of the FAA’s Aircraft Evaluation Division. In these roles, Wayne is responsible for coordinating Flight Standards responsibilities as they relate to AAM while also interfacing with other offices throughout the FAA to enable safe and efficient integration of AAM into the US National Airspace System. In that, Wayne is also responsible to coordinate with international authorities on integration initiatives for AAM aircraft. Wayne serves as the Flight Standards representative on the DOT Interagency Working Group (IWG) and as an ICAO Task Force member on teams developing implementation guidance in support of the ICAO AAM Study Group. He has served as sponsor for several collaborative initiatives such as the Integrated Proposal Document (IPD) process, Innovate28 Program, Integrated Project Management (IPM), and the Flight Standards AAM Work Plan that all seek to cross barriers and enhance communication to facilitate the safe integration of emergent technologies. Prior to joining the FAA, Wayne worked for a government contracting company flying, maintaining, and managing operations domestically and internationally throughout Latin America and the Caribbean. One of his greatest joys is using aviation as a tool to help people. Wayne holds a Master of Science degree in Aeronautical Science with Distinction from Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University with emphasis in Aviation Safety and Management as well as a Bachelor of Science degree in Aviation Technology from LeTourneau University. He holds an Airline Transport Pilot Certificate with several aircraft Type Ratings and an Airframe and Powerplant Mechanic Certificate with Inspection Authorization.
Wendy O'Connor Wendy came from the Air Traffic Organization and has over 25 years of federal service and 9 years of military service in the United States Navy. She was an Air traffic Controller at Kansas City ARTCC for 14 years, then made the transition to FAA Headquarters as a staff specialist in Mission Support Services within the ATO working Operational Requirements for acquisition programs and the F&E budget. Wendy most recently served as the Director, Operations Planning & Integration in Air Traffic Services and took over for her peer Directorate for Operation Policy and Implementation providing executive direction and leadership for the modernization of the National Airspace System (NAS) through the Next Generation Air Transportation System (NextGen) programs, operations policy, staffing and day to day air traffic operations. She is recognized as an expert in change management, NAS modernization initiatives and the FAA budgets. Wendy is now the Executive Director of FAA Advanced Air Mobility Integration in AVS.
Will Hutson Will Hutson is an avid aviation enthusiast with over 15 years of air traffic control experience. He has worked at multiple FAA facilities, including Houston Air Route Traffic Control Center, George Bush Intercontinental Tower, and Denver Tower. He started flying when he was 15 years old and received his private pilot’s license and instrument flight rating shortly thereafter. Will graduated with a bachelor's degree in Air Traffic Management from Embry Riddle Aeronautical University and currently serves as the Urban Air Mobility (UAM) representative for the National Air Traffic Controllers Association.
William Wheeler William is the Director of Operations for Phoenix Air Unmanned, LLC., a sister-company of the Part 135 air carrier, Phoenix Air Group. Previously a remote-control aerial cinematographer, William has flown cameras for multiple major motion pictures and television series. Credits include Warner Brothers, Lionsgate, Universal, New Line Cinema and Netflix. William now oversees beyond visual line of sight flight operations focused on asset management in the utility sector. Phoenix Air Unmanned has inspected over 15,000 miles of powerline infrastructure utilizing multiple certificates of waiver and exemptions from the FAA. William received his Bachelor of Business Administration from Georgia State University. He holds a FAA Private Pilot rating and Level 2 safety certification from the Unmanned Safety Institute.

Last updated: Monday, July 29, 2024
