Title: 5/29/2008 Press Coverage PSN

URL Source: https://www.tippecanoe.in.gov/Archive.aspx?ADID=150

Markdown Content:
1

# 22001133 TTiippppeeccaannooee CCoouunnttyy PPrroosseeccuuttoorr’’ss OOffffiiccee iinn tthhee NNeewwss

December 31, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Illinois man faces a dozen charges in credit card theft 

Written by Justin L. Mack 

A dozen felony charges were filed Tuesday against an Illinois man accused of using the personal information of two Lafayette women to obtain credit cards. 

Kemo D. Whirl, 39, of Wheaton, Ill., was charged in Tippecanoe Superior Court with three counts of forgery, three counts of theft, three counts of fraud, two counts of identify deception and one count of attempted theft. 

According to court documents, the investigation against Whirl began in June when a woman who worked for Riggs Community Health Center told police that several attempts had been made to open credit cards in her name. 

She also reported that in July, a U.S. Bank credit card had been issued in her name and sent to an address in Lafayette. The card was later used to make purchases at Home Depot and Target. 

Surveillance footage from both stores showed the card being used by a black male wearing a baseball cap. 

Further investigation revealed that the credit card was sent to the home of another Riggs official who held an administrative position and had access to the personal information of other employees. When questioned, the administrator denied all knowledge about the illegally obtained credit card. 

When shown surveillance footage, the administrator was reportedly able to identify Whirl as the man who used the credit card at Home Depot and Target. She added that he was a friend who stayed with her from time to time. 

She also stated that Whirl was a Riggs patient. 

After speaking with the administrator, police spoke with a second victim who was a former care provider at Riggs. She too told investigators that she had been the victim of identify theft. 

Records and surveillance footage indicated that a U.S. Bank credit card opened in her name was used by Whirl at CVS and Pay Less Supermarket. 

Police spoke with Whirl on Aug. 19, and court documents allege that he admitted to applying for the credit cards with personal information he found in a trash can at Riggs. He reportedly went on to say that the Riggs administrator who he was friends with had nothing to do with it. 

Whirl allegedly recalled using a card at Home Depot and Target. When asked about using a credit card at CVS and Pay Less, he explained that he only vaguely remembered it and attributed his memory loss to being high on cocaine. 

December 30, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# 2 involved in Purdue grade changing-scheme plead guilty 2

Written by Justin L. Mack 

Two former Purdue University students involved in an elaborate plan to hack into university computer systems and doctor their grades pleaded guilty to their crimes Monday. 

Roy C. Sun pleaded guilty to two counts of computer tampering and one count of conspiracy to commit computer tampering, both Class D felonies. Sujay Sharma pleaded guilty to conspiracy to commit computer tampering, a Class D felony. 

Sun is slated to be sentenced on Feb. 27, and Sharma will be sentenced on Feb. 24. 

According to court documents, Sun’s grade changes date back to May 2008 and continued until his graduation in May 2010. His original grades were nine F’s and one incomplete. He gave himself straight A’s. 

Sharma, a nuclear engineering major, had just one class grade changed — an engineering course, going from a D 

to an A. But he’s accused of accessing course tests and acting as lookout for Mitsutoshi Shirasaki, a third defen dant still wanted and believed to be in Japan. 

Shirasaki, is suspected of changing 24 grades between May 2010 and December 2012 — in some instances, going 

from failing to A’s and B’s. 

The investigation began in November 2012 when an engineering professor contacted the university’s information 

technology security services department because his password had been changed by an unknown party. Shirasaki was later identified as the suspect. 

Court documents state that Shirasaki claimed that he learned how to a ccess professors’ accounts through Sun. It involved physically breaking into professors’ offices and switching their computer keyboards with identical ones. 

The suspects reportedly installed key logging devices to the original keyboards, then broke into p rofessors’ offices 

again to replace the original keyboards. The key logging devices allowed the suspects to figure out their 

professors’ account passwords. 

Purdue police previously told the Journal & Courier that the grade-changing scheme is believed to be a first for the university. 

December 27, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# 2 Ky. men face drug charges 

# Police say car contained 75 pounds of marijuana 

Written by Emily Campion 

Two Kentucky men were formally charged Friday in Tippecanoe Superior Court 2 after police say they found more than 75 pounds of marijuana in their vehicle on Dec. 19. 

Jairo Alejandro Villalobos and Daniel Rivera Barradas face charges of dealing marijuana, a Class C felony, with intent to deliver in the amount of 10 pounds or more; and possession of marijuana, a Class D felony, with the intent to deliver in an amount greater than 30 grams. 3

A Class C felony is punishable by up to eight years in prison, while a Class D felony is punishable by up to three years in prison. 

Indiana State Police Trooper Joseph Winters pulled Villalobos over for no visible license plate. According to court documents, Winters detected the odor of marijuana. Upon requesting consent to search the vehicle, Winters found a clear, vacuum-sealed bag inside a shoebox with green, plant-like material. Winters estimated the bag weighed 1 pound. 

Two large trash bags were found in the trunk, each containing two large, wrapped bundles and weighing about 75 pounds total. A field test confirmed the substance to be marijuana. 

Villalobos told police the drug was loaded into the car at a Wisconsin home. According to court documents, Villalobos said he sat in the living room while Barradas and another man put the marijuana in the trunk. 

Once in the vehicle, Barradas asked Villalobos if he could partially pay Villalobos in marijuana for giving him a ride. According to Villalobos, his uncle knew what was in the trunk and told him not to get in the car. 

Barradas and Villalobos are currently in Tippecanoe County Jail. 

December 27, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Man charged with deviate conduct with mentally disabled teen 

A Lafayette man faces charges of criminal deviate conduct and sexual battery in connection with incidents involving a developmentally disabled teenager victim more than a year ago. 

Christopher D. Lucas, 22, of Lafayette is charged in Tippecanoe Superior Court 2 with two counts of criminal deviate conduct, two counts of sexual battery and two misdemeanor counts of possessing a synthetic drug and drug paraphernalia. 

The most serious charge, criminal deviate conduct, is a Class B felony punishable by up to 20 years in prison upon conviction. 

According to court documents, police were initially dispatched to investigate a sex offense reported to have occurred Dec. 12, 2012, in a residence on Sioux Place. 

According to interviews with witnesses and with the victim, Lucas on more than one occasion forced the male victim to perform a sexual act. According to court documents, the victim was told he wo uld be killed if he “snitched.” 

The alleged incidents occurred on separate dates and at two places between April 2009 and December 2012. 

When police first made contact with Lucas on Dec. 12, according to court documents, an officer found a grinder, a pipe and a sandwich bag containing a green plant-like material. Police said the defendant told them the green 

material was “spice.” Later testing showed the material to be a specific synthetic drug banned under Indiana law. 

In a follow-up interview, Lucas told investigators he never forced the victim and that in at least one case the victim initiated the contact, according to supporting documents. 

According to Tippecanoe County Jail, Lucas was initially booked into jail Dec. 12, 2012, and was released the next day. A warrant for his arrest was issued Friday. As of 5 p.m., he had not been booked. 4

December 24, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Man accused of battery on a child, 12 

Written by Justin L. Mack 

A Lafayette man, accused of shoving and throwing a 12-year-old girl to the ground while fighting with the child’s 

mother, now faces criminal charges. 

James C. Koontz, 30, was charged Monday in Tippecanoe Superior Court with battery on a child, a Class D felony, and interference with the reporting of a crime, a Class A misdemeanor. 

According to court documents, Lafayette police officers were called to a domestic disturbance on Dec. 19 at a home on Cambridge Road. Upon arrival, officers saw Koontz grabbing a wo man’s shirt and yelling at her. 

The woman reported that Koontz “became aggressive” when she attempted to wake him for work. She then told her 

daughter to call the police, but Koontz reportedly took the phone away from her and wouldn’t give it back. 

The girl told police that during the argument, Koontz pushed her and caused her to fall on her 3-year-old brother. She said he also threw her to the ground, and that when she tried to leave the house, Koontz slammed the door on her wrist. 

Kootnz was arrested and booked into the Tippecanoe County Jail. He was released after posting a $500 bond. 

December 24, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Lafayette man charged to 25 years 

By Alexandra Kruczek 

A Lafayette man will spend more than two decades behind bars for multiple charges, including battery of a law enforcement officer. 

James Scott Littrell, 33, was sentenced to 25 years at the Indiana Department of Corrections. 

Littrell was found guilty on all eight counts. Charges include battery of a law enforcement officer, two counts of intimidation, resisting law enforcement, two counts of possession of cocaine, one count of battery and operating a vehicle with a controlled substance in the body. 

Littrell was featured on News 18's Fugitive Search in September 2005. He was found a month later in North Carolina and then brought back to Lafayette. 

December 23, 2013: WLFI TV 5

# Lafayette man sentenced to decade in prison 

A Lafayette man is sentenced to a decade in prison after he is found guilty of four felonies, including dealing methamphetamine, having an illegal drug lab and neglect of a dependent. 

Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington said in addition to the 10 years of prison time, Dale Bulthuis, 31, was sentenced to two years in Community Corrections and six years probation. 

Harrington said in August, law enforcement officers were called to a home in southern Tippecanoe County for a possible meth lab. Bulthuis was arrested on an unrelated warrant. 

When officers investigated the home and garage, they found chemicals and items commonly used to make meth. 

Harrington said Bulthuis admitted trying to make meth, so he could earn some money. 

There were two young children in the home at the time. 

December 23, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Lafayette man faces pornography charges 

A Lafayette man faces child exploitation and pornography charges after prosecutors said he downloaded explicit videos of young girls. 

Prosecutors said investigators discovered Anthony Bryant downloaded the files from a peer-to-peer sharing network in November. 

Prosecutors said Bryant admitted downloading and watching the videos and keeping similar videos on his computer and an external hard drive 

December 23, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Police say man, 28, had relationship with girl, 14 

Written by Justin L. Mack 

A Lafayette man faces felony charges for allegedly having a sexual relationship with a 14-year-old girl. 

Marvin Yovani Manzon-Yacalbaquiej, 28, was charged Monday in Tippecanoe Circuit Court with sexual misconduct with a minor. 

According to court documents, a child forensic interviewer with the Tippecanoe County Prosecutor’s Office 

interviewed the victim on July 10. 

The girl told investigators that Manzon-Yacalbaquiej was her boyfriend. She initially thought he was 24 years old, but she later found out his real age. 6

The girl reported that she ran away from home and straight to Manzon-Yacalbaquie j’s house on July 8. Once she 

was there, she reportedly took a shower, drank a beer and had sex with Manzon-Yacalbaquiej. 

Investigators then executed a search warrant at Manzon-Yacalbaquiej’s home. Inside, they found the girl’s hair in 

the shower, an empty beer bottle and other items consistent with her report. 

Police said Manzon-Yacalbaquiej goes by many names. As of Monday morning, investigators have not been able to speak with the suspect about the incident. 

December 23, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Suspended driver gets 6 years for driving to drug test 

Written by Justin L. Mack 

A West Lafayette woman whose driver’s license had been suspended for life was sentenced to six years after 

driving herself to Tippecanoe County Community Corrections and getting caught with a fake urine sample. 

West Lafayette’s Jennifer Ferguson will spend up to four years behind bars after being convicted for operating a 

vehicle as a habitual traffic violator for life, a Class C felony. She pleaded guilty to the charge. 

Ferguson, 33, was sentenced Friday to six years — two years in custody of the Indiana Department of Correction, two years with Tippecanoe County Community Corrections, and two years on probation. 

The sentence will run consecutive to a sentence she is serving out of Fountain County, according to Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington. 

According to court documents, Ferguson arrived at Tippecanoe County Community Corrections on June 4 to submit a urine sample for a drug screen. During the screen, she was caught with a device holding fake urine. 

Ferguson’s driving privileges were suspended for life earlier this year in Fountain County. When the Tippecanoe 

correctional officer asked Ferguson how she got to the facility, she claimed she was dropped off by another person. 

Surveillance cameras, however, showed a truck pulling into the facility and then turning into a parking space on the 

south side of the building. A female, later identified as Ferguson, got out of the driver’s sid e and walked to the front door. 

During Friday’s sentencing hearing, Ferguson’s criminal history was listed as one of the aggravating circumstances 

adding to her sentence. 

Court documents show that she has been a defendant in 15 previous cases, including cases where she faced felony charges for theft and operating while intoxicated. 

December 23, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Meth cooker given 18-year sentence 7

Written by Justin L. Mack 

A Lafayette father convicted of cooking methamphetamine in the home where he cared for his two children was sentenced Friday to 18 years. 

In November, a jury found Dale A. Bulthius III, 31, guilty of dealing in methamphetamine, a Class B felony; information of an illegal drug lab, a Class D felony; and two counts of neglect of a dependent, Class C felonies. 

He will spend 10 years with the Indiana Department of Correction, two years with Tippecanoe County Community Corrections and six years on probation. 

According to court documents, Bulthius was arrested on Aug. 16 following a tip from the Indiana Department of Child Services. The children, ages 2 and 4, had temporarily been staying with Bulthuis while their mother moved. 

She again has custody of them. 

Tippecanoe County and Indiana State Police, acting on the tip, went to Bulthuis’ Lobo Court home. The y allegedly found Bulthuis hiding in a bedroom closet. 

During a search of the home, according to the affidavit, police allegedly found multiple items commonly used to cook meth. Bulthuis also told investigators that he used meth the day before. 

December 23, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Man gets 25-year sentence for drug possession 

Written by Justin L. Mack 

A Lafayette man convicted of drug possession and trying to bite a sheriff's deputy will spend 25 years behind bars. 

James Scott Littrell, 33, was sentenced Friday to serve his entire sentence with the Indiana Department of Correction. 

He was found guilty of possession of cocaine within 1,000 feet of a school, battery, resisting law enforcement, operating while suspended, operating while intoxicated and two counts of intimidation. He requested a jury trial on the cocaine possession charge. 

According to court documents, the case against Littrell began on June 25 when Officer Jim Knogge of the Dayton Police Department attempted to pull over a van that was speeding on Walnut Street. 8

The van turned onto another street and drove off the road and into a yard at 707 Main St. Knogge suspected that Littrell was impaired because he appeared sluggish and had to pull himself from the van, the affidavit states. 

Littrell reportedly became abusive after his passenger, 53-year-old Jackie Rumler of Dayton, told Knogge that she hid two rocks of cocaine in her waistband after learning that Littrell was under arrest. 

Littrell then tried to head-butt and bite Tippecanoe County sheriff's Deputy Rob Hainje, who assisted at the traffic stop. He reportedly also threatened to harm Hainje and Knogge, along with their families. 

Hainje was not injured, but an onboard computer was damaged during the struggle. 

According to the affidavit, the incident occurred near Dayton Elementary School, and several juveniles were outside, watching the arrest. 

December 21, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# New state criminal code could impair efforts to fight drug crimes, prosecutors fear 

Written by MaryJane Slaby and Douglas Walker 

Indiana prosecutors are concerned that pending changes in the state’s criminal code, set to go into effect next 

summer, will dramatically impair their ability to battle drug crimes. But after changes were made to the law during a committee meeting on Thursday, Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington said he is more confident in the law. 

“I’m very optimistic based on the progress,” he said. 

Several parts of the law, however, still need to be addressed before it takes effect on July 1, Harrington said. 

Addressing drug crimes is one of the controversies brewing over the state criminal justice system’s first major 

overhaul in more than 35 years. House Enrolled Act 1006 was adopted by the state General Assembly last session, 

with the understanding the legislation would be “fine -tuned” before the changes take effect. 

Yet, that’s not to say prosecutors aren’t in favor of many aspects of the code, including a provision that those 

incarcerated will serve at least 75 percent of the sentence imposed by a judge. (For many years, most inmates in Hoosier prisons receiving credit for good behavior have been released after serving half of their sentences.) 

But under the new code, prosecutors say, those inmates will be serving 75 percent, rather than half, of significantly shorter prison terms, particularly in drug-related cases. 

The last time Indiana legislators enacted sweeping changes in the state’s criminal code was in 1977, the year Jimmy 

Carter became president, Elvis Presley died and disco fever, for better or worse, began to grip the nation. 

Most involved agree that after more than three decades, revisions in that code that better reflect the values and priorities of 21st century Hoosiers are in order. 

Harrington agreed and said an update on the code was needed. Everyone involved has cooperated, but said the reduced prison sentences for drug dealers still needs to be addressed. 

Reduced prison penalties by 80 percent for drug dealers is giving the green light to dealers and is counterproductive to helping people recover from their addictions, Harrington said. 9

With those involved in the trafficking of drugs facing more lenient sentences, their incentive to cooperate with police investigations targeting major drug suppliers will diminish, said Aaron Negangard, prosecutor of Dearborn and Ohio counties in southeastern Indiana and an official with the Indiana Prosecuting Attorneys Council. 

“They’re not going to work with us,” the prosecutor said of the lower level dealers who are someti mes willing to 

work as informants in exchange for leniency. “The big guys would be untouchable. ... The big stick (of threaten ed 

prison time) is now a twig.” 

Negangard also said gang members from the Cincinnati area active in the drug trade have tended to stay out of nearby Indiana counties, aware of the Hoosier st ate’s strict drug -dealing laws. 

“It helps keep Indiana safe,” he said of existing penalties. 

The state’s primary motivation in revamping its criminal code? 

“I think without a doubt the reduction o f Department of Correction population and the costs associated with building 

new prisons and warehousing inmates,” Delaware County Prosecuto r Jeffrey Arnold said recently. 

“To me, it’s all about money,” Delaware Circuit Court 4 Judge John Feick said. “The legislature doesn’t want to fund prisons.” 

“Our prisons are at maximum capacity, and they’re very expensive to build,” said stat e Rep. Sue Errington, D-Muncie. 

Harrington said he supports reduced sentences for drug addicts and drug possession because it will allow them to enter the treatment programs they need to improve their lives. He said when someone is addicted to drugs, every facet of his life suffers, from relationships to employment and more. 

But the treatment programs would fall back to the countie s to manage and fund because the new law doesn’t allocate funds for these programs. Without increased funding, community corrections wouldn’t be able to accept 

more people, said Dave Heath executive director of Tippecanoe County Community Corrections. He said the program is already at capacity and would need financial help to add the people who are no longer in state prisons. 

Heath said he supports more treatment programs, but the impact on local government needs to be examined. 

However, Harrington said the committee discussed a state-funded pilot treatment program that would run in Marion and Lake counties, and plans to meet again to discuss how other counties will receive needed funds in the meantime. 

State Rep. Greg Steuerwald, R-Avon, who wrote the bill that became House Enrolled Act 1006, said finding funding 

for local treatment programs was the “most essential” issue facing legislators as they work to revise the c ode before it goes into effect. 

One funding option that’s been discussed, Negangard said, i s a new state tax on beer. Adding a cent to the alcohol tax would bring in an estimated $30 million a year that could be dedicated to community corrections and treatment programs, according to the Thursday committee meeting, Harrington said. 

In addition to drug crimes, prosecutors aren’t happy with a change that would significantly add to a judge’s 

discretion to issue suspended sentences. 

Harrington said he hopes crimes the law deems suspendable still are addressed by lawmakers. Changes made Thursday, such as the addition of the “heinous nine” and habitual offenders to be not suspendable for murder, have 

him hopeful changes will be made. 10 

Regardless of the changes, Harrington said another worry is that the law won’t be finished in time to train everyone 

who n eeds to know the law by time it takes effect July 1. He said training will need to be done in prosecutors’ 

offices, courtrooms, with law enforcement and more. Plus code books, documents and forms will need to completely change. 

State Rep. Sheila Klinker said she thinks there is a chance the law could be postponed, and said she expects the discussion to continue. She said some people, such as law enforcement and prosecutors, are leery, but many members of the public support it because the law provides a second chance for people to be back in the community and improve their lives. 

Harrington said he hopes lawmakers see more time is needed for training and postpone the law at least six months so everyone can learn and enforce the new law correctly. 

“This is a massive piece of legislation,” he said. 

December 18, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Balser Back in Court 

A man arrested after his dog attacked multiple people was back in court Wednesday. 

Corey Balser was booked into the Tippecanoe County jail earlier this month without bond. On Tuesday, Balser was petitioning for a bond reduction. 

The state was pushing for that request to be revoked due to Balser's extensive criminal background. The judge decided not to revoke bond, but said Balser presents a risk to the community. The judge set a cash only bond of $150,000 for Balser. 

Balser is expected to go before a jury next month for failing to restrain his dog, which attacked two people earlier this year. 

December 19, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Alleged robbery victim faces felony charges 

Written by Justin L. Mack 

A West Lafayette man who allegedly called police after he attempted to sell drugs now faces felony charges. 

Charles Simmons, 66, was charged Wednesday in Tippecanoe Superior Court with possession of cocaine, a Class B felony; attempting to deal marijuana, a Class C felony; and maintaining a common nuisance, a Class D felony. 

He also faces misdemeanors for false informing, possession of paraphernalia and possession of marijuana. 

According to court documents, Simmons called the West Lafayette Police Department to his apartment at 3312 Peppermill Drive on the night of Dec. 16. 

When investigators arrived, Simmons reported that three women had just robbed him of $100. He gave police their address and a vehicle description. 11 

Police caught up with the trio, and they said they attempted to buy marijuana from Simmons, but the amount he presented was less than the amount they discussed. 

The women reportedly went on to say that they left without any marijuana, and they denied stealing any money from Simmons. 

One of the women showed the police cellphone video she captured of the unsuccessful deal. The footage shows Simmons getting upset, telling the women to leave and threatening to call the police to report that he was robbed, court documents allege. 

A search warrant for Simmons’ apartment was executed. Inside, police found marijuana, traces of cocaine and drug 

paraphernalia. 

December 18, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Woman charged with child neglect 

A Lafayette woman was charged with one count of felony child neglect after her 3-year-old was found alone at a city park. 

Nicoll D. Stewart, 21, was charged Tuesday in Tippecanoe Superior Court. According to court documents, police were contacted on June 19 after a Tropicanoe Cove lifeguard spotted the child entering the park alone. 

After about 90 minutes, Stewart approached the police and stated that it was her child. She told investigators that she lived about two blocks from the park. 

When asked if she knew how long the child was missing and why she never called police, Stewart allegedly 

responded by saying “what does it matter?” and “she knew how police were.” 

She eventually acknowledged that she was not watching the child as she was required to do, court documents allege. 

December 17, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Man accused of hitting boy, 8, with golf club 

Written by Justin L. Mack 

A West Lafayette man accused of hitting an 8-year-old boy with a golf club now faces two felony charges. 

Joon Kyu Choe, 43, was charged in Tippecanoe Superior Court with two counts of battery on a child, a Class D felony. 

According to court documents, a school guidance counselor noticed that the boy had a bloodshot eye and bruising on his shoulder on May 21. 

During a forensic interview conducted later that day, the boy reported that he was sitting in the passenger side of 

Choe’s van when Choe grabbed him by his hair. Choe then allegedly pushed the boy’s head into the window and 

door of the van multiple times. 12 

The boy told investigators that th e incident happened after a meeting with his teachers, and Choe’s actions were punishment for “speaking incorrectly,” court documents allege. 

The victim went on to say that three days later, Choe hit him on the shoulder with a golf putter as punishment for stealing $200 from Choe to buy mechanical pencils from a friend at school. 

When interviewed by police, Choe initially denied striking the child. He later admitted to pushing the boy and making him cry, but he denied hitting him with a golf club. 

December 16, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# 18 years for fatal DUI - victim, 73, a 'kind and gentle soul' 

Written by Justin L. Mack 

Moments before being sentenced to nearly two decades behind bars for fatally striking 73-year-old Donna Ubelhor while driving under the influence, Elizabeth S. Wesner tearfully begged Ub elhor’s family for forgiveness. 

“No words can ever describe how sorry I feel. ... I’m sorry you have to experience this sadness,” she said. “I think about them and their loss every day.” 

In October, 21-year-old Wesner entered a guilty plea for operating a vehicle while intoxicated with a controlled substance in the blood causing death, a Class B felony, and possession of a controlled substance, a Class D felony. 

On Monday, she received an 18-year sentence for her crimes. She will spend 17 years with the Indiana Department of Correction, and one year on supervised probation. 

The wreck that led to Wesner’s charges occurred about 6:10 p.m. May 29 in front of Ubelhor’ s home at 3104 Commanche Trail. 

According to reports from the Lafayette Metro Fatal Alcohol Crash Team, as Ubelhor and a neighbor, 70-year-old 

James Brown, were conversing on the sidewalk, Wesner’s Chevy Blazer drove over the curb and into the yard. 

Ubelhor and Brown were hit. 

Wesner then continued through the Brady Lane intersection, where she struck a trailer being pulled by a truck and crashed into a fire hydrant. 

Investigators said Wesner admitted that she twice smoked marijuana and went to a bar and consumed alcoholic beverages hours before the wreck. She claimed that she starting blacking out, then remembered feeling a jolt from hitting the hydrant. 13 

A sample of Wesner’s blood tested positive for cannabinoids; alprazolam, which is commonly prescribed to treat 

anxiety; and fluoxetine, which is commonly prescribed to treat depression. 

The possession charges are for pills — codeine, a prescription painkiller, and clonidine, which is commonly prescribed to treat high-blood pressure — marijuana and a glass pipe that investigators found either on Wesner or in her vehicle. 

During Monday’s sentencing hearing, Ubelhor’s children took the stand and talked about the void in their lives. 

“She was a kind and gentle soul. She loved life and she lived it to the fullest,” said Donna Smith, Ubelhor’s dau ghter. 

“My life will never be the same. 

“Instead of hugging Mom this Christmas, I will be going to the cemetery and touching a cold headstone.” 

December 12, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Lafayette man charged with intimidation 

Formal charges were filed Thursday against Hakeem Lishawn Evans, 18, of Lafayette for intimidation by drawing or using a deadly weapon, criminal recklessness while armed with a deadly weapon, resisting law enforcement and disorderly conduct. 

On Tuesday, Lafayette police responded to a call about a fight in the 1600 block of Alabama Street. When 

officers arrived, they heard yelling and comments, such as “put it down” and “drop the knife,” according to court 

documents. 

One officer saw two males running and another following while violently swinging his arm back and forth. Police identified themselves and man turned, making the knife in his hand noticeable. 

The officer ordered the man to drop the knife, but he began walking toward the officer in an aggressive manner. The officer had his weapon drawn and was backing up, but the man kept walking toward him until they were about 15 feet apart. 

Another officer arrived and ordered the man to put the weapon down. The man responded with something to the 

effect of “make me.” He then rai sed the knife and advanced toward the first officer. The second officer tased the man and the knife fell to the ground. 

Police later identified the man as Evans and spoke with his girlfriend’s mother, who told officers the two had been in 

an altercation when neighbors came by the make sure everything was fine. The neighbors left, but Evans followed with a knife and threatened to kill them. 

December 12, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Habitual traffic violator pulled over; found with heroin 

Formal charges were filed Thursday against Jeffrey Len Parr, 47, of Lafayette for possession of a narcotic drug, possession of a syringe, operating a motor vehicle while privileges are forfeited for life, and operating a vehicle while intoxicated. 14 

Lafayette police pulled Parr over Tuesday evening on Fourth Street for not having a functioning license plate light. Police first attempted to pull him over on Third Street across from Bauer Family Resource Center, but Parr turned onto Alabama Street and then Fourth Street before he went off the road and onto the sidewalk. 

According to court documents, officers noticed Parr’s bloodshot and watery eyes and detected the scent of alcohol, 

so they asked Parr to get out of his truck. Parr told police he did not have anything illegal on him and gave police consent to search his vehicle. 

Officers found a baggie of a powdery substance — later determined to be heroin by a field test — in Parry’s coin pocket and a syringe in his coat pocket. Police checked Parr’s license and found he was suspended for life due to three convictions of operating a vehicle while intoxicated in 1997 and 2002. 

Police took Parr to the hospital due to his significant impairment. 

During the traffic stop, Parr was within 1,000 feet of South Tipp Park, maintained by the city of Lafayette and adjacent to Bauer center. 

December 11, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Man charged with possessing, dealing heroin 

Formal charges were filed today against Christopher Louis Baughman Jr., who was arrested Dec. 4 when police found three stashes heroin on or near his person. 

Lafayette police surveyed Baughman’s residence on the 2600 block of Meadow Drive after they received tips of it 

being a possible source of heroin. Officers watched Baughman leave the residence and get into a car before they stopped the vehicle for a traffic infraction. 

According to court documents, an officer spotted a foil package under Baughman’s leg and attempted to retrieve it. 

After a bit of a struggle with Baughman, officers were able to secure him. Police also found a pen housing in 

Baughman’s pocket that tested positive for heroin and a baggie of what appeared to be heroin in Baughman’s 

sock. 

Police also found digital scales in the console. Baughman later admitted the substances were heroin and to selling it a few times. 

Baughman faces charges for possessing and dealing a narcotic drug, possession of paraphernalia and resisting law enforcement. 

December 9, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Pit bull owner jailed without bond 

Corey Balser, the owner of an aggressive pit bull involved in three attacks on people over the past 14 months, turned himself in at the Tippecanoe County Jail around 10:30 a.m. Monday. He had been wanted on a warrant, without a bond, which means he cannot be released without a judge’s order. 15 

Balser’s father, Keith Balser, 52, also was wanted by authorities on an arrest warrant. He said last week that he 

and Corey planned to turn themselves in on Monday. As of 1 p.m. Monday, Tippecanoe County Jail records indicate Keith Balser has not surrendered to police. 

Corey Balser’s pit bull, Chewy, attacked a person in fall 2012. Last month, the same dog attacked Keith Balser, who 

was still recovering from his injuries last week when Chewy attacked a woman and her dog, injuring both. Authorities obtained the pit bill and has since been euthanized. 

December 9, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Lafayette man faces pornography charges 

December 8, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Meth charge costs man 9 years 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - A Lafayette man is jailed without bond following a series of attacks by his pit bull. 

Corey Balser turned himself in to the Tippecanoe County jail Monday morning after being wanted on a warrant. Balser's dog, Chewy, was euthanized last week following three attacks in just over a year. 

Balser first signed a dangerous dog agreement after an October 2012 attack. Subsequent attacks last month and again this month led to the dog being put down. 

Larry Cearing, 32, of Logansport received a nine-year prison sentence Friday for conspiracy to commit dealing in methamphetamine, a Class B felony, and possession of paraphernalia, a Class A misdemeanor, according to the 

prosecutor’s o ffice. 

After Cearing serves his prison sentence, he will be required to serve an additional two years on probation and in 

Tippecanoe County Community Corrections, according to the prosecutor’s office summary of the Superior Court 2 

sentencing hearing. 

Cearing, who initially had been charged with six charges steming from a Feb. 10 traffic stop in West Lafayette, pleaded guilty to the two counts. His plea agreement was found as one of the mitigating circumstances during his sentencing hearing, as were his use of chemical dependency programs in the jail, where he is a trusty, and his remorse for his actions, according to the sentencing summary. Eight previous convictions were cited as aggravating circumstances. 

December 6, 2013: WLFI-TV 

# Man faces a dozen charges after shooting at Cambridge Estates 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - Tippecanoe County Prosecutors said a jealous ex-boyfriend was the cause of shots fired at Cambridge Estates this week. 

Darwin Benefield, 30, of Indianapolis faces a dozen charges including four felonies. 16 

According to court documents, early Sunday morning, he went over to an ex-girlfriend's apartment. When her current boyfriend and another man came outside, he fired a couple shots into the air, pointed a gun at them, and hit both men on the face with the weapon. 

Officers located him at a gas station on Main Street that evening. 

Among Benefield's four felony charges are intimidation with a deadly weapon and carrying a handgun without a license. 

December 4, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

## Felony charges say woman used grandma's checkbook, bought heroin, tattoo 

Written by Justin L. Mack 

Karla M. Culley wrote more than a dozen checks on her grandmother’s account, without permission, and used the 

money to purchase heroin and a tattoo, court documents allege. 

Culley, 30, of Lafayette was charged Wednesday in Tippecanoe Superior Court 2 with four counts of forgery and five counts of theft. All are felonies. 

According to a probable cause affidavit filed with the charges, Culley’s mother contacted police on Nov. 3 to report fraudulent activity on her mother’s account. 

Culley’s mother obtained copies of every check written on her mother’s account since late August. She told police that a number of the checks did not match her mother’s handwriting. 

On Nov. 7, police spoke with Culley’s grandmother and showed her copies of 13 checks written on her account between Sept. 7 and Nov. 2. She indicated that the checks were not in her handwriting, and that some came from a checkbook she never used. 

The checks totaled $6,138.52. 

She also told police that one of the checks appeared to be in Culley’s handwri ting, the affidavit states. 

On Dec. 2, police spoke with Culley, who allegedly admitted that she wrote the checks without permission. She specifically mentioned that two checks were cashed and then used to purchase heroin, and one was used to partially pay for a tattoo. 

December 4, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

## Drug possession conviction adds to Lafayette man's legal woes 

Written by Justin L. Mack 17 

A Lafayette man convicted of trying to bite a sheriff's deputy and threatening to harm two police officers and their families has also been found guilty of drug possession. 

On Tuesday, after less than an hour of deliberation, a jury found James Scott Littrell, 33, guilty of possession of cocaine within 1,000 feet of a school. The charge is a Class B felony that carries a sentence range of six to 20 years. 

On Nov. 27, Littrell pleaded guilty to battery, resisting law enforcement, operating while suspended, operating while intoxicated and two counts of intimidation. He requested a jury trial on the cocaine possession charge. 

According to court documents, the case against Littrell began on June 25 when Officer Jim Knogge of the Dayton Police Department attempted to pull over a van that was speeding on Walnut Street. 

The van turned onto another street and drove off the road and into a yard at 707 Main St. Knogge suspected that Littrell was impaired because he appeared sluggish and had to pull himself from the van, the affidavit states. 

Littrell reportedly became abusive after his passenger, 53-year-old Jackie Rumler of Dayton, told Knogge that she 

— upon orders from Litrell — hid two rocks of cocaine in her waistband after learning that he was under arrest. 

Littrell then allegedly tried to head-butt and bite Tippecanoe County sheriff's Deputy Rob Hainje, who assisted at the traffic stop. He's further accused of threatening to harm Hainje and Knogge, along with their families. 

Hainje was not injured, but damage occurred to an onboard computer during the struggle. 

According to the affidavit, the incident occurred near Dayton Elementary School, and several juveniles were outside watching the arrest. 

Littrell still faces a habitual offender charge that will be settle in a bench trial. 

November 27, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Men face cocaine, marijuana charges 

Written by Justin L. Mack 

An 11-month undercover police investigation ended with two Lafayette men being charged with 13 felony drug offenses. 

Saul Munoz-Torres, 28, and Luis Torres-Reynoso, 31, were charged Wednesday in Tippecanoe Circuit Court. 

Both face seven counts of dealing cocaine, two counts of dealing marijuana, possession of cocaine, conspiracy to deal cocaine, conspiracy to deal marijuana and maintaining a common nuisance. 

According to court documents, the investigation began on Jan. 7 when undercover police made a deal to purchase cocaine from Torres-Reynoso. 

On the day of the deal, Torres-Reynoso allegedly stopped at Munoz-Torres’ apartment before the d eal was completed in Frankfort. 

After the initial deal, police made agreements to purchase cocaine and marijuana from Torres-Reynoso in Tippecanoe County. 18 

Court documents describe seven purchases made by police throughout the year with the most recent taking place on Nov. 21. Police allegedly purchased about 12 ounces of cocaine and 3 pounds of marijuana. 

Munoz-Torres was identified as the person who drove Torres-Reynoso to the last arranged purchase. When questioned, he told police that there was more cocaine in his apartment. 

Search warrants executed at Torres-Reynoso’s and Munoz -Torres’ apartment s led to the discovery of about 1 pound of cocaine, digital scales, a handgun and a large amount of cash. 

November 25, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# El Rodeo eateries reopen after police raids 

# Local managers: 'We don't even know why' documents were seized 

Written by Justin L. Mack 

Officials remain tight-lipped about the Marion County grand jury probe that temporarily closed El Rodeo 

restaurants last week, including three of the chain’s restaurants in Tippecanoe County. 

But two local El Rodeo manager s are anxious to let Greater Lafayette customers know they’re still in business. And, 

they said, they are just as much in the dark about the investigation as anyone. 

“We don’t even know why. They didn’t give us any reason … they just came in, took our stuff and left,” said Jose Bustos, manager of the El Rodeo in West Lafayette. “We were very surprised when the police showed up.” 

On Nov. 18, police in Tippecanoe, Marion and several other counties executed search warrants on El Rodeo restaurants as well as other properties. In some locations police seized cash registers and paperwork. 

Included in the raids were El Rodeo Mexican Restaurants at 140 Frontage Road and 109 Beck Lane in Lafayette, and 140 Howard Ave. in West Lafayette. 

State police also searched at least one El Jaripeo Mexican Restaurant in New Palestine, and two La Carreta restaurants in Merrillville and Schererville. 

El Jaripeo is part of another chain owned and operated by El Rodeo principal Francisco Salgado of Indianapolis, and secretary Jose Melendez of Fortville. But El Rodeo and La Carreta have different owners, according to Indiana secretary of state records. 

Peg McLeish, communications director at the Marion County Prosecutor’s Office, previously told the Journal & 

Courier that the restaurants were being searched in connection to an investigation led by prosecutors in Tippecanoe and Marion counties. 

McLeish said details about the case will not be released until charges are filed in court. As of Monday, no charges had been filed in Tippecanoe County, according to the county clerk’s office. 

Neither McLeish nor Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington returned calls Monday. 

In the meantime, local El Rodeo managers want the public to know that they’re back in business. The West Lafayette 

store reopened Thursday, and the Frontage Road store reopened Sunday. 19 

The Beck Lane store still was closed Monday. 

“They should be back open later this week on Beck Lane,” said Abel Bustos, manager of the Frontage Road store. 

Like his cousin, Jose, Abel Bustos s aid investigators didn’t state what they were looking into when conducting the 

raid. 

“No one said anything to us,” he said. “So far, I don’t think any charges have been filed, so we don’t know what they were looking for.” 

Jose Bustos said while inside, police asked general questions about the business and took photographs. He added that they took business and payroll documents when they left. No one was arrested at either store. 

“They showed up at around 11 a.m. and they were here for a few hours,” he said. “But we’re just happy to be back open.” 

November 25, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Woman sentenced in stabbing case 

Written by Justin L. Mack 

A Lafayette woman who pleaded guilty to stabbing her ex-boyfriend earlier this year will spend more than two years behind bars. 

Ashley N. Niccum, 22, was given a six-and-a-half year sentence after being convicted of battery by means of a deadly weapon. 

She will spend two-and-a-half years with the Indiana Department of Correction, and four years on probation. 

According to court documents, the charges stem from an incident at 3:08 p.m. March 11. At that time, police were called to 3058 Pheasant Run Drive for a reported stabbing in Apartment 1034. 

Upon arrival, police spoke to the victim, 27-year-old Brian Chapple, and observed three cuts on his back. 

Chapple told police that he was stabbed by Niccum, his ex-girlfriend, who went to the apartment to gather her belongings after she ended the relationship the day before. 

Chapple reportedly had three friends over when Niccum arrived. He told two of them to help Niccum carry her belongings to her car. 

Niccum then returned to pick up her laptop and asked Chapple for $40, but Chapple refused to give her any money. 

At that time, Chapple said he heard two other men in the hallway. The men pushed their way into the apartment. One of the men pushed Chapple against the wall of a back bedroom. 

As Chapple was physically engaged with the unidentified man, he was stabbed in the back multiple times. When he turned around, he saw Niccum holding a knife. 

Witnesses told investigators that they saw Niccum stabbing Chapple. They also reported that Niccum told Chapple that "she had people and she would kill him" after he refused to give her the $40. 20 

Police found three knives in the bedroom. Two of them were stained red. Police also recovered sections of the carpet that were covered in red stains. 

Additionally, witnesses told police that Niccum left with the knife. 

November 25, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Jury convicts Lafayette man in domestic battery case 

Written by Justin L. Mack 

A jury has found a Lafayette man guilty of felony battery and strangulation charges. 

On Thursday night, Erick D. Cameron, 22, was found guilty of criminal confinement, domestic battery in the presence of a child and strangulation, all Class D felonies. He also was found guilty of a misdemeanor of domestic battery. 

Cameron’s sentencing hearing is scheduled for 3 p.m. on Dec. 23. 

According to court documents, Cameron was arrested on the morning of July 3 after he was seen fleeing the scene of a Cambridge Estates apartment. 

Police said Cameron confined, strangled and beat a woman in front of her two young children. After the incident, the victim was taken to St. Elizabeth East Hospital for treatment. 

Police reportedly arrested Cameron about two hour later in the area of South Creasy Lane. 

November 20, 2013: Daily Reporter, Greenfield, IN 

# Lake County Mexican restaurants raided as part of probe led by Marion, Tippecanoe prosecutors 

SCHERERVILLE, Indiana — Indiana State Police and excise officers have raided two northwestern Indiana Mexican restaurants as part of an investigation that involves other restaurants in central Indiana. 

The (Munster) Times reports (http://bit.ly/18QwNcM ) the raids Monday at La Carreta restaurants in Merrillville and Schererville were part of a larger investigation that targeted El Rodeo restaurants in Indianapolis, Lafayette, West Lafayette and Richmond. 

Marion County Prosecutor Terry Curry says search warrants were served at numerous locations as part of an ongoing investigation but his office isn't commenting any further. A spokeswoman says the Marion County and Tippecanoe County prosecutors' offices initiated the investigation. 

The Times says the restaurants are owned by Arnulfo Gonzalez. He doesn't have a published home telephone number. 

November 20, 2013: Northwest Indiana Times 

# State, excise police raid abruptly closes La Carreta restaurants 

Joseph S. Pete joseph.pete@nwi.com, (219) 933-3316 21 

SCHERERVILLE | The popular La Carreta restaurants in Merrillville and Schererville abruptly closed after they were raided Monday by the Indiana State Police and Indiana Excise Police. 

The Merrillville location reopened Wednesday afternoon, and an employee said the Schererville location would open at 11 a.m. Thursday. 

State police troopers served search warrants at the Mexican restaurants on U.S. 30 in Merrillville and Indianapolis Boulevard in Schererville on Monday, said Sgt. Ann Wojas, an Indiana State Police spokeswoman. 

Indiana State Excise Police officers assisted with another agency's investigation at the restaurants, as well as at a number of others across the state, said Cpl. Travis Thickstun, spokesman for the Indiana State Excise Police. 

The raids were part of a larger investigation that targeted Mexican restaurants in cities across Indiana, including El Rodeo eateries in Indianapolis, Lafayette, West Lafayette and Richmond. Law enforcement officials were tight-lipped about what they are investigating, but they have made no arrests and filed no criminal charges as of yet. 

The Marion County and Tippecanoe County prosecutors' offices coordinated the investigation, which stretched across multiple counties in Indiana, said Peg McLeish, a spokeswoman for the Marion County prosecutor. 

"Search warrants were served at numerous locations as part of an ongoing investigation," said Marion County Prosecutor Terry Curry in a statement. "We will not comment further in regard to the nature of such an investigation." 

Local police were not involved in the raids. Schererville police Cmdr. Brian Neyhart said his department did not participate, and Merrillville Chief of Detectives Robert Wiley said the extent of his agency's involvement was that a single patrolman stood guard outside in the parking lot while state police officers searched for evidence. 

The Marion County Sheriff's Office assisted with the raid of an El Rodeo restaurant Monday in Indianapolis, which a police report said stemmed from a grand jury investigation. Officers took pictures of nine employees and seized cash, business documents and the cash registers, which they turned over to the grand jury, according to the case report. 

McLeish said the Lake County prosecutor's office was not involved in the investigation to her knowledge. 

Customers going to the La Carreta restaurants Tuesday and Wednesday were greeted with handwritten signs that said they were closed. An employee said Tuesday night the restaurants had closed because of "issues" and should reopen Wednesday. The Merrillville restaurant welcomed diners back at 3 p.m., and an employee at the Schererville eatery said they were working Wednesday to get back open and would resume their normal hours. 

Arnulfo Gonzalez, the registered owner of both restaurants, did not return messages for comment Tuesday and Wednesday. 

Times staff writer Elvia Malagon contributed to this report. 

November 20, 2013: rtv6 ABC, The Indy Channel 

# Lake County restaurants raided by Indiana troopers 

SCHERERVILLE, Ind. - Indiana State Police and excise officers have raided two northwestern Indiana Mexican restaurants as part of an investigation that involves other restaurants in central Indiana . 22 

The (Munster) Times reports (http://bit.ly/18QwNcM ) the raids Monday at La Carreta restaurants in Merrillville and Schererville were part of a larger investigation that targeted El Rodeo restaurants in Indianapolis, Lafayette, West Lafayette and Richmond. 

Marion County Prosecutor Terry Curry says search warrants were served at numerous locations as part of an ongoing investigation but his office isn't commenting any further. A spokeswoman says the Marion County and Tippecanoe County prosecutors' offices initiated the investigation. 

The Times says the restaurants are owned by Arnulfo Gonzalez. He doesn't have a published home telephone number. 

November 20, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Man sentenced for breaking woman's jaw 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - A Lafayette man is sentenced to a decade in prison after prosecutors said he violated a protective order and broke a woman's jaw. 

Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington said Brandon Wendling, 31, was sentenced to 10 years in prison, two years community corrections, and two years of probation. 

In April, News 18 reported police were called to a home on North 16th Street. A woman told officers Wendling entered the house without permission and punched her several times, eventually causing her to lose consciousness. 

Wendling pleaded guilty to several charges in October, including battery resulting in serious bodily injury and invasion of privacy. He also admitted to being a habitual offender. 

November 20, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Tippecanoe Co. couple faces charges 

By Spencer Frady 

A Tippecanoe County couple faces burglary and theft-related charges after prosecutors said they broke into a home and stole jewelry, an iPad and other items. 

Police said Natasha Ollins, 27, was in a car outside the home and Jevon Ollins, 23, was inside when the homeowner arrived and tried to block Natasha in. 

They said she drove off and the homeowner went inside to find items missing and a television moved to the kitchen. 

Prosecutors said the homeowner identified Natasha from a photo array and she admitted being at the home. They say Jevon's fingerprints were found on the TV. 

November 20, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 23 

# Former Lowe's employee charged in forgery, theft 

Written by Justin L. Mack 

A former Lowe’s employee accused of stealing money and merchandise from the home improvemen t store faces criminal charges. 

Cassandra L. Campbell, 21, of Rossville was charged in Tippecanoe Superior Court Wednesday with two counts of forgery, two counts of theft and one count of attempted theft. 

Investigators said they were called to the Lowe’s in Lafayette on July 16 to speak wit h a loss prevention specialist. 

An internal theft case against Campbell had be en compiled, and Lowe’s managers reportedly found evidence that 

Campbell on several occasions processed fake returns in the store and put the money from the fraudulent transactions on gift cards that she kept. 

She then allegedly used those gift cards to make several purchases, including a riding mower worth more than $2,000. 

When speaking to the police, Campbell reportedly confessed to stealing merchandise and acknowledged the fraudulent transactions. 

November 19, 2013: Palladium-Item, Richmond, IN 

# Police raid El Rodeo restaurants in Richmond 

Written by Bill Eagle 

Indiana State Police officers Monday morning raided Richmond’s two locations of popular Mexican restaurant El 

Rodeo as part of a multi-county sweep. 

Search warrants also were executed at three of the chain’s restaurants in Tippecanoe County as well as locati ons in Marion County on Monday. 

In Richmond, shortly after 11 a.m., six police cars — all but one unmarked — roared up to the east-side location at 3567 E. Main St., parking out front to block potential customers from walking into the building. 

At the same time, officers raided the west-side El Rodeo location at 2404 National Road W., and closed it for the lunch hour as well. 

Officers at the scene declined comment and referred questions to the ISP headquarters in Indianapolis. 

Later Monday, a spokesperson for the Marion County Prosecutor’s Office in Indianapolis said the raids were part of a “multi -county investigation” by the Marion County and Tippecanoe County prosecutor’s offices. 

“Our offices are coordinating the investigation,” said Peg McLeish, communications director for the Marion County prosecutor. “Beyond that, we don’t typically share information about our investigations until charges are filed.” 

McLeish said she was unsure of when charges might be filed in the case. 24 

“There is no timeline on that. It’s an ongoing investigation,” she said. 

McLeish said she couldn’t answer questions about what other locations were raided in Richmond and around the 

state or if any arrests had been made. She also would not say what type of alleged criminal activity was being investigated. 

An officer who participated in the east-side raid carried an armful of boxes into the restaurant. 

Customers continued to roll up in their cars through part of the lunch hour before walking up to the front of the building only to be turned away by police. 

At an Avon, Ind., subdivision, ISP officers spent two hours carrying items and boxes from the home of Gina Santana, 50. Neighbor Stephen Collins said Santana was a comptroller for El Rodeo. 

Business websites described Santana as a manager of El Rodeo, 2606 N. High School Road in Indianapolis. A Speedway Police report described her as the owner of the business when she reported a burglary there in 2010. 

Another Avon neighbor said police appeared to haul away two vehicles, including a Humvee, and spent much of their time in the attic of the home. 

November 18, 2013: rtv6 ABC, The Indy Channel 

# Police raid Indiana restaurants amid investigation 

# Police seize documents, cash registers 

Rafael Sanchez 

INDIANAPOLIS - Raids of 10 to 15 restaurants, including El Rodeo restaurants, in at least four Indiana cities are the focus of a multi-county investigation, a spokeswoman for the Marion County Prosecutor's Office said Monday. 

Indiana State Police raided stores of the Mexican restaurant chain in Indianapolis, Lafayette, West Lafayette and Richmond. 

Police took cash registers and boxes full of documents to the Marion County Prosecutor's Office. Sources confirmed that investigators were looking for evidence into possible money laundering and failure to pay sales taxes. 

The Marion County and Tippecanoe County prosecutors' offices are leading the investigation, said Peg McLeish of the Marion County office. 

"Our offices are coordinating the investigation. Beyond that, we don't typically share information about our investigation until charges are filed," she said. "The state police are assisting with the investigation and executing the search warrants." 

Authorities were not disclosing the full details of the focus of the investigation. 

"It's fair to assume search warrants were served in accordance with an ongoing investigation. It's appropriate and necessary at this point to remain confidential at this time," Marion County Prosecutor Terry Curry said. 

In Richmond. The Palladium-Item reported six police cars, all but one unmarked, roared up to one location shortly before 11 a.m. Monday and blocked customers from walking inside, the newspaper reported. At the same time, 25 

officers raided the other Richmond location and closed it for the lunch hour as well. An officer who participated in one of the raids carried an armful of boxes into the restaurant. 

In Lafayette and West Lafayette, police cars were parked in front of the businesses and customers were turned away, the Journal & Courier reported. A hand-written note stating that the business was closed was placed on the locked front door of the West Lafayette location. 

Several stores remained closed on Tuesday, others planned to reopen. 

November 18, 2013: San Francisco Chronicle 

# Police raid Indiana restaurants amid investigation 

INDIANAPOLIS (AP) — Raids of El Rodeo restaurants in at least 4 Indiana cities are part of a multi-county investigation, a spokeswoman for the Marion County Prosecutor's Office said Monday. 

Indiana State Police raided stores of the Mexican restaurant chain in Indianapolis, Lafayette, West Lafayette and Richmond, local news reports said. 

The Marion County and Tippecanoe County prosecutors' offices are leading the investigation, said Peg McLeish of the Marion County office. 

"Our offices are coordinating the investigation. Beyond that, we don't typically share information about our investigation until charges are filed," she said. "The state police are assisting with the investigation and executing the search warrants." 

In Richmond. The Palladium-Item reported six police cars, all but one unmarked, roared up to one location shortly before 11 a.m. Monday and blocked customers from walking inside, the newspaper reported. At the same time, officers raided the other Richmond location and closed it for the lunch hour as well. An officer who participated in one of the raids carried an armful of boxes into the restaurant. 

In Lafayette and West Lafayette, police cars were parked in front of the businesses and customers were turned away, the Journal & Courier reported. A hand-written note stating that the business was closed was placed on the locked front door of the West Lafayette location. 

Attempts to reach two of the restaurants by telephone Monday afternoon were unsuccessful. 

November 18, 2013: Seattle Pi 

# Police raid Indiana restaurants amid investigation 

INDIANAPOLIS (AP) — Raids of El Rodeo restaurants in at least 4 Indiana cities are part of a multi-county investigation, a spokeswoman for the Marion County Prosecutor's Office said Monday. 

Indiana State Police raided stores of the Mexican restaurant chain in Indianapolis, Lafayette, West Lafayette and Richmond, local news reports said. 

The Marion County and Tippecanoe County prosecutors' offices are leading the investigation, said Peg McLeish of the Marion County office. 26 

"Our offices are coordinating the investigation. Beyond that, we don't typically share information about our investigation until charges are filed," she said. "The state police are assisting with the investigation and executing the search warrants." 

In Richmond. The Palladium-Item reported six police cars, all but one unmarked, roared up to one location shortly before 11 a.m. Monday and blocked customers from walking inside, the newspaper reported. At the same time, officers raided the other Richmond location and closed it for the lunch hour as well. An officer who participated in one of the raids carried an armful of boxes into the restaurant. 

In Lafayette and West Lafayette, police cars were parked in front of the businesses and customers were turned away, the Journal & Courier reported. A hand-written note stating that the business was closed was placed on the locked front door of the West Lafayette location. 

Attempts to reach two of the restaurants by telephone Monday afternoon were unsuccessful. 

November 15, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Man found guilty after fatal hit and run 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - A man was found guilty of leaving the scene of a fatal crash last year. 

Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington said a jury returned its verdict for Zaeem Mahmood, 25, Friday afternoon. 

He now faces between two to eight years behind bars after being convicted of a single felony count of leaving the scene of an accident resulting in death. 

As News 18 previously reported, in June 2012, Mahmood hit a pedestrian on U.S. 52 near Morehouse Road. The wreck killed 29-year-old Terry Clingerman, II. 

Harrington said about 15 minutes after the crash, the Sheriff's Office got a call from Mahmood reporting the wreck. He told dispatchers he was on his way to Pay Less, but as he approached the scene of the crash, he was stopped by police and taken to jail. 

His sentencing is set for Jan. 17. 

November 15, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Former Purdue student found guilty of leaving scene after hitting pedestrian 

A man who left the scene after hitting a pedestrian who died from his injuries was found guilty Thursday in a Tippecanoe Superior Court 1 jury trial. 27 

Zaeem Mahmood, 25, who is now employed in San Jose, Calif., but lived in West Lafayette at the time of the accident, was found guilty of leaving the scene of the accident, resulting in death. 

He will be sentenced in January, and could face two to eight years in prison. Mahmood is currently out on bond. However, the court ordered him to surrender his passport, pending sentencing. 

Shortly before 5 a.m., on June 12, 2012, Terry Clingerman II, 29, of West Lafayette, was crossing the westbound lane of U.S. 52 West near Cortez Drive in West Lafayette when Mahmood struck him with his 2011 Kia passenger car. Mahmood then drove around for 20 minutes before returning to the scene, court documents alleged. 

Clingerman had just landed his moped in a ditch, and he sought help from an employee at a nearby Admiral Gas Station to find a missing shoe. Clingerman later died from injuries suffered wh en he was hit by Mahmood’s car. 

At the time, Mahmood was a senior at Purdue University in Krannert School of Management . 

According to a probable cause affidavit, Mahmood was traveling west on U.S. 52 and had just passed another vehicle — going from the left lane to the right lane and back into the left lane — when he allegedly struck Clingerman. 

A witness, the driver Mahmood had just passed, told investigators that he briefly saw the suspect’s vehicle brake, 

but it continued west without stopping. 

The witness also caught the vehicle’s Indiana -issued license pl ate, which read “ZAEEM.” 

Mahmood himself called 911 about 15 minutes later to report that he had been involved in a wreck. When asked for his current location, Mahmood claimed to be enroute to Pay Less Super Market in West Lafayette, then reported being near Morehouse Road and Appomattox Court. 

He continued south on Morehouse Road and came up on two police officers who were directing traffic at U.S. 52 

and Morehouse Road. Mahmood’s Kia had extensive damage to its front hood and windshield. 

The Journal & Courier interviewed Clingerman in June 2010 after he was hospitalized for muscle deterioration in his legs and abdomen, which Clingerman said doctors attributed to his near-daily use of “spice,” a synthetic 

cannabinoid, during a three-month period. 

At the tim e, the drug, which mimics marijuana’s high when smoked, was still legal in Indiana. Clingerman was 

temporarily paralyzed from the muscle deterioration. 

November 14, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Murder, arson charges filed; motive for fire that killed girl, 6, remains unclear 

Written by Justin L. Mack 

Murder charges have been filed against a Lafayette man accused of starting the fire that killed 6-year-old Katelyn Sue Lane over the weekend. 

One charge of murder and two felony counts of arson were filed in Tippecanoe Superior Court against Ryan M. Moynagh, 33, who has been in Tippecanoe County Jail since Saturday. 28 

While the news of Moynagh’s charges does nothing to ease the pain felt by Katelyn’s family, her mother, Mindy 

Kirby, was pleased to learn t hat Moynagh faces the state’s most serious criminal o ffense. 

“It’s not going to bring her back by any means, but I’m happy to know that it’s going to be a very long time before 

he se es the light of day,” she said. 

According to court documents, firefighters responded to the house fire at 2726 Schuyler Ave. at 12:39 a.m. Saturday. Upon arrival, officials saw Moynagh standing in the front yard. 

Another man, 53-year-old David Trueblood, was found lying unconscious in the living room with a fire extinguisher next to his hand. 

Police found Katelyn lying in a bed in the northwest bedroom. According to the court documents, she suffered third-degree burns and smoke inhalation and died as a result of the fire. 

Police said Kirby left Katelyn at the home in the care of Trueblood, a family friend, sometime Friday. 

Kirby said she has known Trueblood for five years, and he has been baby-sitting Katelyn since they became friends. 

“He’s having a real hard time,” Kirby said of Trueblood. “She was like a grandchild to him. In h is heart, she was his 

grandchild. He’s taking it just as hard as my father.” 

November 14, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Molestation charges say man, 30, had sex with 11-year-old 

Two counts of child molestation were filed Thursday against a Lafayette man who allegedly forced an 11-year-old girl to have sex with him multiple times. 

Jeremy R. Ball, 30, was charged in Tippecanoe Superior Court. Both of his charges are Class A felonies. 

According to the probable cause affidavit filed with the charges, the victim told investigators that Ball had sex with her on repeated occasions. The most recent incident reportedly happened on Nov. 7. 

The victim also stated that Ball would show her pictures of other people engaged in sexual activity. 

After initially denying the allegations, Ball reportedly told police that he had been having sex with the girl two to three times a week since August. Like the victim, Ball reported that they last had sex on Nov. 7. 

November 14, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Charges say Lafayette man downloaded, shared child porn 

Written by Justin L. Mack 

A Lafayette man accused of downloading and sharing child pornography now faces criminal charges. 

Daniel C. Hill, 57, was charged Thursday in Tippecanoe Superior Court with child exploitation, a Class C felony, and possession of child pornography, a Class D felony. 29 

Court documents allege that Hill used the peer-to-peer sharing service ARES to download and share videos of children between the ages of 8 and 15 engaged in sexual situations. 

Hill reportedly admitted to downloading the files. He also stated that he tried to turn off the sharing feature of ARES but was unable to. 

November 14, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# 46-year-old registered sex offender accused of having sex with 12-year-old 

Written by Justin L. Mack 

Child molestation charges have been filed against a man accused of having sex with a 12-year-old girl. 

Modeo E. Manning, 46, was charged in Tippecanoe Superior Court with two counts of child molesting as a Class A felony, and one count of child molesting as a Class C felony. 

According to court documents, the victim was interviewed by investigators on Oct. 31. During the interview, the victim stated that Manning made her have sexual intercourse with him during the latter part of the summer. 

She said the incident took place at Manning’s house. 

When talking to police, Manning admitted to knowing the victim and her age, but he claimed that she was the aggressor. He added that he pushed the girl away because she was so young. 

Court documents alleged that Manning initially denied having sex with the girl. He reportedly admitted later to having sex with her on two occasions in late July or early August. 

Court documents state that Manning is a registered sex offender who was convicted in Illinois for aggravated criminal sexual abuse in May 2005. He also has a November 2006 felony conviction for failure to register as a sex offender. 

November 14, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Moynagh faces murder, arson charges 

According to court documents, Katelyn received third degree burns and suffered from smoke inhalation and died as a result of the fire. David Trueblood, 53, was injured during the fire. 

Trueblood and Moynagh both lived at the home on Schuyler Avenue. Family members told News 18 Trueblood was babysitting Katelyn. 

Prosecutors said investigators identified three points of the fire's origin. Two of them were in the bedroom where Katelyn was found. 

Prosecutors said Moynagh admitted to starting two papers on fire with a lighter and he knew there were no working smoke detectors in the house. 

The charges make no mention of a motive. 

Moynagh remains in the Tippecanoe County Jail and is being held on a $500,000 bond. 30 

November 12, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Cocaine in Lafayette hotel room nets 12 years 

By Dan Klein 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - Lamar Bradford, 24, of Lafayette nets a 12-year sentence after having cocaine in a hotel room. 

As News 18 reported in July, officers were called to the Red Roof Inn on State Road 26 because of the smell of marijuana. Bradford tried to swallow a bag that contained nine smaller bags of cocaine while officers interviewed other people in the room. 

Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington said he pleaded guilty to felony charges of cocaine possession and maintaining a common nuisance last month. Harrington said Bradford was sentenced Tuesday to four years in prison, four years community corrections and four years’ probation .

November 12, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Man sentenced for fracturing teenaged girl's skull 

By Dan Klein 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - A Lafayette man who hit a teenage girl so hard he gave her a skull fracture gets a sentence of five years. 

Artago Powers, 19, pleaded guilty last month to a felony charge of battery resulting in serious bodily injury after an incident in August at Linwood Park. 

Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington said Powers got into a fight with a 15-year-old girl and punched her in the face. She was knocked unconscious and had a fractured skull. 

Powers was sentenced to 18 months of prison, 18 months of community corrections and two years of supervised probation 31 

November 11, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Homeless man faces charges for meth 

A homeless man, 46 -year -old James Hampton of Lafayette, faces 10 charges after police said he sold meth to an 

undercover officer multiple  times. 

According to court documents, Hampton sold meth to officers three times in the month of October. Two of the 

incidents were at a duplex on the 3700 block of McCarty Lane and one was at the Knights Inn Motel on State Road 

26. 

Hampton faces eight  felony counts and two misdemeanors. 

November 11, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Found guilty of attempted child molesting 

# Eric Shamblin gets 22 years 

By Alexandra Kruczek 

A West Lafayette man gets a 22 year sentence after he was found guilty of attempted child molesting. 

Prosecutors said the incident happened in the fall of 2011. They said a young girl told investigators that Eric Shamblin laid on top of her while she was on the floor watching TV. 

She also told investigators Shamblin slipped his hand through the opening of her shorts and underwear a few days later. 

Shamblin admitted touching her inappropriately. He is sentenced to 20 years in jail and two years on probation. 

November 8, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Prosecutor emphasizes reporting suspected child abuse, neglect is everyone's duty 

Written by Justin L. Mack 

A father who sexually abuses his daughter. A mother who physically abuses her son. 

A guardian whose neglige nce results in a child’s death. 

Most Hoosiers know that when such individuals are found out, local and state officials work to prosecute them to the fullest extent of the law. 32 

But family members, friends or care providers who are aware of the abuse and fail to report it also could face time behind bars. 

“In the last year or two … we found out b y talking to cops, law enforcement and teachers that a lot of individuals, 

both citizens and those who regularly come in contact with children, really don’t understand Indiana law, because we see things on national TV and think that’s the law,” Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington said. “Every person has a duty to report (child abuse and neglect), but some don’t out of apathy, uncer tainty or fear of 

retribution.” 

This week, the prosecutor’s office organized a pair of community presentations to educat e citizens about Indiana’s “duty to report” law. 

Not reporting suspected child abuse or neglect is a Class B misdemeanor, punishable by up to 180 days incarceration and a $1,000 fine. Individuals who make a report are immune from civil and criminal liability. 

Harrington said he began making such presentations in local schools after the Penn State child sexual abuse scandal that led to sanctions against the university and landed Jerry Sandusky, a former longtime assistant football coach, in a state prison for 30 to 60 years. 

In that case, Mike McQueary, the assistant football coach who witnessed the abuse in a campus locker room, reported it to his superiors but did nothing more to intervene. 

Although not charged with wrongdoing, McQueary faced criticism for not doing more to alert authorities. 

Harrington said that in the Hoosier State, McQueary would have faced more than just angry critics. 

“If this had occurred in Indiana, he would have been charged for failure to report. It’s just that simple,” he said. 

Dur ing Thursday’s presentation, Harrington was joined by Deputy Prosecutor Elizabeth Goodrich, Lt. Jason Huber of the Tippecanoe County Sheriff’s Office and Dawn Gross, lead investigator for the prosecutor’s office. 

Goodrich covered signs of abuse to look for, how to interact with a child once you have reason to believe abuse has occurred, and who to call when making a report. 

She explained that if you’re dealing with a physical or sexual abuse situation that needs an immediate response, 

local law enforcement at 911 is your best bet. 

On the other hand, the Indiana Department of Child Services might be better suited for tackling situations related to a unclean or unsafe living conditions or family behavioral issues that have developed over time. 

Even if you’re n ot completely sure who to call — state, city or county police, or child services — Goodrich stressed the importance of just picking up the phone and getting the ball rolling. 

“Our agencies work together on a daily basis. It’s a seamless process for us, so please don’t use the excuse of ‘I don’t where this happened’ to not call the police,” she said. “Make the call and let us figure out who’s handling it.” 

She added that if you work at a school, a day care, a church or any other facility that provides child care, and if 

you suspect that abuse has occurred, follow that employer’s reporting protocol but also call police or protective services. 

“This is the big kicker. Following your employer’s protocol does not alleviate your responsibility to fulfill your 

indi vidual duty. ... You’re still on the hook to call in and make that report.” 33 

Huber advised that residents not insert themselves in a situation in which they might have to come face-to-face with an angry and potentially dangerous parent. Instead, call police. 

“They are going to just freeze the situation, make sure the child is OK,” he said. Police will also want some 

preliminary information from the caller. 

“Our main responsibility is to make sure that child is safe.” 

Tippecanoe County has seen increased reports of abuse or neglect since the March 16, 2005, death of 4-year-old Aiyana Gauvin, who was beaten by her stepmother, Michelle Gauvin, and neglected and abused by her father, Christian Gauvin. 

Michelle Gauvin is serving life in prison without parole for murder, confinement and neglect. Christian Gauvin, who was charged with Class A felony neglect of a dependent causing death, received a 50-year prison term. 

A former county deputy who lied on a report saying he checked on the child’s well -being — when in fact he never saw her — was convicted of perjury and spent time in jail, as well. 

A civil lawsuit filed by Aiyana’s mother and grandparents against the state was settled for $75,000. The lawsuit 

accused the state agency of failing to adequately investigate complaints that Aiyana was being abused. 

The number of calls in Tippecanoe County has hovered around 3,000 to 4,000 every year since. 

November 6, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Man found guilty after police find him with heroin at Lafayette campground 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - An Attica man faces up to 58 years in prison after dealing heroin at the AOK Campground in Lafayette. 

Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington says Stuart Bookwalter, 34, was found guilty of four charges including dealing heroin. He then admitted to a charge of being a habitual substance offender. 

As News 18 reported in January, officers were called to the campground after receiving a report of a suspicious vehicle. Inside the car, police found a syringe and 18 grams of heroin. 

Bookwalter is set to be sentenced Dec. 6. 

November 6, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# 8 felonies stem from alleged undercover drug buys 

Written by Justin L. Mack 34 

A Lafayette man who allegedly sold methamphetamine to undercover police multiple times last month now faces eight felony drug charges. 

James B. Hampton, 46, was charged Wednesday in Tippecanoe Superior Court 2 with three counts of dealing methamphetamine, three counts of possession of methamphetamine, maintaining a common nuisance, and possession of a synthetic drug or synthetic drug lookalike substance with a prior conviction. 

He also was charged with misdemeanors of possession of paraphernalia and possession of a synthetic drug or synthetic drug lookalike substance. 

According to court documents, a confidential informant told police that Hampton was making and selling methamphetamine in the area. 

The informant then helped set up arranged buys on Oct. 11, Oct. 15 and Oct. 31. 

The first two buys took place at a duplex at 3750 McCarty Lane. The final deal was made at a room in Knights Inn Motel, 4110 Indiana 26 E. 

During the deals, police allegedly paid for methamphetamine with money and pseudoephedrine pills. 

After the final meeting at the motel, police arrested Hampton. A search of the motel suite led to the discovery a meth pipe, scales and baggies containing what appeared to be synthetic marijuana. 

November 6, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Man found guilty after crashing through gate 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - A man was found guilty Tuesday after prosecutors said he drove through the front gate of a Lafayette business, thinking he was at the strip club. 

Prosecutors said Orrin Johnson, 31, was convicted of four charges, including being a habitual traffic violator and resisting law enforcement. 

In April, prosecutors said Johnson drove through the gate at Final Notice Towing on State Road 38. Johnson tried running off but was caught by police. 

Prosecutors said hospital tests revealed Johnson had a BAC of 0.195. 

He is due back in court on Friday to schedule a hearing for additional charges including being a habitual substance offender. 

November 2, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Woman charged in use of stolen credit card 35 

Written By Justin L. Mack 

Eleven felony charges were filed Tuesday against a West Lafayette woman accused of making more than $1,200 worth of purchases with a credit card that belonged to her mother-in-law. 

Maria Figueroa, 40, was charged in Tippecanoe Superior Court with six counts of theft and five counts of forgery. 

According to court documents, Figueroa spoke to police on Aug. 1 and admitted to authorizing the card for her mother-in-law in spring 2012. After completing the authorization, she decided to keep the card. 

Figueroa allegedly told police that she began using the card in December 2012, and continued to use it into early this year. 

She added that she was the only one who used the card. 

Figueroa’s husband and mother -in-law reportedly identified her in security footage when speaking to investigators who were looking into the unauthorized card use. 

The probable cause affidavit filed with the charges mentions five purchases made at Lafayette-area stores from Dec. 12 to Feb. 5 totaling $1,201.04. 

Figueroa acknowledges making purchases with the card in other cities, and out of state. 

November 1, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Prosecutors ask for help to bring back accused Purdue grade changer 

By Dan Klein 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - The Tippecanoe County Prosecutor's Office is asking the federal government for help to bring back a Purdue student charged with changing his grades illegally. 

Pat Harrington tells News 18 that his office has submitted a request to federal authorities to file an unlawful flight to avoid prosecution charge against Mitsutoshi Shirasaki who is believed to be in Japan. 

The request is one of the first steps in a long process to try to bring Shirasaki back to the U.S., a process that could take months or even years. 

As News 18 reported in June, for years, investigators say Shirasaki along with two friends stole passwords from professor's keyboards and then changed their grades. Roy Sun and SuJay Sharma have jury trials scheduled set for February for their alleged roles in the scheme. 

October 30, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Woman pleads guilty after fatal crash 36 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - A Lafayette woman was back in court Wednesday after a fatal crash earlier this year. 

Elizabeth Wesner, 21, pleaded guilty to operating a vehicle while intoxicated with a controlled substance in the blood causing death and possession of a schedule III controlled substance. 

In May, News 18 reported Donna Ubelhor, 73, was working in her yard when she was hit by Wesner's SUV and killed near the intersection of Commanche Trail and Brady Lane. Her neighbor was also injured. 

Wesner's sentencing is set for Dec.16. 

October 30, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Homeless man charged in stabbing 

AFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - A homeless man, 33-year-old Terry McCollum, faces three felony charges after prosecutors say he stabbed a friend in the abdomen this summer. 

According to court documents, McCollum stabbed Jason Menk on June 1 after Menk kicked McCollum and McCollum's girlfriend Andrea Bauer out of his home on Meadow Drive. Menk came home to find McCollum and Bauer inside. They got into a fight and McCollum stabbed Menk with a knife. 

Officers later located McCollum's bag on 18th Street with a meth lab inside. 

Police talked with Bauer in August who said they had spent some time in West Virginia. 

McCollum is charged with battery, criminal recklessness while armed with a deadly weapon and meth possession. 

October 28, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Witness says he saw man choke pregnant wife, 8-month-old 

Written By Justin L. Mack 

A Lafayette man faces several felony charges for allegedly slapping and choking his pregnant wife. 

Perry M. Young, 18, was charged in Tippecanoe Superior Court with battery, domestic battery, strangulation, battery on a child and residential entry. He also was charged with misdemeanors for battery and resisting law enforcement. 

According to court documents, Lafayette police were called on Oct. 23 to investigate a reported domestic dispute at a home on Lori Lee Drive. 37 

Upon arrival, the victim — a 19-year-old female who was four or five months pregnant — told police that Young pushed her to the ground. She attempted to run away when she got up. 

The victim picked up her 8-month-old son. At that point, Young allegedly tried to grab the child. He then slapped and choked the victim until she passed out. 

A male witness who was in the mobile home during the incident told police that Young entered without knocking and went right at the victim. He added that he saw Young choke the victim and the 8-month-old. 

The witness stated that he was able to pull Young off the victim and hold him down until police arrived. As he restrained Young, the witness said he was bitten twice — once on his right arm and once near a nipple. 

Young, the victim and her son were all taken to St. Elizabeth Central for treatment. While at the hospital, Young allegedly refused further treatment and tried to fight off police. The witness who was bitten was treated at the scene. 

Young was eventually arrested and booked into the Tippecanoe County Jail. He was being held Monday on a $500 cash bond. 

October 28, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Lafayette man faces criminal charges 

By Alexandra Kruczek 

A Lafayette man faces seven criminal charges after prosecutors said he hit and strangled his pregnant wife in front of her 8-month-old son. 

Last week, Lafayette police were called to a home on Lori Lee Drive. 

Witnesses told police 18-year-old Lerry Young entered the house without knocking and he went directly to his wife and grabbed her. 

Prosecutors said she told officers Young pinned her in a bedroom, before putting his arms around her throat and causing her to black out. 

Witnesses told police Young also put his hands around the baby's throat. 

According to court documents, Young bit a man trying to pull Young off his wife. 

Prosecutors said Young tried to fight officers as they attempted to handcuff him. 

Young is charged with five felonies and two misdemeanors, including battery resulting in bodily injury to a pregnant woman, strangulation, and battery on a child. 

October 25, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Lafayette man prison-bound after admitting to heroin dealing 38 

Written by David Smith 

Rayshon D. White, 26, of Lafayette was sentenced to 32 years in prison Friday for dealing heroin, to which he pleaded guilty. 

The crime occurred less than two months after he was released from the Indiana Department of Correction on a 2008 cocaine dealing charge, also adjudicated in Tippecanoe County. 

White was charged with numerous felony counts; the most serious was dealing heroin within 1,000 feet of a family apartment complex, charged as a Class A felony. He pleaded guilty to that count in Superior Court 1. 

The charges stem from two occasions in November and December, when White allegedly sold baggies containing heroin to an undercover officer. 

Following his arrest on Feb. 6, police searched an apartment on Adams Street where White lived. Police said they found a computer bag containing sandwich baggies, a digital scale and a baggie containing 3.1 grams of a substance that field-tested positive for heroin, according to the Tippeca noe County Prosecutor’s Office. 

The transactions occurred on or near the Village Pantry property at Indiana 38 East and Creasy Lane, which is within 1,000 feet of Briarwood Apartments, Brampton Apartments, Windemere Apartments and Deerfield Commons, accord ing to the prosecutor’s office. 

In sentencing White to 32 years executed and two years probation, the court noted a history of arrests and convictions dating to 2002 in Cook County, Ill. He was first arrested in Tippecanoe County in 2008, according to the 

prosecutor’s office. 

With time off for good behavior in prison and time already served in jail since his arrest, he could be released in 14½ years. 

October 25, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Tippecanoe Mall shopping spree ends in 13 felony charges for Lafayette man 

Written by David Smith 

A Lafayette man was charged Friday with using another man’s lost credit cards to go on a shopping spree at 

Tippecanoe Mall, court documents allege. 

Timothy McClendone Jr., 22, 2013 Elmwood Ave., faces six Class C felony counts of forgery, six class D felony counts of theft and one Class D felony count of receiving stolen property in connection with purchases totaling $1,822.32 from six stores at Tippecanoe Mall on Oct. 28, 2012. 39 

The investigation began when the victim, Matthew E. Schulz, reported to West Lafayette police on Monday, Oct. 29, 2012, that he lost his wallet either at the Neon Cactus or in a taxi he took home early the previous day. Police said Schulz stopped payment on a Visa card and an American Express card when he discovered the wallet missing. 

According to receipts obtained with a search warrant, interviews with store clerks and security video, a man 

matching McClendone’s description began purchasing items shortly after noon Sunday at Tippecanoe Mall, police said. 

According to the probable cause affidavit, McClendone used a discount card bearing his name to purchase six ball 

caps for $139.05 from Hat World using Schulz’s American Express Card. Police allege he also used a cust omer loyalty card at Finish Line in purchasing three pairs of shoes for $320.97. 

A store clerk at Rue 21 said a black male carrying several shopping bags attempted to make a purchase that afternoon using a credit card. When she asked him for identification , he said he didn’t have one and left. She later 

identified the suspect in a photo lineup, according to police. 

Police said Schulz’s cards also were used that day to purchase clothing from Macy’s, Hollister and J.C. Penney and a 

cellphone from Radio Shack. A Macy’s security video contained an image of McClendone, the affidavit said. 

As of 10 a.m. Friday, McClendone had not been booked into Tippecanoe County Jail, according to a jail official. 

October 25, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Lafayette man faces forgery and theft charges 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - A Lafayette man faces forgery and theft charges after prosecutors say he spent more than $1,200 with credit cards that didn't belong to him. 

They say Timothy McClendone, Jr. used two credit cards to buy a cell phone, clothing, shoes and hats from several different stores. 

Prosecutors say the cards and the wallet they were in had been reported stolen. They say McClendone used discount and rewards cards in his own name when he made the fraudulent purchases. 

October 25, 2013: WLFI TV 

# More charges for driver in fatal 2008 crash 

By Dan Klein 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - A Lafayette man who killed two men in an alcohol related crash five years ago faces more alcohol-related criminal charges. 

Christopher Weaver, 24, was the 19-year-old driver in a June 1, 2008 wreck that killed 17-year-old Jeff student Demetrius Fikes and 20-year-old Benjamin Harrison Shaw at Wabash and Alabama. Court documents later showed Weaver had marijuana in his system and a BAC of .15, almost twice the legal limit. 

According to online records, in 2009, Weaver pleaded guilty and was sentenced to six years in prison, two years of community corrections and four years of probation. 40 

According to court documents filed Wednesday reveal that just before 2 a.m. on Sunday, Oct. 6, a witness reported a truck hit a median on South Street in front of Caterpillar, causing a ladder to fly off and land in the road. An officer later located a ladder truck nearby with Weaver inside. A blood draw showed Weaver had a BAC of .09. 

October 23, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Man faces charges for bank robbery 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - Formal charges were filed Wednesday morning against a Lafayette man accused of robbing the Regions Bank on Teal Road last week. 

According to witnesses, a man entered the bank around noon October 18. Witnesses told investigators a man wearing a white mask and baseball hat demanded money. Witnesses told officers the man left in a gray pickup truck and were able to get a license plate number. 

Moments later an officer spotted the car matching the license plate numbers given by witnesses. Police arrested 48-year-old Kenneth Wetterman of Lafayette in connection to the robbery. According to the probable cause affidavit, Wetterman said "it was me," to police once in custody. 

Wetterman faces three felony charges .

October 23, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Lafayette man charged after allegedly selling pills to undercover officer 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - A Lafayette man faces drug-related charges after prosecutors said he sold Xanax and Lortab pills to an undercover officer. 

Prosecutors said Jonathan Thomas sold the drugs on three different occasions in July and August 2012. 

They said he had the officer drive him to the 18th Street Walgreens to get the Xanax pills. 

Prosecutors said he sold those pills to the officer at 18th and Erie Streets which is near the Dennis Burton Child Care and Hanna Park properties. 

He faces multiple dealing and possession of a controlled substance charges. 

October 21, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Felon with gun nets sentence of 10 years 41 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - Rio Michaels, 40, got a sentence of 10 years for carrying a handgun with a prior felony conviction and criminal recklessness with a deadly weapon. 

Prosecutors say Michaels called police in June 2012 after his wife told him someone was trying to break in. Michaels took his wife's handgun from her and left the house to wait for officers. 

Though his wife told officers she fired a round into the ground in the back yard, neighbors say they saw a Hispanic man on the porch fire one shot into the air. 

Prosecutors say police found a shell casing on his front porch. 

Michaels was sentenced to eight years in prison and two years supervised probation. 

October 17, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Charges filed for PU football players 

# Formal charges filed for Knauf, Woods 

WEST LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - Formal charges were filed Thursday morning against two Purdue football players accused of stealing from Kohl's at the Tippecanoe Mall last month. 

BJ Knauf and Jordan Woods were both booked into the Tippecanoe County Jail on September 30, 2013. 

Police said the two redshirt freshman wide receivers are accused of stealing two $20 tie clips. 

Knauf faced a two game suspension and was benched for the game against Nebraska. 

He'll miss this weekend's game at Michigan State. 

Knauf will be back in action following the bye week at home against Ohio State on November 2. 

Woods was suspended indefinitely because of prior incidents. 

The two men will appear in front of a judge for the first time November 18. 

October 16, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Man gets 50 years in prison for dealing cocaine 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - Antonio McCaster, 33, was sentenced to 60 years after dealing cocaine to an undercover officer. 42 

Prosecutors said McCaster sold two plastic bags of cocaine, that he was storing in his mouth, to the officer in May of last year at Bar Barry Liquor Store on Main Street. 

He was sentenced to 30 years for dealing cocaine, 30 years for being a habitual offender. 

A judge sentenced him to 50 years in prison and 10 years probation. 

October 16, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Man sentenced to 20 years for armed robbery 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - An armed robber who held up a Lafayette gas station at gunpoint and then pistol whipped the cashier on the head was sentenced to 20 years in prison. 

Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington said 24-year-old Emmanuel Winters robbed Tower Liquors on Creasy Lane in March. 

He held a gun to the clerk's head, whipped him with it and ran off with less than $300. 

Police used footprints in the snow to track him to a nearby apartment. 

He was sentenced to 10 years in prison for Armed Robbery with a Deadly Weapon and 10 years for being a habitual offender. 

October 16, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Man caught counterfeiting money gets sentence of 4 years 

WEST LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - Jordan Greenhill, 21, was given a 4-year sentence for using counterfeit money at an ice cream shop. 

In April a report of a fake $20 bill at the Silver Dipper on State Street in West Lafayette led police on a pursuit into Lafayette. 

Greenhill, along with Marice Brown and Keywon Dortch were taken into custody. 

Prosecutors said other counterfeit bills had been passed at several other businesses for more than a month. 43 

Surveillance footage showed Greenhill in stores like Village Pantry and Walgreens, when the counterfeit money was passed. 

A female also admitted that Greenhill was making counterfeit bills at her home. 

Greenhill was sentenced to 3 years in Community Corrections and 1 year of supervised probation. 

October 16, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Judge sentences man 9 years for making meth 

> LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - Kenneth Eller, 29, of Lafayette received a 9-year-sentence for manufacturing meth.

Prosecutors say police were called to Midlex Court last November because a woman wanted Eller to leave and he wouldn't. 

Officers spotted items used to make meth in plain view and in Eller's pockets. 

Eller later told officers about a backpack in the backyard where they found an active meth lab inside. 

He was sentenced to 7.5 years in prison and 18 months probation. 

October 16, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Radzikowski charged 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - A West Lafayette man faces several criminal charges after leading police on a pursuit through two counties. 

43- year-old Joseph Radzikowski faces five counts including aggravated battery, resisting law enforcement and criminal recklessness with a vehicle. 

According to court documents, Radzikowski accelerated towards a West Lafayette police officer working a crash at Northwestern Avenue and Cherry Lane. 

Police pursued through West Lafayette to Lafayette and then to Interstate 65 where the chase was called off because of excessive speeds. 

The chase picked back up in White County. 

Around 10:00 p.m., almost an hour after it all began, stop sticks at State Road 43 and Soldiers Home Road deflated Radzikowski's tires and ending the pursuit. 

October 8, 2013: WLFI TV 44 

# Charges filed after meth lab discovery 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - A one-pot methamphetamine lab state troopers said was one of the biggest they'd ever seen leads to three felony charges for a trio of Tippecanoe County residents. 

Prosecutors said Michael Pulley, his twin brother Jonathon, and Jonathon's wife Sara, are charged with dealing in meth, conspiracy to commit dealing in meth, and possession of meth. 

As News 18 already reported, a tip to the Department of Child Services led Sheriff's deputies to a home in the Lexington Farms subdivision near Faith Christian School. 

At the time, investigators said they believed the lab they found inside had been in operation for about a year. 

Prosecutors said Jonathon admitted manufacturing and selling the drug, Michael admitted using meth and helping make it, and Sara admitted getting materials to make the meth and being present for some of the deals. 

October 4, 2013: Lafayette Journal & Courier 

# Lengthy prison sentence for cocaine dealer 

Tippecanoe County man who admitted to dealing cocaine has been ordered to spend more than three decades in prison. 

Travis Duane Lester, 32, was sentenced to 32 years in prison and four years on probation by Tippecanoe Superior Court 1 Judge Randy Williams on Friday. 

Lester pleaded guilty in August to a lone count of dealing in cocaine, a class A felony, under an agreement with the 

prosecutor’s office. 

Lester originally faced 13 drug-related charges resulting from a May 17, 2012, drug deal, according to court documents. 

A probable cause affidavit showed that investigators purchased cocaine from Lester four separate times, twice within 1,000 feet of a school, from May to October 2012. 

Prosecutor Pat Harrington asked the judge to sentence Lester to 40 years in prison and five years on probation. 

Harrington argued for the longer prison term based on Lester’s substance abuse history, failed attempts at 

rehabilitation and his criminal history, which includes two prior drug convictions. 

October 3, 2013: Lafayette Journal & Courier 

# Stabbing suspect charged with attempted murder 

Battery charges against a West Lafayette man accused of nearly killing someone during an altercation over a woman have been upgraded to attempted murder. 

Timothy A. Bowen, 26, was formally charged in June with aggravated battery; battery by means of a deadly weapon; battery resulting in serious bodily injury; and criminal recklessness by means of a deadly weapon. 45 

A charge of attempted murder, a Class A felony, was added to his existing charges Thursday. 

The victim, 22-year-old Pavel Borovikov of West Lafayette, nearly died from severe blood loss on June 22 after suffering numerous stab wounds and cuts to his chest, back, neck, head and face. 

West Lafayette police officers were called to Bowen’s apartment at 119 E. Columbia St. about 3:40 a.m. that 

morning. Upon arrival, police found Borovikov injured on the sidewalk. 

According to a probable cause affidavit, animosity between the men began hours earlier at a party. Borovikov showed up to the party with his ex-girlfriend, who later left with Bowen. 

This allegedly upset Borovikov, and he and two acquaintances went to Bowen’s apartment building. While speaking 

with Bowen outside, he alle gedly claimed to have a knife and a gun “loaded and ready,” the affidavit states. 

Afterward, Borovikov went to Bowen’s apartment, where he pounded and kicked on the front door. Borovikov 

eventually left without getting inside or speaking with Bowen. 

Witnesses told police that Bowen then ran after Borovikov and repeatedly struck him. They said they did not immediately realize that Borovikov had been stabbed until pulling Bowen off him. 

After a brief vehicle pursuit, Bowen was taken into custody. He had apparent bloodstains on his body and his clothing, the affidavit states. A folding knife with suspected blood on it also was found with Bowen. 

Indiana Department of Correction records show that Bowen previously served five months of a one-year prison sentence for stabbing another man during a fight in March 2009. This also took place near the Purdue University campus. 

Bowen pleaded guilty in that case to criminal recklessness, battery and criminal mischief. 

October 3, 2013: Lafayette Journal & Courier 

Written By Justin L. Mack 

A Lafayette woman accused of running over her estranged husband’s girlfriend and ramming an apartment building 

will spend eight years behind bars. 

Erin L. Fikes, 31, was given a 13-year sentence Wednesday for her involvement in the incident at 4:45 a.m. April 15. Her two children, ages 5 and 13, were in the car at the time. 

Initially charged with nine offenses, including neglect of dependents, she pleaded guilty to attempted aggravated battery, battery by means of a deadly weapon and two counts of operating a vehicle while intoxicated. 

Fikes will serve the first eight years of the sentence with the Indiana Department of Correction. Upon her release, she will spend five years on probation. 

The investigation began when Lafayette police were called to the 1400 block of Sunset Ridge Drive, where a vehicle had crashed into the laundry room of an apartment building. 

Fikes was reportedly found in the front seat. When approached by the police, she began screaming and made several comments that she was drunk and should not be driving. 46 

She then curled up and went to sleep. 

A hospital toxicology report showed that Fikes had a blood-alcohol content of 0.14 percent, and her blood contained traces of amphetamines and cannabinoids. 

Officers found a second f emale, identified as Brittney Libby, pinned under Fikes’ car. She was freed and taken to 

St. Elizabeth East, where she was treated for cuts and bruises. 

Libby told police she recently began seeing Jacob Fikes, who had separated from Erin Fikes three months prior. 

According to court documents, the three adults had been drinking together on April 15 when an argument ensued, and Erin Fikes started throwing and breaking items in the apartment. 

Fikes was reportedly tired of her husband “having his cake and eating it too” and wanted to kill him and his 

girlfriend. After the argument, Fikes then took her two children to leave. 

Jacob Fikes and Libby were standing outside when Erin Fikes backed up her vehicle, then sped forward at 40 to 50 mph — according to Erin Fik es’ own estimati on and admission — toward them. 

The estranged husband managed to jump out of the way, but the vehicle struck Libby, who witnesses said rolled onto the hood and into the windshield. Libby was found pinned under the vehicle once it hit the building and stopped. 

Neighbors told detectives that they saw Erin Fikes kick Libby in the face as she lay pinned under the vehicle, and heard Erin Fikes tell Libby that she deserved it for messing with a married man, court documents state. 

Officers who took Erin Fikes to the hospital for a blood draw also heard her laugh about the incident, according to court documents. 

October 2, 2013: Lafayette Journal & Courier 

# Stabbing victim says alleged moped thief offered TV as payment 

Written By Justin L. Mack 

A Lafayette man faces felony charges after allegedly stealing a moped and stabbing the owner when confronted. 

Elias Zamot, 18, was charged in Tippecanoe Superior Court 2 with battery committed by means of a deadly weapon, a Class C felony, and criminal recklessness committed while armed with a deadly weapon, a Class D felony. 

According to court documents, police were called Friday night to St. Elizabeth East hospital regarding a stabbing victim who was receiving treatment. 

The victim was about to go into surgery for two wounds on the left side of his chest when police arrived. 

The victim told police that his moped had been stolen the day before and that a friend of his knew the individual who allegedly stole it. 

The friend set up a meeting to take place Friday between the victim and the suspected thief, later identified as Zamot. The victim demanded that Zamot pay for the damage done to his moped when he stole and hot-wired the vehicle. 47 

Zamot reportedly refused, stating that he doesn’t have any money, and that is the reason he steals mopeds. 

The victim told police that Zamot offered a TV as payment before pulling a knife and stabbing him in the chest twice. 

The friend of the victim reported that he did not see the stabbing or the knife, but after the altercation he saw the victim grab his stomach and saw Zamot putting something back into his pocket. 

Zamot then told the friend to give him a ride home and commented that he would stab him if he tried anything. 

When police located and arrested Zamot later that day, he reportedly admitted to stabbing the victim twice and throwing the knife away. 

October 1, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Man sentenced for firing shots into a Lafayette home 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - A Lafayette man is sentenced to prison time and probation for threatening to kill a man, firing shots at him, then barricading himself in a garage in a standoff with police. 

Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington said Derek Robbins, 29, pleaded guilty to criminal recklessness committed by shooting a firearm into an inhabited dwelling. 

In March, Robbins and Jason Foltz got into a fight at a home on North 19th Street. Foltz told police Robbins left the house and about ten minutes later, Foltz said he saw a muzzle flash from across the alley. 

Foltz told police he felt an impact on the lower part of his body, but said he had no shotgun wound other than redness, bruising, and small lacerations. 

Harrington said when officers tracked Robbins down, he had barricaded himself in a garage and was armed with two shotguns. After a brief standoff, Robbins was taken into custody where he admitted to firing a shot at Foltz. 

Harrington said Robbins was sentenced to two years behind bars and two years of probation. 

October 1, 2013: Lafayette Journal & Courier 

# Lafayette woman pleads guilty to welfare fraud 

A Lafayette woman pleaded guilty to collecting $17,570 in Social Security funds for her son after he was removed from her care. 

Ruchelle L. Clouse, 36, of Lafayette pleaded guilty to welfare fraud, a class C Felony. She was sentenced to pay $17,570 in restitution to the Social Security Administration, serve one year in the Indiana Department of Correction, three years in Tippecanoe Community Corrections Center and two years on probation. 48 

After her son was removed from her care in May 2009, Clouse collected $17,570 in Social Security Administration’s 

child auxiliary benefits from June 2009 to March 2012, according to court documents. 

Her son spent the next three years at various juvenile treatment or detention facilities, followed by placement at a 

relative’s home since January 2012. 

In December, she was charged in Tippecanoe Superior Court 1 with welfare fraud, theft and two counts of perjury 

— all felonies. The three remaining charges were dropped in exchange for her guilty plea. Sentencing was left up to Superior Court 1. 

September 27, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Man sentenced for knife attack 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - Richard Carrell, 50, was sentenced Friday to three decades in prison and five years of probation after pleading guilty to robbery resulting in bodily injury and being a habitual offender. 

Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington said in May, Carrell attacked his landlady with a knife when she refused to give him some of her prescription pain medication. 

After eventually agreeing to give him a couple of pills, the victim got away and call police. Harrington said officers tracked Carrell down about 30 minutes later. 

September 25, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Don't be in denial about gangs, prosecutor tells community 

Written by Justin L. Mack 

Creating a communitywide strategy to combat youth gangs was the focus of a forum held Wednesday afternoon at  Big Brothers Big Sisters of Greater Lafayette .

The forum, hosted by the  Indiana Youth Institute , attracted about two dozen people in the social service community who deal with local children on a daily basis. 

Attendees explored how to recognize gang activity, and how to develop a plan to address established gangs. 49 

Tippecanoe County Prosecutor  Pat Harrington was the event’s featured speaker, and he led an hourlong 

presentation that explained the impact gangs have on the entire community. 

He said the first step in coming up with a solution is realizing that the problem exists. 

“I’m no longer on the question of ‘does Tippecanoe County have gangs?’ I’m beyond that,” he said. “I see them. I’ve prosecuted them. I’ve convicted them. They’re in our schools, in our parks, in our courthouse. ... The problem we have is perception. They don’t affect y our world. 

“You don’t see it. And when you do see it in the media, you don’t want to believe it.” 

During the presentation, Harrington presented a number of statistics related to gang activity in Tippecanoe County, including a stat on how quickly gangs have spread locally in the last six years. 

The statistic indicated that in 2007, local officials knew of one large prison/national gang, seven street gangs and no local sets. In 2013, officials were tracking eight large prison/national gangs, 38 street gangs and 20 local sets. 

Harrington said the criminal activity these gangs engage in includes drug dealing, robbery, assault, witness intimidation and murder. 

When discussing what attracts young people to gangs, things like money, a feeling of belong, status and protection were listed as some of the biggest factors. 

Harrington added that deterring children and young adults from joining gangs early is the key to solving the problem, but it will take an entire community to accomplish that. 

“Law enforcement and my office … we’re the last solution. That comes after the gang member has committed a crime, been caught, prosecuted, convicted and sentenced,” he said. “By the time they hit my desk and the courtroom, 

we in the society have had multiple opportunities to interv ene, and we’ve failed.” 

Jess Avila, program director for the Tippecanoe Youth Center, attended the event and said it did a good job of educating people unfamiliar with gangs about how they attract young members. 

“I grew up in New York and I’m very familiar with gangs, and coming to place like this, people just kind of don’t want to address the issue. I do think the conversation does need to be continued as a community,” she said. “We 

need education, more resources for kids and more positive outlets for kids .” 

For Robin Loper of Big Brothers Big Sisters, the forum was a great source of information. 

“I run our afterschool program, which is for boys ... and I’ve dealt with boys who live in these kids of situations,” she said. “I know a couple who have reported being in a gang, so I just wanted to find out more information about it. It was good. ... I wish we could spend all day talking about it more in-depth.” 

Wednesday’s forum was a part of the Indiana Youth Institute’s Youth Worker Café series which was design ed to bring together local youth workers to build relationships and inspire collaborations that will benefit children. 

Wednesday’s Youth Worker Café is made possible by the collaborative efforts of the Indiana Nonprofit Resource 

Network, the Community Foundation of Greater Lafayette and Indiana Youth Institute. 

September 22, 2013: WLFI TV 50 

# Tippecanoe Co. gang forum scheduled 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington will host a forum on how to recognize gang activity in our area. 

Harrington will discuss the impact gangs have on schools, children, families, courts, and the quality of life in the community. He will also present a model for community organizations to intervene. 

The forum will run from 11:30 a.m. until 1:00 p.m. on Wednesday, September 25. The forum will take place at Big Brothers Big Sisters of Greater Lafayette. 

The forum is free, and lunch will be served, but reservations are required by noon on Tuesday, September 24. 

To make a reservation, email Jillian Miller of the Indiana Nonprofit Resource Network at jmiller@uw.lafayette.in.us. 

September 17, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Local gang activity receives attention 

# Tippecanoe Co. leaders address gang activity 

By Rachel Akpotu 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - Area leaders are taking a close look at local gang activity. 

To combat gangs in Tippecanoe County, the Indiana Youth Institute (IYI) will host a forum to explore the effects of gang activity in Indiana. 

According to a 2012 Institute of Education study, 16 percent of public schools reported on campus gang activity during the 2009 –2010 school year. 

Tippecanoe County prosecutor Pat Harrington will address the impact gangs have on schools, along with suggestion on how to lower gang activity in schools. 

The forum will run from 11:30 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. on Wednesday, Sept. 25, at the Big Brothers Big Sisters center of Greater Lafayette. For more information, you can contact Debbie Jones at (317) 396-2729 or click here. 

September 17, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Woman charged with selling cocaine to undercover officers 

By Dan Klein 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - Angela Griffith, 47, of Lafayette faces two felony charges after prosecutors said she sold cocaine to undercover officers twice this spring. 

According to court documents, Griffith sold cocaine to an undercover officer in late March. Prosecutors said she did it again in early April when she was with her boyfriend Daryl Bennett. 

Bennett pleaded guilty to conspiracy to deal cocaine in July and was sentenced to 15 years in prison. 51 

Griffith remains in the Tippecanoe County Jail. 

September 12, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Fight at Laf. park results in skull fracture, battery charge 

By Dan Klein 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - Artago Powers, 19, of Lafayette faces one felony charge of battery resulting in serious bodily injury after prosecutors say he hit a teenage girl so hard he gave her a skull fracture. 

According to court documents, on Aug. 24, Powers got into an argument with the 15-year-old at Linwood Park, hit her twice, causing her to fall to the ground and become unconscious for about 5 minutes. Powers later told officers the teen hit him on the head before he punched her in the face. 

September 12, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Man charged after breaking in while owner home 

By Dan Klein 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - Martell Williams, 23, of Lafayette faces three felony charges after police say he broke into a house and tried to steal items while one of the owners was inside. 

According to court documents, a man saw Williams outside his home when he left on a walk Sept. 7, but left the front door unlocked. 

Five minutes later, the man's wife thought her husband returned, but then saw a man she identified as Williams carrying a vase and a cell phone. 

Police say when she yelled, Williams dropped the items and ran out of the house and was later located by officers at 6th and Salem. 

He faces three charges including burglary. 

September 9, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Armed robbery accomplice gets 9 year sentence 

By Dan Klein 52 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - 18-year-old Benjamin Morehouse-Braswell of Lafayette was sentenced Monday to six years in prison for his role in an armed robbery last summer. 

Prosecutor Pat Harrington says just after 1 a.m., Braxton Baker walked into the Casey's General Store on State Road 25 wearing a green monster mask armed with a steak knife and robbed the clerk while Morehouse was outside in June 2012. Less than an hour later, at the Speedway on State Road 26, after Morehouse pumped gas, Baker tried to rob again but the clerk locked the store's door. 

A sheriff's deputy located the vehicle and both men about an hour later. 

Morehouse pleaded guilty in June 2013 and was sentenced Monday to six years in prison and three years of supervised probation. 

September 9, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Child battery charge after 12-year-old girl hit with belt 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - A Tippecanoe County man was charged with child battery Monday after prosecutors said he hit a 12-year-old girl on the leg twice with a belt. 

According to court documents, 31-year-old Javier Gaeta wanted the girl to clean a van on Labor Day. When she refused, he got a belt, chased her out of the living room into the front yard and then back into the house. 

The girl told investigators he hit her twice with the belt on the leg, which was beginning to swell, when deputies responded Sept. 2. Her leg was still red the next day. 

Gaeta told investigators he was protecting himself and only hit her because she was hitting him. 

August 30, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Gang-related charge filed against teen 

— Sophia Voravong/svoravong@jconline.com 

A Lafayette teenager already charged in connection with gunshots fired in May at the Claystone at the Crossing apartment complex faces a new criminal count that — if convicted — would automatically extend prison time. 

The  Tippecanoe County prosecutor’s office  on Friday filed a  criminal gang enhancement  against 18-year-old Heath G. Fletcher. 

Indiana defines a criminal gang as a group of three or more people who promote, sponsor and assist or participate in the commission of a felony or battery. 

The afternoon of May 28, Lafayette police responded to reports of a man possibly carrying a gun on Twyckenham Boulevard. According to a probable cause affidavit, Fletcher was found in the area walking down the sidewalk, but when ordered to stop, he allegedly tried to pull something from his waistband and ran. 

Officers found Fletcher a short time later and retraced his path. A .22-caliber rifle, with one round in the chamber, was found along that path, along with additional rounds on the ground, the affidavit states. 53 

When interviewed, Fletcher allegedly made comments that investigators were probably looking for him already in connection to shots fired at Claystone on May 25 and May 27. 

Fletcher admitted to being a member of the Reckless gang, which is affiliated with Gangster Disciples. The shots were aimed at a member of a rival gang, the affidavit states. 

Fletcher has been in the Tippecanoe County Jail since May 28 and is being held on a combined $25,000 surety and $2,500 cash bond, along with a separate $250 cash bond. 

Other charges against him include criminal recklessness while armed with a deadly weapon and resisting law enforcement. 

August 30, 2013: Tippecanoe County Prosecutor’s Office 

Adam J. Jenkins was sentenced today to in Tippecanoe County, IN to 51 years for his guilty pleas to 2 counts of Child Molestation Causing Serious Injury (A fel) – victim was 20 months old and Possession of Schedule III Controlled Substance (C fel). Total sentence breakdown: 51 years, with 45 years executed in DOC and 6 years suspended on supervised probation. 

August 30, 2013: Tippecanoe Count y Prosecutor’s Office 

Jonathan Creighton Pulley, 22, of Lafayette, IN and Timothy David Renner, 32, of Frankfort, IN, were charged in Tippecanoe County, IN with Conspiracy to Commit Dealing in Methamphetamine (B fel), Dealing in Methamphetamine (B fel), Possession of Methamphetamine (D fel), Illegal Drug Lab (D fel), Dealing in a Synthetic Drug (D fel), Possession of a Synthetic Drug (D fel), and Possession of Paraphernalia (A misd). 

In addition, Jonathan Creighton Pulley was charged with Possession of a Schedule IV Controlled Substance (D fel), and Maintaining a Common Nuisance (D fel). 

In addition, Timothy David Renner was charged with Neglect of a Dependent (C fel). 

Marc Anthony Powers, 31, of Lafayette was charged with Possession of Methamphetamine (C fel), and Maintaining a Common Nuisance (D fel). 

August 30, 2013: Tippecanoe County Prosecutor’s Office 

Additional charges filed against Heath Garrett Fletcher, 18, of Lafayette, IN: 1 count of Criminal Recklessness Committed While Armed with a Deadly Weapon and 1 count of Criminal Gang Sentence Enhancement in Tippecanoe County. 

August 30, 2013: Tippecanoe County Prosecutor’s Office 

Devontae Shakeem Brodnax, 16, of West Lafayette, IN has been charged with Burglary (B fel), and 4 counts of Theft (D fel) in Tippecanoe County. 

August 27, 2013: WLFI TV 54 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - Jeffery Barber, 37, of West Lafayette was sentenced to ten years in prison Wednesday after pleading guilty to possession of methamphetamine, having an illegal drug lab and being a habitual substance offender. 

As News 18 reported in January, during a traffic stop, Lafayette police found close to two grams of meth, almost 100 pseudoephedrine pills and other items used to make meth. 

Barber was taken to the hospital after officers noticed he appeared to swallow something .

August 27, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# West Lafayette man charged in sexual assault 

— Sophia Voravong/svoravong@jconline.com 

A West Lafayette man is accused of sexually assaulting a female acquaintance while she was asleep. 

The suspect, 25-year-old Timothy J. Lafleur, was charged Monday in Tippecanoe Superior Court 1 with criminal deviate conduct, a Class B felony, and sexual battery, a Class D felony. 

The lead charge against him is punishable by six to 20 years in prison, if convicted. 

Lafleur was originally arrested by the Tippecanoe County Sheriff’s Office on Aug. 1, the day that the 24 -year-woman alleges that she woke up to Lafleur fondling her genitals. 

Her shirt and bra also were pushed up and exposed her breasts, according to a probable cause affidavit. 

The woman told investigators that she was friends with Lafleur, but they were never romantically or sexually involved. 

According to the affidavit, Lafleur went to her West Lafayette residence shortly after midnight Aug. 1 to watch movies, and she later fell asleep on the couch. 

She also told sheriff’s detectives that she remembered seeing a flash before fully awakening and looked at Lafleur’s cellphone. His phone allegedly contained five photographs and two videos, some of which allegedly were 

of the woman’s breasts and genitals. 

Lafleur, when interviewed by detectives, provided incriminating details that matched some of the woman’s 

allegations, the affidavit states. 

He was released from the Tippecanoe County Jail on Aug. 2 after posting a combined $12,500 surety and $1,250 cash bond, jail staff said Tuesday. 

August 26, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 55 

# Lafayette man held on child sex abuse charges 

# Girl says molesting dates back to 2009 

A 36-year-old Lafayette man faces numerous criminal charges, stemming from allegations that he repeatedly forced a young girl into participating in sexual acts. 

The suspect, Jeremy D. Stansberry, has been charged in Tippecanoe Superior Court 1 with child molesting; rape; five counts of sexual misconduct with a minor; and two counts of attempted sexual misconduct with a minor. 

As of Monday evening, Stansberry remained in Tippecanoe County Jail on a combined $100,000 surety and $10,000 cash bond. 

The allegations against him date between January 2009 and Aug. 2. 

According to a probable cause affidavit, the girl described multiple instances of intercourse and penetration, beginning when she was in seventh or eighth grade. 

August 22, 2013: Tippecanoe County Prosecutor’s Office 

A Criminal Gang Sentence Enhancement has been added to the charges facing Heath Garrett Fletcher, AKA Drama, 18, of Lafayette, IN. 

Background: On June 4, 2013, Heath Garrett Fletcher, AKA Drama, 18, of Lafayette, was charged for a shots fired incidents targeting the home of a rival gang member. Fletcher is an admitted member of the Reckless Gang, which is associated with the Gangster Disciples. 

Count I: ATTEMPTED CRIMINAL RECKLESSNESS, Committed While Armed with a Deadly Weapon, Class C Felony 

Count II: CRIMINAL REKLESSNESS, Committed While Armed with a Deadly Weapon, Class D Felony 

Count III: RESISTING LAW ENFORCEMENT, Committed While Armed with a Deadly Weapon, Class A Misdemeanor 

August 21, 2013: Tippecanoe County Prosecutor’s Office 

A Tippecanoe County jury found Rio B. Michaels, 38, of Lafayette, IN guilty of Carrying a Handgun without a License (A misd), Criminal Recklessness with a Deadly Weapon (D fel) and Carrying a Handgun with a Prior Felony Conviction within 15 years (C fel). The Defendant did not appear for trial. The Court entered conviction on C Felony possession of handgun without a license, merged the misdemeanor count into that count, and entered conviction on D 

Felony criminal recklessness. The Court revoked the Defendant’s bond and ordered a no -bond warrant to issue. 

August 21, 2013: Tippecanoe County Prosecutor’s Office 

A Tippecanoe County jury has found James Stanifer, 39, of Lafayette, IN guilty on all counts: Criminal Confinement with a Vehicle (C fel), Strangulation (D fel), and Battery (A misd). Sentencing is scheduled for September 16, 2013. 

August 21, 2013: Tippecanoe County Prosecutor’s Office 56 

Dale Allen Bulthuis, III, 31, of Lafayette, IN was charged today with Dealing in Methamphetamine (B fel), Illegal Drug Lab (D fel), and 2 counts of Neglect of a Dependent (C fel) in Tippecanoe County. 

August 21, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Jurors convict man in attack of sister-in-law 

— Sophia Voravong/svoravong@jconline.com 

A Lafayette man’s claim that he battered his sister -in-law in self-defens e wasn’t enough to sway jurors. 

On Wednesday afternoon, following a two-day trial in Tippecanoe Circuit Court, jurors found 39-year-old James A. Stanifer guilty of all three counts he faced: criminal confinement with a vehicle, a Class C felony; strangulation, a Class D felony; and battery, a Class A misdemeanor. 

Prosecutor Pat Harrington said Stanifer faces two to 10 years in prison. He’s scheduled to be sentenced Sept. 16 by Judge Don Daniel. 

Stanifer’s sister -in-law, Tracey Stanifer, suffered abrasions, cuts and scratches to her forehead and neck, according to trial testimony. Stanifer, meanwhile, suffered a bite to his right index finger, which was swollen and bruised with 

a partial break in the skin, sheriff’s Deputy Rodney Dilling told jurors. 

The incident that led to the charges occurred Sept. 13, 2012, as the two were headed to lunch. Their explanations for what happened next do not match. 

Stanifer’s attorney, Kirk Freeman, argued that Stanifer wanted to speak to Tracey Stanifer about her husband , who 

is Stanifer’s brother. Stanifer planned to take her that morning to Davis Ferry Park for lunch. 

Tracey Stanifer, however, told investigators that they had agreed to a downtown restaurant, and she got confused when they drove in the opposite direction. Stanifer was behind the wheel. 

That allegedly prompted her to ask him to stop the vehicle, but she claimed that Stanifer refused. 

Stanifer, however, claimed that his sister-in-law attacked first, and he tried to get her out of the vehicle. 

Witnesses who came upon the altercation believed Tracey Stanifer’s version of events. According to their testimony, 

she could be heard screaming for help. 

August 20, 2013 Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Defendant found guilty on gun charges in absentia 57 

— Sophia Voravong/svoravong@jconline.com 

It took jurors only 10 minutes Wednesday afternoon to find a no-show defendant guilty of recklessly firing a gunshot outside his Lafayette home last summer. 

Thirty-eight-year-old Rio B. Michaels had been representing himself, Prosecutor Pat Harrington said, but he did not appear for his trial, which began Tuesday morning in Tippecanoe Superior Court 1. 

His standby, court-appointed attorney, Kevin O’Reilly, had to defend Michaels without him present because his client 

skipped bond. 

Jurors found Michaels guilty of criminal recklessness with a deadly weapon, a Class D felony, and carrying a handgun without a license. Afterward, Judge Randy Williams found Michaels guilty of a higher count of carrying a handgun with a prior felony conviction within 15 years. 

Michaels was arrested June 30, 2012, by Lafayette police after someone reported a shot being fired. 

According to court documents, Michaels initially told police that his wife fired a shot into the ground after hearing a burglar at their house in the 1200 block of Washington Street. 

But a second woman, who had been sitting on Michaels’ porch at the time, told investigators that Michaels came 

outside, waved a handgun and fired into the air. 

This occurred roughly six months after Michaels was convicted of burglary in Milwaukee County, Wisc. 

He has a lengthy criminal history dating to 1992 and convictions that include auto theft, aggravated assault and robbery, according to Harrington. 

He faces two to 11 years. Since the whereabouts of Michaels is unknown, no sentencing date was set. 

August 20, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Judge sentences armed robber to 24 years 

— Sophia Voravong/svoravong@jconline.com 58 

A Lafayette man has been sentenced for two armed robberies and two attempted armed robberies that were committed within 48 hours in Fe bruary on the city’s east side. 

Michael E. Brown’s motivation was an addiction to prescription drugs, according to court documents. 

The 35-year-old pleaded guilty last month in Tippecanoe Circuit Court to two counts of robbery with a deadly weapon and two counts of criminal confinement while armed with a deadly weapon, all Class B felonies. 

Judge Don Daniel sentenced Brown on Monday to 24 years, 20 of which will be served in the Indiana Department of Correction followed by four years on probation. He also must pay a combined $440 in restitution, according to Prosecutor Pat Harrington. 

The first holdup took place early Feb. 17 outside an apartment in the 1100 block of Red Cloud Trail, off Indiana 26 East. According to court documents, the victim told police that he was forced to drive to an ATM by a man who covered his face with a handkerchief. 

The victim gave Brown $280. 

The second robbery occurred shortly after behind a Mexican bakery at Greenbush Street and Sagamore Parkway. The victim was a bakery employee. Brown took off when another employee came outside. 

The third incident took place early Feb. 18. The victim was leaving his job at Walmart Superstore on Indiana 26 East when Brown stuck a gun inside th e man’s car window and told the victim he was being robbed. 

The victim said he was forced to drive to a nearby ATM. He gave Brown $160. 

The fourth incident occurred the same day outside Circle K gas station on Indiana 26 East. The victim said he was waiting on a friend when he was approached by Brown, who displayed a gun, knocked on the window and demanded cash. The victim, however, could not roll down the window and Brown fled. 

Brown’s arrest came after Lafayette police checked businesses along Indiana 26 East and found him in the Meijer parking lot. 

August 20, 2013: WLFITV 

# Man sentenced for armed robberies 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - A Lafayette man is sentenced to two decades behind bars after pleading guilty to two counts of robbery with a deadly weapon and confinement. 

Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington said Michael Brown, 35, was sentenced to 20 years in prison and community corrections and four years of probation. 

In February, Harrington said Brown approached a man at a Lafayette apartment and another man at Walmart. Harrington said on both occasions, Brown demanded the person drive to an ATM and withdraw money. 

Harrington said Brown told investigators he used the money on prescription drugs. 

August 19, 2013: Tippecanoe County Prosecutor’s Off ice 59 

Michael Eugene Brown, 35, originally from Indianapolis, Indiana has been sentenced today for his guilty pleas to two counts of Robbery With A Deadly Weapon (B fel), and two counts of Confinement (B fel). Brown was sentenced to 24 years (20 years IDOC, 4 years probation) in Tippecanoe County. 

August 14, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Fraud charges: $34,000 taken from elderly woman's account 

# Elderly woman's account a target 

— Justin L. Mack 

A woman accused of stealing more than $30,000 from an elde rly woman’s bank account was charged Wednesday 

with multiple felonies. 

Ashly A. Edwards, 20, of Central Islip, N.Y., was charged in Tippecanoe Superior Court 2 with conspiracy to commit fraud on a financial institution, theft and fraud on a financial institution. 

According to court documents, Edwards allegedly worked with a man named Andre Jones from April 2012 to 

August 2012 to transfer money from an Illinois woman’s account into an E -Trade account set up by Edwards. 

Edwards told police that she met Jones while working at a McDonald’s in Lafayette, and they became friends. 

Investigators believe that Edwards went to the Tippecanoe County Public Library and opened an E-Trade account on April 25, 2012. She also opened a Chase Bank account on May 17, 2012. 

On Aug. 22, 2012, Edwards allegedly transferred $34,000 into her E-Trade account from an account at First Midwest Bank in Illinois. From there, $28,000 was moved from the E-Trade acc ount to Edwards’ Chase account. 

About a week later, officials at the Illinois bank told an E-Trade investigator that the account belonged to an elderly woman, not Edwards. 

Edwards told police that she spent between $3,000 and $4,000 of the money at stores in Lafayette and New York. She claims that she withdrew the rest of the money and gave it all to Jones. 

As of Wednesday, no criminal charges had been filed against Jones. 

Edwards was being held in the Tippecanoe County Jail on two warrants — one with a $100,000 surety bond and the other with a no-bond order. 

August 13, 2013: Tippe canoe County Prosecutor’s Office 

Billy Joe Huddleston, III, 36, of Lafayette, IN has been charged with Carrying of Handgun by a Convicted Felon (C fel), Carrying a Handgun Without a License (A misd), Possession of a Schedule IV Controlled Substance (D fel), and Resisting Law Enforcement (A misd) in Tippecanoe County. 

July 30, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 60 

# Court sentences Village Pantry robber to 6 years 

A Lafayette man who unwittingly helped police identify him as a Village Pantry robbery suspect was sentenced Tuesday to six years in prison for the crime. 

On March 13, 18-year-old Joshua P. Smith purchased cigar wrappers at the Village Pantry at 601 Union St., which required presenting his government-issued photo ID, right before pointing a gun at the store clerk and demanding cash. 

Smith pleaded guilty last month in Tippecanoe Superior Court 2 to robbery with a deadly weapon and battery resulting in serious bodily injury. His prison sentence will be followed by four years on probation. 

According to court documents, the VP clerk told police that the robber used an Illinois identification card with a birth date of Aug. 18, 1994. Police ran that information in law enforcement databases, which led them to Smith, who lived nearby at the time. 

July 26, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Two sex offenders get prison time 

— David  Smith/dsmith@jconline.com 

A registered sex offender accused of moving out of his West Lafayette home and not updating his address as required by law was sentenced Friday to two years in prison, and a man accused of sexual conduct with a minor was sentenced to three years in prison. 

Rex A. Duke Sr., 55, was charged in December in Tippecanoe Circuit Court with failure to register as a sex offender, a Class D felony; failure to register while having a prior, unrelated conviction, a Class C felony, and being a habitual offender, which is a sentencing enhancement. 

He pleaded guilty to the second charge, according to Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington. Judge Don Daniel sentenced Duke to two years in the Department of Corrections and six years on probation. 

On Aug. 31 of last year, Duke registered as a sex offender with the Tippecanoe County Sheriff's Office with an address in the 6000 block of Morehouse Road. In October, a probation officer learned that Duke was no longer staying there. Residents told him he had not lived there for four to six months. Police found and arrested him later that month. 

Duke was convicted of child molesting in 1987 in Howard County and of criminal deviate conduct in 1998 in Cass County; the latter conviction required him to register as a sex offender for life. He was previously convicted of failing to register as a sex offender in 2007 in Tippecanoe County, records show. 

Fondling plea 

Seth Aaron Jonas, 22, was accused of three counts of sexual misconduct with a minor, two as class C felonies and one as a class B felony. Harrington said Jonas pleaded guilty to both class C felonies, contingent on serving the sentences concurrently. In both counts, fondling was the underlying behavior. 

The judge sentenced him to three years. After release from the Department of Corrections he will be placed on two years supervised probation with one of those years on home detention. 61 

He also must pay restitution of $1,666.82 to the sheriff’s department for the cost of transporting him from 

Mississippi. He also must participate in a sex offender treatment program and not have contact with the victim or anyone under 16 years of age. 

According to court records, Jonas was arrested in April, 2012, on suspicion of having had sex with a 15-year-old female. He was 21 at the time. 

Police said the victim claimed she and Jonas kissed while staying in the apartment of her ex-stepbrother during spring break and that in the course of several days the behavior progressed to oral sex and then sex. 

The defendant admitted to fondling and oral sex but denied having sex with the victim. 

Lafayette attorney Michael Trueblood represented Duke and Jonas. 

July 24, 2013: Tippecanoe County Prosecutor’s Office 

Robert L Davis, 40, of Lafayette was charged today with Battery Resulting in Serious Bodily Injury (C fel), and two counts of Domestic Battery (C fel, A misd) in Tippecanoe County. 

July 19, 2013: Tipp ecanoe County Prosecutor’s Office 

In a case unsealed yesterday, Michael J Wright, 29, of Lafayette was charged with Dealing in a Schedule III Controlled substance (A fel) & Possession of a Schedule III Controlled Substance (C fel). 

July 17, 2013: WLFITV 

# Police: Chicago man busted for using fake ID, taking money from banks 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - Court documents say a man's thirst for a hard lemonade lead to his incarceration on heroin and theft charges. 

According to Tippecanoe County court documents, the Lafayette Police Department (LPD) pulled a car over on Old U.S. 231 near the Pay Less on Beck Lane after seeing the car cross over the center line. 

Officers said the passenger of the car, identified as 44-year-old Ralph W. Burkhardt, Jr., was drinking a Mike's Hard Lemonade. 

Officers said they knew Burkhardt had previously been involved in dealing heroin. The officer who had approached the car said he asked Burkhardt where he had gotten the bottle, and Burkhardt said he had bought it. 

Court documents say, however, that the officer had a sneaking suspicion he had stolen the bottle, as it was normally sold in six-pack form and the officer didn't see any other bottles of the drink with the groceries that were in the back of the vehicle. 

The driver of the vehicle gave officers permission to search the car. In the search, officers said they found a prescription bottle under the seat Burkhardt had been sitting in. Court documents say inside the bottle were 12 individually wrapped foils that contained a substance that tested positive as heroin. 62 

Officers also found a large amount of money in Burkhardt's wallet, which was on the dashboard of the car. The investigating officer said he believed this, along with the heroin, indicated dealing activity. 

Officers also looked at the Pay Less grocery receipt, which showed no purchase for the Mike's Hard Lemonade. 

After speaking with the manager of the Beck Lane Pay Less, who said he had found a six-pack of Mike's Hard Lemonade that was missing one bottle. After taking a look at the store's video surveillance footage, officers saw Burkhardt take the bottle from the six-pack and leave the store without paying for it. 

The driver of the car told police he had gone to Pay Less with Burkhardt to buy snacks and that the pill bottle was not his. He said it had not been under the seat when he had recently cleaned out his car. 

Burkhart faces several charges: dealing in a narcotic drug, a Class B felony; possession of a narcotic drug, a Class D felony; and theft, a Class D felony. 

July 16, 2013: WLFITV 

# Couple faces numerous child molestation charges 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - Court documents, along with forensic interviews, indicate a Lafayette couple molested a young child several times, leading to many felony charges. 

Tippecanoe County court documents say over the course of almost three years, 28-year-old Cory A. Desarmo and 30-year-old Elizabeth Carle (on more than one occasion) forced sexual activity upon a child under 14 years of age. 

Court documents say they forced several sexual acts upon the child. In an interview with a trained child forensic interviewer, the child confirmed this. The child also said some of the acts caused the child physical pain. 

Desarmo faces several charges: six Class-A felony charges of child molesting committed by a person older than 21 years of age, two Class-C felony charges of child molesting and one charge of conspiracy to commit child molesting. 

July 15, 2013: WLFITV 

# Police: Chicago man busted for using fake ID, taking money from banks 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - A Chicago man is facing several forgery and fraud charges after, police say, he traveled through Indiana and stole tens of thousands of dollars by masquerading as another man. 

According to Tippecanoe County Court documents, on July 8, officers with the Lafayette Police Department (LPD) headed to Old National Bank on Creasy Lane where they spoke with the vice-president of the bank. She pointed out a man and advised he had taken the bank for a lot of money and said his ID was no good. 

Officers made contact with the man, who identified himself as Larry Glenn and provided a date of birth and Chicago address. LPD said a records check showed 47-year-old Glenn was wanted on a warrant out of Illinois. 

When officers detained Glenn and looked in his wallet, they said they found what appeared to be an Illinois 

driver’s license that had Glenn’s photo on the card, but had a different name, date of birth and address. The name: 

Bruce E. Long. 63 

Bank officials told LPD that Glenn had withdrawn $4,500 from the Creasy Lane branch, using a withdrawal slip with 

Long’s name, account number and “signature.” Records showed Glenn used the same license number to withdraw this 

cash as the number on the ID that was found in his wallet. 

Furthermore, through interviews and video surveillance footage, LPD discovered Glenn had done the same thing at several other bank branches around town, getting away from one successfully with $5,500. The only branch he tried that denied him was the one on Veterans Memorial Parkway, according to court documents. 

It turns out, the Westville, Ill., Police Department had spoken with the real Bruce Long three days earlier, on July 5. Long had reported someone was using his identity to make unauthorized withdrawals from Old National Bank branches in South Bend and Mishawaka, Ind., on July 1, and from a Monticello branch on July 3. 

When investigators spoke with Glenn a few days later on July 12, court documents say he admitted to the scheme, and said there was another man who asked him to participate and that he was paid a “commission” for making the 

withdrawals. He told police the other man took his photo and provided him with the fake Illinois license. 

This was confirmed when officers found the Illinois BMV did not issue Glenn’s licens e. 

This is not Glenn’s first brush with the law. Court documents say Glenn was convicted of retail theft several times: in 

2003, in 2007 and in 2011. He also has several other misdemeanor convictions in Illinois for offenses including retail theft, criminal trespass and domestic battery. 

Glenn faces several charges: fraud on a financial institution, a Class C felony; three counts of forgery, Class C felonies; theft, a Class D felony; and identity deception, a Class D felony. 

July 15, 2013: WLFITV 

# 12 years for woman Tasered by police 

Dan Klein 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - A woman who was stunned by a stun gun by police during a domestic incident netted a 12-year sentence. 

Prosecutors say Vivian Hampton, 34, of Lafayette tried to push her way into an apartment on Union Street on Dec. 29, 2012, with a knife after she started arguing with her boyfriend about a woman who had been at the apartment earlier in the day. She had to be stunned with a stun gun by Lafayette police several times. 

She pleaded guilty to battery with a deadly weapon as well as being an habitual offender and was sentenced to eight years in prison and four years of probation. 

In 2009, Hampton pleaded guilty to neglect of a dependent after she passed out drunk in someone's backyard with her 1-year-old daughter. 64 

July 12, 2013: WLFITV 

# Meth dealer gets 40 years 

Dan Klein 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - A convicted Lafayette meth dealer received a 40-year sentence for making methamphetamine in a basement. 

The lab was found in a basement on the 1500 block of North 17th Street on Nov. 3, 2012. 

Officers found Robert Evans along with an active one-pot meth lab, chemicals and items used to make meth. 

In May, another woman found in the basement, Pamela Smith, pleaded guilty to dealing meth and was sentenced to 10 years in prison. 

July 12, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Lafayette woman gets 8 years in stabbing 

— Sophia Voravong/svoravong@jconline.com 

A Lafayette woman is headed back to the Indiana Department of Correction, this time for stabbing her friend in the neck during a bizarre altercation last December that began with her accusing her boyfriend of cheating. 

The woman, 34-year-old Vivian E. Hampton, pleaded guilty May 17 in Tippecanoe Superior Court 2 to battery by means of a deadly weapon, a Class C felony, and to being a habitual offender, which is a sentencing enhancement. The plea took place about two weeks before her scheduled jury trial. 

Hampton was sentenced Friday to eight years in prison, followed by four years on probation. 

The victim, Ayla Anderson, suffered a stab wound to her neck and cuts to her hand that required stitches. 

According to Prosecutor Pat Harrington, Hampton testified Friday that she drank enough to black out during the 

incident and only remembered waking up in jail. Hampton’ s prior convictions — both for neglect of a dependent, Class D felonies — also were alcohol-fueled: She admitted to drinking and battering her son in 2005 and to drinking and passing out while outside with her 17-month-old daughter, who police found covered in mud and crawling nearby, in 2009. 

She received a combined four years for those convictions. 

Hampton’s most recent arrest took place Dec. 29. That day, Hampton and Anderson had been drinking together 

throughout the day, police previously reported. They later returned to an apartment at 1901 Union St., where Hampton was staying with her boyfriend. 65 

According to court documents, Hampton became angry because her boyfriend was speaking with another woman there. She grabbed a knife and attempted to stab the other woman, but Anderson stepped in — causing the cuts on her hands. The other woman also pulled a knife on Hampton. 

When Anderson walked away, Hampton stabbed her in the neck. 

The first responding officer found Hampton standing outside her boyfriend's apartment and trying to push in the front door. Her boyfriend was on the other side of the door, screaming and apparently trying to keep her from entering. 

Hampton allegedly ignored numerous requests to drop the knife, which she struck downward into the door jamb in view of the officer, according to the affidavit. 

The officer used his Taser to subdue her. He used it again when Hampton, who was within arm's reach of the knife, reportedly tried to pull out the Taser's probes. 

July 12, 2013: WLFITV 

# Woman faces 5 felony charges, including attempted murder, after botched attempt 

Lydia Williams 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - Charges have been filed against a woman who, court documents say, lured her ex-boyfriend outside to murder him by gunfire. Investigators say a stroke of luck kept him alive. 

You may remember, WLFI reported Thursday on 43-year-old Shannon Lea Robertson, who investigators say was arrested last weekend after a failed attempt on her ex-boyfriend’s life. 

To sum up, prosecutors say last Sunday, Robertson texted James Brent Harmon to tell him she had left some things for him outside his home on Villefranche Drive. Harmon told investigators when he stepped outside, Robertson was there with a gun pointed right at him. 

Harmon said as he turned to run away , he heard a “click,” but no gun shot. He then called the police. 

Police found Robertson in a nearby car, and court documents say Robertson later admitted that she came to West Lafayette with the intention of shooting Harmon and then committing suicide. 

"I t's truly a miracle that the gun didn't fire,” WLPD Lt. Troy Harris said. “I think her intention was obviously to kill the victim, that was her intent, and for whatever reason, the gun didn't fire that night.” 

Robertson is facing several charges: attempted murder, a Class A felony; attempted battery while armed with a deadly weapon, a Class C felony; intimidation drawing or using a deadly weapon, a Class C felony; criminal recklessness committed while armed with a deadly weapon, a Class D felony; and pointing a firearm, a Class D felony. 

July 10, 2013: WLFITV 

# Police say woman sold heroin to officer 66 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - A Lafayette woman faces drug dealing charges after prosecutors say she sold heroin to an undercover officer. 

According to Tippecanoe County court documents, the Lafayette Police Department (LPD) officer picked up 25-year-old Alyssa Towe to buy hundreds of dollars’ worth of drugs. 

Prosecutors say Towe took the officer to a home on the 1100 block of State Street and bought almost 1 and 1/2 grams of heroin. 

During a traffic stop, police also found additional heroin and spice under Towe's seat. 

She faces two felony charges: dealing and possessing a narcotic drug. 

July 9, 2013: WLFITV 

# Court docs: Woman got angry over empty pickle jar, hit child 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - Court documents say a child came to school last week with an injured eye –

and told investigators a 32-year-old Lafayette woman hit the child with a bottle after she got mad about what was put back into the fridge. 

According to Tippecanoe County court documents, the sheriff’s office responded on Monday to a report of 12 -year-old student at Hershey Elementary School who had an injured eye. 

A trained child forensic investigator conducted an interview with the child. The child (whose name and gender were not given) said he/she had been washing dishes the previous Friday when Carmine F. Puetz became angry with the child because an empty pickle jar had been put back into the refrigerator. 

When the child denied doing this, court documents say Puetz became even more upset and struck the child with a 

bottle on the child’s left eye. The child said after that, he/she could not see well out of his/her eye, which had 

become bloodshot and black and purple in color. 

Puetz’s hu sband told investigators he was at work when the incident occurred, but said he knew the incident had taken place. He said Puetz had hit the child with what he believed to be a ketchup bottle, swinging it overhand and making a downward motion toward the child. 

Court documents say Puetz admitted to investigators that she was upset with the child over the empty pickle jar in the fridge. However, Puetz said when she got upset she had picked up two salad dressing bottles and thrown them at the child, and one of them hit him/her. 

Puetz faces two charges: battery on a child, a Class D felony; and criminal recklessness, a Class B misdemeanor. 

July 9, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Charges: West Lafayette man shopped with stolen card 

— Sophia Voravong/ svoravong@jconline.com 67 

A West Lafayette man who previously served time in prison for a string of auto theft, theft and possession of stolen property convictions faces new charges of forgery and fraud — this time, for allegedly using a stolen credit card to purchase a cellphone, clothing and shoes at area businesses. 

The suspect, 27-year-old Dennis Pugh III, is being held in Tippecanoe County Jail on a combined $7,500 surety and 

$750 cash bond, jail staff said. He’s also being held without bond for an unrelated arre st warrant issued in June 2010 out of Tippecanoe County. 

On June 2, a woman contacted West Lafayette police to report that she accidentally left her wallet on a table outside Greyhouse Coffee & Supply Co. She later learned that her credit cards had been used at Walmart Supercenter and Foot Locker for purchases totaling $407, according to a probable cause affidavit. 

Surveillance video from both businesses showed a black male with long, braided hair at checkout. 

On June 26, a West Lafayette officer stopped a vehicle for going 60 mph on a road with a 35 mph speed limit. The man had no identification and gave a name, date of birth and Social Security number that could not be confirmed. 

Investigators later learned that the driver was Pugh, and the shoes he wore during the traffic stop were the same 

type of sneakers that were purchased at Foot Locker with the woman’s missing credit card, the affidavit states. 

Three of the woman’s credit cards also were found in the vehicle Pugh was driving. 

Pugh is charged in Tippecanoe Superior Court 2 with forgery, two counts of fraud, receiving stolen property, false informing and being a habitual offender. 

His prior convictions were for crimes that occurred in 2005 and 2006 in Tippecanoe County. 

July 9, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# 1 of 4 defendants enters plea in WL muggings spree 

— Sophia Voravong/svoravong@jconline.com 

One of four teenagers accused of participating in a string of strong-armed robberies on and near Purdue University last fall has pleaded guilty in advance of a jury trial that was scheduled to begin today. 

Eighteen-year-old Walter A. Jones, of Lafayette, pleaded guilty June 28 in Tippecanoe Superior Court 1 to three counts of robbery resulting in bodily injury — one count for each alleged victim. 

The plea means Jones could be a key witness against his codefendants, 18-year-old Julius Q. Armstead, 19-year-old Marqeese Jirmal-Carl Estrada and 17-year-old Claude L. Moore III, all of Lafayette. They’re slated to stand 

trial in September and October. 68 

Under terms of the agreement, Jones will not be sentenced until Oct. 15, after the third and final trial takes place. Each robbery count to which Jones pleaded is punishable by six to 20 years in prison. 

Additional counts against him for conspiracy to commit robbery and theft could be dropped. 

The suspects are accused of committing three muggings that took place between 9:40 p.m. Oct. 26 and 12:30 a.m. Oct. 29 on Third Street, North Russell Street and Centennial Mall Drive. 

In each case, the victims were Asian students, according to court documents. Purdue police previously told the Journal & Courier that the crimes are not believed to be race-related and, instead, were based on electronics and other valuables the suspects were after. 

Police were able to identify the suspects due in part to surveillance cameras placed throughout campus and because a cousin of one of the suspects sold two of the stolen laptops to Cash Loan and Security in Lafayette. 

In each mugging, the victims reported being struck from behind and, in some cases, kicked in the head. They suffered cuts and scrapes to their faces and hands. 

Armstead was recently in the news when he reportedly attempted to resist arrest after showing up for a hearing at the Tippecanoe County Courthouse. After a brief scuffle, he was placed under arrest on charges of battery on a law enforcement officer, resisting law enforcement and escape. 

July 6, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Embezzler to serve 2 years after stealing from Lafayette Glass 

# Former Lafayette Glass worker also must repay $59K 

— Sophia Voravong/svoravong@jconline.com 

Christiana M. “Chris” Denny was a teenager when she started working at Lafayette Glass Co., a family -owned and 

operated business on the city’s south end, in 1987 — eventually becoming office manager with check-writing authority. 

As such, company president Dennis Clark said he considered Denny family and treated her like a daughter. Never did he suspect that Denny regularly stole money — in part by inflating her paycheck, stealing cash deposits and using company credit cards — during the 22 years she was employed there. 

On Friday, the 45-year-old Brookston woman was sentenced to two years in prison, two years on community corrections and four years on probation after pleading guilty to corrupt business influence and forgery, both Class C felonies, in Tippecanoe Superior Court 2. 

She also must pay $59,050 in restitution, $10,000 of which will go to the company’s insurance provider. 

“I’m satisfied with that,” Clark, who took over Lafayette Glass from his parents in 1972, said. “Like I said in (court), 

this has been a real tragedy for us. 

“Too often I’ve heard about people … doing these kinds of crimes and not getting anything for it. She needs to pay for her crimes. I’m glad she’s going to jail.” 69 

Denny was fired from Lafayette Glass on June 1, 2009, two days after the owner’s son, Robert Chris Clark, saw her 

inside the Teal Road business after closing and discovered cash missing from a safe. Criminal charges were not filed until June 2012 because s ubpoenas for Denny’s bank and financial records from various sources did not come back 

until December 2011, Indiana State Police previously told the Journal & Courier. 

Because of that and Indiana’s five -year statute of limitations, Denny could only be charged with money she pocketed between 2007 and 2009 — $49,050. The Clark family suspects the total amount was closer to $250,000 because numerous receipts for cash deposits were missing. Denny herself on Friday admitted to stealing prior to 2007. 

Vice president Chris Clark testified Friday that the company averages $1.9 million in profits annually and, since Denny was fired, has deposited about $160,000 in cash every year. 

But in 2008 and prior years, when Denny was office manager and in charge of finances, only about $900 was deposited annually, Clark said. Some months, no cash was deposited at all. 

“It’s very hard to understand why this happened,” he said. “My father was a very generous guy. He would have helped her out if she needed money.” 

After the thefts were uncovered, “We were all in fear of losing our jobs, all 20 of us,” he said. “ … Between 2001 and 2009, we only had one profitable year. Our books would come to just about even or just below.” 

During her testimony, Denny could not pinpoint when she began stealing from Lafayette Glass. She said it started because her brother owed $8,000 to the Internal Revenue Service. 

She admitted to inflating her paychecks, including one instance in October 2008 where Denny gave herself $3,000. 

She pocketed cash by changing the amounts before depositing the money. When running errands for the company 

at Sam’s Club, she used Lafayette Glass’ credit account there for personal purchases, including family dinners and 

graduation party supplies. 

To “cover my tracks so no one would know money was missing,” Denny wrote two checks to Lafayette Glass totaling 

$13,575 — should another employee come across them, memo lines stated that the checks were for patio doors and a shower — and made a $5,411 payment to the company from her credit card. 

On Friday, she brought a $2,000 check to pay toward restitution. 

“I’m very sorry. I’m very sorry for what I’ve done,” Denny said. “I know they don’t want to forgive me, and I’m sorry. 

“I did things that I thought were for the right reason,” she said, explaining that she was “trying to help someone else out.” 

Dennis Clark, in a letter to the court, said he had questioned how Denny and her husband were able to afford a new truck and Harley-Davidson motorcycle, along with a pool installed at their Brookston home and regular spring trips to the East Coast and the Bahamas. 

But he still never suspected that Denny was stealing from him. Clark, instead, believed that business was poor because of the economy. 

Judge Thomas Busch, in handing down the senten ce, disagreed with Denny’s attorney, Jon Phillips, that Denny was 

remorseful. 

Busch cited Denny’s position of trust, the length of the crime and the amount stolen as aggravators. 70 

The judge said he would consider reducing the prison portion of Denny’s sentence if she’s able to repay $15,000 before July 2014, when she’ll be released from the Indiana Department of Correction. 

Under a plea agreement, additional charges of theft, money laundering and fraud against were dropped. 

July 1, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Man threatens, tries to bite police 

— Sophia Voravong/svoravong@jconline.com 

What began as a traffic stop of a speeding vehicle last week in Dayton ended with the driver in handcuffs after he 

allegedly tried to bite a sheriff’s deputy and threa tened to harm two police officers and their families. 

The driver, 33-year-old James Scott Littrell of Lafayette, was formally charged Monday in Tippecanoe Circuit Court with possession of cocaine, battery, two counts of intimidation and two counts of resisting law enforcement. 

Three of the counts are felonies. 

His passenger, 53-year-old Jackie Rumler of Dayton, was charged with a single count of possession of cocaine. 

On June 25, Officer Jim Knogge of the Dayton Police Department attempted to pull over a van that was speeding on Walnut Street, according to a probable cause affidavit. But the van turned onto another street and drove off the road and into a yard at 707 Main St. Knogge suspected that Littrell was impaired because he appeared sluggish and had to pull himself from the van, the affidavit states. 

Littrell allegedly became abusive after his passenger, Rumler, told Knogge that she — upon orders from Litrell —

hid two rocks of cocaine in her waistband and after learning that he was under arrest. 

According to the affidavit, Littrell allegedly tried to head-butt and bite Tippecanoe County sheriff’s Deputy Rob Hainje, who assisted at the traffic stop. He’s further accused of threatening to harm Hainje and Kno gge, along with their families. 

Hainje was not injured, but damage occurred to an onboard computer during the struggle. 

The incident occurred near Dayton Elementary School, and several juveniles were outside watching the arrest, the affidavit states. 

Littrell is being held in Tippecanoe County Jail on a combined $25,000 surety and $2,500 cash bond, along with two separate $50,000 bonds for violating probation in prior cases. 

Rumler was being held on a combined $10,000 surety and $1,000 cash bond. 

June 28, 2013: WLFITV 

# Woman faces charges after candy theft 71 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - A Lafayette woman faces burglary and theft charges after prosecutors say she broke into a Family Express store for a box of candy. 

The Lafayette Police Department (LPD) says surveillance video shows 25-year-old Jerrica Zygas throwing a rock through a glass door at the Family Express on North Ninth Street in Lafayette early Thursday morning. 

They say while police were later at the scene, Zygas walked through the parking lot and told police she stole a box of candy bars and pointed out where she hid them. 

Prosecutors say police found the box in a nearby tree. 

June 26, 2013: WLFITV 

# 25 year old charged after stabbing almost kills man 

# WLPD: After-party stabbing stemmed from jealousy 

WEST LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - A 25-year-old man has been officially charged after police say he stabbed a man several times outside of his apartment early Saturday morning. Witnesses say the stabbing stemmed from jealousy over an ex-girlfriend. 

According to Tippecanoe County court documents, officers with the West Lafayette Police Department (WLPD) arrived at 119 E. Columbia St. at roughly 3:40 a.m. Saturday to find a male with multiple cuts and stab wounds on the sidewalk in front of the residence. 

That man was later identified as Pavel Borovikov. Police said two men were trying to help him and a third man ran up to officers and said the suspect was leaving in a white Mercedes. 

The three men trying to help Borovikov identified the suspect as 25-year-old Timothy Bowen and said they knew both Borovikov and Bowen. 

Officers located the white Mercedes and pulled it over in a parking lot off of Howard Street in West Lafayette. 

The driver was told to keep his hands visible and when officers asked him where the knife was, they said he reached toward the car’s center console and threw a knife on the ground. 

The driver was identified as Bowen, and officers noted apparent blood stains on his body and clothing. The knife –

a folding single-blade knife with a blade roughly 3 inches long – also appeared to have blood on it. 

In witness interviews, police said witnesses provided the same information. 

They told officers everyone had been at a party, and Borovikov had come with his ex-girlfriend. Witnesses said the ex-girlfriend decided to leave the party with Bowen, which upset Borovikov. 

The three primary witnesses told officers they had tipped Bowen off about Borovikov being angry, and that 

Borovikov was talking about going over to Bowen’s apartment and confronting him. 

The three men said they even went over to Bo wen’s home to talk to him about the situation, which was when Bowen told them he had a gun, “loaded and ready,” and also said he had a knife. 72 

They said Borovikov arrived at Bowen’s home and was pounding or kicking at a different door to the residence. 

Alth ough he did damage to the door, officers said he wasn’t able to get inside. One of the men said he was able to 

get Borovikov to walk away from the house. 

But then, the men said Bowen had gone back inside his home through another door and grabbed a knife. The men said they tried to get Bowen to put the knife down, but he went out the door Borovikov had been pounding on. 

The men said Bowen then ran up to Borovikov and began striking him, sending him to the ground. Bowen had to be pulled off of Borovikov. 

The men said they initially though Bowen had only punched Borovikov, but they had heard him saying something to 

the effect of, “How do you like that knife, (expletive)?” 

The men said they could then see Borovikov was bleeding. They said Bowen ran away with the knife, grabbed the ex-girlfriend and they both left in his car. 

All three men said Bowen was the aggressor and had gone after Borovikov. 

Borovikov had to undergo surgery at St. Elizabeth Hospital, and his doctor told officers Borovikov nearly died due to severe blood loss, describing the wounds as serious and life-threatening. 

Borovikov sustained a large cut across his chest, multiple stab wounds to his back, side and chest, and cuts across his neck and on the side of his head and ear. 

This is not the first time Bowen has been involved in violent activity. Court documents say Bowen was convicted of criminal recklessness with a deadly weapon, battery and criminal mischief in March of 2010. 

Bowen faces multiple charges: aggravated battery, a Class B felony; battery committed by means of a deadly weapon, a Class C felony; battery resulting in serious bodily injury, a Class C felony; and criminal recklessness committed by means of a deadly weapon resulting in serious bodily injury, a Class C felony. 

June 26, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Lafayette woman gets 8 years after testifying in co-defendant's meth case 

# A guilty plea; accused cooker faces 50 years 

A Lafayette woman was sentenced Wednesday to eight years in prison for cooking methamphetamine at a northside home that had to be evacuated last November because of heavy chemical fumes wafting from the basement. 

Pamela K. Smith, 32, of Lafayette could have faced up to 50 years in prison, had the case gone to trial and resulted in a conviction for the lead charge of dealing in meth as a Class A felony. 73 

She instead pleaded guilty last month in Tippecanoe Superior Court 2 to an amended, lesser count of dealing in meth as a Class B felony. The plea agreement required Smith to testify against her co-defendant and accused fellow cooker, 33-year-old Robert W. Evans of Lafayette. 

Smith’s prison time will be followed by two years on probation. 

A Superior Court 2 jury last week found Evans guilty of dealing in meth, possession of meth and having an illegal drug lab. He faces up to 50 years in prison and will be sentenced July 11. 

Smith and Evans were arrested Nov. 3 when police responded to a report of meth possibly being made at a home on North 17th Street in Lafayette. Evans was one of several people, including a juvenile, who were found in the locked basement of a residence there. 

According to court documents, officers who went into the basement smelled strong chemical fumes and evacuated everyone from the home. An active one-pot meth lab was found in the basement, along with various chemicals, coffee filters, funnels and other ingredients commonly used to manufacture the highly addictive drug. 

The juvenile told investigators that he went into the basement to give Smith a blanket and saw Evans shaking a two-liter bottle. 

The boy suspected they were cooking meth, based on items on the floor, but was told by Smith to “shut up” when he 

inquired about what they were doing. 

The lead charge was a Class A felony, the highest level felony next to murder in Indiana. 

That’s be cause the home is within 1,000 feet of Linnwood Park and Linnwood and St. Lawrence elementary schools. 

June 26, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Lafayette woman charged in theft of her ex's credit cards 

A Lafayette woman is suspected of recruiting her 12-year-old daughter to take credit cards from her ex-husband. The credit cards were then used to make several purchases at the Walmart Supercenter, court documents allege. 

The mother, 50-year-old Mary E. McDaniel, is charged in Tippecanoe Superior Court 1 with six counts of forgery and six counts of theft. All of the counts are felonies. 

In February, McDaniel’s ex -husband called the Lafayette Police Depart-ment after learning that two of his credit cards had maxed out. One card balance went from $2,317.22, as of Jan. 10, to $5,597.19. The second card went from a balance of $548 to $4,686.21 in a month. 

The man suspected his ex-wife, McDaniel, and he confronted her. 

Investigators learned that the credit cards were used at Walmart on numerous occasions, with purchases ranging from $110 to $368 each for phone activation cards, a gaming system, video games, a tablet computer and numerous DVDs. 

Surveillance video allegedly showed McDaniel accompanied by her children. 

One of the cards also had been used at the Indi ana Bureau of Motor Vehicles, allegedly to renew McDaniel’s 

license plate after she was stopped by police on Feb. 2. 74 

June 20, 2013: WLFITV 

# PD: Walmart employee stole card from customer to use at other Walmart store 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - A Walmart employee is in hot water after prosecutors say he swiped a credit card from a customer, and then used the card to purchase electronics at a different Walmart in town. 

Tippecanoe County court documents say West Lafayette Police Department (WLPD) officers spoke with a woman on July 18, 2012, who said after going to the West Lafayette Walmart to make a purchase with her Discover card, she got a call from Discover. The company told the woman there were several purchases on her card, which she said she had not made, so the card was immediately canceled. 

The next day, officers obtained video footage from the Walmart in Lafayette on Veterans Memorial Parkway. The footage showed a West-Lafayette Walmart employee using the woman’s Discover card for three separate 

purchases at the Lafayette Walmart. 

Records show the card was used fraudulently to buy two iPads for $640.93 each, and a Nikon camera for $129.47. Officers said receipts found for each purchase showed an illegible signature for each credit card use. 

A West Lafayette Walmart manager identified the male in the video footage as an employee, 27-year-old Brandon D. Davis. 

West Lafayette store footage shows Davis swiping a customer’s card (the woman who contacted police) through a 

card reader and handing the woman her receipt. Court documents say the video shows Davis keeping the Discover card under his hand and then sliding it under a shelf. 

The video shows the woman leaving, and Davis retrieving the credit card and putting it into his pocket. Davis later admitted to officers in an interviewed that he had stolen the card from a woman while working as a cashier. 

Court documents say Davis also admitted to attempting to use the card at the Walmart on State Road 26 in 

Lafayette, but that it wouldn’t work. That’s when , he said, he headed to the Walmart on Veterans Memorial Parkway, where he bought the two iPads and the Nikon camera. 

Davis told officers he also tried to use the card at a Village Pantry, but the transaction was declined. He said he then threw the card away. 

Davis also admitted to officers that he took the items he bought with the stolen credit card to Chicago, where he sold them. 

Davis faces: three charges of forgery, Class C felonies; three charges of fraud, Class D felonies; and one charge of theft, a Class D felony. 

June 20, 2013: WLFITV 

# Man found guilty of meth dealing, making 75 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - A man found guilty of meth-related charges could face up to 50 years behind bars. 

Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington says Robert Evans was found guilty on three charges this week. 

They include dealing and possession of meth, and having an illegal drug lab. 

Harrington says Evans was found in the basement of a home on 17th Street in Lafayette during a methamphetamine investigation last fall. 

He says police evacuated the home and the Indiana State Police Meth Suppression Team found a one-pot meth lab in the basement. 

Sentencing is set for July 11. 

June 19, 2013: WLFITV 

# Woman gets 6 years for drunken crash that hurt motorcyclist 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - A woman is facing 4 years in jail and 2 years on probation after being 

sentenced Wednesday for a July 2012 wreck that resulted in the loss of a motorcyclist’s leg. 

Fifty-five-year-old Laura Fogleman of Lafayette was sentenced by Tippecanoe County judge Michael Morrissey to 6 years for her part in a crash on July 3, 2012, in the 6600 block of State Road 25. 

Last July Fogleman told investigators she was turning into a driveway in order to turn around on State Road 25 near Americus. 

She collided with a motorcycle, driven by 52-year-old Randall Kesling. 

Part of Kesling's leg was amputated as a result of the crash. 

According to court documents Fogleman's blood alcohol content was 0.11. 

Fogleman pleaded guilty May 2 to operating while intoxicating causing serious bodily injury (OWI-SBI) – along with being a habitual substance offender. 

The judge gave Fogleman 3 years on the OWI-SBI, enhanced by 3 years for being a habitual substance offender. 76 

She’s also sentenced to court -imposed standard probation terms, including $164,051.64 in restitution to the victim, Kesling, and several other processes such as drug/alcohol treatment and license suspension. 

June 14, 2013: WLFITV 

# Police: Purdue engineering students tampered with professors' accounts, changed grades 

Lydia Williams 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - Three Purdue engineering students are facing several felony charges after prosecutors say they illegally accessed their professors' accounts and altered their grades to better scores. 

According to Tippecanoe County court documents, on Jan. 3 the director of Information Technology Security Services 

for Purdue University (ITaP) contacted Purdue police concerning a student logging into a professor’s University 

computer account and changing grades. 

The professor twice contacted ITaP to request his password be reset, as someone had changed his password without his permission. 

Purdue security analysts examined the log data for the professor’s account, which showed that on Nov. 30, 2012, 

an unknown pe rson from an IP address not affiliated with Purdue gained access to the professor’s account and 

changed the password. 

The professor contacted ITaP again on Dec. 18, 2012, on the same complaint. This time, ITaP was able to identify that an account by an individual, 24-year-old Mitsutoshi Shirasaki, logged onto the Purdue Air Link wireless network 

(PAL) and logged into the professor’s account, changing Shirasaki’s grade in his Controls Systems Lab class from a C 

to a B. 

The Tippecanoe County Jail does not have a photo of Shirasaki at this time. 

In further investigation, ITaP said it discovered grades in four of Shirasaki’s other classes from that semester were 

also changed to a higher grade. 

Investigators confirmed Shirasaki had accessed his professor’s account through tracking an IP address to Shirasaki’s address on campus. They also discovered various other professors’ accounts were accessed by Shirasaki from 

computers on campus. 

Furthermore, investigators say they found evidence of Shirasaki’s grades being changed in previous semesters’ professors’ accounts. ITaP determined Shirasaki changed more than two dozen of his grades over the course of two 

years to higher grades. 

Court documents show in some cases, F grades were changed to As or Bs, Cs were changed to As, and even As were changed to A-plusses. All professors officers have spoken with for those classes said they gave no permission for those grades to be changed. 

Court documents say investigators found Shirasaki had been installing key-logging devices in various keyboards in 

classrooms and professors’ offices in order to get keystroke data from the user. Investigators say Shirasaki would pick professors’ office doors when locked, and through searches, several keyboards were found on campus that had 

been tampered with. 77 

In a police interview with Shirasaki’s girlfriend, she confirmed the grade -changing to investigators. She also told them Shirasaki had dumped all his used keyboards and his computer out in a country field when he found out police were investigating him. She admitted to Purdue police that Shirasaki had once changed one of her grades, but didn't inform her till afterward. 

His girlfriend told investigators Shirasaki and 24-year-old Sujay Sharma and 24-year-old Roy Chaoran Sun were friends, and that Sun had advised Shirasaki on changing the grades and dumping the evidence. 

Through more investigation, court documents say it was discovered that both Sharma and Sun helped Shirasaki 

break into professors’ offices to plant the keystroke -tracking keyboards. Sharma and Sun admitted in interviews to helping Shirasaki by keeping a lookout when he broke into the offices. 

Investigators say all three changed their grades by illegally accessing their professors’ accounts. Court documents 

also say the men used the planted keyboards to access at least one professor's tests before taking the exams. 

The entire investigation (which spanned from January to April) concluded in April when the three men were charged. The case was released to the public Thursday afternoon. 

The three men face the following charges: 

Conspiracy to commit burglary, a Class C felony 

Conspiracy to commit theft, a Class D felony 

Conspiracy to commit computer tampering, a Class D felony 

Conspiracy to commit computer trespass, a Class A misdemeanor 

Several charges of burglary, Class C felonies 

Several charges of computer tampering, Class D felonies 

Several charges of theft, Class D felonies 

Several charges of receiving stolen property, Class D felonies 

June 12, 2013: WLFITV 

# Man gets decades in jail for making meth 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - A Lafayette man has been sentenced to 31 years for making meth in a West Lafayette motel. 78 

Court documents say 32-year-old Brandon Bulthuis of Lake Station will spend 21 years behind bars and 10 years on probation. 

In November of last year, officers were called to the Prestige Inn to investigate a chemical odor coming from a room Bulthuis and Penny Osmundson were staying in. 

During the interview, Bulthuis told police he dumped what he could down the toilet before Osmundson answered their knock at the door. 

He also said he and Osmundson had stayed at various motels and cooked meth three times throughout the month of November. 

Bulthuis was given credit for 197 days already served and credit for good behavior. 

He was ordered to pay restitution to Indiana State Police and the Prestige Inn for the cost of clean-up. 

June 6, 2013: WLFITV 

# Lafayette woman gets 19 years for stealing $100K from employer 

Dan Klein 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - A Lafayette woman who stole more than $100,000 from her employer on multiple occasions got a 19-year sentence. 

Cynthia Kiser remained silent as she was led away in handcuffs Thursday afternoon. Until her divorce last year, her last name was Prien. 

In April, she pleaded guilty to two counts of theft and a forgery charge after taking nearly $127,000 from her employer, Craft Mechanical. 

At the time, she was still on probation for stealing about $225,000 from a different employer more than a decade ago. 

In court Thursday, Judge Randy Williams commented on Kiser's stoicism and remarking she only seemed remorseful that she was caught. He then sentenced her to 10 years in prison, four years of Community Corrections and five years on probation. 

First, Williams sentenced Kiser to two years for each theft charge, to run concurrently. Then eight years for the forgery charge, to run consecutive to the theft charges. Of the ten total years, five is to be in the Department of Corrections (DOC), two is to be in Community Corrections and three is to be on supervised probation. 79 

Then Williams revoked Kiser's previous plea deal and sentenced her to nine years. Five years in the DOC, two years in Community Corrections and two years of supervised probation. 

June 6, 2013: WLFITV 

# Police say woman faked urine screen, drove without license 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - A felony charge has been filed after prosecutors say a West Lafayette woman brought fake urine to a screening and lied about driving without a license. 

Prosecutors say 32-year-old Jennifer Ferguson of West Lafayette recently went to Tippecanoe County Community Corrections to submit urine for a screening. 

They say police caught her with a device holding fake urine. 

Prosecutors also say Ferguson said she was dropped off at the facility. 

Court documents say, however, surveillance video showed Ferguson parking the car and going into the building. 

Ferguson faces a Class C felony charge of operating a motor vehicle while privileges are forfeited for life. 

June 4, 2013: WLFITV 

# Man arrested, charged for multiple occasions of gunfire near Claystone Crossing 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - Two occasions of fired shots in a south side neighborhood have led to charges against a Lafayette man who witnesses say they saw at the scene. 

According to Tippecanoe County court documents, just before 1:30 a.m. May 25, officers were sent to Claystone at the Crossing Apartments on a report of shots fired. 

Witnesses told officers a white male had fired several shots toward a group of black males. Officers also spoke 

with a man who had come out of his friend’s apartment at Claystone early that morning, running into some guys with whom he told police he had a “bad history.” 

The man told officers he and a friend briefly talked with white male nicknamed “Drama” and his friends. The man 

said his friend indicated the other group of men had a gun, and when they ran away from “Drama” and his friends, 

the man said he heard shots ring out but did not see the gun or the shooter. 

Court documents say upon further investigati on, the man called “Drama” was found to be 18 -year-old Heath G. Fletcher. 

Two days later at roughly 5:30 p.m., officers responded to another complaint of shots fired at Claystone. Witnesses told police that a man – identified as Fletcher – had run through the complex carrying a gun. 

On the 27th a maintenance worker at Claystone also reported to police that a white male had fired a shot within the neighborhood. He said there were a lot of people around the area at the time of the shooting. 

Then, on May 28, an officer responded to a complaint of a white male possibly carrying a gun on Twyckenham Boulevard. The officer found Fletcher walking on the sidewalk and ordered him to stop. 80 

The officer said that’s when Fletcher tried to pull something from his waist are a, with the officer repeatedly telling Fletcher to show his hands. Fletcher ran away, even though the officer ordered him to stop several times. 

Court documents say Fletcher ran out of sight around a residence and a short time later was seen again by another officer, who was able to apprehend him. 

Officers backtracked Fletcher’s runaway route and found a .22 caliber rifle with a round in the chamber on the 

ground in the area where Fletcher had been out of sight. They also said they found more .22 rounds near the rifle. 

In an interview with police, officers say Fletcher admitted he knew the police were probably looking for him regarding the shootings at Claystone. He also admitted he tossed the rifle when running from the officer on the 28th. 

Fletcher told officers he had the same gun on the 25th and fired several shots at Claystone. He also admitted that on the 27th, he had been with a fellow gang member when they saw someone from another gang and wanted to shoot him. Fletcher said that gang member, nicknamed “Moe,” later fired a shot which Moe said did not hit anyone, 

but that everyone took off running. 

Fletcher told officers that “Moe” ditched the gun, but that Fletcher had later returned for it. That’s the gun Fletcher 

had on him when officers found him on the 28th. 

Fletcher admitted being in the “Reckless” gang, which is affiliated with the “Gangster Disciples,” according to court 

documents. 

Court docs also say Fletcher has a history with gun violations: He was convicted of carrying a handgun without a permit and theft back in April and is still on probation as a result of that conviction. 

Fletcher has been charged with: attempting criminal recklessness (committed while armed with a deadly weapon), a Class C felony; criminal recklessness (committed while armed with a deadly weapon, a Class D felony; and resisting law enforcement, a Class A misdemeanor. 

June 4, 2013: WLFITV 

# Formal charges filed in fatal wreck, woman admits 'blacking out' to police 

Lydia Williams 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - A 21-year-old woman faced her first day in court – along with six felony charges – Tuesday, after police say she drove under the influence of drugs and alcohol, resulting in the death of a 73-year-old woman on Lafayette's south side. 

Last week, Donna Ubelhor and 70-year-old James Brown were standing in Ubelhor’s front yard on Commanche 

Trail near Brady Lane when a car sped over the curb. The car hit both, killing Ubelhor and injuring Brown. 

When officers arrived on the scene, they found a green Blazer with heavy front-end damage sitting against a fire hydrant on the corner of Brady and Commanche – inside was 21-year-old Elizabeth Wesner, with no injuries. The Blazer had continued down the street after hitting the two pedestrians, striking another vehicle (whose driver was uninjured in the crash) and landing near a fire hydrant. 

According to court documents, officers said while speaking with Wesner they noted an odor of alcoholic beverages coming from her, and she admitted to drinking alcohol earlier in the afternoon. 81 

Wesner told police she had been at a friend’s house the night before and was late getting up for work. She said while driving to work, her vision became “blurry” so she drove back to her friend’s house and fell back asleep. 

Wesner told officers when she woke up 11 a.m. on Wednesday (the day of the wreck), she smoked marijuana. She said she then went to a bar where she drank alcohol, and after leaving smoked more marijuana. 

Wesner said she then dropped off her friend and went to the store. She says on her way back she took Teal Road to Summerfield, and while she was on Commanche Trail she began feeling ill and started blacking out. 

Wesner told officers the next thing she recalled was feeling a jolt when she hit the fire hydrant. 

When officers searched Wesner’s purs e they found two types of pills that Wesner later admitted she had gotten from friends without a valid prescription. One pill was confirmed by a pharmacist to contain codeine, and the second type of pill was confirmed to be clonidine, a legend drug. 

And du ring a search of Wesner’s vehicle, officers said they found marijuana and a glass pipe with burnt marijuana 

residue. 

As we reported last week, officers reported in court documents that when Wesner was taken to a hospital to be tested, she tested positive for cannabinoids (marijuana) and other drugs. 

Wesner was charged with several felonies: operating a vehicle while intoxicated with controlled substance in blood causing death, a Class B felony; reckless homicide, a Class C felony; possession of a schedule III controlled substance, a Class D felony; possession of a legend drug, a class D felony; possession of marijuana, a Class A misdemeanor; and possession of paraphernalia, also a Class A misdemeanor. 

May 31, 2013: WLFITV 

# Police say man tried to flush drugs down toilet during arrest 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - A Lafayette man faces felony charges after prosecutors say he was suspected of drug-related crimes and locked himself in his house to flush the evidence down the toilet. 

Last week, prosecutors say police were looking into a possible drug overdose. 

The investigation led them to the home of 23-year-old Mitchell Gillham on McCarty Lane. 

According to court documents, police officers were requesting a search warrant and told Gillham to wait outside the house. 

That's when prosecutors say Gillham ran inside and locked the door behind him. 

Police forced their way inside and found heroin and marijuana. 

Gillham faces seven charges, including possession of a narcotic drug, obstruction of justice and resisting law enforcement. 

May 31, 2013: WLFITV 

# Police: Woman stole credit cards, spent money 82 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - A West Lafayette woman faces charges after prosecutors say she stole credit cards and spent more than $160. 

They say Katherine Wier told police she took the cards out of a jacket she found behind the State Street Domino's. 

Prosecutors say surveillance video showed her using the cards at Walmart for more than $115 and a Speedway gas station for nearly $50. 

Wier faces multiple charges including fraud, forgery, and theft. 

May 31, 2013: WLFITV 

# West Lafayette man convicted on several drug charges 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - A West Lafayette man was convicted this week on multiple drug charges. 

Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington says 34-year-old Louis Fromer was found guilty of two counts of dealing a schedule one or two controlled substance, conspiracy to commit dealing in a schedule four controlled substance and being a habitual substance offender. 

As News 18 previously reported, Fromer was arrested after police were called to a reported gunshot on the 700 block of North Grant Street last December. 

Harrington says police executed search warrants for Fromer's phone. 

He says a confidential informant told police he'd bought pills from Fromer. 

Fromer's sentencing is set for June 28. 

May 30, 2013: WLFITV 

# Detectives say teen molested 14 year old 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - A 19-year-old Lafayette man is looking at several felony charges after investigators say he sexually violated an underage family friend. 

According to Tippecanoe County court documents, county sheriff’s detectives discovered through several witness 

interviews that in the overnight hours of May 24 into 25, 19-year-old Travis Wilson molested a 14-year-old girl. 

Court doc uments say witnesses reported Wilson giving a drink to the girl, which he told her was “just orange soda” but the girl reported tasting “kind of sour.” The girl said she began to feel dizzy and foggy after drinking it, and 

that she fell asleep shortly after. 

The girl, along with other witnesses, told investigators that Wilson inappropriately touched her multiple times while she was drifting in and out of consciousness. 

Later, medical officials told detectives they found visible injuries on the girl that indicated molestation. 

Wilson faces a Class B felony charge of criminal deviate conduct, a Class C felony charge of sexual misconduct with a minor and a Class D felony charge of sexual misconduct with a minor. 83 

May 29, 2013: WLFITV 

# Man charged after bicyclist dies in hit-and-run wreck 

Lydia Williams 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - The county prosecutor’s office has filed charges against a Lafayette man who, 

investigators say, left the scene of a wreck that killed a 62-year-old man. 

Prosecutors say 38-year-old Gregorio Felipe faces several charges for hitting a man and leaving the scene of the crash – charges intensified by the death of the bicyclist. 

According to Tippecanoe County court documents, just before 7:30 p.m. May 14, county sheriff’s deputies were sen tto North Ninth Street south of the Davis Ferry Bridge on a report of a bicyclist who had been hit by a white van. 

Deputies said they found an older white male with a head injury lying on the ground next to a bike, and spoke with witnesses, who recounted what they saw that led to the man on the ground. 

Court documents say the witnesses told deputies they were driving southbound on Ninth Street behind a white box-type cargo van when they saw it swerve around a bicyclist who was also southbound on the shoulder of the road. 

The witnesses said the bicyclist went to the left and then the van hit the bicyclist. Other witnesses reported the van had somehow side-swiped the bicyclist, who fell to the ground. 

Witnesses further told deputies they saw the white van stop, and that a Latino man got out briefly to look at the bicyclist, but that he then got back into the van and left the scene. The witnesses said the van continued south on Ninth. 

Deputies say they soon found a van matching the one described by witnesses parked behind a gas station on Ninth Street and Duncan Road, about a mile south of the crash scene. 

Deputies say when they examined the van, the passenger side mirror was broken with a hair on the mirror and markings on the front passenger side quarter panel matched up with the left side of the bicycle handle bar. 

After some digging, deputies discovered the van was registered to a construction company. The owner of the company said the van in question was being driven that day by an employee – Gregorio Felipe. 

On May 15, deputies headed to the construction site in Battle Ground where Felipe was supposed to be working, but another employee said Felipe had not shown up for work that day and no one knew where he was. 

The employee did tell deputies he saw Felipe come to and leave from work the day before, May 14 (the day of 

the wreck), and was driving the company’s white van. The man told deputies he had last seen Felipe around 7 p.m. 

on May 14 when he left work. 

Court documents say the bicyclist, 62-year-old Rodney Smith, was sent to a Lafayette hospital with severe head trauma and bleeding in the brain – his prognosis was poor. Three days later he was put on life support. Two days after that, hospital caretakers told deputies Smith was taken off life support when doctors found no brain activity. He was pronounced dead May 19. 

A few days later on May 23, investigators spoke with another employee of the construction company who said he had spoken with Felipe after the wreck. The man told investigators Felipe had admitted to being the driver who struck a bicyclist. Felipe told the man that the bicyclist appeared to be going around a rock but did not look behind him. Felipe told the man he ran because he had no v alid license and was “illegal.” 84 

And the next day, May 24, Felipe was arrested by authorities in Indianapolis. He is being held in the Tippecanoe County Jail. 

Felipe faces three charges: leaving the scene of an accident resulting in death, a Class C felony; leaving the scene of an accident resulting in injury or death, a Class C misdemeanor; and operating a vehicle while suspended, a Class A misdemeanor. 

May 24, 2013: WLFITV 

# Man sentenced for neglect, drug charges 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - A Lafayette man was sentenced to nearly two decades in prison after pleading guilty to multiple felonies, including neglect of a dependent and possession of heroin. 

Christopher Lawson, 26, was sentenced to 18 years behind bars and two years probation. 

Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington said in July 2011, a caseworker went to a house in Northfield Commons in Lafayette to assist in Lawson's visitation with his kids. 

Harrington said the caseworker found Lawson on the floor gasping for air and the kids' mother unresponsive while both children were present. 

Harrington said Lawson later admitted to taking heroin. 

May 17, 2013: WLFITV 

# Court docs: Woman stole and cashed others' checks 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - A Lafayette woman faces charges after prosecutors say she cashed a stolen check for nearly $1,000. 

Prosecutors say Melissa Lee stole, filled out and cashed a check for $950 from another person's account. 

They say after the account holder closed it and opened a different account, Lee stole the new account number. 

They say she gave it to another person who tried to withdraw $700 from the new account. 

Lee faces theft, forgery, attempted theft and habitual offender charges. 85 

May 16, 2013: WLFITV 

# LPD: Man admitted to doctor he tried to kill his landlady 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - Prosecutors say a man is facing several felony charges after he stabbed his landlady so she would give him pills – and then walked down the street and stole alcohol from a liquor store. 

According to Tippecanoe County court documents, just before 4:30 p.m. on May 11 the Lafayette Police Department (LPD) was sent to a home on Pipers Glen Drive on a report of a stabbing. 

When officers arrived, the victim was with her neighbors and told officers the suspect was 50-year-old Richard J. Carrell, who had run away after the stabbing. 

Officers found a knife on the victim’s porch and what appeared to be blood on the blade and on a mattress cover 

in a bedroom. 

LPD said the victim was taken to the hospital for treatment. She had several cuts and scratches on her face, neck, ear and hands, which LPD says were consistent with knife wounds. 

The victim told officers she had known Carrell for several years and was renting a room to him. She said she had returned home that day to find Carrell drunk. 

The victim told o fficers Carrell had approached her in his drunkenness, telling her he was “in pain” and wanted 

some of her prescription pain medication, which the victim refused to give him. 

She told LPD Carrell then got on top of her, holding a knife to her ear and neck. 

The victim said they fought, and she was in fear for her life. She was cut several times while she tried to keep the 

knife away and told officers she finally told Carrell she’d give him a couple of pills. 

Once she gave them to him, the victim said Carrell tried to keep her in the home, but she was able to escape and 

run to her neighbors’ home. 

In the following search for Carrell, LPD found him walking through a parking lot on South 18th Street just a half an hour later with a bottle of vodka. 

When officers took Carrell to the emergency room to be checked out, officers say they heard Carrell tell the ER doctor he had tried to kill his landlady that day. 

LPD found further cause for theft charges when they interviewed the clerk at Dale Liquors on South 18th St. after they found Carrell. 

The clerk said Carrell had come into the store just before 5 asking where the cheap vodka was located, but left without making a purchase. Upon surveillance video review, officers say they watched as Carrell hid a bottle of alcohol in his pants and left the store without paying. 

Carrell was charged with: robbery committed while armed with a deadly weapon, a Class B felony; robbery resulting in bodily injury, a Class B felony; battery committed by means of a deadly weapon, a Class C felony; and two counts of theft, Class D felonies. 

May 16, 2013: WLFITV 86 

# Jury quickly convicts man of battery after jail fight 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - It took just 15 minutes for a jury to find 21-year-old Ty Wilkerson of Frankfort guilty of battery resulting in serious bodily injury after he beat up another inmate at the Tippecanoe County Jail. 

Prosecutors say Wilkerson broke several facial bones of another inmate in February. This week, he was convicted of that crime. 

Court documents say surveillance video showed Wilkerson hitting the unsuspecting man in the face, then later going back into the man's cell and continuing the fight. 

Several days later, Wilkerson was sentenced to 20 years in prison after pleading guilty to dealing meth at the Knights Inn Motel in Lafayette in April 2012. 

Sentencing for the battery charge is set for June 13. 

May 14, 2013: WLFITV 

# Lafayette man charged with several felonies, child molestation 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - A Lafayette man is sitting in jail on several felony charges after prosecutors say he molested a young girl. 

Fifty-year-old Cornellious Brown faces six felonies including four counts of child molesting. 

Prosecutors say he tried to have sex with an 8-year-old girl on multiple occasions, the most recent taking place last week. 

According to court documents, Brown initially denied the allegations but later admitted to them. 

Brown also faces two counts of criminal confinement. 

He is currently in the Tippecanoe County Jail with a bond of $50,000. 

May 9, 2013: WLFITV 

# Police use sting operation to net dealing suspect 87 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - A Lafayette man has a few felony charges on his plate after police said they caught him selling controlled substances. 

According to Tippecanoe County Court documents, a police informant told the West Lafayette Police Department that a man named Cory was selling his prescribed Suboxone medication. 

Police had the informant line up multiple meetings with “Cory” to purchase the medication. 

The informant was fitted with a body wire transmitter and provided with a set amount of cash by police and met 

with “Cory” at his home on the 3100 block of Fairwood Drive in Lafayette. 

The informant completed the transactions each time and brought back Suboxone strips to investigators. Police 

showed a photo of a suspect to the informant, who confirmed he was the same “Cory” he had just purchased the 

medication from. 

Police arrested 28-year-old Cory Allen Smith on two charges of dealing in a schedule-III controlled substance, a Class B felony. He was also charged with maintaining a common nuisance, a Class D felony. 

May 8, 2013: WLFITV 

# Lafayette man pleads guilty to dealing cocaine 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - A Lafayette man could spend 8 years behind bars after prosecutors say he pleaded guilty to selling cocaine. 

Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington says 41-year-old Marlon Adams was sentenced to 8 years in prison and 4 years on probation. 

In July 2011, Harrington says an undercover officer bought cocaine from Adams in the parking lot at Pay Less in West Lafayette. 

The officer later bought more cocaine from Adams at the Village Pantry at US 52 and Schuyler Avenue. 

Both locations are within 1,000 feet of apartment buildings. 

May 8, 2013: WLFITV 

# Man gets 6 years for carrying guns without license, lying to officers 88 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - A man who misidentified himself to police – and was carrying guns without a license – was sentenced this week to six years in prison with possibly more to come. 

Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington says 35-year-old Heath Burgess pleaded guilty Tuesday to carrying a handgun without a license. 

Last December Lafayette police wanted him on a warrant and heard he was at an apartment on North Street. 

When officers arrived, a man approached them, said his name was "Josh Dilden" and told them he was going into the apartment. 

The officers discovered "Dilden" was carrying two guns, which he admitted he wasn't licensed to carry. 

After telling "Dilden" they were looking for Heath Burgess, "Dilden" told the officers he was in fact Heath Burgess. 

Harrington says Burgess is due in court Wednesday to be sentenced for an OWI charge and being a habitual substance offender. 

May 8, 2013: WLFITV 

# Couple racks up several felony charges during rolling meth lab raid 

Lydia Williams 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - Two locals found themselves the object of police attention last week when officers say they discovered a meth lab inside the couple's car. 

On Wednesday, the Tippecanoe County Prosecutor’s Offi ce filed joint felony charges against 31-year-old Manuel A. Guzman, homeless, and 22-year-old Ashley M. Kallenberger of Lafayette. 

According to court documents, just after 4 p.m. May 3, officers saw a car on Owen Street crossing Fourth Street in Lafayette. 

An officer said he ran the plates on the vehicle and discovered it was registered to Manuel and Karlene Guzman. 

BMV records showed Manuel’s driving privileges had been stripped and he was wanted on more than one warrant. 

Officers saw the car stop in the 1300 block of South Third Street and made contact with the driver and passenger. 

The driver, Guzman, was taken into custody for driving while suspended and on the warrants. 

During a search of Guzman, officers found a pen tube with white residue and a pill bottle that contained pills which officers later identified as schedule-IV controlled substances. 

The passenger, Kallenberger, said she was at a friend’s house and that Guzman was dropping her off. 89 

After an investigation of the vehicle, officers found a baggie of synthetic marijuana, metal canisters containing powdered methamphetamine and another pen tube with a white substance in it. 

Officers said they also found a notebook with ingredients and instructions on how to make meth – it was found in Kallenberger ’s purse. Kallenberger told officers she had used meth for several years but claimed she had not used 

for the past 18 months. 

She was also taken to jail, where officers found two pills in her wallet that were identified by poison control as Amitriptyline, which is a legend drug. 

Officers noted a chemical odor and meth-related items in the car, so the Indiana State Police (ISP) Meth Suppression Unit was called in. 

ISP troopers found items used to make meth, including Coleman fuel, cold packs (ammonium nitrate), lithium, sulfuric acid and sodium hydroxide lye. 

Troopers said they also found a bottle with a cloudy liquid inside, which was deemed a one-pot reaction vessel used to make meth. 

Investigators said after all the evidence pointed to it, they determined the car had been used as a meth lab. 

Officers said Guzman told them Kallenberger had taught him how to make meth, and that she had learned from an old boyfriend. 

Guzman reportedly told officers they had left some nearby apartments after making meth and put the items found in the car. Officers say he admitted to making meth with her before and selling it. 

Charges against the two are more severe because they were found with meth-related items within 1,000 feet of an apartment complex and within 1,000 feet of an elementary school. 

They face six charges each: conspiracy to manufacture meth, a Class A felony; dealing in meth, a Class A felony; possession of meth, a Class B felony; illegal drug lab, a Class C felony; possession of a legend drug, a Class D felony; and possession of paraphernalia, a Class A misdemeanor. 

May 7, 2013: WLFITV 

# Woman pleads guilty to stealing thousands on the job 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - A Brookston woman accused of stealing thousands while on the job entered a guilty plea in court this week. 

Forty-four-year-old Christiana Denny pleaded guilty to forgery and corrupt business influence 

According to Tippecanoe County court documents, Denny was working as a bookkeeper at Lafayette Glass between 2007 and 2009. 

She's also accused of issuing fraudulent payroll checks to herself and making unauthorized purchases on company credit cards. 

When owners confronted Denny, investigators say she admitted to taking the cash. 90 

A sentencing is set for July 5. 

May 3, 2013: WLFITV 

# LPD: Couple charged for baseball-bat holdup 

Lydia Williams 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - A Lafayette couple is looking at multiple felony charges this week after police say they robbed a man by threatening him with a baseball bat. 

According to court documents, just before 10:30 p.m. this past Wednesday, the Lafayette Police Department (LPD) received a report of a robbery. 

LPD officers interviewed a man who said he was on South Third Street when a car pulled over next to him and a black man got out with a baseball bat in his hands. 

The victim said the man came up to him, holding the bat, and told the victim to give him everything he had. LPD says the victim expressed his fear at being confronted by a man with a bat. 

The victim told officers the man took his cell phone and wallet, which had some money and personal papers. 

LPD says the robber then ran back and got into the passenger side of the car that had pulled up. The car, according to the victim, was being driven by a woman. 

Court documents say during a check of the surrounding area, one of the LPD officers noticed a car in a nearby apartment complex parking lot with a bat propped up in the front passenger seat of the car. 

Officers outside the complex, Hidden View Apartments (1508 Holloway Drive), said they noticed a black man run 

upstairs to an apartment with the apartment’s tenant. 

Officers called to them, saying the tenant should send out the man and anyone else who was up there. The tenant sent two people out, identified by police as 23-year-old Yodanny Reynoso Carrasco and 19-year-old Kaitlyn B. Perez, both of Lafayette. 

Court documents explain how officers advised Perez of her rights and she agreed to speak with them. Officers said Perez admitted she and her boyfriend, Carrasco, were involved in a robbery. 

Perez told office rs she had hidden the victim’s items in their friend’s apartment. Officers say they found a wallet 

and cell phone in the apartment that were later confirmed by the victim to be the stolen possessions. 

Perez consented to a search of her vehicle and officers took custody of the bat. 

In a later interview, police say Perez admitted to deciding to rob someone with Carrasco while driving around, because she needed money. 

Perez said the two had been driving on Third Street when they saw a man talking on his cell phone. She said they stopped and confronted him, and that she handed the bat to Carrasco, which had been in the backseat of her car. 

Police say Perez admitted the couple’s intent was to scare the man to the point that he wo uld give them all his property. 91 

Pe rez said after the robbery, they got back into her car and she drove away to their friend’s apartment, where 

they hid the stolen belongings. 

The two face charges three felony charges each: conspiracy to commit robbery while armed with a deadly weapon, a Class B felony; robbery while armed with a deadly weapon, a Class B felony; and theft, a Class D felony; 

May 2, 2013: WLFITV 

# Lafayette woman pleads guilty after drunken-driving crash takes man's leg away 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - A 55-year-old Lafayette woman faces up to 12 years in jail after drunkenly crashing her vehicle into a man riding a motorcycle, resulting in the loss of his leg. 

Laura Fogleman pleaded guilty Thursday at the Tippecanoe County Courthouse to operating while intoxicated causing serious bodily injury – along with being a habitual substance offender. 

Last July Fogelman told investigators she was turning into a driveway in order to turn around on State Road 25 near Americus. 

She collided with a motorcycle, driven by 52-year-old Randall Kesling. 

Part of Kesling's leg was amputated as a result of the crash. 

According to court documents Fogleman's blood alcohol content was 0.11. 

Fogleman faces up to 3 years for the OWI charge and up to 9 years for the habitual offender charge when she's sentenced in June. 

April 30, 2013: WLFITV 

# Man gets 4 years for 2012 stabbing 92 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - A Lafayette man received a 4-year sentence after he pleaded guilty to battery with a deadly weapon. 

According to court records, 26-year-old Dustin McKee was arrested after police responded to a report of a woman stabbed in the face in West Lafayette last September. 

During the investigation, they say McKee told police an argument escalated between him and two men who were with the woman. 

Court documents say he claims he was trying to punch one man and missed, resulting in the stabbing of the woman. 

McKee will spend two years in jail and two on probation. 

April 29, 2013: WLFITV 

# Former PU linebacker fakes urine test, gets more jail time 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - A former Purdue linebacker was sentenced to more than 200 days behind bars Monday for faking a urine test, on top of previous offenses. 

Back in February, DeWayne Beckford was sentenced to almost 5 years of suspended jail time for possessing a synthetic drug and probation violations. 

This sentence came in two parts, according to Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington. 

The first included 2 years of suspended jail time, 2 years with a community corrections service and 10 days of community service. This sentence was for possession of drug paraphernalia with a prior conviction and possession of a synthetic drug. 

The second part came with 6 months in community corrections and an extra year of supervised probation. This sentence was for violating probation multiple times. 93 

Harrington said Monday that on Feb. 25, Beckford attempted to submit a false urine screen as part of his 180-day Tippecanoe County Community Corrections sentence. 

Harrington says the court issued a warrant for his arrest. 

At Monday’s sentencing hearing, the court ordered Beckford to serve the balance of his time in the Tippecanoe 

County Jail and revoked all of his suspended time in those two cases, which totaled 210 days. 

Beckford is to serve those 210 days with an initial recommendation of work release 

.

April 26, 2013: WLFITV 

# Lafayette man sentenced to 15 years for beating 17-day-old boy 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - A young Lafayette man who pleaded guilty to battery on his 17-day-old son was sentenced to 15 years Friday morning. 

In October of 2012, Lafayette Police Department (LPD) officers were called to a home on a report of battery. At the home they found a baby covered in bruises, particularly on his face. 

The baby’s injuries were so severe he had to be taken to an Indianapolis hospital, where doctors say they found he had skull fractures, subdural hematomas and scalp hematomas. He was in critical condition at first but his health eventually improved. 

After officers found the infant, 19-year-old Brendan Bell was put under arrest when he admitted to hitting the baby when it was fussy. 

Bell told investigators that he had put the baby in his car seat and when he wouldn't stop crying, Bell had hit him between three and six times in the face. Bell said the boy had started crying even worse after being hit. 

On March 15, court records say Bell pleaded guilty to one count of battery on a child (Class B felony) and a misdemeanor count of battery. 

And at his sentencing hearing at 10:30 Friday morning, Bell received the sentence of 10 years in prison, 3 years on community corrections and 2 years on supervised probation. 

As part of his probation, Bell was ordered to go through several programs and treatments, including a substance abuse evaluation, mental health evaluation, parenting classes, a character restoration program and a workforce development program. 

Court documents state Bell has repeatedly shown remorse and shame at his actions. 94 

The mother of the beaten infant, whom Bell claims he was never in a relationship with, was also arrested the same day as Bell, but on multiple drug-related charges. 

April 26, 2013: WLFITV 

# 15 years for man who hits girlfriend, threatens mother 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - Dylan Saylor, 20, of Lafayette, was sentenced to prison time and probation after prosecutors say he threatened his mother and hit his girlfriend. 

Last October, Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington says officers were called to the scene of a reported fight on North 18th Street. Saylor's mother told officers her son threatened her with a knife, hit his girlfriend, then took off. 

Harrington says Saylor was arrested a couple hours later. 

Last month, Saylor pleaded guilty to intimidation and battery with a prior conviction. 

He was sentenced Friday to six years in prison and two years supervised probation. 

April 25, 2013: WLFITV 

# Woman pleads guilty to $30K+ stolen from her work 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - A Lafayette woman says she's guilty of paying her credit card bills by stealing tens of thousands of dollars from her job. 

Fifty-four-year-old Cynthia Prien is charged with nearly a dozen felonies, including theft, forgery and corrupt business influence. 95 

Prosecutors say she stole more than $30,000 from Craft Mechanical Contractors. 

She allegedly forged checks and deposited them in various credit card accounts over several years. 

Sentencing for Prien is scheduled for May 31. 

April 23, 2013: WLFITV 

# Fight over misplaced car keys leads to meth charges 

# Car keys turned up in suspect's pocket 

Lydia Williams 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - Thanks to a domestic dispute over the location of a set of car keys, two people already facing meth-related charges from a March pullover can add even more charges to that list. 

Tippecanoe County court documents say 35-year-old Casey N. Lee and 38-year-old Valorie L. Smith face two new charges each: a charge of possession of meth, a Class B felony; and a charge of an illegal drug lab, a Class C felony. 

You may remember Lee and Smith’s names and faces from their arrests in March, when they were pulled over for an expired license plate and arrested when officers discovered a meth lab inside the car. 

Now, the two are back after a street-side shouting match brought officers to respond. 

Court documents say sometime after 11 p.m. April 16, Lafayette Police Department (LPD) officers were sent to an address on Scott Street regarding a domestic dispute involving a man and woman who were yelling at each other on the street. 

When officers arrived they found Lee and Smith at 2020 Scott St., w here they found Smith’s car parked in front of the home. Smith told officers the two were arguing because they couldn’t find the car keys, and officers said they 

noticed she was under the influence of some kind of controlled substance. 

A search warrant was obtained for the car and during the search, investigators found several items related to making meth, so the Indiana State Police (ISP) Meth Suppression Unit was called in to assist. 

Investigators say in the car’s trunk they found a blender with white res idue inside, Coleman camp fuel and an electric skillet with a white substance that later tested positive for meth. 

ISP troopers also discovered sources for chemicals and precursors, which further indicated the manufacture of methamphetamine. 

After Lee was taken into custody the keys for Smith’s car the couple had been looking for were found in his pocket. 

Court documents say the night went even further downhill for the two from there. 

Once Lee was put into a squad car, documents say an officer heard what sounded like a police scanner. The officer 

found a cell phone in Lee’s pocket that had a police scanner app on and running. 96 

While trying to turn off the app, the officer found a screen that showed a YouTube search bar with “How to make meth” and a list of in structional videos and other information on how to make methamphetamine. 

A second cell phone was discovered in Smith’s purse. The officer who found the first cell phone says he knows Lee 

and Smith are frequently together and utilize social media sites such as YouTube to post photos and videos for each other. 

Court documents say the car was parked outside a home next to Columbian Park, which is a public park maintained by the City of Lafayette. 

The documents also detail Lee and Smith’s criminal history. 

In 1998, Lee was convicted of attempted theft and possession of paraphernalia. In 2000 he was convicted of two counts of battery. 

In 2005 she was convicted of possession of meth and possession of marijuana. 

In 2007 Smith was convicted of burglary, for which she is still on probation. Also in 2007 she was convicted of possession of meth. 

And, as we said, they both are on bond for possession of meth charges stemming from their arrests in March. 

April 23, 2013: WLFITV 

# Charges filed in Saturday hit-and-run 

# Victim remains in a coma at IU Health Arnett 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - A West Lafayette woman faces 10 criminal charges after a hit-and-run early 

Saturday morning near Purdue’s campus. 

Courtney Nichols, 25, faces six felonies and four misdemeanors, including operating a vehicle while intoxicated causing serious bodily injury and leaving the scene of an accident. 

Prosecutors said around 3 a.m. Saturday, a Purdue police officer saw a car hit two women crossing Grant Street near North Street. The officer stopped to help and called for backup. 

Minutes later, police pulled Nichols over on Northwestern Avenue, just north of Mackey Arena. Investigators said Nichols smelled of alcohol and her car was damaged. Prosecutors said initial blood tests showed a BAC of 0.184. 

According to court documents, she failed two of three sobriety tests before telling police she thought a person had "punched" her car and kept driving because she was afraid. 

One of the victims, Nicole Ruffolo, 22, fractured her skull. The University of Iowa senior, who was in town visiting her friend at Purdue, remains in a coma at IU Health Arnett Hospital in Lafayette. 

The other victim, Tara Sathaye, had minor injuries. 

April 23, 2013: WLFITV 

# Man with violent history charged after woman's jaw is broken 97 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - A homeless man who already has battery convictions under his belt is facing several 

charges after court documents say he broke into a woman’s home, assaulted her a nd broke her jaw. 

According to Tippecanoe County court documents, just after 3:30 a.m. April 17, officers from the Lafayette Police Department (LPD) responded to a home on North 16th Street in Lafayette. 

The woman who had called dispatchers met with the officers, and officers say they saw swelling and redness over much of her face, with blood on her lips and nose. 

The woman said it hurt to talk, but she was able to give a statement, saying 28-year-old Brandon M. Wendling had entered her home without permission. The woman and Wendling have children together. 

The woman said she retreated to a bedroom with her two children, and Wendling kept calling her names and eventually began punching her in the face. The woman said after he had struck her several times she had escaped to the bathroom and shut the door. 

The woman said Wendling was able to kick the door open and hit her several more times until she lost consciousness. 

When she woke up, the woman said Wendling had disappeared from her home and she called 911. 

Officers noted the bathroom door was broken as if kicked in and also saw blood on the bathroom floo-r. 

Court documents say the woman’s father told police the next day that the woman had been taken to the hospital 

and treated for a broken jaw, and that her mouth was wired shut for the next several weeks. 

Officers also interviewed the two kids – ages 3 and 5 – who are Wendling and the woman’s children. 

The 5 year old told officers his dad broke into their house and started punching his mom in the face until her nose started bleeding. The child said his dad was mad, and his mom was crying. The boy said he had gotten a bat and hit his father in the leg to get him to stop hitting his mother. 

Court documents say the 3 year old described being awakened by the mom screaming, and seeing Wendling 

hitting her in the bedroom. The 3 year old also said Wendling grabbed the woman’s neck and kicked in a locked 

door. 

In an interview with officers, Wendling admitted to being at the home, but denied hitting the woman. He did say he had shoved her while they were in the bathroom. 

Wendling has previously been convicted of attempted theft, invasion of privacy and two counts of domestic battery. 

With this new incident Wendling is facing charges of: battery resulting in serious bodily injury, a Class C felony; domestic battery, a Class A misdemeanor; and two charges of invasion of privacy. 

April 16, 2013: Senate Republican Caucus Press Release 

# [s7] Sen. Hershman: Bill to Combat Gang Activity in Schools 

# Moves to Governor’s Desk 

[s7 ] Sen. Hershman: Bill to Combat Gang Activity in Schools Moves to Governor’s Desk 98 

STATEHOUSE (April 16, 2013) — State Sen. Brandt Hershman’s (R -Buck Creek) legislation to prevent school gang activity cleared final passage in the Senate today. Senate Bill 352 now moves to Gov. Mike Pence’s desk for 

signature. 

SB 352 expands the uses of the Indiana Safe Schools Fund to include educational outreach and school personnel training concerning the identification and prevention of criminal gang activity. The bill would also require school boards to put in place anti-gang policies and awareness programs using model materials developed by the Indiana Department of Education. 

“The way that gangs contact and recruit their members is changing to reflect new technologies,” Hershman said. “We’re seeing the Internet and social media accelerate the spread of gang activity to suburban and rural areas that, up until now, haven’t had to confront this issue. Our schools must stay one step ahead of these trends by putting 

poli cies in place that fit the current times. I’m thankful for the help of Tippecanoe County officials in these efforts, 

especially Prosecutor Pat Harrington and Project Safe Neighborhoods Anti-Gang Initiatives Director Kathryn Redd.” 

Rep. Randy Truitt (R-We st Lafayette) is the bill’s sponsor in the House of Representatives. 

Contact Information: 

Name: Tracy Lytwyn 

Phone: 317-234-9221 

Email:  tlytwyn@iga.in.gov 

April 12, 2013: WLFITV 

# Burglar connected to school lockdown sentenced 

Dan Klein 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - Montez Harris, 23, got a 32-year sentence for a string of burglaries which caused police to put two schools on lockdown. 

Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington says Harris pleaded guilty in November to a string of burglaries last spring. 

In May, a Lafayette man returned home to find Harris putting the man's television into Harris' car. The police search for Harris led Sunnyside Middle School and Murdock Elementary school to be placed on lockdown. 

A judge sentenced Harris to 27 years in prison, 1 year of community corrections and 4 years of probation. 

March 28, 2013: WLFITV 99 

# $50 of fake cash puts Lafayette man in prison for years 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - Spending counterfeit money at a couple of West Lafayette businesses has landed a man in prison a few years. 

According to Tippecanoe County court documents, 22-year-old Devin J. Troupe was sentenced this week to 2 years on a forgery conviction and 4 years on a habitual offender conviction. 

Court documents say on May 24 of 2012, a West Lafayette Speedway manager called police about a person trying to pass fake bills. 

Investigators looked at the surveillance footage and identified Troupe as the man that had attempted to use the fake money to pay. After being “called out” on the fake bills by the manager, Troupe left without any issues. 

Investigators later determined that on the same day Troupe was in the Speedway, he passed fake bills at Five Guys restaurant ($20) and Discount Den ($30) in West Lafayette. 

In an interview with the West Lafayette Police Department (WLPD) Troupe admitted to knowing the bills were counterfeit, and using them anyway. 

Troupe told officers he had gotten the fake money from someone in Chicago. 

Troupe also has a criminal history of battery on a child, theft and strangulation. 

March 22, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Lafayette man gets 6 years for passing fake money 

— Sophia Voravong/svoravong@jconline.com 

A Lafayette man was sentenced Thursday to two years in prison and four years on community corrections for passing counterfeit $5 and $10 bills at local restaurants, convenience stores and gas stations. 

Devin J. Troupe, 22, pleaded guilty in January in Tippecanoe Superior Court 2 to forgery, a Class C felony, and being a habitual offender, which is a sentencing enhancement. 

Two additional counts of forgery and three counts of theft were dropped. 

According to court documents, Troupe told investigators that a woman named Markita Young gave him between 

$200 and $300 of “Monopoly” money, all in denominations of $5 and $10, in exchange for three packs of cigarettes. 

He admitted to being a man caught on surveillance cameras trying to use the money at Speedway at Creasy Lane and Indiana 38 in Lafayette; Village Pantry at Creasy Lane and Indiana 38 in Lafayette; and Five Guys and Discount Den in West Lafayette. 100 

Troupe was ordered Thursday to pay $20 in restitution to Five Guys restaurant and $30 to Discount Den, both in Chauncey Hill Mall. 

The habitual offender enhancement was due t o Troupe’s prior convictions for battery on a child, theft and 

strangulation, all within the past three years. 

March 26, 2013: WLFITV 

# Man sentenced for burglary, theft 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - Aaron Elliott, 20, of Lafayette was sentenced to two years in prison, two years of community corrections, and two years supervised probation after pleading guilty to felony charges of burglary and theft. 

Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington said in February of last year, a woman reported someone had broken into her garage, stealing a dirt bike, bike helmets, money and power tools. 

Harrington said that same day, Elliott and two others were spotted in Romney riding a motor bike that wasn't theirs. 

Harrington said police found the three people had pawned power tools and bike equipment and later determined they were behind the burglary. 

March 26, 2013: WLFITV 

# Police: Man fires shots, vandalizes cars for rent 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - Shots were fired and cars vandalized at a West Lafayette apartment complex last week, leading to criminal charges against one of the community's residents. 

Prosecutors say 21-year-old Tyler Davis faces a felony charge of obliterating identification marks on a handgun and misdemeanor charges of carrying a handgun without a license or permit and criminal mischief. 

The charges stem from an incident last week at Willowbrook Apartments. 

Prosecutors say Tippecanoe County Sheriff's deputies were called to investigate vehicles being vandalized. 

One of the residents told investigators Davis may have been responsible. 

While deputies were still on the scene, shots were fired. 

Prosecutors say Davis came out of one of the apartment buildings carrying a handgun and was detained. 101 

Later, prosecutors say Davis admitted to firing the shots outside his apartment and breaking into several cars after thinking about rent being due. 

March 26, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Man gets 2 years in prison for garage burglaries 

A Lafayette man has been sentenced to two years in prison and two years on community corrections for breaking into a detached garage and stealing money, clothing, a dirt bike and power tools, among other items. 

Aaron C. Elliott, 20, pleaded guilty in January in Tippecanoe Superior Court 2 to burglary, a Class C felony, and theft, a Class D felony. He was sentenced Monday. 

Elliott was one of three people charged with breaking into property on U.S. 231 South on Feb. 7, 2012. That same day, the three suspects were seen riding the stolen bik e in Romney by the bike’s own er, who tried to approach them. 

They were ultimately arrested after pawning stolen power tools and bike equipment. 

Elliott’s prison and community corrections time will be followed by two years on supervised probation. 

March 25, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Vandalisms tied to hunt for rent money 

# Court documents indicate WL man checked vehicles looking for cash 

— Sophia Voravong/svoravong@jconline.com 

A 21-year-old West Lafayette man accused of firing gunshots last Wednesday outside Willowbrook West apartments has been linked to a string of vehicle vandalisms at the same complex early that morning, court documents allege 

Tyler E. Davis told Tippecanoe County Sheriff’s Office deputies that he was thinking about due rent and decided to check for unlocked vehicles, according to a probable cause affidavit filed Monday in Tippecanoe Superior Court 2. 

No one was injured. But Davis is suspected of firing three gunshots into the air just as deputies were patrolling through Willowbrook West, off Lindberg Road in West Lafayette, for the vandalism suspect. 

Davis is a resident there. 

He’s been charged with obliterating identification marks on a handgun; carrying a handgun without a license; and 

three counts of criminal mischief. The handgun charge is a Class C felony, punishable by two to eight years incarceration. The other charges are misdemeanors. 

About 1:20 a.m. Wednesday, three people reported that someone entered or attempted to enter their vehicles and broke or cut through windows. 

Deputies learned from one woman that Davis could be the suspect, based on information she heard about him doing such acts before, according to the affidavit. 

He’s accused of firing the gunshots just as deputies zeroed in on his apartment building. 102 

A search of his apartment bedroom turned up several knifes, a Craftsman rotary tool and numerous handgun rounds and shotgun shells, along with a 9mm Ruger handgun allegedly used that morning, the affidavit states. 

March 22, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Suspect to stand trial in Lafayette rape case 

# Homeless man is deemed mentally fit 

— Sophia Voravong/svoravong@jconline.com 

After spending 14 months in mental health facilities, 27-year-old Daniel S. Dash has been deemed competent to stand trial on accusations that he broke into a Lafayette home and sexually assaulted a female tenant. 

In June 2011, Dash was charged in Tippecanoe Superior Court 1 with 15 felonies, which include multiple counts of rape, criminal deviate conduct and criminal confinement. But three months later, a judge ruled that Dash was not competent, based on psychiatric examinations. 

A trial date for Dash, who is homeless, has not yet been scheduled. 

Dash is accused of breaking a window to get into the woman’s home on South Fourth Street on June 16, 2011. According to court documents, the woman told investigators she was getting her son ready for school on June 17, when a man grabbed her. 

Investigators suspect Dash hid inside the woman’s home overnight. 

The woman told police that she recalled being choked, then blacking out. When she woke up, she was naked and lying on a bed. The woman further described being choked into unconsciousness and having a knife held over her. 

The acts occurred over a four-hour period. 

Her 4-year-old son, who witness ed the assaults, provided graphic details to investigators that matched his mother’s 

statement, court documents state. The boy said his mother yelled for him to leave, but he stayed with her. 

They were able to get away after Dash left the home briefly. Police arrested him walking back toward the 

woman’s home. 

Dash has since been returned to the Tippecanoe County Jail, where he remained Friday on a $100,000 surety bond. 

March 22, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Sentenced handed down in meth arrest 

Adam Martin, 21, of Lafayette, was sentenced to a 12-year term on an amended charge of conspiracy to manufacture methamphetamine. 

Martin was arrested July 18, after someone reported a suspicious person with a flashlight in the backyard of a home at 3006 Elk St. in Lafayette. 

Martin pleaded guilty in January in Tippecanoe Superior Court 2 to the amended count, a Class B felony. 103 

The responding officer found a bottle with a tube protruding from it, which is consistent with a one-pot style meth lab. A search of the home also turned up chemicals and other ingredients commonly used to cook the drug. 

A co-defendant, 20-year-old Patricia Ziegler, pleaded to the same charge and received the same sentence. 

March 21, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Teen sentenced for multiple burglaries 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - A Lafayette teenager was sentenced to prison time and probation after prosecutors said he broke into several homes last year. 

Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington said Aaron Butler, 18, was sentenced 10 years in prison, four years in community corrections, and six years of probation after pleading guilty to four counts of burglary. 

Harrington said last April, Butler and other defendants broke into five homes and stole electronics, sports memorabilia, guns and sabers. 

March 18, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Lafayette woman charged in stabbing of ex-boyfriend 

# Alleged attack was over $40 

- Justin Mack 

A Lafayette woman faces felony charges after being accused of stabbing her ex-boyfriend last week. 

Ashley N. Niccum, 21, was charged with battery by means of a deadly weapon Monday in Tippecanoe Superior Court 2. 

According to court documents, the charges stem from an incident that was reported at 3:08 p.m. March 11. At that time, police were called to 3058 Pheasant Run Drive for a reported stabbing in apartment 1034. 

Upon arrival, police spoke to the victim, 27-year-old Brian Chapple, and observed three cuts on his back. 

Chapple told police that he was stabbed by Niccum, his ex-girlfriend, who went to the apartment to gather her belongings after she ended the relationship the day before. 

Chapple reportedly had three friends over when Niccum arrived. He told two of them to help Niccum carry her belongings to her car. 104 

Niccum then returned to pick up her laptop and asked Chapple for $40, but Chapple refused to give her any money. 

At that time, Chapple said he heard two other men in the hallway. The men pushed their way into the apartment. One of the men pushed Chapple against the wall of a back bedroom. 

As Chapple was physically engaged with the unidentified man, he was stabbed in the back multiple times. When he turned around, he saw Niccum holding a knife. 

Witnesses told investigators that they saw Niccum stabbing Chapple. They also reported that Niccum told Chapple 

that “she had people and she would kill him” after he refused to give her the $40. 

Police found three knives in the bedroom. Two of them were stained red. Police also recovered sections of the carpet that were covered in red stains. 

Additionally, witnesses told police that Niccum left with the knife. 

After being released from St. Elizabeth East hospital, Chapple was arrested on suspicion of domestic battery. 

Lafayette police previously told the Journal & Courier that about 8:50 a.m. March 10, Niccum reported that she had been battered by Chapple. 

It was unclear if Chapple’s arrest was result of that report. 

March 18, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Criminal records could get wiped clean 

Krista Henery 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - A piece of legislation moving through the Statehouse this session would wipe the slate clean for some criminals if it were to pass. 

"The list is amazing that currently qualifies," Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington said. 

The list Harrington is referring to is a list of multiple criminal activities which would be expunged, or virtually wiped clean, from ex-offenders' records under House Bill 1482. 

"Robbery resulting in bodily injury, robbery with deadly weapon, burglary, burglary with deadly weapon, arson, any dealing including cocaine, heroin, all the scheduled control substances, possession or any controlled substance, domestic battery, sexual misconduct with a minor, OWIs, and strangulation is included," Harrington explained. 

Harrington said that list of what is included goes on. 

However, he said the bill is aimed at helping ex-offenders with long-ago, non-violent arrests and convictions clear their records in order to make it easier for them to find work and to access other opportunities often denied to them. 

"Certainly that conviction for a minor offense, whether it be a misdemeanor or a low-level felony, shouldn't follow them throughout their life," Harrington said. "And that's true for any person that has learned from their mistake." 

But while he said he sees merit in erasing the low level "one-time crime," he said there are still too many loopholes that need to be tightened up. 105 

"Domestic battery, drunk driving, robberies, robbery while armed with deadly weapons, dealing drugs, under the current bill, it would allow all of those to go away and that's probably not prudent and it's not wise for public safety," Harrington said. 

There is a waiting period of at least five years after a sentence is completed. Harrington said violent crimes and sex crimes couldn't be expunged, and the person seeking expungements would have to show they stayed out of trouble. 

The bill passed through the Indiana House last month. 

It's now being considered in the state Senate 

March 15, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Lafayette man sentenced for theft and burglary 

Kate Kelty 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - A Lafayette man was sentenced to prison time and probation after pleading guilty to burglary and theft. 

Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington says Shane Brasseur, 30, was sentenced to seven years behind bars and three years of probation. 

On May 29, 2012, officers were called to four Lafayette businesses that reported thefts. 

Harrington says Brasseur's driver's license was found at one of the locations and a half set of dentures with Brasseur's name on it was found at another. 

Harrington says police found some of the stolen items at Brasseur's apartment. 

March 15, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Richmond child porn case leads to local resident 

— Sophia Voravong/svoravong@jconline.com 

A 2011 investigation by the Richmond Police Department into child pornography that was being shared online has led to criminal charges against a 24-year-old Lafayette man. 

Adam Parker Griswold was charged Friday in Tippecanoe Superior Court 1 with five counts of possession of child pornography, all Class D felonies punishable by six months to three years incarceration for each count. 

He had not been arrested as of Friday afternoon. 

On July 9, 2011, a Richmond police lieutenant was able to download images depicting child pornography from a host computer that traced back to a Lafayette residential address, according to a probable cause affidavit. 106 

The lieutenant then contacted an investigator with the Tippecanoe County prosecutor’s office who is a member of the 

Internet Crimes Against Chil dren Task Force, which led them to Griswold’s home in the 2100 block of Crowfoot Drive, on Lafayette’s south end. 

Lafayette police served a search warrant there on Sept. 6, 2011, and seized a laptop, two external hard drives, a thumb drive and several DVDs /CDs from Griswold’s room. 

According to the affidavit, a forensic examination of Griswold’s laptop showed that it contained images of 

underage females engaged in sexual acts. 

Griswold allegedly admitted to trading photos that depicted child porn. 

March 15, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Lafayette teen dad admits hitting infant son 

# He pleads guilty to battery count 

— Sophia Voravong/svoravong@jconline.com 

A Lafayette man has admitted to hitting his 2-week-old son and causing multiple skull fractures and brain bleeding that hospitalized the baby in intensive care last fall. 

The father, 19-year-old Brendan T. Bell, pleaded guilty Friday in Tippecanoe Superior Court 1 to battery on a child, a Class B felony punishable by six to 20 years in prison, for his son’s injuries. 

Bell also pleaded guilty to misdemeanor battery in an unrelated case this past January against a relative. 

He’s scheduled to be sentenced on April 26 by Judge Randy Williams. 

Bell was arrested Oct. 7 after his mother called police to repor t her grandson’s injuries. 

According to court documents, investigators suspected that the injuries were inflicted a day prior, on Oct. 6, when 

Bell picked his son up from the boy’s mother in West Lafayette. Bell and the mother were not in a relationship. 

Shortly after Bell put his son in a car seat and drove away, the boy became fussy and would not stop crying. Attempts to calm him down with a pacifier did not help. 

Bell is accused of striking the right side of his son’s face three to six times. 

He reported ly admitted to noticing that his son’s injuries became worse throughout the night — bruising developed down his face, and the boy was not eating — but Bell didn’t seek help because he was “selfish,” having recently been hired and “did not want to lose” his good job. 

Bell further claimed to be “scared, young and inexperienced,” according to court documents. 107 

The boy suffered skull fractures, subdural hematomas and scalp hematomas. He was released from Riley Hospital for Children in Indianapolis on Oct. 11. 

His mother, 21-year-old Danielle Chamberlain of West Lafayette, also faces criminal charges, based on 

prescription painkills and marijuana found in her apartment when police were investigating the baby’s injuries. 

She’s expected to plead guilty April 1 in T ippecanoe Superior Court 4. 

March 15, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Former pastor enters not guilty plea in hidden cameras case 

An initial not guilty plea was entered Friday morning by a former Lafayette pastor accused of installing hidden cameras an d recording people using the women’s restroom at Sun rise Christian Reformed Church. 

Robert A. Lyzenga, 56, was formally charged Thursday in Tippecanoe Superior Court 1 with five counts of child exploitation, all Class C felonies, and five counts of voyeurism, all Class D felonies. 

He was arrested last May following an investigation by the Tippecanoe County Sheriff’s Office into cameras found 

inside makeshift air fresheners by a church member. 

A search church offices led detectives to Lyzenga. Videos of at least 10 victims were found on an external hard drive repo rtedly found at Lyzenga’s home. 

He’s tentatively scheduled to stand trial July 2. 

A former Lafayette man was sentenced Friday to four years in prison for a string of business break-ins last spring. 

March 15, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Man gets 4 years in prison for Lafayette business break-ins 

Shane M. Brasseur, 30, now of Vincennes, pleaded guilty last month in Tippecanoe Superior Court 1 to burglary, a Class C felony, and two counts of theft, a Class D felony. 

His prison time will be followed by three years on community corrections and three years on probation. 

The charges stem from burglaries over the Memorial Day weekend at Trash Kans, Rescue Rooter and P&B Foundations on South Farabee Drive and Lehnen Furniture on Builder Drive. Items stolen included drive cameras, power tools, couch cushions and an employee's sneakers. 

Brasseur was quickly identified as a suspect, based a wallet that contained his driver's license that was found in a truck that was broken into at Trash Kans. A half set of dentures bearing the name "Brasseur" was found at P&B Foundations, where Brasseur had recently been fired. 

March 14, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Teen sentenced to 9 years in prison 108 

# Teen sentenced after holding up store with knife 

Krista Henery 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - A Lafayette teen has been sentenced to 9 years in prison after he admitted to holding up a Casey's General Store at knifepoint and attempting to rob a Speedway gas station less than an hour later. 

Court documents said it happened June 18, 2012. 

Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington said 19-year-old Braxton Baker pleaded guilty last month to robbery by means of a deadly weapon and attempted armed robbery. 

Court documents state 18-year-old Benjamin Moorehouse was with Baker at the time of the incidents. 

Moorehouse will stand trial in May on similar charges. 

Baker will spend 2 years on probation after he's released from prison. 

March 11, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Man gets 4 years for Shake Weight beating 

— Sophia Voravong/svoravong@jconline.com 

A West Lafayette man was sentenced Monday to four years in prison for attacking his girlfriend with a Shake Weight dumbbell in November 2011, causing injuries that knocked four teeth loose and swelled her eyes shut. 

With a combined 976 days credit for time already served and for good behavior, 20-year-old Jonathan T. Noe could be released in less than nine months. 

He will then serve two years on supervised probation. 

Noe was arrested on Nov . 9, 2011, after Tippecanoe County sheriff’s deputies were called to an apartment in the 3800 block of Grayleaf Drive in West Lafayette. A neighbor brought Noe’s girlfriend into her apartment there. 109 

The girlfriend was bleeding from her nose and mouth, the latter swollen to the point where she had difficulty speaking, according to court documents. Her eyelids were purple and swollen, teeth had been pushed inward toward her throat and she had red marks on her neck, back, arms and chest. 

At the time, the woman had a protective order against Noe, issued out of Porter County. But they still resided together in West Lafayette. 

The beating occurred after Noe went to a party at another West Lafayette apartment complex and the girlfriend went looking for him. The woman told investigators Noe beat her unconscious with a Shake Weight in their apartment because he was unhappy. 

She suffered a subdural hematoma, a broken nose and multiple contusions, among other injuries. 

Deputies found Noe intoxicated inside their apartment, with blood in his hair and on his face, arms, chest, legs and feet. 

Noe pleaded guilty in February 2011 in Tippecanoe Superior Court 1 to battery with a deadly weapon, a Class C felony, and invasion of privacy, a misdemeanor. 

Noe's father testified Monday that his son suffered a head injury in an accident that damaged his frontal lobe. Frontal lobe injuries have been linked to aggressive and violent behavior. 

March 11, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# West Lafayette man sentenced to prison for shooting at friend 

— Sophia Voravong/svoravong@jconline.com 

A day of heavy alcohol consumption that led to a petty argument and a shooting last summer in a quiet West Lafayette neighborhood resulted in a 3 1/2-year prison sentence Monday for the triggerman. 

Jeffrey L. Hancher, 51, of West Lafayette, claimed he was defending himself when he shot five times at a friend, 52-year-old Martin Denney of West Lafayette, the afternoon of June 1 outside 2241 Huron Road. 

One bullet went through Denney’s lower back. Though not seriously injured, he incurred medical costs totaling more than $9,000, according to a restitution request filed by the Tippeca noe County prosecutor’s office. 

Hancher pleaded guilty in February in Tippecanoe Circuit Court to battery by means of a deadly weapon, a Class C felony. 

“I’m sick over it. I can’t believe it happened,” Hancher said Monday during his sentencing hearing. “But I was 

defending my own well-being. When he (Denney) drinks, he gets pretty mean. He came back at me several times when I wa s trying to leave.” 

Denney did not attend Monday’s hearing. 110 

Hancher said the two had spent the morning and afternoon together. He alleged that Denney kept giving him alcohol and was being aggressive. Hancher has previously struggled with alcohol use and substance abuse but had 

“straightened himself out,” over the past decade, his attorney, Carl Sandy, said. 

That afternoon, Hancher was dropping Denney off in the Wabash Shores neighborhood when they got into an argument. Denney was outside, retrieving his sc ooter from an acquaintance’s driveway, when Hancher — who was still in his vehicle — shot at him. 

Hancher fled the scene and turned himself in at the West Lafayette Police Department seven hours later. 

Deputy Prosecutor Kevin McDaniel questioned Hancher about how he initially claimed that the two men were followed by a group of black males. Hancher, however, said Monday that he did not remember denying to investigators that he shot Denney. 

No one else was injured, but two bullets struck a nearby garage and basketball goal. 

According to Sandy, Hancher has said from their first meeting that he knew he would go to prison for the shooting. 

But he asked for a sentence “toward the low end” so that Hancher could be released before his fath er, who has brain cancer, dies. 

Hancher’s prison time will be followed by 18 months on supervised probation. Judge Don Daniel also ordered him 

to pay Denny $9,916.16 in restitution. 

March 9, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Court charges man in Tower Liquors robbery 

— Sophia Voravong/svoravong@jconline.com 

A trail of footprints left in newly fallen snow is how Lafayette police tracked down the person accused of holding up Tower Liquors and pistol-whipping an employee last week, court documents reveal. 

The suspect, 23-year-old Emmanuel A. Winters, was charged Friday in Tippecanoe Superior Court 2 with robbery by means of a deadly weapon and battery by means of a deadly weapon. 

Winters, who currently is serving probation for a 2012 strangulation conviction out of Tippecanoe Superior Court 5, is being held without bond in Tippecanoe County Jail. 

About 10 p.m. March, a black male wearing a dark, hooded sweatshirt and holding a handkerchief over his face walked into Tower Liquors at 981 S. Creasy Lane, pointed a handgun at an employee and demanded cash. 

An employee heard the exchange and, from the store’s cooler, called police. 

Police tracked fresh footprints in the snow to 921 Julia Lane, about 400 yards away in the Treece Meadow neighborhood. 

Winters and several small children were inside the duplex. He denied being involved in the robbery, but officers 

found men’s boots that matched the footprints in the sn ow, according to the affidavit. 

They also found cash hidden inside a sock in a shoe, which was close to the amount taken from Tower Liquors. A loaded .22-caliber handgun was found in a recycling bin just outside the duplex. 111 

March 8, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Man found guilty of dealing meth near schools 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington said Steven Cox, 27, was found guilty Thursday of two felony charges including dealing meth within 1,000 feet of a school after a two-day jury trial. 

Earlier, he pleaded guilty to misdemeanor charges of possession of paraphernalia and operating while suspended. 

Harrington said last January, a traffic stop led police to neighboring apartments at 12th and Brown where they discovered meth and items commonly used to make meth. The apartments are located within 1,000 feet of several schools. 

Sentencing is scheduled for April 5. 

March 8, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Several charges filed in drunken driving crash that caused injuries 

Several charges filed in drunken driving crash that caused injuries 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - A West Lafayette man faces charges after prosecutors say he got behind the wheel with a blood alcohol level at nearly twice the legal limit with a suspended license – crashing into another car and sending a woman to the hospital. 

Court documents say on Sept. 27, 2012, 28-year-old Sean Lyman was traveling north in a pickup truck on US 231 near US 52. 

Lyman went across US 52 and crashed his truck into another moving vehicle. 

The woman driving the other vehicle was taken to St. Elizabeth Hospital to be treated for multiple rib fractures and chest pain. 

Lyman faces several charges, including operating a vehicle while intoxicated and operating a vehicle while suspended. 

March 8, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Man gets 13 years for break-in 112 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington said Phillip Hutchinson, 29, was sentenced to 13 years behind bars after pleading guilty to breaking into a woman's home while she was asleep on the couch. 

Last May, News 18 reported Hutchinson entered a home on South 28th Street in Lafayette. 

Harrington said the woman who lived there was asleep and woke to find Hutchinson standing over her. 

Harrington added Hutchinson used his elbow to hold her down at first, then stole about $150 before he was arrested a few blocks away. 

March 8, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Robber of gas station, grocery gets 6 years 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - A Lafayette man was sentenced to six years behind bars after pleading guilty to robbing a gas station and grocery store. 

Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington said Anthony Herald, 44, was sentenced to six years in prison and four years of supervised probation Thursday. 

As News 18 reported last November, prosecutors said Herald stole cigarettes and money from the Gas America station on Sagamore Parkway Nov. 15, 2012. Three days later they said he stole money from the Aldi on Sagamore Parkway. 

Harrington said Herald displayed a toy firearm in his waistband. 

During an interview with police, Harrington said Herald admitted to both robberies. 

March 7, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Lafayette teen's sexual assault conviction of 13-year-old female classmate upheld 

— Sophia Voravong/svoravong@jconline.com 113 

A Lafayette teenager who sexually assaulted a 13-year-old female classmate — and recorded it to share with acquaintances — last year belongs in an Indiana Department of Correction facility for juveniles, the Indiana Court of Appeals has ruled. 

In an unanimous 3-0 ruling, the appellate court Thursday upheld the sentence handed down in July by then-juvenile Magistrate Faith Graham of Tippecanoe Superior Court 3. Graham n ow is that court’s judge. 

The teenager, who was 14 years old at the time, argued that Graham abused her discretion. The Court of Appeals disagreed — noting that the assault was premeditated, that the teenager was not remorseful and that he has a high risk of reoffending. 

He was one of three teenage boys who sexually assaulted the girl on April 11, 2012, in a wooded area near Faith Community Center. All four attended Faith Christian School. It did not occur on church nor school property. 

The 14-year-old was the ringleader. He eventually pleaded guilty to criminal deviate conduct. 

Partially redacted documents that contained details of the assault were previously released by Graham to news media following public records requests. 

According to the appellate court ruling, in December 2011, the boy told the 13-year-old that he loved her and persuaded the girl to flash him via video chat. He then took a screenshot that was shown to other students and used it to blackmail her up to the day of the assault. 

The assault itself took place for 45 minutes, and afterward the three boys left the girl naked in the woods. 

Assault recorded 

The 14-year-old recorded the assault with his cellphone and shared the video with others, even calling the assault 

“so funny,” according to t he appellate court ruling. 

The blackmail included making a fake Facebook account and threatening to post photos of the girl online. 

A licensed clinical psychologist determined that the boy had an “escalating sense of hostility toward females” and 

demonstra ted an “escalating pattern of sexually sadistic behavior.” 

However, the psychologist disagreed with placing the 14-year-old at a DOC facility. 

March 7, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# West Lafayette man gets 13 years for home invasion 

A West Lafayette man was sentenced Thursday to 13 years in prison for breaking into a south Lafayette home last year and physically assaulting a female tenant. 

The woman woke up about 3 a.m. on May 11 to a man — later identified as 29-year-old Phillip W. Hutchinson Jr. 

— standing over her. When she tried to stand up, Hutchinson shoved his elbow into her chest and told her to shut up. 

He then cocked his arm back, as though to hit her, but eased off after she complied, according to court documents. The woman was not seriously injured. 

Hutchinson pleaded guilty in January in Tippecanoe Superior Court 2 to burglary, possession of cocaine and possession of a controlled substance. 114 

His prison time will be followed by five years on supervised probation. 

According to court documents, the woman told police that Hutchinson was sweating and made comments about needing drugs and suffering from withdrawals. After he left, the woman found that $140 in 20-dollar bills and about $20 in various denominations were missing from her purse. 

March 5, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Fouts receives 105 years in prison 

Elisabeth Rentschler 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - "I do love him," said Curtis Fouts. "He's my brother, and he will always be my brother." 

I love you. That's what Curtis wrote in a letter to his brother, Richard, as he awaited his fate. 

On Monday, 39-year-old Richard Fouts was sentenced to a total of 105 years in prison for the murder of his disabled grandfather, 84-year-old William Hartlep. 

Yet, Curtis said what is most important was what came at the end of the letter. 

"I also said at the end of the letter, that God needs to have mercy on his soul," said Curtis. "He will die in prison, and he chose that himself." 

It all started in Lafayette back in October 2011. Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington said Richard went to his grandfather's house to rob him. 

When he realized his grandfather had no money, Harrington said Richard strangled him and slit his throat. Harrington calls this particular murder a tragedy. 

"He not only killed and basically executed an elderly gentleman who was well-known to his neighbors and loved, but he was disabled and he was his own grandfather," said Harrington. 

On Monday, Richard took the stand for the final time, and said he knew he had done wrong. He even called himself "a worthless piece of garbage." 

Richard begged the court to think of his 4-year-old daughter, whom he said he may never see again, and asked the court to consider less than the maximum sentence. 

He was given just 15 years less. 115 

"Given the defendant's current age, even with credit time for serving, the likelihood of him ever walking free is minimal," said Harrington. 

That's something many members of Fouts family said they can live with. 

Two years later, many of them are still trying to understand how their own flesh and blood could murder someone they all loved so dearly. 

For many like Curtis, there is one thing they know for sure. 

"I never want to talk to him again," said Curtis. 

Fouts' 105 year sentence breaks down like this: 65 years for murder, 20 years for attempted burglary and 20 years for being a habitual offender. 

March 4, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Police: Shower camera used for child porn 

# Lafayette man also faces charges of child molesting, solicitation and exploitation 

—Sophia Voravong/svoravong@jconline.com 

Images of a nude teenager — appearing as though captured without her knowledge, according to court documents 

— were among the 300-plus photos investigators recovered from a cellphone that belongs to a Lafayette man accused of molesting the girl over a number of years. 

Wayne E. Griffin Jr., 35, was formally charged Monday in Tippecanoe Superior Court 2 with four counts of child molesting; two counts of possession of child pornography; and one count each of child solicitation and child 

exploitation. He’s been in the Tippecanoe County Jail since Feb. 26, curre ntly on a $250,000 surety bond. 

Capt. Kurt Wolf, commander of the Lafayette Police Department’s detectives division, previously told the Journal & 

Courier that the allegations against Griffin began when the victim, now 16 years old, was 10 or 11. According to the affidavit, the girl described at least eight incidents in which where Griffin touched her inappropriately. 

The girl described how Griffin gave her 13-year-old sister a shower clock-radio and how Griffin yelled at them for 

removing it from the shower, despite it not working properly. After learning of the alleged molestation, the girl’s 

mother discovered it had several additional parts glued on, including what appeared to be a camera inside. 

The girl told investigators that Griffin also left his cellphone, which was locked in record mode, in her bedroom. 

Images on Griffin’s cellphone included pictures of the older girl while she was in the bathroom. The clock -radio apparently was operated via remote control and had a motion sensor. 

Detectives interviewed Griffin last week, and he made incriminating statements that matched the 16-year-old’s 

accusations. He claimed to shut off the camera when the younger sibling was in the bathroom. 

March 1, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Lafayette mom charged with using kids as shields 116 

—Sophia Voravong/svoravong@jconline.com 

A Lafayette woman is accused of using her five children, ages 9 to 15, as a human shield around her after refusing to comply with police officers who were searching for a wanted felo n staying at the woman’s house. 

Rachelle L. Billups, 33, was charged Friday in Tippecanoe Circuit Court with neglect of a dependent, assisting criminal and resisting law enforcement. Two of the counts are Class D felonies, each punishable by six months to three years in prison. 

Billups was initially arrested Feb. 15. She was released from the Tippecanoe County Jail later that day after posting a combined $2,500 surety and $250 cash bond. 

The incident that led to Billups’ arrest began the night of Feb. 14, when a Lafayette police officer noticed a man — 

later identified as 27-year-old Marquaze S. Johnson of Lafayette — looking at him at the Marathon gas station at Ferry and North Ninth streets, according to a probable cause affidavit. 

The man then took off running. 

Officer Adam Mellady stopped Johnson behind the gas station, during which he learned that Johnson was wanted on a warrant from Arkansas, the affidavit states. At that point, Johnson allegedly took off again — eventually 

going into Billups’ house at 1007 North St. 

According to the affidavit, police asked Billups to send Johnson outside, but she refused. Billups later struck her head out of a window and told officers that neither she nor her children would leave the house. She also stopped communicating with them via phone. 

Officers, armed with a search warrant, entered after knocking down the front door. They found Billups sitting on the stair landings with her children surrounding her. 

The children pleaded with Billups to let them leave, the affidavit states. 

Johnson, who was spotted by another officer on the home’s roof, was found in an upstairs closet. 

He’s charged in Tippecanoe Superior Court 5 with resisting law enforcement .

March 1, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Mom charged with welfare fraud 

A Lafayette woman received an additional $9,691 in public assistance by lying about the whereabouts of her minor daughter, court documents allege. 

Tasha N. Otis, 40, is accused of reporting the girl as a member of her household, when in actuality the girl resided 

with Otis’ parents in Arkansas, the Indiana Family and Social Services Administration claims. 

Otis was charged Thursday in Tippecanoe Superior Court 1 with welfare fraud and two counts of theft, all felonies. A warrant has been issued for her arrest. 

According to a probable cause affidavit, Otis qualified for and received public assistance through Supplemental Assistance to Needy Families — more commonly known as food stamps — and Temporary Assistance to Needy Families between April 2006 and September 2011. 117 

The Family and Social Services Administration began investigating Otis in March 2011 for possible fraud. Officials 

obtained copies of school records for Otis’ daughter, which showed her enrolled in Arkansas, where she has lived 

with Otis’ parents since 2003. 

Otis, however, is accused of repeatedly lying during interviews and on applications that the girl lived with her in Lafayette. 

February 22, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Local man linked to 2 armed robberies 

—Sophia Voravong/svoravong@jconline.com 

An addiction to prescription medication was the apparent motivation behind two armed robberies and two attempted armed robberies committed last weekend by the same Lafayette man, court documents allege. 

The suspect, 35-year-old Michael E. Brown, was charged Friday in Tippecanoe Circuit Court with possession of a controlled substance and two counts each of robbery by means of a deadly weapon; criminal confinement while armed with a deadly weapon; theft; and attempted robbery. 

Brown remained in the Tippecanoe County Jail on Friday afternoon. His bond was increased from $10,000 surety to $50,000 surety and $5,000 cash, jail staff said. 

Capt. Kurt Wolf, commander of the Laf ayette Police Department’s detectives division, said all four robberies were 

separately reported by the victims. Similarities led investigators to suspect they were committed by the same person. 

Brown also allegedly implicated himself and provided details that matched the victims’ statements — down to the dollar amount he had two victims withdraw from ATMs at gunpoint, according to a probable cause affidavit. 

Following is a summary of the incidents, as detailed in court documents and statements from the victims: 

The first reported armed robbery occurred early Sunday outside an apartment in the 1100 block of Red Cloud Trail, off Indiana 26 East. The victim told police that he was forced to drive to an ATM by a white male who held a handkerchief to his face. 

The victim, who gave the suspect $280, said he was scared and did not want to get shot. 

That was followed by an attempted armed robbery early Sunday behind a Mexican bakery at Greenbush Street and Sagamore Parkway. The victim, a bakery employee, said a white male pointed a large black handgun at him and demanded money. 

The suspect, who wore a dark jacket, black gloves and a bandana wrapped around the lower half of his face, fled when another employee came outside. 

The third incident, which led to Brown’s ar rest, took place early Monday. The victim was leaving his job at Walmart 

Superstore on Indiana 26 East and was getting into his vehicle. That’s when a man knocked on his window, stuck a 

gun inside the window and told the victim he was being robbed. 118 

The victim said he was forced to drive to a nearby ATM and told to withdraw $160. 

The fourth incident occurred early Monday outside Circle K gas station on Indiana 26 East. The victim said he was waiting on a friend when he was approached by a white male with a dark scarf over his face. The suspect displayed a gun, knocked on the window and demanded cash. The victim, however, could not roll down the window 

— prompting the man to flee. The victim said he feared he was going to die. 

Brown’s arrest came after Lafayet te police checked businesses along Indiana 26 East and found him in the Meijer parking lot. He matched the description of the person who robbed the Walmart employee. 

February 21, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Woman gets 473 days probation for prostitution, false informing 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - A woman pleaded guilty to prostitution and false informing in Tippecanoe County this week. 

According to Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington, 19-year-old Geneva Barnes will serve 473 days of unsupervised probation for prostitution and false informing. 

Prostitution, a Class A misdemeanor, netted Barnes 365 days’ sentence. False informing, a Class B misdemeanor, got 

her 180 days. She has served 72 of those days and will serve the rest on probation. 

February 16, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Sex offender pleads guilty for failing to register 

— Jessica Contrera/ jcontrera@jconline.com 

A convicted child molester pleaded guilty Friday to failing to register as a sex offender for the third time in Tippecanoe Superior Court 1. 

Ronald G. Reid, 44, a homeless man staying in Lafayette, admitted he did not provide law enforcement with 

updated information on his whereabouts for Indiana’s Sex and Violent Offender Registry and violated his 

probation. 

Reid is scheduled to be sentenced on April 12 by Judge Randy Williams. Under a plea agreement with the 

Tippecanoe County prosecutor’s office, he faces two to eight years incarceration on the failure to register charge, a 

Class C felony, and up to six months for the violation of probation. 119 

In 1996, Reid pleaded guilty to molesting two children younger than 12 and was sentenced to seven years in 

prison. The conviction also required that he be on Indiana’s Sex and Violent Offender Registry for life. He was sent 

back to prison in 2007 and again in 2009 for not registering. 

Indiana law typically requires convicted sex offenders to register once a year in person. But homeless offenders must do so every seven days until they find a permanent address. 

Through questioning by his attorney, Reid admitted that he began to start the sex offender registry process but chose not to complete it. 

He also admitted to missing a December meeting with his probation officer. 

February 15, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Man gets 3 decades behind bars for role in 2010 Lafayette murder 

Brittany Tyner 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - A Putnam County man has been sentenced to more than 30 years in prison for his part in a 2010 Lafayette murder. 

In a sentence hearing Friday afternoon, 30-year-old Jeremiah Thompson was given 33 years behind bars and 2 years of supervised probation. 

In January Thompson pleaded guilty to conspiracy to commit robbery and conspiracy to commit burglary for his part in the April 2010 shooting of 21-year-old Kory Rogers. 

As part of the plea deal, seven other charges, including murder, were dropped. 

He was facing anywhere from 20 to 35 years behind bars. 

"He was realistic enough to know that he wouldn't get 20. He was hopeful that he wouldn't get the 33, as he did. But the number 25 was his own number that he came up with, recognizing that were aggravating circumstances that the court was going to hold against him," said John Commons, Thompson's attorney. 

Thompson's criminal history was brought up against him. His list of previous crimes includes theft, possession of marijuana, and operating a vehicle while intoxicated. 

On Friday, Thompson addressed the Rogers family. He told them he was sorry and that he hopes they can accept his apology. 

"One of the important aspects of it, I believe, was in his own words, he wasn't making any excuses," said Commons. 

Rogers' mother also spoke. She told Thompson this will not be his only judgment day. She said when the next judgment day comes, he will not have a plea agreement to hide behind. 

She said she wanted this terrible part of her family's lives to end with this final sentencing. 

"They want a finality. They wanted to end this chapter in their life. And with this sentence, this defendant cannot appeal so his case has truly ended," said Pat Harrington, Tippecanoe County Prosecutor. 120 

Harrington said after working on the case for 34 months, it's time for closure. 

Last summer Edward Zaragoza was sentenced to 120 years in prison for his role in the murder. 

Thompson went to trial in August, but it ended in a hung jury. 

Thompson has already served more than 700 days in prison for the 2010 crime. Prosecutors said that will go toward his sentencing. 

February 15, 2013: TCPO 

## Two Men Charged in the West Lafayette Check into Cash Armed Robbery 

Landon Terrell Harbert, 37, of West Lafayette, and Malcolm M. Smith, 37, of Indianapolis, were charged yesterday with the following: 

Count I: Robbery, Committed by Means of a Deadly Weapon , Class B Felony 

Count II: Theft, Class D Felony 

Count III: Robbery, Committed by Means of a Deadly Weapon , Class B Felony 

Count IV: Theft, Class D Felony 

This case was investigated by the West Lafayette Police Department. 

All persons charge are presumed innocent until and unless proven guilty in court. 

February 15, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Man gets 33 years in prison for Lafayette shooting death 

SOPHIA VORAVONG;  svoravong@jconline.com 

A Reelsville man was sentenced this afternoon to 33 years in prison for his involvement in the April 8, 2010, shooting death of 21-year-old Kory D. Rogers. 

That was the maximum amount of incarceration that 30-year-old Jeremiah Thompson faced under a plea agreement with the Tippecanoe County prosecutor's office. 

His prison time will be followed by two years on supervised probation. 

On Jan. 3, Thompson pleaded guilty in Tippecanoe Superior Court 1 to conspiracy to commit robbery and conspiracy to commit burglary, both Class A felonies 

Rogers, a marijuana dealer, was fatally shot once in chest in the basement apartment of his sister’s house at 2200 Ottawa Drive, near Jefferson High School on Lafayette’s south end. Prosecutors alleged that Thompson and Edward 

C. Zaragoza were after a large sum of cash and marijuana that Rogers had stolen from his supplier in mid-March of 2010, a few weeks before his death. 121 

Neither suspect knew Rogers, but investigators and prosecutors relied heavily on cellphone technology and statements from their acquaintances to piece together the case, according to evidence and testimony presented during their respective trials. 

Zaragoza, who is the husband of Thompson’s cousin, repeatedly denied these claims. But Thompson’s guilty plea 

reiterated what investigators suspect happened all along. 

Zaragoza is serving a 120-year prison sentence after a jury convicted him last summer of felony murder, murder, being a serious violent felon in possession of a handgun and seven other charges. 

February 13, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Man nabs himself another charge after jail fight 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - A Tippecanoe County Jail inmate who has been behind bars on charges of making meth now has another felony charge on his list. 

According to Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Patrick Harrington, 20-year-old Ty Wilkerson is facing a charge of battery (a Class C felony) after being accused of assaulting a fellow inmate. Wilkerson was already in jail on charges of manufacturing and possessing meth. 

Court documents say on Feb. 7, Tippecanoe County Sheriff’s Lt. S. Hodson was sent to the jail for a report of 

battery between inmates. 

Upon arrival to the C3 area of C-Pod (a section of the jail), Hodson said he noticed blood drops on the floor. 

The victim of the battery had been transported to St. Elizabeth Central Hospital, where doctors said he would need surgery for several broken bones in his face, and it appeared his left orbital bone (the bone around his left eye) had been broken. 

The victim told Hodson that Wilkerson had come down the stairs to the C3 dayroom, walked up to the victim and punched him in the face. The victim said he had then walked back to his cell, but that a short time later, Wilkerson 

had entered the victim’s cell and hit him repeatedly. The victim said both attacks were completely by surprise. 

Hodson took a look at the surveillance video footage from the area in question within the jail. Court docs say the 

video shows Wilkerson coming down the stairs in C3 in a “brisk manner,” setting a Styrofoam cup down and then 

turning and immediately throwing a punch at the unsuspecting victim. 

After the punch, the video shows the two squared off for a moment, but no more activity occurred. The two retreated to their respective cells. 

However, after the confrontation, the video shows exactly what the victim described: Wilkerson rushing to the 

victim’s cell , deliberately closing the door behind him. The video shows other inmates peering through the cell door window. 

Lt. Hodson said it was clear an altercation was taking place inside the victim’s cell. 

Court documents go on to say Wilkerson admitted to officers that he struck Miller in the face, but denied 

subsequently entering Miller’s cell, despite the video showing him clearly doing this. Wilkerson claimed Miller had 

called him a name. 122 

February 12, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Probation, $5K restitution for ex-Purdue football player who punched woman 

SOPHIA VORAVONG;  svoravong@jconline.com 

Booted Purdue University football player Sean P. Collins will spend 275 days on probation and must complete 40 hours of work crew service for punching a woman in the face last summer outside a West Lafayette bar. 

The sentence was handed down Tuesday in Tippecanoe Superior Court 5, after 21-year-old Collins pleaded guilty to battery resulting in bodily injury, a misdemeanor. Additional misdemeanor counts of resisting law enforcement 

and public intoxication were dropped under a plea agreement with the Tippecanoe County prosecutor’s office. 

Collins must also pay $5,404.16 in restitution to the victim, 22-year-old Holly Fu llerton of Monticello. He’s further 

banned from using or possessing alcoholic beverages or controlled substances and cannot enter any taverns, bars or liquor stores while on probation. 

The incident took place about 1 a.m. on July 14, 2012, outside the former location of Where Else? bar, 304 W. 

State St., in West Lafayette’s Village. 

Fullerton told investigators that she and a group of friends were standing outside Where Else? when Collins approached them, allegedly to pick a fight with her male acquaintance, according to court documents. 

After Fullerton tried to intervene, Collins grabbed her arm and hit her cheek with his fist. 

Fullerton was treated at a Lafayette hospital and released the same day. 

Then-coach Danny Hope dismissed Collins from Purdue’s foot ball team on July 15. Collins joined the Boilermakers in 2009 as a walk-on and was on the roster in 2010 and 2011. 

February 11, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Man gets 20 years on charges of cooking meth 

SOPHIA VORAVONG;  svoravong@jconline.com 

A Frankfort man was sentenced Monday to 20 years in prison, followed by five years on probation, for cooking methamphetamine in a Lafayette motel room. 123 

Ty C. Wilkerson, 20, pleaded guilty last month in Tippecanoe Superior Court 2 to dealing meth, a Class A felony. 

His co-defendant, 33-year-old Pedro Villarreal, also of Frankfort, received the same sentence in late January. 

Their arrests on April 23, 2012, came when Lafayette police Officer Ian O’Shields was on routin e patrol at Knights 

Inn, 4110 Indiana 26 East. O’Shields became suspicious when the door to one motel room kept opening and closely 

periodically, but no one was entering or exiting the room. 

According to a probable cause affidavit filed with the charges, Wilkerson eventually walked outside. When 

O’Shields asked whether anyone else was inside, Wilkerson replied “Pete” and gave O’Shields a key card for the 

room. 

Villarreal, however, was allegedly less cooperative and slammed the door on O’Shields. Once inside , the officer noted four plastic bottles on heaters appeared to be boiling or cooking. 

One of the bottles tested positive for methamphetamine. 

Sales records from local pharmacies shows that Wilkerson and Villarreal purchased cold medication containing pseudoephedrine, a common ingredient used to make meth, on numerous occasions in mid-April. 

The suspects have to pay $3,136 in restitution to the Indiana State Police Meth Suppression Section. 

February 11, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Two men arrested trying to rob residence on Butler Street 

— Jessica Contrera/jcontrera@jconline.com 

Two men were arrested Monday morning after an attempt to rob a Lafayette residence. 

Richard Keith Land Jr. and John Paul Garrison were in the process of robbing 2311 Butler St. in Lafayette when stopped by Officer Chris Jarrett, according to Sgt. Jay E. Rosen of the Lafayette Police Department. 

Land was arrested for conspiracy to commit armed robbery, burglary, residential entry, theft and resisting law enforcement. He was being held Monday in Tippecanoe County Jail on a combined $25,000 surety and $1,000 local writ cash bond. 

Garrison was arrested for armed robbery, burglary, residential entry, theft and resisting law enforcement. He was being held in Tippecanoe County Jail on a $25,000 surety bond. 

At 10:56 a.m., LPD arrived at the residence to find the suspects still on the scene. Garrison was apprehended but Land attempted to flee on foot. Land was apprehended by officers a short while later. 

Rosen said a neighbor witnessed Garrison force entry into the residence by breaking in the door while Land stood watch. 

The brother of the homeowner was the only person in the house. Garrison allegedly swung a padlock on a chain at the brother, but did not injure him. 

February 9, 2013: WLFI TV 124 

# Lack of partying leads to 14 year sentence 

WEST LAFAYETEE, Ind. (WLFI) - Ronnie Moore Jr., 20, of Lafayette got a 14-year sentence Friday after stealing items from a West Lafayette residence when he and his friends couldn't find a party they were looking for. 

Moore stole several items including a laptop and X-Box in September. Police found Moore with some friends nearby, our sister station WLFI reports. 

Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington said Moore will serve four years in prison, two years in community corrections and eight years of probation. 

February 9, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Molester of 12-year-old girl gets 30 years 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - A child molester who forced a 12-year-old girl to give him oral sex on multiple occasions was sentenced to almost three decades in prison this week. 

Jason Deaton, 40, of Lafayette was convicted in November on two counts of child molestation. 

Investigators said Deaton is an acquaintance of the child's mother. 

Prosecutor Pat Harrington said Deaton was sentenced to 28 years in prison and two years of supervised probation. He also must register as a sexually violent predator. 

February 8, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Convicted molester sentenced to 28 years 

Jason Deaton, 40, was sentenced Friday to 28 years in prison for repeatedly molesting a 12-year-old girl in his care. 125 

Deaton, of Lafayette, was found guilty of two counts of child molesting as a Class A felony following a two-day jury trial in November in Tippecanoe Superior Court 2. 

The girl testified to three incidents that occurred between October 2010 and July 2011, always in Deaton’s 

bedroom with the door closed and locked. She described the sexual acts in graphic detail and said Deaton would thank her afterward. 

The girl further was able to describe a mole on Deaton’s genitals. 

Deaton was an acquaintance of the girl’s mother. 

His prison time will be followed by two years on probation. 

# Local man sentenced for WL break-in 

A Lafayette man was sentenced Friday to four years in prison, followed by two years on community corrections and eight years on probation, for his involvement in a residential burglary last September near Purdue University. 

The apartment, on Hayes Street in West Lafayette, had been unlocked. 

Ronnie Moore Jr., 20, was one of three people who the tenant saw in the residence that morning. A laptop, video games, DVDs and a backpack were among the items stolen. 

Moore was spotted shortly after with the backpack, which contained the missing laptop and some video games. 

He pleaded last month in Tippecanoe Circuit Court to burglary, residential entry, theft and minor consumption. 

# Repeat offender gets 14 years in prison 

A repeat drunken driver with a lifetime license suspension was sentenced Friday to 14 years in prison. 

Estaban Gonzalez, 44, of Lafayette, was arrested on Feb. 29, after crashing into another vehicle that was stopped at Indiana 26 East and Creasy Lane. 

He admitted drinking, and a portable breath test showed that he had a breath-alcohol concentration of 0.18 percent, more than double Indiana’s legal limit. 

Gonzalez pleaded guilty last month in Tippecanoe Circuit Court to operating a vehicle while forfeited for life and being a habitual substance offender. 

His prison time will be followed by seven years on probation. 

February 7, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Man's 'atrocious' molestation crimes land him 80 years in prison 126 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - A Tippecanoe County man was sentenced to 80 years behind bars for what some are saying are the worst molestation crimes they've ever seen. 

Christopher Bunch will serve 80 years in state prison on five counts of child molestation. 

According to court documents, the female victim was between the ages of 7 and 9 during the abuse. 

He will serve those as he serves a 34 year federal sentence. 

Bunch was sentenced in federal court last month on child pornography charges. 

Investigators say they found more than 30,000 child pornography images in Bunch's Battle Ground home in 2011. 

They say Bunch would video tape the crime, then show it to the victim. 

The prosecution recommended 90 years, but is happy with this sentence. 

“This subject was probably if not the worst one of the worst child molesters in my 30 years I've had to deal with,” Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington said. “He didn't just molest a child, he essentially raped the child. He 

video taped the child.” 

The victim did not appear in court. She and her mother did send letters. 

When asked if he had anything to say, Bunch told the court, “I'm sorry and I wish it never happened." 

February 7, 2013: TCPO 

# Antonio Dereil McCaster AKA Demetrius Evans Charged with Dealing Crack Cocaine on February 5, 2013 in Tippecanoe County 

Antonio Dereil McCaster AKA Demetrius Evans, 33, of Lafayette was charged on Tuesday, February 5, 2013 with dealing and possessing crack cocaine. 

Count I: Dealing in Cocaine, within 1,000 feet of apartments in the 1600 block of Center Street, the 1400 block of Main Street, 300 block of South 18th Street, Class A Felony 

Count II: Possession of Cocaine, within 1,000 feet of apartments in the 1600 block of Center Street, the 1400 block of Main Street, 300 block of South 18th Street, Class B Felony 

Count III: Habitual Substance Offender 

Count IV: Habitual Offender 127 

This case was investigated by the Drug Task Force. 

All persons charge are presumed innocent until and unless proven guilty in court 

February 7, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Mom who left girl, 4, home alone given probation 

SOPHIA VORAVONG;  svoravong@jconline.com 

A Lafayette woman will serve three years on probation for leaving her 4-year-old daughter home alone last summer so she could hang out with friends. 

The girl was left with half a cold pizza and Oreo cookies to eat. 

Kasey N. Goodwin, 30, pleaded guilty in December to neglect of a dependent, a Class D felony. She did not have the benefit of a plea agreement with the Tippecanoe Cou nty prosecutor’s office. 

Goodwin was sentenced Thursday in Tippecanoe Superior Court 2. 

On July 12, a neighbor found the 4-year-old girl wandering through the parking lot of Pheasant Run Apartments, off Brady Lane. She wore a winter coat, though it was 89 degrees outside, and had a soiled diaper, according to court documents. 

Goodwin and her daughter lived at Pheasant Run. 

An employee recognized the girl and let Lafayette police into Goodwin's apartment, which officers described as filthy, with food left out and clothes piled on the floor. 

Goodwin, however, initially claimed that a friend was supposed to baby-sit the 4-year-old. Lafayette police contacted the friend, who said that was never arranged. 

Goodwin then allegedly admitted leaving the girl so that she could hang out with friends. 

February 6, 2013: TCPO 

# Two Charged Today with Cocaine and Heroin Offenses 

Jeffrey P. Pellegrino, 32, of Lafayette was charged with the following today in Tippecanoe County. 

Count I: Dealing in Cocaine, Class A Felony 

Count II: Possession of Cocaine, Class C Felony 

Count III: Dealing in Narcotic Drug (Heroin), Class B Felony 

Count IV: Possession of Narcotic Drug (Heroin), Class B Felony 

Count V: Maintaining a Common Nuisance, Class D Felony 128 

Kelly M. Tyson, 23, of West Pont was charged with the following today in Tippecanoe County. 

Count I: Dealing in Cocaine, Class A Felony 

Count II: Possession of Cocaine, Class C Felony 

This case was investigated by the Lafayette Police Department. 

All persons charge are presumed innocent until and unless proven guilty in court. 

February 6, 2013: TCPO 

## MMaann CChhaarrggeedd TTooddaayy wwiitthh FFoouurr HHeerrooiinn FFeelloonniieess

Rayshon Donielle White, 26, was charged today with the following in Tippecanoe County. 

Count I: Dealing in a Narcotic Drug, within 1,000 feet of apartments on Ironwood Court, Class A Felony 

Count II: Possession of Narcotic Drug, within 1,000 feet of Briarwood Apartments, Brampton Apartments, Windemere Apartments, Deerfield Commons Apartments, Class B Felony 

Count III: Dealing in a Narcotic Drug, within 1,000 feet of Briarwood Apartments, Brampton Apartments, Windemere Apartments, Deerfield Commons Apartments, Class A Felony 

Count IV: Possession of Narcotic Drug, within 1,000 feet of Briarwood Apartments, Brampton Apartments, Windemere Apartments, Deerfield Commons Apartments, Class B Felony 

This case was investigated by the Drug Task Force.z 

All persons charge are presumed innocent until and unless proven guilty in court. 

February 6, 2013: TCPO 

## MMaann CChhaarrggeedd TTooddaayy wwiitthh EEiigghhtt HHeerrooiinn FFeelloonniieess

Michael Laverick Neal, 22, was formally charged today with the following heroin related felonies in Tippecanoe County: 

Count I: Dealing in a Narcotic Drug, within 1,000 feet of apartments on Ironwood Court, Class A Felony 

Count II: Possession of Narcotic Drug, within 1,000 feet of apartments on Ironwood Court, Class B Felony 

Count III: Dealing in a Narcotic Drug, within 1,000 feet of Briarwood Apartments, Brampton Apartments, Windemere Apartments, Deerfield Common Apartments, Class A Felony 

Count IV: Possession of Narcotic Drug, within 1,000 feet of Briarwood Apartments, Brampton Apartments, Windemere Apartments, Deerfield Common Apartments, Class B Felony 

Count V: Dealing in a Narcotic Drug, within 1,000 feet of Claystone at the Crossings Apartments, Class A Felony 

Count VI: Possession of Narcotic Drug, within 1,000 feet of Claystone at the Crossings Apartments, Class B Felony 

Count VII: Possession of Narcotic Drug, within 1,000 feet of Claystone at the Crossings Apartments, Class A Felony 129 

Count VII: Possession of Narcotic Drug, within 1,000 feet of Claystone at the Crossings Apartments, Class B Felony 

This case was investigated by the Drug Task Force.z 

All persons charge are presumed innocent until and unless proven guilty in court. 

February 6, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Lafayette man gets 4 years in prison for stealing swords, guns 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - A Lafayette man was sentenced this week to prison time and probation after pleading guilty to two counts of felony burglary. 

Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington said Tuesday that 20-year-old Dustin Butler was sentenced to four years in prison and four years supervised probation. 

Harrington says in April of 2012, firearms, swords and electronics were stolen from two Lafayette homes. 

Officers got information pointing them to Butler and three others as the people behind the burglaries. 

In May of 2012, Harrington says Butler admitted breaking into the two homes. 

He told investigators they buried the guns at his mother's house before digging them up and taking them to a friend's trailer. 

February 6, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Judge gives man 6 years in assault 

# Acquaintance had outed him as sex offender 

Justin L. Mack 

A Lafayette man who pleaded guilty to assaulting an acquaintance after being outed as a sex offender was given a six-year sentence Wednesday. 

Christopher McDaniel Jones, 25, was sentenced in Tippecanoe Superior Court 2 to five years with the Indiana Department of Correction and one year with Tippecanoe County Community Corrections with the recommendation of home detention. 

On Dec. 14, 2012, Jones plead guilty to assault resulting in serious bodily injury and residential entry. 

According to court documents, Jones punched, stomped on and kicked 32-year-old Ryan Moynagh into unconsciousness. 130 

After the attack, Lafayette police found Moynagh lying motionless in a corner of his Union Street apartment. His head was covered in blood, and both of his eyes were severely swollen, court documents allege. 

During his sentencing hearing, Jones showed remorse for his crime and vowed to try harder to control his anger in the future. 

“I hope and pray that you show some leniency,” Jones said to Judge Thomas Busch. “It’s hard to be a convicted felon 

and live in society and take criticism. 

“It was just a life-threatening situation.” 

According to a probable cause affidavit, Jones had been staying with Moynagh. 

Police said Moynagh, Jones and a third man were hanging out and drinking on July 26. Jones got angry when Moynagh reportedly asked the third man if he knew that Jones was a sex offender. 

Jones left the apartment, but when he returned later, Moynagh would not let him inside. Jones then reached through the partially open door and began choking Moynagh. 

Jones’ body weight then broke the d oor chain, allowing him inside. 

Police said Jones turned himself in at the scene and admitted to choking and punching Moynagh, then kicking and stomping on Moynagh’s head after he fell down. The attack lasted 10 to 15 minutes. 

Before delivering his sentence, Busch told Jones that he will need to find a support system to treat his anger and mental health issues in the future. But admitting that he has a problem controlling his emotions is the first step. 

“If you’ve got a short fuse, you’re probably always going to have a short fuse,” Busch said. 

“You need to figure out how to keep it from blowing up.” 

Court records show that Jones was convicted in Missouri in 2006 on two counts of first degree sodomy to a minor. 

He was released from prison in March 2011 and is listed on Tippecanoe County’s Sex and Violent Offender 

Registry, which can be found at http://www.icrimewatch.net/indiana.php. 

February 5, 2013: TCPO 

## AAnnttoonniioo TTuuttssoonn CChhaarrggeedd YYeesstteerrddaayy iinn TTiippppeeccaannooee CCoouunnttyy wwiitthh

## SSiixx DDrruugg FFeelloonniieess ffoorr CCrraacckk CCooccaaiinnee

Antonio Tutson, 28, of Lafayette was charged yesterday with the following: 

Count I: Dealing in Cocaine, within 1,000 feet of school property, YMCA, Tippecanoe County Fairgrounds, Lafayette, Class A Felony 

Count II: Possession of Cocaine, within 1,000 feet of school property, YMCA, Tippecanoe County Fairgrounds, Lafayette, Class B Felony 

Count III: Dealing in Cocaine, within 1,000 feet of Tecumseh Middle School/Jefferson High School, Georgetown Apartments, Shoshone Apartments, Lafayette, Class A Felony 131 

Count IV: Possession of Cocaine, within 1,000 feet of Tecumseh Middle School/Jefferson High School, Georgetown Apartments, Shoshone Apartments, Lafayette, Class B Felony 

Count V: Dealing in Cocaine, within 1,000 feet of Tecumseh Middle School/Jefferson High School, Georgetown Apartments, Shoshone Apartments, Lafayette, Class A Felony 

Count VI: Possession of Cocaine, within 1,000 feet of Tecumseh Middle School/Jefferson High School, Georgetown Apartments, Shoshone Apartments, Lafayette, Class B Felony 

This case was investigated by the Drug Task Force. 

All persons charge are presumed innocent until and unless proven guilty in court. 

February 5, 2013: TCPO 

## TTwwoo MMeenn CChhaarrggeedd wwiitthh MMeetthhaammpphheettaammiinnee RReellaatteedd FFeelloonniieess iinn TTiippppeeccaannooee CCoouunnttyy

Pablo Lewis Chavez, 26, and Kyle Ray Smith II, 28 were both charged with the following four felonies today. 

Count I: Conspiracy to Deal Methamphetamine, within 1,000 feet of St. Lawrence School, Kids Connection child care, Apartments in the 2000 block of Greenbush Street, Lafayette, Class A Felony 

Count II: Conspiracy to Deal Methamphetamine, within 1,000 feet of St. Lawrence School, Kids Connection child care, Apartments in the 2000 block of Greenbush Street, Lafayette, Class A Felony 

Count III: Illegal Drug Lab, within 1,000 feet of St. Lawrence School, Kids Connection child care, Apartments in the 2000 block of Greenbush Street, Lafayette, Class C Felony 

Count IV: Possession of Methamphetamine, within 1,000 feet of St. Lawrence School, Kids Connection child care, Apartments in the 2000 block of Greenbush Street, Lafayette, Class B Felony 

In addition, Pablo Lewis Chavez was charged with: 

Count V: Habitual Substance Offender 

This case was investigated by the Lafayette Police Department and West Lafayette Police Department. 

All persons charge are presumed innocent until and unless proven guilty in court. 

February 1, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Former Purdue football player sentenced for synthetic drugs, probation violations 132 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - Former Purdue football player DeWayne Beckford was sentenced Thursday to almost 5 years of suspended jail time for possessing a synthetic drug and probation violations. The punishment comes from cases in separate courts. 

Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington said in Superior Court 4, Beckford received 2 years of suspended jail time, 2 years with a community correction service, and 10 days of community service for possession of drug paraphernalia with a prior conviction and possession of a synthetic drug. 

In Superior Court 6, Harrington said Beckford was sentenced to 6 months of community corrections and an extra year of supervised probation after violating probation multiple times. 

Beckford was a starting linebacker for the Purdue football team until former head coach Danny Hope dismissed him from the team last August. 

January 31, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Ex-Purdue football player Beckford sentenced for bath salts, 

# paraphernalia and 3 probation violations 

SOPHIA VORAVONG;  svoravong@jconline.com 

Booted Purdue University football player Dwayne A. Beckford was sentenced Thursday to a combination of community corrections and supervised probation for possessing drug paraphernalia and bath salts, and for violating probation in three prior, separate court cases. 

Beckford, 21, of Irvington, N.J., pleaded guilty to the accusations in December in Tippecanoe Superior Courts 4 and 6. 

On Thursday, he received: 

• Two years and 357 days on “Shadow Tracker” electronic monitoring for possession of paraphernalia, a Class D 

felony because of a prior conviction for the same offense, and possession of a synthetic drug in Superior Court 4. Beckford was also ordered to complete 80 hours of community service over the next six months. 

• Ninety days on house arrest for entering Brother’s Bar & Grill in West Lafayette while on probation for a 2011 

possession of drug paraphernalia conviction, also in Superior Court 4. 

• For violating probation in two convictions in Superior Court 6 — one for leaving the scene of an accident, the other for operating a vehicle while intoxicated — Beckford was ordered to 180 days on community corrections and another year on probation. The judge recommended house arrest or day reporting. 

The violations were for going to Brother’s Bar and having a breath -alcohol content at or above Indiana’s legal limit 

of 0.08 percent, as recorded on an ignition interlock that was installed on Beckford’s vehicle for the OWI. Those 180 days will run consecutive to Beckford’s sentences in Superior Court 4. 

The paraphernalia and bath salts charges stem from an Aug. 20 call to Beckford's apartment at 108 S. River Road for a heated argument between Beckford and a female acquaintance. 

Because Beckford was on house arrest for the drunken driving conviction, officers did not need his consent to search the apartment. 133 

In Beckford’s bedroom, officers found a broken glass smoking pipe with burnt residue, two pieces of aluminum foil with burnt residue on a dresser and a metal container with a substance that presumptively tested positive for bath salts, according to court documents. 

It was Beckford’s fourth arrest in 14 months — prompting former Purdue football coach Danny Hope to drop him from the team. 

January 30, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Man sentenced for dealing cocaine 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - A Lafayette man was sentenced to two decades in prison for dealing cocaine. 

Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington said Jerome Milian, 34, was sentenced to 20 years in the Department of Corrections, six years community corrections and seven years suspended after pleading guilty to dealing cocaine and being a habitual substance offender. 

As News 18 reported in July 2012, investigators said Milian sold cocaine to a police officer six times between May 10 and July 16, 2012, in the area of 13th and Union streets in Lafayette. 

January 30, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Englert sentenced to 80 years in prison for Jeremy Gibson murder 

SOPHIA VORAVONG;  svoravong@jconline.com 

When pictures of her brother’s acid -burned, severely beaten, unrecognizable body appeared on the projection screen last November in Tippecanoe Superior Court 1, Jennifer Sargent glanced over at the defendant, Darren J. Englert, for his reaction. 

But he had none, Sargent tearfully recalled Tuesday during Englert’s sentencing hearing for charges that included 

murder, conspiracy to commit criminal confinement and battery by means of a deadly weapon in the July 6, 2011, death of 26-year-old Jeremy K. Gibson. 

“I watched you. Over and over, I watched you,” Sargent said, locking her eyes on Englert as he sat stone -faced. “I 

kept waiting for a reaction, a sign of remorse. 

“It didn’t happen.” 

On Tuesday afternoon, following an emotion-filled hearing that lasted nearly three hours, Superior Court 1 Judge Randy Williams sentenced Englert, 21, of Lafayette, to 80 years in prison. 134 

The judge called the crime “the worst of the worst.” 

“You participated in the sadistic, systematic torture and murder of Jeremy Gibson,” Williams said, “followed by the 

mutilation of his body with acid in a n attempt to destroy evidence.” 

With Indiana’s two -for-one good time credit for prisoners, plus 1,142 days credit for good behavior and time spent since July 7, 2011, in Tippecanoe County Jail, Englert could be released from the Department of Correction in 37 years. 

Gibson’s stepfather, James Warbritton, said afterward that no sentence could truly fit the brutality. 

“Ideally, we don’t want him released back into society,” Warbritton said. “But we understand that the judge gave what he could under Indiana law, and we respect that. … It’s over now, until he appeals. 

“We’ll have to go, knowing what he did to Jeremy and what happened to all of us through this.” 

Warbritton and his wife, Mary Warbritton, who is Gibson’s mother, thanked Lafayette detectives and prosecutors for their work in “bringing justice to Jeremy.” 

Gibson had two young boys, Dakota and Riley, who are both 3 years old. Sargent, his older sister, has custody of and is in the process of adopting them. 

Englert is planning to appeal. 

He will receive a court-appointed attorney on Friday, when his hired attorneys, Earl McCoy and Chad Montgomery, meet with the judge, Prosecutor Pat Harrington and Deputy Prosecutor Emily Orsinger to go over the $12,000 restitution request from Gibson ’s family for funeral expenses. 

Englert and two friends, 21-year-old Carolann R. Clear, of Lafayette, and 26-year-old Antonio O.J. Williams, of 

West Lafayette, were all equally charged with killing Gibson. The trio had been staying at Gibson’s apartment on 

North Eighth Street. Clear, who recently moved to Lafayette from Florida with her mot her, was Gibson’s girlfriend. 

Events that led to Gibson’s death began with an argument on July 5, 2011, or early July 6, 2011, between him and 

Antonio Williams. It quickly escalated into a physical fight — with the trio accused of hog-tying Gibson, forcing him into the shower and forcing him into a vehicle t hat belonged to Clear’s mother. 

From there, they drove around Tippecanoe County, picked up a shovel, pickax and hatchet from Antonio Williams’ 

home and eventually stopped at a cornfield near U.S. 231 North and County Road 500 North, near Montmorenci, 

where Gibson’s body was found in a shallow grave covered with mul ch, soil and cornstalks. 

They later returned and poured acid onto Gibson’s bo dy, leaving him unrecognizable. 

Gibson suffered numerous blows to the head, but the fatal injury was a laceration to his spine that also severed two arteries. 

During Tuesday’s sentencing hearing, a licensed clinical psychologist, Dr. Jeffrey Vanderwater -Piercy of Lafayette, 

along with Englert’s grandmother and new wife — they married last October, while Englert was awaiting trial —

testified that Englert is easily influenced and a follower. 

His influencer, they said, was Antonio Williams. 

The grandmother described a time when Englert brought Antonio Williams with him to mow her lawn, and Antonio 

Williams “yanked the mower” away beca use Englert was doing it wrong. 135 

“I could tell he was afraid of him,” Englert’s grandmother, Nina Lockard, said, explaining that her grandson had 

plans to join the Army or National Guard before befriending Antonio Williams sometime after March 31, 2011, when he was released from prison. 

Following Englert’s arrest, she visited him at Tippecanoe County Jail and relayed their conversation in court Tuesday. 

“I asked him, ‘Why didn’t you run? Why didn’ t you just run away as fast as you could?’ ” Lockard said. 

“He replied, ‘If I had done that, I would have been in the hole with Jeremy.’ ” 

Vanderwater-Piercy, the psychologist, said he diagnosed Englert with dependent personality disorder after evaluating Englert, interviewing his family and reviewing police reports and witness statements. 

Englert relied on Antonio Williams to make his decisions and would not challenge him, Vanderwater-Piercy testified, adding that Englert shirked responsibilities of adulthood. 

Throughout his trial, Englert’s attorneys asserted that Williams, who has a violent criminal history and convictions that 

included robbery, was th e instigator in Gibson’s death. 

That was reiterated Tuesday by Vanderwater-Piercy, who described the crim e as “sadistic” and meant to assert 

physical and emotional harm to Gibson. He believed the killing empowered Englert and aroused all three suspects 

— so much that Englert and Clear engaged in sexual acts after placing Gibson’s beaten body in the fetal posi tion in a shallow grave. 

“Darren’s role in these sadistic actions, at times, was that of an active participant,” Vanderwater -Piercy said, citing statements that Antonio Williams and Clear gave detectives. 

Englert himself denied physically beating Gibson, instead pleading guilty to murder last March under Indiana’s 

accomplice liability. 

He was then found guilty in November of conspiracy to commit murder, a Class A felony; conspiracy to commit criminal confinement, a Class C felony; criminal confinement, a Class D felony; conspiracy to commit battery with a deadly weapon, a Class C felony; misdemeanor battery; and misdemeanor possession of marijuana following a weeklong jury trial. 

On Tuesday afternoon, he sobbed while apologizing to Gibson’s family and his ow n family, which includes an 11-month-old daughter. 

He claims to have found God while incarcerated, and attorneys submitted numerous certificates he received at Tippecanoe County Jail for completing Bible study and other religious programs. 

“I pray they will forgive me,” Englert said of Gibson’s family. “I’m sorry I don’t seem remorseful. I’m truly sorry. 

“God has made me a new person. When I look back at myself, I’m ashamed.” 

Clear was sentenced Jan. 18 to 44 years in prison after pleading guilty to conspiracy to commit murder and fraud. 

Antonio Williams, who provided Lafayette police with significant information on Gibson’s death, died in January 

from lung complications, roughly 11 weeks after overdosing on methadone while serving time in prison for an unrelated robbery conviction. 136 

January 29, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Darren Englert sentenced for 2011 murder of Lafayette man 

# Gets 80 years in D.O.C 

.

KRISTA HENERY | Reporter 

LYDIA WILLIAMS | New Media Executive Producer 

TIPPECANOE COUNTY, Ind. (WLFI) - One of the men convicted of murdering a Lafayette man was sentenced to 80 years in prison Tuesday for his role in the homicide. 

In November of 2012, 21-year-old Darren Englert was found guilty on six of nine charges filed against him in the July 2011 homicide of 26-year-old Jeremy Gibson. 

Gibson’s body was found buried in a field on County Road 500 North in July of 2011. Three people were 

identified as suspects (25-year-old Antonio Williams, 20-year-old Carolann Clear and Englert) and were brought in and charged with his murder. 

You can learn about the investigation and the details from the night of the murder in our original story. 

As for the other two suspects? In February of 2012, Gibson’s girlfriend, Clear, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to 

commit murder and fraud. On Jan. 18 she was sentenced to 44 years in prison for her involvement in Gibson’s 

death. 

Williams was being held in the Miami Correctional Facility when he made an unsuccessful suicide attempt in late October of 2011. According to Deputy Coroner John Boyer, Williams overdosed on methadone, which led to a 

series of complications that resulted in Williams’ death on Jan. 16, 2012. 

January 26, 2013: TCPO 

# Corey Joseph Kirks Charged with Five Felonies for Multiple Crimes 

# on January 26, 2013 

Corey Joseph Kirts, 20, of Lafayette was charged today with five felonies that resulted from the burglary, theft, police chase and accident that occurred on Saturday, January 26, 2013. 

Count I: Burglary, Class B Felony 137 

Count II: Residential Entry, Class B Felony 

Count III: Theft, Class D Felony 

Count IV: Resisting Law Enforcement, Class D Felony 

Count V: Resisting Law Enforcement, Class D Felony 

Count VI: Criminal Recklessness with a Vehicle, Class A Misdemeanor 

This case was investigated by the Lafayette Police Department. 

All persons charge are presumed innocent until and unless proven guilty in court 

January 25, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Man sentenced for dealing methamphetamine 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - A Frankfort man was sentenced to two decades in prison for dealing methamphetamine. 

Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington said Pedro Villarreal, 34, was sentenced to 20 years in prison and five years suspended after he pleaded guilty to dealing meth and conspiracy to commit dealing meth. 

In May of 2012, News 18 reported a police officer checking the area around the Knights Inn Motel in Lafayette noticed a door opening and closing but no one leaving the motel room. Inside, investigators eventually found an active meth lab. 

January 23, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Woman caught on camera stealing pills 138 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - A Lafayette woman was sentenced to time in community corrections and probation after she pleaded guilty to burglary. 

Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington says in May of 2012, police were called to a reported burglary at an apartment on Ferry Street in Lafayette. 

The resident told police after he had prescription medication stolen from him and that he had set up a web cam to catch whomever did it. 

Harrington says the video shows 33-year-old Tarrah York, a cleaning person at the apartment complex, near the place he kept the medication. 

The building manager told police York was only supposed to clean when a tenant had moved out, and she should not have had a key to that apartment. 

Harrington says York later admitted to police she took the master key and took the pills from a bottle in the kitchen. 

January 18, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Girlfriend gets 44 years in prison for Gibson murder 

SOPHIA VORAVONG;  svoravong@jconline.com 

A Lafayette woman was sentenced this morning to 44 years in prison for her involvement in the confinement and brutal beating death of her boyfriend, 26-year-old Jeremy K. Gibson, 19 months ago. 

Carolann A. Clear, 21, had pleaded guilty in February 2012 to conspiracy to commit murder — a deal with the 

Tippecanoe County prosecutor’s office that required her testify against co -defendant Darren J. Englert during his trial last November. 

In July 2011, Englert and his co-defendants, Clear and 25-year-old Antonio O.J. Williams of West Lafayette, were 

all staying in Gibson’s apartment. 

Events that led to Gibson’s death began with an argument on July 5, 2011, or early July 6, 2011, between him and 

Antonio Williams. It quickly escalated into a physical fight — with the trio accused of hog-tying Gibson, forcing him 

into the shower and then forcing him into a vehicle that belonged to Clear’s mother. 

From there, they drove around Tippecanoe County, picked up a shovel, pickax and hatchet from Anto nio Williams’ 

home and eventually stopped at a cornfield near U.S. 231 North and County Road 500 North, near Montmorenci, 

where Gibson’s body was found in a shallow grave covered with mulch, soil and cornstalks. 139 

Gibson suffered numerous blows to the head, but the fatal injury was a laceration to his spine that also severed two arteries. 

During today’s sentencing hearing, Clear read a letter to Judge Randy Williams that indicated how she was scared 

and intimidated by her co-defendants. 

Gibson’s family and Prosecutor Pat Harrington, however, alleged that Clear was the “puppetmaster” and a 

manipulator who uses men to get what she wants. 

January 18, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Man dealt cocaine to undercover officer multiple times 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - A Lafayette man received 30 years in prison after pleading guilty to dealing cocaine this week. 

Prosecutors say Brian White sold cocaine to an undercover police officer on several occasions in November and December of 2011. 

They say police began an investigation after a report surfaced of a man known as "Cash" selling cocaine and marijuana. 

The undercover officer used a body wire and recorded during the transactions. 

January 18, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Former Broncho Dad given 10-year sentence for molesting 

SOPHIA VORAVONG;  svoravong@jconline.com 

Michael S. McShurley, a former Lafayette School Corp. board candidate who spearheaded efforts to create the Broncho Dads mentoring program at Jefferson High School, was sentenced Friday to 10 years in prison for inappropriately touching a 12-year-old girl in his care. 

The victim said McShurley began touching her — over and under her shirt, pants and underwear — when she was 8 or 9 years old. She alleges that it continued unt il June 12, 2011, the day she told a friend’s mother. 

He was arrested Sept. 1, 2011. 

In December, following a three-day trial in Tippecanoe Circuit Court, jurors found McShurley guilty of three counts of child molesting, but they acquitted him of a fourth molestation allegation involving the girl, now 13 years old. 

All of the charges were Class C felonies. 140 

During the trial, McShurley never denied touching the girl — even testifying that he once went into the bathroom while she showered and hugged her naked body from behind. But it was meant only as affection and not for sexual gratification, he claimed. 

McShurley’s attorney, Carl Sandy, argued that the girl suffered from mental illness and made false accusations 

against McShurley and other adults before. 

The girl’s mother testified Friday that McShurley’s actions were “reprehensible” and infli cted pain on her entire family. 

She described confronting McShurley in August 2011 about the allegations, during which he admitted to kissing an older sibling of the victim and sending inappropriate text messages about her breasts. That girl was of legal age. 

“You never once denied touching (the victim), just that you didn’t do it for sexual gratification,” the girl’s mother said. “You’re still entrenched in the lies you told yourself.” 

The Journal & Courier typically does not identify the victims of sexual-based crimes or their family members. 

Other testimony Friday focused on how sending McShurley to prison would negatively impact his autistic son, who is 21 years old an d has the mental capacity of a child. McShurley’s father, Floyd McShurley, and his wife have helped watch the son for the past 18 months, but they will not able to for much longer, he said. The son’s biological mother 

lives near Atlanta and travels often for her job — making it difficult for her to watch him. 

“I’m not here to argue the facts of the case. A jury already decided that,” Floyd McShurley said. “I’m here because the future of a child is at stake.” 

Deputy Prosecutor Kevin McDaniel agreed with that statement, but he said the child in question should be the victim, 

not McShurley’s son. 

McShurley also received support from a local dignitary: state Rep. Sheila Klinker, D-Lafayette. Klinker submitted a letter to the court — on her official Indiana House of Representatives letterhead, according to McDaniel —

detailing McShurley’s work with schools and the challenges he face s caring for an autistic child. 

Klinker told the Journal & Courier on Friday that she is good friends with McShurley’s parents and kno ws him through church. 

“The parents have the child now, but they can no longer care for him. Maybe if Michael was being monitored … wearing ankle bracelet, he could still help take care of his son,” Klinker said, explaining the contents of her letter, 

which were filed with a confidential pre-sentence investigation report. 

“I was not asked to testify, and I would not have done that. The case … is a very sad state of affairs.” 

McShurley will serve two years on probation after his arrest and must register as a sex offender. 

“You should think long and hard about what you’ve done to put (your son) in this situation,” Judge Pro Tem Gregg Theobald said before handing down McShurley’s sentence. 

January 18, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Woman gets 44 years behind bars for involvement in boyfriend's murder 

Holly Campbell 141 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - Twenty-one-year-old Carolann Clear was sentenced to 44 years behind bars and five years' probation for her involvement in the murder of her boyfriend, 26-year-old Jeremy Gibson, in July of 2011. 

Last February Clear pleaded guilty to a pair of felony charges: conspiracy to commit murder and fraud. Under a plea agreement Clear faced between 25 to 45 years in prison. 

Investigators say she was one of three people who helped kill Gibson. 

During sentencing Gibson's family asked the judge that Clear be sentenced to the maximum amount of time behind bars. Gibson's sister spoke about his two young sons she now cares for. 

Meanwhile, the defense asked the judge for a sentencing of 30 years or less. Clear's father told the court how Clear's mother led her down a troubled path. He also said Clear is a follower. 

He said that's why she took part and helped Darren Englert and Antonio Williams kill Gibson. 

Prosecutor Pat Harrington said the judge took all of those factors into account before deciding on the 44-year sentence. 

"Obviously the crime was very brutal," Harrington said. "It went on for a period of hours. There was plenty of opportunities for this defendant to intercede. There was a position of trust between the two of them as you heard from the family, the victim was in love with her and thought that she was going to be someone that he was going to spend the rest of his life with and instead she basically put him in the situation and assisted in his murder." 

Darren Englert was convicted for his role in the murder last November. He is due to be sentenced Jan. 29. 

Antonio Williams died in prison last year after being charged with murder. 

January 18, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Man who worked with kids sentenced for child molestation 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - Convicted child molester Michael McShurley was sentenced to 10 years in prison and two years probation when he went to court Friday. He must also register as a sex offender. 

McShurley was found guilty of three counts of child molesting last month. 

He appeared on News 18 in 2010 asking for help sending Lafayette Jeff seniors with special needs to prom, as 

well as being a member of the volunteer group “Broncho Dads.” 

The investigation began after a 12-year-old girl came forward in 2011 saying McShurley had fondled her on multiple occasions over the previous 2 years. 

Many people submitted letters to the judge in support of McShurley and against him. 142 

One letter supporting McShurley was from State Representative Sheila Klinker. The judge would not allow us to view the letter and Klinker declined an on-camera interview. However, Klinker says she does not support McShurley's actions. 

She says she wrote the letter on behalf of McShurley's parents, who are caring for his autistic son and cannot care for him any longer. 

In the letter, Klinker says she asked for the possibility of house arrest so McShurley would be able to care for his son himself. She says she only knew McShurley from church and his work in the community. 

McShurley faced up to 24 years in prison. 

January 18, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Man faces 22 years for mixed drug charges 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - A mixed verdict was delivered this week in the trial of a Lafayette man on felony drug charges. 

31-year-old Jeremy Rigney was found guilty of Narcotic Possession, being a Habitual Traffic Violator and Habitual Substance Abuser and Possession of Paraphernalia. 

But he was found not guilty of Narcotic Dealing and possessing a syringe. 

Rigney was stopped by police on State Road 26 East for having an expired license plate. 

Police say he was a habitual traffic violator at the time. 

Police say they found heroin on Rigney and in the car. 

He faces up to 22 years in prison when he's sentenced next month. 

January 17, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# 2 sent to prison for cocaine, meth offenses in Lafayette 

SOPHIA VORAVONG;  svoravong@jconline.com 

30 years for cocaine dealing 

A Lafayette man was sentenced Thursday to 30 years in prison for selling cocaine to an undercover police officers. 143 

Brian White, 28, pleaded guilty last September in Tippecanoe Superior Court 2 to dealing cocaine, a Class A felony. 

Multiple occasions in November and December 2011, according to court documents. 

White had claimed that dealing was out of character for him, but the court noted that the multiple purchases by detectives contradicted that. 

6 years for cooking meth 

A woman was sentenced Thursday to six years in prison and six years on probation for cooking methamphetamine at a Lafayette house where she had been staying last July. 

Patricia Ziegler, 20, had been in Lafayette for only two months at the time of her arrest, according to Prosecutor Pat Harrington. 

Ziegler pleaded guilty to conspiracy to manufacture meth, a Class B felony, Tippecanoe Superior Court 2. 

Her arrest came after Lafayette police received a complaint about a suspicious person with a flashlight in the 

backyard of a home at 3006 block of Elk St., on the city’s north end. It was 2 a.m. 

The responding officer found a bottle with a tube protruding from it, which is consistent with a one-pot style meth lab. A search of the home also turned up chemicals and other ingredients commonly used to cook the drug. 

The tenants told police that they recently met Ziegler and another person and allowed them to stay because they had nowhere to go. 

January 15, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# LPD officer is cleared in suspect's shooting 

SOPHIA VORAVONG;  svoravong@jconline.com 

Donna Gregorash, a three-year veteran of the Lafayette Police Department, won’t face criminal charges or internal 

discipline for firing at a shooting suspect who drove a pickup truck toward responding officers Thursday night on the city ’s east side. 

Two men died in the string of incidents, which ended with a brief chase through the Villas at Cascada neighborhood and the suspect crashing into a home at 114 Kettle Circle. 

In a statement released Tuesday afternoon, Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington said his officer has completed its review of the case and found that Gregorash did not commit any crime in discharging her duty weapon. 

“Officer Gregorash acted courageously and lawfully in defense of herself, other officers and the public,” 

Harrington said. 

His review was independent from an internal Lafayette shooting review board that met from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. Tuesday to determine if Gregorash, 25, followed department policy. 144 

The six-member board, headed by Deputy Chief Dave Payne, fo und that Gregorash’s use of force was justified 

and within department policy. 

Chief Pat Flannelly agreed with the board’s recommendation, according to Payne. 

A news conference is scheduled for this afternoon, during which more details will be released. 

Gregorash, a patrol officer, was one of several officers who responded to reports of a shooting and a man, since identified as Joel Ray Hershman, 63, of Brook, being held against his will in a pickup truck that had been parked at IHOP. 

The suspect was identified as 46-year-old Steven Keith Moseley, a homeless man staying in Lafayette. 

Investigators believe Moseley shot Hershman while they were parked at IHOP. 

Tippecanoe County Coroner Donna Avolt previously said Hershman died from gunshot wounds to both his legs. His death was ruled a homicide. 

She declined to comment on how Moseley died, pending toxicology results. 

January 12, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Admission of murder includes no appeal; victim was grandfather 

SOPHIA VORAVONG;  svoravong@jconline.com 

An Indianapolis man faces 61 to 115 years in prison after admitting that he killed his 84-year-old grandfather, William Hartlep of Lafayette, on Oct. 12, 2011, by strangling his neck with an extension cord and slashing his throat with a knife. 

The grandson, 39-year-old Richard F. Fouts, pleaded guilty Friday morning in Tippecanoe Circuit Court to murder in 

Hartlep’s death and to burglary and being a habitual offender in an unrelated break -in Oct. 11, 2011, at a home on Alabama Street. 

Fouts is scheduled to be sentenced March 3 by Judge Don Daniel. 

Under a plea agreement with the Tippecanoe County prosecutor’s office, Fouts cannot appeal his sentence, and 

additional charges of felony murder, robbery while armed with a deadly weapon and theft could be dropped. 

Investigators allege that Fouts went to his grandfather’s home at 2213 Meadow Drive, off South 18th Street near 

Jefferson High School, and woke him up to ask for money. Hartlep, however, refused and asked Fouts to leave. 

A family friend found Hartlep’s home ransacked later that day. 

The elderly man, a World War II veteran, was a well-known resident of his Edgelea neighborhood, often spotted outside in his motorized scooter, where he waved at passers-by. 

Hartlep’s death had remained unsolved until Fout’s arrest in February 2012. Detectives got their break after collecting DNA samples from Hartlep’s family members to be used for reference and elimination against the 

evidence. 145 

Fouts admitted Friday to initially tying up his grandfather using duct tape. When asked by his attorney, Tom 

O’Brien, how Hartlep was killed, Fouts paused for several seconds before quietly replying, “I strangled him and cut his throat.” 

Hartlep was found lying in a pool of blood on his kitchen floor. 

Investigators suspect that Fouts ransacked the home to make it appear like a robbery. According to court documents, drawers had been removed, furniture had been moved and numerous items were strewn throughout. A safe in a closet also had been opened. 

Fouts, however, did admit to taking coins that he thought were dollar coins. But they turned out to be commemorative coins from TRW, a Lafayette factory where Hartlep worked for many years. 

The habitual offender sentencing enhancement is due to F outs’ extensive criminal history, which dates to 1991 and 

includes convictions for theft, burglary and forgery in Tippecanoe and Warren counties and South Carolina. 

January 11, 2013: Indianapolis Star 

# Indianapolis man admits killing 84-year-old grandfather 

SOPHIA VORAVONG;  svoravong@jconline.com 

An Indianapolis man faces 61 to 115 years in prison after admitting that he killed his 84-year-old grandfather, William Hartlep of Lafayette, on Oct. 12, 2011, by strangling his neck with an extension cord and slashing his throat with a knife. 

The grandson, 39-year-old Richard F. Fouts, pleaded guilty Friday morning in Tippecanoe Circuit Court to murder in 

Hartlep’s death and to burglary and being a habitual offender in an unrelated break-in Oct. 11, 2011, at a home on Alabama Street. 

Fouts is scheduled to be sentenced March 3 by Judge Don Daniel. 

Under a plea agreement with the Tippecanoe County prosecutor’s office, Fouts cannot appeal his sentence and 

additional charges of felony murder, robbery while armed with a deadly weapon and theft could be dropped. 

Investigators allege that Fouts went to his grandfather’s home at 2213 Meadow Drive, off South 18th Street near 

Jefferson High School, and woke him up to ask for money. Hartlep, however, refused and asked Fouts to leave. 

A family friend found Hartlep’s home ransacked later that day. 

The elderly man and World War II veteran was a well-known resident of his Edgelea neighborhood, often spotted outside in his motorized scooter, where he waved at passers-by. 

Hartlep’s death had remained unsolved until Fout’s arrest in February 2012. Detectives got their break after collecting DNA samples from Hartlep’s family members to use be used for reference and elimination against the 

evidence. 

Fouts admitted Friday to initially tying up his grandfather using duct tape. When asked by his attorney, Tom 

O’Brien, how Hartlep was killed, Fouts paused for several seconds before quietly replying, “I strangled him and cut his throat.” 146 

Hartlep was found lying in a pool of blood on his kitchen floor. 

Investigators suspect that Fouts ransacked the home to make it appear like a robbery. According to court documents, drawers had been removed, furniture had been moved and numerous items were strewn throughout. A safe in a closet also had been opened. 

Fouts, however, did admit to taking coins that he thought were dollar coins. But they turned out to be commemorative coins from TRW, a Lafayette factory where Hartlep worked for many years. 

The habitual off ender sentencing enhancement is due to Fouts’ extensive criminal history, which dates to 1991 and 

includes convictions for theft, burglary and forgery in Tippecanoe County, Warren County and South Carolina. 

January 9, 2013: TCPO 

Casey Lee Kimbrell, 17, of Lafayette was charged today as an adult for Dealing in and Possession of a Schedule IV Controlled Substance (Class C and Class D felonies). Kimbrell was in possession within 1,000 feet of McCutcheon High School in Tippecanoe County. 

January 4, 2013: Lafayette Journal and Courier 

# Homicide suspect pleads to lesser charges in Rogers killing 

# If judge agrees, murder charge could be dropped; a Feb. 15 sentencing date set 

SOPHIA VORAVONG;  svoravong@jconline.com 

This time around, Jeremiah Thompson has opted to not take his chances before a second jury on accusations that he was involved in the April 8, 2010, shooting death of 21-year-old Kory D. Rogers. 

Thompson, 28, of Reelsville, had been slated to stand trial beginning Tuesday in Tippecanoe Superior Court 1 on charges that included felony murder, conspiracy to commit robbery, conspiracy to commit burglary and attempted theft. 

It would have been Thompson’s second trial. His first, held over seven days in August, ended because jurors could not reach unanimous verdicts. 

On Thursday morning, Thompson pleaded guilty to conspiracy to commit robbery and conspiracy to commit burglary, which were both Class A felonies, according to Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington. 147 

Under a plea agreement, the additional charges — that includes the lead count, felony murder, along with lesser offenses such as attempted theft — could be dropped when Thompson is scheduled for sentencing Feb. 15. 

And if Judge Randy Williams accepts the plea, Thompson will face only 20 to 35 years in prison. Murder alone is punishable by 45 to 65 years in prison. 

Meanwhile, Thompson’s co -defendant, 32-year-old Edward C. Zaragoza of Moorsville, is serving a 120-year prison sentence after a jury convicted him last summer of felony murder, murder, being a serious violent felon in possession of a handgun and seven other charges. 

Rogers was fatally shot in chest in the basement apartment of his sister’s house at 2200 Ottawa Drive, near 

Jefferson High School on Lafayette’s south end. 

Prosecutors alleged that Thompson and Zaragoza were after a large sum of cash and marijuana that Rogers, a suspected drug dealer, had stolen from his supplier in mid-March of 2010, a few weeks before his death. 

Neither suspect knew Rogers, but investigators and prosecutors relied heavily on cellphone technology and statements from their acquaintances to piece together the case, according to evidence and testimony presented during their respective trials. 

Zaragoza, who is the husba nd of Thompson’s cousin, repeatedly denied these claims. 

Thompson’s guilty plea Thursday jibed with what investigators had been saying all along. He admitted to hatching a 

plan with Zaragoza, which involved using force to rob Rogers of cash and marijuana, Harrington said. 

No one could remember seeing Zaragoza or Thompson in Tippecanoe County on April 7 or April 8, 2010. But investigators caught a break after finding a receipt for the Economy Inn on those dates. 

Though an Economy Inn employee could not identify him, Zaragoza signed in using his real name. The employee, however, could only remember there being two men and did not remember Thompson. 

January 4, 2013: TCPO 

John “Jake” Venters was sentenced today to 19 years for his role in the vehicle accident th at killed Brandon Stansberry. 

The Court sentenced the Defendant to 8 years on Count XIII: Reckless Homicide, Class C Felony (FC); enhanced by 11 years on Count XIV: Habitual Offender. The Defendant will have 18 years executed at DOC and 1 year suspended (supervised probation). 

January 4, 2013: WLFI TV 

# Guilty plea in connection with Rogers murder 

Dan Klein 

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) - A Putnam County man pleaded guilty to his role in a 2010 Lafayette murder case. 

Tippecanoe County Prosecutor Pat Harrington said Jeremiah Thompson, 30, of Reelsville, pleaded guilty to conspiracy to commit robbery and conspiracy to commit burglary charges Thursday. In exchange, seven other charges including murder will be dropped in connection with the April 2010 shooting of 21-year-old Kory Rogers on the 2200 block of Ottawa Drive. 148 

In August 2012, Edward Zaragoza was sentenced to 120 years in prison for his role in the murder. 

That same month, Thompson went to trial. But it ended in a hung jury. 

With the plea deal, Thompson faces 20 to 35 years in prison and avoids a new trial that was set to begin next week. A sentencing hearing is set for Feb. 15 at 1:30 p.m.
