Title: Case studies on agile regulatory governance to harness innovation (EN)

URL Source: https://www.oecd.org/content/dam/oecd/en/publications/reports/2022/08/case-studies-on-agile-regulatory-governance-to-harness-innovation_215b5fc5/0fa5e0e6-en.pdf

Published Time: Wed, 14 May 2025 04:15:18 GMT

Markdown Content:
# OECD Regulatory Policy Working Papers No. 18 

# Case studies on agile regulatory governance to harness innovation: Civilian drones and bio-solutions 

# Guillermo Hernández, Miguel Amaral 

> https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/0fa5e0e6-en

 1

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

# OECD REGULATORY POLICY WORKING PAPERS 

# Case studies on agile regulatory governance 

# to harness innovation 

# Civilian drones and bio -solutions 

PUBE 2   

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNANCE TO HARNES S INNOVATION © OECD 2022

## OECD REGULATORY POLICY WORKING PAPERS 

This series gathers together OECD working papers on the tools, governance and institutions of better 

regulation and their impact on policy outcomes. It includes both technical and analytical material, prepared 

by staff and experts in the field. Together, the papers provide valuable c ontext and background for OECD 

publications on regulatory policy and governance. 

The statistical data for Israel are supplied by and under the responsibility of the relevant Israeli authorities. 

The use of such data by the OECD is without prejudice to the status of the Golan Heights, East Jerusalem 

and Israeli settlements in the West Bank under the terms of international law. 

Working Papers describe preliminary results or research in progress by the authors and are published to 

stimulate discussion on a broad range of issues on which the OECD works. Comments on Working Papers 

are welcomed, and may be sent to either  gov.contact@oecd.org  or the Public Governance Directorate ,

OECD, 2 rue André -Pascal, 75775 Paris Cedex 16, France. 

Authorised for publication by Elsa Pilichowski , Director, Public Governance Directorate. 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

OECD Regulatory Policy Working Papers are published on  www.oecd -ilibrary.org/governance/oecd -

re gulatory -policy -working -papers_24140996 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Applications for permission to reproduce or translate all or part of this material should be made to: OECD 

Publishing,  PACRights&Risks@oecd.org  or by fax 33 1 45 24 99 30.  3

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

## Case studies on Agile Regulatory Governance to Harness Innovation :

## Civilian Drones and Bio -solutions 

Guillermo Hernández*, Miguel Amaral* 

## Abstract 

This paper aims to en hance the evidence base underlying the implementation of the OECD 

Recommendation for Agile Regulatory Governance to Harness Innovation by means of two case studies 

focusing, respectively, on civilian drones and bio -solutions . Each of the case studies focus es on the key 

transformative impacts of the innovations at hand as well as the associated regulatory challenges and 

responses. In addition, they provide a number of relevant concrete examples. 

## Acknowledgements 

This paper was prepared by the Regulatory Po licy Division, headed by Nick Malyshev, under the direction 

of Elsa Pilichowski, Director of the Public Governance Directorate. It has benefited from the support and 

co -operation of the Danish Business Authority, as well as from valuable inputs from David Winickoff, 

Rex Deighton -Smith and Elisabeth Windisch (all from the OECD), Angela Lynch and Rory Hedman (both 

from the UK Civil Aviation Authority ). It was prepared for publication by the OECD Secretariat. 

JEL Classification : D7, H11, K00, K2, L5, O1, O33, O38 

Key words: Regulatory policy, Better Regulation, regulatory governance, agile regulation, innovation  

> *OECD, France

4 

CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNANCE TO HARNES S INNOVATION © OECD 2022 

# Table of contents 

# Introduction 5

# 1 Case study 1: Drones 6

Introduction 6

Background and context 6

Key transformative impacts 9

Regulatory challenges 13 

Regula tory responses 16 

Conclusion 24 

Notes 25 

References 26 

# 2 Case study 2: Bio -solutions 28 

Introduction 28 

Background and context 28 

Key transformative impacts 30 

Re gulatory challenges 33 

Regulatory responses 35 

Conclusions 39 

Notes 41 

References 42 

## FIGURES 

Figure 1.1. Passenger drone market, in USD million and annual growth 7

Figure 1.2. Sector GDP impac t by drones in the UK in 2030 (%) 12 

Figure 1.3. Regulatory principles of the UK’s Civil Aviation Authority 21 

Figure 2.1. Biotechnology and bio -solutions at a glance 29 

Figure 2.2. Facts and figures of bioeconomy in Germany 31 

Figure 2.3. Bio -innovation in the food system 33 

Figure 2.4. Swedish Committee for Technological Innovation and Ethics: model for collaboration, testing and 

experimentation 38 

## TABLES 

Table 1.1. Use of passenger drones across urban environments 7

Table 1.2. K ey Parameters of Drone Regulations in selected countries 20 

Table 1.3. Korean Government Agencies’ Regulation -related Projects 21  5

CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022 

# Introduction 

This working paper encompasses two case studies on regulatory governance focus ing on civilian drones 

and on bio -solutions - the use of renewable bio -resources for industrial scale production, for example with 

a view to creating alternatives to petro -based and chemical products. 

The case studies complement the series of Case Studies on the Regulatory Challenges Raised by 

Innovation and the Regulatory Responses developed jointly between the OECD and the Korean 

Development Institute (OECD/KDI, 2021 [1] ). They explor e a range of issues pertaining to agi le regulatory 

governance beyond "purely digital" innovations (e.g. smart contracts, fintech ) focus ing on the main 

transformative impacts of the innovations studied and their associated regulatory challenges and 

responses providing concrete examples. 

Both case studies present a similar structure. First, they outline key elements of b ackground and context .

They then summarise the main transformative impacts of the innovation at hand. They subsequently 

discuss the main associated regulatory challenges as well as the regulatory responses that may help 

address those challenges, and present a short number of forward -looking conclusions. 

The case studies illustrate the need for f it -for -the -future and innovation -friendly regulation, especially given 

the uncertain ty surrounding decision -making processes in innovation -dominated policy areas. They also 

highlight the need for a whole -of -government approach to regulation and the crucial importance of testing, 

piloting and experimentation. As such, they are expected to further enhance the evidence base underlying 

the implementation of the OECD Recommendation for Agile Regulatory Governance to Harness 

Innovation .1

## Note  

> 1

OECD/LEGAL/0464 ; available at  https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/OECD -LEGAL -

0464#supportDocuments .

## References 

OECD/KDI (2021), Case Studies on the Regulatory Challenges Raised by Innovation and the 

Regulatory Responses , OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/8fa190b5 -en .

[1] 6 

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

## Introduction 

This case study explores a range of regulatory governance issues with regard to drones, which have the 

potential to become a reliable technology for civil, commercial and leisure use. Howev er, existing drone 

regulations often lag behind technological advan ces, causing reluctance among potential adopters or 

hampering new developments (ITF, 2021 [1] ). Indeed, while drones have significant market potential, they 

raise multiple regulatory challenges, such as the need for data from real -life occurrences for informed, 

evidence -based decision making. In particular, this case study illustrates the need for future -proof and 

innovation -friendly regulation, especially gi ven the uncertainty surrounding decision -making processes in 

innovation -dominated policy areas (of which drones are a prime example). This uncertainty can be a barrier 

to innovative start -ups and businesses who are developing new solutions while trying to navigate existing 

regulation. It also illustrates how regulatory policy can allow innovative solutions to be tested, developed 

and brought onto the market while upholding crucial regulatory protections for citizens and the 

environment. 

## Background and cont ext 

The International Transport Forum (ITF) defines drone as “all flying vehicles without a human operator on 

board” (ITF, 2018 [2] ), regardless of automation levels; drones can be manually piloted, remotely piloted or 

fully autonomous. Many drones are capable of vertical take -off and landing (VTOL) and thus do not require 

a runway to launch. This case study adopts the ITF’s definition of drone. It should be noted, however, that 

a number of passenger transport services u sing drones will initially have a human pilot on board. 

Drones can be used to transport passengers as well as freight. They also have the potential to support the 

performance of the transport system or carry out surveillance activities. This case study foc uses on 

passenger drones as well as drones used for freight and delivery services, and many of its findings and 

conclusions will apply to drones in general. The terms drone, unmanned aircraft systems (UAS) and urban 

air mobility (UAM) vehicles will in some cases be used interchangeably in this case study. 

In urban environments, passenger drones have the potential to be used for three main applications: intra -

city flights, airport shuttles and intercity flights (see  Table 1.1 for more details). Manufacturers are currently 

specialising in the production of three different types of aircraft catering to those needs: City Taxis with a 

range of 15 to 50 km, which would cover inner -city needs (e.g. during rush hour, when even short distances 

can be time consuming); Airport Shuttles with a similar range, which would bring travellers to airports, and 

Intercity Jets, which could cover distances of up to 250 km and would connect m ajor cities (Roland Berger, 

2020 [3] ). In addition, some projections suggest that long -distance passenger transportation without pilots 

on board could be introduced from 2030 onwards (ITF, 2018 [2 ]). Passenger drones may be used to improve 

accident and disaster response, both by significantly reducing response times and enabling quick transport 

of injured persons to hospitals (e.g. blocked, congested or damaged roads). This can improve the num ber 

# 1 Case study 1: Drones  7

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

of lives saved as well as the quality of the saved life in cases of life -threatening conditions such as cardiac 

arrest. Some analysts expect the sector to be initially dominated by hybrid, piloted vehicles, with electric 

air taxis making their debut af ter 2025, followed by autonomous aerial vehicles from 2030 (Frost & Sullivan, 

2020 [4] ). However, experts consulted in the context of this case study indicated that there is considerable 

uncertainty regarding the timelines for a doption. 

## Table 1.1. Use of passenger drones across urban environments                 

> Factors Intracity Airport shuttles Intercity
> Typical distance Up to 50 km Up to 100 km Up to 200 km
> Route type Not fixed Fixed Fixed
> Number of passengers 1-2 passengers 2-4 passengers 2-4 passengers
> Luggage 20 -30 kg 50 -80 kg 30 -50 kg
> Source: (FutureBridge, 2020 [5] )

Estimates for passenger drones sold anticipate exponential growth, from about 450 units in 2025 to 18 000 

units by 2035 , or a compound annual growth rate (CAGR ) of 45% (FutureBridge, 2020 [5] ). According to 

research firm Polaris Market Research, the size of the global passenger drones market (including 

hardware, software and services) reached USD 181.76 million in 2018 and is projected to reach USD 1.4 

billion ( CAGR of 29.5% ) during the period to 2026 . S ee  Figure 1.1, which shows market size projections 

(bars) and annual variation (curve) .

## Figure 1.1. Passenger drone market, in USD million and annual growth   

> Source: (Polaris Market Research, 2018 [6] ).

Polaris identifies the following companies as the leading players in the passenger drones industry: Ehang, 

Volocopter GmbH, AeroMobil, Joby Aviation, Uber Technologies Inc., Boeing, Airbus S.A.S., Astro 

Aerospace, Cartivator, Liliu m, and Terrafugia. It also identifies the decline in drone costs and technological 

advancement as main drivers of the passenger drone market. Additional drivers are the growing urban 

population and calls for fighting traffic congestion and emissions. 

Acco rding to a recent study, around 110 cities and regions around the world are working on solutions in 

this area (Roland Berger, 2020 [3] ). Polaris’ analysis also states that technological innovation enabling the 

progressive miniat urisation and improvement of components has encouraged investment in passenger 

drones. However, it points out that safety and privacy concerns are factors restricting market growth 8 

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

(Polaris Market Research, 2018 [6] ). According t o the ITF, a broader set of issues need to be overcome .

Public acceptance will also hinge on environmental , employment and comp etit ion impacts , equity 

consi derations, and impacts on real estate and land value. 

The market potential of delivery drones is al so noteworthy. By one estimate, the drone package delivery 

market is projected to grow from USD 528 million in 2020 to USD 39.01 billion by 2030, or a CAGR of 

53.8% over the period (MarketsandMarkets, 2021 [7] ). By means of comp arison, the global parcel delivery 

market in 2020 was estimated at approximately USD 500 billion (Apex Insight, 2021 [8] ). Mordor Intelligence, 

a research firm, note that “the retail and logistics segment currently dominates the  market, and it is expected 

to continue its dominance during the forecast period due to the increased demand for drones to deliver 

parcels and packages from retailers, e -commerce providers, last -mile delivery companies, shore -to -ship 

drone operations, and p ostal companies ”. When examining the drivers of market growth, they also point 

out that,  “due to the lack of delivery personnel and the impact of the global pandemic, the necessity to 

respond to changes in the logistics industry has become more urgent than  ever before, and the use of 

drones may help realise automatic, contactless delivery services on remote islands, mountainous areas, 

and even within the cities”  (Mordor Intelligence, 2021 [9] ). The transformative impact of deliver y drones are 

further discussed in the next section of this case study. 

In addition to the discussion about the drone market presented earlier in this section, it is importan t to 

consider the full drone ecosystem, which also encompasses services such as fl ight operations, ticket 

brokering , repairs and infrastructure. Roland Berger distinguish five main building blocks within the 

passenger drone ecosystem, each of which “must be compliant with overarching specifications and 

integrated with the others to func tion successfully” (Roland Berger, 2020 [3] ). Box 1.1 outlines these building 

blocks in more detail. While they are presented primarily in connection with passenger transport, a number 

of them are also relevant beyond that context. 

## Box  1.1. Building blocks of the urban drone  ecosystem 

eVTOL vehicles : drones must be specifically designed and built for a target market, whether inter - or 

intra -city travel. 

MRO services : VTOL vehicles require  maintenance, repair and overhaul  (MRO) work, both on demand 

and at scheduled service intervals. 

Flight operatio ns : these involve all ticket distribution and passenger operations, piloting of 

manned/unmanned drone flights and ground handling activities, such as charging and storage. 

Physical infrastructure : flight infrastructure (take -off/landing sites and passenge r hubs), MRO 

infrastructure (such as hangars) and connected infrastructure, or nodes of transportation that bring 

passengers to UAM sites. 

Digital infrastructure  involving three main components: the Drone Control Centre (systems for remote 

surveillance);  Air Traffic Management and Unmanned Aircraft System Traffic Management; and 

navigation aids, such as 5G networks.  

> Source: (Roland Berger, 2020 [3] ).

Among the above -mentioned ecosystem components (for drones in general), unmanned traffic 

management (UTM) systems will be of particular importance, not only in terms of efficient functioning but  9

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

also to manage environmental impacts and ensure equitable access to take -off and landing areas in areas 

of high demand (ITF, 2021 [1] ).

According to Frost & Sullivan, thanks to strong government support and ongoing pilot programs, the United 

Arab Emirates (UAE) , New Zealand and Singapore are expected to be among the early adopters of UAM 

systems . According to a 2020 note, “ Dubai is already on track to be the first city, globally, to commercial ise 

air taxis. With the aim of launching these services within the next two years, companies like Volocopter 

and Ehang in collaboration with the UAE’s Roads and Transport Authority (RTA) have carried out advanced 

tests. New Zealand’s focus on the future of mobility is also evident; since 2017, Kitty Hawk Cora has 

conducted almost 1000 test flights in the Canterbury region. Singapore is also looking set to enjoy first 

mover advantage. Volocopter is working closely with a slew of government agencies to assess the 

feasibility of introducing commercial air taxi services in the city -state. Also in line to be early adopters are 

Brazil and Mexico who are set to leverage their exper tise in helicopter taxis. Meanwhile, the U.S. has been 

the nerve centre of UAM development, with almost 70% market participants based in the country” (Frost 

& Sullivan, 2020 [4] ).

## Key transformative impacts 

Drones are already transforming economic activities such as delivery services (including essential 

supplies), farming and agriculture as well as security and surveillance (e.g. monitoring/inspection of 

infrastructure or industrial works). Mordor Intelligence note, for exampl e, that e -commerce companies are 

increasingly partnering with local postal authorities, in collaboration with local governments, to launch 

drone delivery services that help reduce the cost of delivering packages and parcels to remote islands, 

mountainous a reas and cities (Mordor Intelligence, 2021 [9] ). Drones’ potential for improving first aid 

response times and effectiveness substantially has also been highlighted. Moreover, an ITF note 

concludes that “drones are proving to be versatile and effective tools in the Coronavirus epidemic” even if, 

“with drone regulation still in its infancy, their potential is not fully exploited” (ITF, 2020 [10] ).

Proponents of passenger drones stress their potential for helping to reduce congestion and increase 

transport safety in urban environments. However, some studies suggest that the mode share of drones is 

unlikely to be high enough to have significant impact on road congestion, and it has also been argued that 

dro nes may put additional pressure on urban space and hence traffic, as (public) space for the build of 

physical drone infrastructure (i.e. droneports) will be required (ITF, 2021 [1] ). Drones also have potential for 

facilitating r escue and emergency assistance services. In addition, passenger drones can provide 

enhanced connectivity and resilience to remote regions, render scheduling and routing more flexible, 

reduce infrastructure investment costs and address the potential shortag e of pilots. 

The OECD Observatory of Public Se ctor innovation has documented various use case example s of drones 

for public service delivery, including the following: 

 Aerial mapping system for agricultural areas in the United Arab Emirates (OECD, 2019 [11] )

 Land and building management in Singapore (OECD, 2019 [12] )

 Incident management and public safety emergency response (combined with gunshot detection 

technology ) at the local government level in the Un ited States (OECD, 2019 [13] ) (OECD, 2018 [14] )

Although there are no comprehensive studies on the matter yet and substantial uncertainty levels remain ,

anecdotal evidence points to potential net econ omic gains from drone uptake. For example, PWC have 

estimated the potential impact of drones on the UK’s economy. Their analysis suggests that drones could 

add a net GBP 42 billion (or about 1.9% of GDP) to the country’s output by 2030. According to PWC 

es timates, cost reductions from drone usage will lead to an increase of 3.2% in multi -factor productivity 

across the UK economy, and spur growth in a range of sectors. In relative terms, the largest positive impact 

is expected to be on wholesale and retail trade given their intensive use of inputs from the transport and 10 

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

logistics industry , which will see major ef ficiency gains thanks to dro nes (see  Box 1.2 for an overview of 

selected examples of how drones can transform commercial delivery) . The public sector is also expected 

to experience significant g ains thanks to reductions in the cost of inputs from other services directly 

impacted by drones (PWC, 2018 [15] ). Figure 1.2 shows the proje cted contribution of drones, in relative 

terms, to output in key sectors of the UK economy compared to PWC’s baseline forecast .

## Box  1.2. Use of drones for commercial delivery: selected examples 

Delivery using drones can be classified into two categories: i) direct delivery by drones and 

ii)  collaboration of drones with trucks. In areas with sufficient logistics centres, drones can be used to 

ship directly from warehouses to consumers. If the deli very distance is long, carrying a drone on a truck 

may be suggested. When co -operating with trucks, drones are transported to a flight -able distance, 

from where they operate delivery and return to the truck. 

Drone -only Delivery 

The advantage of using drone s for delivery is that it can reduce costs and delivery time, is more 

environmentally friendly, and is free from road conditions. However, drone delivery involves the issues 

of safety, noise and accessibility because the delivery takes place by air. Accord ingly, 

commercialisation has been limited due to various regulations regarding aviation. 

Starting with Google’s affiliated company Wing, companies such as Amazon and Uber are trying to 

obtain permissions from their Aviation Administrations. The service has  been started or tested mainly 

in small cities or suburban areas. Due to the limitation of battery capacity, the delivery packages weigh 

mostly less than 5kg and the flight range is mostly within 10km radius. While drones are currently mainly 

used to deliv er small items, as technology evolves, they will be equipped to accommodate more weight 

and will become the new future version of last -mile delivery. 

Drone Delivery by Google Wing 

In April 2019, Google's affiliate Wing started operation, which was recogn ised as the first commercial 

application of drones in the United States by the Federal Aviation Administration. It launched its drone 

delivery service in Christiansburg, Virginia, USA on October 18, 2019. The US aviation authorities did 

not insist on regul ating drone delivery, but opened the way for the “drone delivery” business with a 

regulatory solution that applied an existing charter license. 

So far, long -distance commercial delivery using drones has not been permitted in the United States. 

The U.S. dro ne regulations, created in 2016, prevent commercial drones from flying out of the pilot's 

sight. Long -range drone flights were allowed only for testing purposes. Because of this, Wing was 

authorised to ship commercial drones in Australia, instead of the Un ited States. 

The  Wing drone , with a wingspan of 1.5m and a weight of 4.5kg , is capable of carrying objects weighing 

up to 1.5kg, flying at a speed of up to 113km per hour. It is equipped with an additional motor to prevent 

fall and all flights are supervi sed remotely by the pilot. There are plans to expand the flight radius from 

4 miles (about 6.4 km) to more than 12 miles (about 19.3 km). 

Amazon’s Experiment on Drone Delivery 

In July of 2016, Amazon launched a drone delivery service called Amazon Prime  Air. Amazon attracted 

attention by completing delivery via drone to customers living near Cambridge, UK. All of the delivered 

goods weighed more than 2kg, including TV set -top boxes and popcorn. At that time, the delivery took 

only about 13 minutes.  11 

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

Given  that the delivery time of the existing “Amazon Prime” delivery service is about 2 hours, delivery 

service through drones is expected to significantly shorten the time. The industry expects that delivery 

via drones will account for more than 80% of all del iveries in the next five years, especially since fast 

delivery services are gaining popularity. 

Drone -Truck  Co -operation for Delivery 

Long -distance delivery with drones is made possible by loading drones on trucks. This complements 

the drawbacks of drones  regarding long distance delivery. It can also overcome the inefficiency of truck 

deliveries owing to geographical conditions that restrict ground transportation. 

Drones are loaded with cargo in autonomous trucks, then dispatched to deliver goods to their f inal 

destinations as they move around the shipping area. After delivery, they return to the autonomous truck 

and their battery starts recharging. Drones check addresses and deliver to the final destinations 

automatically. 

UPS’s Drone Truck Co -operation 

On  20 February 2017, UPS tested a hybrid electric autonomous truck and a drone to transport cargo. 

The test was conducted in Tampa, Florida, where the population is low, reflecting the characteristics of 

drones that are unsuitable to fly over long distances.  UPS explained that drone delivery would provide 

faster and cheaper shipping. Unmanned aerial vehicles also save fuel and time because there are fewer 

stops. They can enhance the efficiency of delivery and reduce the costs of redundant operations. UPS 

clai ms that savings of up to 1.6 km per day per delivery could save up to $ 50 million a year. 

However, regulations are holding back development of this technology. Under the Federal Aviation 

Administration (FAA) regulations, it is difficult for UPS drivers t o monitor the drone's flight status at all 

times, which reduces the mileage and delivery time of drone -truck co -operation. 

Amazon’s Patent on Drone Truck Co -operation 

On December 24, 2019, Amazon registered a unique drone -related patent (US10514690) with t he 

United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO). The patent describes how to build a system to 

support co -ordination between unmanned autonomous vehicles and drones. 

Both ground vehicles and drones are managed by a central system. The ground vehicle  is dispatched 

to deliver after completing the loading and unloading in the warehouse, and starts delivery in order. 

When the ground vehicle arrives near the customer's address, the drone takes over and finalises 

delivery. 

In this system, drones do not nee d to travel long distances, as the ground vehicle approaches a point 

that is at least three meters away from the destination, and the drone does not fly far from the warehouse 

to the destination,. The risk of accidents is reduced and the probability of noi se problems is low, as it 

does not fly over people or private property. 

The ground vehicle also serves to charge the drone. This is a great advantage for drones with limited 

flight times. Ground vehicles do not have to be cars. They can be anything from sm all mobile robots to 

large trucks. 

While it is not certain yet, it is highly likely that the patented technology will be implemented as it is in 

the near future. Amazon has started investing in electric vehicle startup Rivian and autonomous startup 

Aurora,  which is expected to accelerate the acquisition of autonomous driving technology.  

> Source: (OECD/KDI, 2021 [16] ).

12 

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

## Figure 1.2. Sector GDP impact by drones in the UK in 2030 (%)  

> Source: (PWC, 2018 [15] ).

PWC also foresee a “substantial” impact of drone development on UK jobs : “the combination of drones 

and automation may initially lead to some posts becoming redundant, but over time the gains in cost 

savings, productivity and consumer demand generated by drones will create new jobs (including about 

630 000 jobs in the drone economy by 2030) and have a transformational impact on how we work and 

live”. However, as pointed out by the ITF, g iven th e remaining uncertainties regarding deployment, drones’ 

potential impact on the job market remains difficult to assess (ITF, 2021 [1] ).1

From an economic and industrial perspective, transformative impacts induced by the develop ment of 

drone -based transport will also come from cross -industry partnerships and acquisitions and investments, 

such as those having occurred in recent years; e.g. the USD 30 million investment in German start -up 

Volocopter by Daimler and its consortium pa rtners , and U.S. based Terrafugia’s acquisition by Geely, the 

Chinese parent company of Volvo. Nearly all major automotive firms are likely to enter the UAM vehicles 

market in the near future. In addition, “companies will need to work closely with real est ate firms to acquire 

land to construct and maintain air taxi terminals and incorporate landing pads in residential buildings”, and 

the UAM market is also likely to lead to “novel business models and services including pay per ride models, 

leased corporate fleets, and applications like first responder, critical care delivery and security in urban 

areas”, thus creating a n entire new ecosystem (Frost & Sullivan, 2020 [4] ).

The potential benefits of drone development should be carefully weighed against its potential negative 

effects. These include noise, vibrations and light pollution and their impact both on humans and wildlife; 

energy consumption, emissions and overall sust ainability of drone transport (see  Box 1.3 for more details) ;

accountability and liability issues; workforce impacts; social equity; visual amenity (both during fligh t and 

for air/ground interfaces) and integrity of the environment, and impact on real estate values and 

infrastructure financing cost (ITF, 2018 [2] ). Impact distribution across stakeholder groups will also need to 

be c arefully assessed. If drone services are not affordable to a major ity of citizens (who will however suffer 

their negative externalities), social acceptance will be low, and large -scale drone innovation and 

dep loyment may be impeded from the outset (ITF, 2021 [1] ). 13 

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

## Box  1.3. Impact of delivery drones on climate and the environment: further evidence is still 

## required 

In a brief published in 2020, the European Environment Agency  examined the environmental 

implications of delivery drone development. Many of the conclusions in this brief may to some extent 

be applicable to drones at large. 

According to the brief, research results suggest that the main expected benefit for the enviro nment is 

that, “compared with many traditional methods of delivery (motorcycles, cars, vans, lorries and planes 

using fossil fuel), drones could reduce CO2 emissions as well as other air pollutants for that sector”. 

However, it warns that these results sho uld be “viewed with caution” given the absence of 

comprehensive assessments, the relatively narrow focus of some studies, and uncertainty concerning 

potential development scenarios. For example, it points out that it is still unclear whether drone delivery 

will simply replace alternative delivery methods or lead to additional delivery trips, and that broader 

systemic effects along the entire logistics chain as well as with regard to the life cycle of batteries are 

not systematically taken into account. The  brief concludes that available evidence does not allow for 

robust conclusions about the implications of delivery drones in terms of emissions of GHGs and air 

pollutants. This conclusion is generally in line with a recent ITF report, which stresses that net  emissions 

will depend on  the specific use case and local context . This report, which can be consulted for further 

reference on the environmental impact of drones, adds that large variations in both the size and physical 

characteristics of drones, as well  as in the environments in which they operate, “mean that the 

mitigations that have been developed for traditional forms of aviation are unlikely to be sufficient to 

manage the environmental impacts of drones, and new approaches will be required”. 

The Europ ean Environment Agency also points to other potential environmental impacts, such as 

threats to wildlife, especially birds (since drones tend to operate at low altitude): “Beyond the obvious 

risk of collision, birds could be affected by the noise and stres s caused by the frequent presence of 

drones in their habitat” (with consequences for reproduction and survival). Its brief mentions growing 

evidence of bird -drone interaction and mentions that, “in some areas, such as parks in London, 

authorities have bann ed drones from operating because of concerns over their negative influence on 

wildlife”.   

> Source: (European Environment Agency, 2020 [17] )(ITF, 2021 [1] ).

As discussed in the next section , meaningfu l, evidence -based analysis regarding the costs and benefits 

associated with the development of drones is likely to require a wealth of data from real -life occurrences ,

which can only be collected through testing and piloting. 

## Regulatory challenges 

This se ction examines the main regulatory challenges associated with facilitating the timely development 

and commercialisation of drones without unduly compromising regulatory protections. In particular, it 

focuses on challenges to the design of fit -for -purpose r egulatory frameworks in a context characterised by 

increased technological convergence and erosion of the traditional delineation of sectors, markets and 

policy areas. Crucially, it assesses the ability of existing regulatory frameworks (both national and 

supranational) and rulemaking approaches to promote and enable beneficial innovations and 

accommodate technology -driven disruption while ensuring a sufficient level of regulatory protection for 

people, businesses and the public interest at large. 14 

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

According to the ITF, as far as drones are concerned, “the twin challenge for regulators is to ensure that 

innovation can flourish while at the same time mitigating potentially adverse economic and societal impacts 

that arise from disruptions” (ITF, 2018 [2] ). Drone regulation will also need to address the standard public 

concerns of efficiency, competition and sustainability. A research article published the same year also 

examines a number of regulatory challenges asso ciated with drone developments (Du and Heldeweg, 

2018 [18] ). What follows is a litera ture review summary of drone -related regulatory challenges. This summary 

draws primarily on the aforementioned publi cations and includes additional insights from complementary 

sources. 

Rapid innovation and technological change leading to regulatory uncertainty 

Drones, the technologies that enable them and their potential applications within the transport sector are 

diverse and rapidly evolving. Advances in engineering and manufacturing technologies are pushing the 

pace of change and future drone capabilities and costs. These developments include sophisticated 

simulation models, new materials, dispersed battery storage, 3 -D printing of large (metal) parts, and 

biomimetic 4D printing methods for optimised elastic surfaces. They also include novel software tools and 

ICT technologies such as artificial intelligence, wireless 5G communication and the miniaturisation of 

electronics. These create opportunities for drones to expand into the civil aviation sector with new use 

cases that cannot be fully anticipated. Given t he potential capacity constraints of public servants to even 

ask “the right questions” vis -à-vis highly specialised technology developers and providers, policy makers 

involved with creating new regulations need to consider how best to address this mismatch in skills. As 

discussed later in this section, the pace of innovation in this area also raises questions about the ability of 

existing legal frameworks to protect certain human and fundamental rights in that context (ITF, 2018 [2] ).

A concomitant challenge to rapid innovation (which develops at a faster pace than policies and regulations) 

is regulatory uncertainty , which can ex ante affect innovation insofar as the incentive for stakeholders to 

develop new unmanned air craft systems technology may decrease if it remains unclear whether the 

operations of a novel type of aircraft will be authorised . Moreover, “subjective judgements about particular 

dangers and ethical concerns” (e.g. due to the lack or the delay of proper information delivered to the public 

or because of biases arising from value differences between individuals) may result in increased 

uncertainty and render regulatory action even more challenging (Du and H eldeweg, 2018 [18] ).

Limitations of existing regulatory frameworks 

Many national regulations predominantly current ly focus on controlling and minimizing safety risks , thus 

overlooking some of the broader impacts of unmanned aircraft systems on society and individuals. The 

cameras, sensors and other gadgets with which some small aircraft are equipped warrant, according to 

the authors, a distinct regulatory approach. Ad ditional risks and threats relating to the use of drones that 

scholars and authorities have pinpointed over the years include a “chilling effect; dehumanisation of the 

surveilled; transparency and visibility, accountability and voyeurism; function creep; b odily privacy; privacy 

of location and space; and privacy of association” [  (Finn, 2016 [19] ), quoted in  (Pagallo and Bassi, 2020 [20] )]. 

In addition, it is unclear whether existing legal frameworks upholding human and fundamental rights can 

address the normative challenges brought about by the use of drones in the civil sector including further 

technology advancements, such as the use of  highly sophisticated AI -enabled drones. 

Du and Heldeweg attribute the unbalanced treatment of different potential risks and concerns to the limited 

remit of the regulatory and administrative bodies that produce, implement and enforce rules regarding the 

design, manufacturing and operation of unmanned aircraft systems. Under the current regulatory 

framework, civil aviation authorities (CAAs) are the main regulatory and administrative bodies involved in 

the regulatory process. The traditional scope of mandat e of CAAs, they argue, tends to limit their ability to 

address other relevant concerns, such as privacy, data protection and security. According to some CAAs, 

however, the solution may not be to expand their remit, which they consider broad, but rather to strengthen  15 

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

co -operation across relevant government agencies and regulators. They also point to existing tension s

between, on the one hand, regulators, who are mainly resorting to traditional, top -down approaches , and, 

on the other hand, developers, manufac turers and operators, who call for flexible and bottom -up regulatory 

approaches in order to create an enabling environment for the rapid development of the UAS market. 

According to the authors, many market players perceive existing regulations as being “in sufficiently 

technology neutral” and consider that they are likely to become “a barrier to the early to middle stages of 

the development of unmanned aircraft systems”. 

Moreover, many existing regulatory frameworks may be unable deal with the challenges rai sed by 

commercial drones; further technological developments such as collision avoidance systems could soon 

render them obsolete. There are parallels here with the need to update regulatory frameworks ahead of 

the introduction of automated vehicles such as driverless trucks on public roads (ITF, 2018 [2] ). According 

to the World Economic Forum (WEF), “most governments are subjecting drones to legacy approaches of 

aviation regulation, focused on specific equipment require ments. Regulators lack approval mechanisms 

for innovative new types of flight, including drones flying autonomously, as well as multiple drones flown 

by one operator, or beyond the operator’s line of sight. These outdated approaches are hampering socially 

and economically beneficial uses of drone technology” (World Economic Forum, 2019 [21] ).

Lack of empirical evidence to inform decision -making 

The potential impacts of large commercial drone fleets are not fully understood yet. Assessment of the 

potential impact on aviation has begun , but appraisal rarely adopts a cross -sectoral perspective. Indeed, 

the potential for disruption by drones extends beyond the aviation industry. The large -scale deployment of 

commercial drone fleets w ill challenge the transport system as a whole, for instance due to the potentially 

unlimited proliferation of “drone ports” for take -off and landing. To build trust and public support, questions 

of safety will require answers together with a wide range of concerns traditionally associated with transport, 

including noise, emissions, energy consumption and social equity, but also to novel challenges such as 

privacy and considerations about the visual amenity of cities and landscapes (ITF, 2018 [2] ). There remain 

substantial knowledge gaps about how to respond to public concerns public concerns about the large -

scale deployment of drones , as there is only limited research on the potential impacts of drones that goes 

beyond assessing safety, security and privacy concerns (ITF, 2021 [1] ).

Moreover , restrictive regulations limit the possibilities of observing and c ollecting the outcome of real -life 

occurrences and creating more evidence -based approaches to safety. Several drone operators have been 

reported to stop developing their business cases for urban settings because of restrictive rules. A case 

study on Korea’ s approach also identifies the shortage of appropriate spaces and opportunities for 

conducting pilot/test flights: in this country, prior permission is required to fly a drone within a 9.3 km radius 

of major facilities such as an aerodrome. According to th e authors, it takes more than a week to check the 

flight area for each test flight and obtain approval from local aviation agencies and the Ministry of Defence 

(OECD/KDI, 2021 [16] ).

Erosion of traditional sectoral and administrative boundaries and need for adapted 

regulatory frameworks for international operations 

The growth of commercial drones leads to a blurring of the traditional administrative and sectoral 

boundaries. Furthermore, there are potentially overlapping regulatory responsibilities between national 

regulations or local authority rules in the case of urban drone operations. A corollary of this trend relates 

to the need for relevant public authorities to ensure co -ordinated approaches. It also warrants appro priate 

invest ment by relevant agencies to develop interdisciplinary competencies that may far exceed expertise 

in aviation and transport (ITF, 2021 [1] ).16 

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

Du and Heldeweg a rgue that “inter - or supranational rules on designing and operating unmanned aircraft 

systems or the mutual recognition of national regulations are still largely absent” 2, and that this can 

generate problems, for example, when an unmanned aircraft is designed in accordance with one state’s 

regulations and cannot be operated in another state because of the inconsistencies with that state’s 

regulations (Du and Heldeweg, 2018 [18] ). Other authors have pointed to the existence of relevant 

international instrument s such as the Chicago Convention from 1944 with its Annexes (and subsequent 

amendments), as well as standards and recommended practices developed by the international civil 

aviation Organisation (ICAO). They note, however, that according to certain scholar s, the unique 

challenges stemming from UAS and the need to develop and implement appropriate standards in a timely 

fashion warrant complementing this form of international co -operation through the development of a 

dedicated international legal framework (Pagallo and Bassi, 2020 [20] ). As reported by the ITF, “ any 

unmanned international operations will still require special authorisation under Article 8 of the Chicago 

Convention ”. In addition , it states that “ Article 7 of the Chicago Convention authorises limitations on 

“cabotage” (services between two points within the territory of the same State) and many States rely upon 

that provision to prohibit cabotage (though this is not required by the convention ). These regulations were 

designed many decades ago for manned aviation and do not take into account potential differences in the 

structure of the drone industry versus the traditional airline industry ”. T he growth of scheduled drone 

services could thus po tentially be “constrained by geopolitical considerations that have in many cases 

constrained the growth and development of the manned aviation industry ” (ITF, 2021 [1] ).

New legal and security -related challenges 

The nature of d rone operations makes it difficult to allocate liability amongst manufacturers, operators, the 

(remote) pilot, software providers or any other entity involved in drone operations. In case of mid -air 

collisions, drones may be involved in crashes either with other drones or with manned aircraft. The 

definition of damage may also prove contentious. When it comes to operators, the lack of an internationally 

harmonised liability regime (see discussion on international rules earlier in this section) can result in more 

complex and more costly legal proceedings for operators active in more than one country. In the case of 

potential victims, issues may arise with respect to identifying the source of damage and reporting it to the 

competent authorities. Protecting dro nes from cybersecurity risks is another important challenge since they 

can be targets for a cyber -attack themselves just as they risk being used as potential attack vectors. When 

it comes to cybersecurity and privacy standards for passenger drones, existin g laws may have to be 

adapted and new security and privacy protocols will likely need to be negotiated and implemented (ITF, 

2018 [2] ).

The next section outlines a number of relevant approaches through which jurisdicti ons are attempting to 

address many of the regulatory challenges described thus far. 

## Regulatory responses 

This section provide s an overview of selected regulatory approaches that either have been adopted or are 

being contemplated with regard to drones . The following main features are discussed : regulatory 

instruments at play (e.g. prescriptive vs. performance -oriented approaches), including tools used in the 

regulatory cycle (e.g. drafting new regulation or evaluating existing regulation ); rationale behind the 

selected policy mix/choice of instruments (i.e. how they are meant to address regulatory challen ges); 

instances of co -operation between public and private actors (e.g. development of self - or co -regulation 

arrangements) , and u se of regulatory testing a nd experimentation, including regulatory exemptions. The 

section will also present an example of how regulatory oversight can contribute to improving regulatory 

impact assessment (RIA), and thus regulatory quality, in innovation -dominated areas such as dro nes.  17 

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

According to a study focusing on drone regulation and drone delivery services , although approaches to 

drone regulation differ substantially across countries, the core elements of regulations themselves are 

largely the same from country to country, “w ith wide ranges on the level of restrictiveness of each element 

that are often dictated by whether a country favors the promotion of new technology or a safety -first 

approach”. Typical national regulations refer to a pilot's license, aircraft registration, restricted zones, and 

insurance. Requirements with regard to each of these elements vary depending on drone mass, flight 

altitude, drone use, and pilot license level. As to the regulatory methodologies for incorporating drones into 

legal systems, accordin g to the study these range “from outright bans on the use of commercial drones, to 

permissive legislation, to a strategy of waiting to observe the efficacy of other nations' policies before 

acting”. The study, which dates from 2017, also noted that “e ven f or countries with existing drone 

legislation, laws are constant ly being reevaluated”, and pointed out that nearly all the laws it considered 

had been written or amended within the previous two years (Jones, 2017 [22] ).

Another research paper focusing on the EU context (Du and Heldeweg, 2018 [18] ) confirms the existence of 

a variety of approaches and examines three main models of governance for civil UAS in EU law . These 

models are the following: 

 The top -down model of civil aviation law, supplemented by both soft law and the legal safeguards 

for the protection of human and fundamental rights. This model showed both convergences 

between legal systems (e.g. the EU and US general laws on civil aviation), and differences between 

technologies (e.g. the decentralised regulation of self -driving cars in the EU vis -à-vis the centralised 

EU governance of UAS); 

 The co -regulatory model of data protection with the accountability principle enshrined in Art. 5 of 

the EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), which applies to all processing of personal 

data in the EU, regardless of the technology concerned .

 The “middle -out” model of co -ordination mechanisms for le gal experimentation (i.e. alternatives to 

fully bottom -up and fully top -down governance approaches, such as monitored self -regulation), 

which is being adopted by many legal systems to address innovation -related challenges. 

The authors refer to these three models as part of a legal spectrum: “At one end of the spectrum, there are 

the strict top -down regulatory approaches that aim to govern both social and individual behaviour through 

the threat of physical or pecuniary sanctions, whereas, at the other end of the spectrum, we find pure self -

regulatory solutions with limited accountability and legal framing. In light of the three models of UAS 

governance in civil aviation, data protection, and legal experimentation, we can thus say that the bar of 

legal regulat ion is progressively lowered as we move from the first to the second model, i.e. from civil 

aviation to data protection” (Du and Heldeweg, 2018 [18] ).

Indeed, regulation of the aviation sector highly risk averse because of the low level of public risk tolerance. 

An important question will therefore be whether drone regulation s will or should adopt a similarly risk -

averse approach, how this can be addressed and determined, and what implications it may have for the 

development of the sector. As pointed out by the ITF, “drone transport services may be subject to the same 

market access restrictions as manned aviation under the 1944 Chicago Convention and associated 

aviation licensing and traffic ru les. Restrictions on operations could especially constrain the development 

of drone companies that engage in the carriage of goods or people”. Exempt ing drone ope rations from 

certain restrictive rules involves determining how to distinguish drone services from manned aviation and 

whether to distinguish transport drones from those perfor ming other commercial services such as aerial 

surveillance (ITF, 2021 [1] ).

While not comprehensive in nature, the present section outlines a sele ction of regulatory approaches that 

are of particular interest from the standpoint of agile and innovation -friendly regulatory governance. The 

section focus es on aircraft categories and use cases involving higher levels of risk and/or potential benefits. 18 

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

The EU’s common regulatory framework  for the safe operation of drones 

EU Regulations 2019/947 and 2019/945 set the framework for the safe operation of drones in European 

skies (EU and EASA Member States). They follow a risk -based approach and thus do not  distinguish 

between leisure or commercial activities. Instead, they focus on the weight and specifications of the drone 

and the operation it is intended to undertake. EU Regulation 2019/947, which is in force since the end of 

2020 defines three categories  of operations by risk level:  “open ”, “specific ” and  “certified ” categories. The 

“certified ” category involves the highest safety risk. Therefore, certification of the drone operator and the 

aircraft and licensing of the remote pilot(s) is required. Also  part of the drones’ regulatory framework in the 

EU is  U-space , which was adopted in April 2021. According to the European Commission, U -space 

“creates and harmonises the conditions needed for manned and unmanned aircraft to operate safely, to 

prevent coll isions between drones and other aircraft, and to mitigate the risks of drone traffic on the ground” 

(European Commission, 2021 [23] ).

In response to the increase in the volume and scope of drone operations in Europe, EASA has  also recently 

published guidance for drone operators, manufacturers and national authorities explaining the process for 

the design verification of drones falling under the ‘specific’ category. This process is presented as following 

“a proportionate approac h which will foster innovation and growth in this promising sector” .3

In a 2021 study, EASA has also examined the attitudes, expectations and concerns of EU citizens with 

respect to UAM. It concludes that  “EU citizens are calling for active and pre -emptive measures from 

competent authorities. In addition to mitigating risks related to safety, security, noise and environmental 

impact, these measures are expected to ensure that UAM will be a common benefit to  all of society by 

offering affordable, integrated and complementary mobility”. According to the study, “the notion of 

general/public interest is a determining factor for acceptance: use cases for the benefit of the community, 

such as medical or emergency  transport or those connecting remote areas, are better supported than use 

cases satisfying individual/private needs”  (EASA, 2021 [24] ). In a similar vein, a recent ITF report points out 

that authorities can enhance acceptance by  ensuring that the public is informed about key issues of 

concern, such as accident and incident rates, methods of reporting and addressing grievances, rules that 

govern the flight and take -off and landing procedures of drones, and the benefits provided by  drone 

operations  (ITF, 2021 [1] ).The importance of social acceptance is further discussed later in this section (see 

“social licence to operate” in the UK). 

Sweden’s example of experimentation -friendly approaches to regulation 

In 2018, prior to the implementation of the EASA -based regulatory framework, the ITF  (ITF, 2018 [2] ) had 

identified Sweden as having adopted one of the most permissive approach to drone regulation worldwide, 

including  by designing licensing regimes to accompany the use of experimental flights beyond the visual 

line of sight (BVLOS). Sweden’s experimentation -friendly approach may have helped the country to be 

among the early adopters of drones in sectors such as healthca re and emergency response; e.g. delivery 

of automated defibrillators in the Gothenburg area. Everdrone, a Swedish company involved in the 

deployment of civil drone operations in this context highlighted the importance of long -standing dialogue 

and  co -opera tion with authorities such as the national emergency call centre as having been “crucial for 

the reali sation  of the concept in terms of being able to perform a swift alarm response, and to manage the 

medical and ethical issues involved.” 4 Other relevant ar eas include drone use for law enforcement and 

aerial reconnaissance activities during incidents such as fires, oil spills, and natural disasters. 5

Dro ne taxi service trials in Dubai as part of the national “Smart Dub ai” strategy 

Dubai seeks to integrate air taxis (Volocopter 2X) into existing transportation systems and provide 

additional mobility for up to 10 000 passengers per day with a single point -to -point connection 

(FutureBridge, 2020 [5] ). As part of the “Smart Dubai” strategy that also includes a driverless metro, Dubai  19 

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

has been inviting several passenger drone companies to help achieve the target of 25% of “autonomous 

journeys” of all trips by 2030. In September 2017, the first actual te st flight with a passenger on board a 

drone took place in Dubai. The national Road and Transport Authority also announced that it would co -

operate with the UAE General Civil Aviation Authority and the Dubai Civil Aviation Authority in order to 

develop requ irements for regulations, standards, and certification requirements (ITF, 2018 [2] ).

In 2020 Dubai passed a new law “to help flying taxis and drone deliveries to take off” alongside a network 

of mini airports. The law is expected to facilitate the development of an integrated framework for licensing 

and issuing certificates, permits, and inspection services for the drone industry, as well as a legal system 

for investigating accidents and incidents. Dubai’s strategy also involves creating a master plan for the use 

of infrastructure on the ground, classifying the main urban areas for the distribution of ground and air 

service sites. The project will rely on an integrated digital platform for providing regulatory services f or 

UAVs to use domestic airspace and other related government services. This platform will grant instant 

permits and no -objection certificates for drone operations. It will also facilitate efficient governance of the 

sector to ensure security and safety an d prevent any disruption to the civil aviation airspace. Another 

important component is a system to address safety and security risks of drone activities. The “Dubai Shield ”

system will “detect and track drones and take necessary counter measures in co -ope ration with relevant 

government and security authorities” (Urban Air Mobility News, 2020 [25] ).

China’s First National Standard for Express Delivery Service by Unmanned Aircraft 

In 2020, drone industry players including EHang, J D.com and ZTO Express jointly formulated China’s first 

national standard for Express Delivery Service by Unmanned Aircraft .6 This standard was issued by the 

State Post Bureau and became effective  in  January  2021. According to Ehang, implementation of the 

standard is particularly important for improving the last -mile delivery service, ensuring the safety of 

operations, and promoting the development of intelligent aerial logistics in the UAM industry. It  applies  to 

express delivery services  by unmanned aircrafts with a maximum empty aircraft weight of 116  kg, a 

maximum takeoff weight of 150kg, and a maximum airspeed of 100km/h. The standard also specifies the 

service entities, conditions, procedures, assessments,  safety issues and compensation of expres s delivery 

by unmanned aircraft , thus providing a  clear  reference for postal express companies and drone operators 

that envision engaging  in drone delivery services  (EHang, 2020 [26] ).

Rw anda’s performance -based framework for drones 

Rwanda’s revamped regulatory framework for drones was designed with a view to allowing for more use 

cases and expanding the number of drone companies in the country. The new, performance -based 

framework was a pp roved in January 2018. It set a new standard for open, accountable, and risk -based 

access to airspace that can enable any type of drone operation in any lo cation while maintaining safety; “a

first for drone regulations ” according to the WEF . This framework is reported to have enabled new 

businesses to establish themselves for infrastructure inspections, agricultural and pest spraying, and 

surveying of crops and land ti lling (World Economic Forum, 2019 [21] ). Rwanda’s approach is mentioned as 

an example by the ITF, which recommends a dopt ing performance -based standards tha t restrict noise 

levels, flight patterns, operation times and fuel sources “instead of overregulating drone use based on 

technological specif ications that restrict innovation ”. The ITF notes that performance -based drone 

regulation may be the best way to prevent intrusive uses while permitting innovation. Regulation that 

specifies the vo lume, size, flight altitude and parameters, and use of dron es can ensure that citizens’ 

concerns are r espected while still allowing companies adequate freedom to experiment without restrict ions 

on technology or equipment”. It also states that “r egulators and policy makers around the world will need 

to work closely with industry and other stakeholders to establish performance -based standards for UTMs 

that are interoperab le and interact with exist ing air traffic control systems” (ITF, 2021 [1] ).20 

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

Advocacy and engagement (also ) matter: the example of France’s Civil Drones Council 

France’s Civil Drones Council has launched a number of structuring actions to involve French 

manufacturers and operators in European regulatory and normative processes and has worked to facilitate 

the implementation of current regulations for professional operators. It has notably advocated an evolution 

of the French regulations from operational restrictions, which have allowed the emergence of the sector, 

towards a more aeronautical logic (airworthiness, demonstrati on of safety) which is essential to authorise 

those new uses (ITF, 2018 [2] ).

Regulation Reform Roadmap in Korea 

According to a case study developed by national experts, Korea's current aviation law severely restricts 

drone flights. The Korean regulatory agency is mainly concerned with safety issues. Although there are 

various pilot projects in the country’s island and mountain regions, strict regulations prohibit drone delivery 

in densely populated areas. Furthermore, s ince most of the residential units in Korea are apartments, it is 

difficult to secure spaces for the takeoff and landing of drones. Due to high population density , dense radio 

waves around the residential areas can disturb the signals controlling the drone and cause accidents. 

According to the case study authors, Korea’s current regulatory framework does not fully support 

commercial drone -based projects. The tryouts on modulating regulations such as allowing flights without 

prior approval and expanding the altitude range more favo urably turned out to be not of much help for 

commerciali sation . To address this situation, the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure and Transport in Korea 

has put forward the Drone Regulation Breakthrough Roadmap with the goal of establishing commerciali sed 

drone delivery by 2025.  Table 1.2 shows a benchmarking analysis carried out in the context of Korea’s 

reform efforts in t his area. 

## Table 1.2. Key Parameters of Drone Regulation s in selected countries 

Korea  United States  People’s Republic of China  Japan 

Report & Register  For business or over 12kg  For business or over 250g  Over 7kg  Over 200g 

Qualification  Over 12kg 

For business *

* 14 years old and older 

For business *

* 16 years old and older 

Over 7kg  Over 200g 

Altitude Limits  Lower than 150m *

* From ground, water surface 

or structure 

Lower than 120m *

* From ground, water 

surface or structure 

Lower than 120m *

* From observer or pilot 

Lower than 150m *

* From ground or water 

surface 

Flight Zone 

Restriction 

(radius) 

Seoul (9.3km) Airport (9.3km) 

Nuclear Plant (19km) DMZ 

Area 

Washington (24km) Airport 

(9.3km) Nuclear Plant 

(5.6km) Stadium (5.6km) 

Beijing, Airport, Nuclear 

Plant Area 

Tokyo (All) Airport (9km) 

Nuclear Plant Area 

Flight Speed 

Limits 

Unrestricted  Lower than 161km/h  Lower than 100km/h  Unrestricted 

Out of sight, Night 

flight 

Principle not allowed, but 

exceptions allowed *

* Test flight, flight in pilot 

project area 

Principle not allowed, but 

exceptions allowed *

* Per case through 

Waivable Regulations 

Principle not allowed, but 

exceptions allowed *

* Cloud system access or 

sep arate report required 

Principle not allowed, but 

exceptions allowed 

Flight Above 

Crowd 

Principle not allowed, but 

exceptions allowed *

* Dangerous flight prohibited 

Principle not allowed, but 

exceptions allowed 

Principle not allowed, but 

exceptions allowed *

* Cloud system access or 

separate report required 

Principle not allowed, but 

exceptions allowed *

* Keep over 30m away 

from people, vehicles, 

buildings, etc. 

Drone Usable 

Range 

Unrestricted *

* Exclude projects that 

threaten the safety and 

security of th e people 

Unrestricted  Unrestricted  Unrestricted 

Source: Regulatory Reform Roadmap of Drones, Ministry of Land, Infrastructure and Transport, Korea , quoted in (OECD/KDI, 2021 [16] ). 21 

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

The Ministry of Land, Infrastructure and Transport of Korea has planned various projects to identify and 

improve regulatory issues related to commercialisation of drone delivery. By 2022, the Ministry is planning 

to commercialise drone delivery in non -urban areas. Furthermore, the Ministry ex pects to expand drone -

based delivery to urban densely populated areas by 2025. 

Such milestones are ambitious and a number of conditions will need to be met. Certain regulatory 

improvement s, such as those shown in  Table 1.3, will be necessary to that end . In order to address safety 

concerns, noise issue s, and radio frequency problems, government agencies such as the Ministry of Land, 

Infrastructure and Transport and the Communications Commission are preparing specific regulations 

designed mostly in terms of qualifications and responsibilities. They also deal with issues of flight 

availability in specific regions based on the nature of the flight area. Acc ording to case s tudy authors, 

meeting the Roadmap’s objectives will require , as discussed in the section on regulatory challenges, 

conducting numerous test flights. However, in the current context, flight spaces are strictly limited : there 

are only ten pilot airspaces wit hout flight restrictions in the country at the time of writing .

## Table 1.3. Korean Government Agencies’ Regulation -related Projects   

> Source: Regulatory Reform Roadmap of Drones, Ministry of Land, Infrastructure and Transport, Korea .

The UK Civil Aviation Authority’s innovation -friendly approach 

The UK Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) 7 constitutes a good practice example in that it has defined a set of 

regulatory principles that seek to improve safety , security and consumer protection outcomes and, 

crucially, integrate the innovation dimension in a cross -cutting fashion. These principles are to guide the 

design, prioritisation and implementation of regulatory activities. 

## Figure 1.3. Regulatory principles of the UK’s Civil Aviation Authority  

> Source: UK Civil Aviation Authority .

22 

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

In addition, in April 2019, the UK Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) launched its Innovation Hub with the 

following objectives in m ind: 

 Making it easier for innovators to access CAA expertise, guidance, and viewpoints on regulations 

and providing a focal point of contact and information; 

 Helping innovators maximise regulatory readiness for the demonstration of their aviation systems 

by testing them in safe environments and learning how they address regulatory challenges; and 

 Accelerating the development of new policies and regulations by anticipating regulatory challenges 

in areas of innovation, then defining the requirements for new p olicies and regulations. 8

The cornerstone of this scheme is the Innovation Sandbox, which notably focuses on future innovation in 

aviation, including air mobility, and relies on an iterative, co -operative approach (through workshops, live 

trials and simulations). In this context, the CAA’s website states that, “whilst existing aviation regulations 

can enable the exploration and trialling of innovative future air mobility solutions, they do not yet enable 

commercial operations or fully provide a s calable, proven certification approach”, and recognises that the 

CAA needs to play a role “in identifying and supporting answers to regulatory challenges and working 

alongside Government, industry and public stakeholders” .9 The Sandbox is conceived as a le arning 

platform for policy and regulation as well as a means of accelerating the development of a robust evidence 

base that will support regulatory approvals for demonstration flights. 

There are no restrictions to apply to the so -called Sandbox challenges. Some of the sandbox participants 

– including smaller firms with limited resources – receive UK Government funding, which allows them to 

access CAA support in this way (but the CAA does not provide funding for innovation related projects). 

Moreover, althou gh it seeks to improve the regulatory readiness of participating companies, the CAA does 

not help them with the approval procedure itself as this could confer them an unfair advantage. In addition, 

it shares openly all relevant information generated by the Sandbox. The CAA has published two case 

studies based on its experience with this instrument: respectively, on the experience of Volocopter, one of 

the first companies to join the Innovation Sandbox ,10 and on operating Beyond Visual Line of Sight 

(unmanned aircraft – case study by Skyports 11 ). 

Another key feature of the CAA’s innovation -friendly approach has to do with the dissemination via their 

website of information on how they are responding to novel technologies and business models through 

iterative tes ting and trials, including guidance papers, viewpoints on future regulations and information on 

regulatory approvals that companies may need to consider for conducting trials of their solutions. In the 

area of Advanced Air Mobility (AAM), the CAA has publi shed a comprehensive document outlining its use 

case approach to exploring AAM and its implications for regulation and the aviation sector. According to 

this document, “the aim of the use case regulatory approach is not to enable all proposals unquestionin gly, 

but to allow AAM concepts to be fully explored so that safe proposals can be developed iteratively in 

partnership with the Regulator” .12 

The CAA has also issued guidance on how innovators can build in social engagement as a key part of 

their developme nt strategy. This guidance document revolves around the notion of social licence to 

operate. Social licence is defined as “the ongoing approval from stakeholders for an organisation’s 

products, services, business practices and operations”; “underpinned by a 360  view of stakeholders, a 

social licence brings with it the tangible business benefits of being considered legitimate, credible and 

trustworthy”. It is “particularly important where there is a high degree of change or disruptive and new 

services invol ved”, as well as in situations in which “it is often not immediately evident to the public whether 

innovations will help or harm them” or with no existing regulatory framework or independent oversight 

authority. 13 

One of the challenges to implementing this innovation -oriented vision has to do with the limited availability 

of suitable spaces for pilot flights and related approval procedures, which can be lengthy and have a 

deterring effect. According to the CAA, it is also important to have a strong governmen t policy ensuring  23 

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

appropriate co -ordination of all relevant regulatory authorities. For example, the drone ecosystem has 

implications for areas including local space planning and national building requirements, as well as 

communications (delivery) and ener gy (electric aviation). International engagement is also essential even 

if , for the moment, drone services are less cross -border in nature compared to traditional aviation. This 

involves the exchange of views and experience on regulation (as the CAA does w ith its US counterpart 

among others) as well as multilateral co -operation through international organisations. 

Drones in Regulatory Impact Analysis and the role of regulatory oversight : a statement 

from Norway’s Better Regulation Council ( NBRC) 

In 2019, N orway’s Better Regulation Council issued a statement on proposed regulations for unmanned 

aerial vehicles. It noted that “increasing use of drones provides new and exciting opportunities for the 

business sector, and it is important that clear rules are pro vided for their use to enable the technology to 

be further developed”. Furthermore, it stressed the important potential for the use of drones in the business 

sector, and that regulation should therefore be designed to stimulate business development as well as 

R&D, and “ensure that society does not lose out on the hitherto undiscovered benefits of drone use”. 

The Council considered that the RIA accompanying the proposed regulatory changes was not adequate, 

and pointed out key areas for improvement. The Council’s statement is an example of the important role 

that regulatory oversight bodies can play in ensuring that regulatory management tools effectively help 

improve regulatory quality in high -innovation areas such as drones. Since most of the points raised by the 

Council relate to aspects that should be addressed by RIA and related analyses on similar topics across 

countries, they are summarised next for ease of reference .

NBRC noted that there were almost 4 000 registered or approved drone operators piloting unmanned aerial 

vehicles for business or otherwise useful purposes in 2018, according to the consultation note. NBRC 

would have liked to see a description of the type of business or otherwise useful purpo ses for which drones 

are currently being used, and which businesses have adopted drones and for what purposes. Furthermore, 

it stated that the Civil Aviation Authority should have described in more detail which drones and drone 

tasks will be covered by the “open category”, “specific category” and “certified category”, as this would 

have provided a better basis for assessing the impacts of the proposals. It also called for “a full description 

of the applicable drone legislation, the type of commercial and us eful activities that drones are used for 

today, and how current drone use will be impacted by the rules in the new Basic Regulation ”. 

Furthermore, it underlined the importance of involving of other government agencies and stakeholders in 

the regulatory wo rk. Moreover, it stated that an assessment of how corresponding problems are solved 

and how corresponding rules are formed in other countries would have been valuable, as “this is 

particularly important for the regulation of technology that may be cross -bo rder in nature”. The Council also 

emphasised that “the Civil Aviation Authority and the Ministry of Transport and Communications should, in 

connection with further work on the regulation of drones, collaborate with businesses that have adopted 

the technolo gy”, and that it is important “to facilitate clear and easily understandable rules for those 

concerned”. 

In addition, it pointed out that the competent authorities should have a strategy for evaluating the 

regulations. “Predictability is important for affe cted businesses. At the same time, the technology is 

developing fast, and rule changes may be necessary after a short time in order to ensure that the rules 

fulfil their intended purpose.” 

In its conclusion, the NBRC emphasised that, since regulation can p romote or inhibit innovation and 

technological development, how the rules are formulated and which rules are introduced is essential. 

Moreover, it stressed that regulators should bear this in mind with regard to innovations that are under 

continuous develo pment and are being adopted in increasingly new ways. The NBRC encouraged 

adopting this perspective in further work on the drone regulations (NBRC, 2019 [27] ).24 

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

## Conclusion 

As is often the case in innovation -dominated environment s where disruption is at play, a major challenge 

in the context of drone regulation is the need to remove or update obsolete norms and/or put forward new 

ones that help promote socially beneficial innovation while minimising the associated risks. In the sa me 

vein, it is important to ensure that applicable regulations are as technology -neutral as possible and do not 

impair early stage development of potentially valuable drone technology application. Developing new, 

purpose -specific, regulation may, however, not involve the same considerations as modifying or repealing 

existing regulation. In some cases, it may be necessary to retain existing rules while modifying definitions 

to exclude (in full or in part) the innovative product or service at hand. In additio n, constituencies benefiting 

from existing rules may oppose their modification or removal. 

As illustrated by the examples presented in this case study, regulatory decision making entails clearly 

understanding both the costs and the benefits of intervening in a particular market and transparently 

achieving an appropriate balance between these. This assessment is guided by the expected net benefit 

but also informed by societal issues such as the acceptability of certain types of risk. Achieving this is 

parti cularly difficult in the context of emerging technologies, due to the lack of information on their 

performance and impacts. In this situation, countries are increasingly enabling structured experimentation 

in a collaborative environment between business an d regulators, thus minimising risks, increasing the rate 

of knowledge acquisition and sharing and facilitating trust. Some experts have pointed out that a “learning 

by testing” approach, can indeed help create an enabling legal environment and facilitate i nnovation 

without causing “unacceptable negative results” (Du and Heldeweg, 2018 [18] ).

In this context, enabling and speeding up observation and collection of data and information on the 

outcomes of real -life occurrences would help develop more evidence -based approaches to safety and 

should therefore be considered a priority both in terms of the regulatory framework itself and the availability 

of appropriate spaces for testing and piloting. Dedicated innovation flight test corridors and efforts by 

regulators and market surveillance authorities to improve regulatory readiness of firms in the sector could 

both be instrumental in this respect. Testing and experimentation approaches identified should, howe ver, 

be risk -based and as transparent and inclusive as possible. Proactively seeking stakeholder buy -in, 

providing appropriate guidance and allowing the iterative development of safe proposals by adopting a use 

case approach have all proven effective to th at end. Where possible, early trials of drones should focus on 

use initial use cases that align with overall public policy goals and offer clear public benefits, such as 

transporting medical goods and improving access to remote communities (ITF, 2021 [1] ).

In addition to ongoing monitoring, timely evaluation of regulatory approaches is essential, as is the 

publication of results. Moreover, the complexity and far -reaching implications of drone development call, 

more than ever, for a whole -of -government, holistic approach to regulation. This requires extensive co -

operation with a broad range of government agencies and stakeholders, including across borders – since 

regulatory coherence is essential to promote drone development and in crease safety. This is all the more 

important given the rapid erosion of traditional administrative boundaries and the potentially overlapping 

regulatory responsibilities between national regulations or local authority rules in the case of urban drone 

oper ations. The development of a “communities of practice” approach to facilitate the sharing of knowledge 

and experience by regulators within as well as across national borders, both through overarching 

mechanisms and direct interaction, can be useful in that respect.  25 

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

## Notes  

> 1

In (ITF, 2021 [1] ) (p. 16ff), the ITF presents an analysis of the likely evolution of drone uses in transport 

together with their expected market potential across various categories.  

> 2

The next section briefly discusses, however, the recently enacted common EU regulatory fr amework.  

> 3

https://www.easa.europa.eu/newsroom -and -events/press -releases/easa -issues -guidelines -design -

verification -dr ones -operated . 

> 4

https://news.cision.com/everdrone -ab/r/autonomous -drones -are -now -delivering -defibrillators -to -80 -000 -

residents -in -sweden,c3112538 . 

> 5

https://enterprise -insights.dji.com/user -stories/how -swedish -police -started -case -study . 

> 6

The standard’s text is only available in Chinese: 

http://www.spb.gov.cn/zc/ghjbz_1/201508/w020201204542195544172.pdf . 

> 7

Source for this section: exchanges with CAA officials via phone and e -mail.  

> 8

https://www.caa.co.uk/our -work/innovation/about -the -innovation -team/ . 

> 9

https://www.caa.co.uk/our -work/innovation/regulatory -challenges -for -innovation -in -aviation/ . 

> 10

https://publicapps.caa.co.uk/docs/33/cap1949%20volocopte r%20case%20study.pdf . 

> 11

https://publicapps.caa.co.uk/docs/33/bvloscasestudy.pdf . 

> 12

https://www.caa.co.uk/cap2122 . 

> 13

https://www.caa.co.uk/cap1900 .26 

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

## References 

Apex Insight (2021), Global Parcel Delivery Market Insight Report 2021 , https://apex -

insight.com/product/global -parcel -delivery -market/ (accessed on 22 September 2021). 

> [8]

Du, H. and M. Heldeweg (2018), “An experimental approach to regulating non -military unmanned 

aircraft systems”, International Review of Law, Computers & Technology , Vol. 33/3, pp. 285 -

308, https://doi.org/10.1080/13600869.2018.1429721 .

> [18]

EASA (2021), Study on the societal acceptance of Urban Air Mobility in Europe ,

https://www.easa.europa.eu/sites/default/files/dfu/uam -full -report.pdf (accessed on 

9 September 2021). 

> [24]

EHang (2020), China’s First National Standard for Express Delivery Service by Unmanned 

Aircraft Jointly Formulated by EHang will be Effective from January 1, 2021 .

> [26]

European Commission (2021), Drones: Commission adopts new rules and conditions for safe, 

secure and green drone operations , https://ec.europa.eu/transport/modes/air /news/2021 -04 -

22 -drones_en (accessed on 22 September 2021). 

> [23]

European Environment Agency (2020), Delivery drones and the Environment. Briefing no. 

16/2020 , https://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/delivery -drones -and -the -environment/file 

(accessed on 8 September 2021). 

> [17]

Finn, R. (2016), Big Data, Drone Data: Privacy and Ethical Impactsof the Intersection between 

Big Data and Civil Drone Deployments , Asser Press, The Hague. 

> [19]

Frost & Sullivan (2020), Global Urban Air Mobility Market Heads for Tak eoff, Powered by Air Taxi 

Services .

> [4]

FutureBridge (2020), Changing the Future of Mobility with Passenger Drones . [5] 

ITF (2021), Ready for Take Off? Integrating Drones into the Transport System, ITF Research 

Reports .

> [1]

ITF (2020), “2020”, COVID -19 transport brief. Drones in the Era of Coronavirus , https://www.itf -

oecd.org/sites/default/files/drones -covid -19.pdf (accessed on 18 October 2021). 

> [10]

ITF (2018), “(Un)certain Skies?: Drones in the World of Tomorrow” , International Transport 

Fo rum Policy Papers , No. 54, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/70c74c7b -en .

> [2]

Jones, T. (2017), International Commercial Drone Regulation and Drone Delivery Services ,

RAND Corporation, https://doi.org/10.7249/rr1718.3 .

> [22]

MarketsandMarket s (2021), Drone Package Delivery Market worth $39,013 million by 2030 ,

https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/PressReleases/drone -package -delivery.asp (accessed 

on 16 September 2021). 

> [7]

Mordor Intelligence (2021), Delivery drones market - growth, trends, cov id -19 impact, and 

forecasts (2021 - 2026) , https://www.mordorintelligence.com/industry -reports/delivery -drones -

market (accessed on 16 September 2021). 

> [9]

NBRC (2019), Statement from the Norwegian Better Regulation Council . [27]  27 

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

OECD (2019), Aerial Mapping of Agricultural Areas Using Drones , https://oecd -

opsi.org/innovations/aerial -mapping -of -agricultural -areas -using -drones/ .

> [11]

OECD (2019), Chula Vista Police Drone as a First Responder (DFR) , https://oecd -

opsi.org/innovations/chula -vista -police -drone -as -a-first -responder -dfr/ .

> [13]

OECD (2019), Operations New Era (ONE) -Transforming the Maintenance of State Land and 

Properties in Singapore , https://oecd -opsi.org/innovations/operations -new -era -one -

transforming -the -maintenance -of -state -land -and -properties -in -singapore/ .

> [12]

OECD (2018), Air Incident Response: Public Safety using Autonomous Drones in Urban 

Environments , https://oecd -opsi.org/i nnovations/air -incident -response -public -safety -using -

autonomous -drones -in -urban -environments/ .

> [14]

OECD/KDI (2021), Case Studies on the Regulatory Challenges Raised by Innovation and the 

Regulatory Responses , OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.17 87/8fa190b5 -en .

> [16]

Pagallo, U. and E. Bassi (2020), “The Governance of Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS): 

Aviation Law, Human Rights, and the Free Movement of Data in the EU”, Minds and 

Machines , Vol. 30/3, pp. 439 -455, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11023 -020 -09541 -8.

> [20]

Polaris Market Research (2018), Passenger Drones Market Size & Analysis - Industry Report, 

2019 -2026. Report Summary , https://www.polarismarketresearch.com/industry -

analysis/passenger -drones -market .

> [6]

PW C (2018), Skies without limits. Drones - taking the UK’s economy to new heights ,

https://www.pwc.co.uk//intelligent -digital/drones/Drones -impact -on -the -UK -economy -

FINAL.pdf .

> [15]

Roland Berger (2020), Urban Air Mobility | USD 90 billion of potential: How to capture a share of 

the passenger drone market .

> [3]

Urban Air Mobility News (2020), Dubai passes new regulation “to help flying taxis and drone 

deliveries to take off” alongside network of mini airports .

> [25]

World Economic Forum (2019), Accelerating t he Drone Revolution . [21] 28 

CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022 

## Introduction 

This case study explores a range of agile regulatory governance issues with regard to bio -solutions. 

Bio -solutions use renewable bio -resources combined with elements such as enzymes, proteins and 

bacteria, for production on an industrial scale, and could make a decisive contribution to the green 

transition provided that an enabling policy and regulatory frame work is in place. 

In this context, the case study illustrates the need for future -proof and innovation -friendly regulation for 

bio -solutions. It also illustrates how regulatory policy can allow innovative solutions to be tested, developed 

and brought onto the market while upholding key regulatory protections for citizens and the environment. 

## Background and context 

Biotechnology holds great promise for addressing some of the critical challenges of our time, from 

pandemics, through climate change, to trans itioning to sustainable production systems. Potential 

applications include vaccines, green chemistry (e.g. biofuels) and bio -based materials . In addition, 

biotechnology firms represent an increasingly important segment of the economy. As shown in  Box 2.1,

the term biotechnology encompasses a very broad range of applications. This case study focuses to a 

significant extent on bio -solutions, which use micro -organisms suc h as cells, proteins, bacteria and 

enzymes to harness the potential of renewable biomass (e.g. side streams from food production or other 

sustainable sources), create alternatives to petro -based and chemical products, and plant and seed 

breeding (see  Figure 2.1 for more details). It also discusses, however, other biotechnology applications. In 

addition, it will refer to related concepts such as the bioeconomy, bio -based materials, bio -innovation 1 and 

bio -based products, 2 which for simplicity will in some cases be used interchangeably. 3 Furthermore, certain 

aspects discussed in the sections dedicated to regulatory challenges and regulatory responses are more 

general in na ture, given the need to integrate a comprehensive policy framework perspective as well as 

the existence of a number of systemic challenges. 

## Box  2.1. Proposed OECD single and list -based statistical definitions  of biotechnology (2016 

## update) 

Single statistical definition of biotechnology 

The application of science and technology to living organisms, as well as parts, products and models 

thereof, to alter living or non -living materials for the production of knowle dge, goods and services. 

# 2 Case study 2: Bio -solutions  29 

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

List -based statistical definition of biotechnology 

 DNA/RNA: Genomics, pharmacogenomics, gene probes, genetic engineering, DNA/RNA 

sequencing/synthesis/amplification, gene expression profiling, and use of antisense technology, 

lar ge -scale DNA synthesis, genome - and gene -editing, gene drive. 

 Proteins and other molecules: Sequencing/synthesis/engineering of proteins and peptides 

(including large molecule hormones); improved delivery methods for large molecule drugs; 

proteomics, prote in isolation and purification, signalling, identification of cell receptors. 

 Cell and tissue culture and engineering: Cell/tissue culture, tissue engineering (including tissue 

scaffolds and biomedical engineering), cellular fusion, vaccine/immune  stimulants, embryo 

manipulation, marker assisted breeding technologies, metabolic engineering. 

 Process biotechnology techniques: Fermentation using bioreactors, biorefining, bioprocessing, 

biopulping, biobleaching, biodesulphurisation, bioremediation, bios ensing, biofiltration and 

phytoremediation, molecular aquaculture. 

 Gene and RNA vectors: Gene therapy, viral vectors. 

 Bioinformatics: Construction of databases on genomes, protein sequences; modelling complex 

biological processes, including systems biolog y. 

 Nanobiotechnology: Applies the tools and processes of nano/microfabrication to build devices 

for studying biosystems and applications in drug delivery, diagnostics, etc.  

> Source: (Friedrichs and van Beuzekom, 2018 [1] ).

## Figure 2.1. Biotechnology and bio -solutions at a glance  

> Source: (Iris Group, 2021 [2] ).

New generation bio -solutions can provide durable materials which can attain different degrees of flexibility 

and strength, from soft materials such as fabric to hard objects such as chairs or even wind turbine blades. 

These materials can contribute to a transition to circular economy in a broad range of economic activities. 

Furthermore, rea ctions occur at low temperatures and ambient pressures, thus requiring low energy inputs. 

Indeed, the expansion of a bio -based economy “can help to bring economic growth and environmental 

policy goals closer together” and help achieve objectives such as ru ral industrial development. According 

to research examined by the OECD, at least 50 countries, including the G7 countries, have either national 

bio -economy strategies or policies steering towards a bioeconomy (OECD, 2017 [3] ).30 

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

In addition, bio -solutions may constitute a compelling alternative to fossil and chemically based products, 

whose production generates large greenhouse gas emissions. The use of bio -based materials within 

construction, for instance, has been iden tified as a potential means of improving sustainability within the 

built environment (Jones et al., 2017 [4] ). Bio -solutions may also offer alternatives to fossil -based plastic 

packaging in the food ind ustry and synthetic textiles in the fashion industry, and may be used for producing 

new and more sustainable ingredients for food and feed, as well as for pest control in the agricultural 

sector. 4 It should however be borne in mind that bio -solutions’ cont ribution to the increased sustainability 

of these and other economic activities will depend on the sustainability of the biomass which they process. 

Without attention to sustainability and carbon footprints, bio -based value chains will not be compatible wi th 

climate -change objectives (OECD, 2021 [5] ).

## Key transformative impacts 

The development of bio -solutions and bio -innovation more generally is expected to have a range of 

transformative effects, including creating employment and economy activity, accelerating the green 

transition and, by the same token, contributing to major changes in the chemical and petrochemical 

industries. 

The contribution of the bioeconomy, bio -solutions and bio -innovation to economic 

activity 

The OECD helped develop the notion of “bioeconomy” more than a decade ago. It has been argued that 

the bioeconomy in 2030 would likely involve three elements: advanced knowledge of genes and complex 

cell processes, renewable biomass and the integration of biotechnology applications across sectors 

(OECD, 2009 [6] ). OECD work has notably focused on three main areas of development: agriculture and 

livestock (OECD, 2009 [6] ); health (OECD, 2009 [6] ); and industry (OECD, 2009 [6] ). In addition to improving 

environmental sustainability (see next sub -section), the bioeconomy has the potential to yield efficiency 

ga ins in many productive processes. 

The European Commission, in turn, describes the bioeconomy as “encompassing the sustainable 

production of renewable resources from land, fisheries and aquaculture environments and their conversion 

into food, feed, fibre b io -based products and bio -energy as well as the related public goods”, “including 

primary production, such as agriculture, forestry, fisheries and aquaculture, and industries 

using/processing biological resources, such as the food and pulp and paper indust ries and parts of the 

chemical, biotechnological and energy industries” (European Commission, n.d. [7] ). According to a 2018 

report, the bioeconomy created up to EUR 614 billion of value added in 2017 in the EU -27, or 4.7% of the 

region’s GDP. Around 35% came from the food, beverages and tobacco industry, and 31% from 

agriculture. In 2017, the bioeconomy employed 17.5 million people in the EU -27, or 8.9% of the total labour 

force. Of these, 53% worked in agriculture and a quarter i n the food, beverages and tobacco industry. EU 

Labour productivity gains were achieved in all bioeconomy sectors over the 2009 -2017 period, except for 

the bioelectricity sector. The report also highlights that “the bioeconomy can act as a buffer against 

un employment in times of economic crisis” (Ronzon et al., 2020 [8] ) (European Commission, 2020 [9] ).

Furthermore, bio -based industries could create a million new jobs in the EU by 2030 according to recent 

estimates (JRC, 2021 [10] ).

According to a report quoting data from the US Department of Agriculture (FAO, 2018 [11] ), the bio -based 

industry in 2014 contributed a total of about USD 400 billion value added to the US economy; supported a 

total of 4.2 million jobs through direct, indirect and induced contributions; and generated 1.76 jobs in other 

se ctors of the economy for every bio -based job. Additionally, the indirect jobs in satellite activities are 

estimated to be around 1.53 million jobs, while induced jobs (produced from the purchase of goods and 

services generated by the direct and indirect jo bs directly supported the bio -based product industry)  31 

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

resulted in 2.7 million spillover jobs. The report also estimates that the b io -based industry generated 

USD 127 billion in direct sales and USD 266 billion in spillover sales over the period. 

Germany’s bioeconomy strategy, in turn, defines bioeconomy as “the knowledge -based production and 

utili sation of renewable resources in order to provide products, processes and services in all economic 

sectors, within the context of a future -capable economic system ” (BMBF & BMEL, 2015 [12] ). The concept 

of bioeconomy therefore encompasses all economic sectors and their associated commercial services 

involved in producing, working or processing, using or trading with renewable resources (FAO, 2018 [11] ).

An analysis of bioeconomy’s contribution to the German economy, including the mapping of relevant 

application examples, was carried out in 2015 based on this conceptual framework (see  Figure 2.2). 

## Figure 2.2. Facts and figures of bioeconomy in Germany 

Source: (BMBF & BMEL, 2015 [12] ), quoted in (FAO, 2018 [11] ).32 

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

Acceleration of the green transition in many economic sectors including energy, food 

and agriculture, construction and manufacturing 

Recent OECD work has concluded that the development of the bioeconomy could pl ay a critical role in 

supporting sustainable development (OECD, 2018 [13] ). The movement toward s using wastes, co -products 

and residue sources resonates well with circular economy principles of making the most efficient of uses 

of natural resources, as does as transition in focus from virgin to secondary materials in production (Philp 

and Winickoff, 2018 [14] ). In addition, certain bioeconomy activities such as w aste biorefining can h elp 

address several major policy goals (see  Box 2.2 for more details). 

## Box  2.2. Potential contribution of waste  biorefining to strategic policy objectives 

Using wastes materials in biorefining can be highly instrumental in meeting several policy goals and 

challenges, particularly in that: 

 It relieves pressure on land, thereby enhancing sustainability 

 It avoids the  issues around indirect land use change 

 It avoids issues such as the food versus fuel debate 

 It improves public opinion through the first three 

 In the case of waste industrial gases, especially CO and CO2, as well as the above four 

advantages, this uses GHGs that would otherwise become emissions, i.e. it contributes to 

science and policy goals around reducing emissions in climate policy 

 In the cas e of municipal solid waste all of the above apply (as it is converted to methane in 

landfill sites, and methane is a much more potent GHG than CO2), and an additional policy 

challenge is also addressed  – the diminishing supply of suitable sites for new lan dfills, a problem 

for many countries.  

> Source: (Philp and Winickoff, 2018 [14] ).

OECD analysis also highlights that “the need to reduce carbon emissions and fossil -fuel consumption 

represents an opportunity for engineer ing biology to emerge as a service and manufacturing sector”. 

Indeed, by 2100, more than 95% of chemicals and polymers may need to be derived from renewable 

resources. It is noted, for instance, that biotechnology “could be used to engineer microbes to pro duce 

targeted nutrients for human consumption, while bacteria could be manipulated to produce lightweight 

construction tools and materials” (OECD, 2021 [5] ).

In a similar vein, in the EU, support to a sustainable bioeco nomy is viewed as a means of transforming the 

region’s agricultural and industrial base through the creation of new bio -based value chains and greener, 

more cost -effective industrial processes, as well as enhancing the overall status of natural resources a nd 

ecosystems (JRC, 2021 [10] ). In the US, bio -based products are estimated to displace about 6.8 million 

barrels of oil a year and have the potential to reduce GHG emissions by 10 million metric tons of 

CO2eq/year (FAO, 2018 [11] ).

The potential of bio -innovation in the food system for bringing about new production and consumption 

systems that use renewable biological resources to produce food and feed, materials and energy has been 

particularly highli ghted. A report by the WEF stresses that “closing the biological cycle is a key pillar for 

circular or closed -loop models that are currently being developed and tested worldwide”. This report 

showcases the example of the city of Amsterdam, which is pioneer ing work at the municipal level to 

develop both biological and technical circular models. In line with the above -mentioned OECD analytical  33 

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

work, it states that “addressing food waste and food loss at the farm and consumer levels offers particularly 

compell ing opportunities for bio -innovation to contribute to more circular models; for example, the safe and 

efficient conversion of post -harvest losses and by -products from farming as a renewable energy source 

for fertili sation or other applications is a win -win situation for farmers and the environment” (World 

Economic Forum, 2018 [15] ). Figure 2.3 shows the range of areas within the food system where bio -

innovation could play a transformative role. The figure also indicates their relationship with relevant UN 

sustainable development go als (SDGs). 

## Figure 2.3. Bio -innovation in the food system  

> Source: (World Economic Forum, 2018 [15] ).

## Regulatory challenges 

The development of bio -solutions may be hampered by significant regulatory gaps, uncertainties and 

overlaps, making it difficult for start -ups and innovative businesses to test, develop and introduce new bio -

solutions on the market while at the same time e nsuring they are compliant with existing regulation. In 

addition, certain bio -solutions may fall outside the definitions of products that can be regulated under 

existing regulations, and consequently may not be subject to pre - or post -market oversight and fail to 

undergo the necessary assessment. Moreover, in some countries, case handling times for approving new 

bio -solutions can be particularly long. 

A study for the government of the Netherlands featured in an OECD report (OECD, 2017 [3] ) identified close 

to 80 regulatory barriers to the bioeconomy and grouped them around the following categories: 

 Fundamental constraints: call for a political and policy approach (e.g. import duties, level playing 

field, certification, and financial feasibility). 34 

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

 Conflicting constraints: cannot be removed, but governments can help companies to meet the 

regulations (e.g. REACH regulations). 

 Structural constraints: require adjustments to regulations, but do not demand policy or political 

action. 

 Operational constraints: the regulation itself is not the problem but its implementation. Especially 

for SMEs, these lead to substantial barriers to investment in the bioeconomy. 

According to the s ame report, governments should seek to remove existing barriers by focusing on three 

main objectives as far as regulation is concerned: develop instruments, in particular standards, to reduce 

barriers to trade in bio -based products; promote institutional c o-ordination and policy coherence; address 

regulatory hurdles that hinder investments; and establish a level playing field for bio -based products. 

Regulatory hu rdles and institutional co -ordination and competition issues are briefly discussed next 

together with a set of considerations on emerging risks and vulnerabilities. Technical standards are in turn 

discussed in the next section, as part of the array of regulatory responses to the challenges presented 

earlier in this document. 

Barriers to trade in bio -based products and regulatory hurdles hinder ing investments 

The OECD  has  identified considerable variability in estimates of environmental impacts as a hindrance to 

bio -based production . This hindrance  could be removed through international standardisatio n. In a similar 

vein, the  OECD  points out that, in a context where “the term  “bioeconomy ” itself means different things in 

different countries”, a shared definition of ‘bio -based product’ is needed as a standard for public 

procurement and business developm ent”  (OECD, 2017 [3] ).

As an example, according to exchanges with government authorities, a Danish company specialised in 

bio -based substitutes for chemically based pesticides used in the agricultural sector is reported to have 

been unable to bring its products on to the E U market thus far due to lengthy market approval processes. 

On a related note , a study on the needs and challenges of companies in the bioeconomy in north -western 

Europe notes the importance of regulatory barriers, especially those relating to lack of commonly agreed 

and global assessment tools as well as of internationally agreed sustainability criteria and certifica tion 

systems (NNFCC Ltd, 2018 [16] ).

Need for institutional co -ordination and policy coherence 

The development of commercially viable bio -solutions and bio -based products involves the creation  of new 

value chains and innovation ecosystems . Doing so requires, in turn,  appropriate  institutional and policy  co -

ordination enabling the adoption of a holistic approach that also takes account of interlinkages across 

sectoral regulations.  In particular , the evolution of  waste regulation, which is still predominantly defined as 

something that must be discarded rather re -used  (Philp, 2020 [17] ), is likely to affect the scope and pace of 

development for bio -solutions and the bioec onomy more generally.  As highlighted in OECD work,  national 

policy that overwhelmingly favours second -generation biorefining using waste materials as feedstocks 

directly contradicts national pol icy that aims to minimise waste. T he creation of  “virgin ” valu e-added 

products fro m waste feedstocks makes second -generation biorefining difficult to categorise within the 

classical waste hierarchy . To address this policy contradiction, the OECD has suggested classifying these 

waste feedstocks as  ‘secondary raw mater ials’  instead, in order to  lower waste management regulatory 

barriers  (Philp and Winickoff, 2018 [14] ). An OECD analysis of  Thai land’s bioeconomy  highlighted  the need 

for regulatory reform as a major barrier for the development of the industry.  A key area in this regard relates 

to zoning/ city planning  regulations (which are often not risk -based when it comes to authorising bio -based 

industrial activity) . Accor ding to this analysis, t his seems to be  “a regulatory barrier of high importance as 

it contradicts the ambition of rural biorefining and increasing bioeconomy in general ” (OECD, 2021 [18] ). 35 

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

A related regulatory challen ge will result from the potentially conflicting needs of agriculture and industry. 

As underscored by the FAO, “in the post -fossil -fuel world, an increasing proportion of chemicals, plastics, 

textiles, fuels and electricity will inevitably have to come from biomass, and this will increase competition 

for land” (FAO, 2018 [11] ).

As highlighted by the World Economic Forum, balancing diverse levels of governance, from local to global, 

is another important consideration from a co -ordi nation standpoint: 

At one end of the spectrum, a rapidly growing number of local actors and applications will require locally 

developed and owned governance solutions. Governance solutions would then be aligned with local needs 

and culture, and local comm unities would be empowered to make their own benefit and risk assessments. At 

the other end of the spectrum, the global implications, even of local activities, on shared natural resources and 

biodiversity, cross -border ecosystems and trade, and our shared culture of ethics call for more general 

principles and guideposts. In addition, the trend towards more open and distributed bio -innovation is 

underpinned by large -scale data and technology platforms, whose ownership and influence raise global 

governance qu estions in their own right. Last but not least, national governments will continue to play a crucial 

role in setting framework conditions for bio -innovation, for example by providing research funding, defining 

rules for competition and intellectual propert y, ensuring food safety and providing information to the wider 

public . (World Economic Forum, 2018 [15] )

Prevalence of an uneven playing field 

An uneven playing field may be created, for example, if bio -based products must conform to standards 

and rules tailored to limit risks related to fossil -based processes and products. When aiming to ensure a 

level playing field, regulators should also bear in mind that complex and time -consuming regulation is far 

more damaging to small bio -based companies than to their larger counterparts (OECD, 2017 [3] ). Similarly, 

barriers to entry can stem from the difficulties new, r elatively smaller entrants face in scaling up, whereas 

centralised, large -scale manufacturers in the chemical industry may have already achieved efficiencies. 

Emerging risks and vulnerabilities 

Regulators will also need to take into account the new risks a nd vulnerabilities (e.g. cyber -attacks) resulting 

from the increasing convergence and integration in bio -based production of robotics, microfluidics, cell -

free systems design, synthetic metabolic engineering and other technologies, as well as from the 

invo lvement of many different types of organisations (OECD, 2021 [5] ). A related challenge has to do with 

the increasingly data -driven nature of bio -innovation. With more data being collected, stored and analysed, 

data priv acy and ownership issues become more acute. Like in other sectors, the rise of larger platform 

players owning data or dominating data analytics capabilities raises new questions around who controls 

information and how it is used. 

On a related note, it has been stated that “the proliferation of biotechnology research and development 

raises questions of control and safety. The more players have access to next -generation tools, the more 

challenging it will become for any single player , for example a regulator, to have visibility into who does 

what”. In addition, lower technology cost and ease of access “can lead to do -it -yourself garage -type biology 

beyond government sanctioned or otherwise certified laboratories” (OECD, 2021 [19] ). Appropriate oversight 

is thus essential in this context. 

## Regulatory responses 

This section presents selected relevant regulatory approaches that either have been adopted or are being 

contemplated with regard to the innovations un der consideration in this case study. The following main 

features are focused upon: regulatory instruments at play (e.g. prescriptive vs. performance -oriented 

approaches), development of self - or co -regulation arrangements, and use of regulatory testing an d

experimentation, including regulatory exemptions. 36 

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

Technical standards and certification for bio -based products 

Technical standards are voluntary instruments developed “in response to a need in a particular area 

expressed by stakeholders through a bottom up approach” (OECD, 2016 [20] ). They can be developed 

domestically, by national standards bodies, or internationally (or regionally), by international (or regional) 

bodies. They can also be developed by private bodies. Technical standards may then be referenced or 

incorporated by States within their domestic legislation (OECD, 2021 [21] ).

Standards have strategic importance and provide a solid basis for introducing new products and 

technologies onto the market and a basis upon which further R&D can be built (They also help to remove 

the uncertainties that companies face. Developing standard s in close co -operation between industry, 

research and policy makers is essential to create the right environment for full -scale deployment of new 

products and technologies. Crucially, standards provide the necessary scientific basis for implementing 

legis lation by demonstrating compliance with legal requirements. 

Previous OECD work has highlighted the importance of clear sustainability standards and certification, 

which provide credibility to claims of performance and sustainability, such as “bio -based”, “renewable raw 

material”, “biodegradable”, “recyclable”, or “reduced greenhouse gas impact”. Standards and certification 

help verify claims such as biodegradability and bio -based content that will promote market uptake. Claims 

should be verifiable by consu mers, waste management authorities and legislators. They can also be used 

to verify that policy goals and targets are being met. In this context, product labels should give clear and 

reliable information about the environmental performance of bio -based mat erials. This applies especially 

to bioplastics as these are the most likely to be contentious in society as a result of negative outcomes and 

perceptions coming from the use of petro -plastics. Today, many different “eco -labels” are used globally, 

and defin itions and certification procedures differ widely. Significant efficiency gains may result from 

harmonising eco -labels in the medium term. (OECD, 2017 [3] ).

In a similar vein, OECD analytical work has notably underscore d the importance of developing international 

standards in sustainable fuels, as “the globalisation of supply chains, industry actors, and travel routes 

means that instruments with international coverage are required to promote sustainability without 

compro mising business models” (OECD, 2021 [21] ).

To help to develop the market for bioplastics, the Japan BioPlastics Association (JBPA) started a 

certification programme for products containing biomass -based plastic. The association has established 

standards as well as a methodology for the analysis and the evaluation of these plastics. The programme 

includes a logo that consumers can recognise easily. The JBPA certification, BiomassPla ,5 specifies that 

products with the logo must co ntain 25% of bio -based plastic (as measured by weight). In addition, the 

JBPA claims to co -operate with counterparts in the US (BPI), EU (European Bioplastics), China (BMG) 

and Korea, notably with regard to analytical methods to evaluate biodegradability, product specifications 

and recognition and labelling systems. 6

Creation of regulatory incentives: the case of Italy 

In the bioeconomy , a frequently mentioned example of successful regulation to stimulate innovation is the 

single -use plastic bag ban in Ital y. In January 2011, Italy promoted a first -of -kind regulation aimed at 

replacing traditional plastic carrier bags with biodegradable and compostable bags (compliant with the 

harmonised CEN Standard 13432) and reusable long -life bags. This is considered to have triggered 

various desired effects in Italy including new investments in bioplastics production, with positive cascade 

effects along the value chain. The regulation created improvements in waste management, while Italian 

citizens adopted a behaviour wi th a positive impact on environmental sustainability (OECD, 2017 [3] ). 37 

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

Anticipatory approach developed by the Swedish Committee for Technological 

Innovation and Ethics (Komet) 

The Swedish Committee for Technological Innovation and Ethics (Komet) aims promotes “a more future 

oriented way to work with regulation”, and “rules that are clear, future -proof and developed with legally 

safe methods, but encourage and facilitate ethical and sustainable innovation ”. To do so, it helps the 

Swedish government to proactively address improvements that technology could create for citizens, 

business and society, but also to highlight the conflicting goals that may arise. As stated on its website :

An important objective of the Komet work is to instil courage in the public sector. Although innovators are often 

private, at the end of the day, it is the public sector that must enable, be willing to and dare to meet the demands 

of both business and socie ty. It is the public sector’s role to ensure that the proper regulations are on the table .

(Committee for Technological Innovation and Ethics, 2020 [22] )

The Committee has developed a model to support the increased need for broad collaboration, testing and 

experimentation “as a fast and more secure way to learn about new technical solutions” (see  Figure 2.4).

To do so, it has examined various initiatives promoting experimental activities for technological innovation 

internationally. In addition, “a proposal to Government regarding controlled experiments where outcomes 

for both innovation and regulation can be achieved” is under development. 

St akeholder engagement also features prominently among the Committee’s activities; e.g. by developing 

surveys, organising seminars on technological innovation, ethics and integrity, and creating an open 

mailbox to capture problems with rules and regulation. 

Beyond the Swedish example, it should be noted that anticipatory and upstream approaches have 

emerged in a range of relevant areas that may help explore, deliberate and steer the consequences of 

innovation at an early stage. They allow for responding to p ublic concerns or changing circumstances 

along the development trajectory. From an industry perspective, upstream approaches can incorporate 

public values and concerns, potentially mitigating potential public backlash against technology. In OECD 

countries, frameworks for upstream governance have entered policy debates, e.g. in the context of the 

“Anticipatory Governance” pillar within the US Nanotechnology Initiative. Likewise, under the major EU 

research -funding programme, Horizon 2020, the Responsible Res earch and Innovation (RRI) pillar has 

attempted to mainstream this approach across all research activities, echoed by recent developments in 

the United States. Anticipatory governance also mitigates hubristic tendencies in risk management that 

one can esti mate complex risks and guard against failure with authoritative certainty (OECD, 2020 [23] )

(OECD, 2021 [5] ).38 

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

## Figure 2.4. Swedish Committee for Technological Innovation and Ethics: model for collaboration, 

## testing and experimentation  

> Source: (Committee for Technological Innovation and Ethics, 2020 [22] ).

OECD’s Working Party on the Harmonisation of Regulatory Overs ight in Biotechnology 

The OECD’s Working Party on the Harmonisation of Regulatory Oversight in Biotechnology (WP -HROB) 

deals with the environmental safety of genetically -engineered organisms (plants, animals, 

micro -organisms). Its work constitutes a relev ant example of regulatory co -operation to enhance 

consistency in technical regulations across jurisdictions, facilitate exchanges and help achieve public policy 

objectives. This Working Party aims to ensure that the types of elements used in biosafety asse ssment, 

as well as the methods to collect such information, are as similar as possible amongst countries. This 

improves mutual understanding and harmonised practice, which , in turn, increases the efficiency of the 

biosafety assessment process, limits dupli cation of effort and reduces barriers to trade. The WP -HROB 

participants are mainly officials from OECD countries responsible for the environmental risk/safety 

assessment of products derived from modern biotechnology. There are also representatives from ke y

partners (Brazil, P.R. China, India, Indonesia, South Africa), other interested countries (e.g. Argentina, 

Kenya, Paraguay, Philippines, Russian Federation, Thailand, Uruguay, Viet Nam); Business at OECD 

(BIAC); FAO; UNEP; the Convention on Biological Di versity Secretariat; the African Biosafety Network of 

Expertise (AUDA NEPAD -ABNE) and the Agriculture and Food Systems Institute. Participation from non -

OECD countries is supported by the Global Forum on Biotechnology. 

The publication of Consensus/Guidanc e Documents is a major output of the programme. The se constitute 

a set of practical tools for regulators and biosafety assessors dealing with new transgenic plant varieties 

and organisms, with respect to environmental safety. The 60 Consensus Documents iss ued to date 

address a range of subjects including the biology of crops, trees and microorganisms, as well as selected 

traits that have been introduced in plants. All documents are made available through the OECD BioTrack 

website 7 (OECD, 2021 [19] ). 39 

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

Policy co -ordination and public -private co -operation 

Avoiding value -chain weaknesses and other policy problems requires a whole -of -government, co -

ordinated approach. To this end, it can be useful to establish an independent advisory body, such as the 

German Bioeconomy Council, which advises German y’s Federal Government on the implementation of 

the country’s National Research Strategy Bioeconomy 2030 and National Policy Strategy on Bioeconomy. 

The Bioeconomy Council aims to support re search and development in the knowledge -based bioeconomy, 

set up positive framework conditions for a biobased economy, improve training and professional 

development in the bioeconomy, and conduct an open dialogue with different societal stakeholder groups 

(European Commission, 2021 [24] ). Other countries having established dedicated bio -economy advisory 

councils or stakeholder panels include Finland, France and Italy, whereas Costa Rica has committed to 

forming one (International Advisory Council on Global Bioeconomy, 2020 [25] ).

Such advisory bodies can help align the objectives and strategies of the different ministries and agencies, 

and facilitate the interaction between government and industry. Road maps can be used as policy co -

ordination tools in this context, in which case advisory bodies can help ensure that roadmaps are 

implemented timely and successfully (OECD, 2021 [5] ). An interesting example in this respec t is the UK’s 

Synthetic Biology Leadership Council, which is chaired jointly by a minister and a representative from 

industry or academia and has developed a Synthetic Biology Strategic Plan that focuses on the research 

and commercialisation of Synthetic B iology. 

Another example of policy co -ordination comes from the US , whose 2012 National Bioeconomy Strategy 

emphas ise d the benefits of co -ordinating federal efforts, especially with regard to R&D and regulation. In 

recent years, the country has taken steps to modernise the regulatory system relating to the bioeconomy. 

In 2017, the US Department of Agriculture released an interagency task force report outlining the need to 

increase public acceptance of biotechnology products, modernise and streamline the fed eral regulatory 

system for biotechnology products, and expedite the commercialisation of biotechnology products. The 

White House also released an “Update to the Coordinated Framework for the Regulation of Biotechnology” 

(EPA, 2017 [2 6] ), which aimed at streamlining regulatory processes and accelerating the translation of bio -

innovations to market (International Advisory Council on Global Bioeconomy, 2020 [25] ).

Regulatory sandbox launched by the Korean Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Energy 

In 2020 it was announced that the government of South Korea would designate ten industrial sectors, 

including the biotechnology industry, that would benefit from the count ry’s regulatory sandbox. 8 Within 

30 days, the government will inform companies if their intended business projects breach existing 

regulations. If the government does not respond within the deadline, the firms can assume there are no 

existing rules coverin g the enterprise. If regulations do exist, the government can give companies 

exemptions with provisions added; e.g. to carry out tests. After such tests, companies may obtain either a 

temporary or an official approval to commercialise the goods or services in the country. 9

## Conclusions 

Bio -solutions, and the bioeconomy more generally, can be instrumental in addressing many sustainability -

related challenges. It is thus very important to ensure that applicable regulatory frameworks do not stifle 

useful innovat ions and are technology neutral so as to guarantee a level playing field for bio -based 

products. In addition, these frameworks’ design and enforcement provisions will need to be risk -

proportionate to avoid unduly hampering innovation. This involves allowin g the testing and piloting of 

innovative bio -based products in suitable contexts, as these experimental approaches can enhance the 

evidence base for decision making and thus improve regulatory quality and outcomes. 40 

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

Well -co -ordinated and holistic approaches are also needed to ensure alignment and consistency of 

applicable regulations across sectors and policy areas (e.g. waste management and use, zoning 

regulations), thus avoiding potential contradictions. Dedicated advisory councils or stakeholder panels ca n

facilitate institutional co -ordination and help ensure that there is sufficient understanding and social 

acceptance of the implications of developing the bioeconomy, including bio -solutions. 

Moreover, a whole -of -government, co -ordinated approach, togeth er with appropriate international 

regulatory co -operation and robust oversight, are essential to remove regulatory hurdles such as the lack 

of commonly agreed and trusted assessment tools, sustainability criteria and certification systems. 

International st andards for bio -based products (e.g. on bio -based content, biodegradability, sustainability 

and functionalities) can help ensure consistency across sectors while enabling the development of labels 

for these products. Clear and credible labelling systems ca n in turn stimulate innovation and uptake; e.g. 

by providing consumers with clear information on the environmental performance of the products and 

guiding their purchasing behaviour towards sustainable choices. In addition, given the proliferation of 

natio nal and international labelling schemes, it would be beneficial to associate bio -based products with “a 

successful existing scheme that has a harmonised and standardised approach” (Philp and Winickoff, 

2018 [14] ). In so me cases, labelling and certification schemes may be strengthened through public -private 

co -operation. 

Going forward, and given the increasing technological convergence (i.e. integration of multiple 

technologies, in particular bio -, nano - and digital techn ologies) and associated uncertainty, policy and 

regulatory assessment will require anticipatory approaches that can assess innovations and technologies 

more holistically, while foreseeing possible ethical, social and governance challenges (OECD, 2020 [23] )

(García and Winickoff, 2022 [27] ). 41 

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

## Notes  

> 1

The World Economic Forum defines bio -innovation as “a set of advances in biotechnology, coupled with 

evolving economic and governance models”, thereby recognising “that innovation is shaped by both 

technological and social factors and that the role and impact of technology cannot be dissociated from the 

interests and norms in society that shape it, and are shaped by it” (World Economic Forum, 2018 [15] ). 

> 2

In its legal documents, the OECD Council has defined “Bio -based Products” as “commercial or industrial 

goods (other than food or feed) composed in whole or in significant part of biological products, forestry 

materials, or renewable domestic agricultura l materials, including plant, animal, or marine materials. These 

are products developed from biological materials, with the intent of replacing or enhancing products derived 

from non -renewable resources. The term bio -based product encompasses bio -based che micals, 

bio -based plastics, enzymes, bio -based materials, and bio -fuels. Food and feed are excluded.” (OECD, 

2012 [28] ). 

> 3

While these concepts are broader in scope, much of the analytical work carried out on these topics is 

rel evant for the purposes of this case study.  

> 4

On a related note, the OECD Observatory of Public Sector innovation has documented an interesting 

example from Ljubjliana, Slovenia, of p rocessing of invasive alien plant species into new, useful products 

(i nstead of composting or incinerating them), including paper and wood products, dyes and hybrid coatings, 

extracts for controlling of plant harmful organisms, food source, input materials for the industries of the 

future and 3D composites (OECD, 2016 [29] ) (OECD, 2019 [30] ). 

> 5

http://www.jbpaweb.net/english/e -bp/ . 

> 6

http://www.jbpaweb.net/english/ . 

> 7

www.oecd.org/science/biotrack . 

> 8

https://en.yna.co.kr/view/aen20200116007451320 . 

> 9

http://www.koreaherald.com/view.php?ud=20190110000327 .42 

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HA RNESS INNOVATION © O ECD 2022

## References 

BMBF & BMEL (2015), Bioeconomy in Germany. Opportunities for a bio -based and sustainable 

future .

> [12]

Committee for Technological Innovation and Ethics (2020), Responsible innovation requires new 

workways, and courage , https://www.kometinfo.se/further -reading/responsible -innovation -

requires -new -workways -and -courage/# .

> [22]

EPA (2017), Modernizing th e Regulatory System for Biotechnology Products ,

https://www.epa.gov/regulation -biotechnology -under -tsca -and -fifra/modernizing -regulatory -

system -biotechnology -products .

> [26]

European Commission (2021), Bioökonomierat - German Bioeconomy Council . [24] 

Euro pean Commission (2020), European Commission’s Knowledge Centre for Bioeconomy. 

Brief on jobs and growth of the EU bioeconomy 2008 -2017 .

> [9]

European Commission (n.d.), What is the Bioeconomy . [7] 

FAO (2018), Assessing the contribution of bioeconomy to countries’ economy. A brief review of 

national frameworks , https://www.fao.org/3/i9580en/I9580EN.pdf .

> [11]

Friedrichs, S. and B. van Beuzekom (2018), “Revised proposal for the revision of the statistical 

definitions of biotechnology and nanotechnology” , O ECD Science, Technology and Industry 

Working Papers , No. 2018/1, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/085e0151 -en .

> [1]

García, L. and D. Winickoff (2022), “Brain -computer interfaces and the governance 

system: Upstream approaches” , OECD Science, Technology and Industry Working Papers ,

No. 2022/01, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/18d86753 -en .

> [27]

International Advisory Council on Global Bioeconomy (2020), Global Bioeconomy Policy Report 

(IV): A decade of bioeconomy policy develop ment around the world .

> [25]

Iris Group (2021), “Biosolutions i Danmark - Analyse af bioøkonomiens potentialer og 

vækstbetingelser” , https://em.dk/media/14197/biosolutions -i-danmark -analyse -af -

biooekonomiens -potentialer -og -vaekstbetingelser.pdf .

> [2]

Jones, D. et al. (2017), “Chemical compositions of natural fibres”, in Advanced High Strength 

Natural Fibre Composites in Construction , Elsevier, https://doi.org/10.1016/b978 -0-08 -

100411 -1.00002 -9.

> [4]

JRC (2021), Future transitions for the Bioeconomy tow ards Sustainable Development and a 

Climate -Neutral Economy - Foresight Scenarios for the EU bioeconomy in 2050 .

> [10]

NNFCC Ltd (2018), Needs and challenges of companies in the bioeconomy in NW Europe ,

https://www.nweurope.eu/media/7055/needs -and -challenge s_final.pdf .

> [16]

OECD (2021), Biotechnology Update, ICBG Newsletter No. 39 ,

https://issuu.com/oecd.publishing/docs/icgb_june_2021_new .

> [19]

OECD (2021), “Guidance for a biorefining roadmap for Thailand” , OECD Science, Technology 

and Industry Policy Pape rs , No. 110, OECD Publishing, Paris, 

https://doi.org/10.1787/60a2b229 -en .

> [18]

 43 

> CASE STUDIES ON AGIL E REGULATORY GOVERNA NCE TO HARNESS INNOV ATION © OECD 2022

OECD (2021), International Regulatory Co -operation and International Organisations: The Case 

of ASTM International , https://www.oecd.org/gov/regulatory -policy/irc -astm -case -stu dy.pdf .

> [21]

OECD (2021), OECD Science, Technology and Innovation Outlook 2021: Times of Crisis and 

Opportunity , OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/75f79015 -en .

> [5]

OECD (2020), OECD work on emerging technologies and regulation. Internal working paper . [23] 

OECD (2019), Embracing innovtion in Government. Global trends 2019 , https://trends2019.oecd -

opsi.org/embracing -innovation -in -government -global -trends -2019.pdf .

> [30]

OECD (2018), Meeting Policy Challenges for a Sustainable Bioeconomy , OECD Publishing, 

Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264292345 -en .

> [13]

OECD (2017), The Next Production Revolution: Implications for Governments and Business ,

OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264271036 -en .

> [3]

OECD (2016), Internatio nal Regulatory Co -operation: The Role of International Organisations in 

Fostering Better Rules of Globalisation , OECD Publishing, Paris, 

https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264244047 -en .

> [20]

OECD (2016), Processing of invasive alien plant species into new, useful products , https://oecd -

opsi.org/innovations/processing -of -invasive -alien -plant -species -into -new -useful -products/ .

> [29]

OECD (2012), Recommendation of the Council on Assessing the Sustainability of Bio -Based 

Products [OECD/LEGAL/0395] , https://legal instruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/OECD -

LEGAL -0395 .

> [28]

OECD (2009), The Bioeconomy to 2030: Designing a Policy Agenda , OECD Publishing, Paris, 

https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264056886 -en .

> [6]

Philp, J. (2020), “Bioeconomy 101: Making rubber tyres from da ndelions”, OECD Observer ,

https://www.oecd -ilibrary.org/docserver/d619efca -

en.pdf?expires=1632321347&id=id&accname=ocid84004878&checksum=eaf45d74a3673bbf 

89eb5d1d85182df0 (accessed on 22 September 2021). 

> [17]

Philp, J. and D. Winickoff (2018), “Realising t he circular bioeconomy” , OECD Science, 

Technology and Industry Policy Papers , No. 60, OECD Publishing, Paris, 

https://doi.org/10.1787/31bb2345 -en .

> [14]

Ronzon, T. et al. (2020), “Developments of Economic Growth and Employment in Bioeconomy 

Sectors across the EU”, Sustainability , Vol. 12/11, p. 4507, 

https://doi.org/10.3390/su12114507 .

> [8]

World Economic Forum (2018), Bio -Innovation in the Food System. Towards a New Chapter in 

Multistakeholder Collaboration , https://www.weforum.org/whitepapers/bio -innovation -in -the -

food -system -towards -a-new -chapter -in -multistakeholder -collaboration/ .
