Title: Chongqing completes an investment of RMB 25.17 billion in transportation development in the first quarter of 2023

URL Source: https://news.cqnews.net/1/detail/1098212373502074880/web/content_1098212373502074880.htm

Markdown Content:
The main project of Chongqing-Hunan High-speed Railway – Wubu River Great Bridge.

CHONGQING (CQNEWS) -- Chongqing completed a total investment of RMB 25.17 billion in transportation development between January and March this year, up 14.8% from last year; the investment was over-completed and the growth rate exceeded expectations by 2.8 percentage points, achieving a "good and steady start" in the first quarter of the year, according to the Chongqing Municipal Transportation Bureau.

Railroads, highways, water transport, and civil aviation maintain good growth, up 17.1%, 15.9%, 55.2%, and 4.6% respectively from last year.

It is understood that the transportation industry of Chongqing has made efforts to promote transportation development since the beginning of this year. A plan for promoting effective investment in transportation infrastructure for 2023 was released to accelerate the construction of transportation projects and realize reporting its double-digit growth in transportation investment in the first quarter.

To guarantee the smooth construction of the project, the Chongqing Office of the Leading Group on Transporation Development reviewed and approved the Key Points of the Development of a City with Strong Transportation for 2023, and the Annual Work Plan for the Key Projects of the Development of a City with Strong Transportation for 2023 and Key Tasks of Logistics and Transportation Development. Focusing on key tasks such as increasing investment in transportation construction, deepening research on the strategy for developing a city with a strong transportation system, implementing major transportation projects, and improving the efficiency of logistics and transportation organization, Chongqing will specify steps, clarify responsibilities, keep track of the construction progress, and make every effort to ensure the smooth implementation of transportation projects.

The Chongqing Municipal Transportation Bureau will regularly strengthen the supervision mechanism, and analyze and resolve construction difficulties to ensure the rapid progress of major projects.

The construction of ten railroad projects (covering 1,023 kilometers), including the Chongqing-Kunming High-speed Railway, has been accelerated. The six high-speed railway projects, namely the Chongqing-Qianjiang section of the Chongqing-Hunan High-speed Railway, the Chongqing-Kunming High-speed Railway, the Chengdu-Dazhou-Wanzhou High-speed Railway, the Chongqing-Wanzhou High-Speed Railway, the Second Chengdu-Chongqing High-speed Railway, and the Xi'an-Chongqing High-speed Railway have been completed by about 49%, 52.5%, 12.3%, 9.5%, 2%, and 2.1%, respectively.

The construction of 25 highway projects (covering 1,391 kilometers), including the second Chongqing-Hunan Highway has been sped up. The Wuxi-Shaanxi’s Zhenping highway, the Jiangjin-Luzhou North Line highway, and the Tongliang-Anyue highway have been completed by about 96.5%, 67.7%, and 68% respectively.

In terms of water transport, the construction of 10 projects, including the Wujiang Baima navigation hub, was accelerated; terminals for bulky items in Guoyuan Port are undergoing inspection and acceptance; The Yubei Luoqi Phase I project and the improvement of the waterway from Wujiang Baima to Pengshui has also been sped up.

The Civil Aviation Administration of China (CAAC) has approved the location of Chongqing’s new airport. The steel structure of the T3B terminal and the earthwork design of the flight area at Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport has been completed. (Translated by Yuki, Fathom Language Limited)
