Title: 

URL Source: https://fastcapitalism.journal.library.uta.edu/index.php/fastcapitalism/article/view/355/407

Markdown Content:
Page  75 Fast C apitalism I S S N 1930-014X 

Volume 14 • I s s u e 1 • 2017 d o i : 10.32855/fcapital.201701.013 

## In Remembrance of Ben Agger, an Honorable Critical Theorist 

Explaining the Donald Trump phenomenon is a challenge that will occupy critical theorists of U.S. politics 

for years to come. My first take on the Trump phenomenon is that Donald Trump won the Republican primary 

contest and then the 2016 U.S. Presidential Election because he is the  master of media spectacle , a concept 

that I’ve been developing and applying to U.S. politics and media since the mid-1990s.[1] In this study, I will first 

discuss Trump’s use of media spectacle in his business career, in his effort to become a celebrity and reality-TV 

superstar, and his political campaigns. Then I shall examine how Trump embodies Authoritarian Populism and has 

used racism, nationalism, xenophobia, and the disturbing underside of American politics to mobilize his supporters 

in his successful Republican primary campaign and in the hotly contested win in the 2016 general election. 

## Donald Trump and the Politics of the Spectacle 

I first came up with the concept of media spectacle to describe the key phenomenon of US media and politics 

in the mid-1990s. This was the era of the O.J. Simpson murder case and trial, the Clinton sex scandals, and the rise 

of cable news networks like Fox, CNN, and MSNBC and the 24/7 news cycle that has dominated US politics and 

media since then.[2] The 1990s was also the period when the Internet and New Media took off so that anyone 

could be a political commentator, player, and participant in the spectacle, a phenomenon that accelerated as New 

Media morphed into Social Media and teenagers, celebrities, politicians, and others wanting to become part of the 

networked virtual world joined in. 

The scope of the spectacle has thus increased in the past decades with the proliferation of new media and 

social networking like Facebook, YouTube, Twitter, Instangram, Skype, and the like that increases the scope and 

participation of the spectacle. By “media spectacles” I am referring to media constructs that present events which 

disrupt ordinary and habitual flows of information, and which become popular stories which capture the attention of 

the media and the public, and circulate through broadcasting networks, the Internet, social networking, smart phones, 

and other new media and communication technologies. In a global networked society, media spectacles proliferate 

instantaneously, become virtual and viral, and in some cases becomes tools of socio-political transformation, while 

other media spectacles become mere moments of media hype and tabloidized sensationalism. 

Dramatic news and events are presented as media spectacles and dominate certain news cycles. Stories like the 

9/11 terror attacks, Hurricane Katrina, Barack Obama and the 2008 U.S. presidential election, and in 2011 the Arab 

Uprisings, the Libyan revolution, the UK Riots, the Occupy movements and other major media spectacles of the 

era, cascaded through broadcasting, print, and digital media, seizing people’s attention and emotions, and generating 

complex and multiple effects that may make 2011 as memorable a year in the history of social upheaval as 1968.[3] 

In today’s highly competitive media environment, “ Breaking News! ” of various sorts play out as media 

# Donald Trump, Media Spectacle, and 

# Authoritarian Populism 

# Douglas Kellner Page  76  Douglas Kellner fast capitalism  Volume 14 • Issue 1 • 2017 

spectacle,  including mega-events like wars, 9/11 and other spectacular terrorist attacks, extreme weather disasters, 

or, in Spring 2011, political insurrections and upheavals. These spectacles assume a narrative form and become 

focuses of attention during a specific temporal and historical period, that may only last a few days, or may come to 

dominate news and information for extended periods of time, as did the O.J. Simpson Trial and the Clinton sex/ 

impeachment scandal in the mid-1990s, the stolen election of 2000 in the Bush/Gore presidential campaign, or 

natural and other disasters that have significant destructive effects and political implications, such as Hurricane 

Katrina, the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill, or the Fukushima-Daiichi nuclear catastrophe. Media spectacles can 

even become signature events of an entire epoch as were, arguably, the 9/11 terrorist attacks which inaugurated a 

historical period that I describe as Terror War. 

I’ve argued since 2008 that the key to Barack Obama’s success in two presidential elections was largely due to his 

becoming a master of media spectacle, blending politics and performance in carefully orchestrated media spectacles 

(Kellner 2009 and 2012). Previously, the model of the mastery of presidential spectacle was Ronald Reagan who 

everyday performed his presidency in a well-scripted and orchestrated daily spectacle. Reagan was trained as an actor 

and every night Ron and Nancy reportedly practiced his lines for the next day performance like they had done in their 

Hollywood days. Reagan breezed through the day scripted with a teleprompter and well-orchestrated media events, 

smiling frequently, and pausing to sound-bite the line of the day.[4] 

In the 2016 election, obviously Donald Trump emerged as a major producer of media spectacle (see Kellner 

2016). Trump has long been a celebrity and master of the spectacle with promotion of his buildings and casinos 

from the 1980s to the present, his reality-TV shows, self-promoting events, and now his presidential campaign and 

presidency. Hence, Trump was empowered and enabled to run for the presidency in part because media spectacle 

has become a major force in US politics, helping to determine elections, government, and more broadly the ethos 

and nature of our culture and political sphere, and Trump is a successful creator and manipulator of the spectacle. 

I would also argue that in recent years U.S. wars have been orchestrated as media spectacle, recalling Bush Jr’s 

2003 Iraq shock and awe campaign for one example. Likewise, terrorism has been orchestrated as media spectacle 

since the 9/11 attack that was the most spectacular and deadly attack on the US heartland in history. As we know too 

well, school and mass shootings which can be seen as a form of domestic terrorism, have become media spectacle 

with one taking place in 2015 in Virginia on live TV, while the stock market, weather, and every other form of life 

can become part of a media spectacle. Hence, it is no surprise that political campaigns are being running as media 

spectacles and that Knights of the Spectacle like Donald Trump played the spectacle to win the presidency, nor is it 

surprising that Trump is playing his role as president as King of the Spectacle. 

Trump’s biographies reveal that he was driven by a need to compete and win,[5] and entering the highly 

competitive real estate business in New York in the 1980s, Trump saw the need to use the media and publicity to 

promote his celebrity and image. It was a time of tabloid culture and media-driven celebrity and Trump even adopted 

a pseudonym “John Baron” to give the media gossip items that touted Trump’s successes in businesses, with women, 

and as a rising man about town.[6] 

Trump derives his language and behavior from a highly competitive and ruthless New York business culture 

and an appreciation of the importance of media and celebrity to succeed in a media-centric hypercapitalism. Hence, 

to discover the nature of Trump’s “temperament,” personality, and use of language, we should recall his reality-TV 

show  The Apprentice  which popularized him into a super celebrity and made the Donald a major public figure for a 

national audience. Indeed, Trump is the first reality-TV candidate who ran his campaign and presidency like a reality-

TV series, boasting during the most chaotic episodes in his campaign that his rallies were the most entertaining, and 

sending outrageous Tweets into the Twitter-sphere which then dominated the news cycle on the ever-proliferating 

mainstream media and social networking sites. Hence, Trump is the first celebrity candidate and now president whose 

use of the media and celebrity star power is his most potent weapon in his improbable and highly surreal campaign 

and presidency.[7] 

## The Apprentice, Twitter and the Summer of Trump 

Since Trump’s national celebrity derived in part from his role in the reality-TV series  The Apprentice ,[8] we need 

to interrogate this popular TV spectacle to help explain the Trump phenomenon. The opening theme music “For 

the Love of Money”, a 1973 R&B song by The O’Jays, established the capitalist ethos of the competition for the Donal D Trump,  meDia  spec Tacle, an D auThori Tarian  populism  Page  77 Volume 14 • Issue 1 • 2017  fast capitalism 

winning contestant to get a job with the Trump organization, and obviously money is the key to Trump’s business 

and celebrity success, although there is much controversy over Trump’s wealth, and so far he has not released his 

tax returns to quell rumors that he isn’t as rich as he claims, that he does not contribute as much to charity as he has 

stated, and that many years he pays little or no taxes. 

In the original format of  The Apprentice , several contestants formed teams to carry out a task dictated by 

Trump, and each “contest” resulted with a winner, followed by Trump barking “you’re fired” to the loser. Curiously, 

some commentators believe in the 2012 presidential election that Barack Obama beat Mitt Romney handily because 

he early on characterized Romney as a billionaire who liked to fire people, which is ironic since this is Trump’s 

signature personality trait in his business, reality-TV, and now political career, which has seen him fire two campaign 

managers and more advisors by August 2016 and fire his National Security Advisor, FBI Director, and others during 

his still young presidency. 

The Apprentice  premiered in January 2004, and after six seasons, a new format was introduced:  The Celebrity 

Apprentice . The celebrity apprentice series generally followed the same premise as the original, but with celebrities 

as contestants participating to win money for their chosen charities, rather than winning a job opportunity with 

the Trump organization. There have been seven seasons of  The Celebrity Apprentice  since 2008, although NBC 

announced on June 29, 2015 that it was severing all business ties with Trump due to the latter’s comments about 

Mexican immigrants, but has said its relationship with Mark Burnett and the show will continue, although low ratings 

with another celebrity/politician/show biz dude Arnold Schwarzennegger, and his public feud with the Donald, has 

raised questions about the show’s future. 

When NBC started negotiating with Trump concerning the reality TV-series in 2002, according to NBC producer 

Jeff Gaspin, the network was not sure that the New York-centric real estate mogul would have a national resonance 

and the initial concept envisaged different billionaires each season hiring an apprentice. The show immediately got 

good ratings and Trump became a popular TV figure as he brought the contestants into his board room in Trump 

Tower, appraised their performances, insulted those who did not do well, and fired the loser.[9] 

The Apprentice ’s TV Producer Mark Burnett broke into national consciousness with his reality-TV show 

Survivor , a neo-Darwinian epic of alliances, backstabbing, and nastiness, which provides an allegory of how one 

succeeds in the dog-eat-dog business world in which Donald Trump has thrived, and spectacularly failed as many of 

the books about him document. Both Burnett and Trump share the neo-Darwinian (a)social ethos of 19th century 

ultracompetitive capitalism with some of Donald Trump’s famous witticisms proclaiming: 

> When somebody challenges you unfairly, fight back—be brutal, be tough—don’t take it. It is always important to WIN!
> I think everyone’s a threat to me.
> Everyone that’s hit me so far has gone down. They’ve gone down big league.
> I want my generals kicking ass.
> I would bomb the shit out of them.
> You bomb the hell out of the oil. Don’t worry about the cities. The cities are terrible.[10]

In any case,  The Apprentice  made Trump a national celebrity who became well-known enough to plausibly 

run for president. Throughout the campaign season Trump used his celebrity to gain media time. In addition to his 

campaign’s ability to manipulate broadcast media, Trump is also a heavy user of Twitter and tweets throughout the 

day and night. Indeed, Trump may be the first major Twitter candidate and now president, and certainly he is the one 

using it most aggressively and frequently. Twitter was launched in 2006, but I don’t recall it being used in a major way 

in the 2008 election, although Obama used Facebook and his campaign bragged that he had over a million “Friends” 

thus using Facebook as part of his daily campaign apparatus. I don’t recall, however, previous Presidential candidates 

using Twitter in a big way like Donald Trump, although many had accounts. 

Twitter is a perfect vehicle for Trump as you can use its 140-character framework for attack, bragging, and getting 

out simple messages or posts that engage receivers who feel they are in the know and involved in TrumpWorld when 

they get pinged and receive his tweets. When asked at an August 26, 2015, Iowa event as to why he uses Twitter so 

much, he replied that it was easy, it only took a couple of seconds, and that he could attack his media critics when 

he “wasn’t treated fairly.” Trump has also used Instagram --an online mobile photo-sharing, video-sharing and social 

networking service that enables its users to take pictures and videos, and share them on a variety of social networking 

platforms, such as Facebook, Twitter, Tumblr and Flickr. 

Twitter is perfect for General Trump who can blast out his opinions and order his followers what to think. It 

enables Businessman and Politician Trump to define his brand and mobilize those who wish to consume or support Page  78  Douglas Kellner fast capitalism  Volume 14 • Issue 1 • 2017 

it. Trump Twitter gratifies the need of Narcissist Trump to be noticed and recognized as a Master of Communication 

who can bind his warriors into an on-line community. Twitter enables the Pundit-in-Chief to opine, rant, attack, and 

proclaim on all and sundry subjects, and to subject TrumpWorld to the indoctrination of their Fearless Leader. 

Hence, Trump is mastering new media as well as dominating television and old media through his orchestration 

of media events as spectacles and daily Twitter feeds. In Trump’s presidential campaign kickoff speech on June 16, 

2015, when he announced he was running for President, Trump and his wife Melania dramatically ascended down 

the stairway at Trump Towers, and the Donald strode up to a gaggle of microphones and dominated media attention 

for days with his drama. The opening speech of his campaign made a typically inflammatory remark that held in 

thrall news cycles for days when he stated: “The U.S. has become a dumping ground for everybody else’s problems. 

[Applause] Thank you. It’s true, and these are the best and the finest. When Mexico sends its people, they’re not 

sending their best. They’re not sending you. They’re not sending you. They’re sending people that have lots of 

problems, and they’re bringing those problems with us. They’re bringing drugs. They’re bringing crime. They’re 

rapists. And some, I assume, are good people.” 

This comment ignited a firestorm of controversy and a preview of Things to Come concerning vile racism, 

xenophobia, Islamophobia, and the other hallmarks of Trump’s Cacophony of Hate. Debate over Trump’s assault 

on undocumented immigrants would come to dominate daily news cycles of the Republican primaries and would 

continue to play out in the general election in Fall 2016. In the lead up to the first Republican primary debate in Fall 

2015, Donald Trump got the majority of media time; his daily campaign appearances and the Republican primary 

debates became media spectacle dominated by Trump. Every day that Trump had a campaign event, the cable news 

networks would hype the event with crawlers on the bottom of the TV screen proclaiming “Waiting for Trump,” 

with air-time on cable TV dominated by speculation on what he would talk about. Trump’s speeches were usually 

broadcast live, often in their entirety, a boon of free TV time that no candidate of either party was awarded. After 

the Trump event, the rest of the day the pundits would dissect what he had said and his standing vis-à-vis the other 

Republican candidates. If Trump had no campaign event planned, he would fire off a round of Tweets against his 

opponents on his highly active Twitter account—-which then would be featured on network cable news discussions 

as well as social media. 

Hence, Trump’s orchestration of media spectacle and a compliant mainstream media was a crucial factor in 

thrusting Trump ever further into the front runner status in the Republican primaries and winning for him the 

overwhelming amount of media attention and eventually the Republican nomination. The first major quantitative 

study indicated that from mid-June 2015 after Trump announced he was running through mid-July, Trump was in 

46% of the news media coverage of the Republican field, based on Google news hits; he also got 60% of Google 

news searches, and I will bet that later academic studies will show how he dominated all media from newspapers to 

television to Twitter and new media to social networking during the Republican primaries and then during the general 

election.[11] 

At a press conference on August 26, 2015, before his appearance at a rally in Dubuque Iowa, Trump bragged 

about how all three US cable news networks, as well as the other big three networks and even foreign news networks, 

were following him around all day, broadcasting all his live campaign appearances, and even his appearance for Jury 

duty in New York one day (he didn’t have to serve and cable news anchors led off that night with ordinary people 

who had been waiting all day to see if they would be enrolled to serve on a jury who were asked what Trump had 

been doing all day, if he’d said anything, and so on, clearly a waste of news space and sign that Trump was dominating 

Republican primary coverage). 

The August 26, 2015 Iowa event was the day that a Univision anchor Jorge Ramos tried to interrupt Trump’s 

press conference to challenge Trump on immigration, in which Trump had his operatives throw Ramos out, but then 

let him in to create another media spectacle of Trump vs Ramos as they battled it out debating immigration, letting 

Trump dominate yet another news cycle. 

The same day, Trump bragged about how one major media insider told him that it was the “Summer of Trump” 

and that it was amazing how he was completely dominating news coverage. Trump also explained, correctly I think, 

why he was getting all the media attention: “RATINGS,” he explained, “it’s ratings, the people love me, they want 

to see me, so they watch TV when I’m on.” And I do think it is ratings that leads the profit-oriented television 

networks to almost exclusively follow Trump’s events and give him live TV control of the audience. In his 1989 book, 

Fast Capitalism , and  Speeding Up Fast Capitalism , a sequel to his earlier book, Ben Agger presented a framework 

for analyzing mutations in society, culture, and politics that have made possible a Donald Trump.[12] Without a 

media-saturated cybercapitalism, new technologies like Twitter and social networking, and a celebrity culture that has Donal D Trump,  meDia  spec Tacle, an D auThori Tarian  populism  Page  79 Volume 14 • Issue 1 • 2017  fast capitalism 

morphed into politics, there could never be a Donald Trump. 

Trump rose to prominence in New York during the Reaganite ‘80s as an embodiment of wild, entrepreneurial 

cowboy capitalism in an era of deregulation, the celebration of wealth, and the “greed is good” ethos of Wall Street, 

enabled by the Reagan administration. Trump’s success was tied to an unrestrained finance capital that loaned him 

immense sums of money, often with minimal and problematic collateral, to carry through his construction projects. 

Trump was an extravagant consumer with a three-story penthouse at the top of Trump Towers, a 118 room mansion 

in Palm Beach, Florida Mar-A-Lago that he immediately opened for TV interview segments, and an obscene array of 

properties. He flaunted a yacht bought from Saudi arms dealer Adnan Khashoggi, and a personal airplane to jet-set 

him around the world to luxury resorts. Trump was featured on TV shows like  Life Styles of the Rich and Famous ,

and his life-style was the subject of multi-page spreads in fashion and other popular magazines, making Trump the 

poster-boy for excessive “conspicuous consumption,” of a degree that I doubt Veblen could have imagined.[13] 

Trump’s financial fortunes hit the economic slowdown that followed the Reagan orgy of unrestrained capitalism 

in the late 1980s,[14] and in the 1990s Trump almost became bankrupt. Fittingly, Trump had overinvested in the very 

epitome of consumer capitalism, buying a string of luxury gambling casinos in Atlantic City. The financial slump hit 

Trump’s overextended casinos, driving him to put them on the market. The banks called in loans on his overextended 

real estate investments, and he was forced to sell off properties, his yacht, and other luxury items. Having temporarily 

lost his ability to borrow from finance capital to expand his real estate business, Trump was forced to go into 

partnerships in business ventures, and then sold the Trump name that was attached to an array of consumer items 

ranging from water to vodka, and men’s clothes to fragrances. 

Throughout his career, Trump has been particularly assiduous in branding the Trump name and selling himself 

as a businessman, a celebrity, presidential candidate, and president. Indeed, Trump’s presidential campaign represents 

an obscene branding of a predatory hypercapitalist into a political candidate whose campaign and presidency has 

been run on bombast, dominating on a daily basis the mediascape, and gaining the attention of the public. Obviously, 

Trump is orchestrating political theater, his theatrics are sometimes entertaining, and sometimes utterly appalling. 

Hence, his candidacy represents another step in the merger between entertainment, celebrity and politics (here 

Ronald Reagan played a key role, our first actor President). Yet Trump is arguably the first major candidate to pursue 

politics as entertainment and thus to completely collapse the distinction between entertainment, news, and politics. 

He is also the first authoritarian populist to have been a party nominee for President in recent times. 

## Donald Trump and Authoritarian Populism 

Much has been made of Donald Trump’s character and whether he is fit to be president of the United States. 

In the following analysis, I want to suggest that the theories of Erich Fromm and his fellow German-Jewish refugees 

known as the “Frankfurt School” provide an analysis of authoritarian populism that helps explicate Trump’s 

character, his appeal to his followers, and in general the Trump phenomenon.[15] 

Erich Fromm was a German Jewish intellectual and psychoanalyst who was affiliated with the Frankfurt School, a 

group of German Jews and progressives who left Hitler’s Germany in the early 1930s and settled in the United States, 

developing critical theories of fascism, contemporary capitalism, and Soviet Marxism from a theoretical standpoint 

that combines Marx, Freud, Weber, Nietzsche and other radical theorists and critics of Western civilization.[16] 

Fromm was the group’s Freud expert who was affiliated with the Frankfurt  Psychoanalytic Institute  in Germany, and 

was a practicing analyst in Germany and then the United States. After breaking with the Frankfurt school in the late-

1930s, Fromm went on to becoming a best-selling author and radical social critic in the United States. 

Fromm was a strong critic of Hitler and German fascism and I believe that his major books and some key 

ideas help explain the character, presidential campaign, and supporters of Donald Trump. Hence, in this discussion, 

I develop a Frommian analysis of Trump and his followers and take on the issue of how American authoritarian 

populism looks in the Era of Trump. This project begins with Fromm’s  Escape from Freedom , which explains how 

in modernity individuals submitted to oppressive and irrational regimes and in particular how Germans submitted to 

Hitler and fascism.[17]  Escape  combines historical, economic, political, ideological and socio-psychological analysis, 

as is typical of the best multidimensional work of Fromm and the Frankfurt School, and provides a model that we 

can apply to analyzing Trump and our current political situation. 

Certainly, Trump is not Hitler and his followers are not technically fascists,[18] although I believe that we can Page  80  Douglas Kellner fast capitalism  Volume 14 • Issue 1 • 2017 

use the terms  authoritarian populism  or  neo-fascism  to explain Trump and his supporters.[19] Authoritarian 

movements ranging from German and Italian fascism to Franco’s Spain to Latin American and other dictatorships 

throughout the world center on an authoritarian leader and followers who submit to their leadership and demands. 

I maintain that Donald Trump is an authoritarian leader who has mobilized an authoritarian populist movement 

that follows his leadership. Arguably, Trump is an authoritarian populist in the traditions of Ronald Reagan and 

Margaret Thatcher. Like Reagan, Trump comes out of the entertainment industry and was a popular celebrity as he 

announced his candidacy in summer 2015 thanks in part to his television celebrity as every mainstream media outlet 

touted his announcing his candidacy. Trump does not share the conservative ideology of Reagan and Thatcher, 

although he shares their electoral strategy of taking a populist pose claiming to represent the people against the 

political establishment. 

Yet Trump lacks Reagan’s disciplined skills as a performer and Thatcher “Iron Lady” self-discipline and political 

rationality. Instead, Trump shoots from the lip and cannot resist insults, attacks, impolitic language and rants against 

those who dare to criticize or offend him. While Trump does not have a party apparatus or ideology like the Nazis, 

parallels to Nazism appeared clear to me watching a TV broadcast on August 21, 2015, of Trump’s mega-rally in 

Mobile, Alabama. I watched all afternoon as the cable news networks broadcast nothing but Trump, hyping up his 

visit to a stadium where he was expecting 30-40,000 spectators, the biggest rally of the season. Although only 20-

some thousand showed up, which was still a “huge” event in the heat of summer before the primaries had even 

begun in earnest, Trump’s flight into Alabama on his own Trump Jet and his rapturous reception by his admirers 

became the main story of the news cycle, as did many such daily events in what the media called “the summer of 

Trump.” 

What I focused on in watching the TV footage of the event was how the networks began showing repeated 

images of Trump flying his airplane over and around the stadium before landing and then cut away to big images 

of the Trump Jet every few minutes. This media spectacle reminded me of one of the most powerful propaganda 

films of all time -— Leni Riefenstahl’s Triumph of the Will ¬– a German Nazi propaganda film of 1935. Triumph 

focuses on Hitler flying in an airplane through the clouds, looking out the window at the crowds below, landing, and 

driving through mass crowds applauding him as his proceeded through the streets of Nuremburg for a mass rally. 

The crowds along the way and in the stadium greeted Hitler with rapture as he entered the spectacle of a highly 

touted and orchestrated Nuremburg mass Nazi rally that Riefenstahl captured on film. 

I do not know if the Trump operatives planned this parallel, or if it was just a coincidence, but it is clear that 

Trump, like Hitler, has organized a fervent mass movement outside of the conventional political party apparatuses. 

The anger and rage that Fromm attributed to Nazi masses in  Escape from Freedom  is also exhibited in Trump’s 

followers as is the  idolatry  toward their Fuhrer, who arguably see Trump as the  magic helper  who will solve their 

problems by building a giant wall to keep out the threatening Other, a Fairy Tale scenario that Fromm would have 

loved to deconstruct.[20] 

Like followers of European fascism in the 1930s, Trump’s supporters over the years have suffered economic 

deprivation, political alienation, humiliation, and a variety of hard times, and they appear to be looking for a political 

savior to help them out with their problems and to address their grievances. Trump proposes magical solutions like 

a wall along the Mexican border that will keep out swarms of immigrants that he claims are taking away jobs in 

the U.S., as well as committing waves of crime. Trump claims he will create millions of “great” jobs without giving 

specific plans –- a claim refuted by his problematic business record that includes many bankruptcies, hiring of 

foreign workers to toil on his projects, some of whom he does not pay, and failures to pay many subcontractors who 

worked on his projects.[21] 

Trump thus presents himself as a Superhero who will magically restore the U.S. to greatness, provide jobs and 

create incredible wealth, and restore the U.S. to its rightful place as the world’s Superpower. In this Fairy Tale, the 

billionaire King will fight and destroy all the Nation’s domestic and foreign enemies and the Superman will triumph 

and provide a Happy Ending for the people of the U.S.[22] 

While Trump plays the role of the  Übermensch  (Superman or Higher Man) celebrated by the Nazis and 

embodies their  Führerprinzip  (leadership principle), Trump is a very American form of the Superhero, and lacks 

the party apparatus, advanced military forces, and disciplined cadres that the Nazis used to seize and hold power. 

Like other rightwing American populists, Trump bashed the Federal Reserve, the U.S. monetary system, Wall Street 

hedge fund billionaires, and neoliberal globalization, in the same fashion as Hitler attacked German monopoly 

capitalism. While Hitler ranted against monopoly capitalists, at the same time he accepted big donations from 

German industrialists, as brilliantly illustrated in the famous graphic by John Heartfield “the meaning of the Hitler Donal D Trump,  meDia  spec Tacle, an D auThori Tarian  populism  Page  81 Volume 14 • Issue 1 • 2017  fast capitalism 

salute” which showed Hitler with his hand up in the Nazi salute, getting bags of money from German capitalists. 

[23] Just as Hitler denounced allegedly corrupt and weak party politicians in the Weimar Republic, Trump decries all 

politicians as “idiots,” “stupid,” or “weak” – some of the would-be strongman’s favorite words. In fact, Trump even 

attacked lobbyists, and claimed he alone was above being corrupted by money, since he was self-financing his own 

campaign. Of course, these claims were not really true and Trump filled his administration with lobbyists, corporate 

and political insiders, and other Swamp Creatures as he assembled his administration (see Kellner 2017).[24] 

Trump has his roots in an American form of populism that harkens back to figures like Andrew Jackson, Huey 

Long, George Wallace, Pat Buchanan and, of course, the American carnival barker and snake oil salesman.[25] Like 

these classical American demagogues, Trump plays on the fears, grievances, and anger of people who feel that 

they have been left behind by the elites. Like his authoritarian populist predecessors, Trump also scapegoats targets 

from Wall Street to a feared mass of immigrants allegedly crossing the Mexican border and pouring into the States, 

overwhelming and outnumbering a declining White population.[26] 

Trump’s followers share antecedents in the Know Nothing movement of the 1850s, the Ku Klux Klan 

movement which achieved popularity and media in the 1920s, with Donald’s father Fred Trump arrested at one of 

its rallies,[27] and the movement that made George Wallace a popular candidate in the 1960s. Like the alienated and 

angry followers of authoritarian populist movements throughout the world, Trump’s admirers had suffered under 

the vicissitudes of capitalism, globalization, and technological revolution. For decades, they have watched their jobs 

being moved overseas, displaced by technological innovation, or lost through unequal economic development amid 

increasing divisions between rich and poor. With the global economic crisis of 2007-08, many people lost jobs, 

housings, savings, and suffered through a slow recovery under the Obama administration. The fact that Obama was 

the first black president further outraged many who had their racism and prejudices inflamed by eight years of attacks 

on Obama and the Obama administration by rightwing media and the Republican Party. 

Indeed, Donald Trump was one of the most assiduous promoters of the “birther” myth, erroneously claiming 

that Barack Obama was born in Africa and was thus not eligible to serve as President of the United States.[28] In the 

2008 presidential election, Trump made a big show of insisting that Obama show his birth certificate to prove he was 

born in the U.S., and although the Obama campaign provided photocopies of the original birth certificate in Hawaii 

and notices of his birth in Honolulu newspapers at the time, Trump kept insisting they were frauds and many of his 

followers continue to this day to believe the myth that Obama was not born in the USA.[29] 

Yet unlike classic dictators who are highly disciplined with a fixed ideology and party apparatus, Trump is 

chaotic and undisciplined, viciously attacking whoever dares criticize him in his daily Twitter feed or speeches, thus 

dominating the daily news cycles with his outrageous attacks on Mexicans, Muslims, and immigrants, or politicians 

of both parties who dare to criticize him. Trump effectively used the broadcast media and social media to play 

the powerful demagogue who preys on his followers’ rage, alienation, and fears. Indeed, by March 2016, media 

companies estimated that Trump received far more media coverage than his Republican Party contenders, and by 

June  MarketWatch  estimated that he had received $3 billion worth of free media coverage.[30] Yet, at his whim, 

Trump bans news media from his rallies, including  The Washington Post , if they publish criticisms that he does not 

like. 

Like followers of European fascism, the Trump’s authoritarian populist supporters are driven by rage: they are 

really angry at the political establishment and system, the media, and economic and other elites. They are eager to 

support an anti-establishment candidate who claims to be an outsider (which is only partly true as Trump has been a 

member of the capitalist real estate industry for decades, following his father, and has other businesses as well, many 

of which have failed).[31] Trump provokes their rage with classic authoritarian propaganda techniques like the Big 

Lie, when he repeats over and over that immigrants are pouring across the border and committing crime, that all his 

primary opponents, the media, and Hillary Clinton are “big liars,” and that he, Donald Trump is the only one telling 

the truth—clearly the biggest lie of all.[32] 

Trump’s anti-immigrant and racist rhetoric, his Islamophobia, and his xenophobic nationalism plays into a 

violent racist tradition in the U.S. and activates atavistic fears of other races and anger among his white followers. 

Like European fascism, Trump draws on restorative nostalgia and promises to “Make America Great Again.” 

Thus, to mobilize his followers, Trump arguably manipulates racism and nationalism and plays to the vile side of 

the American psyche and the long tradition of nationalism, America First-ism, and xenophobia, wanting to keep 

minorities and people of color outside of the country and “in their place.” 

Gun rights fanatics were one of Trump’s strong core constituencies and never had a candidate (who previously Page  82  Douglas Kellner fast capitalism  Volume 14 • Issue 1 • 2017 

had no visible connection to gun culture) so rabidly defended gun rights and attacked Clinton and Democrats who 

were allegedly dead-set on taking guns away from men who had little else to cling to.[33] Trump also played on the 

fears, grievances, and resentments of evangelicals who feared that in a secular culture their religious rights would 

be curtailed,[34] and nationalists who believed the nation was in decline and resented as well liberals who allegedly 

pushed civil rights agendas that favored people of color. 

An article in  The New Yorker  by Evan Osmos describes Trump’s followers as “The Fearful and the Frustrated” 

with the subtitle: “Donald Trump’s nationalist coalition takes shape – for now.”[35] The reporter had been following 

Trump’s campaign and interviewing his followers and the article reveals that Trump has not only attracted Tea Party 

followers, but also white nationalists with journals like  The Daily Stormer  “who urged white men to ‘vote for the 

first time in our lives for the one man who actually reps our interests.’” Osmos interviews all over the country other 

members of far right neo-Nazi, white supremacist, and ultra nationalist groups and concludes: 

> From the pantheon of great demagogues, Trump has plucked some best practices -— William Jennings Bryan’s bombast,
> Huey Long’s wit, Father Charles Coughlin’s mastery of the airwaves—but historians are at pains to find the perfect
> analogue, because so much of Trump’s recipe is specific to the present. Celebrities had little place in U.S. politics until the
> 1920 Presidential election, when Al Jolson and other stars from the fledgling film industry endorsed Warren Harding. Two
> decades ago, Americans were less focused on paid-for politicians, so Ross Perot, a self-funded billionaire candidate, did not
> derive the same benefit as Trump from the perception of independence.[36]

Like fascists and authoritarian populists, Trump thus presents himself as the Superhero leader who can step 

from outside and solve the problems that Washington and politicians have created. In the form of  authoritarian 

idolatry  described by Fromm,[37] his followers appear to believe that Trump alone can stop the decline of the 

United States and make it “great” again. Over and over, Trump supporters claim that he is the only one who talks 

about issues like immigration, problems with Washington and politics, and the role of money in politics. Trump 

promotes himself as the tough guy who can stand up to the Russians and Chinese, and to “America’s enemies.” In the 

Republican primaries, he presented himself as “the most militarist” guy in the field and promised to build up the US 

military, and to utterly destroy ISIS and America’s enemies, restoring the U.S. to its superpower status, which he says 

was lost by the Obama administration. Trump embodies the figure to excess of strong masculinity that Jackson Katz 

describes as a key motif in recent U.S. presidential elections.[38] With his bragging, chest-pounding, and hypermacho 

posturing, Trump provides a promise of restoration of White Male Power and authority that will restore America 

to its’ greatness. 

Macho Superman Trump will make “America Great Again” and vanquish all its enemies. Indeed, “Make America 

Great Again” is perhaps the defining motif of Trump’s presidential campaign and presidency-— a slogan he put 

on his baseball caps that he handed out or sold to his supporters. The baseball hat makes it appear that Trump 

is an ordinary fellow, and links him to his followers as one of them, a clever self-presentation for an American 

authoritarian populist. Sporting a baseball cap on the campaign trail is especially ironic, given that Trump appears 

to have borrowed this fashion from award-winning, progressive documentary filmmaker Michael Moore who is 

perhaps the anti-Trump in the U.S. political imaginary. Further, in his speech at the Republican convention, this 

shouting red-faced, orange-haired demagogue presented himself as the “voice of the forgotten men and women” 

-– a Depression era phrase of the Roosevelt administration which Trump inflects toward his white constituency 

who believes they have been forgotten and passed over in favor of the rich, minorities, and celebrities. In his daily 

tweets and speeches on the campaign trail, Trump used the discourse of national crisis also deployed by classic fascist 

and authoritarian regimes to describe the situation in the U.S. and the need for a savior to solve all the problems. In 

contrast to the Nazis, however, Trump tells his followers that it’s his deal-making skills as a supercapitalist billionaire 

which credentials him to be the President, and he induces his followers to believe he will make a “great deal” for 

them and “Make America Great Again.” 

The slogan “Make America Great Again” refers for some of Trump’s supporters to a time where White Males 

ruled and women, people of color, and others knew their place. It was a time of militarism where U.S. military power 

was believed to position America as the ruler of the world—although as the ambiguous Cold War and U.S. military 

defeats in Vietnam and the uncontrollable spaces of Iraq and Afghanistan, this era of American greatness was largely 

a myth. Yet the slogan is vague enough that Trump’s followers can create a fantasy of a “great” past and dream that 

Trump will resurrect it – a fantasy conceit nourished by many authoritarian leaders in the 20th century. 

Trump is replicating this phenomenon of  authoritarian populism  and his campaign exhibits in many ways the 

submission to the leader and the cause found in classic authoritarian movements. Yet Trump is also the embodiment Donal D Trump,  meDia  spec Tacle, an D auThori Tarian  populism  Page  83 Volume 14 • Issue 1 • 2017  fast capitalism 

of trends toward celebrity politics and the implosion of politics and entertainment which is becoming an increasingly 

important feature of U.S. politics (see Note 6). Further, Trump is a master of PR and promoting his image, and 

would even call up journalists pretending to be a PR agent to get gossip items planted about him in newspapers (see 

Note 5). More disturbing is the oft-played footage of Trump mimicking a  New York Times  reporter with a disability. 

[39] Indeed, there is a sinister side to Trump as well as the cartoonish and creepy side. 

Trump is thus an authoritarian populist and his campaign replicates in some ways the submission to the leader 

and the cause found in classic authoritarian movements. In some ways, however, it is Mussolini, rather than Hitler, 

who Trump most resembles. Hitler was deadly serious, restrained, and repressed, while Trump is comical, completely 

unrestrained, and arguably unhinged.[40] Curiously, on February 28, 2016, Trump used his Twitter feed to post a 

quote attributed to Mussolini, which compared the Italian dictator to Trump, and in an interview on NBC’s “Meet 

the Press” that morning said: “It’s a very good quote,” apparently not bothered by being associated with Mussolini. 

[41] There were also news clips that showed Trump speaking, chin jutting out in Mussolini-like fashion, and making 

faces and performing gestures that seemed to mimic characteristics associated with Mussolini.[42] 

Like Mussolini, Trump has a buffoonish side which his mobocracy finds entertaining, but which turns off 

more serious folks. Trump is the embodiment of trends toward celebrity politics and the implosion of politics and 

entertainment which is becoming an increasingly important feature of U.S. politics.[43] Further, Trump is a master of 

PR and continues into his presidency to promote his image, the Trump organization, and the interests of his family 

businesses. Indeed, there is a disturbing side to Trump, and in the conclusion I will discuss how his uncontrollable 

ego, hyperauthoritarian tendencies, and need to create endless media spectacles and dominate the news may lead to 

the destruction of his presidency. 

## Conclusion 

On May 9, 2017, Trump fired FBI Director James Comey creating the most stunning and perhaps consequential 

media spectacle of his presidency. There is a dialectic of the spectacle whereby those who lie by and prosper through 

the spectacle may undergo their downfall and destruction through media spectacles of scandal and delegitimation. 

Miraculously, Bill Clinton survived the spectacle of the Monica Lewinsky sex scandal and impeachment perhaps 

because the spectacle of the noxious Grand Inquisitor Ken Starr and a blood-thirsty Republican Congress turned 

public opinion to support Clinton despite his failings. Michael Jackson, by contrast, during the same era, had his 

career destroyed by revelations that he invited young boys to his home and bed for sleepovers. Yet after his death, 

Jackson underwent a miraculous resurrection of the spectacle as millions around the world mourned his death and 

gave his career and work an afterlife. 

Trump’s firing of Comey, however, has generated negative media spectacles highlighting his pathological 

mendacity as he claimed that he fired Comey because of the mishandling of Hillary Clinton’s email problems during 

the 2016 presidential election. Few outside of Trump supporters believed this, however, especially after it was revealed 

that Comey had requested more resources to investigate the connections between the Trump organization and 

campaign and the Russians during the 2016 presidential election when there was strong evidence that the Russians 

had hacked the democrats and released embarrassing, or distracting, emails from the Clinton campaign to the press 

with the aid of Wikileaks (see Nance 2016 and Kellner 2017). Trump had long called the investigation a hoax and 

“fake news” but the very fact of firing Comey suggested that he was deeply worried about the investigation and was 

viciously struggling for his survival. Firing Comey, however, could lead to Trump’s downfall as shortly thereafter, 

Special Counsel Robert S. Mueller was appointed to investigate the Trump-Russia connections and related issues. 

No doubt, the many investigations into the Trump-Russia connections will be a major media spectacle of the 

contemporary era and perhaps one of the most momentous spectacles in U.S. history. U.S. politics are now totally 

bound up with the logic and dynamic of media spectacle and the fate of the nation demands on how the Trump-

Russia spectacle unfolds and plays out. Page  84  Douglas Kellner fast capitalism  Volume 14 • Issue 1 • 2017 

## Endnotes 

1. On my concept of media spectacle, see Kellner 2001; 

2003a, 2003b, 2005, 2008, 2012, 2016, and 2017. This 

article draws upon and updates my two Trump books 

Kellner 2016 and 2017. 

2. I provide accounts of the O.J. Simpson Trial and the 

Clinton sex/impeachment scandal in the mid-1990s in 

Kellner 2003b, ; engage the stolen election of 2000 in the 

Bush/Gore presidential campaign in Kellner 200; and 

describe the 9/11 terrorist attacks and their aftermath 

in Kellner 2003a. 

3. See Kellner 2012. 

4. On the scripting of the Reagan presidency, see 

Cameron 1982. 

5. See Michael D’Antonio, Never Enough. Donald Trump 

and the Pursuit of Success (New York: Thomas Dunne 

Books, 2015); Gwenda Blair, The Trumps (New York: 

Simon and Schuster, 2000); and Michael Kranish and 

Marc Fisher, Trump Revealed. An American Journey of 

Ambition, Ego, Money and Power. New York: Scribner, 

2016 . Blair’s chapter on “Born to Compete,” op. cit., pp. 

223ff., documents Trump’s competitiveness and drive 

for success at an early age. 

6. Marc Fisher , Will Hobson , “Donald Trump ‘pretends 

to be his own spokesman to boast about himself.’ Some 

reporters found the calls disturbing or even creepy; 

others thought they were just examples of Trump being 

playful.” The Independent, May 13, 2016 at http://www. 

independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/us-elections/ 

donald-trump-pretends-to-be-his-own-spokesman-to-

boast-about-himself-a7027991.html (accessed August 

9, 2016). 

7. For my take on celebrity politics and the implosion of 

entertainment and politics in U.S. society, see Kellner, in 

Marshall and Redmond, pp. 114-134. See also Wheeler, 

2013. The best study of Trump, the media, and his long 

cultivation and exploitation of celebrity is found in. 

O’Brien 2016 [2005]. 

8. Trump’s book The Art of the Deal , co-written with 

Tony Schwartz (New York: Ballantine Books, 2005 

[1987]), helped introduce him to a national audience 

and is a key source of the Trump mythology; see Blair, 

op. cit., 380ff. 

9. Gaspin was quoted in CNN, All Business. The 

Essential Donald Trump . September 5, 2016. 

10. Quotations from Chairman Trump, edited by Carol 

Pogash. New York: Rosetta Books, 2016, pp 30, 152, 153. 

11. Ravi Somaiya, “Trump’s Wealth and Early Poll 

Numbers Complicate News Media’s Coverage 

Decisions.” The New York Times , July 24, 2015 at http:// 

www.nytimes.com/2015/07/25/business/media/ 

donald-trumps-wealth-and-poll-numbers-complicate-

news-medias-coverage.html (accessed July 22, 2016). 

12. Ben Agger, Fast Capitalism (Champaign-Urbana: 

University of Illinois Press, 1989) and Speeding Up 

Fast Capitalism (New York and London: Routledge, 

2015). 

13. Thorstein Veblen, Theory of the Leisure Class: An 

Economic Study in the Evolution of Institutions . New 

York: Dover, 1994 (1899). 

14. For the story of Trump’s financial down-fall and 

near collapse in the 1980s and 1990s, see the detailed 

and well-documented narratives in Barrett, op. cit.; 

John O’Donnell and James Rutherford, Trumped!: The 

Inside Story of the Real Donald Trump-His Cunning 

Rise and Spectacular Fall . New York: Simon and 

Schuster, 1991;D’Antonio,op. cit; andKranish and 

Fisher, op. cit. 

15. The analysis of Fromm and Trump was first 

presented as “Fromm and the Counterrevolutionary 

Character: Frommian Reflections on Donald Trump” 

in a conference “The (in)sane society: Remembering 

Erich Fromm and the Frankfurt School,” CUNY, New 

York, April 1, 2016 

16. On Fromm, see Daniel Burston, The Legacy of Erich 

Fromm. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press, 

1991; Rainer Funk, Erich Fromm: His Life and Ideas. 

Translators Ian Portman, Manuela Kunkel. New York: 

Continuum International Publishing Group, 2003; 

Lawrence J. Friedman, The Lives of Erich Fromm: 

Love’s Prophet . New York: Columbia University Press, 

2013. 

17. Erich Fromm, Escape from Freedom. New York: 

Holt Paperbacks, 1991 (1941). 

18. Parenthetically, there were enough media 

comparisons between Trump and Hitler and fascism 

for Trump to say with some perhaps genuine perplexity 

“I’m not Hitler! I don’t like the guy!” See Sam Sanders, 

“Trump Champions The ‘Silent Majority,’ But What 

Does That Mean In 2016?” NPR, January 22, 2016 at 

http://www.npr.org/2016/01/22/463884201/trump-

champions-the-silent-majority-but-what-does-that-

mean-in-2016 (accessed on July 20, 2016). At this 

time, Trump was asking his followers to raise their 

hands if they would vote for him as President, and the 

simultaneous raised hands going up looked like a mob 

of Hitler salutes! And there is a story out there that 

Trump keeps a book of Hitler’s writings by his bedside; 

see O’Brien, op. cit., p. 200; the story originates from a 

UPI report, August 9, 1990, cited in O’Brien, op. cit., 

p. 260. 

19. Carl Bernstein started calling Trump a neo-fascist 

and an American-brand fascist on CNN on June 19, Donal D Trump,  meDia  spec Tacle, an D auThori Tarian  populism  Page  85 Volume 14 • Issue 1 • 2017  fast capitalism 

2016. See Tom Boggioni , “Carl Bernstein: Donald Trump 

is a ‘pathological liar’ and America’s first ‘neofascist’ 

nominee,” Rawstory, June 19, 2016 at http://www. 

rawstory.com/2016/06/carl-bernstein-donald-trump-

is-a-pathological-liar-and-americas-first-neofascist-

nominee/ (accessed on July 20, 2016). In an article 

by Adam Gopnik, “Being Honest About Trump, The 

New Yorker , July 14, 2016 at http://www.newyorker. 

com/news/daily-comment/being-honest-about-trump 

(accessed on July 20, 2016), Gopnik comments: “It is 

the essence of fascism to have no single fixed form— 

an attenuated form of nationalism in its basic nature, 

it naturally takes on the colors and practices of each 

nation it infects. In Italy, it is bombastic and neoclassical 

in form; in Spain, Catholic and religious; in Germany, 

violent and romantic. It took forms still crazier and 

more feverishly sinister, if one can imagine, in Romania, 

whereas under Oswald Mosley, in England, its manner 

was predictably paternalistic and aristocratic. It is no 

surprise that the American face of fascism would take on 

the forms of celebrity television and the casino greeter’s 

come-on, since that is as much our symbolic scene as 

nostalgic re-creations of Roman splendors once were 

Italy’s.” Op. cit. 

20. The notion of “the magic helper” to whom the 

follower submits in the hopes their problems will be 

solved is found in Erich Fromm’s Escape from Freedom 

, op. cit., pp. 174-178; on “authoritarian idolatry,” see 

Sane Society, op. cit. p. 237f. Escape from Freedom 

not only critiqued Nazi ideology, the party apparatus, 

the concept of the Fuhrer, and the psychology of Nazi 

mass followers of Hitler in Escape from Freedom , but 

was also fascinated by fairy tales and magical thinking 

in National Socialism, a theme he expanded in later 

writings like The Forgotten Language: An Introduction 

to the Understanding of Dreams, Fairy Tales and Myths 

. New York: Random House, 1988. 

21. On Trump’s business failures, see Wayne Barrett, 

Trump: The Greatest Show on Earth: The Deals, the 

Downfall, the Reinvention . New York: Regan Books, 

2016 (revision of 1992 book Trump: The Deals and the 

Downfall ); O’Brien, op. cit.; D’Antonio, op. cit.; David 

Cay Johnston, The Making of Donald Trump. New 

York: Melville House ; and Kranish and Fisher, Trump 

Revealed, op. cit . See also and “The Art of the Bad Deal. 

Donald Trump’s Business Flops, Explained,” Newsweek, 

August 8, 2018: 24-33, 

22. On the centrality of the role of a Superhero in 

U.S. culture and politics, see Robert Jewett and John 

Lawrence, The American Monomyth . New York: 

Anchor, 1977 and Robert Jewett and John Lawrence, 

The Myth of the American Superhero. Grand Rapids, 

Mich: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, 2002. 

Trump’s campaign follows this model of the redemptive 

Hero who will slay America’s enemies and return the 

Kingdom to peace and prosperity. 

23. See the Heartfield images at https://www.google. 

com/search?q=John+Heartfield:+the+meaning+of+ 

the+Hitler+salute&biw=1600&bih=1028&tbm=isch 

&tbo=u&source=univ&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjt4K 

vV-N7LAhVM6WMKHUPABGMQsAQIJg (accessed 

March 22, 2016). 

24. After bragging how his campaign was self-funded 

during the Republican primaries, Trump released a 

statement showing that much of the money he spent was 

paid into his own companies; see Nicholas Confessore 

and Sarah Cohen, “Donald Trump’s Campaign, Billed 

as Self-Funded, Risks Little of His Fortune.” The 

New York Times, February, 5, 2016 at http://www. 

nytimes.com/2016/02/06/us/politics/donald-trumps-

campaign-billed-as-self-funded-risks-little-of-his-

fortune.html?_r=0 (accessed July 29, 2016). During 

the Fall Presidential election, Trump is forced to court 

donors and raise funds, thus undercutting his claims to 

be the only self-financing candidate. 

25. See Lauren Langman and George Lundskow, 

“Escape From Modernity: Authoritarianism and the 

Quest for the Golden Age,” Paper delivered at “The 

Psychodynamics of Self & Society,” Eighth Annual 

ASA Mini-Conference, Seattle, August 18, 2016. 

26. Trump’s vision of Latin American immigrants 

pouring over the border into the U.S. is a fantasy, as 

studies have shown that more Mexicans are returning 

to Mexico after working in the U.S. than coming 

into the country, illegal or not; see A na Gonzalez-

Barrera, “More Mexicans Leaving Than Coming to the 

U.S. Net Loss of 140,000 from 2009 to 2014; Family 

Reunification Top Reason for Return.” November 19, 

2015 at http://www.pewhispanic.org/2015/11/19/ 

more-mexicans-leaving-than-coming-to-the-u-s/ 

(accessed September 3, 2016). 

27. Kranish and Fisher, op. cit., pp. 27-28. It was not 

clear from police and media reports whether Fred 

Trump was marching with the Klan or was just part of 

the crowd that got involved in a melee with the police. 

28. On the birther myth, see Michael D’Antonio op. cit, 

pp. 283ff. 

29. Public Policy Polling reports that a “new poll finds 

that Trump is benefiting from a GOP electorate that 

thinks Barack Obama is a Muslim and was born in 

another country, and that immigrant children should 

be deported. 66% of Trump’s supporters believe 

that Obama is a Muslim to just 12% that grant he’s 

a Christian. 61% think Obama was not born in the 

United States to only 21% who accept that he was. 

And 63% want to amend the Constitution to eliminate 

birthright citizenship, to only 20% who want to keep 

things the way they are.” Public Policy Polling. “ 

Trump Supporters Think Obama is A Muslim Born 

in Another Country,” September 01, 2015 at http:// 

www.publ icpol icypol l ing.com/main/2015/08/ 

trump-supporters-think-obama-is-a-muslim-born-in-

another-country.html (accessed August 3, 2016). 

30. Nicholas Confessore and Karen Yourish, “$2 

Billion Worth of Free Media for Donald Trump,” Page  86  Douglas Kellner fast capitalism  Volume 14 • Issue 1 • 2017 

## References 

agger, B.(1989) Fast  capitalism.  champaign-urbana:  university 

of  illinois  press. 

agger, B. (2015)  speeding  up Fast  capitalism.  new York and 

london:  routledge. 

Barrett, W. (2016) Trump: The  greatest  show on  earth: The 

Deals, the Downfall, the  reinvention .  new York:  regan Books 

Blair,  g. 2000. The Trumps.  new York:  simon and  schuster. 

Burston, D. (1991) The  legacy of  erich Fromm.  cambridge, 

mass:  harvard  university  press. 

cannon,  l. (1982) reagan.  new York:  putnam. 

D’ antonio,  m. (2015)  never  enough. Donald Trump and the 

pursuit of  success .  new York: Thomas Dunne Books. 

Friedman,  l.J. (2013) The  lives of  erich Fromm:  love’s  prophet. 

new York:  columbia  university  press. 

The New York Times, March 15, 2016 at http://www. 

nytimes.com/2016/03/16/upshot/measuring-donald-

trumps-mammoth-advantage-in-free-media.html?_r=0 

(accessed August 6, 2016)and Robert Schroeder , “ 

Trump has gotten nearly $3 billion in ‘free’ advertising.” 

Marketwatch, May 6, 2016 at http://www.marketwatch. 

com/story/trump-has-gotten-nearly-3-billion-in-free-

advertising-2016-05-06 (accessed August 6, 2016). 

31. On Trump’s business failures, see Note 16 above. 

32. At the Republican convention, Trump insisted that 

“you won’t hear any lies here,” For documentation of 

Trump’s Big and little lies, see Hank Berrien, “Lyin’ 

Donald: 101 Of Trump’s Greatest Lies,” Dailywire , April 

11, 2016 at http://www.dailywire.com/news/4834/ 

trumps-101-lies-hank-berrien (accessed August 8, 2016). 

33. On Trump’s appeal to gun owners, see Daniel 

Hayes, “Donald Trump Takes Aim,” The New York 

Times, August 20, 2016 at http://www.nytimes. 

com/2016/08/21/opinion/campaign-stops/donald-

trump-takes-aim.html?_r=0 (accessed August 24, 2016). 

34. In an article subtitled “How the Christian right came 

to support a thrice-married adulterer,” see Daniel K. 

Williams “Why Values Voters Value Donald Trump,” 

The New York Times, August 20, 2016 at http:// 

www.nytimes.com/2016/08/21/opinion/sunday/ 

why-values-voters-value-donald-trump.html (accessed 

August 24, 2016). 

35. Evan Osmos “The Fearful and the Frustrated: 

Donald Trump’s nationalist coalition takes shape – for 

now” The New Yorker , August 31, 2015 at http://www. 

newyorker.com/magazine/2015/08/31/the-fearful-

and-the-frustrated (accessed July 22, 2016). 

36. Osmos, op. cit. 

37. On Fromm and “authoritarian idolatry,” see Fromm, 

1955, p. 237f. 

38. See Jackson Katz, Man Enough? Donald Trump, 

Hillary C, and the Politics of Presidential Masculinity 

. Northampton, Mass.: Interlink Publishing Company, 

2016. 

39. See the video at CNN, http://www.cnn.com/ 

videos/tv/2015/11/26/donald-trump -mo cks-

reporter-with-disability-berman-sot-ac.cnn (accessed 

August 9, 2016). 

40. In a classic example of Freudian projection, over 

the weekend of August 6-7, Trump accused Hillary 

Clinton of being unbalanced, coming unhinged, and 

being mentally unstable, previously the charges being 

deployed against Trump which I discuss below using 

Fromm’s categories. See Jose A. DelReal , “Trump, 

in series of scathing personal attacks, questions 

Clinton’s mental health,” Washington Post, Aug. 7, 

2016 at https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-

politics/wp/2016/08/06/trump-in-series-of-scathing-

personal-attacks-questions-clintons-mental-health/ 

(accessed August 10, 2016). In a speech in West Bend, 

Wisconsin, on August 16, 2016, Trump called Clinton a 

“bigot,” a charge frequently tossed at him. 

41. Maggie Haberman, “ Donald Trump Retweets 

Post With Quote From Mussolini ,” The New York 

Times, February 28, 2106 at http://www.nytimes. 

com/politics/first-draft/2016/02/28/donald-trump-

retweets-post-likening-him-to-mussolini/ (accessed 

August 8, 2016). 

42. Media Matters S taff, “Ted Koppel Compares 

Donald Trump To Benito Mussolini. Koppel: Trump 

And Mussolini Both ‘Say Very Little In Terms Of 

Substance, But The Manner In Which They Say It Gets 

The Crowds Excited,’” Media Matters , December 16, 

2015 at http://mediamatters.org/video/2015/12/16/ 

ted-koppel-compares-donald-trump-to-benito-

muss/207564 (accessed August 9, 2016). 

43. For my take on celebrity politics and the implosion 

of entertainment and politics in U.S. society, see 

Kellner, in Marshall and Redmond, op.cit, pp.114-134. Donal D Trump,  meDia  spec Tacle, an D auThori Tarian  populism  Page  87 Volume 14 • Issue 1 • 2017  fast capitalism 

Fromm,  e.(1991 [1941]).  escape from Freedom.  new York:  holt. 

Fromm,  e.(1955). The  sane  society.  new York:  holt s. 

Funk,  r. (2003)  erich Fromm:  his  life and  ideas. Translators 

ian  portman,  manuela Kunkel .  new York:  continuum 

international  publishing  group. 

Katz J. (2016),  man  enough? Donald Trump,  hillary  c, and 

the  politics of  presidential  masculinity .  northampton,  mass.: 

interlink  publishing  company. 

Kellner, D. (2017) The  american  horror  show:  election 2016 

and the  ascendency of Donald J. Trump .  rotterdam, The 

netherlands:  sense  publishers. 

Kellner, D. (2016)  american  nightmare: Donald Trump,  media 

spectacle, and  authoritarian  populism .  rotterdam, The 

netherlands:  sense  publishers. 

Kellner, D. (2012)  media  spectacle and  insurrection, 2011: From 

the  arab  uprisings to  occupy  everywhere.  london and  new 

York:  continuum/Bloomsbury. 

Kellner, D. (2005)  media  spectacle and the  crisis of Democracy . 

Boulder,  col.:  paradigm  press. 

Kellner, D. (2003a) From  september 11 to Terror War: The 

Dangers of the Bush  legacy .  lanham,  md.:  rowman and 

littlefield. 

Kellner, D. (2003b)  media  spectacle .  london and  new York: 

routledge. 

Kellner, D. (2001)  grand Theft 2000.  media  spectacle and a 

stolen  election .  lanham,  md.:  rowman and  littlefield. 

Kranish,  m and  marc Fisher (2016) Trump  revealed.  an

american Journey of  ambition,  ego,  money and  power .  new 

York:  scribner.. 

marshall,  p.D. and  sean  redmond (2015)  a companion to 

celebrity ,  malden,  ma . and  oxford,  uK. Wiley-Blackwell. 

nance, m. (2016) The  plot to  hack  america.  how  putin’s 

cyberspies and Wiki leaks Tried to  steal the 2016  election . 

new York:  skyhorse  publishing. 

o’Brien, T. l. (2016 [2005]). Trump nation: The  art of Being 

the Donald .  new York:  grand  central  publishing, 

o’Donnell, J. and James  rutherford (1991) Trumped!: The 

inside  story of the  real Donald Trump-his  cunning  rise and 

spectacular Fall .  new York:  simon and  schuster. 

Trump, Donald J with Tony  schwartz (, 2005 [1987]), The  art of 

the Deal ,  new York: Ballantine Books. 

pogash,  c. ed. (2016) Quotations From  chairman Trump .  new 

York:  rosetta Books. 

Veblen, T. (1994 [1899]) Theory of the  leisure  class:  an

economic  study in the  evolution of  institutions .  new York: 

Dover,. 

Wheeler,  m (2013)  celebrity  politics.  cambridge,  uK.
