Title: Missing the Mark: Obama and Trump's use of similar communication strategies

URL Source: https://scholarsarchive.library.albany.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1031&context=honorscollege_pos

Published Time: Fri, 27 Jun 2025 19:06:11 GMT

Markdown Content:
University at Albany, State University of New York University at Albany, State University of New York 

# Scholars Archive Scholars Archive 

Political Science  Honors College 

Summer 8-2019 

# Missing the Mark: Obama and Trump's use of similar Missing the Mark: Obama and Trump's use of similar 

# communication strategies communication strategies 

Chamberlain Harris University at Albany, State University of New York , charris@albany.edu 

The University at Albany community has made this article openly available. 

Please share Please share  how this access benefits you. 

Follow this and additional works at:  https://scholarsarchive.library.albany.edu/honorscollege_pos 

Part of the  American Politics Commons 

Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 

Harris, Chamberlain, "Missing the Mark: Obama and Trump's use of similar communication strategies" 

(2019). 

Political Science . 32. 

https://scholarsarchive.library.albany.edu/honorscollege_pos/32 

This Honors Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by the Honors College at Scholars Archive. It has 

been accepted for inclusion in Political Science by an authorized administrator of Scholars Archive. 

Please see  Terms of Use . For more information, please contact  scholarsarchive@albany.edu .Missing the Mark :

Obama and Trump’s use of similar communication strategies 

An honors thesis presented to the 

Department of Political Science, 

Rockefeller College of Public Affairs and Policy, 

University at Albany, State University of New York 

in partial fulfillment of the requirements 

for graduation with Honors in Political Science 

and 

graduation from The Honors College 

Chamberlain Harris 

Research Advisor: Timothy Weaver , Ph .D. 

August, 2019 ii 

Abstract 

This paper examines the traditional notion that President Obama and President Trump were polar 

opposites. It seeks to answer the questions of how are similar or differe nt the Trump and Obama 

campaign communication strategies are and how these strategies have changed from 

campaigning to governing mode. The paper seeks to answer these questions by looking at six key 

communication strategies. These six communication strategies and explanations are known as 

the social media strategy, branding, engaging with the public, autonomy over the messaging, 

focus on personality, and rhetoric. This paper looked at the relationship between these strategies 

by fi rst analyzing the strategies relative to the candidates which they were running against and 

then to themselves. Through this analysis it was found that Obama and Trump’s communication 

strategies were similar throughout both campaigning and governing. Analy zing the similarities 

between Obama and Trump helps show the public how social media has changed the ways in 

which communication is conducted and how elections are decided. iii 

Acknowledgments 

First off, I would like to thank Professor Weaver for all of the help he has provided me with 

throughout my undergraduate academic career and for both his help and flexibility with my 

thesis process. I am especially thankful for his advice and help during my “thesis crisis.” 

I would also like to thank Professor Barta for making my graduation from the honors program 

this summer possible and Dean Chang for teaching me that research is indeed fun. 

To my family and friends, I would also like to extend my gratitude for y our support throughout 

these past two years , as I know I would not have survived without you. iv 

List of Tables 

Table 1 ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 15 

Table 2 ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 28v

Table of Contents 

Abstract ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... ii 

Acknowledgments ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................... iii 

List of Table s ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................. iv 

Table of Content s ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ v

Introduction ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .1

Literature Review ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................... 1

Methods ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 3

Campaign Communication Strategies ................................ ................................ ...................... 3

Historical Analysis of Previous Presidential Campaign Communication ........................ 3

Obama ’s Campaign Communication Strategies ................................ ............................... 8

Trump ’s Campaign Communication Strategies ................................ .............................. 11 

Similarities and Differences between the Campaigns ................................ .................... 15 

Governing Communication Strategies ................................ ................................ .................... 20 

Historical Analysis of Previous Presidential Governing Communication ...................... 20 

Obama ’s Governing Communication Strategies ................................ ............................ 22 

Trump ’s Governing Communication Strategies ................................ ............................. 25 

Changes in Communication Styles ................................ ................................ ................. 27 

Similarities and Differences between the Governing Styles ................................ ........... 28

Conclusions ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ 31

Implications ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................... 32 

Impact on Future Campaigns ................................ ................................ .......................... 32 

Impact on Governing Styles ................................ ................................ ............................ 34 

Reflection on Social Media Presidency ................................ ................................ ................... 35 

Limitations and Ideas for Further Research ................................ ................................ .......... 36 

References ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 38 1

Introduction 

President Trump has been contrasted with President Obama since before he was even 

elected. Communication scholars have said that Trump speaks at a “Fourth Grade Level” and 

that his election , in true populist style , was a result of a cultural backlash against Obama and 

overall greater globalization (Bostdorff, 2017). Trump’s victory has been most widely attributed 

to his Tweeting and consequential free media. However, Trump was not the first president to use 

Tweeting to his advantage. Obama was, instead, the first president to claim victory in a social 

media election. Trump and Obama make up the f irst two “Social Media Presidents ” (Gerodimos 

& Justinussen, 2015). However, there have never been two presidents as juxtaposed as them in 

American history. Both Presidents have run against Hillary Clinton, been characterized as both 

charismatic and anti -establishment , and had the unique ability to excite a crowd. They also both 

served their first two years as president with one party control of the government. This paper 

seeks to delve further into this enigma by first examining how similar or different Tr ump and 

Obama’s campaign communication strategies are and second, examining how these 

communication strategies have changed as the president’s transition into governing mode. The 

hypothesis is that Trump and Obama used similar communication strategies duri ng their 

campaigns but different communication strategies while governing and after analysis it was 

found that the presidents used similar communication strategies throughout both their campaign 

and time as President. 

Literature Review 

Political communication has been traditionally difficult to define. Denton and 

Woodward’s definition of political communication is “a pure discussion about the allocation of 2

the public resources, official authority, and official sanctions” (M cN air, 201 7, p. 3). Their 

definition includes verbal and written political rhetoric but not symbolic communication acts. 

They focus their definition more on the intentions of the sender to influence the political 

environment. Garber , on the other hand, offers a more encompassing definition that includes not 

only rhetoric but also body language and political acts (Mc Nair, 201 7). This paper will use the 

definition of McNair which builds upon Denton and Woodward’s definition, focusing 

specifically on intentions. 

McNair’ s definition of political communication is “purposeful communication about 

politics” (McNair, 201 7, p. 4). His definition encompasses three things: the first is all forms of 

communication used by politicians and political actors for the purpose of a specif ic goal, the 

second is communication addressed to the actors by non -politicians, and third is communication 

about these actors in the media (news reports, social media, etc .) (McNair, 201 7). This definition 

is all encompassing and includes all political di scourse (McNair, 201 7). The definition 

differs from Denton and Woodward in the fact that they want not only to written communication 

but they also want to include symbolic and visua l communication. 

This paper will follow McNair’s definition by looking at political communication in its 

broadest sense. It will be using the idea of political communication to analyze similarities and 

differences in how the first two social media presidents have communicat ed both during their 

campaigns and while governing. Throughout this process the paper will focus primarily on the 

first aspect of McNair’s definition of political communication which discusses it in terms of 

communication used by politicians and political actors to achieve a specific goal. In this paper, 

that goal would be getting elected president and being re -elected for a second term. 3

Methods 

This paper will analyze six strategies used by both presidents in their campaign . It will 

then analyze strategies they used while they were governing to determine whether or not their 

communication strategies were similar during their election campaigns and whether or not they 

re mained similar throughout their time as President. It will first analyze the strategies relative to 

the candidates which they were running against and then to themselves. For the purpose of this 

paper strategy will be defined a s any type of communication t hat is correlated to getting a 

candidate elected to office. The six strategies we will be looking at are the social media strategy, 

providing staff with more autonomy over messaging , the ability to create a brand, the extent to 

which they engage with the p ublic, focus on their personality, and their rhetoric. 

Campaign Communication Strategies 

Historical Analysis of Previous Presidential Campaign Communication 

Election campaigns are inherently communication campaigns. In order to get a better 

understanding of Trump and Obama’s Campaign communication strategies it is important to do 

an analysis of the history of modern campaign communication strategies. For the purpose of this 

paper modern will b e determined as post 1960 after the first televised debate. This paper will 

first examine Obama’s 2008 and 2012 campaign communication strategies and then Trump’s 

2016 strategies. It will then compare and contrast them to see if President Trump and Preside nt 

Obama are indeed different as most scholars have said or if they actually are more similar than 

people typically believe . It will then expand this analysis to examine each president’s governing 

style. To see if the similarities or difference between the ir strategies carry through to when they 

are in office. Comparing both the election strategies and governing strategies will allow us to 

truly see how similar or different these two presidents are. 4

Blumer and Kavanaugh (1999), discuss political communicat ion in three phases. They 

describe the first phase as the “golden age of parties” where the communication system is 

dominated by the parties. The second phase is where our analysis begins. They discuss the 1960s 

as the “era of television” where JFK was the first president to win through televised debates. The 

third era is the digital era. They describe this as the “age of internet” which has seen the 

personalization of campaigning and a rise in populism due to more people being able to 

participate in electi ons. Enli (2017), suggests that this digital era does not describe the current 

atmosphere and instead describes a fourth phase starting from 2010 onward called the “era of 

social media”. He says that social media hasn’t replaced television but changed the way in which 

people watch it. 

In each era there has been a president that has capitalized on these new forms of media 

before other s leading to their election and increased control of the message. Over time th e

presidents that have success fully done this have stood out. H owever, in more recent decades with 

the emergence of the digital and social media age these presidents have become a bit more 

blurred. Some scholars have pointed to Obama as the first social media president but in the wake 

of Trump’s election some have suggested that he is the true social media president because of his 

striking use of Twitter during not only his election but also his presidency. In some ways, Donald 

Trump can be considered similar to both to Franklin Delano Roosevelt and John F. Kennedy 

because they all changed the way in which communication was used once it office. FDR 

succeeded as president by dominating the radio and JFK dominated via television. FDR sought 

to bypass traditional means of communication at t he time to talk to the public and dissuade fears. 

These became known as his “fireside chats” and by 1933 radio was most popular form of 

communication because it was faster, cheaper, and easier. JFK embraced television during his 5

1960 campaign and then bega n to schedule live televised news conferences. By the 1960s , 90% 

of Americans had televisions in their homes (Nelson & Thurber, 2019). Each of these president s

used new forms of communication in their time to bypass the traditional conception of electoral 

and presidential communication strategies. 

Campaigns are a time for experimental communication strategies. However, in each era 

unlike Trump, Obama, JFK, and FDR there have been candidates that are not as successful in 

implementing new media. Two candidat es have sought to use new media technologies to curry 

favor with voters but have failed. Democratic challenger, Senator Edward Kennedy, participated 

in CBS primetime documentary about his career and potential campaign. However, Kennedy was 

unprepared for t he interview and could not even answer the question of why he wanted to be 

president. The other candidate was Governor Michael Dukakis. Dukakis was seen as weak on 

national defense so he planned a press stunt followed by a policy speech on national defense 

spending. Instead of communicating a strong image the campaign instead resulted in laughter 

from reporters as the event was televised to the world. 

A communication strategy that Trump experimented with in his campaign was earned 

media. Earned media is me dia coverage that a candidate receives from a news outlet for free. 

Trump’s tweet s and ability to drive the news agenda placed a new emphasis on earned media. 

However, this strategy has been prevalent in campaign communications for a long time. The only 

th ing that has changed is the means of attaining it. One president that was successful in earning 

free media was Bill Clinton. His unique way of attaining this was going on Saturday Night Live 

in 1992 wearing sunglasses and playing the saxophone. The clip wa s replayed multiple times 

across major news stations and allowed him to reach out in a much more personal level to a new 

type of voter. This also allowed him to frame his opponent as older and out of touch (Nelson & 6

Thurber, 2019). Clinton’s Saturday Night Live appearance also exemplified the increased aspect 

of personal campaigning that Blumer and Kavanaugh (1999) discuss as a new aspect of the 

digital era. 

Johnson (2011) discusses the differences in campaign communication strategies across 

the 20 th versus 21 st century specifically focusing on how the online revolution changed them. For 

instance, how instead of going on late night TV to earn free media Trump used social media to 

achieve the same effect. He notes seven factors about the 20 th century m odel of campaigning. He 

first notes that political consultants are in command and control mode and that these strategists 

employ a top -down method of communicating that does not actually involve the voters in critical 

campaign decisions (Johnson, 2011). He further notes that campaigns relied heavily on TV as 

their chief medium of communication and that this allowed campaigns time to craft messages, 

advertisements, and responses. He states that most campaign work was done based on instinct 

and past experienc e and that, in general, fundraising was done with big ticket events. He says 

that all of these contribute to the voters being spectators in elections (Johnson, 2011). He 

analyzes how these seven aspects changed in terms of the 21 st century and found that political 

consultants still dominate campaigns but that the top down model has given way to a more fluid 

model which encourages more citizen input and involvement. He notes that television is still 

important in campaign advertising but that the timeline in which campaigns have to respond has 

decreased dramatically due to the internet (Johnson, 2011). He says that guesswork and 

experience has been replaced by data and metrics and that although campaigns still rely on big 

dollar donors , they also have increas ed the amount of small donations they receive from the 

general public. Overall, he concludes that in the 21 st century voters have a greater sense of 

participation in campaigns (Johnson, 2011). 7

In explaining these shifts, Johnson discusses what he describe s as the “online revolution.” 

He says that this began with Bob Dole announcing his website address in the 1996 debates but 

was not really noticed until 2004 when the Governor of Vermont, Howard Dean began his 

campaign. Dean’s campaign was deemed influentia l because it created three innovations that 

carried over into modern campaigning (Johnson, 2011). The first was interactive communication 

between supporters and campaign, the second was that he was able to use the technology to 

gather together supporters a nd organize, and the third was that he pioneered online fundraising. 

Although Johnson discusses Dean as playing a big role in the overall transitions of campaign 

strategies others such as Gerodimos and Justinussen (2015) have argued that his role was a lot 

less prominent and that his campaign resulted in a “Façade of interactivity” because he made the 

tools available but didn’t listen to voter comments. Instead, they argue that his website was more 

used as a “static campaign flyer.” 

Johnson does a good job at analyzing the history of what Blumer and Kavanaugh (1999) 

discuss as the “digital era.” However, Johnson was developing his framework in 2011 which was 

a pre -Twitter, pre -Trump era. Pearson and O’Connell (2012) do a good job of analyzing the 

changing l andscape of political communication strategies in what Enli (2017) refers to as the 

“fourth phase” or the “era of social media.” They note that in 2009, Twitter was a novelty in 

politics, but in 2012, it’s a necessity. From 2008 to 2012 people using social media doubled and 

Twitter went from 3 to 500 million while Facebook exceeded 1 billion users in 2012 (Gerodimos 

& Justinussen, 2015). This increased usage of the media has created an overflow of information 

and in the social media age it is also important for candidates to be able to break through the 

clutter. “With the proliferation of the 24/7 news cycle came 24/7 politicking” (Johnson, 2011, p. 

23). Being on top of the news cycle 24/7 and controlling the news cycle is a strategy that Trump 8

was extremely successful at. The communication scene has changed drastically since Obama’s 

first 2008 campaign and i n this new era, both Trump and Obama have had to change their 

communication strategies in order to stay ahead of their opponents and to adapt to the new media 

environment .

Obama’s Campaign Communication Strategies 

“So while Hillary Clinton and John McCain set out to run the last campaign all over again, 

[Barack] Obama forged ahead and ran the first campaign of the twenty -first century” 

– Garret M. Graff (2009) 

(Johnson, 2011 p. 1). 

Obama was the first successful candidate to use social media in his campaigns. In his first 

election he ran against a total of 20 other major party candidates and was successful (Johnson, 

2011). In terms of social media, President Obama was ahead of the times and created an 

innovation gap. McCain’s lag in adapting to the changing media environment greatly impacted 

the amount of media coverage he received (Bimber, 2014). Nelson and Thurber (2019) have 

referred to the 2008 election as the “YouTube election” saying that the plat form heavily 

impacted the debates and how campaigns advertised. Obama’s campaign manager “David 

Plouffe stated that “Technology was core to our campaign from day one and it only grew in 

importance” (Johnson, 2011, p.6). In 2008 Obama had 100 staff members to work on social 

media and by the 2012 election that figure increased dramatically (Gerodimos & Justinussen, 

2015). Through online communication Obama was able to get supporters to hold 100,000 events, 

had 10,000 applicants for 3,000 organizing fellows, a nd made 3 million phone calls in the last 4 

days of his campaign (Johnson, 2011). I n 2011 , Obama announced his re -election bid with a 

Youtube video and a tweet (Gerodimos & Justinussen, 2015). “Pearson & O’Connell (2012) note 9

that, ‘in 2009, Twitter was a novelty in politics, in 2012, it’s a necessity’” (Gerodimos & 

Justinussen, 2015, p. 115). 

“The Obama campaign was the best financed, best run, and most sophisticated 

combination of online technology, social networking and grassroots activism, and blending of 

old and new media.” ( Johnson, 2011, p.1) Obama’s use of social media as a campaign strategy 

was still very new. Because of this he did not write any of his own social media messages in 

2008 and instead opted for trained professionals to craft his conte nt (Enli, 2017). In 2012, only 

1% of Obama’s tweets throughout the election cycle were actually his. He often indicated this by 

signing “b.o.” on the bottom (Enli, 2017). In 2012 many of the other presidential candidates had 

caught on to the effectiveness of using social media. However, one of the reasons that Obama’s 

tweeting strategy in 2012 was successful was because he gave his digital media staffers much 

more autonomy over messaging and techniques than Romney provided his staffers with (Enli ,

2017). 

Obama not only used Twitter as a communication strategy in his campaigns but he also 

used Facebook heavily. The Obama campaign treated Facebook as a tool of top -down 

promotion, as opposed to a means of substantive civic interaction. The majority of the messages 

that the campaign posted in the 67 days before the 2012 election were picture posts with a

caption (Gerodimos & Justinussen, 2015). More than half of these photos were pictures of 

Obama speaking or hugging supporters and over 13% were pictu res of hi s wife and children 

(Gerodimos & Justinussen, 2015). With a more personal focus also comes more positive rhetoric. 

Obama’s 2012 Facebook campaign was mostly positive and avoided highly polarizing or 

negative attacks (Geordimos & Justinussen, 2015) . His campaign also chose not to respond or 

make defensive posts in response to attacks by Romney (Geordimos & Justinussen, 2015). 10 

Overall, his campaign focused more on symbolic and affective aspects of political 

communication rather than political argumen tation and issue -oriented campaigning (Gerodimos 

& Justinussen, 2015). 

As discussed earlier, the main focus of Obama’s posts was his personality instead of 

policy (Gerodimos & Justinussen, 2015). The p olicy statements that were made by his campaign 

were o ften obstructed by people’s fascination with Obama’s character . Gerodimos and 

Justinussen state that “by focusing on Obama’s family and personality, the campaign essentially 

controlled the discussion because neither of those topics is particularly conduciv e to substantive 

and in -depth political engagement on the part of citizens” (Ge ro dimos & Justinussen, 2015, p. 

128). By controlling the message and using social media platforms to put out videos and 

advertisements it forced news outlets to report on it bec ause “it was news” (Nelson & Thurber, 

2019). This i n a way allowed him to “earn media coverage ” (Enli, 2017). This also represents 

how campaigning in the social media age has taken on a more personal focus (Enli, 2017). 

Obama’s social media campaign excited voters. He was able to use the social media 

platform to create a brand. This brand was the Change campaign and developed out of his youth. 

Madden (2018) characterized, Oba ma’s 2008 “Change campaign ” as extremely succes sful . It 

was particularly successful in garnering the support of first -time voters. In 2008, Obama won 

69% of voters age 18 -24. He was able to do this through not only his use of social media but his 

use of phone technology and SNS (Ki yohara, 2009). This a llowed him to talk directly to his base 

and then activate them through rallies and events. Part of Obama’s appeal in 2008 was his 

charisma. Bligh and Kohles (2009) have suggested that charismatic leadership theory highlights 

aspects of Obama and his follow ers, that in combination with the unfolding economic crisis were 

particularly relevant in helping understand how as a relatively inexperienced political outsider he 11 

was able to ascend to the US Presidency. In contrast to traditional political rhetoric of c hange, 

Obama was much more focused on hope and positivity towards the future. Chants of “Change 

we can believe” and “Yes we can” were prevalent at h is rallies that near the end of the campaign 

topped nearly 100,000 people in both St. Louis , Missouri and Virginia (WSJ Staff, 2008) .

Obama’s rallies were greatly contrasted with his opponent John McCain who never received a 

crowd that big and whose rallies often took on a much more negative tone. 

Overall, Obama used social media throughout his campaign in a new way that his 

opponents did not. His campaign was able to use new media in creative ways due to the greater 

autonomy they were given over messaging. However, the c ampaign did not use this social media 

to heavily emphasize policy but instead to focus on Obama’s personal attributes that would make 

him a great president. In the same way that Obama used new communication strategies 

throughout his campaign , Trump did as well. Trump went on to make social media the primary 

focus of his campaign and he use Twitter in a way that no one else had before. 

Trump’s Campaign Communication Strategies 

“Without Tweets I wouldn’t be here” 

-President Donald Trump to Financial Times in April 2017 

(Nelson & Thurber, 2019, p. 241) 

Trump used Twitter throughout the election to court media attention. He is best known 

for his Tweets and m any have said he “Tweeted his way to power .” Many major news outlets 

have acknowledged that th eir coverage of his tweets are part of the reason that Trump is 

president today. Tweets have become a part of how Trump is viewed by the American public. 

Trump received a superior amount of earned media coverage in relation to his opponent Hillary 

Clinton. According to the Tyndall report, across the three major news broadcasters, ABC, CBS, 12 

and NBC, Donald Trump’s presidential campaign received 1144 minutes of coverage while 

Hillary Clinton’s campaign received merely 506 minutes over the course of the genera l election .

ABC had the biggest differential in coverage between the two candidates, covering Donald 

Trump’s campaign for 235 more minutes (greater than the entire total coverage of Clinton) while 

NBC came in a close second covering Trump’s campaign for 23 4 more minutes than Clinton. In 

each case the news station covered Trump’s campaign at a differential greater than Clinton’s 

entire coverage by that broadcasting station. Overall, MediaQuant said that Trump earned more 

than $6 billion in free or earned med ia over the course of the presidential campaign while 

Clinton received less than $3 billion (Nelson & Thurber, 2019). 

Some have suggested that Trump did not achieve this via any particular communication 

strategy but instead sought to cause “chaos everyday” and “scramble the news agenda” (Nelson 

& Thurber, 2019). However, every campaign has a strategy of some sort and in d igital era 

(Blumer & Kavanagh, 1999) no one runs a campaign without professionals by their side. That 

said, Trump did attain the appearance of a “no strategy” campaign by using the “dead cat 

strategy” (Madden, 2018). The dead cat strategy is when a candida te successfully changes the 

subject by distracting from what the original topic was about. This is different from traditional 

pivoting because it is less intentional and much more destructive. This strategy allowed Trump to 

continually deliver shock value which is considered a cornerstone of media success (Madden, 

2018). This strategy originated with President Lyndon B. Johnson and it allowed Trump to 

control the conversation and set the agenda (Madden, 2018). One example of the way Johnson 

manipulated publ ic discourse to his strategic advantage was “telling his aides to accuse his 

congressional opponent of sleeping with barnyard animals. When he was questioned as to the 

veracity of this claim, Johnson reportedly said, ‘I know it's not true; I just want to h ear him deny 13 

it!’” (Madden, 2018, p. 31). Johnson’s strategy served as a precursor to Trump’s modern 

communication strategy. 

The success of Trump’s “Dead Cat” Tweeting strategy was due to having more autonomy 

over the communication process. In the age of social media having more freedom over the 

communication process allowed him to seem more authentic to the voters. The 2016 Trump 

campaign was more willing to engage with the general public and didn’t control as much as 

Clinton (Enli, 2017). Tweets after 7pm were directly from Trump and during the day they were 

usually from staffers who he dictated to (Enli, 2017). Therefore, his campaign had a more 

amateur appearance but higher authenticity level than Clinton. Hillary Clinton’s tweets were 

usually well t hought out and although she is traditionally seen as tech savvy , having announced 

her 2012 campaign via a YouTube video, she had a lag in adapting compared to Trump. In 

August 2017 Pew Research found that 2/3 of adults receive their news from social media 

(Madden, 2018). Her need to control the message resulted in her seeming less authentic. 

The freedom Trump had to construct his own communication strategies and tweet 

resulted in the creation of his brand. Trump has two traditional identities as a business man: “Mr. 

Trump the Builder” and “Mr. Trump the Deal Maker” (Madden, 2018). He is known as a great 

marketer and was able to successfully market himself through twitter because he was able to 

control the message and bypass traditional media. By using his identity as Trump the Builder, he 

was able to use the slogan “Make America Great Again” and turn that into a personal brand 

because he was going to “rebuild” America. With this idea of Trump as a Builder he was able to 

represent the blue -collar billionaire which was missing from modern politics and appeals to 

disaffected voters (Wells et al ., 2016). 14 

Trump was able to use his populist brand in order to excite and activate his base. “Mr. 

Trump excited and mobilized these particular groups in a way no previou s candidate had and 

primarily by fueling and lending credence to their economic angst, as well as their unique social 

and cultural sensibilities” (Madden, 2018, p. 22). He was charismatic and held lots of rallies. 

Trump held a total of 26 rallies during th e general election and visited 12 states while Clinton 

only held 19. His biggest rally was in Mobile, AL with approximately 28,000 people in 

attendance which was over 10,000 more than Clinton’s biggest rally (Smith & Kreutz, 2016). 

Trump’s rally style also differed from what was seen as traditional as his rallies have been seen 

as entertainment and full of gesture. 

Personality is extremely important in political campaigns in the social media era (Enli, 

2017). Trump’s personality was central to his campaig n and Twitter allowed him to showcase it. 

After an analysis of Trump’s rhetoric scholars have said that Trump’s communication was done 

on a “fourth grade level” while Obama was said to have communicated on a “ninth grade level” 

(Madden, 2018). This was par t of Trump’s personality and his affinity for brief statements via 

twitter and repetition of words such as winning, politically correct, MAGA, and believe me. 

Another part of his personality and rhetoric style was to create caricatures of his opponents. 

Tr ump was quick to brand Hillary Clinton “Crooked Hillary” due to her email scandal. He 

referred to others during the primary as “Lyin Ted” and “Liberal Elites” (Madden, 2018). These 

statements were very effective to marketing and branding during the electio n and are a part of 

Trump’s personality. 

Overall, Trump’s used Twitter during his campaign to set him apart from his opponents. 

His campaign did not use this social media to heavily emphasize policy but instead to focus on 

his personal attributes and tho ughts. His twitter was used to activate potential voters but it also 15 

came with the use of more negative rhetoric. This rhetoric was also used during his rallies and 

came to characterize his campaigns. 

Similarities and Differences between the Campaigns 

Table 1

Trump and Obama Strategies during Campaign 

Strategies:  Similar  Different 

Use Social Media  I

Providing More Autonomy  I

Branding  I

Engaging Voters  I

Focus on their Personality  I

Rhetoric  I

When analyzing and comparing strategy this paper is looking at how the strategy worked 

relative to the president’s opponent instead of the strategy in terms of one election cycle to 

another. It will be analyzing the strategies of Obama relative to McCain a nd Romney and Trump 

relative to Hillary. Then it will be seeing if these strategies were both used successfully by 

Obama and Trump. After looking at Obama and Trump’s campaign communication strategies 

six strategies were identified. The first was the basic use of social media, in particular, Twitter. 

The second is providing their staff with more autonomy than their competitor. The third is that 

they created a brand. The fourth was that they were able to excite voters and the fifth was that 16 

their campaign pu t a great emphasis on their personality. The sixth and what some consider to be 

the most important is the rhetoric they used. 

Both Trump and Obama used social media, specifically Twitter to their advantage. Their 

use of social media resulted in earned med ia. Each of them benefited from their opponent’s 

inability to adapt and lag in innovation. MediaQuant said Trump earned more than 6 billion in 

free or earned media over the course of the presidential campaign while Clinton only got less 

than 3 billion (Nel son & Thurber, 2019). They went on to say that Trump earned more than 3.5 

times that of Obama in 2012 and more than 6 times that of Romney. Although Trump used this 

strategy more effectively, both Trump and Obama executed it properly. Trump built upon 

Obam a’s strategy from 2012. Obama got less free media than Trump but he still got twice the 

amount of his opponent , like Trump did. 

Both Trump and Obama allowed their campaign to have more autonomy over the social 

media platforms than their opponent. In his 2012 Campaign, Obama provided his digital media 

staffers with much more autonomy than Romney did. While Obama had much more autonomy in 

his campaign than Romney, the difference between the amount of autonomy that Trump 

provided his staff compared to Clinton was even greater. In that way, Trump had higher 

autonomy than both Clinton and Obama (Enli, 2017). Trump’s strategy varied from Obama’s in 

that he maintained control of his Twitter after 7pm but overall the strategies were mostly the 

same. It is i mportant to note that Trump’s post 7pm Tweets have been what sets him apart from 

Obama the most and have served as a major point of contrast between their rhetoric. 

Trump’s ability to maintain control of his Twitter while running for office is something 

that was virtually unheard of and had never been done in electoral politics to date. This 

contributed to his “anti -political correctness” image because he was able to tweet what he was 17 

thinking, uncontrolled by campaign managers and staffers. This often res ulted in unpolished 

tweets and controversial statements that came to characterize him on the campaign trail. This 

ability to tweet set him apart from other candidates but also had ramifications. The rhetoric he 

used in his tweets became crucial to his bran d but also remain a crucial point of difference 

between him and Obama. 

Both Obama and Trump were very successful at developing their own brand. Trump used 

social media to develop the “Make America Great Again” brand and build upon the idea of “Mr. 

Trump t he Builder.” Obama was able to use social media to create his “Change” brand. Both of 

these brands were key to the success of each candidate and stood in stark contrast to that of their 

opponent. In each case, the president had a brand that was able to cre ate excitement and 

engagement while their opponents failed at doing so. 

Each president was able to excite their base via social media and activate them via rallies. 

Both of these strategies resulted in an increased engagement among their supporters. Trump was 

able to excite his populist base by representing a “blue collar billionaire ” that appealed to 

disaffected voters. Obama was able to use his brand to present himself as being an agent of 

change and hope for the future. This appealed to many Americans w ho felt that the previous 

administration had failed them with the financial crash. 

Although their personalities were very different both of their campaigns placed a heavy 

focus on the candidate’s personality via social media. Obama’s campaign usually twe eted more 

about his personality than specific policy proposals. Trump’s campaign focused more on his 

personality as an “end to political correctness” politician. Both president s were also very 

charismatic people and were able to give speeches that compelle d their audiences. 18 

Aside from their personalities, their rhetoric is one place where they really differed and is 

one of the main reasons that they are always juxtaposed. Obama used professionalism in his 

campaigns and hardly ever wrote his own tweets. Mea nwhile, Trump used de -professionalism 

and was known to speak on a fourth -grade level. He often goes off script at campaign rallies and 

tweets whatever he thinks is relevant. Obama was said to have spoken at a ninth -grade level. He 

always made sure to speak in carefully crafted messages. The main differences rhetorically 

between them was the degree to which they were “politically correct.” Trump rejected the idea of 

political correctness that he saw Obama as embodying. This rejection was also a rejected of t he 

establishment and resulted in Trump having a much more negative tone to his rhetoric than 

Obama who chose to take a more hopeful approach. 

It is important to acknowledge the significance of the rhetoric al difference between 

Trump and Obama throughout t heir campaigns. This is the major source of criticism and 

difference between the two. Trump has sought to attract people via the politics of resentment, 

which is rather different to Obama’s rhetoric of hope. Trump ran an outsider campaign and chose 

to main ly reject experts and the elites (Shapiro, 2018). With the rejection of the expert class 

Trump was able to criticize more freely without worrying about offending experts because he 

stated that his opinion was just as valid as theirs, if not better. The important implication of this 

on po litical communication was that Trump’s base, which consisted of about half of Americans, 

didn’t care about the opinions of the expert class either. This allowed Trump to criticizes many 

different types of people including his own government. Shapiro has ch aracterized this as Trump 

running against his own government (Shapiro, 2018). As part of this, Trump has sought to 

suggest that the body politic has been invaded by both immigrants and corruption and this has 

been represented through the rhetoric of “Build the Wall” and “Drain the swamp.” 19 

As an explanation for this, Bostdorff discusses how Trump’s rhetoric was a backlash 

against Obama’s presidency (Bostdorff, 2017). He stated that Obama’s rhetoric as the democratic 

nominee did not focus on anger although he criticized his opponents. Instead he says that 

Obama’s rhetoric was focused on instilling calmness and “promoting confidence in his ability to 

bring needed change” (Bostdorff, 2017, p. 69 7). When examining Trump’s rhetoric, he states 

that “we can disce rn the promise and peril of anger” (Bostdorff, 2017, p. 698). Trump used 

rhetoric to cast images of a dystopian future that incited anger in the American public. The 

changes that Obama created throughout his presidency left certain sections of Americans be hind 

and it prompted a sense of loss and victimhood in Americans that fueled Trump’s rhetoric and 

propelled him to the White House. This illustrate s how the rhetoric of political change can vary 

based on the candidate and the strength with which the differ ence in rhetoric has , characterize s

each president. 

After looking at these strategies there were five where they shared similarities and one 

where they strayed. The main difference between Trump and Obama is their personalities and 

rhetoric. This is a ver y important difference when voting but not as important when it comes to 

strategies. The same strategies can work for multiple different types of candidates depending on 

the climate surrounding their election and who they are running against. This major di fference 

usually overshadows their similarities and has caused scholars to contrast them . However, after 

analyzing their communication strategies it is pretty clear that they share 5/6 and that they are 

indeed more similar than different when it comes to c ampaign communication strategies. 20 

Governing Communication Strategies 

Now that it has been determined that Trump and Obama used similar campaigning 

strategies it is important to look at how their strategies carried over to their presidency and 

whether or not they still remain ed similar. Traditionally, it has been known that when presidents 

take office, they typically abandon campaigning techniques and focus solely on policy making. 

However, some scholars have argued that Trump has kept what they refer to as “a permanent 

campaign.” In the age of social media, it is not abnormal for presidents to campaign. They 

usually heavily endorse candidates during the midterms and advocate for their party. Trump has 

also been criticized for his use of social m edia while president. However, he is not the only 

president to have sought out other means of communication during his presidency. FDR sought 

to bypass traditional means of communication and talk directly to the public via his “fireside 

chats” (Nelson & Th urber, 2019). The main focus of analysis in this section will be looking at 

how the candidates use of social media and rallies changed since being in office. 

Historical Analysis of Previous Presidential Governing Communication 

Communication str ategies of ten change when president s enter office. Historically, 

modern presidential communication has been linked to radio from the 1920s onward and 

television since the 1950s . News networks have always focused on the presidency because news 

coverage of the president is profitable (Smoller, 1990). The news networks covered four types of 

presidential news. The first was personal profile which often begins during the electoral season, 

the second is legislative proposals which is when the news network shifts to cover the president’s 

legislative agend a (here it focuses on substances an on the politics of persuasion), the third is 

policy evaluation where they evaluate the effectiveness of the policies, and the final type is 

presidential reassessment where they reas sess an initially positive image to usually be more 21 

negative (Smoller, 1990). Th e huge emphasis that the media places on coverage of the 

Presidency became known as the “six -o’clock presidency ” (Smoller, 1990). This was in part due 

to the big emphasis that presidents would also place on the media coverage. The idea was that 

when the average American turned on their television they would learn and see news about the 

president. Therefore, each president was now defined by how they were portrayed on the evening 

“six -o’clock” news. 

The quantity of presidential news affects the president’s ability to lead (Cohen, 2008). 

Because the national news networks often concentrate on presidential news, presidents often 

used it as their main form of communication with the public. Many presidents use the major 

broadcasting systems such as ABC, CBS, and NBC to make major, prime time addresses to the 

nation. They all recognized the impact of the news media and redirected their activities to 

address the needs of these sources (Cohen, 2008). Ronald Reagan believed that television was 

the most important medium covering the presidency. His presidency became known as the 

“sound -bite” presidency (Smoller, 1990). He was able to control what the news media covered 

and direct the conversation by taki ng fewer questions, holding fewer press conferences, and 

keeping some reporters more distant from him (Smoller, 1990). 

Other president’s such as Nixon have had more tense relationships with the press during 

their presidency. Nixon was one of the first pre sidents to feel the effects of the switch from even 

coverage between congress and the president to almost a sole focus on it by 1963 (Patterson, 

2017). In the new era of 24/7 cable, there was an increased demand to create picture focused 

news. As a result, modern presidents have had to deal with national cable news and try to control 

and respond to coverage. Nixon was known to have said “The press is your enemy… Enemies. 

Understand that? . . . Because they’re trying to stick the knife right in our groin” (P atterson, 22 

2017 , p. 3 ). Many other president’s such as Clinton have also claimed unfair negative coverage 

from the press. Clinton exploded in a Rolling Stone interview saying “I’ve fought more damn 

battles here than any president in 20 years with the possib le exception of Reagan’s first budget 

and not gotten one damn bit of credit from the knee -jerk liberal press. I am damn sick and tired 

of it” (Patterson, 2017 , p. 3 ). Due to this , many presidents have sought to bypass the traditional 

coverage. Reagan fed n ews stories straight to local media bypassing cable news while Clinton 

preferred one on one interviews to provide their side of the story (Patterson, 2017). 

New types of media such as social media, and especially Twitter have become new ways 

for president s to be able to bypass these traditional forms. Social media has become a favored 

alternative to even one -on -one interviews because the presidents are allowed to push out an 

unedited version if their story. This has allowed them to have more control and attempt to drive 

the coverage and set the agenda more. However, they have also brought more criticism as every 

member of the public also has the ability to comment on their actions. As a result, social media 

has changed the way in which presidents have chosen to communicate throughout their 

presidency. Twitter has been used by government officials recently, to improve their image by 

appearing responsive to public, at tract public attention and engage thought with other leaders and 

potential voters, assert administration viewpoints, galvanize supporters to take action, and for 

blunt criticism (Katz et. al., 2013). 

Obama’s Governing Communication Strategies 

“President Obama is trying to talk directly to the American people, these days …

making the case for his ambitious agenda in forums as varied as Jay Leno’s late -

night television show and a news conference on Tuesday. Now Mr. Obama will 

have a chance at even more direct engagement… in what the White House is 

billing as the first Internet video news conference by an American President” 

-New York Times 

(Katz et.al, 2013, p. 51) 23 

At the time of Obama’s election in 2008 he was deemed the “social media President” 

(Katz et al ., 2013). As President, Obama still used social media and sought to use online 

platforms and the internet as a way of “opening the White House to all Americans” (Katz et al .,

2013). The way Obama’s administration used social media changed and it largely shifted from 

an emphasis on personal ity to policy. It was used as a way to talk directly to the people, answer 

policy questions, and develop policy ideas. As the first president of the social media age, Barack 

Obama allowed his staff to have autonomy and try out new ways of engaging with the public. As 

a result, Obama was the first president to communicate via live video format (Katz et al ., 2013). 

His administration orga nized the first ever town hall where the president would answer questions 

live for 75 minutes. They used the suggestion box submissions and voting as a money -saving 

way of gathering ideas via Twitter and held “Online Office Hours” via Twitter (Katz et al., 

2013). 

Obama also use d social media to keep his supporters excited throughout his presidency. 

Obama used the autonomy that social media provided him to try new ways of communication 

and to engage the public. His administration created a White House engag ement invitation in 

2012 as the top link on the White House homepage ( Katz et al., 2013). Obama also had a first 

ever Google+ Hangout interview in 2012 which was the first completely virtual interview. He 

also held the first presidential texting event wher e youth texted the president about student debt. 

This kept his base engaged with his policy making and allowed Obama to continue to 

communicate effectively with the public even when he was not campaigning. 

As President, Obama was able to use the emphasis he placed on policy to create a brand 

for himself as President of the United States. He was able to use the Affordable Care Act as his 

signature presidential policy. It eventually became known as Obamacare and it quickly turned 24 

into Obama’s brand. There is debate as to whether or not this branding was done intentionally by 

him or as an attempt to negatively attack him from the Republican party. However, regardless of 

this, it is undeniable that he was able to use this as a brand , as e ven after his presidency Obama 

was remembered for Obamacare and the policy withstood attacks from the Republican’s in early 

2016. 

The Obama administration ’s rhetoric remained largely hopeful while he was president. In 

fact, Olson found that Obama's campai gn and governing rhetoric were consistent. He suggested 

that Obama used the rhetoric of the campaign to help build a basis for governance (Olson et. al, 

2012). He tried to follow through on what he promised to do and maintained positive rhetoric to 

descri be his policy accomplishments. Overall, much of Obama’s rhetoric as president was both 

positive and scripted. He was a typical teleprompter president when he gave speeches throughout 

his presidency. It is also important to note that he did not continue hol ding rallie s while he was 

president. 

Overall, as President Obama focused less on himself and placed a greater emphasis on 

more creative communication strategies that could help him implement the promises that he had 

made throughout the campaign. All of th ese strategies were both ways to engage the public and 

control the message. Like Clinton, Obama chose to control the message by having one -to -one 

interviews (Surso, 2018). These interviews allowed him to share his views and opinions with the 

press and public without being ambushed by unwanted questions. In these settings he could be a 

little bit more honest. As president, this communication strategy was not new but did prove very 

effective for him. 25 

Trump’s Governing Communication Strategies 

“In his first words as President of the United States, as if still on the campaign trail, Donald 

Trump described a country in ruins” 

-Bob Garfield 

(Gladstone & Garfield, 2017) 

Trump is an extremely controversial President. He is known for “Tweet ing to Power.” 

One of the main sources of controversy and topics during his transition from candidate to 

president was whether or not he would continue tweeting throughout his presidency. Trump’s 

use of social media has continued throughout his presidency. His tweets range from personal 

thoughts, criticisms, and policy announcements. When it comes to Twitter, Anderson has found 

that Trump criticizes more Republican lawmakers than Democrats as president . Additionally, he 

disseminates a significant amount of information from conservative talk shows, such as Fox and 

Friends (Anderson, 2017). 

Trump ’s tweets are not only a way for him to engage with the public but also a way for 

the p ublic to engage with him. The tweets that the public most frequently engaged with fall into a 

few categories . These rang e from policy ideas and statements , self -praise, praising others, 

personal attacks and media criticism (Anderson, 2017). Trump’s most s uccessful three 

categories of public engagement via tweets are policy at 39%, personal attacks at 20%, and 

personal praise at 13% (Anderson, 2017 , p. 41 ). This actually challenges what much of the 

public believes about Trump’s Tweeting habits. It is import ant to note that a lthough a large 

portion of Trump’s public engagement is with more policy tweets since being elected, they are 

still largely focused on him. The policy statements that he makes are often controversial and 

unpolished which maintains his “ou tsider” and “anti -political correctness brand .” Overall, there 

has been a s light s hift in what Trump tweets about. The tweets that Trump makes about policy 26 

often have a personal emphasis and focus on his opinions about certain policy, attempts to fulfill 

his policy statements , commitments he made during the campaig n, or criticisms of others for 

blocking his policy proposals. 

Trump has continued to use social media to brand himself throughout his presidenc y. 

Many have said that his tweets have become his brand. However, t hroughout his campaign he 

focused on his brand in terms of being a builder and a political outsider. As both a candidate and 

as president, Trump has rejected both the media and expert class . Trump is unique in that he was 

one of the first president s to continue to claim the idea of being a political outsider while he was 

in office . In this way, even throughout his presidency he has stuck to being “on brand” (Shapiro, 

2018). 

Trump has been c riticized for his rhetoric as president and his use of campaign style 

rallies. During his transition he held a “thank you tour” which consisted of a total of nine 

different rallies in nine different states (Homans, 2018). He also held over 20 rallies in hi s first 

few years as president (Homans, 2018). Trump’s rhetoric as president has been the opposite of 

the traditional “teleprompter president.” He does not like scripted events and prefers one -to -one 

interviews as president to press conferences (Durso , 2018). This allows him to have more control 

over the way in which he is portrayed in the media. Trump has been criticized for his 

communication style as president for being unprofessional and having a more campaign like feel. 

Some evidence of this is his continuation of the “Dead -Cat” strategy he used on the campaign 

trail (Madden, 2018). Trump has used this strategy to invite chaos as president and attack both 

adversaries and allies. He has criticized many allies but also government agencies such as the 

justice department and the intelligence agencies because he felt that they were hard to rein in 

(Shapiro, 2018). Trump was the first president to carry this strategy over into office and Twitter 27 

provided him the informal platform with which to do so (Shapi ro, 2018). This is one of the 

many aspects of his communication style that has set him apart from previous presidents. 

Changes in Communication Styles 

This paper will now analyze whether or not Trump and Obama’s governing 

communication strategies change d or stayed the same to their campaigning communication 

strategies. This will allow us to then be able to analyze their governing communication styles 

with more context to how it relates to their overall communication style. 

Trump’s use of social media has remained the same from the campaign trail to the 

Presidency. However, the content of his tweets have shifted slightly more to policy. Trump’s 

administration has not had the same freedom it had during the campaign to experime nt with 

communication strategies. This can be seen in Trump’s White House press office as there has 

been a lot of turn over due to unsatisfactory press results. Besides tweeting and personal 

interviews, the Trump administration has not been as free to try out new communication 

strategies as they were during the campaign. Trump has furthered his personal brand and 

continued to engage with the public throughout his presidency. His rhetoric also appears to 

remain mostly the same between his campaign and presid ency. It is still mostly negative eve n

while his administration is in the White House. 

Overall, it appears that Trump maintains his campaign style communication techniques 

throughout his Presidency. This creates an appearance of what some scholars have referred to as 

a “permanent campaign.” However, this is not necessarily the case. The Wash ington Post has 

suggested that Trump is not necessarily campaigning any earlier than other presidents but instead 

he is just being more upfront about it (Doherty, 2017). Trump is instead using social media to 

continually market himself as any other preside nt would through the policy decisions he makes. 28 

He has also used rallies to sustain excitement surrounding his presidency and engage with the 

public. Many other presidents have sought to engage with the public and undoubtedly, any 

president is going to be thinking about how their decisions have ramifications on their re -election 

at any given moment. 

Although it often appears so, after analysis Obama also did not change his techniques too 

much when he became president. Obama continued to use social media th roughout his 

presidency although the content of his tweets and posts shifted mostly to policy. He also 

continued to use social media to engage with the public and interact with them . He allowed his 

staff to have the same autonomy they experienced in the ca mpaign and to try new 

communication techniques as president (making him the first president to engage with the public 

via the internet in this way) . Obama continued to create a personal brand while he was president. 

Although the way he did this was differ ent from the campaign, he was able to take a policy issue 

and use it as a branding strategy. The big things that Obama did change throughout his 

presidency were that he focused less on his personality and his rhetoric became toned down as he 

mainly focused on policy issues. 

Similarities and Differences between the Governing Styles 

Table 2

Trump and Obama Governing Strategies 

Strategies:  Similarities  Differences 

Using Social Media  I

More Autonomy  I29 

Branding  I

Engaging Public  I

Focus on their Personality  I

Rhetoric  I

*note that ‘engaging voters’ has been changed to ‘engaging public’ because it is no longer an 

election cycle 

Now this paper will analyze the similarities and difference between Trump and Obama’s 

governing communication strategies. Both Obama and Trump continue to use social media 

throughout their presidency. In the case of Obama, it was very clear that as he shifted towards 

the presidency the content of his social media shifted from a focus on the personal to a focus on 

policy. What was shocking to find was that Trump also shifted his focus slightly more to policy. 

Although his shift to policy within his use of social media is less than Obama’s and has gone 

much more unnoticed because of his controversial policy statements , it is still there. Compared to 

his campaign Trump’s focus has shifted slightly more to policy. 

Trump and Obama’s strategies of autonomy differ as president. Obama continues his use 

of autonomy over from the campaign and allows his staff freedom to come up with creative new 

ways of communicating with the public. On the other hand, Trump does not cont inue this same 

freedom over from his campaign. Instead, he has a stricter format because of all of the turnover 

in his administration and his difficulties with the press as president. 

Both Trump and Obama have continued to create a brand as President. Ob ama does this 

through his policy achievements such as Obamacare. His brand shifts as President from someone 

who is hoping to enact change to someone who did and Obamacare is the projection of this. On 30 

the other hand, Trump creates a brand as President. How ever, this brand takes on a very different 

format than Obama’s brand. Trump builds upon the brand that he started in the campaign. He 

project s the image of a political outsider from within the White House. Casting himself as an 

agent of change that will “D rain the Swamp” with his new leadership and policies. 

Trump and Obama were the first president s to use social media in campaigns to engage 

with the public. T hey both made active attempts to engage the public throughout their 

presidency. Obama did this by trying to get the public’s input on policy proposals. Trump did 

this through tweeting and having the public engage as well as holding rallies and his “thank you 

tour.” 

Although it may not seem like it. Both president’s strategies to emphasize their 

personality during the campaign changed once they got i nto office. They both shift to 

emphasizing policy more as president. Trump focuses on his personality more than Obama as 

president however, it is still slightly more toned down from when he was a candi date. Trump has 

often been criticized as not focusing on policy as President. However, since he was elected, he 

has placed a great deal of emphasis on following through on his policy promises. One of the 

main reasons that Trump and Obama are usually assess ed differently on this point is that their 

rhetoric is very different . For instance , Obama’s tweets about policy took on more of the form of 

a press release while Trump’s took on policy more in terms of his successes as president. 

Rhetoric remains the o verall main difference between Obama and Trump in both the 

campaigns and governing styles . Their personalities , styles , and rhetoric are completely different. 

The difference in their rhetoric and tone is huge and emphasizes their different levels of 

profes sionalism. Trump is seen as unprofessional and someone who goes off script. Obama was 

seen as a teleprompter president. The different levels of their rhetoric have remained consistent 31 

with how they were in the campaign. Trump often used critical rhetoric o f both opponents and 

allies throughout his presidency. His use of the “Dead Cat” rhetorical strategy as president 

resulted in an overall image of a chaotic presidency. In contrast, Obama aimed for a more 

coherent and positive rhetorical approach. He focuse d on his success while Trump focused more 

on criticisms of others. The different levels of their rhetoric have remained consistent with how 

they were in the campaign. 

Out of six strategies only four remain similar after they become president. Obama 

primar ily focuses on policy throughout his presidency and does not use Twitter in the same way 

as Trump. Trump maintains his emphasis on his policy successes as President, continues to hold 

campaign style rallies, and tweet. Contrary to popular belief and the or iginal hypothesis , Obama 

and Trump still share 4/6 strategies throughout their presidency. Obama’s strategies changed 

more. However, Trump and Obama still remain more similar than different throughout their 

Presidenc ies .

Conclusions 

Although President Trump has been juxtaposed with President Obama since his 

candidacy, they actually have very similar communication strategies. There is no doubt that 

President Trump and Obama are completely different people with both opposing policy view s, 

parties, and both personal style and rhetoric. However, they are the first two social media 

presidents, and as a result, have taken on very similar communication strategies to arrive at the 

White House. Trump and Obama’s campaign communication strategie s were very similar. In 

fact, they shared over five out of six strategies to become president. The only thing they did not 

have in common was their use of rhetoric. Another surprising discovery was that Trump and 

Obama did not change their overall communic ation strategies to o much when they transitioned 32 

from campaigning to governing. After analysis of their governing styles, it was even more 

shocking to find that Trump and Obama also shared four out of six communication strategies as 

president. The two stra tegies that differed as president were autonomy and rhetoric. Rhetoric was 

the one constant that difference between the two presidents throughout the study and is most 

likely the main explanation for why they are always juxtaposed. The similarities during the 

campaign are definitely more significant and outweigh the similarities between their governing 

styles. However, when combining these two analyses together it is found that President Trump 

and President Obama have overall similar communication strategie s. 

Implications 

Impact on Future Campaigns 

American election styles often set trends in political communication (Durso, 2018). 

Therefore, it is fair to ask whether or not Trump and Obama’s strategies as the first social media 

president s will have a lasting impact on political communication. Shapiro d iscusses three 

communication strategies that President Trump used that he believes will be continued on in the 

future campaigns. The first was the idea of d irect communication with voters, the second is 

governing against his own government, and the third is the d ismissal of expertise (Shapiro, 

2018). 

It is important to look at how thes e factors were not only reflected in both president 

Trump’s and Obama’s campaigns and presidencies but also the 2020 candidates. Both President 

Trump and Obama used social media as a means of direct communication with the voters. This 

can also be seen in t he campaign communication style of almost everyone running for president 

right now. Every candidate has social media and is using it to advocate or engage the voters. The 33 

idea of Trump running against his own government as a political outsider is not neces sarily 

something new although Trump has capitalized it more than candidates in the past. This strategy 

might not have a lasting impact as it appears that many of the 2020 candidates are aligning 

themselves more with the party as a backlash against Trump’s outsider image. The third strategy 

as the dismissal of expertise will also have to be looked at from the perspective of the 2020 

candidates and what they do in response to Trump’s image. 

Something else that Trump did that will most likely continue to last for a while in 

political communications is his critici sm of the media. Although Trump as seen as one of the 

harshest critics of the media many other president s h ave done this in the past and will likely 

continue to do it in the future. Obama was strict on releasing info to the press (Risen, 2016). His 

adminis tration prosecuted eight whistleblower cases w hile only three were prosecuted in the 

previous administration. At the time, many academics said that his crackdown on the media by 

ordering subpoenas and monitoring phone records, was almost as bad as Nixon. 

Trump’s populist communication style has been seen spreading to some European 

countries, including England. The use of social media and populist rhetoric is probably the 

communication style that will have the biggest lasting impacts on not only US politic s but also 

the world. The political rhetoric in America has become more and more polarizing as the 

rejection of experts and the elite class has taken hold and become more popular. Social media 

has provided everyone with a voice and with the influx of more voices comes both more 

opinions and more criticism. This negative rhetoric will most likely continue to polarize 

throughout future elections. 34 

Impact on Governing Styles 

Along with analyzing the implications of American social media elections on politica l

communication as a whole , i t is also important to look at how social media has impacted the 

presidency and more specifically governing styles. American governing styles often do not carry 

over and set trends the way that campaigning styles do. However, s ocial media has changed the 

way that presidents have chosen to govern and it is important to investigate whether or not 

Trump and Obama’s governing styles will have lasting impacts. 

One of the biggest lasting impacts for future presidents will be how they chose to use 

social media to help them govern. Trump chose to use Twitter to do this and it has been his 

biggest source of criticism throughout his presidency. A Washington Post -Worl d ABC News 

polls from July 2017 found that 67% of Americans thought Trump should stop tweeting while 

70% thought it was unpresidential (Nelson & Thurber, 2019 , p. 261 ). The American public have 

not been the only ones critical of Trump’s tweets. Many politi cal insiders have also expressed 

their distaste for Trump’s tweeting as president. Former Speaker of the House, Paul Ryan, has 

been quoted saying that “he [Trump] didn't know anything about government ... I wanted to 

scold him all the time” (Perper, 2019). In many news reports Republicans from within his own 

party have been heard complaining that Trump is, in some respects, his own worst enemy 

because his tweets seem to undermines his own governance. 

Trump on the other hand has responded via Twitter that “My use of social media is not 

Presidential -its MODERN DAY PRESIDENTIAL” “Make America Great Again!” (Nelson & 

Thurber, 2019, p. 261 ). With candidates and many other government officials now using Twitter 

on a daily basis it is fair to take his comments in to consideration. Is this the new normal? And 

will t weeting be continued throughout future presidencies to come? President Obama and 35 

President Trump have both used Twitter throughout their presidency. Trump has over 55 million 

followers on Twitter and Obam a has nearly double that at 103 million followers (Shapiro, 2018). 

Twitter has become an integral part of the political communication scene due to these two social 

media presidents. Although Trump has drawn a major source of criticism over his tweets, it i s

highly unlikely that future presidents will decide not to follow this new trend. Twitter provides 

them with direct connection with the voters and the ability to bypass the media and gain control 

which almost every president in history has sought to have the ability to do. It is likely that future 

presidents may not use as harsh of rhetoric , which has been the major source of contention with 

Trump’s tweets , but it is highly unlikely that they w ould use Twitter on the campaign trail and 

then give it up once in office. 

Reflection on Social Media Presidency 

Social media will have the longest lasting impact on political communication as a whole. 

Within the span of 10 years it has already change d how politicians both campaign and govern. 

This new social media age has both advantages and disadvantages. The consequential question is 

whether or not these advantages outweigh the disadvantages. Many of the advantages and 

disadvantages of the era of so cial media are being expressed now throughout Donald Trump’s 

Presidency. 

Some of the advantages that social media provides presidents is that they are able to 

communicate with the public and voters in a more personal way than they ever could before ,

they can send messages directly to the public without having to go through other media outlets ,

and they are able to send messages out quickly. These advantages allow the presidents to have 

more control over how they are portrayed and allows to give their vers ion of events. Some 

disadvantages of social media presidents include that their every move and comment is 36 

documented , that it can be used in a careless or unfiltered way by leaders, and that now everyone 

has the ability to comment and criticize them via so cial media. 

These advantages and disadvantages are both specific to the presidency but also more 

general and can be applied to the overall use of social media. For most Americans, the good 

outweighs the negative in terms of social media. In an ever evolvi ng and faster paced 

environment the benefits of increased communication do outweigh the possible negative effects 

and as long as the public continues their use of social media, presidents will as well. It is ,

however, important for social media presidents to remember to be warry of how they use their 

new platform and how their interactions effect not only themselves but also the American public. 

Limitations and Ideas for Further Research 

It is important to note the limitations of this paper. First of all, when doing the analysis 

and comparison it is important to remember that Obama has over two terms of campaign ad 

governing style research to look at. Trump has only been in office for thre e years and has not run 

a second campaign so it is tough to see if he will stay consistent with his communication 

strategies and if they will remain effective in the future. Because of this there has been a l ack of 

depth in the quality research available into Trump’s governing communication style and his use 

of T witter as President . Most of the research that exists focuses on his attacks o n the media .

This paper would benefit from a deeper analysis over a longer period of time ideally at 

least two, two te rm social media presidents. The problem with using Obama and Trump is that 

social media was not really fully fledged and used by the average American until 2012 and 

Trump only has one term to analyze which is 2016. The election in 2016 came as a shock to m ost 37 

people and therefore, there is a lot of research about the campaign but not as much about the 

administration. 38 

References 

Anderson, J. (2017). Twitter -in -chief: A content analysis of president Trump’s tweeting habits. 

Elon Journal of Undergraduate Research in Communications, 8 (2), 36 -46. 

Bimber, B. (2014). Digital media in the Obama campaigns of 2008 and 2012: Adaptation to the 

personalized political communication environment. Journal of Information Technology & 

Politics, 11 (2), 130 -150, DOI:  10.1080/19331681.2014.895691 

Bligh, M. C., & Kohles, J. C. (2009). The enduring allure of charisma: How Barack Oba ma won 

the historic 2008 presidential election. The Leadership Quarterly , 20 (3), 483 -492. 

Bossetta, M. (2018). The digital architectures of social media: Comparing political Campaigning 

on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, and Snapchat in the 2016 U.S. electio n. Journalism & 

Mass Communication Quarterly, 95 (2), 471 –496. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/1077699018763307 

Bostdorff , D. M. (2017). Obama, Trump, and reflections on the rhetoric of political change. 

Rhetoric & Public Affairs , 20(4), 695 -706 .

Blumer, J. G., & Kavanaugh , D. (1999). The third age of political communication: Influences 

and features. Political Communication , 16 (3) , 209 –230. 

Cohen, J. E. (2008). The presidency in the era of the 24 -Hour news. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 

University Press. 

Doherty, B. J. (2017). “Trump isn’t really campaigning earlier than other recent presidents. He’s 

just more upfront about it.” The Washington Post .39 

www.washingtonpost.com/news/monkey -cage/wp/2017/02/21/trump -isnt -campaigning -

any -sooner -than -other -recent -pr esidents/ 

Enli, G. (2017). Twitter as arena for the authentic outsider: exploring the social media campaigns 

of Trump and Clinton in the 2016 US presidential election. European Journal of 

Communication , 32 (1), 50 –61.  https://doi.org/10.1177/0267323116682802 

Farnsworth, S. J., & Lichter, S. R. (2011). The nightly news nightmare: Media coverage of U.S. 

presidential elections, 1988 -2008 (3 rd Ed). Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield 

Publishers. 

Gainous, J., & Wagner, K. M. (2014 ). Tweeting to power: The social media revolution in 

American politics. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 

Gerodimos R. , & Justinussen , G. (2015). Obama’s 2012 Facebook camp aign: Political 

communication in the age of the like button. Journal of Information Technology & 

Politics , 12 (2), 113 -132 . doi : 10.1080/19331681.2014.982266 

Gladstone, B., & Garfield, B. (2017). “‘ On the Media. ’ The president and the press: A history. ”

New York Public Radio . www.wnyc.org/story/presidential -press -history/ .

Greenstien, F. (2009). The presidential difference: Lea dership style from FDR to Barack Obama 

(3 rd Ed). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 

Homans, C. (2018). “The post -campaign campaign of Donald Trump: He has been president for 

more than a year - so why is he still holding rallies? ” New York Times .

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/04/09/magazine/donald -trump -rallies -campaigning -

president.html 40 

Johnson, D. W. (2011). Campaigning in twenty -first century: A whole new ballgame? New York, 

NY: Routledge. 

Katz, J. E., Barris, M., & Jain, A. (2013). The social media president: Barack Obama and the 

politics of digital engagement . New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan. 

Kiyohara, S. (2009). A study on how technological innovation affected the 2008 U.S. 

Presidential election: Young voters' participation and Obama's victory. 2009 Ninth 

Annual International Symposium on Applications and the Internet , 223 -226. 

doi: 10.1109/SAINT.2009.51 

Madden, C. (2018). Free media: An analysis of political communication strategies and their role 

in the 2016 Presidential election. University of Texas at Austin. 

https://repositories.lib.utexas.edu/handle/2152/ 65271 

McNair, B. (2017). An introduction to political communications . London: Routledge. 

Nelson, C. J., & Thurber, J.A. (Eds.). (2019). Campaigns and elections American style: The 

changing landscape of political campaigns (5 th ed.). New York, NY: Routledg e. 

Olson, J., Ouyang, Y., Poe, J., Trantham, A., & Waterman, R. W. (2012). The teleprompter 

presidency: Comparing Obama’s campaign and governing rhetoric . Social Science 

Quarterly , 93 (5), 1402 -1423. 

Patterson, T. E. (2017). News coverage of Donald Trump’s first 100 days. Harvard Kennedy 

School.  https://www.hks.harvard.edu/publications/news -coverage -dona ld -trumps -first -

100 -days 41 

Perper, R. (2019). “Trump goes on late -night Twitter rant hitting back at 'failed' Paul Ryan after 

scathing claims in new book.” Business Insider.  https://www.businessinsider.com/trump -

tweets -hitting -back -at -paul -ryan -claims -new -book -2019 -7

Risen, J. (2016). “If Donald Trump targets journalists, thank Obama. ” New York Times .

www.nytimes.com/2016/12/30/opinion/sunday/if -donald -trump -targets -journalists -

thankobama.html .

Shapiro, J. (2018). “Trump has redefined polit ical communication for the world -and soon 

everyone could speak like him.” Business Insider. 

https://www.businessinsider.com/whole -world -will -soon -start -talking -like -trump -2018 -

10 

Smith, C., & Kreutz, L. (2016). “Hillary Clinton’s and Donald Trump’s campaigns by the 

numbers. ” ABC NEWS . Retrieved from:  https://abcnews.go.com/Politics/hillary -clinton -

donald -trumps -campaigns -numbers/story?id=43356783 

Smoller, F. T. (1990). The six o'clock preside ncy: A theory of presidential press relations in the 

age of television. New York, NY: Praeger Publishers. 

Wells, C., Shah, D.V., Pevehouse, J. C., Yang, J., Pelled, A., Boehm, F.,… Schmidt, J.L. (2016). 

How Trump drove coverage to the nomination: Hybrid me dia campaigning. Political 

Communication , 33 (4), 669 -676. 

WSJ Staff (2008). “Obama rally draws 100,000 in Missouri. ” Wall Street Journal .

https://blogs.wsj.com/washwire/2008/10/18/obama -rally -draws -100000 -in -missouri/ 42 

Xu, Z . (2018). The rise of Twitter in Presidential communication: an examination of the 

relationship between President Trump’s Twitter feed and the media coverage of his first 

100 days. University of Texas.  https://r c.library.uta.edu/uta -

ir/bitstream/handle/10106/27670/XU -THESIS -2018.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
