Title: Home - SkyGrid

URL Source: https://www.skygrid.com/

Markdown Content:
Powering the next 

generation of aviation.
-------------------------------------------

SkyGrid takes a smarter approach to safely integrate advanced air mobility and highly automated aircraft operations into shared airspace.

Safe, secure and

scalable operations
-------------------------------------

We are developing assured third-party services to open the sky for autonomous flight and scale advanced air mobility.

Precision Data

Integration

SkyGrid’s technology integrates high performance datasets specifically designed to meet the unique demands of uncrewed and AAM operations.

Unified Operational

Insight

By aggregating ingested data, SkyGrid constructs a high-fidelity common operating picture to support the Operator’s decision-making.

Automation and

Decision Support

SkyGrid delivers advanced automation and predictable decision support tools that form the foundation for sophisticated strategic and tactical functions.

Our 

Partners
--------------

We believe global collaborations are key to ensuring airspace safety.

##### Wisk

Wisk
----

Wisk is an advanced air mobility company dedicated to delivering safe, everyday flight for everyone. Wisk’s self-flying, eVTOL air taxi will make it possible for passengers to skip the traffic and get to their destination faster. With over a decade of experience and over 1600 test flights, Wisk is shaping the future of daily commutes and urban travel, safely and sustainably.

Headquarters: Mountain View, CA

##### The Boeing Company

The Boeing Company
------------------

As a leading global aerospace company, Boeing develops, manufactures and services commercial airplanes, defense products and space systems for customers in more than 150 countries. As a top U.S. exporter, the company leverages the talents of a global supplier base to advance economic opportunity, sustainability and community impact.

Headquarters: Arlington, VA

##### Insitu

Insitu
------

With offices in the U.S., U.K., and Australia, Insitu creates and supports unmanned systems and software technology that deliver end-to-end solutions for collecting, processing and managing sensor data. To date, their systems have accumulated more than 1.3 million flight hours.

Headquarters: Bingen, WA

##### Avathon

Avathon
-------

Avathon, a leader in Industrial AI, extends the life of critical infrastructure while advancing the journey toward full autonomy. Avathon’s Industrial AI platform empowers commercial and government customers with scalable, secure, and value-driven solutions that enhance efficiency and resilience across heavy industry. Avathon sits at the intersection of infrastructure and artificial intelligence, engineering, and computer science.

Headquarters: San Francisco, CA

##### Global UTM Association

Global UTM Association
----------------------

The Global Uncrewed Traffic Management Association- represents organizations involved in innovative drone services and smart mobility solutions. It engages in impactful research and development and in technical, regulatory, and political processes to foster a global ecosystem in a fair global drone services market.

Headquarters: Lausanne, Switzerland

##### WEY Technology

WEY Technology
--------------

WEY Technology is a Swiss-based global information technology company with 11 branch offices worldwide and representation in more than 45 countries with local business partners. WEYTEC solutions transmit, control, distribute and display real-time data in command centers, control rooms and trading floors around the world. WEYTEC specializes in KVM products and solutions that switch and distribute all information sources in any combination to an unlimited number of desks, video walls and screens.

Headquarters: Unterengstringen, Switzerland

##### Raytheon Technologies

Raytheon Technologies
---------------------

Raytheon Technologies Corporation is an American multinational aerospace and defense conglomerate headquartered in Arlington, Virginia. It is one of the largest aerospace and defense manufacturers in the world by revenue and market capitalization, as well as one of the largest providers of intelligence services.

Headquarters: Arlington County, VA

##### ATCA

ATCA
----

ATCA is an independent, non-profit organization, that is dedicated to promoting, maintaining, and enhancing the stature and well-being of the Air Traffic Control profession and the aviation community. And developing and disseminating knowledge of air traffic in all its phases and applications. Encouraging intelligent and honorable cooperation between all persons, parties, and agencies interested in and concerned with the promotion and advancement of aviation and, in particular, the air traffic control field.

Headquarters: Alexandria, VA

##### Russ Bassett

Russ Bassett
------------

For 55 years, Russ Bassett Corporation has built a reputation for design and manufacture of high quality, innovative products backed with integrity and passionate customer service. Trusted in mission critical environments, we deliver real life solutions involving technology integration, space utilization and user interface.

Headquarters: Whittier, CA

##### NASA

NASA
----

The National Aeronautics and Space Administration is an independent agency of the U.S. federal government responsible for the civil space program, aeronautics research, and space research. The agency has a diverse workforce of just under 18,000 civil servants, and works with many more U.S. contractors, academia, and international and commercial partners to explore, discover, and expand knowledge for the benefit of humanity.

Headquarters: Washington, D.C.

##### TruWeather

TruWeather
----------

TruWeather’s state-of-the-art technology platform delivers reliable, real-time weather information to its clients. With benefits unmatched in the industry, TruWeather offers dynamic products including certified snowfall reports that have no sign-up costs and are available in PDF format within 24 hours.

Headquarters: Allentown, PA

News
----

Get the latest updates from SkyGrid.

*   October 23, 2025

Collaboration will deliver high-resolution weather models to support safe, scalable Advanced Air Mobility.  Austin,

*   October 15, 2025

Picture this: you want to travel from the airport to downtown, and you can choose

*   October 1, 2025

The future of flight is taking shape above our cities, promising a new era of

*   September 25, 2025

The future of aviation demands safe, routine autonomous operations, and new rules by the Federal

*   September 3, 2025

The evolution of Air Traffic Management (ATM) is about integrating and supplementing new tools into

*   August 19, 2025

Picture the low-altitude skies above a major city five years from now: dozens of autonomous
