Title: The Five : FOXNEWSW : September 18, 2024 9:00pm-10:00pm PDT : Free Borrow & Streaming : Internet Archive

URL Source: https://archive.org/details/FOXNEWSW_20240919_040000_The_Five

Markdown Content:
9:00 pm

greg gutfeld tonight. that should be interesting. "the five" right now. ♪ ♪ >> greg: hi i'm greg gutfeld

9:01 pm

along with judge jeanine pirro, harold ford jr., jesse watters, and her life is always under a microscope, dana perino. "the five." ♪ ♪ just moments ago, president trump saying that he feels safe as he storms his old stomping grounds of new york city, where he is said to hold a big rally later tonight. but before that he made one incredibly important pit stop. kicking back with the most handsome host to ever exist. >> mr. p, how is your golf game? >> haven't been thinking about it too much lately. [laughter] i always said golf is a very dangerous game. >> it really is. especially if they are playing with you. >> that's true. >> that was a mean joke? >> pretty sad. >> if they had told you the shooter was there, when you have tried to take him out with your

9:02 pm

three would? >> i think so. actually, the secret service did a great job. they saw the barrel of the gun, big gun, and it came out through bushes. and how many people would see that? he really was very exceptional to have done it. >> greg: meanwhile, the dems are desperate to control the narrative on trump's second brush with death. press secretary karine jean-pierre losing it on peter doocy for daring to ask if joann kamala were going to cool the anti-trump rhetoric. >> how many more assassination attempt on donald trump until the president and vice president and you pick a different word to describe trump other than threat? >> i actually completely disagree with the premise of your question. the question that you are asking is also incredibly dangerous in the way that you are asking it. >> greg: this is interesting come a day now kjp defends, saying trump is a threat, and if you bring up saying trump is

9:03 pm

a threat, that itself is a threat. i bring this up to you, saying what just happened, does that mean we just made the threat even worse? >> dana: exponentially so. >> greg: it's like those russian dolls. >> dana: reminds me of my dream when i was late to the plane and i couldn't get here, but here i am. congrats on the interview because i think that is a great venue for trump. kamala harris would never do that. >> greg: no. >> dana: it is spontaneous and you have to have substance at a quick wit and an ability to get a laugh. >> greg: we don't have an open bar. >> dana: that's difficult and one of the reasons i don't come on that much anymore. one of the problems i think for the democrats is not just what karine jean-pierre said, but they want a constitutional officer of the united states to say, has said, that is tim walz. let me read to you what he said yesterday pure he said there is no guarantee to free speech on misinformation or hate speech. donald trump is to be banned from social media, that was harris. if you don't police are platforms we are going to hold

9:04 pm

you accountable. most dangerous presidential ticket in history. and he has gone on to say that basically it is utterly disqualifying -- something that is utterly disqualifying when he says you don't have a right to free speech. sir, it is in the first amendment. it is in the title. >> greg: it's crazy. it's crazy, jesse, because they always say it is went to be trump or the republicans that are going to take away our rights and right there he just took away your right to speech. >> jesse: i don't want doocy asking questions, either. that guy is annoying. everybody knows that. i thought trump was great on your show because he actually listened. you don't usually see him stop and let other people talk. and i can't wait to see it tonight at 10:00. i'm just saying come i'm not going to watch. >> greg: of course not. >> jesse: he looked relaxed and he leaves and goes to the lower east side to a bitcoin dive bar. so that is why he is such a threat. it is not about the threat to democracy. he's a threat because he's a

9:05 pm

revolutionary. he's taken his democratic party, and now the unions, the teamsters aren't even endorsing because the entire union body wants trump. he is blowing through this blue wall that is a complete threat to the democratic hierarchy. he is closing the border, that is a threat to all of these people that want new voters and all the corporations that want this cheap labor, and then he is realigning all of our alliances and all of our trade deals and scrambling the entire world until a lot of people that is scary. change is scary pure he is ushering in radical change and it is like fight or flight. that is why he is a threat, he is a threat to them, he has a threat to them emotionally because he doesn't speak in their coded language. they are jealous of him because they wish they could be as blunt as he is. >> greg: interesting. you know, judge, the guy in the middle mix a good point. they keep saying he is a threat to democracy but you have joe biden and kamala harris call trump after the second attempt

9:06 pm

to see if he was all right. would you call a threat to democracy to see if they were all right? or somebody who is an existential threat? it may mixed me think maybe they don't mean it when they call him those names. >> judge jeanine: they are so delicate in to having to convince america that donald trump is a threat to democracy that they can't even answer a question about whether calling him a threat to democracy is in fact instigating the people on the outer edge who are ready to act on the so-called threat to democracy. it's like me saying to you, you have a gun. is that a gun? and you say to me, that's a dangerous question. but you have a gun. and that's the way they are. i mean, it's about politics over pipo. it's about power over people. and the realignment of the parties, the fact the republicans are holding more weight with the teamsters is

9:07 pm

really an example of what's going on in america. he speaks to americans. he speaks to the issues we are concerned about. he speaks in a very clear language. he speaks a lot. he is on his way to uniondale, i think, tonight. and this is a guy come anybody else would be suffering from post-traumatic stress syndrome or under a desk. they shot him once and hit him and they are ready to shoot at him again and he wanted to finish the game. i mean, that's the way he is and that is exactly who we need to take out those people who are more interested in power than they are in the people of this country. >> greg: yeah, harold come in your face. you know, it is interesting, you were talking in the green room and said, wow, the teamsters for the first time in decades didn't endorse a democrat. is it because men just can't vote? democrat anymore? because it is a woman's party? what have i done to myself, greg, help me -- those were your words. >> harold: again, we should go to the tape appeared first of all, i'm looking forward to

9:08 pm

seeing the interview, as well pure listening to you at the start of that little dig there, saying -- everybody should know you will be you. when president trump got a call from vice president harris, i heard the rally, he said it was a good call, nice call, and some people in the audience were booing him, he said no, no, no, it was a good call, she was nice to call. i hope at some level gives people in the country some assurance that some things are said in these campaigns and sometimes these candidates don't mean it all and we shouldn't take it all as if they meet it all and react appeared. >> judge jeanine: so we shouldn't believe them? >> harold: i don't think we should believe president trump either with some other things he is saying. let me finish my point for one moment. former vice president cheney and pentz have endorsed vice president harris, so has liz cheney peer i think to your point, greg, we are seeing, to your point, jesse, seeing a realignment in many ways in politics. i have said president trump in my lifetime has communicated and conveyed better and resonated better as a republican running for president with middle-class americans and blue-collar americans, blue-collar working americans than i have ever seen.

9:09 pm

this alignment in some ways is a positive thing for the body politic because it forces both parties to talk to the base they had ten years ago or 12 years ago, eight years ago, but have lost it a little bit, democrats speak a little better to better educated or higher educated americans which interesting we will see what happens. i want the seriousness to return in the last 47 days of the race. we saw the fed today cut 50 basis points. i want to hear the candidates answer, do you think the economy is in worse shape than you did a ago or a week ago or two weeks ago? what do you thing the federal thinks and what does that make you think about a fed chair, who you may choose to put on the fed? the debt is higher than it has ever been, does that help, as you think about how you are going to create jobs? three, we talked about social media. president trump has signaled he is in favor of tiktok, in some ways, and said this in administration is against it. the courts are now deciding, just had an argument before the appellate courts about whether tiktok should be forced to sell,

9:10 pm

which the legislation and president biden signature confirms that it does. and finally, what do terrorists do? i want to hear the candidates get into this. as much as i want to hear vice president harris speak more concretely and specifically about her economic plan, i want to hear president trump do the same. i know you probably got some of these things tonight, greg, and if you didn't get to all of them i hope in the last 47 days that is what we get because that is what is on voters minds, as much as anything. >> jesse: he answered about the fed cut, said the economy is either in worse shape than anybody really thinks or the threafedhis playing politics p. >> harold: my 9-year-old son did that. what now do you -- does that make you react differently about your economic plan more terrors tariffs, fewer tariffs? >> jesse: in a dive bar on the lower east side, didn't get into that. kamala can't. >> harold: she beat him in the debate. she is not done, you -- don't call her dumb.

9:11 pm

>> greg: you personally -- >> harold: say that out loud appeared. >> judge jeanine: someone from abc said that. >> harold: we've got to move on pure if you want to hear more from donald trump you will be joining me for the entire hour n gutfeld at 10:00 p.m. peer coming up next is kamala really a robot? ♪ ♪

9:12 pm

if you have generalized myasthenia gravis, picture what life could look like with... vyvgart hytrulo, a subcutaneous injection that takes about 30 to 90 seconds. for one thing, could it mean more time for you? vyvgart hytrulo can improve daily abilities and reduce muscle weakness with a treatment plan that's personalized to you. do not use vyvgart hytrulo if you have a serious allergy to any of its ingredients. it can cause serious allergic reactions like trouble breathing and decrease in blood pressure leading to fainting and allergic reactions such as rashes, swelling under the skin,

9:13 pm

shortness of breath, and hives. the most common side effects are respiratory and urinary tract infections, headache, and injection site reactions. it may increase the risk of infusion-related reactions and infection. tell your doctor if you have a history of infections or symptoms of an infection. talk to your neurologist about vyvgart hytrulo for gmg and picture your life in motion. hey, get your head in the game, son. the scout from football college is up in the stands. maybe i'd rather go to school for insurance. i didn't raise no insurance man. but you did, dad. football's your passion. but mine is providing around-the-clock protection to progressive customers who bundle home and auto. jamie, we need you out here for football. you're giving up on your dream, james. no, dad. i'm giving up on yours. no, james, wait! oh, that's not the exit.

9:14 pm

9:15 pm

♪ ♪ >> jesse: kamala bot needs a tuneup. the vp finally getting herself out there with more interviews and chitchat with journalists but her style so far has been robotic. whenever asked to give policy

9:16 pm

specifics, harris reverts to her preprogrammed over rehearsed talking points. check out this rinse rather replete. >> i was raised as a middle-class kid. >> i grew up middle-class. >> i grew up in middle-class kid. >> i intend to create an opportunity economy. >> created acre trinity economy. >> opportunity economy. >> why: opportunity economy. >> i started my career as a prosecutor. >> i was a career prosecutor for most of my career. >> having a background as a prosecutor. >> jesse: [laughs] the programmers still trying to work out the bugs in kamala spot. word salad and -- testing on her latest accent in washington. >> i love you! >> i love you back! >> i grew up understanding the children of the community are the children of the community. >> recently i was in nevada.

9:17 pm

these streets in town everywhere. >> we have some work to do. in fact a lot of hard work ahead of us. but we like hard work. hard work is good work. hard work is joyful work, i say. >> jesse: oh, god, so embarrassing. dana. you could ask her what are we going to do about the situation in gaza and she would say, well, i was raised in a middle-class family. >> dana: her line on that one is i will give israel what they need to defend themselves but israel has a right to defend itself. she knows that mine and she used it yesterday. she is doing what i called prevent defense. >> harold: there we go, dp. >> dana: they want to make no news for the next 47 days. they are in survivor 47 days. her goal is to not give president trump anything to use against her. everybody can make fun of her and say she only has these five lines, she recycles them all the time, she comes up with the accent in order to fit in with the group peer hears what she needs.

9:18 pm

she has to keep her base. they have already factored in the teamster situation, would have loved to have the endorsement, did not get the endorsement, a big blow but it's great for trump. when i was told by some democrats today, we already factored it in and knew we weren't going to have those people because they already knew what the polls looked there. but you cannot win a news cycle if you are playing it so safe. now trump is going to play the news cycle. going to play it, sometimes going to win it and sometimes going to lose it. there is also a school of thought -- i'm not exact leasure where i sit on it -- it is whoever this race is about is the one who is going t. so what kamala harris wants is for everybody to be talking about trump all the time because it worked in 2020. that was the basement campaign. so now she is hiding in plain sight by doing some of these safe events but not rocking the boat so much that you would actually get a lot of news made because the news she would make would be something like the interviews she did when she was

9:19 pm

at the white house and then after that she would be asked to go to her room for six months. >> jesse: the risk to that strategy is these clips are now the news. everyone is seeing her say the same thing over and over again. and that makes her look bad, greg. >> greg: i disagree with calling her robotic. it's more liquidy. she is likely liquidy robot. a slinky. if a slinky could talk, that's her. maybe because i have watched too much sewing son said, but it is very wine chatty. she needs a chihuahua and an espresso martini, seems super relaxed. i love how she uses this phrase "opportunity economy." all she did was reverse economic opportunity. then explain what it is. opportunity economy doesn't mean anything. economic opportunity dollars. i think if you want her to blow a fuse, okay, she keeps talking about i come from a middle-class

9:20 pm

family, some reporters should ask, where do you come from growing up? she might actually answer with a specific statistic about what to do about inflation because she will have, she will go -- i come from -- wait a second i can answer with the right answer appeared i can beat inflation by blah, blah, blah. it little steam locomotive her head. it is a testament to how joe biden is, was, that the dems are grateful for that. >> jesse: judge jeanine, you have seen so many times are not really saying much, did you hear what she said with the children of the community are the children of the community? what do you think she means by that? >> judge jeanine: were you the one -- look, when she talks about, i grew up middle-class. you know what? donald trump may have grown up more upper-class, but he understands the middle-class, and he understands americans and what they need better than she

9:21 pm

does. he understands it. he proved it when he was president, and he continues to talk about the issues. and dana is right. all they are trying to do is, she doesn't want to make news. all she wants to do is do these interviews where she doesn't really answer any questions so that we can't complain and say she's not doing any interviews. and brian fallon, who is one of the senior spokespersons, says you know what? if you want to know what we do or what she would do, look at all the things she was doing before the ticket switch. even her spokespeople can't tell you what she's going to do except to refer to what she was doing before the ticket switch and all she was doing was laughing and giggling. and so in the end they can't tell you anything. they are gaslighting us and they are trying to make us feel like we are crazy but i think the

9:22 pm

most important question when you are a kid you learn who what where when and how, right? and why? she doesn't know how. and i don't think she knows why. if you asked kamala harris why are you running for president, i'm sure she would be stuck. but the best answer she could probably give is to beat donald trump, as opposed to saying something about bettering this country, about maybe donald trump would say making america great again, you know, she's just, she's robotic, she's liquid. she's not really smart. >> jesse: she is a slinky. and to dana's point, she says she is playing prevent defense. what happens when you play prevent defense? prevent yourself from winning, harold. >> harold: first of all, like the bebe king music. >> dana: that's like saying you come from a middle-class family. >> jesse: run out the clock. >> harold: you say prevent defense, the first debate come

9:23 pm

out down at her was defeated by the dumb vice president, he said he one after, if you are the champion, you don't give a second debate to the loser, so he was playing his own version of prevent defense and saying i'm going to use the strategy. i'm not convinced that strategy works for either. the vice president says she wants an opportunity economy. it would be great if she gave us some elements p or what doesn't opportunity economy look like? more affordable to buy a home, raise their kids, buy groceries, pay for education? is it stimulus or tax cuts for small businesses? maybe their first million dollars or a small business you cut taxes and have for them? give us some meat on the balloons. i would argue president from has not given this, either. look what i did five, six, seven, eight years ago p or most people don't know what they did five hours ago, five days ago, five months ago, let alone five years ago. both of them can do better, which is what i was trained to say in the first segment, they should both sit down and we deserve to see them stand side-by-side and have very tough

9:24 pm

questions. i would agree with you judge, i wish different questions had been asked the last debate come i think martha and bret woo a far better job, you can't play prevent defense. no one wants to see that happen. the thing i learned from the things you said a minute or two, judge, that last thing, who what when where -- >> judge jeanine: who what where when how why. >> harold: i'm going to give you credit. >> judge jeanine: not today. >> jesse: coming up, hillary clinton now wants to lock americans up. over what funny means you are posting. ♪ ♪

9:25 pm

the day you get your clearchoice dental implants changes your struggle with missing teeth forever. it changes how you eat, how you feel, and how you enjoy life. clearchoice network doctors have changed over 150,000 lives with dental implants. because a clearchoice day changes every day. finance your new smile for as low as $148 a month per arch for qualified patients. schedule a free consultation.

9:26 pm

(man) these men of means with their silver spoons. what will become of them when they discover robinhood gold allows others to earn their very liberal rates on idle cash? ♪ they would descend into chaos.

9:27 pm

we've always loved taking care of our home. but last year, grandpa here broke his arm. we realized some home maintenance jobs

9:28 pm

aren't worth the risk. that's when we called leaffilter to protect our gutters. leaffilter's patented filter technology keeps debris out of your gutters for good. they gave us a free inspection and we had the system installed that week. my only regret is not calling them sooner. now we can focus on what we really enjoy. join millions of satisfied homeowners. call 833 leaffilter today or visit leaffilter.com here's to getting better with age. here's to beating these two every thursday. help fuel today with boost high protein, complete nutrition you need, and the flavor you love. so, here's to now... now available: boost max! ♪ ♪ >> judge jeanine: the party of big tech censorship is at it again. dear old hillary clinton wants to control the flow of information.

9:29 pm

she's now demanding that americans be arrested over so-called misinformation. watch this. >> there are americans who are engaged in this kind of propaganda. and whether they should be civilly or even in some cases criminally charged is something that would be a better deterrent. because the russians are unlikely, except in a very few cases, to ever stand trial in the united states. >> judge jeanine: wow. hillary clinton is so dug in, jesse, on this russian propaganda stuff, in spite of the fact she hit the reset button with russia with the foreign minister that she is interested in curbing free-speech if she thinks it is russian propaganda. >> jesse: if you accuse her husband of something she wants to curb that speech or ask about

9:30 pm

epstein, curb it, ask about benghazi, curb it. she sounds like putin, she sounds like xi, she sounds like the countries that need to stay out of our election, meanwhile we are in everyone else's election. last time i checked, china influenced her husband's reelection in '96. the biden family. no problem with that. a couple of websites, things on facebook, that she has a problem with, criticizing u.s. policy is allowed the last time i checked appeared criticizing an american president is allowed. saying you want peace in ukraine doesn't mean you are a russia propagandist. it just means you want peace. >> judge jeanine: you know, harold, she things americans are engaged in this russian propaganda should be prosecuted civilly or criminally. does she not know the difference between treason and the first amendment? >> harold: i suspect she does. let me be very clear about something. she's not the nominee. as much as i feel like focusing on her, she doesn't speak for kamala harris. she doesn't speak for the

9:31 pm

democratic party. she is certainly entitled to her opinions and she has a big personality we can focus on. one thing when it comes to social media, i believe in free speech, i know this administration does come and infect the one thing that they have gone after and one thing they say free-speech is not above his national security interests. i think it is important just to identify where the candidates differ. president trump is on record saying he would not prosecute tiktok like joe biden is. i happen to think that if something americans should know because the biden administration believes that national security interests are at stake. do i agree with former secretary of state clinton with what she said? no. do i agree with what the bite and administration is doing with tiktok? yes. >> judge jeanine: do you agree what the biden in the station was doing with the fbi and various other people contacting the post and other conservatives and making sure there were certain things that were not published on social media before the election?

9:32 pm

it is russian propaganda? the hunter laptop? >> harold: are you finished? >> judge jeanine: yet. >> harold: i have seen the things mr. zuckerberg have said, the accusation those things are true, the biden administration was complete iran. >> judge jeanine: then dana, what about the fact americans are protected and free-speech, hate speech, speech that we all, you know. >> dana: i cannot wait for this vice presidential debate between j.d. vance and tim walz because this is exactly what tim baltz said. there is no guarantee to free speech on misinformation or hate speech. and to me that is utterly disqualifying. if you want to be in the highest office of the my hand. it's in the first amendment. that is what the whole point is. to ask about that, i hope the moderators do because there has been 13 days and no response from tim walz on this question about censorship. the other thing is but democrats didn't seem too upset when china

9:33 pm

was pushing all of the anti-semitism and pro-hamas content on tiktok that was driving a lot of the campus protests. they want to get upset, can get it set about that, too p or it. >> judge jeanine: all right, greg peered. >> greg: sounds like putin but looks like the fellow on the quaker oaks can. she also said, which was really interesting, and crazy, is take trump literally. the example that she used was when he said that he will be dictator on day one, which was a joke. but she really believes you should take him literally. jokes. analogies. exaggerations. literally. if you said to me, dana, did you see the game, notre dame killed purdue, imagine the mentality of, they killed them! how dare you! she is telling people to adopt a system that will make you seem like you are mentally ill. which is why all those women on tiktok look crazy.

9:34 pm

memes and thoughts, disinformation do not influencer hoaxes do. hoaxes that create an umbrella narrative that moves voters. it is not memes come it is the "fine people" hoax, which propelled the white supremacy hoax narrative. a memes did not make people think trump called nazis find people. the pee tape. it is not memes. >> judge jeanine: the steele dossier -- >> harold: can i ask a question? do you think tiktok should be sold? >> judge jeanine: congress made that decision. >> harold: tiktok has appealed appeared. >> judge jeanine: we will see what the appellate appellate courts say. try to prevent talking about hunter's laptop. coming up, watch out, kamala, george clooney might be plotting to take down another democrat

9:35 pm

nominee and replace her with oprah. ♪ ♪

9:36 pm

we're told in genesis chapter 1:26 that god is made man in his image and by his likeness has he made him. genesis is a book of fundamental importance for the jewish and christian faiths and a literary masterpiece that has profoundly shaped western civilization. now, in this exclusive online course from hillsdale college, you can deepen your understanding of how this ancient book is essential to you today. sign up for the genesis story. absolutely free at learnfromhillsdale.org. dr. justin jackson, a distinguished hillsdale college professor, will guide you through this fascinating free online course that unfolds the biblical stories of adam and eve, abraham, isaac, jacob and joseph. when you sign up, you'll explore some of life's most important questions, gain

9:37 pm

a greater appreciation for how the bible confronts pain and hardship with redemption and hope and discover how the struggles people faced thousands of years ago are deeply relevant to us still today. take this six lesson course whenever it's most convenient for you at your pace or in your schedule. signing up is easy and free when you go to learnfromhillsdale.org today. so the fun thing with the serpent is how does a serpent talk? and not only that, but why is the serpent's punishment to crawl on its belly when that's what it does? join the hundreds of thousands of americans who are enriching their lives through this exclusive online course from hillsdale college and gain access to this premium content today. what i hope you'll get from studying genesis in this course is a deeper appreciation of the biblical insights with regards to the human person psychology, our predilection towards rivalry, but also reconciliation sign up for the genesis story free of charge,

9:38 pm

at learnfromhillsdale.org today. what's considered normal for your cat is interesting. but if your cat isn't their quirky self lately, they may have pain from a common condition called osteoarthritis. now, there's solensia. solensia is a once-monthly injection to control your cat's oa pain. veterinary professionals administering solensia who are pregnant, trying to conceive, or breast feeding should take extreme care to avoid self-injection. self-injection could cause allergic reactions like anaphylaxis. ask your vet about solensia and help get your cat back to their normal.

9:39 pm

♪ ♪ >> harold: after leading the charge to kick president biden off the ticket, george clooney is raising some eyebrows again over which celebrity he thinks could run for president and a big one ifad. >> have you ever talked to oprah about policies and said you should run for president? a lot of people say this to you all the time pit. >> no, she should. she would win immediately. in a big way. she would win. >> have you ever encouraged her? >> i just did. >> harold: not a bigger superstar. clooney wasn't done there, the superstar also heading back at president trump the man he would get out of politics peered watch this.

9:40 pm

>> i will if he does. [laughter and applause] >> that's a trade-off i do. >> harold: judge, shaking your head, what did you think about that exchange? >> judge jeanine: look, george clooney certainly has an inflated ego. i mean, he was really a vessel. barack obama used him to write that opinion piece to get joe biden out of the picture. you know, donald trump is a former president. if you don't like him, that's fine peered but at the same time stop thinking that you are likes huge political operative, as though we respect your political opinion. i really think these celebrities, unless somebody says who are you going to vote for, they want to say it, great, but don't tell me i am deplorable if i don't vote for that one or if, you know, you have to vote for this person, or lecture me. i'm done with it. it was like osher, they took the right approach. it's your own business, stay out

9:41 pm

of it. we want you for what you do. the singer dancer actor road everett is pit. >> harold: free-speech peered what do you think about that, jesse? >> jesse: relationship observation, clooney's look wife, or look, brad pitt datinge exact same woman, they look exactly alike. has anybody noticed that? >> greg: just you. >> jesse: i got "people" magazine yesterday. this gives you a window into democrats, they are not looking for a leader, policy chops, oprah just so she can win. that's the future of democrat politics. you bring in somebody, doesn't matter what they believe, what they have done. just a placeholder to win. we could run the rock. he could win. then he could sit back and go to the gym all day with all of the unelected people make all of the decisions. that is where we are headed in this country.

9:42 pm

>> harold: i actually think you are right. >> jesse: the brad pitt thing? >> harold: we should be talking more about issues. dp? >> dana: one reason oprah is interesting right now because kamala harris will sit down for a two hour interview tomorrow with oprah. i'm curious how that will go peered i think you will get a lot of bio, i am from the middle class, et cetera, but oprah is not beyond as asking a questione endorsement speech, the first time she went to a convention was kamala harris' convention. i just don't take hollywood that seriously but they take themselves very seriously. >> harold: greg, what are your thoughts about this? >> greg: i don't care. so i'm going to try to pretend that i do. >> dana: let's see you are acting. >> greg: this is what i call the artificial stance. i'm so tired of famous people who have a problem when they run into somebody that is more famous than they are. as if their superstardom is put

9:43 pm

in some kind of perspective and they can handle it, whether it is howard stern or jimmy kimmel, they hate trump because he is larger-than-life. it happens to you, jesse, what i am here, especially now i have trump on my show. >> jesse: that's why i like on fridays when you are not here. can we just have tyrus? >> greg: all actors have an imposter syndrome, and it's like they run into somebody that is not an actor but is well known, it kind of flips them out. >> jesse: what kind of syndromes do comedians have? >> greg: comedians, i don't -- they have -- >> jesse: or complexes? >> dana: because they think they can play a president on tv, it wouldn't be that hard to actually be the president? >> greg: yes, then they -- >> harold: president trump attacked him, too, for writing that piece peered. >> dana: all spare. >> greg: that's the point, harold b. >> harold: free-speech peered up next, house speaker mike johnson does a killer trump impression.

9:44 pm

♪ ♪ america. built by those who dare to dream, those who push the limits, and those who serve. at bass pro shops, we stand with those who stand for our freedoms... proudly offering a legendary salute discount every day. and recently partnering with the army and air force exchange service, becoming the official outdoor gear provider for our heroes. because it's more than the great outdoors— it's about honoring those who protect it. bass pro shops voted america's best outdoor retailer.

9:45 pm

ah, these bills are crazy. she has no idea she's sitting on a goldmine. well she doesn't know that if she owns a life insurance policy of $100,000 or more she can sell all or part of it to coventry for cash. even a term policy. even a term policy? even a term policy! find out if you're sitting on a goldmine. call coventry direct today at the number on your screen, or visit coventrydirect.com.

9:46 pm

9:47 pm

9:48 pm

>> dana: quick update for you here. former president trump now has the same protected package as when he was president from the secret service. this is after his failed second assassination attempt. it includes counter snipers, counter assault, culture surveillance, counter -- and drone teams. and that is the news on that. and out of this. house speaker come apparently he's got talent. mike johnson doing a spot on trump impression while speaking in washington. watch. >> and he said, i'm about to do my impression come i'm sorry peered. [laughter] it comes up on me. i hear his voice in my head. we want to talk about energy independence, energy dominance.

9:49 pm

dominance. >> dana: yeah, i mean, that's a pretty good impression. and a lot of people have pretty good impressions. i don't know why we are doing this segment. >> greg: that once sucked, i thought. so many people do a better job. as a child, growing up, we all did impressions. i make it of the '70s, you did john wayne, humphrey bogart, who was the gangster actor? from "white heat?" james -- and then you have richard nixon. i am not a crook. and pretty big shoes. every kid on your block had five impressions. and then suddenly it just went away. we did them all the time. do you remember the brady bunch when peter was doing nothing buy impressions? pork chops and applesauce. pork chops and applesauce. >> harold: what you talking about, willis. >> dana: did that well.

9:50 pm

>> jesse: i'm not doing a trump impression. >> jesse: i'm too self absorbed. many people don't realize how nonself absorbed i am. i did a speech in d.c. with this guy, mike johnson, he was before me, obviously. 30 minutes of trump impressions and brought the house down. going to dine out on that forever. i want to talk about what you said at the top. why did it take so long to get him this type of protection? that should have been done immediately after butler. >> dana: or before. >> jesse: he doesn't need congressional funding, obviously. biden did it with the stroke of his pen. >> dana: may be president biden wait income i don't know, they have that conversation. harold, anything else? >> harold: i'm glad, to your point, this is taking place, and again, i repeat what i said yesterday our first segment, we all think about what we said and how we say it. >> greg: i'm never going to do that, harold.

9:51 pm

>> judge jeanine: you should tell karine jean-pierre not to say he is a threat. >> harold: hope you, me, and everybody things what we say and how we say. >> dana: judge jeanine -- >> judge jeanine: do you remember come acting director of the secret service rowe, he is the one who said well, it wasn't on the schedule, so we didn't secure the golf course, right? think about this. president trump has been playing on that golf course for four years before, as if they didn't even know that golf course existed. >> dana: the hole in the fence. >> judge jeanine: the thing about mike johnson, i understand he was a theater major in college. >> greg: really? >> judge jeanine: this is what i want him to do. i want him to do a kamala impression where he just goes -- [fake laughs] what do you think, harold? [laughter] >> dana: i feel like that's

9:52 pm

it. >> greg: let's do another 10 minutes. >> dana: "one more thing" is up next. >> judge jeanine: whose idea was that? ♪ ♪ (♪) hey lexus, show alternate routes. technology that's ready for the road ahead. the lexus nx.

9:53 pm

9:54 pm

9:55 pm

cordless outdoor power, brings you the ego power+ blower. reaching an incredible 765 cfm, it's more powerful than gas. and at speeds of up to 200 mph, it's the most powerful ego blower ever. featuring ego's patented 56-volt arc lithium battery technology, it runs up to 90 minutes on a single charge. plus, the same battery powers all ego tools. battery technology. it run exclusives up to 90 minua single charge. plus, the same battery au powers, all ego tools exclusively in lowe's, ace and ego

9:56 pm

authorized dealers in the midst of war. >> when all hope seemed lost, faith overcame fear and showed the way forward for our heroes under his wings. a new collection of real life stories from fox news's emily compagno preorder now at fox news books .com. >> now for one more thing, dana oh, there's some sad news of a friend of ours who has passed away nelson de mille just an incredible human. he was a bestselling author. he passed away at the age of 81. he suffered from cancer in the last few months. he was born in new york city in 1943, joined the army in 1966, and he received a bronze star for his service in vietnam. his first major novel, novel was by the rivers of babylon. that was published in 1978. but people will probably know him best by the gold coast. and charm school and many other wonderful novels. may he rest in peace and definitely go get some of his books and read them. >> they're absolutely wonderful. what a loss. >> excellent.

9:57 pm

all right. tonight, we've got a big show. donald trump is joining us, emily campagna, kat timpf, retired. does that neat the way that's done? i think we have a promotional shot, do we not? >> i got one last question. >> has your heart ever been broken? oh. oh, wow. >> that's such a question. what a tease. it is a tease. you know what? >> what's also fun to tease this. greg sexy goes to music. >> all right, let's go. let's get some sexy guys. >> you know, it's not long ago that they were strangers, but then they met in a meadow, and they met for life. >> and then they made for life, which he didn't know about at the time. he was keeping a couple other birds on the hook on the side. >> yeah, but you know what? it all worked out for them. >> the feathers flew and her goose got cooked. >> yeah, she liked to lay

9:58 pm

a golden egg. >> could have been faking it. >> that doesn't happen. who's next? no. no one ever fakes it. now would with you. >> moving on. you fake it with me? yes. oh, my word. we all hit influencers, don't we? what about bosnian influencers ? this is an influencer i like because she almost died. this guy goes into a bear cave or a den. that's just like a nice way of saying cave. they still live underground. this guy almost got eaten, but he's bosnian, so he survived. >> bosnians. real survivors. we love you. bosnia tonight, "jesse watters primetime" news secret service whistleblowers will tell their tales at eight a.m.. >> i'll be tuning in for that. know you want that? i want to know you celebrate. i'll be out somewhere. i'll write judge. all right. disclaimer this is not my grandchild. despite popular belief. so an eight-year-old girl wanted to go shopping so

9:59 pm

badly that she stole her mother's car, drove it for nearly 30 minutes to her local target store. luckily, the only thing she hit was a mailbox. along the way, police found her inside target safe and sound and shopping. how she actually bought a starbucks frappuccino while she was shopping. you go, girl. where was that? i don't know. where was that, guys? >> that's amazing. eight and eight-year-old, she's eight years old. >> yeah, she could drive. that does not bode well for the future. yes. >> tennis icon billie jean. look at you. one of my favorite doesn't even wait for me to say, hey, here. >> wow. you know what? i thought we might for you. go ahead in a second. >> billie jean king is set to become the first individual female athlete to be awarded the congressional gold medal. the honor was announced by a bipartisan group of congressmen, representatives brian fitzpatrick of pennsylvania and mikie sherrill of new jersey. tuesday, after past unanimously

10:00 pm

in the senate, the bill was introduced on the 50th anniversary of king's winning the battle of the sexes, which remains the most watched tennis match of all time. she's known not only for her illustrious career on the court, but for her advocacy for women in sports education. what? i'm sorry, do you think that she's been really great lately on women in sports? yeah. >> go, dana. i'm sorry. i. by the way, who walks like that's the most watched thing in she years for tennis. that says something about kind of got to tell them. i think that she has an amazing voice and she has an amazing things for women's sports. and there are women who would love to be able to have a level playing field in sports. she for the what is she just doesn't say anything. >> she doesn't talk about it. and she has a voice that would matter in your face. harold, i hope you learned a lesson. yes. graduate. despite the scandal. >> regulations, billy. yeah, that's. that's interesting. >>>> welcome to jesse

114 Views

info Stream Only

Uploaded by TV Archive on September 19, 2024
