Title: 

URL Source: https://www.congress.gov/118/meeting/house/117257/witnesses/HHRG-118-BU00-Wstate-KirchnerJ-20240508.pdf

Published Time: Sat, 18 May 2024 01:40:00 GMT

Markdown Content:
The Cost of the Border Crisis 

Testimony before the House Budget Committee 

May 8, 2024 

Chairman Arrington , Members of the Committee, thank you for inviting me to speak today on the 

impact the border crisis is having on our nation. 

My name is Julie Kirchner, and I am the Executive Director of FAIR, the Federation for American 

Immigration Reform. With 45 years of experience and expertise, FAIR is a national nonprofit that seeks 

to educate Americans on the impact of mass immigration and advocate for policies that serve our 

national interests, not special interests. 

For over three years now, Americans have been watching an unprecedented crisis unfold at our border s. 

In the past fiscal year alone, we have seen a record number of illegal migrants encountered at our 

borders, a record number of suspected terrorists encountered , a record number of asylum claims – not 

to mention a record caseload in the immigration courts – and a record number of fentanyl seizures and 

overdoses. So many illegal aliens are arriving at our borders that our immigration system is beginning to 

collapse under its own weight. 

This chaos is also imposing record costs on Americans. Last year, FAIR published a report entitled the 

Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers . The study strives to illustrate the 

myriad of ways Americans pay for illegal immigration. Our estimate, which is a conservative one, is that 

Americans now pay $150.7 billion dollars annua lly due to illegal immigration. This figure represents a 

net cost. In terms of gross expenditures due to illegal immigration, we estimate that Americans pay 

$182 billion. Approximately $31 billion is received from illegal aliens in taxes , only 17 percent of the 

costs they create .

Th e fiscal burden of illegal immigration is due to several factors. First, because illegal aliens usually have 

low incomes, those who do pay taxes pay little, if anything . Secon d, illegal aliens incur significant costs 

to the taxpayer on a daily basis, because public services such as policing , K -12 education, emergency 

services, etc. , are provided universally. Further , due to loose eligibility criteria – intentional or otherwise 

– many illegal aliens receive benefits from federal, state, and local jurisdictions , despite the fact that 

they have no legal status. 

The majority of costs are incurred at the state and local level. The predominant cost at the state and 

local level is K -12 education of the children of illegal aliens, which costs taxpayers roughly $70 billion 

each year. This estimate covers the educatio n of children with no legal status and U.S. -born children .

The second highest expenditure for illegal aliens at the state level is medical expenditures, which we 

estimate to be approximately $22 billion annually. This figure includes costs attributable to 

uncompensated medical care, improper Medicaid payouts, Medicaid for citizen children of illegal aliens ,

and certain state laws that provide Medicaid coverage for illegal aliens. 

What is clear from these numbers is that the impact of the border crisis is nationwide. It is being felt 

acutely in both border states and destination states. We can look to New York City as a good example ,

where over 180,000 migrants have settled and 30,000 migrant children have enrolled in New York City 

public schools . Mayor Eric Adams now anticipates the border crisis will cost the city $10.6 billion through 

the summer of 2025. While stunning to contemplate how a local jurisdiction could absorb so many 

people who have acute needs, little to no money, and lower education levels, this situation is being replicated in cities across the country. These local costs for food and shelter , and other costs that are 

not well -documented, are not incorporated into our repor t. This means that taxpayers are paying much 

more than we estimate. 

It does not have to be this way. Americans need not be paying billions of dollars as a result of illegal 

immigration. This i s a man -made crisis. From the moment the Biden Administration took office, it tore 

down all programs and policies designed to deter illegal immigration. It immediately rescinded the 

Remain in Mexico policy and safe third country agreements, almost completely abandoned expedited 

removal, and began releasing illegal aliens en masse instead of detaining and deporting them as 

required by law. 

Not only did the Biden Administration release the aliens en masse , it restricted enforcement policies so 

th ose aliens could not be apprehended in the interior. It dramatically curtailed ICE enforcement, 

attempted to institute a 100 -day ban on deportations, left detention beds empty and failed to renew 

287(g) agreements. The Department of Homeland Security even went so far as to declare that being 

inadmissible alone was not a sufficient reason to initiate deportation proceedings. The message was 

clear: there would be no consequences for illegal behavior. And, even if an illegal alien was put in 

removal proceedings, the Bi den Administration saw to it that immigration judges could administratively 

close the case without deciding on the merits, letting illegal aliens walk out of court and carry on as if 

nothing had happened .

If that isn’t bad enough, the Biden Administration has proactively taken steps to help illegal aliens obtain 

benefits. This has been accomplished through a variety of means, but in particular , through illegal parole 

programs and the retroactive granting of Temporary Protected Status (TPS). These programs and others 

that offer “lawful presence ” but not legal status enable millions of illegal aliens t o obtain work permits 

and Social Security number s, and unlock the door to other benefits that Americans must shoulder .

To provide one example , let’s examine the administration’s parole program for Cuban, Haitians, 

Nicaraguans, and Venezue lans. Many people don’t realize this program has an immediate and 

significant cost to taxpayers. Upon being paroled into the U.S., these aliens – who have no legal status –

immediately become eligible for work permits, Social Security numbers, and Obamacare, and will be 

able to obtain valuable tax credits, such as the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) and the Additional Child 

Tax Credit (ACTC). 

On top of that, parolees are eligible for federal benefits programs on the same terms as legal permanent 

residents. That means they immediately become “qualified aliens” under the law and after a five -year 

waiting period, they may receive benefits under Medicaid, Social Security, Supplemental Security 

Income (SSI), Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), Temporary Assistance for Needy 

Families (TANF), and Federal Student Aid —assuming they otherwise qualify . For Cuban and Haitian s,

however, the fi ve -year waiting period does not apply . That means that Cuban and Haitian nationals 

brought to the United States through the President’s parole program are immediately eligible to apply 

for and receive benefits from all major federal benefits programs . Th is happens before they even file a 

tax return and despite the fact that they have no legal status .

Members of the Committee, over the past three years , between 9 -10 million illegal aliens have been 

encountered illegally crossing borders. On top of that , approximately 1. 8 million illegal aliens have 

evaded Border Patrol agents and are counted as “gotaways.” And there is no end in sight. If we do not reverse course now, if we do not change our current policies , the numbers will only grow and the costs 

will only increase. 

To demonstrate how these costs will grow, I had my staff do a r ough calculation on the fiscal costs that 

will be incurred when all of the parolees who have arrived since the start of FY 2022 become fully 

eligible for federal benefits . Looking at only three programs, Medicaid, SNAP, and the Earned Income 

Tax Credit (EITC), and using all of the same assumptions as our current report, we estimate that the 

costs of illegal immigration will increase by $20 billion. That means the gross costs due to illegal 

immi gration will soon surpass $200 billion. And this does not even include other federal benefits 

programs or state and local costs. 

Supporters of the current open -borders policies often argue that nothing can be done. They cite 

unprecedented “glo bal migration” forces as the cause. These forces are seemingly beyond anyone’s 

control, they say, or that they can only be controlled by addressing the “root causes” of migration. This 

argument , however, only looks at push factors at work . It does not contemplate the much stronger pull 

forces ignited by the current policies . Just consider th e case of Venezuela. The Maduro regime led 7.7 

mil lion Venezuelans to leave their country since 2014 and sea rch for a better life. However, about 84 

percent of those who left Venezuela since 2014 first settled in neighboring Latin American 

countries. Mass migration to the United States did not begin until 2021, when open -borders policies 

were implemented. 

In reality, the true “global forces” driving the current wave of illegal immigration over our borders are 

the open -borders policies of the current administration. This crisis can be stopped. We urge Congress to 

step in and return our immigration system to a lawful, orderly one that places the interests of Americans 

first. The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 1The Fiscal Burden of 

# Illegal Immigration 

# On United States Taxpayers 2023 

A FEDERATION FOR AMERICAN IMMIGRATION REFORM RESEARCH REPORT Contents 

INTRODUCTION  1

PART I: FEDERAL EXPENDITURES AND RECEIPTS  6

Education  7

Medical Costs  11 

Justice Enforcement  16 

Welfare Costs  23 

Overall Federal Fiscal Costs before revenue  29 

Income Tax  31 

Other Taxes  36 

PART II: STATE AND LOCAL EXPENDITURES AND RECEIPTS  41 

Education  42 

State Medical Costs  46 

Administration of Justice  51 

State Welfare Programs  55 

Total State Expenditures  58 

State and Local Taxes Collected  59 

PART III: TOTAL FEDERAL AND STATE FISCAL OUTLAYS  66 

ENDNOTES  68 The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 1

# Introduction 

This report is currently the only comprehensive examination of the financial impact of illegal 

immigration in the United States. Every day, hundreds of millions of dollars in American taxpayer 

money are spent on costs directly associated with illegal immigration. Only a small fraction of these 

costs is ever recouped from taxes paid by illegal aliens, with the rest falling on the shoulders of American 

citizens and legal immigrants. 

Our aim in this report is to show the American people the fiscal burden of illegal immigration at every 

level and across nearly all aspects of life. These costs range from emergency medical care to in-state 

tuition; from incarcerating illegal aliens in local jails to federal budgets that pay out billions in welfare 

every year. Because there are so many different ways that money is spent on illegal aliens at both the state 

and local levels, the information in our report is otherwise hard to find (or even intentionally hidden). 

This report supersedes FAIR’s 2017 cost study 1 and highlights massive increases in spending related to 

illegal immigration that were implemented while American citizens deal with an uncertain economy. 

Why does this matter? 

Put simply, almost all expenses associated with illegal immigration are preventable. Illegal immigration’s 

annual net burden on the economy, now more than $150 billion, is greater than the annual GDP output 

of 15 U.S states. 2 There is a strong correlation between the security of America’s borders and the rate at 

which the cost of illegal immigration increases. With proper border controls and the enforcement of laws 

already on the books, the cost of illegal immigration would be greatly reduced. 

The period since FAIR’s last fiscal burden study in 2017 has not been easy for the American people. A 

global pandemic and economic disruptions have drastically raised the prices of necessary goods and 

services, and has contracted the jobs market so that many citizens remain without gainful employment. 

Because these factors are also global, the U.S. remains a magnet for foreign nationals who wish to 

compete for the jobs and benefits that American citizens rely on. While millions of Americans are 

struggling to put food on the table and hold gainful employment, we believe they deserve to know where 

their federal, state, and local tax dollars are going. The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 2

Overview 

This report examines the annual fiscal impact of illegal aliens on at both the federal and state levels. 

FAIR used the most recent data available and accounted for new programs and legislative/policy 

developments up to the end of 2022. Significant temporary spending related to illegal immigration, like 

aid programs during the COVID-19 pandemic, also took place during the study period. While we do 

highlight COVID-related costs, they are not included in our overall totals because of their temporary 

nature, and this report strives to paint a picture of more static costs. 

This project contains extensive analysis of both federal and state/local spending on many fronts, 

reflecting the nationwide scope of illegal immigration. From public schooling and postsecondary 

education programs, to welfare and healthcare costs, we account for as many known costs as possible. 

This wide scope is important, as the highest costs often occur outside of traditional illegal alien 

destinations. 3

In total, the gross cost of illegal immigration now total $183 billion, up more than 35.7 percent since 

2017. The cost incurred per illegal alien (including their U.S.-born children) has increased as well, now 

totaling $8,776 annually. 

Because this report covers the full fiscal impact of illegal immigration, it also includes the contributions 

of illegal aliens to the economy. These include tax payments made directly to state and local jurisdictions, 

the federal government, as well as excise, property, and sales taxes. However, these receipts fall far short 

of covering the expenses incurred due to illegal immigration. Taxes paid by illegal immigrants only 

covered around 17.2 percent of the costs they created for American citizens. 

When the taxes paid by illegal aliens are factored in, the net cost of illegal immigration to U.S. taxpayers 

is now $150.7 billion. This means that each American taxpayer shells out a net average of $956 (or 

$1,156 before the taxes paid by illegal aliens are factored in) due to illegal immigration. 4

What’s Changed 

Since our 2017 report, the immigration landscape has shifted significantly. The Trump administration 

engaged in an aggressive approach towards combatting illegal immigration, which increased spending 

on security but also tempered the growth of other federal expenses tied to illegal immigration. However, 

even this slower growth was offset by an increase in states expanding programs available to illegal aliens 

like in-state tuition and certain medical benefits. In many cases, these expansions were a reaction to those 

administration policies, but they have continued to broaden in scope under the Biden administration. 

Currently, under the Biden administration, the U.S. is experiencing a full-fledged migration crisis. The The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 3

illegal alien population is expanding rapidly after drastic cutbacks to border security, with monthly 

encounters hitting all-time highs. The administration is now attempting to redirect additional border 

security funding to expand migrant processing initiatives that have, so far, only spurred additional illegal 

immigration. Another new program is set to allow tens of thousands of illegal aliens to fly directly into 

the United States monthly under “humanitarian parole.” 

This self-imposed crisis is only driving the costs associated with illegal immigration even higher. States 

like Texas and Arizona have been forced to spend huge sums to compensate for reduced federal law 

enforcement presence on the border. Meanwhile, the federal government and states like California and 

New York alike are increasing illegal alien access to taxpayer-funded benefits. 5 Various policy shifts have 

made it harder to obtain data on these increases in spending from the federal government, but FAIR has 

exhaustively analyzed the effects of our ongoing illegal migration crisis in this report. The net result has 

been a sharp increase in the fiscal costs of illegal immigration under the Biden administration that shows 

no signs of slowing down. 

A Note on the Lack of Transparency in Government Data Reporting 

Information transparency is essential to good governance. It encourages a well-informed citizenry to 

hold their elected officials responsible and motivates those officials to implement policies that benefit 

their constituents instead of special interest groups. Furthermore, citizens have the right to know 

pertinent information, presented in a clear and comprehensible manner, on issues that impact them. 

Unfortunately, there is a concerning lack of transparency and openness when it comes to the issue of 

illegal immigration. 

While preparing this study, we often had to grapple with a paucity of easily accessible official data. Many 

state and federal entities do not publish detailed data that they collect, making it difficult to reliably 

separate illegal aliens from citizens or lawful immigrants in many of the fields covered in this report. 

We have also encountered cases where the current administration has revoked or restricted documents 

published by previous administrations in order to reduce the visibility of data which shines a negative 

light on their immigration policy agenda. Extremely helpful publications like the Alien Incarceration 

Report, which documented foreign criminals in custody in the United States, are no longer updated 

under the Biden administration. This kind of subtle de facto censorship is highly unethical and does not 

serve the interests of the American public. 

Thankfully, we were able to find most of the necessary information to complete this study by analyzing 

existing databases and publications from the federal and state/local governments as well as other 

reputable organizations and academic institutions. However, as is noted throughout this report, there 

were a few instances where we were unable to obtain enough data to make reliable estimates. For The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 4

example, illegal immigration imposes a significant direct cost on the United States in the form of 

gang-related crime and trafficking of drugs and humans, but thanks to jurisdictional differences and 

“sanctuary” policies that protect criminal illegal aliens in many states or localities, this cost often remains 

a “known unknown.” For other topics, like post-secondary education, we had to stitch sources together 

and create new methodologies in order to calculate our estimates because, while the relevant data is 

tracked, it is fragmented across different sources. 

So, why are Americans being kept in the dark? Primarily because the political and ideological influence 

of the open-borders lobby, both within and outside the federal government, holds significant sway over 

the Biden administration and many state governments. This “hear nothing, see nothing, say nothing” 

attitude is rooted in the hope that if the American public doesn’t have easy access to valid information 

regarding the impacts of illegal immigration, they will accept the lie that no problem exists. 

In carrying out this study, FAIR is advancing the belief that the American people have a right to 

transparent and accurate information so that they are fully informed of what is occurring in their 

country and how much it costs them. 

Summary of Methodology 

FAIR made every effort to source the data in this report from government agencies and testimony from 

government officials, using these as the foundation of our estimates. When official data is unclear or 

unavailable, FAIR looked to research generated by credible, non-partisan organizations and academic 

institutions. On the rare occasions that a calculation must be estimated and/or assumed, we offer a 

detailed reasoning for the estimation so that readers can examine the relevant information and judge our 

conclusions for themselves. For the sake of maximum accuracy, we have noted various areas where we 

believe it is impossible to estimate a cost. 

Throughout this study, we have taken caution to never overestimate totals, and have chosen to err on the 

lower side of cost estimates, and the higher side of tax contributions, when our calculations resulted in 

a range instead of a static figure. We do this to ensure that our cost figures do not extend beyond what 

the evidence can empirically prove. Combining this with the fact that there are some costs that cannot 

be reliably estimated, it can be safely assumed that the actual cost of illegal immigration is considerably 

higher than the final tally offered here. Given current trends – rapidly increasing illegal immigration, 

increased federal and state government spending, inflation, and the fact that numerous state benefits are 

set for expansion to unauthorized migrants – the fiscal burden of illegal immigration is sure to grow even 

higher in the near future. The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 5

Every effort was made to find and utilize the most recent data available as a basis for calculations; 

thus, the majority of the data is drawn from sources covering between fiscal years (FY) 2020 and 2022. 

However, the COVID-19 pandemic, and the massive government spending binge it caused, complicated 

our calculations. In cases when spending on various programs was sharply but temporarily increased 

during the pandemic, we preferred to utilize pre-pandemic data and adjust accordingly for inflation and/ 

or other developments in order to paint a more accurate picture of the static costs. We do not include 

pandemic-related spending measures unless they were enacted as permanent programs. However, we 

make a point to highlight these costs in their relevant sections so that readers are aware of their impacts. 

An essential part of our calculations relies on FAIR’s latest illegal alien population estimate, which 

is 15.5 million (20.9 million when the U.S.-born children of illegal aliens are included) as of the 

beginning of 2022. 6 Our estimate is higher than those offered by most mainstream immigration 

research organizations, most of which stick to the oft-repeated “10-11 million” figure, despite record 

illegal immigration over the past couple of decades and even further surges over the past few years. 

Most mainstream estimates fail to take into account the constant rate of growth in this demographic, 

overestimate the outflow rate of illegal aliens, and/or have deceptively lowered the rate at which they 

believe the U.S. Census Bureau undercounts illegal aliens. Moreover, for ideological reasons, many 

groups also misclassify the increasing influx of unaccompanied alien minors (UAMs), Temporary 

Protected Status (TPS) recipients, Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) beneficiaries, and 

parolees as being in the United States “legally.” This is a dishonest characterization because such 

individuals have not received any lawful immigration status. Rather, these illegal aliens have merely 

received temporary and discretionary reprieves from removal and lack a clear pathway to citizenship. 

Finally, it’s important to note that FAIR includes costs incurred by the minor, U.S.-born children of 

illegal aliens, as these costs are fully attributable to their parent’s unlawful residence in the United States. 

Many mass-immigration apologists claim that this is an unfair inclusion, as the estimate does not include 

any long-term contributions made by these minors once they become adults. However, further research 

has demonstrated that the children of migrants – especially illegal aliens – no longer see significant 

economic improvement as was the case several decades ago. 7 Therefore, if we did attempt to account 

for their future tax contributions, we would also need to account for their reliance on state and federal 

benefits programs. This would likely only serve to increase our cost estimates further, not drastically 

lower it as many open border advocates insist. The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 6

# Part I: Federal 

# Expenditures and 

# Receipts The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 7

# Federal Education Costs 

Education 

Primary and Secondary Education (Title I-A)  $3,020,696,000 

The “Every Student Succeeds Act” Title I, Part A (ESEA Title I-A) provides for grants of supplemental 

federal funding to increase educational opportunities for and improve the academic performance of 

children from low-income families, among whom illegal aliens and their children are disproportionately 

represented. Approximately 47 percent of all K-12 students in the country qualify for these grants either 

individually or on a schoolwide basis. 8 In 2022, just over $17.5 billion was budgeted for this program. 9

Based on FAIR’s income profile for illegal aliens, the vast majority of the children of illegal aliens will fall 

within the economic eligibility criteria applicable to this program. 

FAIR estimates that as of 2022, after years of unprecedented illegal immigration and a surge in 

unaccompanied minors arriving in the United States, approximately 5 million K-12 students in the 

United States are illegal aliens or the children of illegal aliens. 10  Furthermore, this population is heavily 

overrepresented among Title I-A recipients due to their families’ lower income levels, comprising nearly 

20 percent of total recipients by our estimates. Using calculations based on this proportion and the 

program’s overall budget, FAIR estimates that approximately $3 billion is spent annually on Title I-A 

grants to K-12 students linked to illegal immigration. The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 8

Limited English Proficiency (LEP) – Title III  $580,895,000 

The federal government provides Title III-A grant funding to the states based on census data on 

school-age limited English proficiency (LEP) youth. This funding is dedicated to improving English-

language acquisition for students whose native language is not English. According to U.S. Department 

of Education data, $831,400,000 was allocated in FY 2022 in support of supplemental English language 

instruction. 11  Of that amount, $764,335,990 was distributed to states based on the number of English 

learners in their schools. 

In FAIR’s recent report on education, we estimated that in 2020 approximately 3.6 million LEP students 

in American schools were either illegal aliens or the children of illegal aliens. 12  Due to unchecked illegal 

migration and the arrival of unprecedented numbers of unaccompanied minors, we now estimate that 

the number of students connected to illegal immigration has increased to approximately 3.8 million. 13 

This represents 76 percent of LEP students in the U.S. Based on the per-student costs detailed in our 

aforementioned study on education, it can safely be estimated that illegal aliens and their children 

account for almost $581 million in Title III-A funding in FY 2022. 

Migrant Schooling (Title I-C)  $239,418,000 

The Migrant Education Program (MEP) was established in 1966 as part of the Elementary and 

Secondary Education Act. Its goal is to help migrant students who move between different areas inside 

of the United States regularly during the year receive an adequate education and meet academic 

standards. These students often face challenges to learning because they may interact with inconsistent 

curricula and are not settled long enough to meaningfully engage with their schools. The federally 

appropriated funds for this program were $423,749,000 in FY 2022. 14 

The U.S. Department of Education indicates that the primary beneficiaries of the MEP program are 

“the children of migrant agricultural workers and fishers.” 15  The majority of migrant agriculture and 

fisheries workers are illegal aliens — approximately 56.5 percent — according to a study conducted by 

the Pew Research Center. 16  Therefore, using these assumptions as a basis for our methodology, FAIR 

estimates that approximately $239,418,000 of the MEP budget goes to educating the children of illegal 

aliens. 

Head Start  $2,768,080,000 

The federal Head Start and Early Head Start programs combine federal funding ($11.037 billion 

budgeted for FY 2022) with local matching funds. There is little data on the exact enrollment of illegal-

immigration-connected participants in these programs, but children with a non-English home language 

make up at least a third of total Head Start enrollment. 17  In FAIR’s most recent study of education The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 9

costs, we determined that approximately 76% of LEP students in primary and secondary education nationwide 

are the children of illegal aliens. While illegal alien participation in Head Start is likely to be somewhat lower 

because of a general reluctance to engage with federal aid programs in many cases (as noted elsewhere in this 

report), this is counterbalanced by a higher poverty rate that increases the likelihood they will be eligible. Using 

a conservative estimate that the proportions are the same for illegal alien households with children, which 

correlates with the generally low English proficiency rates of illegal aliens, we estimate that around 25% of 

Head Start enrollment pertains to the children of illegal aliens. This means that the total federal Head Start 

expenditures attributable to illegal immigration are well over $2.7 billion. 

COVID-19 Relief Funds 

The use of pandemic relief funds for illegal aliens and their children in schools was also noted in FAIR’s recent 

report on the excessive costs that bilingual education imposes. The COVID-19 pandemic had particularly 

heavy impacts on LEP students, the vast majority (76 percent) of whom are illegal aliens or the children of 

illegal aliens. Most LEPs do not have an English-speaking home environment to maintain their limited skills 

during periods of online schooling. As a result, school districts across the country were burdened with dedicating 

millions of dollars of COVID-19 relief funds to special bilingual/LEP programs that do not serve the general 

student population. 

Throughout the pandemic, Congress passed three different relief packages: the 

Elementary and Secondary School Emergency Relief (ESSER) Fund packages I 

and II, and the American Rescue Plan (ARP). These programs awarded grants 

to address the impact of pandemic shutdowns on schools. 18  In total, schools 

received around $189.5 billion, an unprecedented level of federal spending, for 

various programs. The ARP ESSER funds for education, totaling $122 billion, 

specifically require states to set aside 5 percent, and districts 20 percent, of the 

received funding for “most affected students,” specifically mentioning 

LEPs multiple times. 19  This means a huge allocation of limited funds 

went to assisting LEP students, mostly the children of illegal aliens, 

at the expense of taxpayers. 

In addition, many districts spent large chunks of discretionary 

relief funding on services specifically for LEP students. 

Fairfax County Public Schools in Virginia, for example, spent 

$2,681,449 of ARP funds on LEP-specific services with no 

relevance to the general student population. 20  The same is true 

for dozens of other school districts as well. The total cost of this relief 

spending giveaway for illegal aliens is split across thousands of school The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 10 

## Total Federal Educational Expenditures: 

## Primary and Secondary Education - Title I-A  $3,020,696,000 

## Limited English Proficiency (LEP) - Title III  $580,895,000 

## Migrant Schooling (Title I-C)  $239,418,000 

## Head Start  $2,768,080,000 

## Total  $6,609,089,000 

districts that compile budgets in different ways and is likely incalculable. If ascertained, however, it would likely 

be included as one of the single largest education-related costs of 2020 and 2021 that illegal aliens imposed on 

the American taxpayer. Since it is impossible to decipher to what degree funds were used for the education of 

illegal aliens, and since these are not regular annual expenses, we do not ascribe a total to this cost. However, it is 

something worth noting as it certainly resulted in a temporary – but significant – burden on U.S. taxpayers. The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 11 

# Federal Medical Costs 

Medical Costs 

Most (but not all) illegal aliens are, as a matter of law, barred from receiving welfare benefits through 

targeted aid programs that are jointly administered by states and the federal government. This bar 

was put in place by the 1996 Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act 

(PRWORA). 21  The PRWORA states that “aliens who are not qualified aliens” are ineligible for “federal 

public benefits” and for “state and local public benefits.” The act defines a qualified alien as any 

immigrant “who is lawfully admitted for permanent residence under the Immigration and Nationality 

Act,” or who meets at least one of several other exceptions listed in Section 431 of the Act. These 

exceptions cover many people who are unlawfully present in the United States but have been granted 

deferred action through programs such as parole with a set term of at least one year, TPS, and several 

other categories. 

In addition, many states still provide subsidized healthcare services to illegal aliens (more on these 

programs can be found in the part of this report that covers state healthcare). These programs 

technically do not violate the terms of PRWORA if they are solely funded by state taxpayers. However, 

the diversion of state taxes into these types of programs often result in larger state requests for federal 

budget assistance, as including low-income illegal aliens often make states eligible for additional federal The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 12 

grants. Much of this assistance is provided in the form of supplemental healthcare funding distributed to 

state providers. 

Medicaid is a joint federal and state program that provides healthcare coverage to children, pregnant 

women, senior citizens, and individuals with disabilities, among others. While most illegal aliens are 

technically excluded from full Medicaid programs, they may still receive Medicaid coverage for prenatal 

and obstetric care. These services are provided based on the idea that the unborn child, rather than the 

illegal alien mother, is the one receiving medical treatment. In addition, under the current interpretation 

of the 14th Amendment to the Constitution, the U.S.-born children of illegal aliens are natural-born 

U.S. citizens. Quite often, they are also considered “targeted low-income children” eligible for Medicaid 

and other federal medical assistance programs. 

Finally, it is unclear if the thousands of illegal aliens paroled into the country by the Biden administration 

will become eligible for Medicaid and other federal benefits. Paroled illegal aliens can receive certain 

benefits if the terms of their release is for a period of at least one year, but there is little information on 

whether these parolees from the border are receiving any set term lengths at all, and what federal benefits 

are being extended to them. 

Uncompensated Hospital Expenditures  $8,153,000,000 

In 2017, the federal outlay to help cover uncompensated care provided to uninsured individuals was 

approximately $21.7 billion annually. Assuming these reimbursements occur at a similar rate today, 

that accounts for approximately $26.3 billion. 22  The national uninsured population of all ages was 26.4 

million in the first quarter of 2022. 23  According to a 2019 estimate from the Migration Policy Institute, 

a little over half (53 percent) of the illegal alien population in the United States is uninsured. 24  This 

proportion would suggest, according to FAIR’s most recent estimates of the Illegal aliens population, that 

roughly 8.2 million of the illegal aliens currently in the country do not have insurance coverage, making 

up approximately 31 percent of the total uninsured population. 25  If uninsured illegal aliens are assumed 

to require healthcare at a rate similar to other uninsured persons, they would make up approximately 

$8.2 billion of the uncompensated hospital expenditures in the United States. 

Medicaid Births  $1,596,902,000 

After rising rapidly since the 1980s, births to illegal alien mothers dropped along with the overall birth 

rate during the Great Recession (2008-2010). Since then, the numbers have held relatively steady. The 

Center for Immigration Studies (CIS) estimated that in 2014, illegal alien mothers in the U.S. gave birth 

to 297,000 children, or 7.5 percent of total births. 26  In 2020 (the most recent year for which statistics are 

available), foreign-born mothers accounted for 22 percent, or 790,041, of the nationwide total of about 

3.6 million births. 27 The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 13 

Medicaid paid for 42 percent of all births in 2020. 28  However, a study published in 2018 found that 48 

percent of foreign-born women had their births paid for by Medicaid, compared with 42 percent of 

native-born mothers. 29  This would mean that Medicaid covered the costs of approximately 377,000 

births (48 percent) to foreign-born mothers. The cost of those births is shared between the federal and 

the state taxpayer. The total cost depends on the type of delivery and whether complications occur. 

We assume that the birthing costs incurred by illegal alien mothers will be roughly similar to legal 

immigrant and native mothers. According to past medical research conducted in Colorado, illegal 

alien mothers “have lower rates of pre-term delivery and low birth weight infants, but higher rates of 

pregnancy related risk factors.” These risk factors are offset by other factors, such as illegal alien mothers 

consuming less tobacco and alcohol than the national average, lower hypertension rates and other 

factors. 30  Based on the birth rates observed in the Colorado study, this indicates that roughly 201,960 (68 

percent) of current illegal alien births were natural, and 95,040 (32 percent) were surgical. Again, these 

rates suggest that the average costs for illegal aliens will be similar to the overall national average. 

The federal share of the expenditure varies among states, averaging out to approximately 63 percent 

overall. Thus, to determine the cost of illegal aliens using Medicaid to fund births, we remove the 

percentage of illegal aliens believed to have some form of health insurance, which is approximately 

47 percent. The uninsured remainder comes out to 157,410 births — 107,038 naturally, and 50,371 

by surgical intervention. With natural births costing $13,024 on average and surgically-assisted 

births averaging $22,646, the total, combined state and federal expenditure for obstetric medical 

costs is approximately $2,534,764,578. 31  With 63 percent of these costs being covered by the federal 

government, the total federal cost comes out to $1.6 billion. 

This estimate is certainly on the conservative side of reality. In 2007, a report in the  Journal of the American 

Medical Association  found that “... a little-known part of the state-federal health insurance program for 

the poor,” known as Emergency Medicaid, “pays about $2 billion a year for emergency treatment for 

a group of patients who, according to hospitals, mostly comprise illegal immigrants. Most of it goes to 

reimburse hospitals for delivering babies for women who show up in their emergency rooms, according 

to interviews with hospital officials and studies.” 32  A portion of this expenditure is attributable to the 

$1.6 billion Medicaid spends on illegal alien births. However, there is little recent data regarding what 

percentage of that $2 billion expense covers emergency obstetrical services for illegal aliens (given both 

inflation and increased Medicaid spending since then, this figure is certainly much higher now). Without 

further data, FAIR is unable to estimate a reliable value for this additional expenditure. 

Improper Medicaid Payments  $7,997,566,000 

The total amount of improper Medicaid payouts in the United States during FY 2022 was 

approximately $80.6 billion, or 15.6 percent of total outlays. 33  By contrast, Medicaid Fraud Control The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 14 

Units (MFCUs) were able to recover only $1.7 billion in FY 2021 (when improper payments were $99 

billion, 22 percent of total outlays), around 1.7 percent of the total improperly paid. 34 

Assuming that uninsured illegal aliens receive improper Medicaid payouts and/or commit Medicaid 

fraud at the same rate as U.S. citizens — a very conservative estimate, considering illegal aliens are both 

more likely to commit document-related fraud and have greater incentive to commit Medicaid fraud — 

there would be approximately 1,284,508 illegal aliens receiving improper Medicaid payouts each year. 

The average improper Medicaid payout per-person comes out to approximately $6,226, meaning the 

overall annual total loss attributable to illegal aliens is approximately $8 billion. 

Medicaid for U.S.-born Children of Illegal Aliens  $5,385,007,000 

U.S. citizens and Lawful Permanent Residents (green card holders) are eligible for Medicaid benefits; 

therefore, the U.S.-born children of illegal aliens are eligible for Medicaid. While these children were 

born in the United States, they would not be present in the United States had their parents not entered 

the U.S. illegally or overstayed a visa. These children are typically classified as low-income (see FAIR’s 

income profile of illegal aliens in this report). Because of this, they represent a significant burden on the 

U.S. Medicaid program. 

There is a strong correlation between uninsured status and low income. 35  The vast majority of uninsured 

people in the United States are low-income earners, for the simple reason that it is more difficult for low-

income individuals to afford health insurance and low-wage jobs are likely to offer fewer health benefits. 36 

Therefore, low-income families depend more on government healthcare programs to pay for any medical 

treatment that they require. 

Per federal guidelines, in order to be eligible for Medicaid on the basis of low income, children must be 

members of a family earning an income less than 138 percent of the federal poverty level (FPL). States 

have the option to extend Medicaid coverage to those whose income is too high to qualify under federal 

guidelines, but most states have set their guidelines at 138 percent of the FPL. 37  The average family 

headed by an illegal alien falls around or below the FPL, and therefore their U.S.-born children will be 

eligible for Medicaid. Many other illegal aliens are likely utilizing various methods of fraud to improperly 

obtain Medicaid, as regularly occurs with other federal benefit programs. 

At least 53 percent of illegal alien households are uninsured, meaning that approximately 2.83 million 

U.S.-born children of illegal aliens are without insurance. 38  Based on the foregoing evidence, FAIR 

estimates that approximately 75 percent of 

these 2.83 million U.S.-born children of 

illegal aliens (2.1 million) are eligible for, and 

receiving, Medicaid as members of The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 15 

low-income households, a similar rate to households with a non-illegal head of household. This accounts 

for the few illegal alien families whose income is in fact too high to qualify, as well as others who avoid 

interacting with federal programs to maintain a low profile. 

Per the Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access Commission, average Medicaid spending per enrolled 

child in 2020 was $3,500. 39  Adjusted for inflation, the total today is now around $4,030. This would 

make the annual Medicaid spending on the U.S.-born children of illegal aliens about $8.5 billion. The 

federal share of that expenditure (63 percent) is about $5.4 billion annually, with the remainder being a 

cost borne by the states (see the state and local portion of this report for those totals). 

Affordable Care Act (ACA) 

The ACA allows for eligible individuals to apply for various levels of federally subsidized healthcare, 

depending on their annual income. While most illegal aliens do not qualify for coverage under the ACA, 

some with certain designations and deferments do. These categories include those with TPS, Deferred 

Enforced Departure (DED), Deferred Action Status (other than DACA), victims of trafficking, some 

asylum applicants, and several other categories. 40 

Data is lacking on exactly how many individuals fall into each of these categories. However, when taking 

maximum estimates from various immigration agencies and organizations, it is estimated that somewhere 

between 500,000 and 1 million illegal aliens fall into an immigration category covered by the ACA. 

Unfortunately, without more information regarding the total number of illegal aliens that qualify for 

coverage along with their income levels, family size, and/or participation in other programs covered by 

this report, it is impossible to estimate how many illegal aliens participate in the ACA, and what level 

of federal subsidy they receive. However, this number is almost certainly substantial, and the federal 

government should be reporting the extent to which those who entered the country illegally participate 

in this program. 

## Total Federal Medical Expenditures 

## Uncompensated Hospital Expenditures  $8,153,000,000 

## Medicaid Births  $1,596,902,000 

## Medicaid Fraud  $7,997,566,000 

## Medicaid for U.S.-born Children of Illegal Aliens  $5,385,007,000 

## Total  $23,132,475,000 The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 16 

# Federal Justice Costs 

Justice Enforcement 

Immigration enforcement constitutes a significant portion of the overall federal law enforcement budget. 

Because every crime committed by an illegal alien is inherently a preventable crime, immigration has 

a broad effect on justice expenditures beyond the costs directly involved in securing the borders and 

managing ports of entry. Therefore, this report separates federal immigration enforcement expenditures 

into two categories: 1) the cost of securing the border, managing ports of entry, and processing/removing 

immigration violators from the interior; and 2) the cost of prosecuting/incarcerating federal criminal 

aliens and subsidizing state and local law enforcement expenses connected with illegal immigration (e.g., 

housing illegal aliens in local jails, information-sharing costs, etc.) 

Most of these expenditures cannot be eliminated as long as the United States remains the most common 

destination for illegal migrants. However, many of them could be drastically reduced by the construction 

of a functional border barrier, the implementation of effective deterrents to illegal immigration, and 

the comprehensive detention and removal of criminal aliens living in the United States. In addition, the 

refusal of many countries to accept their own citizens when they are deported from the United States 

also increases costs to the American taxpayer. 41 The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 17 

Federal Incarceration  $1,670,374,000 

The illegal alien population consists of both those aliens who entered the United States without 

authorization and those who entered the United States lawfully but overstayed their authorized period 

of stay. Illegal aliens are subject to removal from the United States simply because they are present in the 

United States without authorization. However, many illegal aliens come to the attention of DHS only 

when they are arrested for the commission of a crime. 

Legal immigrants are also subject to deportation if convicted of certain crimes. However, data indicates 

that these immigrants tend to commit crimes at a lower rate than illegal aliens. 42  This is unsurprising 

since the very concept of illegal immigration requires a certain level of disrespect for the laws of the 

destination country. We include costs of incarcerating legal immigrants if their convictions are likely to 

lead to the loss of their immigration status. 

Illegal aliens who come to the U.S. for economic gain often commit crimes such as identity theft or using 

fraudulent documents to work illegally, unlicensed driving, tax evasion, and/or unlawfully obtaining 

public benefits. Moreover, many illegal aliens cross the border without authorization specifically for the 

purpose of engaging in criminal activity within the U.S., such as drug and human trafficking. Conversely, 

legal immigrants have a greater incentive to avoid criminal behavior due to the possibility of losing their 

hard-earned legal status if convicted. 

The majority of illegal immigrants who are convicted of crimes are prosecuted in state courts and 

confined to state correctional facilities to serve out their sentences. These expenses are addressed in 

the section of this report covering the state costs of illegal immigration. By contrast, the population of 

foreign-born individuals incarcerated in Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP) facilities tends to include more 

illegal aliens than foreign-born populations incarcerated in state prisons. 43  This is because the federal 

government has exclusive jurisdiction over immigration-specific crimes. Therefore, both legal and illegal 

migrants convicted of criminal violations of the INA are confined to federal prisons. Illegal aliens who 

have been taken into custody by the federal government and placed in deportation proceedings will also 

be held in federal detention facilities. Both BOP and ICE maintain such 

facilities. This section addresses BOP costs as well as costs borne by 

the US Marshals Service (USMS), which detains many illegal 

aliens before trial and before sentencing. The 

following sections on ICE expenditures 

include the costs of detaining aliens in 

facilities owned and operated by that 

agency. The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 18 

BOP statistics indicate that by the end of 2022, the number of alien inmates in BOP custody is 25,608, 

a number that has been slowly increasing since many prisoners were released during the COVID-19 

pandemic. 44  A 2019 report by the Department of Justice estimates that 94% of alien inmates in BOP 

custody have no claim to lawful status. 45  The cost to incarcerate federal inmates has increased markedly 

in the past few years, with the FY 2020 figure of $39,924 per inmate being an approximate increase of 

$4,500 from the previous fiscal year. 46  While the COVID-19 pandemic has delayed the release of the 

most recent statistics on the cost of incarceration, generously assuming a similar figure to FY 2020 would 

imply annual costs of over $1 billion for alien BOP inmates alone. 

The USMS also incurs significant costs related to illegal aliens because they are responsible for much 

of federal pre-trial and pre-sentencing detention. While USMS custody is more short-term, it also sees 

much higher annual numbers than the BOP. Approximately 37 percent of individuals in USMS custody 

at any given time are illegal aliens, with 98 percent of that group being criminal illegal aliens. 47  This high 

percentage of illegal aliens in USMS custody and USMS’s consistent custody numbers year-over-year 

translate to approximately $648 million in annual spending on custody and transportation for illegal 

aliens. 

Enforcement and Removal Operations (ERO)  $4,118,902,000 

The branch of DHS responsible for interior enforcement of the Immigration and Nationality Act is U.S. 

Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE). Within ICE, the office most directly involved in the arrest 

and deportation of illegal aliens is the Office of Enforcement and Removal Operations (ERO). ERO is 

responsible for apprehending illegal aliens and placing them in removal proceedings, detaining aliens 

who are a flight risk, and effectuating the removal of aliens ordered deported by U.S. immigration courts 

or federal district courts. To accomplish its mission, ERO works with state, local, and other federal law 

enforcement agencies to identify and process illegal aliens. This includes lodging “detainer” requests with 

state and local agencies to ensure that criminal illegal aliens are transferred into DHS custody, especially 

when those jurisdictions have entered into 287(g) agreements with ICE that allow local and state officers 

to assist with immigration law enforcement. 48 

ERO also liaises with the Federal BOP to ensure that illegal aliens being held for ICE pending 

immigration hearings are processed appropriately. In addition, ERO works with BOP to make sure that 

illegal aliens incarcerated for federal crimes are promptly deported when their sentences are completed. 

ERO activities incur a broad range of annual expenses, including holding aliens in DHS-operated 

detention facilities, or leased facilities. The FY 2021 budget for ERO was about $4.11 billion, and it is 

appropriate to attribute the entirety of this budget to combating illegal immigration. 49 The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 19 

Customs and Border Protection (CBP)  $8,565,574,000 

U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP), another DHS agency, is responsible for securing the 

borders of the United States and managing land, sea, and air ports of entry. CBP acts as the first line of 

defense against illegal entry, alien and drug smuggling, and human trafficking. A large portion of CBP’s 

responsibilities relates directly to detecting, deterring, and prosecuting illegal immigration. 

CBP is also responsible for the trade management, impost collection, licensing and enforcement duties 

that were handled by the U.S. Customs Service prior to the formation of DHS. Therefore, we must 

determine which costs relate to trade management and impost functions and which arise directly from 

border security functions. 

Breaking down the enacted FY 2022 budget by component, Congress directly appropriated a total of 

$8,565,574,000 for the components of CBP involved in border security, which is effectively everything 

outside of the CBP Office of Trade. 50  This large figure reflects the scale of the border crisis and its 

continuous growth. The FY 2023 President’s Budget, which is essentially the administration’s wish list, 

would eliminate appropriated border wall funding but ultimately increase the border-related spending 

total above $9 billion if enacted because of the demands illegal immigration imposes on CBP. 

Other ICE Operations  $1,715,897,000 

ICE is responsible for enforcing both civil and criminal immigration laws within the interior of the 

United States. Non-ERO ICE operations conducted by the Homeland Security Investigations (HSI) 

department involve detecting, arresting, and prosecuting lawfully present aliens who engage in criminal 

acts, as well as detecting, detaining, and criminally prosecuting illegal aliens involved in, human 

trafficking and smuggling, drug trafficking, and gun running. ICE is also responsible for the enforcement 

of U.S. customs laws within the interior of the United States and investigations of certain transnational 

crimes. As such, it handles some of the impost collection, licensing and enforcement duties that were 

handled by the U.S. Customs Service prior to the formation of DHS. 

Accordingly, it is necessary to distinguish non-ERO ICE expenses associated with the criminal 

prosecution of lawfully admitted alien criminals, international terrorism interdiction, and customs 

enforcement duties, from those expenses related to the criminal investigations of illegal aliens. 51  HSI 

operations are budgeted at approximately $1.7 billion in FY 2022. 52  HSI’s work is almost always heavily 

involved with transnational crime, involving violations of visas and other immigration-related offenses. 

HSI is also responsible for investigating the cartels that smuggle narcotics and people into the United 

States, and much of their work on transnational crime is devoted to this particular menace. The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 20 

State Criminal Alien Assistance Program (SCAAP)  $234,000,000 

The State Criminal Alien Assistance Program (SCAAP) provides federal payments to states and localities 

that incurred correctional officer salary costs for incarcerating criminal illegal aliens who have at least 

one felony or two misdemeanor convictions for violations of state or local law, and who are incarcerated 

for at least 4 consecutive days during the reporting period. 53  This program tends to cover only a minute 

percentage (typically less than one percent) of the full cost of incarceration, and the rest are absorbed 

by state and local jurisdictions. Appropriations for this program were $244,000,000 in FY 2021 and 

$234,000,000 in FY 2022. 54  It should be noted that the Biden administration formally proposed 

removing all funding for this program over the past two fiscal years, which would have removed even the 

most meager federal compensation received for the immense cost that criminal illegal aliens impose on 

the states who incarcerate them. So far, Congress has rejected these proposals. 

Executive Office for Immigration Review (EOIR)  $622,809,000 

The Executive Office for Immigration Review (EOIR) is a DOJ agency that includes the U.S. 

Immigration Court, the Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA) and the Office of the Chief Administrative 

Hearing Officer (OCAHO). The U.S. Immigration Court hears deportation cases lodged against both 

lawfully admitted and illegal aliens. The BIA hears appeals of U.S. Immigration Court Decisions. The 

OCAHO hears cases involving allegations of knowingly hiring illegal aliens and failure to comply with 

employment verification requirements. The vast majority of the work performed by EOIR is handled 

by the U.S. Immigration Court, which is faced a case backlog amounting to more than 1.9 million active 

cases at the end of FY 2022. 55 

Based on data available through Syracuse University’s Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse 

(TRAC), which analyzes deportation cases by the type of charge levied against the respondent, roughly 

70 percent of new cases are based upon entry without inspection, terrorism, crime, and other violations 

associated with illegal alien status. 56  This is a significant increase in cases involving illegal aliens, as 

opposed to visa violations, from previous years and coincides with the rapid collapse of border security. 

31.1 percent of new immigration cases are categorized as “other immigration charge”, and even an 

extremely generous assumption that these primarily represent overstays or violations of valid visas still 

leaves the percentage of new cases involving illegal aliens much higher than in previous years. 

EOIR’s budget was $673 million in FY 2020, $734 million in FY 2021, and $891 million in FY 2022. 

Using the most recent appropriation, which largely coincides with the time period the TRAC data 

covers, EOIR funding used on deportation cases for illegal aliens is approximately $622,809,000. The 

President’s Budget request for EOIR in 2023, not enacted, is $1.355 billion, but the vast majority of this 

increase is split between dubious “legal access initiatives” to fund lawyers for illegal aliens or the opening 

of more immigration courts to process cases faster; if enacted, this cost could nearly double in the 

near future. The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 21 

Alien Minors  $8,006,000,000 

The number of unaccompanied minors entering the United States continues to surge in an 

unprecedented manner, as many would-be illegal aliens are aware that an unaccompanied minor is a 

potential anchor for future migration down the line and with smugglers acutely aware that children are 

given much less scrutiny. Unfortunately, these minors often suffer untold horrors as they are brought to 

the American border. The number of unaccompanied minors entering the United States hit a record 

122,000 in FY 2021 and then again with 130,000 in FY 2022. 57 

The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Administration for Children and Families (ACF) 

is tasked with providing for these minors until they are connected with family residing in the United 

States, placed in foster care, or repatriated. As the scale of UAM entries grows, so do the costs associated 

with caring for them. These costs have increased on a shocking scale in recent years, with the FY 2020 

budget of just over $1.3 billion increasing to over $3.6 billion (after a significant transfer of COVID 

relief funding) in FY 2021 and a staggering $8 billion in total spending in FY 2022. 58  This amounts 

to the spending of $61,584 per unaccompanied minor entering the shelter system in FY 2022, nearly 

tripling the per capita costs from our previous comprehensive cost study for a number of unaccompanied 

alien minors almost twice as large. 

NOTE: The financial impact of UAMs on the nation’s public school systems is included, as a separate 

cost, in the sections of this report pertaining to education. 

Byrne Grants  $4,180,000 

The Edward Byrne Memorial Justice Assistance Grant (JAG) Program is the primary provider of federal 

criminal justice funding to state and local jurisdictions. The JAG Program provides state and local 

governments with funding to support law enforcement, prosecution, court, and corrections programs. 

Funding for this program was $92,888,141 in FY 2022, a significant decrease from the amounts routinely 

allocated in years before FY 2021. 59 

The federal government provides SCAAP funding to states that compensates for the roughly 4.5 percent 

of the national total of state and local prisoners who are illegal aliens. Since the majority of illegal 

aliens held in state and local custody are prosecuted in state and local courts, this is a good measure for 

estimating the share of Byrne grants attributable to the arrest, prosecution, and incarceration of illegal 

aliens. 4.5 percent of the FY 2022 allocation is just over $4 million. 

DOD Funding for National Guard  $191,625,000 

In order to handle the border crisis, the U.S. Department of Defense continues to keep around 2,500 

National Guard members from states across the country deployed to the U.S.-Mexico border to assist the The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 22 

U.S. Border Patrol in support missions. 60  States have committed varying numbers of troops and other 

means of support, like aviation assets, with funding for the operation provided by the Department of 

Defense. 

FAIR estimates the cost of these deployments based on publicly available figures relating to the pay of 

state National Guard units deployed at the border. At the prevailing rate for actively deployed National 

Guard, this operation (which has been ongoing for multiple years) is estimated to currently cost just over 

$190 million annually. 

Criminal Gangs 

In its 2009 National Gang Threat Assessment, the FBI concluded that criminal street gangs, whose 

members are often illegal aliens, are responsible for the vast majority of violent crimes in the United 

States, as well as the distribution and trafficking of most illegal drugs. 61  In the intervening years, the 

presence of illegal alien gangs, especially from Central America, has only increased. Established gangs like 

MS-13, its rival the 18th Street Gang, the Latin Kings, and growing numbers of new Dominican, Middle 

Eastern, and Somali gangs are responsible for a broad range of both local and transnational crimes, 

including: theft, extortion, murder, drug trafficking, human/sex trafficking and gun running. 

Because it is impossible to truly quantify the comprehensive cost of gangs to American taxpayers, FAIR 

does not included an estimate of those expenditures. Nevertheless, it is important to remember that 

crimes committed by transnational gangs represent a significant portion of the costs imposed on U.S. 

taxpayers by lax immigration enforcement and irresponsible immigration policies. 

## Total Federal Justice Enforcement Expenditures 

## Federal Incarceration  $1,670,374,000 

## Enforcement and Removal Operations (ERO)  $4,118,902,000 

## Customs and Border Protection (CBP)  $8,565,574,000 

## Other ICE Operations  $1,715,897,000 

## State Criminal Alien Assistance Program (SCAAP ) $234,000,000 

## Executive Office for Immigration Review (EOIR)  $622,809,000 

## Alien Minors  $8,006,000,000 

## Byrne Grants  $4,180,000 

## DOD National Guard Deployment  $191,625,000 

## Total  $25,129,361,000 The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 23 

# Federal Welfare Costs 

Welfare Costs 

This section details the profound impact that illegal immigration exerts on programs intended to 

provide financial aid or services exclusively for low-income Americans. Most, but not all, illegal aliens 

are theoretically ineligible for the welfare programs covered in this section. However, virtually all federal 

welfare programs available to the children of U.S. citizens are also available to U.S.-born children of 

illegal aliens because those children are, under the current constitutional interpretation, U.S. citizens. We 

include this information because the costs of providing benefits to this cohort are directly attributable to 

their parents’ illegal presence in the United States. 

USDA Food and Nutrition Service  $1,550,108,000 

The U.S. Department of Agriculture’s (USDA) Food and Nutrition Service (FNS) operates the National 

School Lunch Program (NSLP), the School Breakfast Program (SBP), Special Milk Program (SMP), 

and other food programs that provide subsidized meals to school children. These programs operate in 

approximately 100,000 public and non‐profit private schools and residential child care institutions. They 

furnish low‐cost or free breakfast, lunch, and snacks to millions of children each school day. However, 

these schools make no effort to identify whether the students using these programs are legally in the 

United States. The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 24 

There are approximately 30 million children receiving meals from these programs. 62  According to 

research conducted by CIS, approximately 48 percent of illegal alien households received some form of 

benefit under the school lunch program. 63  FAIR estimates that there are roughly 5.1 million students who 

are the children of illegal aliens. 64 

Based on these totals, approximately 2.45 million children of illegal aliens are receiving this benefit, 

which is a conservative figure given the typically low incomes of illegal alien households. The funding 

for school meal programs, including breakfasts, lunch, snacks and milk, cost nearly $18.8 billion in 

FY 2019, the last year before the pandemic and the subsequent two-year period (2020-2022) of free 

school lunches for all students (which was rolled back with the 2022-2023 school year). 65  To estimate 

the impact of illegal immigration on school nutrition programs, we take our estimate of the number of 

illegal alien children and compare it to the total number of participants in school nutrition programs. 

This comparison indicates that almost 8.3 percent of children receiving meals are part of an illegal alien 

household. Therefore, we conclude that $1.55 billion of the federal funds expended annually on the above 

USDA FNS programs goes to the children of illegal aliens. 

Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP)  $5,757,872,000 

Colloquially referred to as “Food Stamps,” the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) is 

also administered by USDA-FNS. Most illegal aliens are ineligible for SNAP, but their U.S.-born children 

are eligible. In certain limited circumstances, elderly and disabled citizens residing with illegal alien 

relatives may also qualify for SNAP benefits, but they account for only a very small percentage of use by 

illegal alien households. 

Research conducted by CIS found that approximately 31 percent of illegal alien households with children 

benefit from SNAP. 66  The estimated total number of American households headed by an illegal alien 

is approximately 6.7 million, of which 2.7 million contain at least one child. 67  This would indicate that 

around 825,000 illegal alien households draw benefits from SNAP. 

Given that the average illegal alien household with children has 2.5 children, almost 2.1 million children 

of illegal aliens are likely to draw SNAP benefits. Data from the USDA indicates that the average monthly 

benefit per participant in FY 2022 was $232.72, or $2,793 per year. 68  Accordingly, the total estimated cost 

to the American taxpayer of providing SNAP to the children of illegal aliens is almost $5.8 billion. 

Women, Infants, and Children (WIC)  $999,961,000 

The Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children, commonly known 

as “WIC”, provides federal grants to states for supplemental foods, healthcare referrals, and nutrition 

education for low-income, pregnant, breastfeeding, and non-breastfeeding postpartum women, and to 

infants and children up to age five who are found to be at nutritional risk. The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 25 

The WIC program is primarily funded through two separate federal grants: a food grant, and the 

Nutrition Services and Administration grant. In FY 2022, the food grant was approximately $4.7 

billion and the Nutrition Services grant approximately $2.2 billion. The total grant allocation was 

$6,855,458,974. 69 

Eligibility for WIC is based on income. Currently, those earning between 100 percent and 185 percent 

of the FPL inclusive qualify. According to the U.S. Department of Agriculture, in FY 2021 WIC served 

an estimated 43 percent of all infants in the United States. 70  WIC is available to anyone in the United 

States who falls within a WIC eligible category, is a full-time resident of the state where he/she is 

applying, meets the income requirements, and is at risk for malnutrition. As a federally funded but state-

administered program, each state is entitled to determine whether it will allow illegal aliens to draw WIC 

benefits. All fifty states have extended eligibility to illegal aliens. 

A study by CIS found that approximately 35.1 percent of illegal alien households with children use the 

WIC program. 71  Using FAIR’s baseline of 6.7 million illegal alien households, this would indicate that 

approximately 937,000 illegal alien households draw benefits under the WIC program, equating to 

roughly 2.3 million individuals. In February 2022 (the most recent month of available statistics), WIC 

served approximately 6.2 million participants. 72 

Based on FY 2021 data, the average annual benefit per participant is approximately $426.96. 73  This means 

that the cost to taxpayers for providing WIC to illegal aliens is approximately $1 billion. 

Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF)  $1,430,527,000 

The Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program is the current successor to the former 

Aid to Families with Dependent Children program. TANF was created to help needy families achieve 

self-sufficiency by providing temporary cash assistance to supplement their earned income. In order to 

qualify, applicants must be either pregnant or responsible for a child under 19 years of age, meet income 

requirements, and be unemployed or underemployed. 74 

As with SNAP, most illegal aliens are theoretically barred from using TANF. However, illegal alien 

families that have U.S.-born children may still obtain significant financial assistance via this program. 

Certain TANF benefits are also available to the U.S. citizen children of illegal aliens who are being cared 

for by grandparents, foster parents, aunts, and uncles. These are referred to as “child-only” applications. 

Despite TANF eligibility provisions requiring that applicants be working, seeking work, or training for 

employment, neither income earned by parents nor caregiver resources are considered when a child-only 

TANF case is processed. 75  Therefore, virtually all U.S. citizen children of illegal aliens may be eligible for 

TANF, under the right circumstances, and the costs for providing TANF to the U.S. citizen children of 

illegal aliens are borne entirely by the U.S. taxpayer. The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 26 

There were 1,479,103 child recipients of TANF benefits as of June 2022, according to the DHHS’s Office 

of Family Assistance (OFA). 76 

In FY 2021, according to DHHS OFA, federal spending on TANF amounted to about $15.1 billion 

(TANF funding is not adjusted for inflation or other circumstances, so funding levels have not changed 

significantly since the program’s creation by the PRWORA of 1996). 77  Based on CIS data, FAIR estimates 

that U.S. citizen children of illegal aliens accounted for almost 9.4 percent of the TANF caseload in FY 

2022. 78  Using this percentage, the total cost for providing TANF benefits to the U.S.-born children of 

illegal aliens comes out to approximately $1.43 billion. 

Child Care and Development Fund (CCDF)  $911,307,000 

The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services’ Child Care and Development Fund (CCDF) 

programs are an additional source of welfare benefits that are available to U.S.-born children of illegal 

aliens, and some illegal alien children through the Head Start and Early Head Start programs. The CCDF 

program is overwhelmingly federally funded, but is matched in part by state funding. 

Pursuant to the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 2014, the program matches and 

expands upon state funds spent on programs providing affordable child-care services to low-income 

families who work, are training for work, attending school, or whose children receive government 

protective services. 79 

Assistance is provided in the form of either a contracted childcare program or a voucher that may be 

used to access care from any provider that meets state requirements. Eligibility requirements for these 

programs vary widely among states. 

Most illegal aliens are not eligible for CCDF programs. However, under relevant federal rules and 

regulations, the recipient child is considered the primary 

beneficiary of CCDF childcare programs. Accordingly, benefits 

are awarded based on the immigration status of the child rather 

than the parents. As a result, many U.S.-born children of illegal 

aliens receive subsidized childcare under CCDF programs. 

In FY 2022, $9.65 billion  in 

federal funds were allocated to the program. 80 

While COVID-19 served as a justification to 

spend almost $50 billion in additional temporary 

CCDF funding (a part of which was undoubtedly 

spent on the children of illegal aliens), we do not 

include this spending spree in our estimate. The The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 27 

reason is because there is no clear indication at this moment that this spending will be permanent (in the 

case of these funding streams, the deadlines for obligating the money have either expired, or will expire 

in 2023). 81 

Since the child is considered the primary beneficiary of CCDF programs, HHS appears to collect little 

information on the immigration status of the parents of the recipient children. Therefore, we must 

estimate the childcare expenses for illegal aliens paid out under CCDF programs using the TANF data, 

for which we estimated that 9.4 percent of the caseload consists of the children of illegal aliens. We do 

this because the demographics of children from illegal alien households who are eligible for CCDF are 

very similar to the population that will typically seek child-only TANF benefits and the qualifications 

for each program set by law cover very similar income groups. While TANF income thresholds are set 

at the state level, CCDF income eligibility is based on the FPL and state median incomes and tends 

to have higher thresholds in general; hence, our method of using TANF thresholds may result in a 

slight underestimation of illegal alien families collecting CCDF benefits. However, it provides the most 

accurate approximation possible with limited data available. 

Applying this proportion to federal CCDF expenditures (the state share is discussed in the state welfare 

programs section), this works out to about $911 million spent on children with at least one illegal alien 

parent. 82 

Supplemental Security Income (SSI)  $600,350,000 

The Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program applies to some U.S.-born children of illegal aliens if 

they have a “medically determinable physical or mental impairment which can be expected to result in 

death, or which has lasted or can be expected to last for at least 12 months in a row … provided your 

impairment keeps you from engaging in substantial gainful activity for at least 12 months in a row.” 83 

According to the existing research, it appears that only around 1.1 percent of illegal alien households 

participate in this program. 84  That would correspond to 73,400 households. If we err on the side of 

caution and assume that only one person in each of these households is an SSI recipient, and multiplying 

them by an inflation-adjusted average yearly benefit of $7,363, federal SSI payments attributable to 

illegal immigration would amount to a minimum of $541 million annually. Federally-administered state 

supplements add an additional $60 million to this amount. 85 

Public Housing  $334,442,000 

When a household is eligible for public housing benefits but one or more members are illegal aliens, The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 28 

they are eligible for prorated or reduced federal housing benefits, depending on the specific program. 86 

However, housing benefit fraud is common and illegal aliens often live covertly with citizen and lawfully 

present relatives who are receiving housing benefits. 

Currently there is only fragmented data on the use of housing benefits by families with illegal alien 

members. According to a Congressional Research Service (CRS) report, mixed-status families make 

up approximately 0.5% of all assisted households. 87  In addition, the report reveals that this percentage 

totals more than 25,000 mixed status families consisting of more than 108,000 people, including roughly 

55,000 children who were the U.S.-born children of illegal aliens. 88  At a minimum, therefore, the eligible 

children of illegal aliens cost taxpayers approximately $334 million annually, based on the average 

benefit received per year. 89  Barring additional information regarding the immigration status of the other 

households covered by this program, it’s impossible to reliably estimate the entire cost of this program. 

## Total Federal Welfare Programs 

## Meals in Schools  $1,550,108,000 

## Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP)  $5,757,872,000 

## Women, Infants, and Children (WIC)  $999,961,000 

## Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF)  $1,430,527,000 

## Child Care and Development Fund (CCDF)  $911,307,000 

## Supplemental Security Income (SSI)  $600,350,000 

## Public Housing  $334,442,000 

## Total  $11,584,567,000 The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 29 

# Total Federal Expenditures 

Overall Federal Fiscal Costs before revenue 

The approximately $66.4 billion in federal expenditures attributable to illegal aliens is 

staggering, and constitutes an increase of 45 percent since 2017. This amounts to roughly 

$3,187 per illegal alien, per year. 

FAIR believes that every concerned American citizen should be asking our government why, in 

a time of increasing costs and shrinking resources, it is spending such large amounts of money 

on individuals who are not authorized to be in the United States. This is an especially important 

question in view of the fact that the taxes paid by illegal aliens offset very little of the enormous 

costs stemming from their presence in the country. 

## Total Overall Federal Expenditures 

## Federal Educational Expenditures  $6,602,699,000 

## Federal Medical Expenditures  $25,129,361,000 

## Federal Law Enforcement  $23,132,475,000 

## Federal Welfare Programs  $11,584,567,000 

## Total Federal Expenditures  $66,449,136,000 The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 30 

# Federal Tax Payments and Credits 

Taxes collected from illegal aliens help offset fiscal outlays and therefore must be included in any 

examination of the cost of illegal immigration. However, illegal alien advocates frequently cite the 

alleged large tax payments made by illegal aliens as a justification for their unlawful presence and as a 

reason itself to grant them amnesty. That argument is nothing more than a red herring. Such claims 

rarely look at the costs associated with illegal immigration, and instead only focus on the amounts 

contributed to the economy and paid in taxes. 

Most studies grossly overestimate both the taxes actually collected from illegal aliens and, more 

importantly, the net amount of taxes actually paid by them (i.e., the amount of money collected from 

illegal aliens and ultimately kept by the federal government). A predominant reason for this is that in 

recent years, the United States has focused on apprehending and removing almost solely criminal aliens 

(and since President Biden took office, many criminal aliens are now protected from deportation as well). 

Because of this, the majority of illegal aliens seeking employment in the United States now live in an 

environment where they have little fear of deportation even if discovered. 

This increasingly comfortable environment has created an environment where most working illegal 

aliens are both able and willing to not only work in the above ground economy, but even file tax returns. 

Because the vast majority of illegal aliens hold low-paying jobs, most who file tax returns actually wind 

up receiving a complete refund of all taxes paid. Many will receive credits in excess of their annual The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 31 

deductions. As a result, it’s often beneficial for illegal aliens to file tax returns with the IRS, knowing 

that it will not subject them to removal, and will likely result in a monetary profit. Indeed, the IRS has 

stated in the past that they have no intention of reporting known or suspected illegal aliens who file tax 

returns. 90 

Government data support this argument. According to the latest information available from the 

Congressional Budget Office (CBO) from 2019: 91 

• The lowest-income households in the United States (the bottom 20 percent) had an average 

income of about $20,000 before taxes and transfers and paid an average net federal income tax 

rate of –11.1 percent. 

• The second-lowest 20 percent had an average household income of about $50,000 before 

taxes and transfers and paid a net federal income tax rate of –1.7 percent. 

In 2017, FAIR estimated that the average household headed by an illegal alien earned approximately 

$36,000 per year. Since that time, the overall average household income for the country has increased 

by approximately 13.2 percent. 92  Using the same methodology as before and assuming, generously, that 

the income for illegal aliens has increased at the same rate as the overall average, this cohort now earns 

approximately $40,800 annually. 

FAIR estimates that there are approximately 6,673,000 households with an illegally present head of 

household. 93  This figure was derived from previous research from FAIR and organizations such as the 

Heritage Foundation and Pew Research, then applied to our most recent estimate of the illegal alien 

population. 94 ,95 

We therefore estimate that illegal aliens in the United States earn a gross income of approximately 

$272,258,400,000 annually. Therefore, despite making up approximately 4.7 percent of the entire U.S. 

population, illegal aliens only contribute approximately 1.3 percent of the gross personal income earned 

in the country. 96 

Income Tax 

Income Tax Paid  $4,146,850,000 

To determine how many illegal aliens earn an income significant enough to require that they pay more 

in income taxes than they receive in benefits, several factors must be considered. First: many illegal 

aliens who are paid in cash and work under the table avoid paying taxes regardless of what their income 

level happens to be. Second: there is only a small population of visa overstayers and illegal entrants 

who possess the specialized skills sufficient to earn an income which results in a net tax payment greater The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 32 

than the amount they receive in benefits. Finally: those illegal aliens who are neither “white collar” 

nor “highly-skilled” business visa overstayers are unlikely to be paying more in taxes than they receive 

in benefits. As mentioned before, the first and third cohorts comprise the vast majority of illegal alien 

households. 

However, a small number of illegal aliens may work jobs that earn enough to necessitate a net payment 

of income tax payments. Many of these workers with high earning potential use fraudulent means to 

obtain employment. These include using stolen or fake Social Security Numbers (SSNs), overstaying 

their high-earning occupational visa, or working as “subcontractors,” a loophole which allows employers 

in many states to avoid verifying their employment eligibility. A small number of illegal aliens who hold 

work authorization (especially college-educated DACA students and TPS holders) will also fall into this 

category. 

Based on data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), the American Community Survey (ACS), 

and previous FAIR estimates, the aboveground illegal alien labor force participation rate has likely 

decreased about 1 percent since our last report in 2017. 97  The main reasons for this decrease are the 

lingering impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic along with a more generous welfare environment at 

both the federal and state levels. The unemployment rate among the foreign-born has also increased by 

approximately 8 percent during this time period. Based on these factors, and adjusted to fit the current 

illegal alien population, we estimate that approximately 7.9 million illegal aliens are participating in 

the aboveground economy, with just under 7.5 million currently employed. We also estimate that an 

additional 2.6 million illegal aliens are participating in the underground economy and are therefore 

paying no federal taxes at all. 98  This indicates that illegal aliens have a slightly higher labor force 

participation rate than the overall foreign-born population (67.8 percent vs 64.7 percent, respectively). 

This makes sense as a higher proportion of illegal aliens are in single-member households, and the 

primary driver of illegal immigration to the United States is economic opportunity. 

In FAIR’s 2017 report, we estimated that, in addition to visa overstayers who worked higher earning jobs, 

approximately 3 percent of the overall illegal alien workforce employed in the open economy falls within 

an income bracket that requires them to pay more in taxes than they receive in benefits. 99  Based on 

currently available data, we believe this proportion has stayed constant. 100  This means that approximately 

414,685 illegal aliens currently fall into this category. 

In order to determine the average income of those illegal aliens who pay more in taxes than they receive 

in credits, we assume that they earn, on average, a wage similar to that of a foreign-born worker with 

at least a bachelor’s degree. In 2020, that income was approximately $71,000 for individuals ($82,000 

when adjusted for inflation). 101  Assuming standard deductions, this makes the taxable total approximately 

$69,050, 102  and places the alien in the 22 percent tax bracket. 103  This means the average federal income The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 33 

tax paid is approximately $10,000 per individual (Social Security and Medicare taxes are calculated later 

in this section). This means that illegal aliens who pay more in income taxes than they receive in benefits 

are contributing approximately $4,146,850,000. 

Additional Child Tax Credit  $5,400,000,000 

Although it seems counterintuitive, large numbers of illegal aliens file tax returns. Many wish to establish 

a record of complying with tax laws in case a new amnesty is enacted (full payment of taxes owed was a 

requirement under the 1986 amnesty, and it is often listed as a requirement in recent amnesty proposals). 

Others want to take advantage of various benefits and credits that are available to them. One benefit 

is the Additional Child Tax Credit (ACTC), which is an annual lump sum paid by the U.S. Treasury to 

low-income filers with citizen children even if their parent does not have a SSN and has no tax liability. 

As the IRS explains on its website, “It [the ACTC] is a refundable credit, which means taxpayers may 

receive refunds even when they do not owe any tax.” 75  However, to receive the funds a tax return must be 

filed. 

Most illegal aliens who are not using a stolen or fraudulent SSN file their tax return using an Individual 

Tax Identification Number (ITIN). An ITIN allows individuals who don’t qualify for a SSN to file 

income tax returns. The vast majority of ITIN recipients are illegal aliens according to the federal 

government. However, in some instances, lawfully permitted migrants who are not eligible for Social 

Security Numbers, or lawfully permitted migrants who are working without authorization, may apply 

for ITINs as well. According to the U.S. Treasury Department, there were 5.4 million active ITINs in 

2021. 

Per the Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration (TIGTA), the U.S. Department of Treasury 

paid $4.2 billion to 2.18 million illegal alien claimants using ITINs in 2010. 104  The TIGTA report 

noted a very strong correlation between 

tax returns filed using an ITIN and the 

claim for the ACTC, i.e., 93 percent of all 

such cases. In addition, the report noted 

allegations that some filers for the credit 

were identifying children who did not have 

SSNs because those children lived abroad. 

However, the report still offers strong 

evidence that at least 90 percent of ITIN 

filers for tax credits are illegal aliens. 

As part of President Biden’s $1.9 trillion The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 34 

stimulus package, the ACTC increased to $3,600 for children under six, and $3,000 for children between six and 18. 105 Additionally, the income threshold was raised to $150,000 for families, and $75,000 for 

single filers. The U.S.-born children of i llegal aliens who have SSNs are allowed to take part in this benefit so long as one of their parents have an ITIN or SSN. FAIR estimates that there are nearly 2.7 million households with at least one illegal head and one child and 5.4 million active ITIN filers, nearly 

all of whom are believed to be illegal aliens. Furthermore, there are more than 5.3 million U.S.-born children of illegal aliens who hold SSNs. FAIR estimates that less than 5 percent of illegal alien households make above the threshold which 

would dis qualify them for this credit (see the federal income tax section of this report). However, we also 

estimate that approximately 25 percent of the illegal alien workforce participates in the underground economy, therefore paying no taxes and receiving no credits. While it’s most likely that the majority of underground economy workers are single-person households without U.S.-born children, we will assume the ratio is even due to a lack of hard data. This means that illegal alien households received approximately $13.4 billion in child tax credits in 2022 for the 2021 tax year. 106 

However, ACTC totals reverted back to the previously set amounts for the 2022 tax year since Congress declined to extend the increased limits. So, while we estimated that illegal aliens received $13.4 billion for the 2021 tax season, we estimate that this amount will decrease dramatically to somewhere in the area of $5.4 billion going forward, based on the current limits set by the IRS and other restrictions. 107 

This is the total that we use since it better represents what the amount will be in future years, barring a reinstatement of the COVID-era expansion. However, it is important to highlight the fact that illegal aliens received approximately $8 billion in tax credits under the Biden Administration’s stimulus package for tax year 2021. 

Earned Income Tax Credit  $2,987,987,000 

The Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) is a refundable tax credit available to low and moderate-income 

individuals who are employed. The amount paid depends on a recipient’s income, marital status, and 

number of children. The credit increases with each additional dollar earned, until a maximum credit 

amount is reached. In tax year 2022, these limits ranged from $560 to $6,935. 108  The average EITC 

benefit in 2013 was $2,411. 109 

According to the IRS, a family with less than $53,865 in earnings and two dependents would have 

zero tax liability and qualify for an EITC of $5,980. Instead of paying a tax on income, that worker 

would receive a net profit courtesy of the American taxpayer. Based on an annual household income 

of approximately $40,600 and an average household size just over three, most illegal alien households 

would qualify for a credit of approximately $4,025. This is assuming, however, they were eligible for 

the program. The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 35 

Theoretically, most illegal aliens are barred from participating in the EITC program. However, there 

is no provision in the relevant statutes specifically barring individuals who are unlawfully present from 

collecting an EITC; rather, anyone filing for an EITC is required to have a valid SSN and must be 

considered a “resident alien” for taxation purposes. This requirement blocks those who cannot obtain a 

SSN from collecting an EITC. The program is also closed to ITIN holders. 110  However, there are certain 

classes of illegal aliens who are eligible for SSNs, such as parolees, TPS holders, and DACA recipients. 

Once these illegal aliens meet the criteria for being a “resident alien,” they may apply for and receive the 

EITC. 111 

However, there are several major designations (along with a collection of smaller categories) that illegal 

aliens can obtain which would provide them a Social Security Number and work authorization within 

the United States. Below is a list of those categories and how many illegal aliens FAIR estimates to hold 

those designations: 

• DACA: 594,000 

• TPS: 450,000 

• Qualified asylum applicants: 508,000 

• Stolen identifications and fraudulent SSNs: 977,000 

• Other designations offering SSNs: (at least) 440,000 112 ,113 

• Total: 2,969,000 

Based on FAIR’s estimates regarding household size, income, and employment participation rates, we 

assume that approximately 25 percent of this population will be tax filers receiving the EITC at the 

average credit of $4,025. This means that illegal aliens receive just under $3 billion in these tax credits. 

Net Income Tax Payment and Credit Receipt  $4,241,137,000 

Therefore, although illegal aliens do technically pay billions in income taxes every year, they ultimately 

receive a far greater amount in tax credits. As our estimate details, because illegal aliens pay about $4.1 

billion in income tax and receive tax credits of $5.4 billion (ACTC) and $3.0 billion (EITC), the U.S. 

Treasury suffers a net loss of $4.2 billion annually. The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 36 

Other Taxes 

Social Security and Medicare Taxes  $19,527,768,000 

Illegal aliens who work in the open economy will normally have Social Security and Medicare taxes 

withheld, with a matching amount paid by the employer. The standard withholding amount for workers 

and employers is 6.2 percent each (12.4 percent total) for Social Security and 1.45 percent (2.9 percent 

total) for Medicare. 

A 2010 Social Security Administration (SSA) actuarial note on the impact illegal aliens have on 

the Social Security Trust Fund estimated that illegal aliens pay a total of $13 billion into the Social 

Security trust fund annually. 114  The report also stated that illegal alien retirees, even though nearly 

all are technically excluded from retirement benefits even if they hold a SSN, 115  managed to receive 

approximately $1 billion payouts every year. This makes the total net payment into the fund by illegal 

aliens approximately $12 billion annually. At the time, the report indicated that the primary way in 

which illegal aliens obtained Social Security benefits was by using stolen/fraudulent Social Security 

Numbers, or through a small number of those receiving deportation deferment. Since then, with the 

implementation of DACA and the expanded utilization of TPS, parole and other programs that grant 

work authorization to illegal aliens, a much higher number are now contributing to the program. 

Based on FAIR’s estimate of the total earnings contributed by illegal aliens to the aboveground economy, 

total contributions by illegal aliens has likely increased to approximately $16.9 billion. 116  This figure falls 

closely in line with the 2010 SSA estimate when adjusted for the increase in the illegal alien population 

and their associated incomes since that time. 

Because nearly all who pay into the Social Security Trust Fund will also pay into Medicare, and since 

the rate is similarly fixed, we extrapolate from our Social Security analysis to determine how much 

illegal aliens pay into Medicare. The Medicare deduction rate is 1.45 percent for both employees and 

employers, which is 23.4 percent of the Social Security deduction rate. Therefore, the total amount 

paid into Medicare by illegal aliens is 23.4 percent of the Social Security rate. This comes out to 

approximately $3.9 billion. 

Adding these figures together, we estimate that illegal aliens make approximately $20.8 billion in Social 

Security and Medicare tax contributions annually. These estimates again are conservative, as we operate 

on the assumption that virtually all illegal aliens working in the open economy are paying social security 

taxes. 

According to data contained within the 2010 SSA actuarial note, illegal aliens recoup approximately 7.7 

percent of what they pay into the Social Security program, which means that they are likely receiving The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 37 

around approximately $1.3 billion in improper payments each year. This makes the net total paid in 

Social Security and Medicaid approximately $19.5 billion. 

Excise taxes  $932,864,000 

The federal government also receives revenue in the form of excise taxes on the sale of consumer goods 

such as fuel, tobacco, alcohol and airline tickets. Here, we include a rough estimate of receipts by the 

federal government from fuel, tobacco, and alcohol purchases. We do not include an estimate of excise 

revenue generated by illegal alien purchases of airline tickets based on the reasonable presumption that 

most illegal aliens engage only in very limited commercial airline travel. 117 

Fuel Taxes 

The United States consumed approximately 135 billion gallons of motor gasoline in 2021, which 

averages out to about 592 gallons per licensed driver. 118  We assume that the illegal alien rate of 

gasoline consumption is slightly lower than it is for the lawful migrant and U.S. citizen population. This 

presumption is based on the fact that many states do not permit illegal aliens to obtain driver’s licenses. 

In addition, many illegal aliens fall into an income bracket which limits the ability to purchase, maintain, 

insure, and operate a motor vehicle at the same rate as the general public. Moreover, it is safe to assume 

that those illegal aliens that do drive, minimize the amount that they drive due to their unlawful status 

and lower average income. 

It is important to note that all 50 states now allow DACA recipients, TPS holders, and several other 

categories of illegal aliens with deferred deportation to obtain drivers licenses. 119  Moreover, a growing 

number of states are making licenses available to all illegal aliens. 120  Because of this, we assume that a 

greater percentage of illegal aliens are driving now than when this report was last published. 

Based on these assumptions, we estimate that approximately 65 percent of adult illegal aliens drive on 

a regular basis, 121  compared to more than 80 percent of American adults overall. 122  This means that 

approximately 9 million illegal aliens drive in the United States. Furthermore, we assume that they 

consume, on average, approximately 70 percent as much fuel as the overall average driver, or around 414 

gallons each year. With the current federal fuel tax at 18.4 cents per gallon, that means illegal aliens pay 

approximately $686 million in federal fuel taxes annually. 123 

Alcohol Taxes 

We presume that illegal aliens, in general, will prefer beer or wine because it is less expensive than liquor 

and can generally be purchased in grocery and convenience stores. Furthermore, all individuals in the 

United States consume beer at a much higher rate than other alcoholic beverages. The general excise tax 

on beer was reduced from $18 per barrel (31 gallons) for beer to $16 per barrel in 2020. 124 The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 38 

Studies indicate that alcohol consumption varies widely among immigrant groups, but that immigrants 

overall tend to drink less than native-born Americans. 125  However, the vast majority of illegal aliens are 

Hispanic, a demographic that consumes alcohol at a rate higher than the average American. 126  Because 

of the offsetting variances in terms of income, nativity, and race, we simply assume that illegal aliens 

likely consume alcohol at a rate relatively close to the rest of the country. This amounts to approximately 

$136 million in excise revenue generated by illegal alien alcohol purchases 127 

Tobacco Taxes 

Studies of smokers have found an incidence of smokers among the foreign-born population to be 

about one-third lower than the native-born population. 128  Based on this data, it can be assumed 

that approximately 10.5 percent of illegal alien adults are smokers. The average smoker consumes 

approximately 75 packs of cigarettes per year. 129  The current federal excise tax on cigarettes is $1.01 per 

pack, 130  which means that illegal aliens are likely to pay approximately $111.5 million per year. 

The cumulative total federal excise tax revenue from the illegal alien population for fuel, alcohol, and 

cigarettes, therefore, totals approximately $932,864,000 annually. The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 39 

# Net Federal Impact of Illegal Aliens 

## Federal Receipts from Illegal Aliens 

## Income Taxes  $4,146,850,000 

## Social Security and Medicare Taxes  $19,527,768,000 

## Excise taxes  $932,864,000 

## Total Receipts  $24,607,482,000 

## Credits Given to Illegal Aliens 

## ACTC  $5,400,000,000 

## EITC  $2,987,987,000 

## Total Credits  $8,387,987,000 

## Net Federal Receipts from Illegal Aliens 

## Total Receipts  $24,607,482,000 

## Total Credits  $8,387,987,000 

## Net Federal Receipts from Illegal Aliens  $16,219,495,000 

## Net Federal Impact of Illegal Aliens 

## Total Federal Outlays  $66,449,136,000 

## Net Federal Receipts  $16,219,495,000 

## Net Federal Fiscal Impact  $50,229,641,000 The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 40 

# State by State Costs of Illegal Immigration 

State # of Illegal Aliens # of Illegal Aliens & their Kids Adjust ed COLI Cost Per Alien to State Taxpayers Cost Of Illegal Aliens To State Taxpayers Cost of Illegal Aliens & their Kids to State Taxpayers 

California 3,226,000 4,373,000 1.230 7,074 $ 22,821,903,942 $ 30,936,201,468 $Texas 2,226,000 2,992,000 0.836 4,466 $ 9,942,111,305 $ 13,363,340,982 $Florida 1,185,000 1,595,000 0.928 5,040 $ 5,972,788,206 $ 8,039,322,522 $New York 1,081,000 1,453,000 1.212 6,846 $ 7,400,654,942 $ 9,947,411,314 $New Jersey 697,000 937,000 1.120 5,625 $ 3,920,584,853 $ 5,270,571,029 $Illinois 628,000 845,000 0.898 4,636 $ 2,911,654,025 $ 3,917,751,037 $Georgia 514,000 692,000 0.832 4,386 $ 2,254,644,675 $ 3,035,436,022 $North Carolina 488,000 657,000 0.874 4,781 $ 2,333,226,108 $ 3,141,249,083 $Arizona 453,000 610,000 0.893 5,230 $ 2,369,284,949 $ 3,190,427,856 $Virginia 419,000 563,000 0.940 5,038 $ 2,110,828,714 $ 2,836,268,654 $Maryland 350,000 471,000 1.194 6,123 $ 2,143,152,396 $ 2,884,070,796 $Washington 346,000 466,000 0.981 5,630 $ 1,947,937,290 $ 2,623,522,477 $Nevada 293,000 395,000 0.939 5,028 $ 1,473,177,349 $ 1,986,024,071 $Massachusetts 292,000 393,000 1.196 7,396 $ 2,159,721,305 $ 2,906,748,195 $Colorado 278,000 374,000 1.016 5,191 $ 1,443,024,697 $ 1,941,335,384 $Pennsylvania 251,000 338,000 0.944 4,845 $ 1,216,181,625 $ 1,637,726,651 $Michigan 185,000 248,000 0.827 4,525 $ 837,055,573 $ 1,122,106,931 $Oregon 181,000 243,000 1.177 6,030 $ 1,091,347,377 $ 1,465,179,075 $Connecticut 167,000 225,000 1.194 5,694 $ 950,901,447 $ 1,281,154,644 $Tennessee 162,000 218,000 0.829 4,456 $ 721,798,530 $ 971,309,133 $Indiana 154,000 207,000 0.838 4,451 $ 685,394,297 $ 921,276,750 $Minnesota 140,000 187,000 0.922 4,692 $ 656,934,062 $ 877,476,212 $Utah 137,000 185,000 0.874 5,033 $ 689,499,518 $ 931,075,992 $Oklahoma 136,000 183,000 0.824 4,278 $ 581,796,674 $ 782,858,760 $Ohio 132,000 178,000 0.857 4,411 $ 582,270,353 $ 785,182,749 $New Mexico 119,000 160,000 0.889 4,628 $ 550,760,808 $ 740,518,733 $South Carolina 117,000 157,000 0.929 4,752 $ 555,936,741 $ 746,000,585 $Wisconsin 111,000 150,000 0.891 4,633 $ 514,282,563 $ 694,976,436 $Kansas 104,000 140,000 0.842 4,308 $ 447,982,255 $ 603,053,035 $Arkansas 97,000 131,000 0.813 4,475 $ 434,102,463 $ 586,262,089 $Louisiana 97,000 131,000 0.867 4,613 $ 447,503,641 $ 604,360,588 $Alabama 91,000 122,000 0.838 4,298 $ 391,086,456 $ 524,313,710 $Missouri 77,000 104,000 0.833 4,446 $ 342,317,218 $ 462,350,529 $Kentucky 69,000 94,000 0.875 4,579 $ 315,944,133 $ 430,416,645 $Hawaii 63,000 84,000 1.735 9,178 $ 578,184,869 $ 770,913,158 $Idaho 62,000 83,000 0.839 4,880 $ 302,552,823 $ 405,030,392 $Nebraska 56,000 75,000 0.868 4,495 $ 251,721,107 $ 337,126,482 $Iowa 55,000 74,000 0.853 4,352 $ 239,356,102 $ 322,042,755 $Rhode Island 42,000 57,000 1.139 5,487 $ 230,445,009 $ 312,746,797 $Washington DC 38,000 51,000 1.417 7,569 $ 287,622,055 $ 386,019,073 $Delaware 35,000 47,000 0.948 5,201 $ 182,021,162 $ 244,428,418 $Mississippi 34,000 45,000 0.786 4,169 $ 141,758,417 $ 187,621,434 $Alaska 15,000 21,000 1.216 6,192 $ 92,885,562 $ 130,039,073 $New Hampshire 14,000 19,000 1.091 5,659 $ 79,232,741 $ 107,530,149 $Maine 12,000 16,000 1.063 5,650 $ 31,807,322 $ 42,496,390 $Vermont 10,000 13,000 1.116 5,743 $ 32,335,129 $ 43,201,571 $South Dakota 9,000 12,000 0.926 4,742 $ 26,695,927 $ 35,667,276 $Wyoming 8,000 10,000 0.876 4,520 $ 25,445,858 $ 33,997,112 $Montana 8,000 10,000 0.906 5,196 $ 29,251,625 $ 39,081,833 $North Dakota 6,000 9,000 0.918 4,806 $ 27,057,058 $ 36,149,768 $West Virginia 6,000 9,000 0.881 4,431 $ 24,945,830 $ 33,329,047 $

App. 15,516,000 App. 20,852,000 85,801,109,086 $ 115,654,701,582 $

*totals may vary slightly from elsewhere in this report due to rounding. 

Estimated Total State Taxes Collected from Illegal Aliens: $15,172,140,000 Total Net Cost of Illegal Immigration on States and Localities: $100,482,561,582 The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 41 

# Part II: State and 

# Local Expenditures 

# and Receipts The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 42 

# State Education Costs 

Education 

Public School Expenditures  $70,401,000,000 

FAIR recently completed a comprehensive analysis of K-12 education costs associated with mass 

immigration into the United States entitled:  The Elephant in the Classroom: Mass Immigration Imposing Colossal 

Cost and Challenges on Public Education .131  This report also provided an estimate of the education costs 

associated with illegal immigration. 

A significant number of the students in the United States are the children of illegal aliens. As of the 

2021-2022 school year, FAIR estimates that 5.1 million public school students – roughly 6.5 percent of 

total U.S. enrollment – are the children of illegal aliens or are illegal aliens themselves. 132 

Most of the children from illegal alien households are designated as having Limited English Proficiency 

(LEP). It is estimated that only 7 percent of illegal alien households speak English as their primary 

language at home. Furthermore, only 25 percent of all illegal aliens can speak English at a proficient 

level. 133  LEP students cost roughly 15 percent more to educate than non-LEP students. 134 

Based on the same methodology from our comprehensive K-12 Education report, updated to account 

for the current illegal alien population, at least 3.8 million children of illegal aliens qualify as LEP, The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 43 

costing taxpayers approximately $58.8 billion. Additionally, the education of non-LEP children of illegal 

aliens costs taxpayers approximately $16.9 billion, meaning it costs U.S. taxpayers approximately $75.7 

billion to educate the children of illegal aliens. 

The vast majority of this cost falls to the states via an unfunded mandate handed down from the U.S. 

Supreme Court in its ruling in  Plyler v. Doe .135  In fact, 98.9 percent of all LEP costs, and 92.1 percent of 

overall education funding, are borne by state and local governments. 136  Applying both of these totals 

to the aforementioned totals indicate that states shell out approximately $70.4 billion to pay for K-12 

education costs associated with illegal immigration. 

Post-Secondary Tuition Assistance  $2,789,760,000 

Title IV of the Higher Education Act precludes illegal aliens from receiving federal tuition grants, 

loans, or work assistance under the act, and requires recipients to be citizens, permanent residents, or be 

eligible for permanent residency. 137  In addition, a provision in the Illegal Alien Reform and Immigrant 

Responsibility Act of 1996 (IIRIRA) prevents states and their subdivisions from offering postsecondary 

education benefits, like in-state tuition, to illegal aliens on the basis of state residence if U.S. citizens 

residing in other states are not offered the same benefit. 138  However, largely in response to the efforts 

of illegal alien advocacy groups, eleven states began offering in-state tuition to illegal aliens by 2010 

by arguing that illegals were charged in-state tuition on the basis of local high-school attendance and 

graduation rather than their state of residence. Three of those states offered scholarship assistance to 

students who are unlawfully present. 

In the years since then, that number has increased significantly. According to the National Conference 

of State Legislators 139  and research into state legislation, there are now 24 states and the District of 

Columbia that fully allow illegal aliens to receive in-state tuition at their public universities. This means 

that significantly more illegal aliens are eligible for grants, state-funded scholarships and subsidized loans, 

driving up higher education costs for states. Several other states permit illegal aliens to receive in-state 

tuition only in portions of their university system or restrict in-state tuition to illegals with DACA status. 

It is often the case in states with no legislation on the matter that access to in-state tuition is granted 

under a “don’t-ask-don’t-tell” policy, with university administrations simply declining to solicit any 

information on a student’s immigration status. In states that do not offer in-state tuition to illegal aliens, 

it is also likely that many unlawfully present students still receive in-state tuition rates because few states 

verify the immigration status of enrollees by using the Systematic Alien Verification for Entitlements 

(SAVE) database. 

Several of the states that allow illegal aliens to pay in-state tuition have also extended state-funded 

financial aid to illegal aliens to counterbalance the ban on federal funding. Of the six most populous The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 44 

states, California, Texas, New York, and Illinois allow in-state tuition and state funding for illegal alien 

college students. These states spend nearly $100 million annually supporting illegal alien students with 

taxpayer funds, and many university administrators in California even bemoan the fact that illegal 

students aren’t using all the aid the government provides. 140 

An increasingly hospitable political climate and the continuation of DACA have led to the steep growth 

in the numbers of illegal aliens receiving post-secondary education in the United States. Community 

college systems are significant, but under-referenced, contributors to this growth, as the vast majority 

(60%) of illegal alien post-secondary students attend community colleges rather than four-year 

universities. Community colleges, like four-year universities, charge out-of-state tuition rates and allow 

students to receive state education aid, representing significant costs to the taxpayer when illegal aliens 

are allowed to access benefits that Americans from other states cannot. 

Enrollment data for illegal aliens in public post-secondary schools is sparse, especially in states that 

do not explicitly bar or permit illegal aliens to receive benefits. To estimate the cost to taxpayers of 

granting in-state tuition to illegal aliens, FAIR first must estimate how many illegal aliens are enrolled 

in post-secondary education. By extrapolating from known enrollment values for illegal alien students 

in certain states, as well as government data on the makeup of the illegal alien population and their 

choices in higher education, FAIR can determine the size of the illegal alien post-secondary population 

and their distribution among states. This population, as well as the costs associated with it, has increased 

significantly since FAIR’s last cost study. FAIR then estimates the cost of enrollment and aid based on 

population, state-level costs, and the proportions of students attending different categories of university. 

Significant costs come from both the difference between in-state and out-of-state tuition and from 

financial aid given to illegal alien students where allowed. Because of their low average family incomes, 

illegal aliens tend to receive higher amounts of state financial aid than citizen or visa-holder students 

in states that allow aid. FAIR is able to account for the majority of students who do not hold DACA 

status but are still permitted to pay in-state tuition in many states. We can 

also determine the significant increases in financial aid offered to illegal alien 

students by states like New York and Illinois since the last version of this study 

was issued. However, these costs are still likely to be an understatement. 

Even in states that do not permit in-state tuition or financial aid to 

illegal alien students, fraud, document theft or misuse, or simple 

“don’t ask, don’t tell” policies certainly allow at least some 

illegal aliens to obtain in-state benefits in those states. 

The states that bear the greatest fiscal impact from their in-

state tuition benefit to illegal aliens are California ($816M), Texas The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 45 

($459M), Florida ($228M), New York ($226M), and Illinois ($134M). These states, 5 of the 6 most 

populous, account for two-thirds of the total cost of approximately $2.789 billion that illegal aliens cost 

in in-state tuition and financial aid. All of these states have large populations of illegal aliens, and in all 

but Florida, state laws actively permit illegal aliens to take advantage of the financial aid the state offers 

on the basis of need. 

## Total State Educational Expenditures 

## K-12 Public School  $70,401,000,000 

## Post-Secondary Tuition Losses/Financial Aid  $2,879,760,000 

## Total Educational Expenditures  $73,280,760,000 The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 46 

# State Medical Costs 

State Medical Costs 

Illegal aliens access taxpayer-supported medical assistance at the state level in several ways. First, the 

Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act (EMTALA) of 1986 requires that public hospitals provide 

emergency medical assistance regardless of the patient’s ability to pay. Thus, low-income individuals 

lacking health insurance, including illegal aliens, often rely on hospital emergency rooms as a source of 

free or low-cost healthcare. This abuse of EMTALA leads to significant hospital operating costs, because 

EMTALA does not reimburse hospitals for these services. 

EMTALA also requires that hospitals provide care for indigent mothers who give birth in emergency 

rooms regardless of their ability to pay, so many illegal aliens rely on emergency care facilities for child 

delivery as well. EMTALA even covers delivery costs for mothers who deliberately cross the border 

specifically for the purpose of accessing U.S. hospitals, adding further to the expenses imposed on 

healthcare providers. Tens of thousands of women come to the United States with the express intent of 

giving birth every year, including thousands of illegal aliens. 141  In addition to taking advantage of better 

healthcare facilities, migrants engage in this “birth tourism” primarily to ensure that their child is born a 

U.S. citizen. 142 

While hospitals near the border bear the brunt of this financial burden, states far from the Southwest The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 47 

Border are feeling the strain as well. New York City provides a powerful illustration of the fiscal costs 

imposed on local taxpayers by furnishing free healthcare to illegal aliens: 

“At an April [2016] press conference, Dr. Ram Ramu, [a New York City health official], said that caring for [illegal 

aliens] consumes about one-third of his $7.6 billion annual budget. Rounding down, that means that $2.5 billion — of 

which the city is picking up an increasingly large chunk every year, as state and federal aid dries up — goes toward providing 

health care to illegal aliens in New York.” 143 

Although it’s unlawful to utilize federal funds to provide non-emergency healthcare for most illegal aliens, 

some states and local governments use their own funds to offer coverage to illegal alien children. For 

example, the “Healthy Kids” program in San Francisco covers uninsured children under the age of 19, 

including illegal alien children. Similarly, the “All Kids” program in Illinois covers all children under the 

age of 19 whose families meet program income requirements, regardless of immigration status. 144 

Additionally, a number of states are expanding other statewide health benefits to illegal aliens. For 

example, California has expanded Medi-Cal to cover many illegal aliens. Washington State is slated to 

start offering coverage to illegal aliens in 2023. 145  The costs of these programs are covered later in this 

section. 

Medicaid births  $937,863,000 

States pay a matching share for all Medicaid births, as mentioned in the federal portion of this cost study. 

For most Medicaid expenses, this comes out to nearly 63 percent of the total cost of this program. 146 

After subtracting costs covered by health insurance, for those illegal aliens who have it, the total reported 

cost of Medicaid birth for illegal aliens comes out to $2.53 billion, with $1.6 billion covered by the 

federal government. This leaves the states with a burden of $937,863,000. (See the federal portion of 

this report for further details on this issue.) 

Uncompensated Medical Expenses  $4,501,175,000 

As noted earlier, unpaid medical expenses incurred by uninsured illegal aliens typically fall to the 

states. Most of these come from unpaid visits to emergency rooms. The Kaiser Family Foundation 

estimated that, in 2017, states paid for $11.9 billion in total uninsured medical costs, which comes out to 

approximately $14.45 billion in 2022 dollars. 147 

Only about 47 percent of illegal aliens have health insurance, leaving about 8.2 million illegal aliens 

uninsured. 148  Many of those who do have health insurance do not have comprehensive plans, leaving 

them uncovered for certain ailments. In the first quarter of 2022, according to DHHS, there were 

about 26.4 million uninsured people in America. 149  Since the implementation of the ACA, illegal aliens 

constitute a growing share - now approximately 31 percent - of the overall uninsured population. That The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 48 

indicates a total state-level expenditure of approximately $4.5 billion for uncompensated medical 

expenses incurred by those illegally present. 

Improper Medicaid Payments  $4,696,983,000 

As described in the federal expenditures section, there is significant evidence of fraudulent use 

of Medicaid by illegal aliens. When we calculate the shared costs between states and the federal 

government, the amount paid by states is approximately $4.7 billion. 150  (See the federal portion of this 

report for further commentary on this issue and an explanation of our methodology.) 

Medicaid for U.S.-born Children of Illegal Aliens  $3,162,623,000 

Sixty-three percent of the Medicaid costs for U.S.-born children of illegal aliens are shouldered by the 

federal government. That amounts to approximately $5.4 billion of the total $8.5 billion cost, leaving the 

states with a cost of $3.16 billion. 151  (See the federal portion of this report for further commentary on 

this issue and an explanation of our methodology.) 

Medi-Cal Expansion  $4,802,094,000 

Beginning in May 2022, California expanded access to Medi-Cal, the state’s Medicaid program, to all 

illegal alien adults over 50. As of the end of reporting year 2022, this policy provides free state-funded 

medical care to more than 304,000 illegal aliens. 152  This drastic change follows a significant expansion 

enacted in 2020 that provided full Medi-Cal coverage to illegal aliens aged 19-25, which added state-

funded coverage for at least another 116,000 illegal aliens. 153  Because another (at least) 142,000 income-

eligible illegal alien children under 18 were already included in the Medi-Cal system, 154  California 

effectively provides healthcare to all illegal aliens under 26 or over 49. 

This additional coverage represents a significant burden on the state’s finances, reflecting especially high 

demands that older illegal aliens place on the healthcare system. 155  After accounting for average Medi-

Cal expenditures and estimates of the proportion of California’s population with a disability, 156  the total 

spending on the expansion for illegal aliens over 50 in California accounts for nearly $3.7 billion. The 

previous expansion of Medi-Cal to illegal alien adults aged 19-25 added around $750 million, while 

existing Medi-Cal spending on illegal immigrant minors totals around $360 million. 

It must be noted that the government of California, led by Governor Gavin Newsom, has proposed an 

expansion of Medi-Cal coverage to all income-eligible illegal aliens beginning after January 1, 2024. The 

government of California itself estimates that this expansion would cost approximately $819 million to 

enact, and reach a full annual expenditure of $2.7 billion in the future. 157  If enacted, this total would be 

in addition to the current costs. Because federal aid matching funds cannot be spent on programs that 

only benefit illegal aliens, California taxpayers are footing this entire bill, and will be on the hook for all 

future expansions of the program. The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 49 

Other State Programs 

$526,098,000 

Like California, other states have expanded various health 

insurance coverage to illegal aliens to varying degrees. 

Generally, this coverage is restricted to children or pregnant/ 

postpartum women. However, Illinois has taken after 

California in progressively expanding state-funded 

coverage to older illegal aliens, with any illegal alien 

over the age of 42 now able to enroll in state-funded 

care in addition to all minors. State statistics on the 

expansion program 158  indicate that total annual spending on 

these covered populations clocks in at just over $460 million annually. 

As of mid-2022, the state of Oregon has also aggressively moved to expand its 

state-funded Medicaid coverage to illegal aliens. Oregon’s Cover All Kids program 

funds medical services for illegal alien children under 19, at a conservatively estimated 

annual cost of around $15.2 million based on state data, 159  and the state legislature has authorized $50 

million in annual spending on health coverage for illegal alien adults. 160  Several other states like Vermont, 

Rhode Island, and Maine have established programs that provide health insurance to illegal aliens under 

19, although due to the small population size of these states and the difficulty of finding concrete data the 

costs can be hard to estimate. Nevertheless, these states do incur costs in the millions of dollars annually 

by operating these programs, which cannot be federally funded. 

The coming years are certain to see additional billions in state taxpayer dollars spent on healthcare for 

illegal aliens, none of which is reimbursable by the federal government. In 2022, multiple states adopted 

legislation expanding illegal aliens’ access to medical benefit programs at taxpayer expense. The largest 

of these expansions will be in New York State, where full state-funded Medicaid coverage was approved 

in the 2022 state budget and will be provided to illegal aliens 65 or older once implemented. 161  Coverage 

for this age group, as California and Illinois have proven, is extremely expensive. With Medicaid costing 

over $20,000 a year per senior enrollee in New York, 162  the fiscal impact of this expansion will cost 

billions once fully in place. Other relatively populous states like Colorado, Connecticut, New Jersey, and 

Washington also have programs set to go into effect in the coming years that will expand coverage to 

certain categories of illegal aliens. 

Additionally, some other services are made available to illegal aliens through Medicaid programs in 

some states. For example, in New York, Medicaid for Emergency Care is used to provide chemotherapy 

and radiation to uninsured or underinsured illegal aliens with cancer. In twelve states - including New The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 50 

York, California, North Carolina, Colorado, Illinois, and Washington State - it can be used to provide 

outpatient dialysis for illegal aliens. These are medically important procedures, but they impose a heavy 

burden on taxpayers who are attempting to deal with the increasing costs of providing healthcare for 

themselves and their dependents. Since detailed information is not made available on the extent to which 

illegal aliens are using these programs, we cannot affix a cost estimate to them. 

## Total State Medical Expenditures 

## Medicaid births  $937,863,000 

## Uncompensated Medical Expenses  $4,501,175,000 

## Improper Medicaid Payouts  $4,696,983,000 

## Medicaid for Citizen Children of Illegal Alien  $3,162,623,000 

## Medi-Cal Expansion  $4,802,094,000 

## Other State Programs  $526,098,000 

## Total Medical Expenditures  $18,626,836,000 The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 51 

# Administration of Justice 

Administration of Justice 

Immigration enforcement is a completely federal responsibility — at least, that is the argument of those 

who oppose state and local efforts to cooperate with the Department of Homeland Security. But the 

costly truth is that state and local governments face extensive criminal justice expenditures related to the 

presence of illegal aliens. 

These costs may be generally grouped into three categories: (1) Policing; (2) Judicial; and (3) Corrections. 

Policing costs refer to the fiscal costs of police operations in response to criminal activity by illegal aliens, 

especially in municipalities where gang activity and drug trafficking is rampant. 

Judicial costs refer to the cost of operating the judicial system for illegal aliens. These costs include 

providing pre-trial detention, court hearings, and probation of illegal aliens who stand accused of 

criminal offenses. These costs are significantly higher than average because of the frequent need for 

bilingual court services programs in order to ensure that due process requirements are met. 

Corrections costs incorporate the cost to states and local jurisdictions for the incarceration of illegal 

alien criminals. The federal government operates a program to help defray the state and local costs of 

incarceration of illegal aliens, SCAAP (see Part I of this report). However, that program only covers 

a fraction of the expenses, around 2-5% of the costs reported by jurisdictions who apply for and win The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 52 

grants. 163 

The National Institute of Corrections provides estimates of the cost per prisoner expended by each 

state. 164  We use this data and assign costs for each state proportionate to the size of the illegal and 

deportable alien population reported by the local authorities to the Bureau of Justice Statistics. 165 

This method, to varying degrees, understates these expenditures because not all jurisdictions that 

imprison illegal aliens participate in the SCAAP program, meaning that many states face expenditures 

proportional to the size of their criminal alien population, but are not reflected in federal compensation 

calculations. We estimate non-participating jurisdictions’ costs by their total illegal alien population and 

the average state correctional expenditure. Our estimations are listed below as an aggregate for all 50 

states: 

Policing  $8,952,291,000 

Judicial  $3,720,668,000 

Corrections  $6,213,721,000 

As is reflected in these figures, correctional expenses make up approximately a third of the total cost of 

illegal aliens in this section, with police expenses comprising nearly half of the total and judicial expenses 

making up the rest. 166 

In FY 2020, the most current and complete year of statistics available, there was a sudden and significant 

decrease in the number of criminal aliens in custody due to the COVID-19 pandemic. 167  The number 

of criminal aliens in federal custody fell by 24% from 2019, and similar declines were registered in 

most states due to COVID-driven lenient release policies in jails and prisons across the country. 168 

Nevertheless, an examination of state and local budgets indicate that, as a general rule, staffing costs 

did not appreciably decrease because of the temporary nature of the disruptions and rising personnel 

expenses. Costs are anticipated to increase further as the custodial population renormalizes in the coming 

years. 

State Border Security Costs  $3,135,000,000 

In addition to costs by ICE, CBP, the National Guard, etc., some border states also allocate money to 

their own law enforcement agencies to combat the public safety and national security threats associated 

with illegal migration. These costs are only necessary due to the federal government failing to properly 

secure the border. Some states even fund the deployment of National Guard Troops to support U.S. CBP. 

The vast majority of state border security funding efforts come from Texas. For the past two legislative 

sessions, the state has reinforced its dedication to combat illegal immigration and the drug trade epidemic The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 53 

until the federal government effectively addresses these issues. Arizona’s approximately $20 million 

border task force, one of the components of its greatly increased border funding, is also a relatively new 

endeavor with the same goal. 

Listed below are the states that share a border with Mexico, along with the portion of their state budget 

that is  officially  dedicated to combating illegal immigration: 

Texas: $2.589 billion — The Texas Legislature meets every two years. Spending in the current legislative 

cycle is approximately $4.5 billion, reflecting massive increases in illegal border crossings and state efforts 

to compensate for inadequate federal enforcement. 169  The Texas government has greatly increased 

spending on public safety in recent years and recently announced a further $339 million increase in 

border funding outside the normal legislative appropriations cycle. 170  Meanwhile, the federal government 

has so far ignored Texas’ requests for reimbursement of its funds spent on border security. Therefore, the 

entirety of these costs is being paid for by state taxpayers. 

New Mexico:  Negligible  — Any state funds spent on border security are not specifically tracked or 

reflected in state or legislative budget records. Thus, while the New Mexico government does not appear 

to specifically designate any significant amount of state resources directly to border security measures, 

as its border is short and has difficult terrain. Of course, this doesn’t mean that state and local law 

enforcement officers aren’t expending additional effort and resources to combat the impact of illegal 

immigration. 

Arizona: $546 million — The Arizona government, like Texas, has drastically increased appropriations 

in recent years in response to a lack of federal action to secure the border. Arizona’s H.B. 2317 recently 

appropriated $335 million for state-level border wall construction and physical infrastructure to reinforce 

the border. Total budgetary expenditures on border security, including dedicated law enforcement and 

facilities construction, are $546 million. 171 

California:  Negligible  — The California government does not allocate funding toward border security. 

On the contrary, the state government spent considerable time and expense litigating the Trump 

Administration’s policies to improve border security. However, California benefits from being the first 

state in the U.S. to have its international border reinforced by wall. This effort began in the 1990s, 

when the Federal government constructed, and has since maintained, a wall along the busiest parts 

of California’s border that has been extremely successful in preventing illegal immigration and drug/ 

human trafficking directly into the state. Similar walls across the entire Southern border would quickly 

pay for themselves, and drastically reduce the need for states to divert tax dollars to fund border security 

measures. The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 54 

The entirety of these costs are directly attributable to the failure of the federal government to secure the 

border and remove incentives that encourage illegal immigration. It’s also important to note that the 

failure of the federal government to secure our borders has also resulted in enormous costs not directly 

reflected in state and local budgets, especially in small communities located near the border. 

## Total State Administration of 

## Justice Expenditures 

## Policing  $8,952,291,000 

## Judicial  $3,720,668,000 

## Corrections  $6,213,721,000 

## State Border  $3,135,000,000 

## Total  $22,021,680,000 

## SCAAP funds from Federal Government  -$210,240,000 

## Net Justice Expenditures  $21,811,440,000 The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 55 

# State Welfare Programs 

State Welfare Programs 

As noted in the Federal portion of this study, illegal aliens (with a few exceptions) are not considered 

“qualified aliens” pursuant to Title IV of the PRWORA of 1996. 172  Therefore, most are ineligible state 

and local public benefits which are supplemented by federal funds, as stated in the act. However, the fact 

that most medical benefits exclude the majority of illegal aliens does not mean they receive no taxpayer-

supported services. 

Illegal aliens with certain designations, such as TPS status or recipients of parole with a set term of at 

least one year, are able to lawfully collect certain state benefits, even if they are supplemented by federal 

funds. Moreover, PRWORA contains a loophole that undermines its own declared intent by allowing 

states to extend state welfare benefits “through the enactment of a State law … which affirmatively 

provides for such eligibility” so long as the funding is entirely sourced at the state level. 173  This creates a 

pull factor at the state level and saddles state taxpayers with additional costs. 

In addition to the exceptions granted under PRWORA, the U.S.-born children of illegal aliens are 

eligible for virtually all state programs granted to U.S. citizens, granted they meet other eligibility 

criteria. There are also many recipients of welfare who obtain it by fraud. The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 56 

Child Care and Development Fund (CCDF)  $171,033,000 

In 2022, the state share of CCDF funding was $1.8 billion. These costs were divided almost equally into 

state “Maintenance of Effort” programs and state-share matching funds. 174 

As laid out in the federal section, FAIR estimates that 9.4 percent of the CCDF caseload consists of 

the children of illegal aliens. Applying that proportion to the state’s share of CCDF costs results in 

approximately $171 million attributable to illegal immigration. For more details on the CCDF program 

and how illegal aliens utilize the program, see our analysis in the federal section of this report. 

Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF)  $1,432,105,000 

TANF programs vary widely by state, which presents difficulties in estimating the amount of TANF 

funding attributable to the presence of illegal aliens and their citizen children who qualify for the 

program. As previously indicated in the federal portion of this report, however, we estimate that 9.4 

percent of the TANF caseload is made up of the children of illegal aliens. 

Overall state spending on TANF programs amounted to about $15.2 billion in FY 2021. 175  This means 

that approximately $1.43 billion of those funds are the result of illegal immigration. 

Meals in Schools  $376,556,000 

The federal free and reduced price meal program for K-12 students has a state matching requirement. 

State expenditures are much lower than they are at the federal level. To receive federal funding for 

subsidized school lunch programs, states must contribute matching funds equal to 30 percent of the 

federal funds they received in 1980. Because the matching funds requirements are frozen at 1980 levels, 

state required contributions are often very small relative to the federal reimbursement level. 

The 1980 total cost to the federal 

government was approximately 

$3.2 billion, 176  meaning that states 

are required to contribute at least 

$960 million. As noted earlier, FAIR 

estimates that almost 8.3 percent of 

participants in this program are illegal 

aliens or the children of illegal aliens, 

meaning the total current state burden 

in this program would be a minimum 

of $79.35 million. The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 57 

The USDA has indicated in the past that federal funds and required matching state funds fall about 9 

percent short of the full cost of this program, leaving the rest to local school districts. 177  The budgeted 

cost of this program was $19.7 billion during the pre-pandemic year of 2019 (this combines the federal 

expenditures of $18.8 billion and the $960 million in required state contributions), implying a shortfall 

of $1.77 billion. The illegal alien-attributable share of this is $147 million. With the budgeted state share 

attributable to illegal immigration, the total comes out to slightly over $226 million. 

Moreover, to fully account for the costs of providing free or low-price school meals to the children of 

illegal aliens (both foreign and U.S.-born) we must consider recent temporary funding measures and 

account for more permanent spending which began during the COVID-19 pandemic. As mentioned 

in the federal section, from 2020 to 2022 federal spending was significantly, but temporarily, increased 

to allow all pupils to receive free school lunches and breakfasts. Once these benefits expired as of the 

2022-2023 school year, some states decided to either extend free school meals using their own funds 

(e.g., Massachusetts, Nevada, Vermont) or permanently implement state-funded universal free school 

meals (California, Colorado, Maine). 178  California committed to allocating $650 million annually to this 

program; Colorado’s program costs $100 million per year (and is being funded by limiting state income 

tax deductions for households making more than $300,000 a year); and Maine’s program is estimated to 

cost $34 million annually. 179  FAIR estimates that the additional costs of these programs attributable to 

the children of illegal aliens amount to $150 million annually. 180  In total, the state-level burden of illegal 

aliens on school meal funds amounts to $376.6 million. 

Supplemental Security Income (SSI) and other Cash-Related Welfare Programs 

In addition to federal funding and federally-administered state supplements, most states also administer 

their own supplemental SSI payments. Delaware, the District of Columbia, Iowa, Pennsylvania, and 

Rhode Island pay out both Social-Security-Administration-administered state supplements as well as 

their own. 181  Because these state-administered programs vary from state to state, and many of them do 

not release ample budgetary information, FAIR does not endeavor to estimate what proportion of these 

funds are attributable to illegal immigration. 

## Total State Welfare Expenditures 

## Child Care and Development Fund (CCDF)  $171,033,000 

## Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF)  $1,432,105,000 

## Meals in Schools  $376,556,000 

## Total Welfare Expenditures  $1,979,694,000 The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 58 

# Total State Expenditures 

Total State Expenditures 

The total fiscal burden of illegal immigration on state taxpayers has now reached a staggering $115.6 

billion, which is 30 percent more than it was in 2017. The primary reasons for this, aside from a rapid 

increase in the illegal alien population, are that a number of states have opted to expand access to state 

welfare, education, and medical programs to illegal aliens. These expansions have led to taxpayers paying 

tens of billions in additional funding to cover these costs. 

Concerningly, as will be seen in the following section, the taxes paid by illegal aliens to state and 

local governments fall far short of making up for the numerous additional state-funded benefits they 

are receiving. Moreover, with many states set to begin offering even more benefits to illegal aliens, as 

mentioned previously, these costs are only expected to increase even further. 

## Total State and Local Expenditures 

## Total Education Expenditures  $73,190,760,000 

## Total Medical Expenditures  $21,811,439,000 

## Total Administration of Justice Costs  $18,626,836,000 

## Total Welfare Expenditure  $1,979,694,000 

## State and Local Total  $115,608,729,000 The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 59 

# State and Local Taxes Collected 

State and Local Taxes Collected 

As with federal costs, state and local costs are offset - to some degree - by the taxes illegal aliens pay. As 

noted in the Federal taxes portion of this section, proponents of illegal immigration argue that the taxes 

paid by illegal aliens result in a net boon to state and local coffers. However, this is a spurious argument. 

Evidence shows that the tax payments made by illegal aliens fall far short of covering the costs of the 

services they consume. 

It is also important to note that calling illegal alien tax payments a net receipt is a mischaracterization. 

The overall wage depression inflicted on local labor markets by the presence of large numbers of illegal 

aliens willing to work for less than market rates has far-reaching fiscal implications that are often not 

quantified on average balance sheets. Low-wage workers generally access more government benefits 

than higher-paid employees. Furthermore, illegal aliens also tend to remit large portions of their 

earnings back to their home countries, and thus less money is incorporated back into local economies 

and less is paid in local sales and excise taxes. However, because this study looks at the fiscal impacts of 

illegal immigration, and tax collections are a fiscal offset, we do our best to estimate how much of the 

fiscal costs borne by taxpayers are reduced by taxes paid by illegal aliens. The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 60 

Illegal aliens are not typical taxpayers. First, the large percentage of illegal aliens who work in the 

underground economy avoid paying any income tax at all. Those that do work in the formal economy 

often receive back more than they pay to the federal government through refundable tax credit 

programs. Finally, the average earnings of illegal alien households are considerably lower than earnings 

of legal aliens and native-born workers, thus they typically fall into the lowest tax brackets. 

Disposable Income Profile of Illegal Aliens at the State and Local Level 

FAIR estimates there are about 7.9 million illegal aliens participating in the aboveground economy, with 

approximately 7.5 million currently employed. 182  As noted previously, the average household headed 

by an illegal alien earns approximately $40,800 annually. However, those working in the underground 

economy are estimated to earn far less. 

Since a significant portion of state and local taxes are levied on spending instead of income, in forms 

such as sales and excise taxes, it’s important to recognize the negative impact of remittances on the 

amount of state and local taxes collected. The term “remittances” in the context of illegal immigration 

refers to money earned in the United States that is transferred to relatives, friends or business associates 

who still live abroad. 183  A 2019 FAIR study estimates that the average illegal alien remits approximately 

20 percent of their gross income out of the country. This comes out to approximately $8,160. 184 

Remittances by both lawful and illegal aliens harm state and local governments, as they lower overall 

disposable income, local spending, and related revenue. Despite this lower disposable income, illegal 

aliens still often use state and local services that rely on spending-based taxation at rates similar to 

native-born citizens. These include services such as fire and police assistance, public roads, other public 

transportation infrastructure, and public schools. 

Currently, only Oklahoma has a “remittance tax,” which places a $5 or 1 percent fee (whichever 

is greater) on all outgoing, out-of-state money transfers. 185  This tax helps the state recoup lost tax 

dollars stemming from income sent out of the state primarily by immigrants, including illegal aliens. 

It is estimated that if a similar tax were instituted nationwide, the federal and/or state governments 

could recoup more than $2 billion in lost tax revenue from migrants remitting their income to other 

countries. 186 

Factoring in remittances, we construct the disposable income profiles of illegal aliens by first estimating 

their incomes in each state. We then account for the sum of federal taxes paid versus credits received, 187 

as well as the amount of state income taxes paid (in states that have a state income tax) versus credits 

received. Finally, other state taxes, such as property tax, must be considered. Based on the methodologies 

detailed in the Federal taxes portion of this study, as well as the forthcoming sections on specific state 

taxes, the average illegal alien has a disposable income of approximately $28,144 annually. The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 61 

Income Tax Receipts  $5,728,653,000 

As noted in the Federal portion of this cost study, most illegal alien households will have little income tax 

liability, if any at all, and millions more avoid liability by working in the “underground economy.” For the 

most part, this holds true at the state level as well. 

Nearly 30 percent of all illegal aliens in the United States reside within the nine states without a state 

income tax: Texas, Florida, Nevada, Washington, Wyoming, Tennessee, New Hampshire (which only 

taxes dividends and interest), Alaska, and South Dakota. 188  In California, where approximately 21 

percent of the nation’s illegal aliens reside, the tax bracket for those making the estimated wage for illegal 

alien households in the state is a measly 2 percent. 

In addition, FAIR estimates that 25 percent of all illegal alien households work in the underground 

market. This means that a significant majority of illegal aliens will pay little or no state income tax. 

FAIR estimates the total amount of state income taxes paid by illegal aliens by adjusting the nationwide 

average income per illegal alien household higher or lower for each state based on how much the average 

income varies from the overall national average. 189  We then analyze the tax rates for each of these states, 

minus standard deductions, to determine the effective average tax bracket for illegal alien households 

in each state. 190  After using this data to determine the average amount paid per household, we multiply 

that number by the estimated total number of tax-paying illegal alien households employed in the 

aboveground economy. 191  Nationwide, that total comes out to approximately $5.7 billion. 

Property Tax Receipts  $3,152,993,000 

Families who own residences are subject to property taxes. Individuals living in rental property do not 

pay property taxes directly, although their monthly rent is likely calculated to subsidize a portion of their 

landlord’s property taxes. 

For states that host the largest number of illegal aliens, property taxes hover right under the 1 

percent mark. In addition, in many states like Texas and Florida, property can be purchased at prices 

considerably lower than the national average. 

Of course, illegal alien households are far less likely to be homeowners than U.S. citizens. According 

to the Pew Research Center, illegal alien households are half as likely to own property as native-born 

households. 192  Based on data from the 2020 ACS, approximately 70 percent of all households owned their 

own property. This means that, most likely, about 35 percent of illegal alien households own property. 193 

According to the Wells Fargo Home Affordability Calculator, 194  an illegal alien household making the 

average wage in a city with an average cost of living index would be able to afford a residence costing The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 62 

no more than $150,000. Using this as the mean home value and an average annual property tax of 0.90 

percent, it can be estimated that illegal aliens pay approximately $3.2 billion annually in property taxes. 

State Fuel Taxes  $1,440,000,000 

The average state fuel tax for the United States comes out to 38.69 cents per gallon, according to the 

American Petroleum Institute. 195  Average fuel taxes have remained significantly more stable than the 

national gas price average, which currently fluctuates around $3 per gallon, excluding a significant drop 

during much of 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The overall average price for unleaded gasoline 

at the end of 2022 was approximately $3.20 per gallon. 196  As noted earlier in this report, the average 

American purchased approximately 592 gallons of gasoline in 2021, and we estimate that the average 

illegal alien purchased approximately 414 gallons under the assumption that they drive somewhat less on 

average than U.S. citizens and lawfully present migrants. 

Based on these calculations, the average illegal alien driver spends somewhere around $1,325 annually 

on fuel, $160 of which would go to state-level fuel taxes. Based on our earlier estimate that there are 

about 9 million illegal alien drivers in the United States, this means that they contribute approximately 

$1.4 billion in state fuel taxes. This considerable increase since our last report is due to the fact that an 

increasing number of illegal aliens are comfortable driving due to the significant increase in the number 

of states that offer driver’s licenses to illegal aliens. 

State Sales and Excise Tax Receipts 

$4,850,494,000 

To calculate state sales and excise tax receipts, 

we take an alien’s total disposable income, then 

determine what percentage of that will be spent 

on goods and services that are subject to the 

tax. We then estimate the overall average sales 

and excise tax rate for the average illegal alien 

based on their population distribution and the 

applicable tax rates in each state. 

In almost every state, staple groceries and most 

other food items are exempt from sales tax. 

According to the USDA, the average family spent 

approximately 10.3 percent of their disposable 

personal income on groceries in 2021. 197  For The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 63 

illegal alien households, this amounts to $2,896 annually. However, due to their lower average income, it 

can be assumed that they likely spend a higher proportion of their income on groceries. 

Fuel and housing taxes are included separately in this report, so spending on those categories should 

be subtracted as well. The average illegal alien spends about $1,325 annually on fuel, as mentioned 

previously. The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) estimates that the average American family spends 25.9 

percent of their gross income on housing. 198  This totals approximately $10,567 for illegal aliens. Again, 

since their incomes are significantly lower than the average American citizen, it’s almost certain that 

housing costs account for a greater proportion of their budget. 

There are other categories that may be exempt from sales tax in certain states. For example, many digital 

items such as streaming services, e-books, and digital copies of music and movies are exempt in many 

states. Other states exempt certain categories of clothing from sales tax. In addition, many states have 

sales tax holidays. It is difficult to estimate how much illegal aliens are spending on these items. 

Based on the above analysis, we believe a safe assumption is that no more than 30 percent of the 

disposable income from illegal alien households goes toward purchasing goods and services that are 

subject to sales tax. So, based on the population distribution of illegal aliens, 199  their average income, 

and the corresponding tax rates in each state, 200  we estimate that illegal aliens pay a total of $4.9 billion 

annually in sales and excise tax nationwide. 201 The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 64 

# Net State Impact of Illegal Aliens 

## Total State Tax Receipts s

## Income Tax Receipts  $5,728,653,000 

## Property Tax Receipts  $3,152,993,000 

## Fuel Tax Receipts  $1,440,000,000 

## Sales and Excise Tax Receipts  $4,850,494,000 

## Total State Taxes Paid  $15,172,140,000 The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 65 

## The state tax payments made by illegal aliens fall far short of the costs 

## incurred by their presence, as detailed below. These figures negate the 

## argument that illegal aliens represent a net economic benefit to the 

## United States. 

## Total State and Local Expenditures  $115,608,729,000 

## Total State and Local Tax Receipts  -$ 15,172,140,000 

## Net State and Local Fiscal Impact  $100,436,589,000 The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 66 

# Part III: Total 

# Federal and State 

# Fiscal Outlays The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 67 

At the federal, state, and local levels, taxpayers shell out approximately $182 billion to cover the costs 

incurred by the presence of more than 15.5 million illegal aliens, and about 5.3 million citizen children 

of illegal aliens. That amounts to a tax burden of approximately $8,730 per illegal alien family member. 

These figures are before taxes paid by illegal aliens are factored in. The totals with taxes factored in are 

as follows: 

## Total Expenditures 

## Total Federal Expenditures  $66,449,136,000 

## Total State and Local Expenditures  $115,608,729,000 

## Total National Expenditures  $182,057,865,000 

## Net Tax Contributions 

## Net Federal Taxes Paid  $16,219,495,000 

## Net State and Local Taxes Paid  $15,172,140,000 

## Total Net Tax Contributions  $31,391,635,000 

## Total Cost of Illegal Immigration 

## Total National Expenditures  $182,057,865,000 

## Minus Total Tax Contributions  $31,391,635,000 

# Total Fiscal Cost of Illegal Immigration on 

# U.S. Taxpayers: $150,666,230,000 The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 68 

Endnotes  

> 1

Matthew O’Brien, Spencer Raley, Jack Martin. “The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration On United States Taxpayers 

(2017)”, Federation for American Immigration Reform (FAIR), September 2017,  https://www.fairus.org/issue/publications-

resources/fiscal-burden-illegal-immigration-united-states-taxpayers  

> 2

“Gross Domestic Product by State and Personal Income by State, 3 rd  Quarter 2022”, Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. 

Department of Commerce,  https://www.bea.gov/sites/default/files/2022-12/stgdppi3q22.pdf  

> 3

“Small Migrant Populations, Huge Impacts”, FAIR,  https://www.fairus.org/sites/default/files/2020-01/Low-Immigration-

States_web.pdf  

> 4

Total number of U.S. taxpayers is based on the following report: Erica York, “Summary of the Latest Federal Income Tax 

Data, 2023 Update,” Tax Foundation,  https://taxfoundation.org/publications/latest-federal-income-tax-data/  

> 5

The federal government does this by releasing illegal aliens into the country under the expanded use of humanitarian 

parole, and by expanding programs such as Temporary Protected Status. Both of these programs consider illegal aliens to be 

“qualified aliens,” which expands their access to many federal welfare and medical programs.  

> 6

FAIR Research, “2021 Update: How Many Illegal Aliens Live in the United States?” FAIR, April 2022, 

https://www.fairus.org/issue/illegal-immigration/2021-update-how-many-illegal-aliens-live-united-states  

> 7

Stephen A. Camarota, “The Second Generation: Glass Half Empty or Half Full?”, Center for Immigration Studies, 

https://cis.org/Report/Second-Generation-Glass-Half-Empty-or-Half-Full  

> 8

Graph: Participation in Title I, Part A, ED Data Express, U.S. Department of Education, https://eddataexpress.ed.gov/ 

dashboard/title-i-part-a/2020-2021  

> 9

Title I-A Funding Status and Awards, Office of Elementary and Secondary Education, U.S. Department of Education, 

https://oese.ed.gov/offices/office-of-formula-grants/school-support-and-accountability/title-i-part-a-program/funding-

status/  

> 10

“The Elephant in the Classroom: Mass Immigration Imposing Colossal Cost and Challenges on Public Education”, FAIR, 

https://www.fairus.org/sites/default/files/2022-09/FAIR%20Education%20Report%20Sept%202022_1.pdf  

> 11

Title III-A Funding Status and Awards, Office of Elementary and Secondary Education, U.S. Department of Education, 

https://oese.ed.gov/offices/office-of-formula-grants/school-support-and-accountability/english-language-acquisition-state-

grants/funding-status/  

> 12

“The Elephant in the Classroom: Mass Immigration Imposing Colossal Cost and Challenges on Public Education”, FAIR, 

https://www.fairus.org/sites/default/files/2022-09/FAIR%20Education%20Report%20Sept%202022_1.pdf  

> 13

We reach this estimate by examining all available data regarding the demographics of incoming illegal aliens since 2020, The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 69 

and then use that data to create an estimate of how many of those new illegal aliens are minors who are likely to be enrolled 

in schools. Finally, we apply the LEP proportion statistics from our aforementioned Education study to this total.  

> 14

Department of Education’s FY 2022 Congressional Action, U.S. Department of Education, https://www2.ed.gov/about/ 

overview/budget/budget22/22action.pdf  

> 15

“High Standards for All Students: A Report from the National Assessment of Title I on Progress and Challenges Since the 

1994 Reauthorization”, U.S. Department of Education, https://www2.ed.gov/rschstat/eval/disadv/nati.pdf  

> 16

Major Occupation Groups by Nativity and Status, Pew Research Center,  https://www.pewresearch.org/ 

hispanic/2016/11/03/appendix-d-detailed-tables/ph_11-03-16_unauthorized-app-d-13/  

> 17

Home Language Support, Head Start ECLKC, U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, 

https://eclkc.ohs.acf.hhs.gov/culture-language/article/home-language-support  

> 18

Elementary And Secondary School Emergency Relief Fund, Office of Elementary and Secondary Education, 

https://oese.ed.gov/offices/education-stabilization-fund/elementary-secondary-school-emergency-relief-fund/  

> 19

“Frequently Asked Questions (ESSER/GEER Programs),” U.S. Department of Education, 

May 2021, https://oese.ed.gov/files/2021/05/ESSER.GEER_.FAQs_5.26.21_745AM_ 

FINALb0cd6833f6f46e03ba2d97d30aff953260028045f9ef3b18ea602db4b32b1d99.pdf  

> 20

“ESSER III Funding Recommendations Work Session,” Fairfax County Public Schools, July 13, 2021, 

https://go.boarddocs.com/vsba/fairfax/Board.nsf/files/C4VJTV4EAABE/$file/Final%20ESSER%20III%20Funding%20 

Recommendation7.13.21.pdf  

> 21

United States Congress, “Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996,” 

https://www.congress.gov/104/plaws/publ193/PLAW-104publ193.pdf ; see also Abigail F. Kolker, “Unauthorized 

Immigrants’ Eligibility for Federal and State Benefits: Overview and Resources,” Congressional Research Service, November 

29, 2022,  https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R47318  

> 22

Teresa A. Coughlin, Haley Samuel-Jakubos, and Rachel Garfield, “Sources of Payment for Uncompensated Care for the 

Uninsured,” Kaiser Family Foundation, April 6, 2021,  https://www.kff.org/uninsured/issue-brief/sources-of-payment-

for-uncompensated-care-for-the-uninsured/ ; adjustments for inflation, which increased significantly during the COVID-19 

pandemic and resulting government spending sprees, were performed using the U.S. Inflation Calculator available at 

https://www.usinflationcalculator.com/  

> 23

Richard Payerchin, “National rate of uninsured people hits record low 8%, HHS says,”  Medical Economics , August 4, 2022, The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 70 

https://www.medicaleconomics.com/view/national-rate-of-uninsured-people-hits-record-low-8-hhs-says ; for the original 

report see Aiden Lee, Joel Ruhter, Christie Peters, Nancy De Lew, Benjamin D. Sommers, “National Uninsured Rate 

Reaches All-Time Low in Early 2022”, Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, August 2022,  https://aspe.hhs.gov/ 

sites/default/files/documents/15c1f9899b3f203887deba90e3005f5a/Uninsured-Q1-2022-Data-Point-HP-2022-23-08.pdf  

> 24

“Profile of the Unauthorized Population: United States,” Migration Policy Institute, https://www.migrationpolicy.org/ 

data/unauthorized-immigrant-population/state/US; according to 2012 Congressional Budget Office estimates, at least one 

quarter of those without insurance are illegal aliens, see “The Affordable Care Act: Coverage Implications and Issues for 

Immigrant Families,” Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, U.S. Department of Health and Human 

Services,  https://aspe.hhs.gov/reports/affordable-care-act-coverage-implications-issues-immigrant-families-0  

> 25

This figure is based on the percentage of illegal aliens without health insurance as applied to FAIR’s latest illegal alien 

population estimate.  See  “2021 Update: How Many Illegal Aliens Live in the United States?”, FAIR, April 2022,  https:// 

www.fairus.org/issue/illegal-immigration/2021-update-how-many-illegal-aliens-live-united-states  

> 26

Steven A. Camarota, Karen Zeigler, and Jason Richwine, “Births to Legal and Illegal Immigrants in the U.S.,” Center for 

Immigration Studies, October 9, 2018,  https://cis.org/Report/Births-Legal-and-Illegal-Immigrants-US . 

> 27

“Births to foreign-born mothers in the United States,” The Annie E. Casey Foundation, April 2022,  https://datacenter. 

kidscount.org/data/tables/14-births-to-foreign-born-mothers  

> 28

“Births Financed by Medicaid,” Kaiser Family Foundation,  https://www.kff.org/medicaid/state-indicator/births-

financed-by-medicaid/  

> 29

Masanori Kuroki, “Immigrant women and Medicaid-financed births,”  Demographic Research , Vol. 39, Article 31, October 16, 

2018, pp. 871-882,  https://www.demographic-research.org/volumes/vol39/31/39-31.pdf  

> 30

Mary M Reed, John M Westfall, Caroline Bublitz, Catherine Battaglia, and Alexandra Fickenscher, “Birth outcomes in 

Colorado's undocumented immigrant population,” BMC Public Health vol. 5 100, October 4, 2005,  https://pubmed.ncbi. 

nlm.nih.gov/16202159/  

> 31

Andrew Hurst, “The Cost of a C-Section Is More Than $9,000 Greater on Average Than a Vaginal Delivery,” 

Valuepenguin.com, May 3, 2021,  https://www.valuepenguin.com/cost-of-vaginal-births-vs-c-sections  

> 32

“How Undocumented Immigrants Sometimes Receive Medicaid Treatment,” PBS News Hour, February 13, 2013, 

https://www.pbs.org/newshour/health/how-undocumented-immigrants-sometimes-receive-medicaid-treatment ; see also 

C. Annette DuBard and Mark W. Massing, “Trends in Emergency Medicaid Expenditures for Recent and Undocumented 

Immigrants,” JAMA 297(10) 1085-1092, March 14, 2007,  https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/206014  

> 33

“Federally-facilitated Exchange Improper Payment Rate Less Than 1% in Initial Data Release,” Centers for Medicare The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 71 

& Medicaid Services, November 15, 2022,  https://www.cms.gov/newsroom/press-releases/federally-facilitated-exchange-

improper-payment-rate-less-1-initial-data-release ; For FY 2021 see “Financial Audit: FY 2021 and FY 2020 Consolidated 

Financial Statements of the U.S. Government,” U.S. Government Accountability Office, February 17, 2022,  https://www. 

gao.gov/assets/gao-22-105122.pdf  

> 34

“Medicaid Fraud Control Units Fiscal Year 2021 Annual Report,” U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office 

of Inspector General, March 2022,  https://oig.hhs.gov/oei/reports/OEI-09-22-00020.pdf  

> 35

Jennifer Tolbert, Kendal Orgera , and Anthony Damico, “Key Facts about the Uninsured Population,” Kaiser Family 

Foundation, November 6, 2020,  https://www.kff.org/uninsured/issue-brief/key-facts-about-the-uninsured-population/  

> 36

Ibid.  

> 37

“Medicaid Income Eligibility Limits for Adults as a Percent of the Federal Poverty Level,” Kaiser Family Foundation, 

timeframe as of January 1, 2022,  https://www.kff.org/health-reform/state-indicator/medicaid-income-eligibility-limits-for-

adults-as-a-percent-of-the-federal-poverty-level/  

> 38

“Profile of the Unauthorized Population-United States”, Migration Policy Institute, https://www.migrationpolicy.org/data/ 

unauthorized-immigrant-population/state/US  

> 39

“EXHIBIT 22. Medicaid Benefit Spending Per Full-Year Equivalent (FYE) Enrollee by State and Eligibility Group,” 

Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access Commission, February 2022,  https://www.macpac.gov/wp-content/ 

uploads/2022/10/EXHIBIT-22.-Medicaid-Benefit-Spending-per-Full-Year-Equivalent-Enrollee-FYE-by-State-and-

Eligibility-Group-FY-2020.pdf  

> 40

“Immigration status and the Marketplace”, Healthcare.gov, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,  https://www. 

healthcare.gov/immigrants/immigration-status/  

> 41

Jill H. Wilson, “Immigration: ‘Recalcitrant’ Countries and the Use of Visa Sanctions to Encourage Cooperation with Alien 

Removals”, Congressional Research Service, https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/IF/IF11025  

> 42

Matt O’Brien et al., “SCAAP Data Suggest Illegal Aliens Commit Crime at a Much Higher Rate Than Citizens & Lawful 

Immigrants”, FAIR, https://www.fairus.org/sites/default/files/2019-01/SCAAP-Data-Illegal-Aliens-Have-Higher-Crime-

Rate_0.pdf  

> 43

“Alien Incarceration Report,” Fiscal Year 2019, U.S. Department of Justice,  https://www.justice.gov/opa/press-release/ 

file/1328316/download  

> 44

“Inmate Citizenship”, United States Bureau of Prisons,  https://www.bop.gov/about/statistics/statistics_inmate_citizenship. 

jsp  

> 45

“Departments of Justice and Homeland Security Release Data on Incarcerated Aliens”, United States Department of The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 72 

Justice,  https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/departments-justice-and-homeland-security-release-data-incarcerated-aliens  

> 46

“Annual Determination of Average Cost of Incarceration Fee”, United States Bureau of Prisons, 

https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2021/09/01/2021-18800/annual-determination-of-average-cost-of-

incarceration-fee-coif  

> 47

“Alien Incarceration Report,” Fiscal Year 2019, U.S. Department of Justice, https://www.justice.gov/opa/press-release/ 

file/1328316/download  

> 48

“State and Local Cooperation on Immigration Enforcement: ICE Access”, FAIR, https://www.fairus.org/issue/illegal-

immigration/state-and-local-cooperation-immigration-enforcement-ice-access  

> 49

FY2023 Budget in Brief, U.S. Department of Homeland Security, https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/ 

files/2022-03/22-%201835%20-%20FY%202023%20Budget%20in%20Brief%20FINAL%20with%20Cover_Remediated. 

pdf  

> 50

FY23 Budget Overview, U.S. Customs and Border Protection, https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/2022-03/U.S.%20 

Customs%20and%20Border%20Protection_Remediated.pdf  

> 51

Legal immigrants to the United States who are convicted of a crime often lose their status, whether a visa or lawful 

permanent residence, upon conviction, and become illegal aliens subject to removal. Their removal is a cost associated with 

illegal immigration.  

> 52

FY2023 DHS Budget in Brief, DHS  

> 53

State Criminal Aliens Assistance Program, Bureau of Justice Assistance,  https://bja.ojp.gov/program/state-criminal-alien-

assistance-program-scaap/overview  

> 54

FY22 Federal Budget Appropriations Chart, National League of Cities, https://www.nlc.org/wp-content/ 

uploads/2022/03/FY22-Appropriations-Chart.pdf  

> 55

Immigration Court Backlog Tool, TRACImmigration, University of Syracuse,  https://trac.syr.edu/phptools/ 

immigration/court_backlog/  

> 56

Nature of Charge in New Filings Seeking Removal Orders through February 2022, TRACImmigration, University of 

Syracuse, https://trac.syr.edu/phptools/immigration/charges/apprep_newfiling_charge.php  

> 57

Camilo Montoya-Galvez, “Nearly 130,000 unaccompanied migrant children entered the U.S. shelter system in 2022, a 

record”, CBS News, https://www.cbsnews.com/news/immigration-unaccompanied-migrant-children-record-numbers-us-

shelter-system/  

> 58

FY2023 Budget in Brief, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, https://www.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/fy-The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 73 

2023-budget-in-brief.pdf  

> 59

FY22 Byrne Memorial Justice Assistance Grant Program Solicitation, Bureau of Justice Assistance, 

https://bja.ojp.gov/funding/o-bja-2022-171368.pdf  

> 60

Christian Wade, “States deploy about 2,500 National Guard troops to U.S.-Mexico border”, The Center Square, https:// 

www.thecentersquare.com/national/states-deploy-about-2-500-national-guard-troops-to-u-s--mexico-border/article_ 

b043558a-440d-11ed-98b5-37b300fa8344.html  

> 61

“National Gang Threat Assessment – 2009”, Federal Bureau of Investigation,  https://www.fbi.gov/file-repository/stats-

services-publications-national-gang-threat-assessment-2009-pdf/view  

> 62

Kara Clifford Billings, “School Meals and Other Child Nutrition Programs: Background and Funding,” Congressional 

Research Service, updated May 23, 2022,  https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R46234  

> 63

Steven A. Camarota, “Welfare Use by Legal and Illegal Immigrant Households: An Analysis of Medicaid, cash, food, 

and housing programs,” Center for Immigration Studies, September 9, 2015,  https://cis.org/Report/Welfare-Use-Legal-

and-Illegal-Immigrant-Households ; for a more recent update based on 2018 data (which, unfortunately, did not distinguish 

between illegal aliens and legal immigrants) see Steven A. Camarota, “ Welfare Use for Immigrants and Native-Born 

Households,” Center for Immigration Studies, September 1, 2021,  https://cis.org/Camarota/Welfare-Use-Immigrants-and-

NativeBorn-Households  

> 64

“The Elephant in the Classroom: Mass Immigration Imposing Colossal Cost and Challenges on Public Education,” FAIR, 

September 14, 2022,  https://www.fairus.org/issue/illegal-immigration/elephant-classroom-mass-immigration-imposing-

colossal-cost-and-challenges  

> 65

USDA Food and Nutrition Service, “Federal Cost of School Food Programs 1,” data as of October 14, 2022,  https://fns-

prod.azureedge.us/sites/default/files/resource-files/cncost-10.pdf 

66 Steven A. Camarota, “Welfare Use by Legal and Illegal Immigrant Households: An Analysis of Medicaid, cash, food, and 

housing programs,” Center for Immigration Studies, September 9, 2015,  https://cis.org/Report/Welfare-Use-Legal-and-

Illegal-Immigrant-Households  

> 67

See our population and income profile of illegal aliens in the federal tax contributions section of this report for more on 

how we calculate this total  

> 68

“Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program,” USDA Food and Nutrition Service, data as of November 10, 2022, 

https://fns-prod.azureedge.us/sites/default/files/resource-files/34SNAPmonthly-11.pdf  

> 69

“WIC Program Grant Levels by Fiscal Year,” USDA Food and Nutrition Service, updated October 3, 2022,  https://www. 

fns.usda.gov/wic/wic-program-grant-levels-fy The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 74  

> 70

“WIC Program,” USDA Economic Research Service, August 10, 2022,  https://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/food-nutrition-

assistance/wic-program/  

> 71

Steven A. Camarota, “Welfare Use by Legal and Illegal Immigrant Households: An Analysis of Medicaid, cash, food, and 

housing programs,” Center for Immigration Studies, September 9, 2015,  https://cis.org/Report/Welfare-Use-Legal-and-

Illegal-Immigrant-Households  

> 72

“WIC During COVID-19: Participation and Benefit Redemption Since the Onset of the Pandemic,” Food Research & 

Action Center, October 2022,  https://frac.org/wp-content/uploads/wic-during-covid-19-2022.pdf 

Historically, WIC participation was at its peak in 2010 (10 million), declining steadily in subsequent years down to 7 million 

in 2020. See “Figure 1: WIC Participation, 1992–2020,” USDA Food and Nutrition Service, updated February 14, 2022, 

https://www.fns.usda.gov/wic/participant-program-characteristics-2020-charts  

> 73

“WIC Program: Average Monthly Benefit Per Person,” USDA Food and Nutrition Service, data as of November 10, 2022, 

https://fns-prod.azureedge.us/sites/default/files/resource-files/25wifyavgfd$-11.pdf  

> 74

Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, Benefits.gov, accessed February 6, 2023,  https://www.benefits.gov/benefit/613  

> 75

“How Grandparent and Relative Caregivers Can Access Support through the TANF Program,” American Bar Association, 

May 1, 2014,  https://www.americanbar.org/groups/public_interest/child_law/resources/child_law_practiceonline/child_ 

law_practice/vol-33/may-2014/how-grandparent-and-relative-caregivers-can--access-support-thro/  

> 76

“TANF: Total Number of Child Recipients,” U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Office of Family Assistance, 

September 26, 2022,  https://www.acf.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/documents/ofa/fy2022_tanf_caseload.pdf  

> 77

“Federal TANF and State MOE Expenditures Summary by ACF-196R Spending Category, FY 2021,” U.S. Department of 

Health and Human Services Office of Family Assistance, December 13, 2022,  https://www.acf.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/ 

documents/ofa/fy2021_tanf_financial_data_table_20221201.pdf  

> 78

CIS estimates that 2.8 percent of illegal-alien-headed households with children received TANF. Since there are almost 2.7 

million such households, this means that almost 75,000 illegal alien households/families benefited from TANF, making up 

9.4 percent of all TANF-receiving families (based on a FY 2022 monthly average). See “TANF Caseload Data 2022,” U.S. 

Department of Health & Human Services, Office of Family Assistance, current as of January 25, 2023,  https://www.acf.hhs. 

gov/ofa/data/tanf-caseload-data-2022  

> 79

“Child Care and Development Fund Reauthorization,” U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, Office of Child 

Care, May 19, 2022,  https://www.acf.hhs.gov/occ/ccdf-reauthorization  

> 80

“GY 2022 CCDF Allocations (Based on Appropriations),” U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, Office of Child 

Care, current as of July 13, 2022,  https://www.acf.hhs.gov/occ/data/gy-2022-ccdf-allocations-based-appropriations The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 75 

This includes a permanent annual increase of $633 million to federal mandatory and matching funds introduced as part of 

ARP in 2021  

> 81

“ACF Releases Nearly $10 Billion in COVID-19 Relief Funds to State, Territory, and Tribal CCDF Programs,” U.S. 

Department of Health & Human Services, February 4, 2021,  https://www.acf.hhs.gov/occ/news/acf-releases-nearly-

10-billion-covid-19-relief-funds-state-territory-and-tribal-ccdf ; See also “Information Memorandum: ARP Act CCDF 

Discretionary Supplemental Funds,” U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Administration for Children and 

Families, June 11, 2021,  https://www.acf.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/documents/occ/CCDF-ACF-IM-2021-03.pdf  

> 82

We arrived at this figure by taking 9.4 percent of the $9.65 billion in federal CCDF 2022 funding, which is $911 million  

> 83

“Social Security Handbook”, Social Security Administration, last revised April 19, 2017,  https://www.ssa.gov/OP_Home/ 

handbook/handbook.06/handbook-0602.html  

> 84

Steven A. Camarota, “Welfare Use by Legal and Illegal Immigrant Households: An Analysis of Medicaid, cash, food, and 

housing programs,” Center for Immigration Studies, September 9, 2015,  https://cis.org/Report/Welfare-Use-Legal-and-

Illegal-Immigrant-Households  

> 85

We took 1.1 percent of 6.7 million illegal alien households, which helped us arrive at the figure of 73,400 illegal alien 

households likely receiving SSI payments. The average monthly SSI payments, which we updated for inflation because 

they were valid as of December 2021, can be found online in the 2022 Social Security Administration “Annual Statistical 

Supplement”, available at  https://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/statcomps/supplement/2022/7b.html 

We used a similar methodology on the federally-administered state supplements in California, Delaware, the District of 

Columbia, Hawaii, Iowa, Michigan, Montana, Nevada, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, and Vermont, taking into 

account that the illegal alien population (including U.S.-born children) accounts for 32 percent of the total national illegal 

alien (plus children) population  

> 86

Maggie McCarty and Abigail F. Kolker, “Noncitizen Eligibility for Federal Housing Programs,” Congressional Research 

Service, July 23, 2020,  https://sgp.fas.org/crs/misc/R46462.pdf 

It should be noted that the references to HUD data revealed during the Trump administration on mixed-status families was 

scrubbed from the report in the process of updating in January 2023  

> 87

Ibid.  

> 88

Ibid. The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 76  

> 89

This was derived by adjusting the 2017 numbers for illegal alien population growth, and then dividing that total by the 

total number of nationwide program beneficiaries (10.4 million). When applied to the last pre-COVID (2019) federal housing 

assistance spending of $51 billion annually, we arrive at $334 million. See “The Federal Government’s Support for Low-

Income Housing Expanded During the Pandemic,” Peter G. Peterson Foundation, June 24, 2022,  https://www.pgpf.org/ 

blog/2022/06/how-does-the-federal-government-support-housing-for-low-income-households ; “Policy Basics: Federal Rental 

Assistance,” Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, updated January 11, 2022,  https://www.cbpp.org/research/housing/ 

federal-rental-assistance  

> 90

Spencer Raley, “IRS Boss: Not Our Job to Report Identity Fraud Committed by Illegal Aliens”, FAIR 

https://www.immigrationreform.com/2016/04/15/irs-boss-not-our-job-to-report-identity-fraud-committed-by-illegal-aliens/  

> 91

“Average Household Income Before Transfers and Taxes, 2019”, The Distribution of Household Income, 2019, 

Congressional Budget Office,  https://www.cbo.gov/publication/58781#_idTextAnchor015  

> 92

Jessica Semega and Melissa Kollar, “Income in the United States: 2021”, U.S. Census Bureau,  https://www.census.gov/ 

content/dam/Census/library/publications/2022/demo/p60-276.pdf  

> 93

FAIR estimates that 40 percent of the total households with an illegal alien head contains at least one child, as mentioned 

elsewhere in this report. Of those families, it is estimated that the average household size is approximately 4.5. This closely 

mirrors data for immigrant families contained in the U.S. Census Bureau along with those of other reputable research 

organizations. It is important to note that FAIR believes that the percentage of illegal households containing at least one 

child is lower than the overall immigrant total of 47 percent. This is because illegal alien demographics contain a higher 

concentration of single males, and individuals who entered the U.S. illegally but left their families in their home country  

> 94

Jason Richwine and Robert Rector, “The Fiscal Cost of Unlawful Immigrants and Amnesty to the U.S. Taxpayer,” The 

Heritage Foundation, May 6, 2013,  http://www.heritage.org/immigration/report/the-fscalcost-unlawful-immigrants-and-

amnesty-the-us-taxpayer  

> 95

Abby Budiman, “Key findings about U.S. Immigrants”, Pew Research Center,  https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-

tank/2020/08/20/key-findings-about-u-s-immigrants/  

> 96

“Personal Income and Outlays, December 2022”, Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce,  https:// 

www.bea.gov/sites/default/files/2023-01/pi1222.pdf  

> 97

“Foreign-Born Workers: Labor Force Characteristics- 2021”, Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Commerce, 

https://www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/forbrn.pdf  

> 98

In FAIR’s previous iteration of this report in 2017, we estimated that approximately 25 percent of the illegal alien workforce 

participated in the underground economy based on available information (largely from a 2013 report from the Social 

Security Administration, remittance data from World Bank, estimates from other organizations such as Pew Research and the 

Migration Policy Institute, and other fragmented data). While the general political environment has become more favorable to 

illegal aliens in the past couple of years, there is little concrete evidence to suggest that this estimate has changed. The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 77  

> 99

This figure was derived primarily by examining the demographics estimated to have the skills and opportunity to participate 

in higher earning occupational fields. We estimated this figure by tracking available information pertaining to individuals with 

“unmatched arrival records” in high-earning visa categories, such as B-1, H-2B, visa-waiver visitors for business, and other 

minor business-related visa categories, as well as visa overstay data as reported by DHS. We then adjusted these numbers 

to account for individuals who are believed to have left the country, and applied our estimated labor force participation and 

unemployment rates to the final total. 

See “Fiscal Year 2020 Entry/Exit Overstay Report”, U.S. Department of Homeland Security, September 30, 2021,  https:// 

www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/2021-12/CBP%20-%20FY%202020%20Entry%20Exit%20Overstay%20Report_0.pdf; 

“DHS Tracking of Visa Overstays is Hindered by Insufficient Technology”, Office of Inspector General, U.S. Department of 

Homeland Security, May 1, 2017,  https://www.oig.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/assets/2017/OIG-17-56-May17_0.pdf  

> 100

This assumption is based on the fact that while the overall number of DACA recipients has decreased, the total number of 

TPS holders and asylum applicants has increased.  

> 101

“Foreign-born workers with a bachelor’s degree and higher earned more than native born in 2018”, U.S. Bureau of Labor 

Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor,  https://www.bls.gov/opub/ted/2019/foreign-born-workers-with-a-bachelors-degree-

and-higher-earned-more-than-native-born-in-2018.htm  

> 102

Tina Orem, “Standard Deduction: How Much It Is in 2022-2023 and When to Take it”, NerdWallet,  https://www. 

nerdwallet.com/article/taxes/standard-deduction  

> 103

Sabrina Parys and Tina Orem, “2022-2023 Tax Brackets and Federal Income Tax Rates”, NerdWallet,  https://www. 

nerdwallet.com/article/taxes/federal-income-tax-brackets 

> 104

“Individual Taxpayer Identification Number (ITIN) Filers and the Child Tax Credit: Overview and Legislation”, 

Congressional Research Service,  https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R44420  

> 105

“Child Tax Credit”, Policy Issues, U.S. Department of the Treasury,  https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/coronavirus/ 

assistance-for-american-families-and-workers/child-tax-credit  

> 106

This per-capita estimate falls in line with estimates from the Center for Immigration Studies (CIS). However, our final 

estimate is slightly higher than theirs as FAIR’s assessment of the illegal alien population is higher than estimates from CIS. 

See Steven A. Camarota, “Illegal Aliens Get $10.5 Billion from Child Tax Credit in Reconciliation; More than Previously 

Estimated,” Center for Immigration Studies, November 9, 2021,  https://cis.org/Camarota/Illegal-Immigrants-Get-105-

Billion-Child-Tax-Credit-Reconciliation-More-Previously  

> 107

“What You Need to Know about CTC, ACTC and ODC”, Internal Revenue Service,  https://www.eitc.irs.gov/other-

refundable-credits-toolkit/what-you-need-to-know-about-ctc-and-actc/what-you-need-to-know The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 78  

> 108

“Earned Income and Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) Tables, Internal Revenue Service, 

https://www.irs.gov/credits-deductions/individuals/earned-income-tax-credit/earned-income-and-earned-income-tax-

credit-eitc-tables  

> 109

“Earned Income Tax Credit Overview”, National Conference of State Legislatures,  https://www.ncsl.org/research/labor-

and-employment/earned-income-tax-credits-for-working-families.aspx  

> 110

“Basic Qualifications”, Earned Income Tax Credit & Other Refundable Credits, Internal Revenue Service, 

https://www.eitc.irs.gov/tax-preparer-toolkit/frequently-asked-questions/basic-qualifications/basic-qualifications-2  

> 111

“Resident Aliens,” Internal Revenue Service,  https://www.irs.gov/individuals/international-taxpayers/resident-aliens  

> 112

Steven A. Camarota and Karen Zeigler, “Estimating Illegal Immigrant Receipt of Cash Payments from the EITC and 

ACTC”, Center for Immigration Studies,  https://cis.org/Report/Estimating-Illegal-Immigrant-Receipt-Cash-Payments-

EITC-and-ACTC  

> 113

It is important to note here that the Biden administration is utilizing (and arguably misusing) various programs such as 

humanitarian parole to usher apprehended illegal aliens into the country while they await immigration proceedings and 

ultimately provide them with some form of status (even if that status does not mean they are lawfully admitted into the 

country), most of which include work authorization. These illegal aliens are included in this category. Specific data for these 

categories beyond early 2022 is scant. Therefore, as more information on the consequence of these programs become public, 

we can expect this designation to grow considerably.  

> 114

Stephen Goss et al., “Effects of Unauthorized Immigration on the Actuarial Status of the Social Security Trust Funds”, 

Office of the Chief Actuary, Social Security Administration,  https://www.ssa.gov/oact/NOTES/pdf_notes/note151.pdf  

> 115

“Spotlight on SSI Benefits for Noncitizen-2022 Edition”, Social Security Administration,  https://www.ssa.gov/ssi/ 

spotlights/spot-non-citizens.htm  

> 116

We assume that most illegal aliens working in the aboveground economy pay Social Security taxes, and that none of the 

illegal aliens working in the underground economy pay into the program. The same is true for our Medicare estimates.  

> 117

Since the federal government continues to delay the implementation of REAL ID (which would bar most illegal aliens from 

flying), and an increasing number of states offer driver’s licenses to illegal aliens, it's likely that a growing number of illegal 

aliens are now using air travel as a means to move around the country. However, since most illegal aliens are low-income 

earners, it is still unlikely that a large portion of them can regularly afford to travel by air, meaning that their tax contributions 

(currently 7.5 percent of the base ticket cost) would be relatively limited.  

> 118

“Gasoline Explained”, U.S. Energy Information Administration,  https://www.eia.gov/energyexplained/gasoline/use-of-

gasoline.php The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 79  

> 119

‘Deferred Action For Childhood Arrivals- Federal Policy and Examples of State Actions”, National Conference of State 

Legislatures,  https://www.ncsl.org/research/immigration/deferred-action.aspx 

See also “Real ID Frequently Asked Questions for the Public”, U.S. Department of Homeland Security, 

https://www.dhs.gov/archive/real-id-public-faqs  

> 120

Pawel Styrna, “Drivers Licenses for Illegal Aliens: A Bad Policy That Undermines our Immigration Laws, FAIR, August 

2020,  https://www.fairus.org/issue/illegal-immigration/drivers-licenses-illegal-aliens-policy-immigration  

> 121

This estimate is based on previous FAIR research (FAIR’s 2017 Fiscal Cost Study) as well as our previous assessment that 

illegal aliens are less likely to drive in states which do not allow them to obtain drivers licenses, and are less likely to drive as 

much U.S. citizens and lawful migrants due to their lower average income.  

> 122

Megan Brenan, “83% of U.S. Adults Drive Frequently; Fewer Enjoy It a Lot”, Gallup,  https://news.gallup.com/ 

poll/236813/adults-drive-frequently-fewer-enjoy-lot.aspx  

> 123

Gasoline Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs), U.S. Energy Information Administration,  https://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/ 

faq.php?id=10&t=10  

> 124

“Tax Reform- Craft Beverage Modernization Act”, Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau, U.S. Department of the 

Treasury,  https://www.ttb.gov/alcohol/craft-beverage-modernization-and-tax-reform-cbmtra  

> 125

Magdelena Szafarski, Lisa A. Cubbins, and Jun Ying, “Epidemiology of Alcohol Abuse Among U.S. Immigrant 

Populations,” Journal of Immigrant Minor Health vol. 13,4 (2011) 647-58, August 13, 2011,  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ 

pmc/articles/PMC3133815/  

> 126

Race Demographics Statistics on Alcoholism & Treatment, American Addiction Centers,  https://alcohol.org/alcoholism-

and-race/  

> 127

Samuel Stebbins, “How much beer does your state drink? In the thirstiest, about 40 gallons a year per person”, USA 

Today,  https://www.usatoday.com/story/money/2019/09/14/how-much-beer-did-the-average-person-drink-in-every-

state/40109241/  

> 128

Jizzo R. Bosdriesz et al., “Smoking Prevalence among Migrants in the US Compared to the US-Born and the Population 

in Countries of Origin”, PloS one vol. 8,3 (2013),  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3592805/  

> 129

“The Stats on Smoking”, Swedish Health Services,  https://www.swedish.org/classes-and-resources/smoking-cessation/ 

smoking-statistics  

> 130

“Cigarette and Tobacco Taxes”, American Lung Association.  https://www.lung.org/policy-advocacy/tobacco/tobacco-

taxes The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 80  

> 131

“The Elephant in the Classroom: Mass Immigration Imposing Colossal Cost and Challenges on Public Education”, 

FAIR,  https://www.fairus.org/issue/illegal-immigration/elephant-classroom-mass-immigration-imposing-colossal-cost-and-

challenges  

> 132

Figure estimated by applying the share of students who are the children of illegal aliens as estimated in FAIR’s report  The 

Elephant in the Classroom: Mass Immigration Imposing Colossal Cost and Challenges on Public Education  to FAIR's estimate of how much 

the illegal alien population has grown since timeframe covered by the report.  

> 133

“Profile of the Unauthorized Population: United States”, Migration Policy Institute,  https://www.migrationpolicy.org/ 

data/unauthorized-immigrant-population/state/US  

> 134

The Elephant in the Classroom, FAIR  

> 135

Plyler v. Doe , 457 US 202 (1982),  https://www.oyez.org/cases/1981/80-1538  

> 136

The Elephant in the Classroom, FAIR  

> 137

20 U.S.C. § 1091(a)(5),  https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/20/1091  

> 138

U.S.C. § 1623,  https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/8/1623  

> 139

“Tuition Benefits for Immigrants”, National Conference of State Legislatures,  https://www.ncsl.org/immigration/tuition-

benefits-for-immigrants  

> 140

Zaidee Stavely, “Challenges remain for undocumented students to tap financial aid in California”, EdSource,  https:// 

edsource.org/2021/challenges-remain-for-undocumented-students-to-tap-financial-aid-in-california/664079  

> 141

Pawel Styrna, “Birth Tourism,” FAIR, March 2020,  https://www.fairus.org/issue/legal-immigration/birth-tourism . 

> 142

Pawel Styrna, “Birthright Citizenship and Illegal Immigration,” FAIR, March 2020,  https://www.fairus.org/issue/legal-

immigration/birthright-citizenship-and-illegal-immigration  

> 143

Seth Barron, “Undocumented—and Unmeasured: New York’s political leaders obscure the costs of illegal immigration 

under sentimental rhetoric,”  City Journal , September 2, 2016,  https://www.city-journal.org/html/undocumented-and-

unmeasured-14713.html  

> 144

“Undocumented Immigrants in the United States: U.S. Health Policy and Access to 

Care,” The Hastings Center,  https://undocumented.thehastingscenter.org/issuebrief/health-policy-and-access-to-care/  

> 145

Sabrina T. Sanchez, “700,000 undocumented immigrants to be covered in California's Medi-Cal expansion,” ABC10, 

June 29, 2022, https://www.abc10.com/article/news/community/race-and-culture/california-expand-medi-cal-

undocumented-residents/103-3e6111cf-a126-47a9-9bcb-3fc9bb8e5d77; Timothy H.J. Nerozzi, “HHS approves Washington 

state request to offer health insurance to illegal immigrants, citing 'health equity,'” Fox News, December 13, 2022,  https:// 

www.foxnews.com/politics/hhs-approves-washington-state-request-offer-health-insurance-illegal-immigrants-citing-health-

equity The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 81  

> 146

Robin Rudowitz, Elizabeth Williams, Elizabeth Hinton, and Rachel Garfield, “Medicaid Financing: The Basics,” Kaiser 

Family Foundation, May 7, 2021,  https://www.kff.org/report-section/medicaid-financing-the-basics-issue-brief/  

> 147

Teresa A. Coughlin, Haley Samuel-Jakubos, and Rachel Garfield, “Sources of Payment for Uncompensated Care for the 

Uninsured,” Kaiser Family Foundation, April 6, 2021,  https://www.kff.org/uninsured/issue-brief/sources-of-payment-for-

uncompensated-care-for-the-uninsured/  

> 148

“Profile of the Unauthorized Population: United States,” Migration Policy Institute,  https://www.migrationpolicy.org/ 

data/unauthorized-immigrant-population/state/US 

MPI’s estimates of percentages of insured and uninsured illegal aliens were applied to FAIR’s estimates of the total illegal 

alien population in the U.S.  

> 149

Richard Payerchin, “National rate of uninsured people hits record low 8%, HHS says,”  Medical Economics , August 4, 2022, 

https://www.medicaleconomics.com/view/national-rate-of-uninsured-people-hits-record-low-8-hhs-says ; for the original 

report see Aiden Lee, Joel Ruhter, Christie Peters, Nancy De Lew, Benjamin D. Sommers, “ Assistant Secretary for Planning 

and Evaluation, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, August 2022,  https://aspe.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/ 

documents/15c1f9899b3f203887deba90e3005f5a/Uninsured-Q1-2022-Data-Point-HP-2022-23-08.pdf  

> 150

Rudowitz et al., Medicaid Financing, Kaiser Family Foundation  

> 151

Ibid.  

> 152

Eligible Older Adult Expansion Individuals Enrolled in Medi-Cal, CHHS Open Data,  https://data.chhs.ca.gov/dataset/ 

a5ea66bb-df0d-4e4a-bd9f-b73c24f0edc0/resource/7271b885-7340-49e2-ba56-5435b698a972/download/odp-oae-dataset-

august-2022-to-october-2022-12.14.2022.csv  

> 153

Eligible Young Adult Expansion Individuals Enrolled in Medi-Cal, CHHS Open Data, 

https://data.chhs.ca.gov/dataset/32396537-86c9-41cc-b5d2-74e20a15e6c0/resource/e7d1d4f4-009b-4cb0-9467-

a8b4859ca03d/download/yae-odp_2022_q3andoct202212.9.2022.csv  

> 154

SB-75 Full Scope Medi-Cal for All Children Enrollment, CHHS Open Data, 

https://data.chhs.ca.gov/dataset/fbf46fd8-63ca-441f-954c-e2ffb007c34f/resource/8d27e04c-a706-4721-9aa5-

5d1c57c09878/download/sb-75_october-2022_odp.csv  

> 155

“2021 Medi-Cal Facts and Figures Almanac”, California Health Care Foundation, 

https://www.chcf.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/08/MediCalFactsFiguresAlmanac2021.pdf  

> 156

California Disability Impacts, CDC National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities, 2021, 

https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/disabilityandhealth/impacts/pdfs/California_Disability.pdf The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 82  

> 157

California Legislative Analyst’s Office, “The 2022-23 Budget: Analysis of the Medi-Cal Budget,” February 2022,  https:// 

lao.ca.gov/reports/2022/4522/medi-cal-budget-020922.pdf  

> 158

Medical Advisory Committee HBIA meeting Reports, Illinois Department of Healthcare and Family Services 

https://www2.illinois.gov/hfs/About/BoardsandCommisions/MAC/publiced/Pages/Reports.aspx  

> 159

OHP Rate Development, Office of Health Analytics, Oregon Health Authority,  https://www.oregon.gov/oha/HPA/ 

ANALYTICS/Pages/OHP-Rates.aspx  

> 160

House Bill 3352, 81 st  Oregon Legislative Assembly,  https://olis.oregonlegislature.gov/liz/2021R1/Downloads/ 

MeasureDocument/HB3352/Enrolled  

> 161

State Governor Kathy Hochul, “Governor Hochul Announces Historic $20 Billion Multi-Year Healthcare Investment in 

FY 2023 Budget,” April 9, 2022,  https://www.governor.ny.gov/news/governor-hochul-announces-historic-20-billion-multi-

year-healthcare-investment-fy-2023-budget  

> 162

“Medicaid Spending per Enrollee (Full or Partial Benefit),” Kaiser Family Foundation,  https://www.kff.org/medicaid/ 

state-indicator/medicaid-spending-per-enrollee/  

> 163

This figure is derived from an aggregate of comparisons between known values, like state-level incarceration costs in a 

given year for a given jurisdiction, and the SCAAP awards received for that year in that jurisdiction  

> 164

2020 National Averages, National Institute of Corrections, USDOJ,  https://nicic.gov/state-statistics/2020/2020-national-

averages  

> 165

“Table 20, Prisoners in 2020- Statistical Tables”, Bureau of Justice Statistics,  https://bjs.ojp.gov/content/pub/pdf/p20st. 

pdf  

> 166

“Justice Expenditure and Employment Extracts 2017”, Bureau of Justice Statistics,  https://bjs.ojp.gov/library/ 

publications/justice-expenditure-and-employment-extracts-2017-preliminary  

> 167

“Table 11, Prisoners in 2019”, Bureau of Justice Statistics,  https://bjs.ojp.gov/content/pub/pdf/p19.pdf  

> 168

Impact of COVID-19 on State and Federal Prisons, March 2020–February 2021, Bureau of Justice Statistics,  https://bjs. 

ojp.gov/library/publications/impact-covid-19-state-and-federal-prisons-march-2020-february-2021  

> 169

Office of Texas Governor Greg Abbott,  https://gov.texas.gov/news/post/governor-abbott-announces-additional-30-

million-in-grants-to-boost-local-border-security-efforts  

> 170

Office of Texas Governor Greg Abbott,  https://gov.texas.gov/news/post/governor-abbott-lt-governor-patrick-speaker-

phelan-senate-finance-house-appropriations-committee-chairs-announce-additional-874.6-million-for-public-safety-initiatives  

> 171

Office of Arizona Governor Doug Ducey,  https://azgovernor.gov/governor/news/2022/06/governor-ducey-signs-most-

meaningful-border-security-legislation-state-history The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 83  

> 172

8 U.S.C. § 1611,  https://www.ssa.gov/OP_Home/comp2/F104-193.html  

> 173

Ibid.  

> 174

“GY 2022 CCDF Allocations (Based on Appropriations),” U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, Office of Child 

Care,  https://www.acf.hhs.gov/occ/data/gy-2022-ccdf-allocations-based-appropriations  

> 175

“Federal TANF and State MOE Expenditures Summary by ACF-196R Spending Category, FY 2021,” U.S. Department 

of Health and Human Services Office of Family Assistance, December 13, 2022,  https://www.acf.hhs.gov/sites/default/ 

files/documents/ofa/fy2021_tanf_financial_data_table_20221201.pdf  

> 176

“The National School Lunch Program,” Office of Government Affairs, Food and Nutrition Service, September 1990, 

https://dolearchives.ku.edu/sites/dolearchive.drupal.ku.edu/files/files/historyday/originals/hd14_school_lunches_015.pdf  

> 177

Zoe Neuberger and Tina Fritz Namian, “Who Benefits From Federal Subsidies for Free and Reduced Price School 

Meals?” Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, January 30, 2010,  https://www.cbpp.org/research/who-benefits-from-

federal-subsidies-for-free-and-reduced-price-school-meals  

> 178

Mackenzie Wilkes, “States put free school meals on the menu,”  Politico , December 31, 2022,  https://www.politico.com/ 

news/2022/12/31/states-put-free-school-meals-on-the-menu-00075642  

> 179

Ali Tadayon, “Healthier options on the menu as California begins providing free meals for all students,” EdSource, August 

16, 2022,  https://edsource.org/2022/healthier-options-on-the-menu-as-california-begins-providing-free-meals-for-all-

students/676773 ; Sharon Zhang, “Colorado Votes to Provide Universal Free School Meals by Taxing the Wealthy,” Truthout, 

November 10, 2022,  https://truthout.org/articles/colorado-votes-to-provide-universal-free-school-meals-by-taxing-the-

wealthy/ ; “Maine makes free school lunches permanent after federal funding ends,” National Public Radio, August 31, 2022, 

https://www.npr.org/2022/08/31/1120223479/maine-makes-free-school-lunches-permanent-after-federal-funding-ends  

> 180

To arrive at this estimate FAIR employed a complex methodology, which, in simple terms, involved determining how 

many K-12 public school pupils in each state did not receive free or reduced price school meals before the pandemic, and 

how many of them came from illegal alien households. Those percentages were then applied to the annual costs of the new 

universal school meal programs introduced in California, Colorado, and Maine  

> 181

“Understanding Supplemental Security Income SSI Benefits -- 2022 Edition,” Social Security Administration,  https:// 

www.ssa.gov/ssi/text-benefits-ussi.htm  

> 182

See the federal tax contributions section of this report for methodology.  

> 183

Matthew O’Brien, Spencer Raley and Casey Ryan. “The United States Loses $150 Billion Annually in Remittances”, 

FAIR,  https://www.fairus.org/issue/workforce-economy/united-states-loses-150-billion-annually-remittances  

> 184

Ibid. The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 84  

> 185

63 OK Stat § 2-503.1j (2022),  https://law.justia.com/codes/oklahoma/2022/title-63/section-63-2-503-1j/  

> 186

David North, “The Remittance Fee in Oklahoma, Georgia, and in the U.S. Congress”, Center for Immigration Studies, 

https://cis.org/North/Remittance-Fee-Oklahoma-Georgia-and-US-Congress  

> 187

See the federal tax contributions portion of this report for more details on the net amount of taxes paid by illegal aliens.  

> 188

“States With No Income Tax”, Investopedia,  https://www.investopedia.com/financial-edge/0210/7-states-with-no-

income-tax.aspx  

> 189

Average income data can be found at the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics’ “Labor Force Statistics from the Current 

Population Survey” page,  https://www.bls.gov/cps/earnings.htm  

> 190

FAIR sources state tax data from the aggregation of state income tax and deduction information as compiled by the 

reputable Tax Foundation in the “State Individual Income Tax Rates and Brackets for 2022” report,  https://taxfoundation. 

org/publications/state-individual-income-tax-rates-and-brackets/  

> 191

FAIR made these calculations by taking the adjusted average earnings by illegal alien households in each state, subtracted 

standard deductions as set by each state (when applicable), and finally multiplied that taxable income by our estimate of the 

total number of illegal alien households employed in the aboveground economy in each state. More about the average income 

and total number of households can be found in the introduction of the federal taxes section of this report.  

> 192

“IV. Social and Economic Characteristics”, Pew Research Center,  https://www.pewresearch.org/hispanic/2009/04/14/ 

iv-social-and-economic-characteristics/  

> 193

“Profile of the Unauthorized Population: United States”, Migration Policy Institute, 

https://www.migrationpolicy.org/data/unauthorized-immigrant-population/state/US  

> 194

Home Affordability Calculator, Wells Fargo,  https://www.wellsfargo.com/mortgage/home-affordability-calculator/  

> 195

“Gasoline Tax”, American Petroleum Institute,  https://www.api.org/oil-and-natural-gas/consumer-information/motor-

fuel-taxes/gasoline-tax  

> 196

“National Average Gas Prices”, AAA,  https://gasprices.aaa.com/ 

> 197

“Food Prices and Spending”, Economic Research Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 

https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/ag-and-food-statistics-charting-the-essentials/food-prices-and-spending/  

> 198

“Consumer Expenditures-2021”, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, 

https://www.bls.gov/news.release/cesan.nr0.htm  

> 199

Based on FAIR’s annual estimate and distribution of the illegal alien population as previously referenced in this report. The Fiscal Burden of Illegal Immigration on United States Taxpayers 2023 85  

> 200

Janelle Fritts, “State and Local Sales Tax Rates, 2023”, Tax Foundation,  https://taxfoundation.org/publications/state-and-

local-sales-tax-rates/  

> 201

We reached this total by taking the data detailed in this section to create an estimate of the disposable income for illegal 

aliens in each state that is subject to state and local sales tax. We then applied that total to the combined state and local 

average tax rate in each of the 50 states plus Washington, D.C. FAIR is dedicated to promoting public understanding 

and critical thinking about immigration’s impact on 

every aspect of life 

in America. 

United with and supported by more than 500,000 

concerned citizens who are willing to take action to 

secure our nation’s future, we fight battles across the 

country against those who would exploit the national 

immigration policy to enhance their private interests 

or political power. 

We believe our nation can and must have immigration 

policies that are nondiscriminatory and designed to 

serve the societal, environmental, and economic needs 

of our country. Recent polls show that the American 

public feels the same way. 

To learn more abou T FaIr, The need  For   

> Imm Igra TI on re Form

, and wha T you can do , vIsIT  us     

> on The web aT

FaIrus .org .

As America approaches a defining moment it its immigration 

history, your support is crucial to our fight for immigration 

policies that serve the interests of the American people. 

ENCLOSED IS MY DONATION OF: 

$1,000  $500  $250  $100  $50 

$25  Other $_________________ 

PAYMENT METHOD: 

 Check made payable to FAIR 

 Credit Card:  Visa  Mastercard 

Amex  Discover 

_________________________________________________ 

Cardholder’s Name 

_________________________________________________ 

Card Number 

_____________  ____________________________________ 

Expiration Date  CVV 

_________________________________________________ 

Signature 

_________________________________________________ 

Address 

_________________________________________________ 

City  State  Zip 

_________________________________________________ 

Email 

# Stay informed. Get Involved. Make a Difference! Federation for American Immigration Reform 

25 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Suite 330 | Washington, DC 20001 

202.328.7004 | www.FAIRus.org
