Title: Lake County, CA | Official Website

URL Source: https://www.lakecountyca.gov/

Markdown Content:
1.   Latest News & Updates
---------------------

2.   Stay Up To Date With Lake County

1.   If PG&E’s Proposal to decommission Scott Dam and the Potter Valley Project were approved, eliminating Lake Pillsbury, how could it affect Lake County and the broader region? Read On to view a Fact Sheet. Read on... 
2.   During Tuesday's (5/20, 1-2pm) Board of Supervisors meeting, We Serve Veterans, Inc., will facilitate a presentation honoring Lake County Veterans Killed in Action. Military Funeral Ceremony to include ceremonial gunshots from the front Courthouse Steps. Read on... 
3.   The County of Lake’s Public Works Department is excited to announce 16 miles of Cobb Area pavement damaged by the Valley Fire (and subsequent rebuilding efforts) will be reconstructed, beginning in May 2025. Read on for more. Read on... 
4.   The annual burn ban in Lake County starts on Thursday, May 1, 2025 to address concerns over both ?re hazard and air quality. The burn restriction applies to all areas in Lake County. All burn permits expire on April 30, 2025. Read on for more. Read on... 
5.   The Lake County Weed Management Area is delighted to announce its annual “Invasive Weeds Tour for 2025.” Events will be held on May 8 and 9, 2025. Please read on for more information. Read on... 
6.   The Board of Supervisors is seeking applicants to fill one vacancy on the LAKEPORT FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT BOARD OF DIRECTORS. Candidates will be interviewed by the LFPD Board March 25, 2025. App deadline is March 20, 2025. Read On for more, and apply! Read on... 
7.   When the lake reaches 8.0 feet or higher on the Rumsey scale for a twenty-four (24) hour period, Ordinance 3065 requires idle speed when boating within one-quarter mile or less from the shore of Clear Lake. Read On for more. Read on... 
8.   As we prepare for additional rainfall and snow by the end of next week, residents are encouraged to visit the "Prepare" and "Response" tabs at https:/Ready.LakeCountyCA.gov for valuable resources! Read on... 
9.   Friday Night Live Youth Empowerment Program Stands Against Underage Drinking in Lake County. Lake County Behavioral Health Services plays a key role in facilitating these efforts. "Read On" for more information. Read on... 
10.   "Read On" for an Important Announcement from the Lake County Continuum of Care regarding Emergency Solutions Grant Funding Available for Rapid ReHousing and Emergency Shelter Programs! Read on... 
11.   Lake County Behavioral Health Services is pleased to announce implementation of Community Assistance, Recovery, and Empowerment (CARE) Court within Lake County to Assist Individuals with Severe Mental Health Challenges. "Read On" for more. Read on... 
12.   Lake County Behavioral Health Services (LCBHS) has released a Request for Proposals (RFP) to fund innovative programs aimed at reducing opioid-related harm and supporting individuals and families affected by substance use disorders. "Read On" for more! Read on... 
13.   A Public meeting to review and provide design input on the Kelseyville Senior Center Remodel Project will be held at 5245 Third St., Kelseyville, Thursday 12/5, 6-7:30pm. For more information, “Read On” Read on... 
14.   The annual Lake County Burn Ban for 2024 is lifted as of 9:00 am, Friday, November 22, 2024. Residential and Agricultural burn permits can be obtained online at WWW.LCAQMD. NET or by appointment at the District office. “Read On” for more. Read on... 
15.   Golden Mussels (an invasive freshwater bivalve) have been found in several locations in the Port of Stockton and in the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta region. Remember, "Clean, Drain, Dry" when moving a boat between water bodies! Read on... 
16.   The Clerk of the Board of Supervisors invites you to apply for Advisory Boards and Committees. "Read On" for information on available roles, and for a link to our electronic application! Read on... 
17.   The Lake County Probation Department and Rural Communities Housing Development Corporation (RCHDC) will hold a 2nd Community Meeting on November 14, 2024 at 5:30 p.m. on Zoom. "Read On" for Zoom link and further information. Read on... 
18.   The Board of Supervisors emerged from Closed Session at 3:10pm today (10/22) to make this exciting announcement! Gregory Wilkins brings more than a decade of diverse experiences in animal care and leadership roles! Read On to learn more. Read on... 
19.   Do you love Lake County? Do you want to make a difference in the future of your community? The Lake County 2050 Project is working to update General and Area Plans right now. Read On to learn how you can contribute! Read on... 
20.   The United States Board on Geographic Names’s (BGN’s) Domestic Names Committee has created and distributed the “[Frequently Asked Questions] for the proposal to change the name of Kelseyville to Konocti” document. "Read On" for a link to their document. Read on... 
21.   Lake County Probation Department is excited to announce their 3rd Annual Resilient Re-Entry Event, which will offer information and services for justice-involved individuals. 10/11, 10am-4pm, at Woodland Community College’s Lake County Campus! Read on... 
22.   Flags at County offices and facilities are at half-staff Tuesday, September 24, and Wednesday, September 25, to recognize the passing and contributions of Brad Onorato, Deputy Chief of Staff to Congressman Thompson. Read on... 
23.   Lake County Behavioral Health Services, in partnership with Community Behavioral Health, is pleased to announce a resource distribution and community support event to lift up those affected by the Boyles Fire. “Read on” to learn more. Read on... 
24.   The Lake County Continuum of Care has announced 3 grant opportunities through the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD): Renewal Projects; New Domestic Violence Funding; and New CoC Bonus Grant. “Read On” for more! Read on... 
25.   The Premier Local Science Event of 2024 is Taking Place August 15-16 at Robinson Rancheria Conference Center. Register Today to Participate or Volunteer for the historic Clear Lake Science Symposium! Read on... 
26.   Beginning today (Wednesday, 6/26), Lake County youth in custody will again be primarily housed in Mendocino County. Read On for more information. Read on... 
27.   Registration Now Closed - Watch for Future Recreation Opportunities - From 9am-12pm (noon) Tuesday, July 30, Wednesday, July 31, and Thursday, August 1, Lake County Parks and Recreation will host a FREE Summer Day Camp at Lakeside Park Read on... 
28.   Visit https://www.countyoflakenews.com/join/ today to sign up to receive the 1st edition. These engaging, and easy to read, monthly newsletters, will be available in English and Spanish, starting tomorrow, June 5! Read on... 
29.   Born and raised in Lake County, Ruddock Borre brings 25 years of leadership experience in government organizations. This appointment is effective July 8, 2024. Read on for more information. Please join in welcoming Ms. Ruddock Borre home! Read on... 
30.   Workshop for current and prospective business owners will be held from 10am-2pm at Lower Lake Town Hall, 16195 Main St, Lower Lake, CA, 95457. Read on... 
31.   Visit www.lakecountyprt.com to view and comment on the plan! You can also provide comment in person at any of the three County Library branches, or the Public Services Department (333 Second St., Lakeport, 95453) Read on... 
32.   The County of Lake is very pleased to announce Glen March has been appointed Director of Public Works effective Monday, June 29, 2024. Will concurrently serve with present Director, Scott DeLeon, Monday June 3, 2024, through Sunday June 28, 2024. Read on... 
33.   The County of Lake is very pleased to announce Rachael Dillman Parsons has been appointed Director of the County of Lake’s Social Services Department. This appointment is effective Wednesday, May 15, 2024. Read on... 
34.   The United States Fish and Wildlife Service will present their Conservation Strategy for the Clear Lake Hitch during the May 21 meeting of the Board of Supervisors. “Read On” for a link to the Draft Strategy and more information. Read on... 
35.   The Lake County Children’s Council’s Resilient Lake County Subcommittee invites you to join their Comprehensive Prevention Plan Launch Event May 23, 2024, 11am-2pm at Robinson Rancheria. Register by May 16! Read on... 
36.   CA Department of Water Resources-awarded funds will support analysis of the effects of PG&E’s proposed Decommissioning of Scott Dam. Read on... 
37.   The annual burn ban in Lake County starts on Wednesday, May 1, 2024 to address concerns over both fire hazard and air quality. The burn restriction applies to all areas in Lake County. Read on... 
38.   Special high lake level boating restrictions have been lifted; Chapter 15 Recreation Ordinance restrictions still apply. Please Read On for more information, and a link to Lake County’s standard Boating regulations. Read on... 
39.   Please join, 5:30pm at Xabatin Community Park, 800 North Main Street, Lakeport. This event will raise awareness of resources available to unhoused and housing insecure individuals in the Lakeport area. Dinner provided by Kiwanis of Lakeport! Read on... 
40.   Assistant County Administrative Officer (ACAO) Stephen L. Carter, Jr., has additionally been appointed Interim Director of the County of Lake’s Social Services Department, effective May 4, 2024. Read on... 
41.   At 10am, or soon thereafter, on Tuesday, 5/21, the Board of Supervisors will conduct a Public Hearing for consideration and presentation of Fire Mitigation Fee Nexus Studies and an Ordinance Amendment Updating Chapter 27 - Mitigation Fees. Read on... 
42.   Board of Supervisors Chambers in the Courthouse (255 N. Forbes Street, Lakeport, CA 95453). Public testimony regarding the Fire Mitigation Fee Program and Nexus Study on behalf of the Lake County Fire Agencies. Read on! Read on... 
43.   The Countywide Community Visioning Forum Planning Committee will next meet Monday, March 18, 2024, at 7pm. This group presented 2023's "Honoring ALL Voices" Public Forum series, and will consider recommendations flowing from that work. Read on... 
44.   On Tuesday, March 12, 2024, the Lake County Board of Supervisors approved the establishment of Big Valley Advisory Council (BVAC). Any person who resides in the boundaries of the Kelseyville Planning Area may apply to sit on the BVAC Board! Read on... 
45.   Effective March 1, 2024, Lake County Animal Care and Control's after-hours on-call services will be suspended. Please read on for more information. Read on... 
46.   Reduced Boating Speed Enforced When Operating a Motor Boat Within One-Quarter Mile of Shore While Lake Levels are High in Clear Lake. Watch for Floating and Submerged Debris Throughout Clear Lake. Read on... 
47.   During their Tuesday, February 6, meeting, the Lake County Board of Supervisors formally appointed Anthony Arton Health Services Director. Arton is an experienced Public Health leader with additional experience in emergency services! Read on... 
48.   The Lake County Water Resources Department’s Lakebed Management team and Lake County Sheriff’s Office’s Marine Patrol Division encourage boaters to exercise extra caution operating motorboats on Clear Lake due to debris. Read on... 
49.   The Cobb Community Center (Little Red Schoolhouse) at 15780 Bottle Rock Rd, Cobb, CA 95426, will be open daily as a Warming Center, 8am-6pm, until further notice. “Read On” for more information on available services. Read on... 
50.   Lake County OES encourages residents and business owners who sustained damage to their primary structure as a result of the Late January/Early February Winter Storms to report damages. “Read On” for more information. Read on... 
51.   Business Assistance Workshops will be held on select Wednesdays and Thursdays through April 26, 2024. There is no cost to attend, but space is limited. “Read On” for registration details, and Register Today! Read on... 
52.   Boil Water Advisory Issued for Southern Half of Clear Lake Following Sewage Overflow Incident, Please Read On Particularly if You Draw Water Directly from Clear Lake Using a Private Intake Read on... 
53.   Hearing to be held Tuesday, 1/9/2024, at 10:45 A.M. in the Board of Supervisors Chambers at 255 N. Forbes Street, Lakeport. Public Comment will be taken. Please “Read On” for more details regarding this Hearing. Read on... 
54.   Michelle Irace began service as Principal Planner Monday, December 4. Community Director Development Director, Mireya Turner, “Could not be more thrilled” Ms. Irace has chosen to apply her decade-plus of experience in Lake County! Read on... 
55.   This holiday season, Dr. Noemi Doohan and the Lake County Health Services team encourage Lake County residents to “Spread Cheer - Not Viral Infections.” “Read On,” for tips to keep your loved ones safe as you celebrate! Read on... 
56.   Redwood Community Services (RCS) is now operating and supporting the emergency shelter (as of today, December 1)! Newly renamed "Xamitin Haven" (at 1111 Whalen Way, Lakeport) is open 24/7, currently accommodating 35 established guests. Read on... 
57.   Members of the public will be aware multiple incidents of youth opioid overdose have recently occurred in Lake County. These are tragic and stark reminders consuming drugs, even once, can prove fatal. Read on... 
58.   In December 2023 or January 2024, the Bookmobile will embark on its Welcome Tour. Its regular route will begin in 2024. Thanks to all residents who shared their service needs to inform the initial plan for the Bookmobile! Read on... 
59.   Lake County's annual Burn Ban was lifted Monday, October 23, at 9am. Please "Read on" for information on burn permits and more. Read on... 
60.   Ray Buenaventura, Chief Public Defender, wants to work with you to promote community-focused, holistic Public Defense in Lake County. "Read on" to learn more about Ray's vision and how you can help. Read on... 
61.   Property Tax bills with Whittier Return Address (P.O. Box 6011) ARE legitimate. Bills will be mailed out beginning the week of October 23. Please "Read On" for more information from the Treasurer-Tax Collector's Office! Read on... 
62.   Do you live along or near the Soda Bay Corridor? If you missed Monday evening's Soda Bay Corridor Evacuation Planning Meeting, you can view the presentation slides and access our online survey by clicking "Read on..." Read on... 
63.   Promoting the well-being of every County resident is among the Lake County Board of Supervisors' highest priorities. "Read on..." for a Statement from Chair Pyska on recent changes to Health Services Department Leadership. Read on... 
64.   CalFresh recipients living in Cobb zip code 95426 who have not yet received replacement benefits due to the power outages in August 2023 will have 30 percent of their August 2023 benefits replaced. Read on... 
65.   Noemi C. Doohan, MD, PhD, MPH, has been appointed Public Health Officer for the County of Lake. The Ceremonial Oath of Office will be administered tomorrow, 9/12; scheduled for 1:30pm, it will not be taken up earlier than that time. Read on... 
66.   On Tuesday, September 19, at 11am, the County of Lake will be hosting a small and micro business owner training in Kelseyville, focused on “Business Start-up and Expansion in 2023.” Read On to learn more, and Register Today! Read on... 
67.   The Lake County Department of Public Works (DPW) invites you to a public meeting on development of a Soda Bay Corridor Evacuation Plan. Monday, September 25, from 4:30-7:30pm. Riviera Heights HOA clubhouse. Read on... 
68.   Funds are available in two $123,123 grants: 1) a Formula Allocation Grant for Rapid Rehousing Programs only; and 2) a Regional Competition Grant for Emergency Shelter or Rapid Rehousing Programs. Deadline: 10/1, 11:59pm PST Read on... 
69.   Lake County has recently observed a concerning uptick in West Nile Virus (WNV) activity. County Public Health and Vector Control leaders provide guidance on how residents can protect themselves from this mosquito-borne disease. Read on... 
70.   Continuum of Care (LCCoC) announces availability of $113,627 in combined federal grant funding for providers of homeless services projects across Lake County, offered by the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). Read on... 
71.   With high temperatures expected to persist over much of the next week, many members of Lake County's communities will be seeking opportunities to escape the heat. Read on for heat safety information and more! Read on... 
72.   August 31 is International Overdose Awareness Day and Lake County Behavioral Health Services would like to recognize all of those lost to drug overdose and those struggling with addiction. Learn more about how to raise awareness! Read on... 
73.   NWS’ Eureka Office has issued an Excessive Heat Watch for much of Lake County Friday morning, July 14, through Sunday evening, July 16. "Read on" for options to Beat the Heat. Read on... 
74.   Remember, personal use, “Safe and Sane,” fireworks are only legal when purchased and used within the incorporated boundaries (City Limits) of the City of Lakeport. Fireworks are illegal in the City of Clearlake and unincorporated Lake County. Read on... 
75.   Effective Tuesday, June 27, 2023, Zonehaven AWARE has changed its name to Genasys Protect. Only the name is changing. Zone information and zone numbers will not be changing. "Read on..." to learn more! Learn more... 
76.   Cyanobacteria blooms have recently worsened, and are visible in many portions of Clear Lake. This 2023 Cyanobacteria informational release contains helpful general guidance on what to do when cyanobacteria blooms are present. Read on... 
77.   Seven students graduated from Job Readiness, Courage to Change Substance Abuse, and Coping with Anger classes on June 21, 2023. Programs were hosted by the Probation Department, Coletrain Transformation Station and Woodland Community College! Read on... 
78.   Funds will be used to support development of Countywide Evacuation and Climate Adaptation Plans, and other measures to make Lake County communities more resilience to climate change. Congrats to the County Office of Climate Resiliency! Read on... 
79.   On Thursday, June 29, at 6pm, the County of Lake will partner with Community Development Services (CDS) to host a small and micro business owner training at Middletown Art Center, “Business Start-up and Expansion in 2023” Register Today! 
80.   3er Foro de Vision Comunitaria: Honrando a Todas la Voces Lunes, 26 de Junio, 2023 a las 6:00 p.m. -- 3rd Honoring All Voices Community Visioning Forum Monday, June 26, 6pm Read on... 
81.   2do Foro de Visión Comunitaria: Honrando a Todas las Voces - 2nd Honoring All Voices Community Visioning Forum Monday, May 15, 6pm Read on... 
82.   The County of Lake Parks and Recreation Division recently constructed an outdoor trail and installed multiple fitness stations at Lucerne Creek Park. Visit 6238 9th Avenue, Lucerne, to Enjoy These New Public Amenities! Read on... 
83.   The $220,638 in AB 178-enabled grant funding will be used to establish a Mobile Probation Service Center, which will greatly enhance supports for unhoused individuals. Read on... 
84.   Thursday, May 11, 9am-noon, Aquatic Weed Tour at Clark’s Island! Friday, May 12, 9am-noon, Weeds and Wildflowers at the McLaughlin Reserve! Read on... 
85.   This Saturday, April 15, 2023, Lake County Water Resources will be hosting a Highland Springs Vegetation Cleanup Day, from 9am-2pm. Participants will be meeting at the Highland Springs Disc Golf Course. Read on... 
86.   Honoring All Voices: A Community Visioning Forum Monday, April 24, 6pm - Honrando todas las voces: Un foro de visión comunitaria lunes 24 de abril, 6 p. m. Read on... 
87.   The Lake County Water Resources Department urges Highland Springs recreators to continue to exercise caution, due to storm-related damage. Due to wet conditions, trails remain closed to equestrians and bikers. Read on... 
88.   The County is hosting a Parks, Recreation and Trails-focused Visioning Workshop 4/11 from 6:30-8:00 pm at 255 N Forbes Street, Lakeport. Pop-up events in Lakeport and Clearlake 4/11 and 4/12. Read on... 
89.   Visit Lake County's Agricultural Center at 883 Lakeport Blvd, Lakeport. 325 specimens and 254 different Lake and Mendocino County species from twenty different butterfly and moth families! Monday-Friday, 8am-5pm. Read on... 
90.   We are very pleased to announce BOS appointments of Lloyd Guintivano as County Counsel, effective March 25, 2023, and Assistant County Administrative Officer, Stephen L. Carter, Jr., as Behavioral Health Director, effective March 18. Read on... 
91.   The Lake County Office of Emergency Services invites the public to learn more about the 2023 Local Hazard Mitigation Plan Update Thursday, March 23, 6pm, at 19400 Hartmann Rd, Hidden Valley Lake, CA, 95467. Read on... 
92.   Highland Springs Recreation Area will remain closed until further notice, due to hazardous conditions caused by storm damage. This closure includes the Range and Rod and Gun Club. Read on... 
93.   With the National Weather Service (NWS) now reporting storm activity is slowing, some enhanced services will be suspended tomorrow morning (3/1), at 7am. Thank You to ALL Who Have Sacrificed to Help Others Endure the Storm Read on... 
94.   The County of Lake is opening an additional Warming Center at the Middletown Senior Center, 21256 Washington St., Middletown, 95451. This location will be open 7pm-7am today (Monday, February 27), and tomorrow (Tuesday, February 28). Read on... 
95.   If you or someone you know is homebound and unable to access critical services, please call 707-262-4431 for information on available resources, and emergency needs. Read on... 
96.   Residents are encouraged to prepare now for the possibility of further power outages. Light mountain snow expected today in some portions of Lake County, and heavier snowfall, “down to 1,000 feet Sunday night into Tuesday.” Gusty winds Monday. Read on... 
97.   Passionate about ensuring Indigent Defense Services are effectively and equitably provided? The Board of Supervisors is seeking applicants to fill vacancies on the Lake County Public Defenders’ Advisory Committee! Read on... 
98.   US Forest Service Report Shows Tree Mortality is Worsening in Lake County. County officials and partners are heavily engaged in efforts to secure funding. Read on... 
99.   Are you passionate and knowledgeable about locally-led long term sustainable conservation and stewardship of natural resources and agriculture? Apply today to fill a vacancy on the Lake County Resource Conservation District Board of Directors! Read on... 
100.   “Small Business Success in 2023” Event to be Held 2/22 (NEXT WEDNESDAY!), 6-7:30pm, at Lake County Volunteer Firefighter’s Association Brick Hall, 16374 Main Street, in Lower Lake – REGISTER TODAY! Read on... 
101.   Please join Monday's Visioning Meeting via Zoom (all are welcome), and consider becoming a member of this important committee! Read on... 
102.   Boaters advised to exercise caution today (February 3) through February 13, due to Seine Net Fishing for the Clear Lake Common Carp And Goldfish Management Project (Robinson Rancheria Press Release) Read on... 
103.   Parks, trails, and recreation programs encourage an active lifestyle, and we want all Lake County residents to have access. Please provide input on the future of our facilities and programs through our Community Needs Survey by March 10! Read on... 
104.   UPDATED: Stormwater runoff from recent rains has washed trees and other floating debris into the Clear Lake. County residents and visitors are advised to take caution to avoid such hazards when boating. Read on... 
105.   If an Invasive Mussel Introduction Occurred, How Would the County Respond? - Virtual Forum to be held Thursday February 2, 2023 at 10am via Zoom, read on for registration information! Read on... 
106.   The Lake County Sheriff's Office of Emergency Services shares an update on the ongoing winter storm event, outlook for the future, and tips to help residents prepare. Read on... 
107.   The National Weather Service's Eureka Office is predicting 6-12 inches of additional rain between now and Tuesday for portions of Lake County. Sign up for LakeCoAlerts and Nixle and view other informational resources. Read on... 
108.   Information and resources for Lake County residents from the County's Water Resources Department, including links to real-time and forecasted lake and stream conditions. Read on... 
109.   The Office of the State Fire Marshal (OSFM, CAL FIRE) advises a Public Hearing on Fire Hazard Severity Zones will be held in the Lake County Board Chambers 1/24 at 9:15am. Read on... 
110.   County Library Branches and Peer Support Centers can provide respite from the wind and rain. Locations, Hours 
111.   The County of Lake's Invasive Species Coordinator, Angela De Palma-Dow, recently served as lead author of an Ecosphere-public journal article! The research team found Climate Change, not wildfires, primarily drives Clear Lake Water Quality. Read on... 
112.   After 41 years of service, Lake County’s Auditor-Controller, Cathy Saderlund retired yesterday, December 13. Saderlund's commitment to not only do her job with integrity but see that the work effectively continues beyond her time is truly remarkable! Read on... 
113.   On Tuesday, December 13, the Board of Supervisors, colleagues and Congressman Thompson Commended Sheriff Martin for outstanding service. Wife, Crystal Martin, emphasized, “If you think he’s a great Sheriff, you should see him as a husband and father.” Read on... 
114.   On Tuesday (12/13), the Board of Supervisors presented a Proclamation of Commendation, celebrating Ms. Ringen’s upcoming retirement (effective December 30, 2022) after 32 years of distinguished service! Read on... 
115.   During yesterday’s (12/13) meeting, the Lake County Board of Supervisors celebrated the rich contributions of Michelle “Micki” Dolby, in her more than 16 years of service to the County of Lake. Read on... 
116.   With the MyAccount feature, you can customize your viewing experience, sign up for notifications, and engage in information you care about. Read on... 

View All News
