Title: Enhancing Rural Representation Through Electoral System Diversity

URL Source: https://scholarship.richmond.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=3418&context=lawreview

Published Time: Wed, 26 Apr 2023 23:19:05 GMT

Markdown Content:
University of Richmond Law Review University of Richmond Law Review 

Volume 57 

Issue 3 

Overlooked America: Addressing Legal 

Issues Facing Rural United States  Article 6 

4-1-2023 

# Enhancing Rural Representation Through Electoral System Enhancing Rural Representation Through Electoral System 

# Diversity Diversity 

Henry L. Chambers Jr. University of Richmond School of Law 

Follow this and additional works at:  https://scholarship.richmond.edu/lawreview 

Part of the  Courts Commons , Election Law Commons , Judges Commons , Law and Politics Commons ,

Law and Society Commons , State and Local Government Law Commons , and the  Supreme Court of the 

United States Commons 

Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 

Henry L. Chambers Jr., 

Enhancing Rural Representation Through Electoral System Diversity , 57  U. Rich. L. 

Rev.  851 (2023). 

Available at:  https://scholarship.richmond.edu/lawreview/vol57/iss3/6 

This Symposium Articles is brought to you for free and open access by the Law School Journals at UR Scholarship 

Repository. It has been accepted for inclusion in University of Richmond Law Review by an authorized editor of UR 

Scholarship Repository. For more information, please contact  scholarshiprepository@richmond.edu .851 

ENHANCING RURAL REPR ESENTATION THROUGH 

ELECTORAL SYSTEM DIV ERSITY 

Henry L. Chambers, Jr. *

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION ................................ ................................ ............. 85 3

I. RURAL VIRGINIA AND THE NATURE OF 

REPRESENTATION ................................ ............................... 85 7

A. First -Past -The -Post, Single -Member Districting ......... 859

B. Voting and Representation ................................ .......... 86 2

C. Representing Rural Virginia ................................ ....... 871 

D. Rural Problems, Urban Problems, and Virtual 

Representation ................................ ............................. 87 3

II. ELECTORAL DIVERSITY ................................ ....................... 87 8

A. Multimember Districting ................................ ............. 879

B. Ranked Choice Voting ................................ ................. 884

1. The Process ................................ ............................. 884

2. RCV’s Possible Effects ................................ ............ 88 8

3. Primary Elections ................................ ................... 890 

4. Single Transferable Vote ................................ ........ 891 

III. THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY , ELECTORAL DIVERSITY ,

AND CIVIC PARTICIPATION ................................ .................. 892

A. Multimember Districting and the General 

Assembly ................................ ................................ ...... 892           

> *Professor of Law & Austin E. Owen Research Scholar, University of Richmond School
> of Law ;J.D., University of Virginia School of Law ,199 1; B.A., University of Virginia , 1988.
> Professor Chambers was a member of Governor Northam’s Commission to Ex amine Racial
> and Economic Inequity in Virginia Law, which met from 2019 –2022. He thanks those re-
> sponsible for the Law Review Symposium, hopes for all the best for those in Overlooked
> America, and thoroughly appreciates his family for all their support. 852 UNIVERSITY OF RICHMO ND LAW REVIEW [Vol. 57 :851

B. Civic Engagement Bet ween Elections .......................... 89 4

C. Expanding Multimember Districting and 

Ranked -Choice Voting ................................ ................. 89 5

CONCLUSION ................................ ................................ ................ 89620 23 ] ENHANCING RURAL REPR ESENTATION 853 

INTRODUCTION 

Rural Virginians face disparities in outcomes regarding health -

care, access to important infrastructure, and other services. 1 Some 

disparities may be related to rurality. 2 The sparseness of popula-

tion in rural areas may limit the sites where people may access 

services, 3 trigger ing the need to travel significant distances to ob-

tain goods and services in such areas. 4 Lim ited access may lead to 

disparities even when the quality of goods and services in rural 

areas is high. The disparities affect all rural Virginians, 5 but dis-

proportionately affect rural Virginians of color. 6 The causes of the 

1. COMM ’N TO EXAMINE RACIAL & ECON . INEQUITY IN VA. L., IDENTIFYING VIRGINIA ’S

RACIALLY DISCRIMINATORY LAWS & INEQUITABLE ECONOMIC POLICIES 34 –37 ( Jan. 6, 2022) ,

https://www.law.virginia.edu/system/files/news/2022/2022 -report.pdf [https://perma.cc/4R8 

2-NU EV] [hereinafter COMMISSION REPORT ] (discussing various disparities in rural areas 

of Virginia). 

2. The Center for Rural Virginia was created, in part, to consider and address such 

disparities. See VA. CODE ANN . § 2.2 -2720 (2022). 

3. See SETY ABOOALI , VA. STATE OFF . OF RURAL HEALTH , POLICY BRIEF : FOCUS ON 

SCHOOL -BASED MENTAL HEALTH FOR RURAL CENTRAL VIRGINIA ’S YOUTH 1 (2022), https:// 

www.vdh.virginia .gov/content/uploads/sites/76/2022/06/final -Focus -on -School -base d-Men-

tal -Health -for -Rural -Central -VAs -Youth.pdf [https://perma.cc/Y9JM -BAT2] (“Those living 

in rural areas have historically been more susceptible to poor mental health days and de-

creased acc ess to healthcare care services. ”). 

4. See Thomas C. Ricketts, III, Geography and Disparities in Health Care , in 

GUIDANCE FOR THE NATIONAL HEALTHCARE DISPARITIES REPORT 149, 155 –57 (E laine K. 

Swift ed., 2002); SETY ABOOALI , VA. STATE OFF . OF RURAL HEALTH , POLICY BRIEF : FOOD 

INSECURITY IN SOUTHWEST VIRGINIA 2 (2022),  https://www.vdh.virginia.gov/conten t/uplo 

ads/sites/76/2022/05/Policy -Brief -Food -Insecurity -in -SWVA.pdf [https://perma.cc/U7P6 -L2 

F8] (noting long distances many people in Southwest Virginia must travel to reach a super-

market); Surekha Carpenter & Sonya Ravindranath Waddell, The Landscape of the Rural 

Fifth District: Does Race Matter? , FED . RSRV . BANK OF RICH .: REG ’L MATTERS (March 11, 

2021), https://www.richmondfed.org/research/regional_economy/r egional_matters/2021/rm 

_0 3_11_21_landscape_race [https://perma.cc/B743 -5UMY] (“Compounding the existing 

health challenges in rural areas is the recent increase in rural hospital closures that is im-

pacting all rural residents ’ access to health care. ”). 

5. See ABOOALI , supra note 4, at 1 ( “The majority of the Southwest Virginia region is 

federally designated as rural, and has the highest food insecurity and lowest socioeconomic 

status in Virginia. ”). 

6. COMMISSION REPORT , supra note 1, at 34 ( “The challeng es discussed affect all rural 

residents, but disproportionately impact people of color in rural areas. Our hope is that these 

proposals will target the issues most affecting people of color, while also benefiting all rural 

Virginians. ”). Economic dispariti es have historically fallen on Virginians of color. Anita S. 

Earls, Kara Millonzi, Oni Seliski & Torrey Dixon, Report, Voting Rights in Virginia: 1982 –

2006 , 17 S . CAL . REV . L. & SOC . JUST . 761, 763 –64 (2008) (discussing racial disparities in 

Virginia in th e 1980s, 1990s, and 2000s); Carpenter & Waddell, supra note 4 ( “Rural places 

have long had higher poverty rates than urban areas in the United States. More specifically, 854 UNIVERSITY OF RICHMO ND LAW REVIEW [Vol. 57 :851 

disparities are complex and my riad, and may be based on race, 

class, or a combination of both. 7

The lack of political representation of those who most acutely 

experience the disparities may help explain the disparities. 8 The 

interests of racial and political minorities in rural Virgi nia may not 

be fully represented in Virginia’s legislative bodies, including the 

General Assembly. 9 Those rural Virginians have the right to vote, 

however, their interests may be ignored by their representatives. 

Legislation that may help minimize disparit ies may not be forth-

coming because the interests of those suffering the disparities may 

not acutely concern their representatives. 10 New programs to help 

ease the rural disparities may never be proposed. 11 Proposed pro-

grams may receive insufficient support f rom rural legislators and 

legislators from non -rural areas of Virginia. 12 The lack of represen-

tation of th e interests of some rural Virginians may stem from the 

a legacy of opportunity gaps between white and black southerners has contributed to an 

even higher poverty rate for rural black residents. ”).

7. See COMMISSION REPORT , supra note 1, at 34 ( “[T]his Commission decided to inves-

tigate the intersection of rural issues and race issues in the Commonwealth and propose 

solutions to disparities borne disproportionately by people of color in rural areas. ”); Carpen-

ter & Waddell, supra note 4 ( “From slavery through Jim Crow, to the higher poverty rates 

of today, this article seeks to connect the unique history of our rural black population to 

today ’s social and economic rural environment. ”).

8. This may be a specific manifestation of a more general problem. See KHALILAH 

BROWN -DEAN , ZOLTAN HAJNAL , CHRISTINA RIVERS & ISMAIL WHITE , JOINT CTR . FOR POL . 

> AND

ECON . STUD ., 50 YEARS OF THE VOTING RIGHTS ACT : THE STATE OF RACE IN POLITICS 23 

(2015), https://jointcenter.org/wp -content/uploads/2019/11/VRA -report -3.5.15 -1130 -amupda 

ted.pdf [https://perma.cc/2AK9 -4F8B] ( “The results to this point suggest that black voices 

are less equal than others when it comes to policy. ”). 

9. That would be consistent with national trends. See Daniel T. Lichter & James P. 

Ziliak, The Urban -rural Interface: New Patterns of Spatial Interdependence and Inequality 

in America , 672 ANNALS AM. ACAD . POL . & SOC . SCI . 6, 7 (2017) ( “Rura l and small -town 

America is often left at the sidelines in policy discussions, far removed from the American 

cultural and economic mainstream. ”). 

10 . See ABOOALI , supra note 3, at 1 ( “Expanding School -based Mental Health (SBMH) 

services is an opportunity t o focus on the youth population ’s mental health needs in an ef-

fective and convenient way, but legislation is needed to address rural school boards ’ limited 

funding resources in order for SBMH to be implemented. ”). 

11 . See COMMISSION REPORT , supra note 1, a t 6 –7, for a list of recommended policies 

and legislation to ease rural disparities that have been largely ignored. 

12 . A significant amount of potential legislation dies in committee or on the floor of the 

General Assembly. See Jackie DeFusco, Here ’s What Bills Lived, Died and Remain Unde-

cided in Divided General Assembly , WAVY -TV , https://www.wavy.com/news/politics/virgini 

a-politics/heres -what -bills -lived -died -and -remain -undecided -in -divided -general -assembly/ 

[https://perma.cc/7XKD -DBQY] (Mar. 14, 2022, 7 :14 PM); Dave Ress, Running Out of Time: 

Life and Death of Bills in the General Assembly , ROANOKE TIMES , https://roanok e.c om/ne 

ws/state -and -regional/govt -and -politics/running -out -of -time -life -and -death -of -bills -in-the -

general -assembly/article_8317056e -5f 3e -544a -90f7 -eb1bd6c3dddb.html [https://per ma .cc/ 4

A6K -ABR4] (Mar. 3, 2023) (discussing bills that died without passage). 20 23 ] ENHANCING RURAL REPR ESENTATION 855 

electoral system used to select representatives, rather than from 

personal failings of rural representatives. 

The representation Virginians receive flows from the dominant 

electoral system in use in Virginia: first -past -the -post (“FPTP”), 

single -member districting (“SMD”). 13 That system may facilitate a 

narrow vision of representation that may lead rural representa-

tives to ignore the interests of the portion of their constituency that 

most starkly faces disparities. The candidate who garners the most 

first -place votes in an FPTP, SMD voti ng system wins the election, 

even if that share of the votes is significantly less than a majority. 14 

The FPTP, SMD system may encourage an elected representative 

to focus on their perceived supporters and to ignore the interests 

of political minorities who may not have supported the representa-

tive. It may spawn representatives who have little incentive to rep-

resent the interests of all or even most of their constituents because 

a tension exists between representing one’s entire constituency 

and focusing on keeping one’s supporters happy. Losing focus on 

representing one’s supporters may lead to losing reelection. 15 How-

ever, Virginia need not invariably use a n FPTP, SMD system. 

Virginia law allows electoral mechanisms other than FPTP, 

SMD systems, such as mult imember districting (“MMD”) and 

ranked choice voting (“RCV”). 16 MMD involves a single district 

choosing multiple representatives, resulting in the possibility that 

more voters be represented by at least one representative who will 

support their interests. 17 RCV involves electing candidates based 

13 . For example, all Congressional representatives and General Assembly members are 

chosen from single -member districts. See VA. CODE ANN . §§ 24.2 -302.2(A), -303.3(A), -

304.3(A) (2016) .

14 . See Allan Ides, Approximating Democracy: A Proposal for Proportional Representa-

tion in the California Legislature , 44 LOY . L.A. L. REV . 437, 439 –40 (2011) (discussing the 

mechanics of FPTP systems); Richard H. Pildes & G. Michael Parsons, The Legality of 

Ranked -Choice Voting , 109 CALIF . L. REV . 1773, 1780 –81 (2021) (noting the mechanics of 

FPTP voting) .

15 . See Ford O ’Connell, Opinion, A Surprising Loss for Unsurprising Reasons , U.S. 

NEWS & WORLD REP.: OP. (June 14, 2014), https://www.usnews.com/opinion/blogs/ford -ocon-

nell/ 2014/06/14/eric -cantor -lost -touch -with -his -constituents -before -primary -loss [https://per 

ma. cc/GF4A -K857] (arguing incumbent Virginia Congressman Eric Cantor ’s loss to Dave 

Brat i n a primary election was due to Cantor failing to prioritize constituent service). 

16 . See VA. CODE ANN . §§ 24.2 -304.1, -673.1 (Cum. Supp. 2022) .

17 . See George Bundy Smith, The Multimember District: A Study of the Multimember 

District and the Voting Rights Act of 1965 , 66 ALB . L. REV . 11, 11 (2002) [hereinafter Smith, 

Multimember Districts and the Voting Rights Act ] ( “A [MMD] may be defined as one in which 

the same voters elect more than one representative to serve a geographical area t hat could 

be divided into several areas, each represented by a single person. ”). The United States 

Senate is technically elected through MMDs with staggered elections. Each state has two 856 UNIVERSITY OF RICHMO ND LAW REVIEW [Vol. 57 :851 

on the electorate’s overall preference for candidates, rather than 

solely based on the first -place votes a candidate receives. 18 It may 

allow political minorities to influence or determine who is elected, 

allowing thos e groups to help choose representatives who are more 

likely to support legislation that might help those groups. Now 

might be the time for Virginia to use MMD and RCV more widely 

to help political and racial minorities in rural areas have their 

voices hear d. 

This Article suggests electoral system diversity could enhance 

the representation of the interests of political and racial minorities 

from rural areas in Virginia’s legislative bodies. Experimentation 

with electoral systems to advance democratic and rep ublican inter-

ests is common in American history. 19 Expanding the use of elec-

toral mechanisms explicitly authorized under Virginia law, such 

as MMD and RCV, could change the nature of political representa-

tion in rural Virginia, yield more effective represent ation for racial 

and political minorities in rural Virginia, and help ease the dispar-

ities those rural Virginians face. 

Part I of this Article discusses the state of rural representation 

in Virginia. Part II discusses MMD and RCV as electoral options. 

Part III suggests a plan for redistricting the General Assembly 

based on MMD and RCV, noting such a plan could increase civic 

engagement.                                      

> senators selected from the same district —the entire state. Some have suggested U.S. sena-
> tors should run from districts inside states. See Terry Smith, Rediscovering the Sovereignty
> of the People: The Case for Senate Districts , 75 N.C. L. REV .1, 73 –74 (1996).
> 18 .Virginia Republicans use RCV to select some of their general election candidates.
> See DEB OTIS ,FAIR VOTE ,RANKED CHOICE VOTING IN VIRGINIA :ACONSER -VATIVE SOLUTION
> FOR PARTY NOMINATIONS 1(2022), https://fairvote.org/report/rcv_ in_virginia_report/ [https:/
> /perma.cc/38J8 -A6ZZ] (“The Virginia GOP has used [RCV] in party -run nom ination con -
> tests for the last two years as a way to unite the party behind nominees with broad support
> who will have wide appeal in general elections. ”).
> 19 .See Pildes & Parsons, supra note 14, at 1777 (“Just as we have experimented in the
> past with at -large or single -member district elections for Congress, state legislatures, and
> local governments, the trade -offs between SCV and RCV present a policy question for voters
> and legislators concerning how best to realize vario us democratic values and aims through
> the choice of election systems. ”).

20 23 ] ENHANCING RURAL REPR ESENTATION 857 

I. RURAL VIRGINIA AND THE NATURE OF REPRESENTATION 

Political and racial minorities may not be fully represented when 

an FPTP, SMD system is in use and a single party dominates. 

Given this Article’s focus on rural Virginia, the issue may appear 

to be whether political and racial minorities can enjoy full repre-

sentation in a rural Virginia that is dominated by the Republican 

Party. However Republican representatives are not necessarily the 

problem. The problem is an electoral system that encourages what-

ever party is in charge to drift away from a broad vision of repre-

sentation toward a narrow one. The drift, exacerbated by hi ghly 

partisan politics, is the problem. 

Virginia politics ha s been transformed in the last sixty years. 

The dominance of Republicans in rural Virginia is relatively new. 

For much of the century following the end of Reconstruction, Vir-

ginia —like most Sout hern states —was solidly Democratic. 20 In the 

wake of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 (“VRA”), which helped turn 

many parts of the South from solid Democratic to solid Republican, 

the Democratic Party and Republican Party have moved to near 

parity in the Commo nwealth. 21 In addition, in the 1960s, the Su-

preme Court of the United States’ one -person, one -vote (“OPOV”) 

jurisprudence upended redistricting by requiring legislative dis-

tricts have approximately equal populations. 22 Redistricting in Vir-

ginia has always be en contentious. 23 However, in the wake of the 

VRA and OPOV, Virginia’s redistricting battles morphed from dis-

agreements over whether rural interests are overrepresented ver-

sus urban interests to fights over the partisan divide between                                  

> 20 .See generally DEWEY W. GRANTHAM ,THE LIFE &DEATH OF THE SOLID SOUTH :A
> POLITICAL HISTORY 26 (paperback reprt. 1992) (discussing the predominance of the Demo-
> cratic Party in southe rn states during the early twentieth century).
> 21 .The VRA ’s effect took time. See Michael S. Kang, Hyperpartisan Gerrymandering ,
> 61 B.C. L. REV . 1379, 1411 –12 (2020) (noting the Republican Party was effectively nonexist-
> ent in the South, and would take tim e to emerge after the VRA ’s passage).
> 22 .Reynolds v. Sims, 377 U.S. 533, 577 (1964); Kirkpatrick v. Preisler, 394 U.S. 526,
> 531 (1969).
> 23 .See Micah Altman & Michael P. McDonald, A Half -Century of Virginia Redistricting
> Battles: Shifting from Rural Malap portionment to Voting Rights to Public Participation ,47
> U. RICH .L. REV .771, 798 (2013) ( “From the Commonwealth ’s inception, Virginia ’s redis-
> tricting has been mired in politics, as is common in other states. The political battles have
> pitted urban and ru ral regions, Democrats and Republicans, and Whites and Blacks, and
> were sometimes narrowly targeted to punish specific politicians. ”).

858 UNIVERSITY OF RICHMO ND LAW REVIEW [Vol. 57 :851 

Republicans and Democr ats. 24 These developments have changed 

the nature of districting and representation in Virginia. 

Rural Virginia’s current political geography is clear. 25 The west-

ern and southern portions of Virginia are largely rural and tend to 

elect Republican representat ives. 26 The eastern and northern parts 

of Virginia are more densely populated with large cities and coun-

ties that tend to elect Democratic representatives. 27 However, all 

regions of Virginia contain rural areas 28 and a ll rural areas of Vir-

ginia are home to si gnificant proportions of Republicans and Dem-

ocrats. 29 

The interests of p olitical minorities should be fully represented 

in every region of Virginia, whether the area is dominated by a 

single party or not. However, partisanship and the dominant 

FPTP, SMD sys tem in Virginia make full representation increase -

24 . Post -1960 census redistricting focused on urban -rural divide rather than partisan 

divide because Democrats held signi ficant majorities in both houses of the General Assem-

bly. Id. at 779. “Following the 1970 census, the primary redistricting issue was again how 

to reconcile urban population growth with rural political interests. ” Id. at 782. “The 1980s 

continued the urban and rural battles in the House of Delegates, with Northern Virginia 

hoping to gain three seats in the House of Delegates, partially due to continued population 

growth and a perceived shortchange of one seat during the previous decade. ” Id. at 785. 

25 . How ever, Virginia ’s physical geography can be defined in various ways. See, e.g. ,

UNIV . OF VA., DEMOGRAPHICS RSCH . GRP ., VIRGINIA ’S REGIONS 1–2 (2014), https://demograp 

hics.coopercenter.org/sites/demographics/files/RegionalProfiles_28July2014_0.pdf [https:// 

perma.cc/N9CR -JDKH] (dividing Virginia into eight regions based on socioeconomic and de-

mographic characteristics); Regions in Virginia , VA. TOURISM CORP ., https://www.virginia .

org/places -to -visit/regions/ [https://perma.cc/RQV9 -MGUM] (dividing Virginia i nto ten re-

gions based on tourism destinations); The Regions of Virginia , VA. MUSEUM OF HIST . & CUL -

> TURE

, https://virginiahistory.org/learn/regions -virginia [https://perma.cc/GD3L -N356] (di-

viding Virginia into five regions based on geography). 

26 . Virginia General Assembly, BALLOTPEDIA , https://ballotpedia.org/Virginia_Genera 

l_Assembly [https://perma.cc/G8PV -TV4G]. 

27 . See id. Of course, there are anomalies including rural areas in eastern and northern 

Virginia and urban areas in western and southside Virg inia. 

28 . See VA. STATE OFF . OF RURAL HEALTH , VIRGINIA RURAL HEALTH PLAN 2022 -2026 ,

at 1 -2 (2022), https://www.vdh.virginia.gov/content/uploads/sites/76/2022/01/Virginia -Rural 

-Health -Plan_Book_POST_1 -24 -22_LR.pdf [https:/perma.cc/F8WV -JS6W] ( “Rural Virgi n-

ia ’s geography extends from the wild horse drawn beaches of the Eastern Shore, to the 

northwestern mountains of the Shenandoah Valley, to the Appalachian highlands of the 

southwest, and into the former tobacco regions of Central and Southside Virginia. ”).

29 . See Lichter & Ziliak, supra note 9, at 11 –12 ( “Rural America is heterogeneous and 

defies facile generalizations. The same is true of urban America, but this has almost always 

been understood implicitly. ”); Dante J. Scala & Kenneth M. Johnson, Politic al Polarization 

Along the Urban -rural Continuum? The Geography of the Presidential Vote, 2000 –2016 , 672 

ANNALS AM. ACAD . POL . & SOC . SCI . 162, 163 (2017) ( “Voters who reside in the most remote 

rural places, especially if they are dominated by farming, typi cally favor Republicans. Yet 

Democrats find electorally important pockets of strength among voters residing in rural 

areas dominated by recreational amenities and services. ”). 20 23 ] ENHANCING RURAL REPR ESENTATION 859 

ingly difficult. Political and racial minorities may need voting 

mechanisms that increase their ability to elect their candidates of 

choice to guarantee full representation of their interests .30 The re-

mainde r of this Part considers FPTP, SMD systems, the nature of 

representation, who represents rural Virginia, and why issues of 

rural representation may not be resolved through virtual represen-

tation. 

A. First -Past -The -Post, Single -Member Districting 

FPTP, SMD is dominant in the United States and Virginia. 31 

Elections using the system are simple to understand. Typically, 

each voter votes for a single candidate, with the candidate with the 

most votes winning. 32 The system has its virtues and its draw-

backs. Its sim plicity and its clear identification of a specific repre-

sentative to represent a district’s constituency are virtues. 33 How-

ever, the system is prone to gerrymandering and manipulation 

30 . On occasion, some representatives may not represent the community that elected 

them. See Collins v. City of Norfolk, 883 F.2d 1232, 1238 –39 (4th Cir. 1989) (involving an 

official who noted she has received substantial voting support from Black voters, but “she 

did not characterize herself as a representative of the Black comm unity.”) .

31 . SMD has been dominant for decades. See Daniel D. Polsby & Robert D. Popper, 

Ugly: An Inquiry Into the Problem of Racial Gerrymandering Under the Voting Rights Act ,

92 MICH . L. REV . 652, 664 (1993) (“The American political system is at a fork in the road, 

and it will have to choose between explicitly recognizing some kind of antigerrymandering 

[sic] principle or moving away from the single -member district system as its dominant rep-

resentational form.”). That has not always been the case. See Co nference, The Supreme 

Court, Racial Politics, and the Right to Vote: Shaw v. Reno and the Future of the Voting 

Rights Act , 44 AM. U. L. REV . 1, 89 –90 (1994) (transcribing Professor Pamela Karlan’s com-

ments on the prevalence of MMD at the local level in the past); Paul A. Diller, Toward Fairer 

Representation in State Legislatures , 33 STAN . L. & POL ’Y REV . 135, 168 (2022) (“Because 

FP [T] P SMDs raise serious democratic problems under our current geopolitical landscape, 

the time is ripe for states to consider m ore drastic changes to the districting system. While 

FP [T] P SMDs seem hardwired into the American political culture, they became widespread 

only relatively recently. MMD’s [sic] were quite common until the 1960s, and survive in a 

small number of states tod ay, largely in muted form.”). 

32 . Benjamin P. Lempert, Note, Ranked -Choice Voting as Reprieve from the Court -Or-

dered Map , 119 MICH . L. REV . 1785, 1791 (2021) (“Most American jurisdictions, of course, 

vote in a different way: they use the “single -choice vote” (SCV ), where a ballot asks for one 

preference, not a ranking, and where the winner is the candidate who earns the most 

votes. ”). 

33 . See Jonathan S. Gould, The Law of Legislative Representation , 107 VA. L. R EV . 765, 

779 (2021) ( “One of the few advant ages of a system of single -member geographic districts is 

that it creates a strong representational link between each legislator and a well -defined set 

of geographic constituents. A system of single -member districts promotes legislative respon-

siveness to c onstituents, local civic and political organizations, and local governments. ”); 

Ides, supra note 14, at 441 –42 ( “One of the potential advantages of plurality/majority sys-

tems is that such systems create an identifiable link between the elected representati ve and 

the residents of a geographically distinct SMD. ”). 860 UNIVERSITY OF RICHMO ND LAW REVIEW [Vol. 57 :851 

that may not produce a legislature of representatives that repre-

sent the interests of the entire populace. 34 Those are significant 

drawbacks. 

FPTP elections can trigger majoritarian concerns. When more 

than two candidates are on a ballot, the winner may not earn a 

majority of votes. That is why FPTP systems are also deemed “plu-

rality” systems. 35 Plurality systems are sensible alternatives to 

elections that require the winner garner a majority of votes regard-

less of the number of candidates. 36 Systems that allow more than 

two candidates on the ballot but require the winner to g arner a 

majority of votes may require many rounds of voting to determine 

a winner. 37 

If several candidates are on the ballot, an FPTP election may not 

identify the candidate generally acceptable to the largest number 

of voters. The winner of an FPTP electio n may win with a small 

fraction of the votes, with the winning candidate disliked by a ma-

jority of voters. In addition, the election may be affected by third -

party or independent “spoiler” candidates who change an election’s 

outcome by siphoning votes from major party candidates who 

would otherwise win. 38 The election may also be skewed by split-

ters , candidates from the same party who divide the vote among 

multiple candidates of the same party thereby allowing a different 

party’s candidate to win. 39 Given con cerns with spoilers and split-

ters, FPTP voting may encourage voters to vote strategically, 

34 . See Ides, supra note 14, at 449 ( “Winner -take -all does not mean that the winner 

shares the power with the loser; it means loser -take -nothing. This problem can be com-

pounded at the legislative le vel where a majority of the SMD -elected legislators represents 

significantly less than a majority of the electorate —a mere majority of the majority. ”). 

35 . See Ides, supra note 14, at 439. 

36 . See Pildes & Parsons, supra note 14, at 1796 (discussing use of plurality voting to 

avoid the need to rerun elections until a candidate won a majority of votes); see also T. Quinn 

Yeargain, Democratizing Gubernatorial Selection , 14 NE. U. L. REV . 1, 8 (2022) (noting var-

ious jurisdictions that require a candidate win a majority of the vote to avoid a runoff). 

37 . The recent race for Speaker of the U.S. House of Representatives is an example of 

the perils of requiring majority votes. See Annie Karni, McCarthy Wins Speakership o n 15th 

Vote After Concessions to Hard Right , N.Y. TIMES , https://www.nytimes.com/2023/01/06/us/ 

politics/house -speaker -vote -mccarthy.html [https://perma.cc/ED9Q -Y66N] (Jan. 7, 2023). 

38 . Pildes & Parsons, supra note 14, at 1781 –82 (discussing spoiling in w hich a minor -

party candidate siphons votes from a major -party candidate allowing a less popular major -

party candidate to beat a more popular candidate from a different major party). Spoilers 

may not exist. If a race is won by the candidate who wins the mos t votes, the “spoiler ” does 

nothing more than provide an alternative who is preferred to the top two candidates. Third -

place candidates are a feature of the system, rather than a bug in the system. 

39 . See id. at 1781. 20 23 ] ENHANCING RURAL REPR ESENTATION 861 

rather than for their preferred candidate. 40 Some voters who be-

lieve their candidate has no chance to win may not vote at all. 41 

SMD has benefits and drawbacks. It all ows a constituency to 

bond with its representative, who is directly accountable as the 

constituency’s only representative. 42 The relationship between rep-

resentative and represented should create a loop , in which commu-

nication regarding legislation and what i s occurring in the district 

can constantly circulate between the legislator and constituents. 

Ironically, SMD may limit the relationship between a representa-

tive and some constituents. If the representative ignores constitu-

ents whom the representative does not believe supported the rep-

resentative’s election, those constituents may have no relationship 

with the representative and may be left without effective represen-

tation. 43 

Political minorities would appear to have little opportunity to be 

elected and rep resented in an SMD system. However, a political or 

racial minority’s ability to elect its candidate of choice in an SMD 

system depend s on the size of its districts and how the political or 

racial minority is distributed in the jurisdiction. The smaller the 

districts and the more concentrated or segregated the political or 

racial minority is, the more easily that minority can be drawn into 

a district that allows the group to elect its candidate of choice. 44 

For example, a small city dominated by Democrats can anchor a

smaller Virginia House of Delegates district in a broadly rural area 

far more easily than it can anchor a much larger state senate dis -

40 . Pildes & Parsons, supra note 14, at 1782; see also Rob Richie, Patrick Hynds, Stevie 

DeGroff, David O ’Brien & Jeremy Seitz -Brown, Toward a More Perfect Union: Integrating 

Ranked Choice Voting with the National Popular Vote Interstate Compact , 15 HARV . L. &. 

POL ’Y REV . 145, 155 (2020) ( “There are several problems afflicting American elections that 

RCV can help solve: unrepresentative outcomes, toxic partisanship, lack of choice, the need 

for ‘strategic voting, ’ and low turnout. The most common way of voting in the United 

States —single -choi ce, plurality voting —contributes to all of these problems. ”). 

41 . See Grant M. Hayden, Abstention: The Unexpected Power of Withholding Your Vote ,

43 CONN . L. REV . 585, 590 –92 (2010) (discussing the application of various economic theories 

to explain voter abstention). 

42 . See Henry L. Chambers, Jr., Enclave Districting , 8 WM. & MARY BILL RTS . J. 135, 

146 –47 (1999) ( “Single -member districting reflects a belief that representative democracy 

works best when voters can closely identify with a representative, a nd a representative can 

closely identify with her constituency. This style of representation requires an easily iden-

tifiable constituency and a single representative selected by that constituency. ”). 

43 . Some argue this explicitly. Ides, supra note 14, at 449 ( “The victor after an SMD 

election does not, in fact, represent the entire constituency; rather, the victor represents 

only that part of the constituency that voted for him or (less likely) her. ”). 

44 . A residentially concentrated minority group is the basis for drawing compact, ma-

jority -minority districts. See Bush v. Vera, 517 U.S. 952, 979 (1996). 862 UNIVERSITY OF RICHMO ND LAW REVIEW [Vol. 57 :851 

trict in the same area .45 Whether a political minority can win a 

district and gain representation in an SMD syst em can be a matter 

of luck. 

B. Voting and Representation 

The right to representation is linked to, but distinct from, the 

right to vote. The right to vote is individual; the right to represen-

tation is collective. At the Founding, voting was treated as a privi-

lege. 46 Now, voting is typically open to all U.S. citizens who are 

eigh teen years of age or older who have not been convicted of a 

crime. 47 Voting allows citizens to protect their political interests. 48 

Voting and representation are intertwined, but the ability to 

vote does not guarantee the ability to elect a representative who 

will fully represent the voter’s interests. In a perfect democratic 

republic, representatives would represent all their constituents 

equally by fully presenting the interests of each of their constitu-

ents in the relevant legislative body. 49 However, rather than pro-

tect the right to representation, American law merely protects the 

right to not have one’s vote diluted. 50 

Protections against vote dilution are afforded to groups and te nd 

to focus on the ability to win elections in a districted system. For 

example, racial vote dilution doctrine ensures that groups of voters 

are not limited in their ability to elect their candidates of choice 

based on their race when their numbers are “la rge and geographic -

45 . Virginia is comprised of 40 state senate districts and 100 state house districts, yield-

ing state senate districts 2.5 times the size of st ate house districts. See VA. CODE ANN . §§ 

24.2 -303 .3, -304.03 (2016). 

46 . Historically, the franchise was given to those with a specific recognized stake in 

government’s functioning, such as the need to protect their property. See Minor v. Hap-

persett, 88 U.S. 162, 172 –74 (1874) (listing voter franchise provisions in Founding -era state 

constitutions); see also Joshua A. Douglas, The Right to Vote Under Local Law , 85 GEO .

WASH . L. REV . 1039, 1046 –48 (2017) (discussing property requirements at the Founding). 

47 . See U.S. C ONST . amends. XIV, XV, XIX, XXIV, XXVI. 

48 . See Chambers , supra note 42, at 138 (“At its core, the one -person, one -vote doctrine 

established that all citizens have an equal right to choose their political representatives, 

advance their polit ical interests, and influence government.”). 

49 . That may not be possible, especially when groups of constituents are diametrically 

opposed to one another. See Gould, supra note 33, at 795 –97. 

50 . Racial minorities may have less practical representation th an others. See BROWN -

DEAN ET AL ., supra note 8, at 23 (“A minority should not have as much influence as a ma-

jority. But this does not explain why Blacks win less than all of the other small minorities 

we examine (such as the poor, those without a high scho ol degree, young Americans , or 

religious minorities ).”). 20 23 ] ENHANCING RURAL REPR ESENTATION 863 

ally compact to constitute a majority in [an SMD].” 51 However, ra-

cial vote dilution protections are narrow and are getting nar-

rower. 52 

Outside of the racial vote dilution area, protection against vote 

dilution is primarily based on the OP OV doctrine. The doctrine en-

sures votes have relatively equal weight by ensuring representa-

tives in a legislature represent approximately the same number of 

people. It does not guarantee that any specific voter or political mi-

nority inside a district exerc ises political power. Neither OPOV nor 

racial vote dilution doctrine guarantees a general right to repre-

sentation to political groups when a group’s number is insufficient 

to win specific elections. A slightly deeper discussion explains how 

a right to repr esentation is or is not protected. 

The protection the OPOV doctrine provides —limited as it is —is 

relatively new. The Supreme Court initially resisted recognizing 

an OPOV doctrine, denying the claim that malapportioned dis-

tricts could trigger an equal prot ection claim based on a citizen’s 

exercise of unequal voting power in Colegrove v. Green .53 In Co-

legrove , the plaintiffs argued that, when electing a representative, 

an individual vote in a district nine times the size of another dis-

trict is one -ninth as po werful as an individual vote in the smaller 

district, violating the Equal Protection Clause as a result. 54 The 

Court declined to address the issue, deeming it nonjusticiable. 55 

Two decades later, the Court revisited the issue, finding one citi-

zen’s vote shou ld not have substantially more power than another 

citizen’s vote. 56 It ruled a substantial difference in the power of two                  

> 51 .See Thornburg v. Gingles, 478 U.S. 30, 50 (1986). For a discussion of racial vote
> dilution doctrine, see Henry L. Chambers, Jr., Readying Virginia for Redistricting after a
> Decade of Election Law Upheaval , 55 U. R ICH . L. R EV . 227, 257 –63 (2020).
> 52 .The Supreme Court ’sforthcoming decision in Merrill v. Milligan may clarify racial
> vote dilution doctrine. No. 21 -1086 (U.S. argued Oct. 4, 2022).
> 53 .328 U.S. 549, 556 (1946).
> 54 .Id. at 566 –68 (Black , J., dissenting) (noting Illinois ’largest congressional district
> contained 914,000 people and its smallest contained 112,116 people).
> 55 .Id. at 553 –54 ( “Nothing is clearer than that this controversy concerns matters that
> bring courts into immediate and active relations with party contests. From the determina-
> tion of such issues this Court has traditionally held aloof. It is hostile to a democratic system
> to involve the judiciary in the politics of the people. And it is not less pernicious if such jud -
> ici al intervention in an essentially political contest be dressed up in the abstract phrases of
> the law. ”).
> 56 .Gray v. Sanders, 372 U.S. 368, 379 (1963) ( “Once the geographical unit for which a
> representative is to be chosen is designated, all who participat e in the election are to have
> an equal vote —whatever their race, whatever their sex, whatever their occupation, what-
> ever their income, and wherever their home may be in that geographical unit. ”).

864 UNIVERSITY OF RICHMO ND LAW REVIEW [Vol. 57 :851 

citizens’ votes would trigger an equal protection violation. 57 The 

Court operationalized the OPOV doctrine by requiring a jurisdic-

tion’s legislature to have relatively equipopulous districts. 58 

Though the OPOV doctrine’s genesis was an equal protection 

claim based on the value of an individual voter’s vote, there is an 

assumption embedded in the OPOV doctrine that a representative 

represents their entire constituency. The equipopulous districts re-

quirement has been justified by a broad majoritarian concern re-

lated to the collective power of constituencies. 59 In the wak e of the 

OPOV cases, when the apportionment of state legislatures was at 

issue, the Court considered whether a legislative majority in a ju-

risdiction represented a popular majority. 60 The concern centered 

on whether a minority of the population should be al lowed to con-

trol legislative enactments. 61 In a jurisdiction with significantly 

malapportioned districts, a legislative majority could represent a 

population minority. For example, in the U.S. Senate, a legislative 

house with districts of wildly different p opulations, fifty -one sena-

tors may represent far less than a majority of the American popu-

lation. 62 Conversely, in a jurisdiction of equipopulous districts, a 

legislative majority necessarily represents a popular majority, but 

only if representatives are de emed to represent all their constitu-

ents. The OPOV doctrine treats each elected representative as 

though the representative speaks for all their constituents. 

57 . Id. at 379 –81 ( “The conception of political equality fro m the Declaration of Inde-

pendence, to Lincoln ’s Gettysburg Address, to the Fifteenth, Seventeenth, and Nineteenth 

Amendments can mean only one thing —one person, one vote. ”). 

58 . Altman & McDonald, supra note 23, at 772 ( “Legislative boundaries are periodic ally 

redrawn ostensibly to achieve federal and state constitutional and statutory goals. The most 

important federal criterion is equalizing districts ’ populations following the decennial fed-

eral census, which effectively means redistricting must take place every ten years. ”). 

59 . Reynolds v. Sims, 377 U.S. 533, 565 (1964) ( “Logically, in a society ostensibly 

grounded on representative government, it would seem reasonable that a majority of the 

people of a State could elect a majority of that State ’s legisla tors. ”). 

60 . Id. (“Since legislatures are responsible for enacting laws by which all citizens are to 

be governed, they should be bodies which are collectively responsive to the popular will. ”). 

61 . Id. (“[T]o sanction minority control of state legislative bodies, would appear to deny 

majority rights in a way that far surpasses any possible denial of minority rights that might 

otherwise be thought to result. ”). 

62 . In the 117th Congress, although the Senate was split evenly between Democrats 

and Republicans , the fifty Democratic senators represented 41.5 million more people than 

the fifty Republican senators. Mara Liasson, Democrats Increasingly Say American Democ-

racy is Sliding Toward Minority Rule , NPR (June 9, 2021, 5:00 AM),  https://www.npr.org 

/202 1/06/ 09/1002593823/how -democratic -is -american -democracy -key -pillars -face -stress -tes 

ts [https://perma.cc/3W27 -CCWE]. 20 23 ] ENHANCING RURAL REPR ESENTATION 865 

Partisanship can disrupt the assumption that representatives 

represent all their constituents. P olitical discussion often focuses 

on blue and red states, essentializing a state’s politics based on 

which party controls a legislature or the governor’s mansion. 

States controlled by Republicans are red and conservative; states 

controlled by Democrats are blue and liberal. 63 Essentialism en-

courages and reflects tribalism. 64 A blue state is Democratic be-

cause Democratic voters nearly invariably vote Democratic; a red 

state is Republican because Republican voters nearly invariably 

vote Republican. Independent voters often are treated as an inter-

esting sideshow in the discussion, though they may provide the 

electoral margin of victory that determines whether a state is Re-

publican red or Democratic blue. 65 

The same blue -red discussion often occurs regarding jurisd ic-

tions inside states. When counties and cities are colored red or blue 

based on Republican or Democratic political control, mostly red 

counties and mostly blue cities emerge. 66 Often, wide swaths of red 

counties engulf blue cities, though blue counties anc hored by urban 

areas may also emerge. 67 The visual representation can cause some 

to assert Republicans are more popular than Democrats in vast 

portions of the country, ignoring that neither party is vastly more 

popular than the other among the country’s pop ulace. 68 

The blue -red state narrative is incomplete. Nearly every part of 

every state has a significant percentage of people who vote for each 

63 . The dichotomy can arise in various policy contexts. See Lee -ford Tritt, Litigation 

Blues for Red -State Trusts: Judicial Construction Issues f or Wills and Trusts , 72 FLA . L. 

REV . 841, 852 –68 (2020) (discussing differences between red states and blue states regard-

ing wills and trusts jurisprudence). 

64 . For a discussion of how tribalism may and may not be consistent with democracy, 

see Seth Davis, Tribalism and Democracy , 62 WM. & MARY L. REV . 431 (2020). 

65 . See David A. Hopkins, Independent Voters are More Important than Ever , WASH .

POST (Dec. 27, 2022, 1:32 PM), https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/independent -vote 

rs -are -more -imp ortant -than -ever/2022/12/27/5e7c3f4e -85eb -11ed -b5ac -411280b122ef_story 

.html [https://perma.cc/E2PB -RP7S] (noting the large percentage of voters who consider 

themselves independent and their effect on elections). 

66 . See Scala & Johnson, supra note 29, at 181 (“Politically speaking, the urban -rural 

interface lies in the suburbs of smaller metropolitan cores and at the outer edge of larger 

metropolitan areas. At this tipping point, where the suburbs start to resemble rural exurbia, 

and in the vast rural regi ons beyond, Republicans find much friendlier territory. ”). 

67 . See 2021 Virginia Election Results , POLITICO , https://www.politico.com/election -res 

ults/2021/virginia/ [https://perma.cc/88X9 -QKE2] (Jan. 10, 2022, 1:22 PM). 

68 . Rural red areas are much larger geographically than urban blue areas. See Scala & 

Johnson, supra note 29, at 163 (noting seventy pe rcent of the America ’s land is rural). 866 UNIVERSITY OF RICHMO ND LAW REVIEW [Vol. 57 :851 

of America’s two major political parties. 69 Significant numbers of 

Democrats reside in deep red states or deep red areas of states and 

significant numbers of Republicans reside in deep blue states or 

deep blue areas of states. 70 An electoral map that colors Virginia —

a purple state —red or blue misses nuance. Such a map suggests 

Virginia is a commonwealth of rural red ar eas and blue urban ar-

eas. 71 The full story is more complex. 72 Though the Republican 

Party dominates rural Virginia and the Democratic Party domi-

nates urban Virginia, every jurisdiction in the Commonwealth is 

home to a significant proportion of Republican vot ers and Demo-

cratic voters. 

A focus on which party controls a jurisdiction, coupled with 

FPTP, SMD, can lead to an impoverished vision of representation 

focusing on supporters rather than constituents. A representative 

should represent the district’s entir e constituency. 73 However, a fo-

cus on partisan power may lead commentators and the populace to 

think about a district as a Republican district or a Democratic dis-

trict. The representative of a Republican district may be assumed 

to provide different represen tation than the representative of a dis-

trict who happens to be a Republican. The former may focus on the 

Republicans in the district, leaving non -Republicans with little ef-

fective representation; the latter may provide a Republican slant 

69 . See Charles Fain Lehman, The GOP ’s Urban Gains , CITY J. (Nov. 23, 2022), https:// 

www.city -jou rnal.org/gops -urban -gains [https://perma.cc/Z7TK -ZRW9] (noting Republican 

voting gains in urban areas relative to 2018 and 2020); Josh Kraushaar, Democrats Show 

Signs of Life in Rural America , AXIOS (Dec. 11, 2022), https://www.axios.com/2022/12/11/ 

democr ats -rural -america -midterms [https://perma.cc/W37T -5FHH] (discussing Democratic 

voting gains in rural areas relative to 2020). 

70 . The urban -rural split is a broad American phenomenon. See e.g. , Fred M. Shelley, 

The Deeping [sic] Urban -rural Divide in U.S. Presidential Politics: Presidential Votes in 

Iowa, 2008 –2020 , POL . GEOGRAPHY , Mar. 2022, at 1 ( “In recent years, the electoral gap be-

tween urban and rural areas in American politics has intensified, with cities and suburbs 

tending more Democratic and rural areas tending more Republican. ”). However, there is 

substantial complexity. Diller, supra note 31, at 160 (discussing how voter migration into 

and out of urban and rural areas makes the issue very nuanced). 

71 . See 2021 Virginia Election Results , supra no te 67. 

72 . More Virginians believe they live in rural areas than demographers would suggest. 

See VA. STATE OFF . OF RURAL HEALTH , supra note 28 , at 2 -2 to -3 ( noting both that “People 

living in communities covering eighty -eight percent of [Virginia] consider those communi-

ti es rural” and that the Office of Management and Budget ’s definition of rural areas would 

consider eighty -eight percent of Virginia ’s population to be living in metropolitan areas). 

73 . League of United Latin Am. Citizens v. Perry, 548 U.S. 399, 469 –70 (2006) (Stevens, 

J., concurring and dissenting in part) (discussing representatives ’ obligation to represent 

their entire constituency). However, that can be difficult. Gould, supra note 33, at 797 (not-

ing the difficulty of representing every part of a constituency). 20 23 ] ENHANCING RURAL REPR ESENTATION 867 

to their represent ation of the entire district. 74 In a hyper -partisan 

world, the two approaches may converge, but the approach to gov-

ernance matters. Aggressively tending to one’s perceived support-

ers to the exclusion of the interests of political minorities in one’s 

constit uency is different from trying to find common ground while 

refusing to abandon one’s political beliefs. 

A focus on one’s supporters may be part of our system of repre-

sentation, but it need not be absolute. 75 For example, the U.S. Con-

stitution allocates memb ers of the U.S. House of Representatives 

to states. 76 Members of Congress represent their state, but are cho-

sen by their district’s voters. 77 Though many may argue Members 

of Congress should decide issues based on more than how their dis-

tricts will be affect ed , few would fault them for supporting policy 

positions their constituents or their supporters in their constitu-

ency prefer. 78 Conversely, they can be faulted for ignoring their 

constituents who did not support them. 

A focus on supporters rather than const ituents may leave polit-

ical minorities unrepresented. A political minority may have no 

right to exercise power in a majoritarian democracy. There is no 

generalized right to representation or power based on a political 

minority’s numbers in a constituency. However, their interests 

need not be ignored. 79 The failure to represent the interests of polit -

74 . Gould, supra note 33, at 791 ( “A Republican legislator in a solidly red district could 

gain reelection only by attending to the preferences and interests of Republicans; the oppo-

site holds for a Democrat in a solidly blue district. ”). 

75 . Id. at 789 –97 (no ting various ways electoral structures can result in representatives 

cultivating their perceived supporters at the expense of other constituents). 

76 . U.S. C ONST . art. I, § 2 ( “The House of Representatives shall be composed of Mem-

bers chosen every second Y ear by the People of the several States, and the Electors in each 

State shall have the Qualifications requisite for Electors of the most numerous Branch of 

the State Legislature. ”). Congressional Representatives are chosen by district because of 

federal st atutory law. 2 U.S.C. § 2c (requiring congressional districts). 

77 . See Chambers, supra note 42, at 152 (discussing the nature of congressional repre-

sentation). 

78 . Arguably, Congress imposed districting to encourage U.S. Representatives to think 

from the somewhat narrower view of their district, rather than from a statewide perspec-

tive. See Rob Richie & Andrew Spencer, The Right Choice for Elections: How Choice Voting 

Will End Gerrymandering and Expand Minority Voting Rights, from City Councils to Con-

gress , 47 U. RICH . L. REV . 959, 959 (2013) ( “When the United States Congress first imposed 

single -member congressional districts on the states in 1842, it had the loftiest of intentions. 

The several states that at the time elected U.S. House Representatives on a statewide, at -

large basis often had only one party win seats due to winner -take -all election rules. ”). 

79 . However, m inority interests may be protected through judicial review, rather than 

through the political process. Sonu Bedi, Collapsing Suspect Clas s with Suspect Classifica-

tion : Why Strict Scrutiny Is Too Strict and Maybe Not Strict Enough , 47 GA. L. REV . 301, 

330 –31 (2013). 868 UNIVERSITY OF RICHMO ND LAW REVIEW [Vol. 57 :851 

ical minorities in a district may be unsurprising, but it is not an 

inevitable part of majoritarian rule. 80 Political minorities may not 

control legislation, but their interests should be heard and repre-

sented if they are a significant chunk of the population. 

Political minorities who represent significant portions of the 

populace should be represented, though they are not ensured pro-

portional representation. Prop ortional representation suggests a 

majority should control a legislature, and a significant political mi-

nority should hold a significant minority of seats in a legislature. 81 

That assumes representation in a legislature, at the macro -level, 

should track pol itical interests in the populace. SMD in an OPOV 

system does not guarantee proportional representation. With vir-

tually no protections for a right to political representation, major-

ity control of a legislature under SMD systems may depend on the 

geography o f a jurisdiction, how voters are distributed in a juris-

diction, the degree of partisan polarization in a jurisdiction, and 

the use of partisan gerrymandering. 82 Indeed, SMD does not guar-

antee a jurisdiction’s majority party will win a majority of seats in 

a legislature. 83 

In an SMD system prone to partisan gerrymandering —which 

the U.S. Constitution does not bar 84 —the interests of political mi-

norities or even those of a party with fifty -percent support can be 

substantially underrepresented in a legislature. Wi th some meas-

ure of partisan redistricting, the assumption that an even partisan 

split of voters could, or should, yield an even partisan split in a 

legislature may not hold. Assume a jurisdiction, divided into 100 

districts, with 1 million voters (500,000 Republicans and 500,000                                                    

> 80 .Some would disagree. See, e.g. , Ides, supra note 14, at 449 ( “The victor after an SMD
> election does not, in fact, represent the entire constituency; rather, the victor represents
> only that part of the constituency that voted for him or (less likely) her. Winner -take -all
> does not mean that the winner shares the power with the loser; it means loser -take -noth-
> ing. ”).
> 81 .See Lee D rutman, Elections, Political Parties, and Multiracial, Multiethnic Democ-
> racy: How the United States Gets It Wrong ,96 N.Y.U. L. REV .985, 1015 –17 (2021) (discuss-
> ing the advantages of using proportional representation in heterogenous polities).
> 82 .See CHRI STIAN R. GROSE ,JORDAN CARR PETERSON ,MATTHEW NELSON &SARA
> SADHWANI ,USC SCHWARZENEGGER INST .FOR STATE AND GLOB .POL ’Y,THE WORST PARTI -
> SAN GERRYMANDERS IN U.S. STATE LEGISLATURES 2–5(2019), http://schwarzeneggerinst i-
> tu te.com/theworstpartisangerrymander s [https://perma.cc/EYP3 -EMDN] (discussing how
> par tisan gerrymandering can lead to minority control of state legislatures).
> 83 .The Code of Virginia only loosely bars partisan gerrymandering in redistricting. VA.
> CODE ANN .§24.2 -304.04(8) (Cum. Supp. 2022) ( “A map of districts shall not, when consid-
> ered on a statewide basis, unduly favor or disfavor any political party. ”).
> 84 .See Rucho v. Common Cause, 139 S. Ct. 2484, 2501 (2019).

20 23 ] ENHANCING RURAL REPR ESENTATION 869 

Demo -crats). If Republicans and Democrats are evenly distributed 

in the jurisdiction, each district could have an approximate 50/50 

partisan split, with the legislative partisan tilt depending on 

whether the prior election was a wav e election in which many vot-

ers voted for the opposite party’s candidate. Conversely, fifty dis-

tricts could have an approximate 60/40 Republican lean and fifty 

districts could have an approximate 60/40 Democratic lean. Each 

seat would appear safe, with the legislature having no partisan tilt 

except after a significant wave election year. However, a legisla-

ture could have a durable partisan lean if legislative districts are 

gerrymandered. Sixty districts could have an average 60/40 Repub-

lican lean, while for ty districts could have an average 65/35 Dem-

ocratic lean. All districts are relatively safe, with the legislature 

having a 60/40 Republican lean in typical election cycles, even 

though OPOV was scrupulously observed. 

A political minority in a highly polari zed jurisdiction may have 

virtually no power or influence if districts are drawn to provide rel-

atively slim majorities. For example, assume a jurisdiction con-

taining 1 million voters (520,000 Republicans and 480,000 Demo-

crats) divided into 100 equipopulous districts . If Republicans and 

Democrats are relatively evenly geographically distributed in the 

jurisdiction, each district could be approximately fifty -two percent 

Republican and forty -eight percent Democrat. In a highly polarized 

jurisdiction, an election resulting in a legislature consisting of sev-

enty Republicans and thirty Democrats might not appear odd. In-

deed, finding thirty Democrats to overcome a four percent Repub-

lican advantage in a highly polarized jurisdiction might be 

difficult. 

Even under relaxed assumptions, a seemingly skewed legisla-

ture might not appear odd. Assume the same highly polarized ju-

risdiction with more residential sorting by political party. 85 That 

distribution could yield seventy districts with an average 55/45                

> 85 .Sorting happens and geography can matter. See Altman & McDonald, supra note
> 23, at 829 (noting that, in Virginia, Democrats tend to live bunched together in a manner
> that may allow Republicans to win a higher percentage of seats than their percentage share
> of the vote); Scala & Johnson, supra note 29, at 163 (citing Poli tical Polarization in the Amer -
> ican Public ,PEW RSCH .CTR .13 (2014), https://www.pewresearch.org/wp -content/uploads/si
> tes/4/2014/06/6 -12 -2014 -Political -Polarization -Release.pdf [https://perma.cc/U4R5 -D3UN])
> (“Even after accounting for sex, race, and ideo logy, place itself is political. Liberals prefer
> living in areas where people live closer to one another and can walk to stores and other
> amenities. Conservatives, on the other hand, prefer living farther apart from their neigh-
> bors, even if that means they have to drive significant distances to reach schools and res-
> taurants. ”).

870 UNIVERSITY OF RICHMO ND LAW REVIEW [Vol. 57 :851 

Republican lean and thirty districts with an average 55/45 Demo-

cratic lean. Under these conditions, a legislature with a 70/30 Re-

publican advantage might not appear surprising. That would leave 

the minority party wit h little power in a jurisdiction in which it 

garnered nearly half the votes. If the legislature allowed two -thirds 

of its members to control all legislative actions and override guber-

natorial vetoes, the minority —with forty -eight percent support in 

the pop ulace —might have virtually no power or influence. 

The OPOV doctrine, operationalized through equipopulous dis-

tricts, is now a bedrock doctrine of American democracy . However, 

it does not guarantee the full representation of the interests of po-

litical minor ities. Rough proportional representation may be a le-

gitimate baseline for judging the fairness of an electoral system. 86 

Nonetheless, courts —including the Supreme Court of the United 

States —are quick to note proportional representation is not re-

quired under the Constitution. 87 Indeed, even statutes that focus 

on providing substantive representation to groups of people dis-

claim any requirement of rough proportional representation. 88 

Representation is guaranteed only to groups that win elections, not 

necessarily to all who participate in the political system. Protecting 

the interests of voters whose candidates do not win elections is a 

matter of grace, though only a cramped view of majoritarian rule 

would necessarily leave the interests of political and racial mi nor-

ities unrepresented. A lack of protection for the interests of all vot-

ers is ironic given the notion that a legislature should consider the 

interests of all people is an old one. 89                                  

> 86 .Johnson v. De Grandy, 512 U.S. 997, 1000 (1994) (holding rough proportionality
> should be considered in the totality of circumstances when evaluating the opportunity for
> minority voters to participate in the political process).
> 87 .E.g. ,Rucho , 139 S. Ct. at 2499.
> 88 .52 U.S.C. § 10301(b) (Voting Rights Act) (“Provided ,[t] hat nothing in this section
> establishes a right to have members of a protected class elected in numbers equal to their
> proportion in the population. ”); Thornburg v. Gingles, 478 U.S. 30, 84 (1986) (O ’Connor, J.,
> concurring) ( “[W]e ...know that Congress did not intend to create a right to proportional
> representation for minority voters. ”).
> 89 .See Bethune -Hill v. Va. State Bd. of Elections, 114 F. Supp. 3d 323, 341 (E.D. Va.
> 2015) ( “A legislature reflective of the democratic body is the root from which all rights and
> laws derive. As John Adams wrote, an assembly ‘should be, in miniature, an exact portrait
> of the people at large. It should think, feel, reason, and act like them. ’” )(quoting JOHN
> ADAMS ,THOUGHTS ON GOVERNMENT :APPLICABLE TO THE PRESENT STATE OF THE AMERICAN
> COLONIES ;IN A LETTER FROM A GENTLEMAN TO HIS FRIEND 9(Philadelphia, John Dunlap
> 1776)).

20 23 ] ENHANCING RURAL REPR ESENTATION 871 

Virginians receive representation in Virginia’s legislative bodies 

based on their numbers. 90 The OPOV doctrine buttressed by Vir-

ginia law ensures each citizen’s vote carries approximately equal 

weight. 91 Nonetheless, the interests of political minorities who can-

not affect an election through their votes may be unheard. 

C. Repres enting Rural Virginia 

Republicans overwhelmingly represent rural Virginians. The in-

ability of political and racial minorities in rural Virginia to elect 

their representatives of choice may lead to a lack of representation 

of their interests in Virginia’s legislature. The General Assembly 

has few Democratic members from the rural western and southern 

regions of the state. 92 The two Democratic state senators from the 

western part of the state represent oddly -shaped districts that 

have been significantly resha ped into new districts in the wake of 

the 2020 census. 93 Similarly, there are few Democratic delegates 

elected from those areas. The Democratic delegates who were 

elected in 2021 represent districts centered on Charlottesville and 

Roanoke that are surrounde d by districts represented by Republi-

can legislators. 94 

90 . VA. CODE ANN . § 24.2 -304.04(1) (Cum. Supp. 2022) ( “Districts shall be so constituted 

as to give, as nearly as is practicable, representation in proportion to the population of the 

district. A deviation of no more than five percent shall be permitted for state legislative 

districts. ”). 

91 . See Reynolds v. Sims, 377 U.S. 533, 558 (1964). Chambers, supra note 51, at 256 

(describing the OPOV doctrine). 

92 . District maps for the Virginia State Senate and the House of Delegates provide 

helpful visual depictions of this reality. Virginia State Senate , BALLOTPEDIA , https://ballo 

tpedia.org/Virginia_State_Senate [https://perma.cc/Z4KD -8KEB]; Virginia House of Dele-

gates , BALLOTPEDIA , https://ballotpedia.org/Virginia_House_of_Delegates [https://perma.cc/ 

U8WD -EA66]. 

93 . John Edwards and Creigh Deeds represented Senate Districts 21 and 25, respec-

tively. See Virginia State Senate , supra note 92. Because districts were redrawn and renum-

bered for the 2023 election, Senator Edwards is running to represent District 4, and Senator 

Deeds is running to represent District 11. State Senate District 4 , VA. PUB . ACCESS PROJECT ,

https://www.vpap.org/ offices/state -senate -4/district/ [https://perma.cc/6DRK -UCJX]; State 

Senate District 11 , VA. PUB . ACCESS PROJECT , https://www.vpap.org/offices/state -senate -11/ 

district/ [https://perma.cc/RA29 -KXGT]. 

94 . In 2021, Virginia House of Delegates District 57 covered Charlottesville and District 

11 covered Roanoke. Virginia House of Delegates , supra note 92. The new districts —54 and 

38, respectively —have boundaries similar to their predecessors. See House of Dele gates Dis-

trict 54 , VA. PUB . ACCESS PROJECT , https://www.vpap.org/offices/house -of -delegates -54/red 

istricting/ [https://perma.cc/77XP -KNLM]; House of Delegates District 38 , VA. PUB . ACCESS 

PROJECT , https://www.vpap.org/offices/house -of -delegates -38/redistr icting/ [https://perma. 

cc/T7FS -4UWY]. 872 UNIVERSITY OF RICHMO ND LAW REVIEW [Vol. 57 :851 

The Republican dominance in rural Virginia may change over 

time, but may not change soon. All General Assembly districts 

were reapportioned and redrawn in the wake of the 2020 census. 

The 2021 House o f Delegates general election was run using the 

pre -2020 census districts. 95 Delays in receiving census data, cou-

pled with problems related to the newly -created Virginia Redis-

tricting Commission, delayed redistricting so that the districts 

could not be redra wn and approved before the 2021 elections. 96 The 

Supreme Court of Virginia approved new districts in December 

2021. 97 In 2023, the entire General Assembly —100 delegates and 

40 senators —will run for office. Little reason exists to believe the 

Republican domin ance in rural areas will change significantly with 

the new districts. 

Rural areas voted for Republicans in the 2020 presidential and 

2021 gubernatorial elections. In 2020, President Biden won Vir-

ginia fifty -four percent to forty -four percent ,98 but m ost rural areas 

of the Commonwealth voted for President Trump. 99 However, even 

in some heavily Republican areas, Biden had significant sup-

port. 100 In 2021, Republican Glenn Youngkin won the gubernato-

rial election over Democratic former Governor Terry McAuliffe ,

50.6% to 48.6%. 101 Rural areas of t he Commonwealth voted heavily 

for Youngkin, but McAuliffe had significant support in most rural 

95 . Dean Mirshahi, Virginia ’s Redistricting Commission Plans to Submit Redrawn Leg-

islative Maps Before Nov. 2 Elections , WRIC, https://www.wric.com/news/politics/virginias -

redistricting -commission -plans -to -submit -redr awn -legislative -maps -before -nov -2-elections/ 

[https://perma.cc/6QBV -2GUK] (Apr. 1, 2021, 11:03 AM). 

96 . Id. ; Dean Mirshahi, Shifting its Focus, Virginia Redistricting Commission Appears 

Unlikely to Redraw State Legislative Maps , WRIC, https://www.wric.com/ news/politics/capi 

tol -connection/shifting -its -focus -virginia -redistricting -commission -appears -unlikely -to -redr 

aw -state -legislative -maps/ [https://perma.cc/V3VQ -5EZ7] (Oct. 11, 2021, 4:43 PM). 

97 . In re Decennial Redistricting, 300 Va. 379, 379 –80 (2021). 

98 . 2020 November General , VA. DEP ’T. OF ELECTIONS , https://results.elections.virgini 

a.gov/vaelections/2020%20November%20General/Site/Presidential.html [https://perma.cc/8 

DWB -EYBU] (Jan . 21, 2021, 3:01 PM) .

99 . See Joe Biden Won in Virginia , POLITICO , https://www.politico.com/2020 -election/re 

sults/virginia/ [https://perma.cc/CR3G -VK6L] (Jan. 6, 2021, 4:41 PM). 

100 . For example, in the three most heavily -Republican of Virginia ’s eleven congres-

sional districts, President Biden won 28.3%, 38.4%, and 45.0% o f the vote. VA. DEP ’T. OF 

ELECTIONS , supra note 98. 

101 . 2021 November General , VA. DEP ’T. OF ELECTIONS (D ec. 8, 2021, 11:17 AM), https:// 

re sults.elections.virginia.gov/vaelections/2021%20November%20General/Site/Statewide. 

html [https://perma.cc/87HS -W3EG]. 20 23 ] ENHANCING RURAL REPR ESENTATION 873 

areas of the Com -monwealth other than in far southwestern Vir-

ginia and some counties in the Shenandoah Valley. 102 

The existence of a significant political minority in rural areas of 

Virginia has benefits and drawbacks. The minority’s existence sug-

gests heterogeneity and a significant diversity of thought in those 

areas. Conversely, the larger the political minority, the larger the 

portion of the population that may not have their interests repre-

sented in the legislature. In an area dominated by a single party, 

that party’s primary election may function as the general elec-

tion. 103 Unless voters from the political minority are willing to vote 

in the dominant party’s prim ary election, they may have little or 

no ability to affect who ultimately represents them. In such areas, 

representatives may also need to focus on representing their base 

rather than the mainstream of their party to win the primary. 104 

That may lead to more extreme candidates who are unlikely to 

fully represent the interests of political and racial minorities in 

their constituency. 

D. Rural Problems, Urban Problems, and Virtual Representation 

Concerns about political minorities in Virginia not having their 

interests represented may seem overblown if those political minor-

ities are aligned with a political party that is well represented in 

state and local government. In theory, a representative in one part 

of a jurisdiction can represent a voter in a different part of the ju-

risdiction. However, even if a representative is inclined to repre-

sent the interests of a political minority in a different part of a ju-

risdiction who is aligned with the same political party, the rep -

resentative may not have sufficient know ledge or ability to do so. 

Members of the representative’s political party may support differ-

ent solutions to the same problem and may support very different 

solutions to somewhat different problems. 

Some problems may be common to urban and rural areas. I n

some respects, urban and rural communities may not be starkly           

> 102 .See 2021 Virginia Election Results ,WASH .POST ,https://www.washingtonpost.com/
> elections/election -results/virginia/ [https://perma.cc/7WBA -T7DZ] (Dec. 3, 2021, 12:12 PM)
> (providing a map with jurisdiction -by -jurisdiction results).
> 103 .Gould, supra note 33, at 795.
> 104 .Id.

874 UNIVERSITY OF RICHMO ND LAW REVIEW [Vol. 57 :851 

different. 105 Indeed, whether an area is fully urban or fully rural 

may be unclear, with urban and rural areas arguably being less a 

binary than a continuum based on interests and geography. 106 Co n-

versely, in other locales, a rural -urban divide may appear clearer, 

with different amounts of political attention paid to the areas trig-

gering resentment. 107 Rural problems may differ from urban prob-

lems. 108 

Sparse population may make some disparities in rur al areas 

more difficult to solve. Solutions to problems that might work in 

densely populated areas differ from solutions that might work in 

sparsely populated areas. The need for a significant volume of cus-

tomers or clients may make some services difficult to provide in 

rural areas. For example, rural healthcare facilities may be re-

quired to serve a large area to have sufficient population to support 

th em . The distance to travel to the facilities could affect health out-

comes. 109 Increased interest from politi cal representa tives who 

105 . Lichter & Ziliak, supra note 9, at 7 ( “At the time of this writing, the urban -rural 

divide seemingly has never been greater. That rural Americans across the country voted in 

substantial numbers for Do nald Trump makes this point; rural people tipped the national 

scale in Trump ’s favor and against urban and coastal elites, minorities, and immigrants. 

But, perhaps paradoxically, it may also be the case that urban and rural communities and 

people have also never been more tightly integrated and interdependent. ”). 

106 . Id. at 10 ( “[C]onceptual and operational definitions of urban and rural are subject 

to great variation, and scholars and policy -makers not only adopt different classification 

schemes but also o ften view rural and urban as polar ends of a continuum in which Amer-

ica ’s people and communities are arrayed. Urban -rural is not a simple binary. ”). The divide 

can extend to approaches to health. See Yue Sun & Shannon M. Monnat, Urban -rural and 

Within -Rura l Differences in COVID -19 Vaccination Rates , 38 J. RURAL HEALTH 916, 919 

(2022) ( “Using county -level data from the CDC, we found that COVID -19 vaccination rates 

are significantly lower in rural than in urban counties as of August 11, 2021. ”); see also 

Shel ley, supra note 70, at 2 –3 (noting increasing political polarization between rural and 

urban areas across the nation). 

107 . Scala & Johnson, supra note 29, at 163 ( “The differences between urban life and 

rural life, and the feeling among rural residents that their areas are often neglected by po-

litical elites, lead to resentment among those who live in areas peripheral to metropolitan 

areas. ”). 

108 . See ABOOALI , supra note 3, at 3 ( “A unique barrier to seeking mental health care in 

rural areas is the stigm a against it. In small, rural communities, there tends to be a lack of 

trust in confidentiality since everyone knows each other. ”). 

109 . See CTRS . FOR MEDICARE & MEDICAID SERVS ., IMPROVING HEALTH IN RURAL COM -

> MUNITIES

: FY 2021 YEAR IN REVIEW 1 (2021), https ://www.cms.gov/files/document/fy -21 -im-

proving -health -rural -communities508compliant.pdf [https://perma.cc/WR66 -P9RV]; AGEN - 

> CY FOR

HEALTHCARE RSCH . & QUALITY , PUB . NO. 17(18) -0001 -2-EF, NATIONAL HEALTHCARE 

QUALITY & DISPARITIES REPORT : CHARTBOOK ON RURAL HEA LTH CARE 4–6 (2017), https:// 

www.ahrq.gov/sites/default/files/wysiwyg/research/findings/nhqrdr/chartbooks/qdr -ruralhe 

althchartbook -update.pdf [https://perma.cc/3R2C -S44L]. 20 23 ] ENHANCING RURAL REPR ESENTATION 875 

want to help solve rural health disparities may not solve these 

physical problems. 

The state’s geography may also matter. 110 The distance between 

predominantly urban areas and predominantly rural areas of Vir-

ginia may make solutions t o some urban problems different than 

solutions to some rural problems. With urban areas of Virginia lo-

cated primarily in the northern and eastern parts of the state and 

many rural areas located in the western and southern parts of Vir-

ginia, the state’s geo graphy and topography may create local or re-

gional problems in rural areas that are not replicated in urban ar-

eas of the state. If interests and solutions to problems relate to 

regional geography and topography, the problems and interests of 

rural areas ma y be different than the problems and interests of 

urban areas in ways that do not merely relate to population den-

sity. 

Virtual representation may not address concerns regarding po-

litical minorities in rural Virginia who lack strong representa-

tion. 111 In a highly partisan context, an urban Democrat might 

seem able to represent a rural Democrat. In a state where cities 

have grown with suburbs, exurbs, and rural areas surrounding 

them in similar geography and topography, the urban issues and 

rural issues might be similar enough that urban representatives 

could virtually represent suburban and rural members of the same 

party. Similarly, rural representatives might seem able to virtually 

represent urban members of the same party. However, the regional 

inter ests and problems of rural Democrats may be sufficiently dif-

ferent than the interests and problems of urban Democrats to ren-

der virtual representation among those groups nearly impossible. 

Democratic legislators who represent urban areas may not neces -              

> 110 .Place can matter. See Lichter & Ziliak, supra note 9, at 21 ( “Economic dispari ties in
> income and poverty are associated with disparities in economic and geographic access to
> health care and physical and emotional well -being. Hunger and food insecurity also has a
> spatial dimension. ”).
> 111 .Virtual representation tends to be problemati c. See Joseph Fishkin, Taking Virtual
> Representation Seriously , 59 W M. & M ARY L. R EV . 1681, 1682 (2018) ( “Nobody likes virtual
> representation. Even the suggestion of it carries a taint of illegitimacy. There are good rea-
> sons for this. The history of democr atic political development, both in this country and else-
> where, has been a history of the incremental, halting, painfully slow, sometimes reversed,
> always contested replacement of virtual representation, in which people do not get to vote
> for their represe ntatives, with actual representation, in which they do. ”).

876 UNIVERSITY OF RICHMO ND LAW REVIEW [Vol. 57 :851 

sari ly be able to virtually represent the interests of rural Demo-

crats. 112 

In addition, divisions among rural communities may exist. 113 

Rural areas are not homogeneous. 114 Different parts of rural Vir-

ginia may have local problems that require local solutions. 115 Even 

if some rural Democrats were elected, they may not be able to rep-

resent the interests of Democratic rural voters in other areas of the 

state adequately. 

Our dominant electoral system in Virginia may provide the in-

centive to ignore the interests of politi cal and racial minorities in 

rural areas. Disparities in rural outcomes may result, to a degree, 

from the incentive Virginia’s electoral structure provides to legis-

lators to ignore those interests. Legislators from rural areas may 

care about racial or poli tical minorities in their constituency, 116 but 

they have been incentivized by the electoral system to prioritize 

the constituents they believe voted for them or supported their 

campaigns financially. Some representatives may be blind to the 

problems of some constituents who have supported them, 117 but 

those legislators may face little peril by ignoring the interests of 

political or racial minorities who did not support the representa-

tive electorally or financially. 118 

112 . See COMMISSION REPORT , supra note 1, at 34 –37; CTRS . FOR MEDICARE & MEDICAID 

SERVS ., supra note 109, at 1. 

113 . See VA. STATE OFF . OF RURAL HEALTH , supra note 28, at 1 -2 ( “Understanding that 

rurality is extremely difficult to define, once you ’ve visited one rural community, you have 

visited one rural community. ”). 

114 . See Scala & Johnson, supra note 29, at 163 ( “In fact, rural America is a deceptively 

simple term describing a remarkably divers e collection of places. It encompasses more than 

seventy percent of the land area of the United States and 46 million people. ”). 

115 . For example, rural communities have varied responses to public health problems. 

See Sun & Monnat, supra note 106, at 919 ( “Within rural counties, average vaccination rates 

[for COVID 19] are highest in recreation -dependent counties and lowest in mining - and 

farming -dependent counties. ”). 

116 . Alternatively, a lack of care could explain a lack of economic prosperity for people 

of color in the Commonwealth. See Earls et al., supra note 6, at 763 (noting the lack of socio -

economic gains African Americans made in Virginia from the 1980s to 2000s). 

117 . See Collins v. City of Norfolk, 883 F.2d 1232, 1239 (4th Cir. 1989) ( “While being 

thoroughly questioned on her sources of political support, Howell admitted that she had 

received high levels of black support in the past, but she did not characterize herself as a 

representative of the black community . . . . She did not think that the bl ack community of 

Norfolk had any special needs or interests. ”). 

118 . That might explain why proposals to help rural Virginians may fall on deaf ears. 

See COMMISSION REPORT , supra note 1, at 34 –47 (discussing rural disparities and recom-

mending policies to am eliorate them). 20 23 ] ENHANCING RURAL REPR ESENTATION 877 

Plurality voting in a polarized, partisan sy stem allows the dom-

inant party in a jurisdiction to functionally choose the general elec-

tion winner in their primary. 119 FPTP, SMD is not designed to al-

low the interests of political and racial minorities to be rep -

resented. If minority interests are represe nted, it will be by the 

grace of the representative chosen by majority interests, through 

the virtual representation of a legislator chosen in a different dis-

trict, or through legal compunction such as the VRA. 120 

The effects of partisanship, one -party rule , and plurality -based 

SMD may ensure the views of rural political minorities, including 

the rural poor, are unlikely to be heard. The electoral system may 

leave the interests of political and racial minorities in rural areas 

poorly represented in Virginia’ s legislative bodies. 121 However, the 

interests and voices of significant political minorities should be 

heard in Virginia’s legislative chambers. Rural political minorities 

may need dedicated representatives if their interests are to be rep-

resented. If the only way for those interests to be heard is to have 

a representative focused on those interests, the electoral system 

should be reformed to help political minorities influence the elec-

tion of a representative or to help them elect a representative of 

choic e. 

A different set of representatives may not change outcomes for 

rural Virginians. The rural disadvantaged may be disadvantaged 

because the remainder of the state may not care about them. Con-

versely, they may be disadvantaged because rural representatives 

have not convinced the rest of the General Assembly to do what is 

necessary to eliminate the disparities between rural and non -rural                          

> 119 .That is the case now and historically was the case in the one -party South in the con -
> text of the White primary. See generally United States v. Classic, 313 U.S. 299, 314 (1941)
> (finding that an interference with the right to vote in a c ongressional primary is unconsti-
> tutional when that is the only stage where a voter has “any practical effect on the ultimate
> result ”).
> 120 .United States Representative Adam Clayton Powell ,Jr. (D -NY) and various other
> congressmen virtually represented Blac k America in Congress during the middle of the
> twentieth century. STAFF OF COMM .ON H. ADMIN ., BLACK AMERICANS IN CONGRESS 1870 –
> 2007, H.R. DOC .NO.108 -224, at 236 (2008) ( “The burden of advocating black interests fell
> on the shoulders of a few Representat ives: De Priest and Arthur Mitchell of Illinois in the
> 1930s and Powell and Dawson in the 1940s, joined by Diggs and Robert Nix of Pennsylvania
> in the 1950s. ”).
> 121 .The problem is not limited to Virginia or to today. See id. at 237 (describing how the
> Black representatives of the middle twentieth century were among the elite in their com-
> munities, thus hardly resembling their less -affluent constituents).

878 UNIVERSITY OF RICHMO ND LAW REVIEW [Vol. 57 :851 

Virginians. 122 Nonetheless, there are disparities between urban 

and non -urban Virginia, and a significant portion of rural V irginia 

does not choose its representative of choice. If the electoral system 

transmits power to representatives to make change, the lack of rep-

resentation and the disparities may be linked. 

II. ELECTORAL DIVERSITY 

Using electoral systems other than or in addition to FPTP, SMD 

could help facilitate the representation of the interests of political 

and racial minorities in rural areas in Virginia, possibly lessening 

the disparities those groups face. MMD and RCV are two options 

that can help political and rac ial minorities influence elections or 

choose their representative of choice in rural areas. MMD, which 

involves districts that elect multiple representatives, has been pop-

ular historically but has fallen out of favor in the wake of the 

VRA. 123 Virginia law a llows MMD in some elections. 124 RCV, which 

allows voters to rank multiple candidates they are willing to have 

represent them —rather than choose a single candidate —has re-

cently been approved for some Virginia elections. 125 Using MMD, 

RCV, or both in more Virginia elections, including General Assem-

bly elections, could help rural political and racial minorities have 

122 . AGENCY FOR HEALTHCARE RSCH . & QUALITY , supra note 109, at 4 ( “Compared with 

their urban counterparts, residents of rural counties are: [o]lder, [p]oorer, [m]ore likely to 

be overweight or obese, and [s]icker. ”). Some of the disparities may be very difficult to re-

solve. 

123 . See Holloway v. City of Virginia Beach, 42 F.4th 266, 270, 273 (4th C ir. 2022) (dis-

cussing VRA challenges to MMDs ); see also Earls et al., supra note 6, at 768 ( “As of 1991, 

only nine of the state ’s forty -one cities abandoned at -large council elections. Eight of the 

nine converted because of litigation under the Equal Prote ction Clause or DOJ intervention 

under the VRA. Without the VRA, African -Americans would have undoubtedly been denied 

participation or accorded only token representation on governing bodies in these jurisdic-

tions. ”). See generally Smith, Multimember Distri cts and the Voting Rights Act , supra note 

17 (providing an extensive discussion of the tension between MMD and the VRA). 

124 . VA. CODE ANN . § 24.2 -304.1(A) (Cum. Supp. 2022) ( “Except as otherwise specifically 

limited by general law or special act, the gover ning body of each county, city, or town may 

provide by ordinance for the election of its members on any of the following bases: (i) at large 

from the county, city, or town; (ii) from single -member or multi -member districts or wards, 

or any combination ther eof; or (iii) from any combination of at -large, single -member, and 

multi -member districts or wards. ”). 

125 . Id. §24.2 -673.1(B) (Cum. Supp. 2022) ( “Elections of members of a county board of 

supervisors or a city council may be conducted by ranked choice voti ng pursuant to this 

section. The decision to conduct an election by ranked choice voting shall be made, in consul -

tation with the local electoral board and general registrar, by a majority vote of the board 

of supervisors or city council that the office be ing elected serves. ”). 20 23 ] ENHANCING RURAL REPR ESENTATION 879 

their interests heard by electing their candidates of choice, affect-

ing who is elected, or both. 

A. Multimembe r Districting 

MMD involves dividing a jurisdiction into districts, each of 

which will be represented by multiple legislators. 126 MMD is nei-

ther new nor foreign to Virginia or the United States. 127 Virginia 

authorizes the use of MMDs by statute. 128 The General A ssembly 

was elected in part through MMDs until the U.S. Department of 

Justice (“DOJ”) declined to allow their use after the post -1980 cen-

sus redistricting. 129 

MMD has been problematic in the recent past because it can al-

low majorities to stop racial minorit ies from selecting their repre-

sentatives of choice. 130 It can also stop political minorities from 

electing their representatives of choice, though that has not typi-

cally been deemed a concern. The mathematics of MMD is the core 

of the problem. Traditionally, MMD systems allow each voter to 

control the same number of votes as representatives to be chosen, 

126 . The terms “multimember ” and “at -large ” are sometimes used interchangeably. At -

large voting often refers to the election of an entire jurisdiction ’s legislative body in a juris-

diction -wide vote, such as a non -districted countywide election of all members of a school 

board. See Chambers, supra note 42, at 144 –45 (discussing mechanics of MMD and at -large 

voting). 

127 . Multiple states allow MMD for vario us offices, including state legislative seats. See, 

e.g. , MD. CONST . art. III, § 3 ( “Each legislative district shall contain one (1) Senator and 

three (3) Delegates. Nothing herein shall prohibit the subdivision of any one or more of the 

legislative distri cts for the purpose of electing members of the House of Delegates into three 

(3) single -member delegate districts or one (1) single -member delegate district and one (1) 

multi -member delegate district.”) .

128 . VA. CODE ANN . § 24.2 -304(1) (Cum. Supp. 2022). 

129 . Altman & McDonald, supra note 23, at 786 –87 (noting that the General Assembly 

finally jettisoned its remaining MMDs in the post -1980 census redistricting at the DOJ ’s

behest); Earls et al., supra note 6, at 771 ( “The DOJ objected to portions of the 1981 reap-

portionment of the Virginia House of Delegates. Specifically, the DOJ noted that the City of 

Norfolk was retained as a large, multi -member district, whereas a fairly apportioned plan 

of single -member districts would have provided for two districts wit h substantial African -

American majorities. The multi -member district plan had the inevitable effect of limiting 

the potential of African -Americans to elect their candidates of choice. ”). 

130 . Collins v. City of Norfolk, 883 F.2d 1232, 1236 (4th Cir. 1989) ( “The Supreme Court 

has long recognized that at -large voting in a multimember political unit, such as Norfolk ’s

city council, may prevent minorities from electing representatives of their choice by diluting 

their voting strength. ”); Earls et al., supra note 6, at 769 (discussing how at -large voting 

had impeded African American voters from electing sufficient candidates of choice in Dan-

ville, Virginia ’s city council elections). 880 UNIVERSITY OF RICHMO ND LAW REVIEW [Vol. 57 :851 

with each vote cast for a different candidate. 131 Under those condi-

tions, when fifty -one percent of the electorate votes for the same 

candidates, a bare majority can control 100% of seats. Consider an 

election to choose three representatives in which each of 1 ,000 vot-

ers is given three votes with each vote required to be cast for a 

different candidate. If 501 voters vote for the same three candi-

dates, none of the other candid ates can win more than 499 votes 

(one vote apiece from each of the remaining 499 voters). The three 

candidates preferred by 50.1% of voters win the three seats. 132 

A racial majority engaging in polarized bloc voting could deny a 

significant racial minority any seats in the MMD. The plan would 

not require much coordination. The majority party would need to 

hold a party primary to select the same number of candidates as 

legislators to be elected in the general election. If the majority -

party members voted for those candidates, the candidates would 

be elected, and no candidates favored by the political minority 

would be elected. The primary would essentially become the gen-

eral election. Not surprisingly, the Supreme Court eventually de-

termined the VRA would limi t the use of MMD when it was used 

or maintained to guarantee, or had the effect of guaranteeing, a 

racial minority would be unable to elect a representative of 

choice. 133 If an SMD system would allow a minority group to elect 

a representative of choice but a multimember system applied to the 

same jurisdiction would not, the choice to use the multimember 

system triggers VRA scrutiny. 134 In a jurisdiction with segregated 

131 . This can be contrasted to cumulative voting which allows multiple votes to be cast 

for a single candidate. See Nicholas O. Stephanopoulos, Our Electoral Exceptionalism , 80 U. 

CHI . L. R EV . 769, 835 (2013) (discussing limited and cumulative voting). 

132 . See Diller, supra note 31, at 183 ( “[I]t was entirely possible —and, indeed, quite com-

mon —for an all -white slate to win all seats within a district using winner -take -all, particu-

larly where whites were a majority of the population and there was racially polarized vot-

ing. ”). The purpose of single -member districting was to alter this pheno menon. See Richie 

& Spencer, supra note 78, at 959 ( “Proponents argued that single -member districts would 

ensure fair representation of every viewpoint, majority or minority, making Congress a ‘mir-

ror of the people. ’” (quoting CONG . GLOBE , 27 th Cong., 2d S ess. app. 345 (1842) (statement 

of Rep. John Reynolds)). 

133 . Thornburg v. Gingles, 478 U.S. 30, 47 (1986); see also Holloway v. City of Virginia 

Beach, 42 F.4th 266, 270 –71 (4th Cir. 2022) (discussing Gingles and law underlying inter-

action between SMD, MM D, and the VRA). 

134 . Gingles provides a three -part test to determine when the VRA had been violated. 

See Chambers, supra note 51, at 242 ( “The three Gingles preconditions are: (1) the minority 

voters must be sufficiently numerous to constitute a majority i n a regularly drawn single -

member district, (2) the minority voters must be politically cohesive, and (3) bloc voting 

must exist such that nonminority voters can generally stop the minority voters from electing 

their candidate of choice. ” (citing Gingles, 478 U.S. at 50 –51)). 20 23 ] ENHANCING RURAL REPR ESENTATION 881 

neighborhoods and racially polarized voting, districting is more 

likely to provide representa tion for minority rights than at -large 

districting or MMD. 135 Therein lies the preference for SMDs. 136 

Thus, MMDs fell out of favor. 

A political minority becomes more likely to be able to elect a rep-

resentative of choice under an MMD system when the MMD sys-

tem restricts the number of votes a voter can cast to fewer than the 

number of representatives elected. 137 Limiting a voter in an MMD 

to a single vote is sensible if an MMD is treated as the combination 

of several SMDs. A voter in an SMD typically casts a singl e vote. 

Limiting that voter to a single vote when multiple districts are 

combined is not surprising. 138 

When a voter is given a single vote in an MMD election, a candi-

date is guaranteed election by winning votes based on the following 

formula: 

135 . See Richie & Spencer, supra note 78, at 962 –63 ( “In places with racially polarized 

voting, the power of electoral majorities to shut out voters in the minority can allow those 

candidates preferred by the white majority to win 100% of the seats, despite a substantial 

number of racial minorities preferring other candidates. Such outcomes make a mockery of 

the principle of one person, one vote; while every voter has the same number of votes, voters 

in the majority have five votes that each help elect a candidate, while voters in the minority 

can elect none. ”). 

136 . See id. at 960 ( “At the state and local level, judges routinely order creation of single -

member, winner -take -all districts as the judicially preferred remedy to violations of the Vot-

ing Rights Act despite evidence of the shortcomings of these districts. ”). 

137 . If political or racial minorities are evenly dispersed in districts, MMDs may be use-

ful to help them elect a candidate of choice. In that circumstance, the minority grou p may 

be a minority in every district that could be reasonably drawn, leaving them unable to elect 

a representative of choice. Conversely, some jurisdictions have attempted to convert an SMD 

system into an MMD system with the result that some African Ameri can voter s who could 

elect a representative of choice under the SMD system would be unable to do so under the 

MMD system. See Earls et al., supra note 6, at 772 (discussing a DOJ -rejected proposal by 

Greensville County, Virginia); Richie & Spencer, supra note 78, at 966 ( “Consequently, 

many southern jurisdictions began shifting to elections by winner -take -all, at -large methods 

that would allow racial minorities to cast a ballot, but deny them any reasonable possibility 

of actually electing anyone. Immediate ly following the passage of the VRA, for example, 

many local jurisdictions in Georgia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Louisiana, and Missis-

sippi switched to winner -take -all, at -large elections. ”). 

138 . An interesting question is whether Virginia could recr eate traditional at -large dis-

tricts in which voters could cast as many votes as representatives to be elected. That could 

lead to all Democrats or all Republicans being elected over a large area that would typically 

elect a combination of Republicans and D emocrats. The adoption of such a plan is unlikely 

to violate the U.S. Constitution given that partisan gerrymandering that could lead to the 

same result does not appear to violate the U.S. Constitution. Rucho v. Common Cause, 139 

S. Ct. 2484, 2489 (2019). The plan might violate Virginia ’s bar on partisan gerrymandering 

in redistricting, but that is unclear. See VA. CODE ANN . § 24.2 -304.04 (Cum. Supp. 2022). 882 UNIVERSITY OF RICHMO ND LAW REVIEW [Vol. 57 :851 

• votes suffici ent for victory = (total number of votes cast/(number 

of representatives to be chosen+1)) + 1 

The formula may appear complicated, but it is easy to understand. 

If three candidates are to be elected in an election with 1000 votes 

cast, the votes necessary t o guarantee a candidate receives one of 

the top -three vote totals is: 

• (1000/(3+1))+1 = 251 

If Candidate A receives one -fourth of the votes plus one (251), 

there are not enough votes (749) remaining for three candidates to 

beat or tie Candidate A. If Candid ate B receives 251 votes and Can-

didate C receives 251 votes, only 247 votes remain for any other 

candidate. Candidate A must be a top -three finisher, winning a 

seat as a result. 139 

In an MMD that selects two representatives, a candidate who 

wins 33.4% of th e votes cast is guaranteed to win a seat. A moti-

vated 33.4% of voters can ensure the election of their candidate of 

choice. Advocating for a system in which 33.4% of voters in a dis-

trict can control a legislative seat in a two -representative MMD 

election m ay seem problematic. However, in an SMD in which the 

winner of a party primary may be virtually guaranteed to win the 

general election, a candidate may functionally win the election by 

energizing less than 33.4% of the electorate. 

The more representatives chosen in the MMD, the smaller the 

proportion of voters must be to elect their candidate of choice. How-

ever, the larger the MMD, the larger the number of votes in sup-

port of a specific candidate is required to guarantee representation. 

Assume a jurisdicti on with twelve SMDs of 1000 voters each. A 

candidate needs 501 votes in a specific district to guarantee elec-

tion. A candidate would need the following number of votes to guar-

antee election under various MMD plans in the same jurisdiction:                       

> 139 .See Richie & Spencer, supra note 78, at 983 –84 ( “For choice voting, the threshold of
> exclusion depends on the number of seats being elected. Candidates will be elected if they
> receive one more than a percentage of the vote equal to one divided by one more than the
> number of candidates. If choice voting were applied to a single -member district, the w inning
> candidate would need one vote more than one -half, or fifty percent plus one vote; in a two -
> seat election, a candidate would need one vote more than one -third, or 33.33% plus one vote;
> in a three -seat election the candidate would need one vote more than one -fo urth, or twenty -
> five percent plus one vote; in a four -seat election the candidate would need one vote more
> than one -fifth, or twenty percent plus one vote; and so on, with representation becoming
> more proportional the greater the number of seats to be filled. ”). 20 23 ]ENHANCING RURAL REPR ESENTATION 883
> •six two -member d istricts (2000 voters) 2000/3 + 1 = 667 votes (in
> a district)
> •four three -member districts (3000 voters) 3000/4 + 1 = 751 votes
> •three four -member districts (4000 voters) 4000/5 + 1 = 801 votes
> •two six -member districts (6000 voters) 6000/7 + 1 = 858 votes

If a candidate’s supporters are fairly evenly spread throughout 

the jurisdiction, the candidate may be likely to win a seat in a mul-

timember district. Similarly, if voters with similar interests are 

evenly spread through a jurisdiction, MMD may allow them to 

elect a candidate of choice who would represent their interests 

when they would be unable to do so in an SMD system. 

There is a wrinkle for a majority party in a n FPTP, MMD, lim-

ited voting system. The majority party may need to organize to 

avoid winning less than a proportional share of seats. If one or a 

few majority -party candidates are very popular, they may win far 

more votes than necessary to secure a seat. If so, multiple minority 

party candidates may win more votes than less popular majorit y-

party candidates. 

Assume the following vote totals in a 100,000 -voter, three -seat 

MMD, limited single -vote election in which the voters vote sixty -

five pe rcent Republican, thirty -five percent Democratic:              

> •Candidate A (R) 35,000 votes
> •Candidate B (R) 15,000 votes
> •Candidate C (R) 15,000 votes
> •Candidate D (D) 17,000 votes
> •Candidate E (D) 17,000 votes
> •Candidate F (D) 1,000 votes

Candidates A, D, and E —two Democrats and a Republican —

would win seats. That does not track the partisan lean of voters. 

Conversely, t he concern for voters in the minority party is the need 

to coordinate to ensure they do not split votes among too many can-

didates and lose all representation in the process. 140 

The primary value of MMD (with limited voting) is in giving a 

political minority the ability to elect a representative of choice. In 

a jurisdiction with politically polarized voting in which a political 

minority has virtually no ability to elect a representative in an 

SMD system, the ability to elect a representative in a multimember    

> 140 .See id. at 987.

884 UNIVERSITY OF RICHMO ND LAW REVIEW [Vol. 57 :851 

system may energize the political minority to become more en-

gaged. 

As statewide races from the last few years suggest, there are 

pockets of Democratic support in deep -red rural areas. The most 

recent Virginia General Assembly races suggest the same. In co n-

tested St ate Senate races in 2019, Democrats (or Independents) in 

rural areas demonstrated a level of support that might allow them 

to elect a candidate of choice if Virginia’s electoral systems were 

diversified. 141 The same was true in the 2021 House of De legates 

races. 142 Those results suggest that with an attractive candidate, 

political minorities in rural Virginia might be able to win in 

MMDs. 143 

A drawback of representation under an MMD system is the dif-

fusion of representation that accompanies it due to mu ltiplicity of 

representatives. 144 That may be a problem for the political major-

ity, who may not know to which representative to turn. It is not a 

problem for the political minority that might not have a dedicated 

representative in an SMD system but might hav e a single repre-

sentative in an MMD system. 

B. Ranked Choice Voting 

1. The Process 

RCV determines an election’s winner based on an electorate’s 

overall preferences for candidates rather than based solely on the 

number of first -place votes a candidate rec eives. It is not new. 145 

141 . See 2019 November General , VA. DEP ’T. OF ELECTIONS (N ov. 18, 2019, 5:34 PM), 

https://results.elections.virginia.gov/vaelections/2019%20November%20General/Site/Gener 

alAssembly.html [https://perma.cc/9LV8 -YFTR]. 

142 . See 2021 November General , VA. DEP ’T. OF ELECTIONS (Dec. 16, 2021, 3:28 PM), 

https://results.elections.virginia.gov/vaelections/2021%20November%20General/Site/Gener 

alAssembly.html [https://perma.cc/TD2D -UBYB]. 

143 . This is consistent across the rural United States. Scala & Johnson, supra note 2 9, 

at 164 ( “However, the Republican Party ’s dominance in rural America has not been uniform. 

Pockets of relative Democratic strength have emerged in areas dominated by the ‘new rural ’

economy of amenities and recreation. ”). 

144 . See Chambers, supra note 42, at 178 ( “Under non -districted systems, voters cannot 

be certain who champions their interests (i.e,. [sic] who is their representative), and repre-

sentatives cannot be certain whose interests to champion (i.e., who are their constituents). ”). 

145 . See Pilde s & Parsons, supra note 14, at 1784 ( “Developed in the mid -1800s, RCV —

also known as ‘instant -runoff voting, ’ ‘preferential voting, ’ or the ‘alternative vote ’—allows 

voters to rank the candidates running for office in order of preference rather than limitin g20 23 ] ENHANCING RURAL REPR ESENTATION 885 

RCV allows voters to rank multiple candidates for whom they are 

willing to vote, allowing their lower -ranked candidates to receive 

their vote if their higher -ranked candidates are removed from con-

sideration during the RCV tabulation process. 146 Rather than allow 

a candidate to win with a small proportion of votes, as FPTP sys-

tems do, RCV requires a winning candidate receive a certain per-

centage of the available votes cast depending on the number of po-

sitions to be filled. For example, i n an election for an SMD, the 

winning candidate in an RCV election must receive fifty percent 

plus one of the valid, non -exhausted ballots during a tabulation 

round. Ballots become exhausted when all candidates listed on a 

ballot have been eliminated in su ccessive vote tabulation rounds. 

RCV is designed to guarantee the winning candidate has a signifi-

cant level of support from the electorate. That encourages candi-

dates to seek support from all parts of the electorate, even from 

political minorities. That ma y lessen polarization and allow politi-

cal minorities to influence an RCV election in a way they could not 

influence a n FPTP election. 147 

Some argue RCV is confusing; it is not. Some voters may be con-

fused by how votes are tallied, but RCV voting is not confu sing. 148 

The voter is asked to list the candidates for whom the voter is will-

ing to vote based on the voter’s preferences. Jurisdictions may limit 

the number of candidates a voter can rank. 149 If a voter were given 

a list of several ice cream flavors and asked to rank order their 

preferred flavors, they could likely do so. Some voters might decline 

to list any flavors because they do not like ice cream. Other voters                                      

> voters to a single choice. ”); see also Richie & Spencer, supra note 78, at 1010 (noting that
> nearly two -dozen cities adopted RCV in the early twentieth century).
> 146 .VA.CODE ANN .§ 24.2 -673.1(A) (Cum. Supp. 2022) ( “Ranked choice voting ’means a
> method of casting and tabulating votes in which (i) voters rank candidates in order of pref-
> erence, (ii) tabulation proceeds in rounds such that in each of round either a candidate or
> candidates are elected or the last -place candidate is defeated, (iii) votes for voters ’next -
> ranked candidates are transferred from elected or defeated candidates, and (iv) tabulation
> ends when the number of candidates elected equals the number of offices to be filled. ”); see
> also Pildes & Parsons, supra note 14, at 17 75 (explaining the mechanics of RCV).
> 147 .See Pildes & Parsons, supra note 14, at 1775 ( “In our era of hyperpolarized and toxic
> politics, political reformers are searching for changes to our electoral processes that would
> encourage a less divisive style of elections and governance. Reformers argue that among the
> most promising would be a shift to RCV. ”).
> 148 .See Steven J. Mulroy, The Great Unskewing: Remedying Structural Bias in U.S.
> Elections ,58 U. LOUISVILLE L. R EV . 101, 129 (2019) (noting voters are not typically confused
> by RCV).
> 149 .Alaska allows the voter to rank up to five candidates in a single race. See Alaska
> Better Elections Implementation ,ALASKA DIV .OF ELECTIONS ,https://www.elections.alaska.
> gov /RCV.php [ https://perma.cc/8WN7 -ZGX5]. 886 UNIVERSITY OF RICHMO ND LAW REVIEW [Vol. 57 :851

might list a few flavors because they do not like many of the avail-

able flavors. Yet other voter s might list nearly as many flavors as 

were presented because they would favor a barely preferred flavor 

of ice cream to nothing. Tabulating the votes under an RCV system 

is like deciding which single ice cream flavor will be served at a 

party after gettin g the rank order preferences from all the party 

attendees. 

The tabulation of votes in an RCV election proceeds in rounds. 

In the first round, each voter’s first -place votes are counted. If the 

candidate who wins the largest number of votes in round one ha s

more than fifty percent of the votes, that candidate wins. If the 

candidate with the most votes garners fifty percent of the votes or 

fewer, the candidate with the fewest votes is eliminated. A voter’s 

vote for their most preferred (i.e., first place) ca ndidate will be 

counted for that candidate until the candidate is eliminated from 

consideration. The votes for the candidate with the fewest first -

place votes will be reallocated to the second -place candidate on 

those ballots. Votes that have no second -pla ce candidate are ex-

hausted, set aside, and no longer counted for the purpose of deter-

mining if a candidate has reached the fifty -percent -plus -one vote 

threshold. 150 The process continues until a candidate has reached 

the fifty -percent -plus -one vote threshold of non -exhausted ballots. 

By eliminating the last place finisher in each round until the win-

ner meets the threshold for victory, RCV eliminates spoilers and 

splitters. 151 

Some argue RCV ensures only candidates with majority support 

win SMD elections. 152 That is not quite accurate. Due to the exist-

ence of exhausted ballots, a winning candidate may win with a ma-

jority of non -exhausted ballots counted in the winning round, while 

only winning a plurality of all ballots cast in the initial round. In-

deed, that occur red in Alaska’s 2022 special congressional election. 

United States Representative Mary Peltola won the election, but 

she did not win the support of a majority of those who voted in           

> 150 .Pildes & Parsons, supra note 14, at 1786.
> 151 .Id.
> 152 .See ,e.g. , Richie et al., supra note 40, at 158 ( “Using RCV in a presidential election
> determined by the national popular vote would generate yet more progress by replacing a
> plurality rule with majority rule; RCV ensures majority rule by correcting the ‘vote -splitting ’
> dynamic that occurs when there are more than two candidates for President. ”).

20 23 ] ENHANCING RURAL REPR ESENTATION 887 

election. 153 In the first round, 188,582 valid ballots were cast, list -

ing Peltola (75,799), Sarah Palin (58,973) , or Nick Begich (53,810) 

as a first choice. 154 Begich was the last -place finisher in the first 

round and was eliminated from consideration. Begich’s first -choice 

ballots were redistributed based on the second choice lis ted on 

those ballots. Palin added 27,053 of Begich’s votes, Peltola added 

15,467 of Begich’s votes, and more than 11,000 Begich voters did 

not list Peltola or Palin as a second choice. After the redistribution, 

Peltola won with 91,266 votes and Palin lost with 86,026 votes. 

Peltola won some measure of support from 48.4% (91,266 of 

188,582) of those who cast a valid vote in the initial round of the 

election. 155 In Alaska’s regular November 2022 election, Repre-

sentative Peltola won with a majority measure of su pport of those 

who cast a ballot in the initial round of the election. 156 

Exhausted ballots may not ultimately determine who is elected. 

However, they provide important information about the prefer-

ences of the voters. The ballots indicate where support for v arious 

candidates diminishes. They may suggest frustration with many 

or most candidates on the ballot. 157 If a significant number or pro-

portion of voters are only willing to vote for one or two candidates 

on a ballot with many candidates, an opportunity may exist for a 

candidate who appeals to those voters to be a voice for those people 

in the next election cycle. In the alternative, the candidate who 

wins may wish to consider whether exhausted ballots reflect disil-

lusion with that candidate. The winning cand idate can use that as 

an opportunity to reach out to those voters, who are part of the 

candidate’s constituency.                                            

> 153 .STATE OF ALASKA ,2022 SPECIAL GENERAL ELECTION RCV TABULATION (2022),
> https://www.elections.alaska.gov/results/22SSPG/RcvDetailedReport.pdf [https://perma.cc/
> JBE3 -447C].
> 154 .Id .
> 155 .RCV may have done exactly what it was designed to do: eliminate those who play
> heavily to their base. See JIMMY BALSER ,CONG .RSCH .SERV ., LSB10837, RANKED -CHOICE
> VOTING :LEGAL CHALLENGES AND CONSIDERATIONS FOR CONGRESS 2 (2022) ( “Proponents of
> RCV claim that other election systems , such as SCV elections with plurality thresholds,
> overly benefit candidates with a strong core of support, or a ‘base, ’by allowing those candi-
> dates to win with only a plurality of voter support even if they are strongly opposed by the
> rest of the elector ate. ”).
> 156 .STATE OF ALASKA ,RCV DETAILED REPORT :GENERAL ELECTION 2(2022) ,https://
> www.elections.alaska.gov/results/22GENR/US%20REP.pdf [https://perma.cc/FC29 -4JK2].
> 157 .Exhausted ballots may be a type of protest vote. See Hayden, supra note 41, at 593
> (“Alienated voters may also make their intentions clear by actually showing up at the polls
> and casting a protest vote. ”).

888 UNIVERSITY OF RICHMO ND LAW REVIEW [Vol. 57 :851 

Some may argue second -place (or third -place) votes are funda-

mentally different from first -place votes and should not decide an 

election. Second -place votes may suggest a lack of positive inten-

sity for the winning candidate. A voter’s preference for their sec-

ond -place candidate may not match the intensity of their prefer-

ence for their first -place candidate. However, a voter’s preference 

for their second -place candidate may outstrip another voter’s pref-

erence for their first -place candidate. 158 The key issue is whether 

an electorate believes a second -choice vote should help decide an 

election, regardless of the intensity it reflects. If so, second -pla ce 

votes should help decide an election. Those votes are tiebreakers 

when a majority preference for a candidate does not exist. They 

represent preferences that may be relevant to how well a constitu-

ency will be served or will feel served during an elected official’s 

term. 

2. RCV’s Possible Effects 

The winner of a n FPTP election may also win the same election 

if decided by RCV, but that will not invariably be the case. The 

highest vote -getter after the first round of balloting may not al-

ways win an RCV elect ion. One of the purposes of RCV is to allow 

a voter to help their second -choice candidate to win. Competitive 

candidates may need to think about how to become the second -

place choice of other candidates’ supporters, possibly changing the 

nature of campaign ing. 159 The need to appeal to a majority of voters 

may lead to campaigning that is more cooperative and less incen-

diary. It may prompt more attempts to connect with a larger group 

of voters. It may also yield candidates who are likely to support the 

policy p references of voters who list them second. That could lead 

to legislators who are willing to consider and support the interests 

of political or racial minority voters they otherwise could ignore.                

> 158 .See Grant M. Hayden, The False Promise of One Person, One Vote , 102 MICH .L.
> REV .213, 236 –51 (2003) (discussing the difficulty of interpersonal utility comparisons in the
> context of voting).
> 159 .BALSER ,supra note 154, at 2 ( “Proponents also argue that RCV creates strong in-
> centives for candidates to appeal to voters who may cast them as their second or third choice,
> thereby encouraging the election of officials by a broader coalition of voters and reducing
> partisanship. ”); Pildes & Parsons, supra note 14, at 1775 ( “Because RCV creates strong in-
> centives for candidates to appeal beyond their base of ‘first -choice ’support to voters who
> might still rank them second or third, RCV is believed to encourage greater coalition -build-
> ing, less divisive campaigning, and a larger number of elected officials that appeal to a
> broader array of voters. ”).

20 23 ] ENHANCING RURAL REPR ESENTATION 889 

More cooperative campaigning may lead to better governing, a s in-

cumbents think about how to keep the populace sufficiently satis-

fied to win RCV elections in the future. 

RCV can help a political minority affect who is elected without 

necessarily giving the minority a strong chance to elect their can-

didate of choice .160 Nonetheless, the ability to vote for a candidate 

a voter strongly supports and to vote for a candidate the voter is 

willing to accept if the voter’s most preferred candidate does not 

win may be of value to a voter, possibly increasing election turn-

out. 161 Even modest increased turnout could be important for at 

least three reasons. First, increased turnout suggests lower apathy 

among the voters. 162 Lessened apathy may lead to greater civic en-

gagement between elections. Second, the higher the turnout the 

bette r an elected official may be able to understand the electorate. 

Third, increased turnout may encourage elected officials to listen 

to a larger proportion of citizens. The more relevant a broader pro-

portion of the electorate becomes, the more likely an incu mbent 

may be to listen to that broader group of citizens. 

160 . RCV can satisfy a greater number of voters than plurality voting. See Richie & 

Spencer, supra , note 78, at 983 (“Choice voting will maximize the number of voters who elect 

one of their favorite candidates under two conditions: (1) when there are ca ndidates who 

reflect the diversity of views within a jurisdiction; and (2) when voters rank candidates re-

flecting their views in order of preference.”). That may minimize the so -called ‘wasted vote’ 

problem that deems a vote “wasted” when it is cast for a losing candidate, or a vote that 

increases a winning candidate’s margin of victory. See Gill v. Whitford, 138 S. Ct. 1916, 1924 

(2018) (discussing wasted votes). The nomenclature of a wasted vote is misplaced if a repre-

sentative’s margin of victory is rele vant to how a representative governs. 

161 . Whether RCV increases turnout significantly is not clear. Compare Brandon Marc 

Draper, No More Half Measures: The Case for Compulsory Voting in United States Elections ,

13 ELON L. REV . 147, 171 –74 (2020) (arguing RCV to be coupled with compulsory voting 

laws to increase turnout), and Courtney L. Juelich & Joseph A. Coll, Ranked Choice Voting 

and Youth Voter Turnout: The Roles of Campaign Civility and Candidate Contact , 9 POL . &

GOVERNANCE 319, 319 –31 (2021) (conclu ding increased voter contact in RCV systems in-

creases youth voter turnout), with Gordon Merrick & Anders Newbury, Proactively Protect-

ing Vermont’s Participatory Democracy: Reforms to Election Structure, Campaign Finance, 

and Voter Engagement , 45 VT. L. REV . 481, 493 (2021) (providing examples of RCV inde-

pendently increasing turnout in municipal elections), and Richie et al., supra note 40, at 

157 (“Keeping voter choice limited will make it harder to draw voters in who are already 

disaffected by their choice s. Notably, cities with RCV have seen turnout increase in recent 

mayoral elections across a variety of contexts.”). 

162 . Voters may vote more often if they are not alienated. Hayden, supra note 41, at 593 

(“Alienated voters may abstain in different ways. In many cases, they may simply fail to 

show up at the polls on election day.”). 890 UNIVERSITY OF RICHMO ND LAW REVIEW [Vol. 57 :851 

3. Primary Elections 

The role of primary elections may change in an RCV system in 

rural Virginia. In many rural areas, for practical purposes, the Re-

publican primary is the general election. RCV may expand the ef-

fective electorate from the majority party’s primary electorate to 

the general electorate, lessen the importance of party lines, and 

render primary elections unnecessary. Primaries could be restruc-

tured as open primaries with the top finisher s creating the field for 

the general election. 163 RCV in an open primary would help winnow 

the field to the strongest contenders. RCV in the general election 

would choose the consensus winner. Conversely, the general elec-

tion could be a restricted -field RCV election filled with party pri-

mary winners and independents who could meet a threshold to se-

cure a spot on the general election ballot. Political parties would 

presumably prefer to select a candidate who could win in the RCV 

general election. That could le ad the party’s voters to choose a more 

moderate candidate for the general election than the base might 

prefer. That candidate might be more willing to consider the inter-

ests of the political minority. 

RCV may not change the party of the representative sel ected .

However, it may change who is selected and their partisan profile. 

RCV may encourage different candidates to run or may encourage 

the incumbents to govern differently. RCV may not always lead to 

moderation and the election of the moderate candidate who is 

thought most likely to represent their entire constituency, but it 

can. 164               

> 163 .This is a qualifying or “jungle” primary. See David A. Hopkins, Can American Po-
> litical Parties Disagree b ut Still Get Along? , 51 TULSA L. REV .349, 351 n.7 (2016).
> 164 .Pildes & Parsons, supra note 14, at 1785 (“This is not to say that RCV will always
> encourage or incentivize ideological moderation. Whether a progressive, moderate, or con-
> servative candidate wi ns is a function of coalition -building, and ‘middle -of -the -road’ policies
> will not always be the best way to create a majority coalition. In fact, in elections in which
> a spoiler, minor -party candidate would take enough votes away from an ideologically ex-
> treme major -party candidate to give the race to a moderate candidate from the other major
> party, the use of RCV might bolster the prospects of that more extreme candidate. ”).

20 23 ] ENHANCING RURAL REPR ESENTATION 891 

4. Single Transferable Vote 

When RCV and MMD are used in tandem, the result is the single 

transferable vote (“STV”) system. 165 The choices voters make are 

the same. The number of votes a winning candidate needs to win 

under an STV system is no different than under MMD without 

RCV. The only difference relates to the tabulation of votes, which 

is more complicated. Once a winning candidate reaches the thresh-

old of votes necessary to win, STV considers what to do with the 

“excess votes” a winning candidate has received. 166 The election 

process allocates the candidate’s excess votes to other candidates 

based on the proportion of second -place votes that candidate’s vot-

ers gave to other can didates. Assume a candidate needs 251 votes 

to win a seat in an MMD election. If that candidate wins 300 votes, 

she has 49 excess votes that will be reallocated to other candidates. 

In successive rounds, the winning candidate’s excess votes and the 

votes o f the candidate who has finished last in the round are di-

vided among the remaining candidates. 167 The process continues 

until all seats are filled by candidate s who have reached the re-

quired threshold of votes. STV obviates the need for the parties to 

organi ze their voters, as might be necessary to avoid splitting in 

an MMD race that uses FPTP tabulation. 168 Consequently, STV 

mimics proportional representation, limiting the support a major-

ity party can receive in a highly polarized setting. The political mi-

nori ty’s representation may also be capped, but it is higher than it 

would have been in an SMD system in which the minority party 

might lose every district’s election.                              

> 165 .See VA.CODE ANN .§24.2 -673.1 (Cum. Supp. 2022) ( “‘ Ranked choice voting ’is kn own
> as ‘instant runoff voting ’when electing a single office and ‘single transferable vote ’when
> electing multiple offices. ”).
> 166 .See Diller, supra note 31, at 175 –76 (discussing STV).
> 167 .See Jeffrey C. O’Neill, Everything That Can Be Counted Does Not Necessarily Count:
> The Right to Vote and the Choice of a Voting System , 2006 MICH .ST.L. REV . 327, 336 –37
> (2006).
> 168 .See Pildes & Parsons, supra note 14, at 1781 (2021) (discussing splitting); Richie &
> Spencer, supra note 78, at 987 ( “[C]hoice voting has worked well in complex jurisdictions
> with diverse racial minority communities, where the potential for split votes would other-
> wise be more likely. ”).

892 UNIVERSITY OF RICHMO ND LAW REVIEW [Vol. 57 :851 

III. THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY , ELECTORAL DIVERSITY , AND CIVIC 

PARTICIPATION 

Electoral diversity can foster a more responsive government that 

is more likely to address the ills of all people than FPTP, SMD sys-

tems. MMD can help political and racial minorities elect their can-

didates of choice. RCV can help political minorities influence who 

is elected without necessarily allowing them to elect their candi-

date of choice. Both MMD and RCV make elections more relevant 

to political minorities in rural areas dominated by one party, in-

centivizing those local political minorities to fully engage in the po-

liti cal process. The General Assembly could be restructured to help 

facilitate this change. 

A. Multimember Districting and the General Assembly 

The General Assembly could convert some of its SMDs into lim-

ited voting MMDs. Currently, the General Assembly consis ts of 

forty state senate SMDs and 100 house SMDs. Virginia could be 

divided into twenty electoral districts. Each district would be an 

MMD electing two senators and five delegates. All five delegates 

could be elected at -large in each electoral district, or the districts 

could be subdivided so that one subdistrict elects two delegates, 

and one subdistrict elects three delegates. 169 The approach is un-

conventional, but not unknown in Virginia. 170 

Any plan incorporating MMD would need to survive federal and 

state voting rights regulation. 171 Meeting such scrutiny requires 

169 . These might be reasonably -sized MMDs. See Richie & Spencer, supra note 78, at 

1002 ( “The application of choice voting to state legislative elections and congressional elec-

tions should generally take the form of multi -member districts composed of between three 

and five members each. ”). Some states have smaller MMDs. See MD. CONST . art. III, § 2. 

170 . See Za ch Armstrong, Supervisors Vote for County to Continue With Two Multi -Mem-

ber Districts , P RINCE GEORGE J. (Oct. 12, 2021), https://www.theprincegeorgejournal.com/ne 

ws/supervisors -vote -for -county -to -continue -with -two -multi -member -districts/article_5b50c 

cbc -26c5 -11ec -b599 -e36a10b31871.html [https://perma.cc/ T7HQ -26CM] (discussing Prince 

George County Board of Supervisors which has five members chosen from one two -repre-

sentative district and one three -representative district). 

171 . Meeting federal VRA scrutin y may become easier over time as the Supreme Court 

of the United States appears to be lessening VRA section 2 scrutiny. See Brnovich v. Demo-

cratic National Committee, 141 S. Ct. 2321, 2346 –50 (2021) (holding that no section 2 vio-

lation occurs if a voting law is facially neutral, it furthers a compelling state interest, and 

its disparate burden on minority voters is small); see also Chambers, supra note 51, at 258 –

60, 262 –63 (discussing the Court ’s section 2 redistricting jur isprudence between 2010 and 

2020). The Court may be poised to eliminate significant protections for minority groups in 20 23 ] ENHANCING RURAL REPR ESENTATION 893 

the MMD not to lessen the opportunity of racial minorities to elect 

their representatives of choice. 172 Expanding MMD and RCV as 

suggested is intended to provide political and racial minorities a 

grea ter chance to elect representatives of choice and influence elec-

tions than they would have in an SMD scheme. Two -member dis-

tricts allow political minorities with 33.4% support to elect a rep-

resentative, three -member districts allow political minorities wit h

25.1% support to elect a representative, and five -member districts 

allow political minorities with 16.7% support to elect a representa-

tive. If parts of the plan did not meet voting rights scrutiny, any 

part of the districting plan could be modified to me et objections. 173 

Any electoral district could be restructured to provide single -mem-

ber electoral or delegate districts inside the framework of the 

twenty -electoral district scheme, if required by voting rights stat-

utes. 

The plan has two additional virtues r elated to redistricting. 

First, t he plan is a nested plan, in which the delegate districts are 

embedded in larger senatorial districts. That is a feature of the 

2021 General Assembly legislative maps the Supreme Court of Vir-

ginia approved in the wake of th e post -2020 census redistricting 

effort. 174 Second , the plan would likely decrease gerrymandering, 

as fewer district lines would need to be drawn. The dispute over 

where the lines should be drawn might be contentious. 175 However, 

with fewer lines and larger di stricts, disagreements about moving 

small bits of land from one district to another would be less likely 

to occur. 

the redistricting context in Merrill v. Milligan , which the Court heard this term. See No. 21 -

1086 (U.S. argued Oct. 4, 2022). 

172 . See Vo ting Rights Act of 1965 § 2, 52 U.S.C. § 10301; VA. CODE ANN . § 24.2 -126 

(Cum. Supp. 2022) (establishing the state law equivalent of section 2). 

173 . That is the approach of the (Federal) Fair Representation Act, which would require 

MMD and RCV for congress ional districts. See Diller, supra note 31, at 170 –73. 

174 . While this is a feature of the maps, the special masters did not “adhere to this stand-

ard religiously ” in either the draft or final maps due to other competing criteria. BERNARD 

GROFMAN & SEAN TREN DE , SPECIAL MASTERS ’ PRELIMINARY MEMORANDUM 10 (2021), htt 

ps://www.vacourts.gov/courts/scv/districting/memorandum_re_va_redistricting_2021.pdf 

[https://perma.cc/YM28 -CCYH] (explaining the nesting concept); BERNARD GROFMAN &

SEAN TRENDE , SPECIAL MASTERS ’ FINAL MEMORANDUM 6 (2021), https://www.vacourts .gov/ 

courts/scv/districting/2021_virginia_redistricting_memo.pdf [https://perma.cc/Y5ZX -N9Y4]; 

see also In re Decennial Redistricting, 300 Va. 379, 380 (2021) (approving the special mas-

ters ’ Final Redistrictin g Maps). 

175 . Drawing a small number of lines may be fraught. Virginia need only draw eleven 

congressional districts, many fewer than state house or senate districts. Nonetheless, con-

gressional redistricting was as contentious as state legislative redistric ting in the wake of 

the 2010 census. See Chambers, supra note 51, at 248 –54. 894 UNIVERSITY OF RICHMO ND LAW REVIEW [Vol. 57 :851 

Well before the post -2020 census redistricting, the General As-

sembly signaled it wanted to avoid partisanship and partisan ger-

rymandering in the redistricting process. 176 A deemphasis on draw-

ing lines to construct so many SMDs might help lessen the parti -

sanship. That is particularly important given that the Virginia Re-

districting Commission was unable to produce maps during their 

redistricting period, requiring special masters to draw legislative 

maps for approval by the Supreme Court of Virginia. 177 As of today, 

there is little reason to believe the redistricting process will pro-

ceed any differently in 2031 than it did in 2021. 

B. Civic Engagemen t Between Elections 

With the potential of a stronger connection to a representative 

who supports its interests, a political minority may have its inter-

ests fully considered under an MMD/RCV/STV system. That may 

lead to stronger civic engagement between ele ctions, as the politi-

cal minority may hold their representatives responsible for their 

actions in real time. 178 In that political atmosphere, incumbents 

may be more responsive and may consider their next election more 

closely as they are governing. In theory , there could be a drawback 

to expanding the use of MMD. Adopting MMD to guarantee explicit 

representation for the political minority may suggest a representa-

tive can reasonably ignore part of the representative’s constituency 

because another representativ e is thought to represent them. The 

concern is theoretical because the expansion of MMD may be nec-

essary precisely because representatives may already be ignoring 

part of their constituency. If the collection of representatives se-

lected in the MMDs are ful ly representing the political majority 

and the political minority, the MMD system has worked as 

planned. 

The pool of people considering a run for office might broaden for 

the better. A potential candidate who knows 25.1% of the vote will 

garner a seat in a three -representative MMD or 33.4% of the vote 

will garner a seat in a two -representative MMD may be more likely             

> 176 .See Henry L. Chambers, Jr., The Fight Over the Virginia Redistricting Commission ,
> 24 R ICH . P UB . I NT . L. R EV . 81, 82 –86 (2021) (discussing the origin of the Virginia Redistrict-
> ing Commission).
> 177 .Mirshahi, supra note 96.
> 178 .See Gould, supra note 33, at 790 –91 (noting relationship between legislator and con -
> stituents is one of accountability). 20 23 ]ENHANCING RURAL REPR ESENTATION 895

to run than if the candidate faced an almost certain loss in a SMD .

MMD and RCV should encourage parties to run candidates in 

every election wi th no uncontested General Assembly seats in fu-

ture elections. 

Expanding the use of MMD and RCV in the General Assembly 

could encourage its broader adoption at the local level, possibly 

changing the composition of boards of supervisors, city councils, 

and s chool boards. Civic involvement may increase regarding local 

issues. Though local boards may already be hotbeds of civic in-

volvement, additional productive involvement may be beneficial. 

Pushing legislative bodies to be more accountable and responsive 

may be the essence of democratic engagement. 

C. Expanding Multimember Districting and Ranked -Choice 

Voting 

The benefits of expanding MMD and RCV are fairly clear. Ex-

panding MMD and RCV should increase the quality of representa-

tion for political or racial mino rities. It may increase turnout, civic 

engagement, and demands for accountability from representatives, 

as voters expect to be heard. However, expanding MMD and RCV 

is fraught and may not occur. The expansion would provide repre-

sentation and power to group s that have been powerless. 

The ceding of power could cause resistance to expanding elec-

toral diversity at the General Assembly or at the local level. Polit-

ical minorities have lost because they often are —by definition —

numerical minorities in an SMD syste m. Expanding MMD and 

RCV in specific jurisdictions might require the political majority to 

cede some power to the political minority, leading some officehold-

ers to lose their seats. That makes expansion unlikely in the ab-

sence of a public groundswell. Even with a groundswell at the Gen-

eral Assembly level, concerns regarding unfairness may attend the 

choice to install MMD in some areas but not others. If a majority 

party imposed MMD in an area where it had no representation, 

but declined to do so in areas wh ere it was dominant, problems 

would arise. Those expanding electoral diversity would need to be 

careful. 179    

> 179 .A generalized concern about mixing SMD and MMD in the General Assembly can
> be dismissed. The General Assembly had a combination of SMDs and MMDs for years before
> the DOJ objected to MMDs after the post -1980 census redistricting. See infra notes 127 –29

896 UNIVERSITY OF RICHMO ND LAW REVIEW [Vol. 57 :851 

The implementation of MMD and RCV could be controversial, 

but both are authorized under Virginia law. That suggests Virgin-

ians are willing to accept e lectoral diversity when and where use-

ful. When limited voting is a part of the MMD system, accepting 

that form of electoral diversity could rest on the desire to have the 

interests of localized political minorities represented in the rele -

vant legislative body. If Virginians do not share that desire, the 

expansion of MMD and RCV is less likely to occur in the General 

Assembly or in local legislative elections. 

The General Assembly or a local jurisdiction that considers ex-

panding MMD would need to determine how large a political or 

racial minority must be to deserve dedicated representation. The 

decision would govern the size of the MMDs. Explicit questions the 

political majority must ask regarding expanding electoral diversity 

in the General Assembly includ e: What partisan balance in the 

General Assembly is “fair”? What ideas should be represented in 

the state legislature that have not been represented? Local juris-

dictions contemplating expanding MMD and RCV would need to 

ask the same questions regarding the ir jurisdictions. The answers 

are unclear and require extensive civic engagement. The discus-

sion should start now. 

CONCLUSION 

Virginia has a history of declining to represent the interests of 

some of its citizens; 180 it surely is not alone. 181 Whether Virginia ns 

want to see the interests of all Virginians represented is unclear, 

but they should. The representation of the interests of political mi-

norities could raise the quality of legislation from the General As-

sembly. The views of representatives who have cons idered the in-

terests of view of rural political and racial minorities can lead to                 

> and accompanying text. Indeed, the Code of Virginia allows choosing a single legislature
> using SMD and MMD. VA.CODE ANN .§24.2 -304.1(A) (Cum. Supp. 2022); see also Holloway
> v. City of Virginia Beach, 42 F.4th 266, 271 –73 (4th Cir. 2022) (discussing Virginia B each
> city council which had been elected exclusively through at -large voting but must now be
> conducted through a combination of at -large and districted voting due to Code of Virginia
> section 24.2 -222(A) (Cum. Supp. 2021)).
> 180 .See Earls, et al., supra not e 6, at 770 –77 (noting the litany of ways Virginia juris-
> dictions attempted to use electoral systems reforms to harm African American voters).
> 181 .See BROWN -DEAN ET AL .,supra note 8, at 23 ( “When government shapes policy, it is
> more likely to ignore black voices than the voices of any other racial or ethnic group. That
> gap may be small, but given the high stakes, any inequality in policy responsiveness is worth
> highlighting and eventually addressing. ”).

20 23 ] ENHANCING RURAL REPR ESENTATION 897 

legislation that is not only good for some Virginians, but good for 

all Virginians. When the voices of political minorities are unrepre-

sented and unheard, they cannot help sh ape legislation and make 

it better. 

If Virginians want the interests of political minorities repre-

sented, mechanisms already allowed in Virginia law —MMD and 

RCV —can facilitate that. Precisely where, when, and how to im-

plement diverse electoral structures t o give political minorities in-

fluence in the election of their representatives or the power to elect 

their representative of choice may be controversial. The switch to 

an MMD plan, an RCV or an STV plan may meet more resistance 

in some areas than in others .

This Article focuses on the concerns of political and racial minor-

ities in rural Virginia , who tend to support Democratic candidates. 

However, two considerations should remain in mind. First, elec-

toral diversity considers rural interests that may not be repre-

sented in Virginia’s legislative bodies. Those are the interests of 

political minorities broadly defined. Political minorities are not 

party -specific. They may include racial minorities, members of var-

ious political parties, other disaffected issue -based groups, or some 

combination of them. 182 Second, the introduction of electoral diver-

sity can be used in heavily Republican rural areas to help Demo-

cratic voters whose interests may have been ignored, in heavily 

Democratic urban areas to help Repub lican voters whose interests 

may have been ignored, or in any other area where the interests of 

a local political minority have been ignored. 

If Virginians want more representation for the interests of polit-

ical and racial minorities in rural Virginia, th e General Assembly 

can use existing law to do so. Providing that representation could 

be a first step in aggressively seeking to remedy disparities in rural 

areas. 183 Experimentation with electoral rules and systems to serve              

> 182 .There can be an interesting relationship between race and partisan affiliation in
> some elections. See M.V. Hood III, Quentin Kidd & Irwin L. Morris, Race and the Tea Party
> in the Old Dominion: Split -Ticket Voting in the 2013 Virginia Elections , 48 PS: POL .SCI .&
> POL .107, 113 (2015) (suggesting partisan affiliation may affect voting more than racial an-
> imus or prejudice in some elections).
> 183 .See Lichter & Ziliak, supra note 9, at 22 ( “We need new approaches to social prob-
> lems and policies that are spatia lly inclusive —that recognize that urban -centric approaches
> may by definition inadvertently miss or downplay the importance of topics that are inextri-
> cably linked to the health and well -being of rural America. ”).

898 UNIVERSITY OF RICHMO ND LAW REVIEW [Vol. 57 :851 

our democratic values is not new. 184 If there is an appetite to en-

sure the interests of political minorities in rural Virginia are heard, 

a change to the dominant FPTP, SMD structure of Virginia elec-

tions could make a difference. 

184 . See Pildes & Parsons, supra note 14, at 1777 ( “Since the nation ’s beginning, Amer-

icans have experimented with the best ways of structuring the democratic process to meet 

the values and concerns of their era. Whether those experiments have meant requiring par-

ties to use primary elections to choos e their nominees, or the best way to finance campaigns, 

or what policies are appropriate for determining how candidates become eligible to get on 

the ballot, we have chosen to structure our elections in a variety of ways as our conception 

of democracy has evolved. ”).
