Title: FBI didn't review sensitive materials in Clinton email probe, declassified documents show

URL Source: https://thenationaldesk.com/news/americas-news-now/fbi-didnt-review-sensitive-materials-in-clinton-email-probe-declassified-documents-show

Published Time: 2025-07-21T17:16:12.000-04:00

Markdown Content:
by ELAINE MALLON | The National News Desk

Mon, July 21st 2025 at 5:16 PM

Updated Mon, July 21st 2025 at 5:55 PM

President Joe Biden, right, presents the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the Nation's highest civilian honor, to former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, in the East Room of the White House, Saturday, Jan. 4, 2025, in Washington. (AP Photo/Manuel Balce Ceneta)

TOPICS:

FBI Hillary Clinton Private email server Investigation Classified information James Comey Declassified materials Chuck Grassley

WASHINGTON (TNND) — The FBI failed to thoroughly investigate materials pertaining to its investigation of Hillary Clinton's use of a private email server during her time as Secretary of State.

A whistleblower gave the FBI thumb drives that "contained highly sensitive information exfiltrated from U.S. government agencies, including the Department of State, as well as then-President Barack Obama’s emails and, potentially, congressional information," but the FBI failed to review them, according to declassified materials documents from the "Clinton annex" found in the appendix of a 2018 Department of Justice Office of Inspector General report.

"This document shows an extreme lack of effort and due diligence in the FBI’s investigation of former Secretary Clinton’s email usage and mishandling of highly classified information," Sen. Chuck Grassley (R-IA), who released the report, said in a Monday press release. ""Under Comey’s leadership, the FBI failed to perform fundamental investigative work and left key pieces of evidence on the cutting room floor. The Comey FBI’s negligent approach and perhaps intentional lack of effort in the Clinton investigation is a stark contrast to its full-throated investigation of the Trump-Russia collusion hoax, which was based on the uncorroborated and now discredited Steele dossier. Comey’s decision-making process smacks of political infection."

Clinton, who served as Secretary of State in the Obama administration from 2009 to 2013, was under investigation by the FBI for sharing and storing classified materials on a private email server. The FBI, headed by Director James Comey, advised against seeking criminal charges to Clinton, the Democratic presidential nominee in July 2016 — just months before the presidential election.

"Although there is evidence of potential violations of the statutes regarding the handling of classified information, our judgment is that no reasonable prosecutor would bring such a case," then-FBI director James Comey said in a press release in 2016. "Prosecutors necessarily weigh a number of factors before bringing charges. There are obvious considerations, like the strength of the evidence, especially regarding intent. Responsible decisions also consider the context of a person’s actions, and how similar situations have been handled in the past."

The declassified appendix revealed that the FBI came across Russian intelligence asserting that then-Democratic Committee chairwoman Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz (D-FL) was communicating with two individuals from the Soros Open Society Foundations. In an effort to ease donors concerns regarding the FBI investigation, Wasserman communicated that the "data was removed from the mail servers just in time.”"

3.6K

SNAP suspension hits hard: Families fear crowded pantries as support vanishes

"The intelligence reports alleged that the Obama administration took efforts to scuttle the investigation into Clinton and protect her candidacy," Grassley's release reported. "I warned years ago that the Clinton investigation failed to hit the mark, and I’m grateful the American people can finally see the facts for themselves"

_Have questions, concerns or tips? Send them to Elaine at emallon@sbgtv.com._
