Title: 

URL Source: https://www.ojp.gov/pdffiles1/Photocopy/145677NCJRS.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 01 Feb 2021 02:45:24 GMT

Markdown Content:
\..  "s t

# "I  ~-

# • •

# a

.~ 

A ,T:,:  ~-.- , I ..  ,

## 145677 

U.S.  Department of Justice National Institute of Justice This document has been reproduced exactly as received from the person or organization originating  It.  Points of vieW or opinions stated  In 

this document are those of the authors and do not necessarily  represent 

the official position or policies of the  National  Institute  of Justice. Permission to reproduce this copyrighted  material  has been 

gra~~~ti  tute for Substance Abuse Research to the National Criminal Justice Reference  Service  (NCJRS). 

Further reproduction outside of the  NCJRS  system requires permission of the copyright owner. 

# • " , '41!'~- •

# •

# , "

# 1 _ .. 

# .. , ... 

# • •If you have issues viewing or accessing this file contact us at NCJRS.gov. CONTENTS 

Preface Quiz 

Parents 

Schools 

Marijuana Hashish Hashish  Oil 

Opium 

Heroin 

Dilaudid 

~2'1:>':'S-t'Jhm~·';"la"·~¥s'"r.':Jt,r;\;~) '!(,"iii,,';~,:j~'i:l;:i~;i~iJ\t:~ .. ~~ ,,'~  - H :'"  • i'  b ":l,'  ~~,,]  .•  :;<",,\/,,::'y,'.P\  '-1';;.  ;;~'''1.W'···  .:'t''''';~'l;>;-·:t.lW;i~:\·~/~;~~;;;:~i·'  ~

Cocaine 

Smoking  Cocaine Amphetamines/Methamphetamines Clandestine 

LSD·25 

PCP 

Mescaline 

Psilocybin·  Psilocyn  Mushrooms 

[4zTnhalants~'-',,-'~~--- ~~ 

Steroids 

Prescription Drugs Most Abused Designer Drugs The  Look-alikes 

Alcohol  Plus  Other  Drugs Warning  Signs  of  Alcoholism 

Tobacco 

Smokeless  Tobacco 65 Glossary of  Slang  Terms 67 References ~~~~~~~----------,.-----

The  following  true story was  related  by Mrs.  Chantal  Devine, wife ofthe  Honorable  Grant Devine,  Premier 

of Saskatchewan, at the  PRIDE  Canada  National  Conference on Youth and Drugs in May, 1988 in  Ottawa. 

The story was  told  to Mrs. Devine by Father Lucien Larre, a priest in  Saskatchewan  and a founder of Bosco Homes, a home for  delinquent  boys. 

# "WHY  DIDN'T  WE HOLD  HANDS  SOONER?" 

The story takes place in southern Saskatchewan in the fall of the year, just prior to harvest, when the wheat grows to a height of three to four feet. 

A few years ago a young  farmer  was working out in the field on his combine. He was putting in some new teeth while his  four-year  old son played in the dirt. After a while the father looked up and noticed that his son was not in the same place where he saw him last. He put down his tools and walked around trying to locate him. He looked out across the field and realized his son had wandered out into the wheat. The young father then went out and started to look for the child,  calling  his name over and over again. After a short time, the father began to worry and went back into the house to  tell  his wife. They walked around the field until noon,  calling  the boy's name with no success. The parents returned to the house and put in a long ring. For those of you who still  remem-

ber the party  line,  a long ring would alarm everyone in the area of an emergency or something of importance. 

People  came from miles and miles around to help this young couple look for their son. They looked  all  afternoon,  all  night and the entire next day. 

On  the third day, they were standing in the yard. The young father had his hands down in despair; his shirt was open, and he was obviously exhausted.  In  frustration he said,  "Why  don't we  all  join hands and walk out into the  wheat?" 

There was complete silence as the people joined hands. They then walked out  arm-in-arm 

into the wheat field. They had gone no more than  10  steps when they found the boy.  It  was too late; he was gone. The young man came back into the yard, looked to his wife and said,  "If  only we had held hands sooner." First  Printing,  1985 Revised  Second  Printing,  1987 Revised Third  Printing,  1988 

Printed  with permission from Mrs. Grant Devine Reprinted from  PRIDE  Quarterly,  National  Parents'  Resource 

Institute  for Drug Education,  Inc.,  Ati:'inta,  Georgia.  Summer 

1988  vol  9, no 4 Fourth  Printing,  1988 Revised Fifth  Printing,  1989 Revised  Sixth  Printing,  1990                      

> Revised Seventh Printing, 1991 Revised Eighth Printing, 1992 Revised Ninth Printing, 1993
> ©Copyright 1993 Institute for Substance Abuse Research (ISAR)
> P.O. Box 6837 Vero Beach, Florida 32961

(407)  569-3121                                        

> All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any form by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and recording, or by any information storage or retrieval system, without permisSion in writing from the publisher.
> ISBN 0935847-09-X
> Printed in the United States of America

ii ince the first Opium War, which lasted from 1839 to 1842, when the British de-feated the Chinese in their attempt to win a monopoly the' world opium trade, people of many nations have waged battles over drugs. In the United 

States,  the earliest combatants to engage in a different kind of drug war were inducted the day the Harrison Narcotics Act of 1914 became law. These new defenders, a total of 162 men, began the effort to control the flourishing interna-tional commerce in narcotics. Assigned to the Bureau of Inter-nal Revenue, they were given the task of  controlling  and regulating narcotic and coca products, the abuse of which had  rfNlched 

epidemic proportions in America. From that humble beginning, drug-enforcement today engages tens of thousands of men and women in the struggle to sup-press abusive drugs in this country. 

Sadly,  since those early days of tax-regulated drug con-trol, law enforcement  and  even international agreements have . not achieved significant, lasting success in curbing drug abuse in the United  States.  The almost unrestrained use of some drugs is too widespread to expect law enforcement alone to provide anything more than a holding 

action.  More citizens of our 

coun,fry  must get involved in the 

fight  against drug abuse. After 25 years as a law en-forcement officer, it's clear to me that the majority of American people are uninformed about drugs and rely too much on others to deal with this serious national problem.  It  has also become evident that more em-phasis must be placed on educat-ing Americans about drugs of abuse and their destructive effects on our society. Armed with knowledge,  U.  S.  citizens will be better prepared to participate in the war on drugs. 

DIGEST  was created to provide concise, reliable and easy-to-read information about drugs of abuse. This handy reference is intended to help parents, educators, and emp/oy-ers to recognize symptoms of drug abuse, the hazardous effects of using drugs, and how to effectively deal with drug-abuse problems. The major drugs of abuse are categorized and color coded to help the reader quickly locate information regarding almost any drug-related question that might arise. 

It  is hoped that improved education will increase aware-ness and understanding of the problems pertaining to drug 

iii 

PREFACE 

abuse. Perhaps, when this occurs, some of the drug-related burdens can be shifted from law enforcement to mainstream America, where the real opportu-nities for success in defeating drug abuse are to be realized. It is time for  all  Americans to join in the battle. Law enforcement is only the first line of defense. Greater public awareness through defensive education offers the only permanent solution for rescuing our citizens from the life-threatening seduction of drugs. I wish to acknowledge my grateful appreciation to Adrian 

Swain  for his writing and re-search. A special thanks to my wife Lynne for her editorial contri-butions and tireless dedication in support of our efforts to accu-rately inform our readers. Allan R.  Pringle           

> Deputy Regional Director U.S. Drug En-forcement Administration (Retired). Former Director of Vice-Presidential
> South Florida Task Force (Florida Joint Task Group), a multi-agency effort to interdict drugs and investigate drug traffickers.

QUIZ 

TEST  YOUR  KNOWLEDGE  ABOUT  DRUGS  OF  ABUSE 

Please  read  all  the instructions before taking this quiz. Before  consulting  DIGEST,  attempt to answer  all  25 

multiple  choice or  true/false  questions. Use  column  1 for the answers (X) () 

It  is now recommended that you study  DIGEST  and retake the quiz. Use  column  2 for the answers () (X).  It  is expected there  will  be a significant improvement. (An-swers may be found on page 66 of this book.) Less than  20  correct answers indicates a need to further increase your  knowledge  about drugs of abuse. 

1. The primary mind altering substance found in marijuana is: ( ) () A) Hashish ( ) () B) THC (Tetrahydrocannabinol) ( ) ()  C)  Sinsemilla ( ) () D) Hashish  Oil 

2. Withdrawal from barbiturate overdoses can be more serious and  mOl'e  frequently fatal than with-drawal from heroin: () () A) True () () B)  False 

3. Sleeplessness, loss of appetite, and an increased state of arousal are symptoms of the  following: 

( ) () A) Cocaine use ( ) () B) Amphetamine abuse ( ) ()  C)  Barbiturate abuse ( ) () 0) A and B ( ) () E) Band  C

4. Heroin is up to ten times as addictive as mor-phine: ( ) () A) True () () B)  False 

5. Ways in which cocaine is abused include: ( ) () A)  Injecting 

( ) () B)  Inhaling  or sniffing ( ) ()  C)  Smoking ( ) () 0)  All  of the above () () E) Band  C

6. Darvon, Percodan, and Leritine are: ( ) () A) Methadone compounds ( ) () B) Addictive painkillers that are  classified  as controlled substances ( ) ()  C)  Over-the-counter  painkillers  available  at any drug store ( )  ()  0)  All  of the above ( ) () E) None of the above iv 7. Hashish oil is derived from which of these natural plants: ( ) () A)  Opium  poppy ( ) () B)  Peyote  cactus ( ) ()  C)  Marijuana shrub ( ) () 0) Psilocybin mushroom ( ) () E) None of the above 

8. Methaqualone or Quaalude is an addictive drug () () A) True () () B)  False 

9. Cocaine is often mixed with which of these dilu-ents to increase the amount that can be sold: ( ) () A)  Procaine 

( ) () B) Lidocaine ( ) ()  C)  Baking Soda ( ) () 0)  All  of the above ( ) () E) None of the above 

10.  Feelings of depression, irritability, and pessimism are  aU  associated with: ( ) () A) The use of uncut or pure varieties of cocaine ( ) () B) Coming off a cocaine  "high" 

( ) ()  C)  Overdose of cocaine ( ) () 0) None of the above 

11. Crack cocaine and freebase cocaine are both base forms of cocaine hydrochloride: () () A) True ( ) () B)  False 

12. A twelve-ounce beer, a 11/2 ounce shot of whis-key, and a f!ve-ounce glass of wine  all  contain the same amount of alcohol: ( ) () A) True () () B)  False 

13. Dexedrine.  Ritalin,  and Preludin are: ( ) () A)  Slang  names of amphetamines ( ) () 8)  Slang  names of depressants ( ) ()  C)  Trade names of amphetamines ( ) () 0) Trade names of depressants ( ) () E) None of the above 

14. The THC of a marijuana  Cigarette  can remain in the 

liver,  lungs and brain for two weeks, even up to two months: () () A) True () () B)  False 15. Which of the  following  statements are true? ( ) () A)  20  million Americans are estimated to abuse alcohol ( ) () B)  20  percent of all ninth grade boys can be called problem drinkers ( ) ()  C)  Over  5000  teenagers are killed yearly in auto accidents due to drunk driving ( ) () D) All of the above are true ( ) () E) None of the above are true 16.  LSD  possesses these characteristics: ( ) () A) A sweet taste () () B) A red color ( ) ()  C)  A sickly-sweet odor ( ) () D) All of the above ( ) () E) None of the above 17. Like  LSD,  PCP can produce reactions similar to schizophrenia and can cause  "trips"  long  after the drug is processed from the body: () () A) True () () B) False 18. The smoke of one marijuana cigarette is as dam-aging to  lung  tissue as 16 ordinary cigarettes: () () A) True () () B) False 19. Common  aerosol  products that are abused as in-

halants  include: ( ) () A)  Paints 

( ) () B) Cookware coating sprays ( ) ()  C)  Hair sprays ( ) () D)  All  of the above ( ) () E) None of the above 

20.  Common prescription drugs that are abused 

include: 

( ) () A) Valium or Librium () () B) Darvon ( ) ()  C)  Seconal 

( ) () D) All of the above ( ) () E) None of the above 21.  "Look~alike"  drugs are  usually  promoted as being safe and  legal  stimulants,  diet-aids, or  sleep-aids, 

but are  actually  harmful  in  large  quantities: () () A) True ( ) () B) False 

v

22. The use of  fentanyl-based  drugs can  result  in: ( ) () A) The symptoms and effects of  Parkinson's 

Disease ( ) () B)  Permanent  crippling () ()  C)  Death 

( ) () D)  /\11  of the above () () E) A and B 23. Which of the  following  is not a true statement? ( ) () A) When cigarette smoke is inhaled. between  70 

and  90  percent of the chemical substances in smoke are retained in the lungs. ( ) () B)  Parental  example has  little  or no influence on whether or not their children smoke. ( ) ()  C)  A small amount of nicotine injected directly into the bloodstream would kill a person. ( ) () D)Tobacco smoke contains such compounds  'as  tar, nicotine, carbon monoxide, benzene.  formalde-

hyde, ammonia and hydrogen sulphide. 24. The effects of  alcohol  on the body depend upon these things: ( ) () A) Body weight, age. and sex of the individual ( ) () B) The amount of stimulants, such as coffee.  taken 

by the individual ( ) ()  C)  The amount and speed of alcohol consumption () () D) A and B 

. () () E) A and  C

25. Cocaine is a highly  addictive drug and smoking it can cause death: () () A) True () () B) False Answers to  QUIZ  can be found on page 66 WHAT WE CAN  DO  ABOUT DRUG  ABUSE 

## Drug abuse prevails today in every sector of  our- society. Drug and alcohol abuse exists among  all  races and religions, 

## all  ages and both sexes.  It  has become commonplace in families, learning institutions, and industry. 

> 1

A large number of school-age children may be using drugs and alcohol for two or three years before a parent is aware of it. Educators are often unaware that their students are using and 

selling  drugs, frequently on school property.  One  out of every 

10  workers abuse drugs or alco-hol to the extent that it affects their job performance. Substance abuse is costing the  U.S.  $140 

billion  annually  and most experts believe that lost worker productiv-ity amounts to more than $33 

billion. 

Clearly we are facing an epidemic that is threatening and destroying families, futures, and sapping the strength of the busi-ness community. 

Parents 

It  is  vitally  important for parents to learn about the effects of drugs and to recogni.ze the signs of drug use. This know-ledge can be used to guide youngsters and help them acquire the strength to resist peer pres-sure to use drugs.  Strong  family support and firm, caring direction are necessary to help children develop confidence and to ac-quire a balanced sense of per-sonal values.  Tell  your children you love them,  accept  them as they are not as you think they should be. Encouragement and praise can help children develop faith in themselves. Talk to your children about their interests and problems. Be able to discuss drugs know-ledgeably. Listen  carefully  when your children are talking, give your attention and avoid interrupt-ing.  Allow  your child to express and share his views, this is the only way you can hope to know what's going on in his  life.  Ac-cepting his feelings doesn't mean you are condoning his habits or attitudes.  Impress  on the child that drugs are not cool or accept-able, in fact, just the opposite is true. Drugs taken  illegally  and improperly are hazardous to health and often deadly.  Parents 

should set a good example by not using drugs themselves. Household rules regarding drug use should be discussed, and then strictly applied. Limits for acceptable and unacceptable behavior must be clearly under.-stood and agreed upon. When house rules are broken, ground-ing (or privilege curtailment) is in order. Explain why the grounding has occurred to your child's friends, and let  all  concerned know that you care about the welfare of your child. Limits and behavioral stan-dards need to be clearly  outlined 

and, whenever possible, rein-forced by other parents in the neighborhood.  Parents  need to understand that to deny that a drug problem exists only enables the problem to become worse. When parents minimize the problem or make excuses for the child, however well-intentioned, they only serve to protect the child from the consequences of his/her use, thereby contributing to the child's addictive disease which could end in death. 

Support  teachers and admin-istrators who are tough on drugs. Encourage the development of a school policy with a strong no drug message. Contact television stations and newspaper publish-ers and protest when TV pro-grams or other media reporting portray drugs or drug use in ahumorous or acceptable manner. The adverse affect of TV advertising on young minds has 

2

been considerable in past years. The acceptance of alcohol and drugs is too often glamorized in movies and on television, foster-ing the idea that personal prob-lems can be easily solved if one takes drugs or alcohol.  Parents 

and teachers can help negate this pro-drug process through active participation in community pro-grams. 

Protests  from various public groups, including more than 

55,000  Parade  Magazine read-ers, prompted the Motion  Picture 

Association of America to adopt stricter rating  guidelines  that could result in some  so-called 

"drug-favorable" movies being rated X. Jack Valenti,  President 

of the Motion  Picture  Association has stated,  "We  believe these strictures on drug use in films  will 

be applauded by parents even as we hope to see less exhibition of drug use in any form in films. This new criterion is a tough rule, as we want it to be." 

Signs  Of  Drug Abuse 

Parents  should be aware of changing patterns of behavior, appearance and performance which may indicate a problem associated with drug or alcohol use.  Some  of these signs are: distinct personality changes, starting to use foul language, changes in friends, lowered school grades, fits of anger, sloppy dress, changes in sleeping or eating habits, money or valu-ables  miSSing  from the house, increasing dishonesty,  smell  of alcohol or marijuana, drug para-phernalia, or empty bottles hidden in bedroom, truancy from school, and deteriorating family relation-ships.  Some  of these changes are part of the adolescent stage, but enough of them should raise the suspicion of chemical abuse. . Care must be taken to not falsely accuse.  Parents  who suspect drug use must deal with their own emotions of anger and guilt. To deny the signs and postpone confronting the child 

allows  the problem to become worse.  Instead  obtain sufficient facts, and then approach the suspected drug abuser in a firm but rational manner. Do not confront a child while he is under the influence of drugs.  If  war-ranted, seek professional help. 

Responses To Avoid 

When dealing with a drug-abuse situation at home,  the  ac-cusatory approach,  "You're  lying 

to  me,"  only  puts the child on the defensive and blocks further  talk 

between parent and child. Like-wise, statements such as  "Don't 

think for one minute you can hide what you're doing from  me,"  or saying,  "How  could you do such a terrible  thing?"  are examples of how to widen the communications gap between parent and child. When a child is made to feel defensive and  excluded  from the family, that  feeling  often translates into drug abuse.  Open  and regular communication among family members is vital to growth and understanding. Self-reproach should be avoided as  well.  There is no point in asking yourself or your child,  "Where  have  I gone 

wrong?"  Start  making positive changes now. What is past cannot be changed, but today can be improved by  all  of us if we become more positive, aware, informed, alert, and confident. 

Schools 

School  officials, parents, and students should  all  be involved in the development of policies that clearly establish that drug use, possession and sale of drugs, both on and off the school cam-pus, will not be tolerated. The polices may address such issues as enforcement, and referrals for treatment when necessary.  Once 

these policies are adopted, they should be fairly and uniformly enforced. Teachers must have educa-tion and training before working with the students. They should learn what drugs look and  smell 

like, the effects on the body, and behavior patterns associated with drug use.  In-service  training by law enforcement officials and drug and  alcohol  professionals to  help 

school personnel gain an aware-ness and understanding of the drug problem is necessary. Drug education programs in our schools should be designed to provide current and accurate information about drugs and 

alcohol.  Programs  should also deal with health, and social and economic consequences associ-ated with the use of drugs and 

alcohol. 

Among the most successful programs are Drug Abuse Resis-tance Education (DARE) and 

"Just  Say  No".  Both programs are widely used in school systems throughout the United States. These programs are conducted by trained DARE law enforcement officers and teachers. Achieving success in drug education  lies  in training children in the kindergarten and elemen-tary grades  ..  Prevention  efforts directed toward our young chil-dren are the most effective means to fight drug abuse.  Positive,  non-threatening drug information imparted at these impressionable levels should be provided regu-larly in appropriate health-related classes, and should be continued through grade 12. 

3

Students 

From their earliest school years, stUdents begin to develop self-discipline and  self-control. 

Realistic scholastic and social goals are set and achieved at  all 

levels of the student's develop-ment. Achievement requires energy, brain power, mental alertness, and hard work.  In  this process, there is no room for alcohol or drugs. The student's time should be devoted to study and to acquiring the knowledge, social grace, and confidence needed to meet the demands of the adult world. Television, movies and  /)ocial 

influences continue to playa  major 

role in making drug use attractive to children. A Weekly Reader survey offers insights into why students take drugs. For  all 

children, the most important reason for using marijuana is to  "fit 

in with others."  "To  feel  older"  is the second main reason for children in grades four and five, and  'to  have a good  time"  for those in grades six to twelve. Students need to learn the harmful and sometimes deadly effects that drugs can cause. When drugs are offered, children should have the self-confidence to turn them down without hesitation. When young persons have established a good sense of values, have a confident, positive attitude, and can establish goals that are within their grasp, they are becoming mature. 8elf-discipline, the ability to assess one's moods and to complete assigned tasks, as  well  as to learn to postpone gratification of desires are  all  further evidence of maturity. These skills are only acquired through education, training and time. Drug use blocks this process. Students can help fight drug use by setting a positive example for other students and speaking 

forcefully  against drug use. Teach other students about the harmful effects of drugs and encourage friends who have a drug problem to seek help.  Re-

port persons  selling  drugs to the principal or school resource officer. 

> Alternatives To Drug Use

Parents, educators, and  ex-

drug users can help ensure constructive activities are  avail-

able to replace drugs as the central focus in  life.  These school-sponsored activities or parties should be planned  care-

fully and participation should be dependent on an agreement not to use drugs. Give students opportunities for leadership. They can be trained to serve as leaders in drug prevention programs for younger students. Youth training  pro-

grams are available from informa-tion centers such as America's 

PRIDE,  1-404-577-4500  and NFP Reach America Training, 1-505-345-7134. Local sports or social-club activities such as the Big Brother and  Sister  programs, part-time jobs, hobbies, religious programs, and other group activities are  all 

part of the constructive effort needed to combat the malaise caused by drug abuse. Parents, teachers, and community leaders can help in providing these  pro-

grams, which offer healthy, optimistic, and beneficial chal-lenges. Participation in such programs  will  help in turning our young people away from drugs. Encourage children to satisfy physical needs through  spoFts 

activities. Fulfill emotional needs through volunteer service,  de-

velop talents, learn to express 

feelings  openly, including  nega-

tive feelings and thoughts.  Intel-

lectual activities such as reading, writing poems or stories, or taking up a musical instrument are all positive activities. Better understanding of the seriousness of drug use and vigorous pursuit of wholesome alternatives is a key to winning the war on drugs. The outcome will decide whether our children see drugs as a harmless kick, or whether they  realize  that illicit drug use can destroy their futures, their families and their  lives. 

> Management

The employee is the most important asset and greatest investment of any company.  No 

other asset is more costly or more valuable to business than its people. Drug abuse has moved into mainstream America taking root in the machine that drives our country. An epidemic has been created that is sapping the strength of the business community. Until recently, employers were primarily concerned with alcohol abuse among employees. But now the problem of substance abuse has become more complex and the economic consequences are staggering. 

One  out of every  10  workers abuses drugs or alcohol to the extent that it affects their job performance. By using the following formula, a company can determine what chemically  depen-

dant employees are costing their firm: 

4

1. Number of employees in your business 2.  10  to 23% of  employ-

ees with health or personal problems X .10 

3. Number of troubled employees in your firm 4. Multiply  line  3 by  aver-

age salary of your employees 5. Troubled employees will cost  your  company approximately 25% of their actual  payroll 

dollars X .25 6. Total Cost To You From Troubled Employees 

In  other words, a business with one hundred employees on the payroll, with an average salary of  $18,000  probably wastes 

$4,500  per annum on each chemically dependent employee. Insurance actuaries revea.l over half the financial losses are for health and accident compensation made to employees and their families involved in drug abuse. American businesses, faced with the  increasing  use of drugs on the job, are resorting to new measures for dealing with the problem. Many companies have established company policies regarding drugs. Other  tech-

niques include mandatory urine testing, undercover investigations, and electronic surveillance. Many large companies or corporations provide Employee Assistance Programs (EAP) for their workers. Medical or skilled staff personnel capable of treating drug abuse problems are a part of these services. What works best for one company may not always work well at another company. For the smaller company manager or supervisor, here are some suggestions that will help improve employee performance and company balance sheets: • Know what is happening in the drug world and include drug-related topics in regular training sessions. 

• Be sure all employees know the company policy on drug abuse, and enforce this  policy 

firmly and fairly. 

• Be available to  all  employ-ees, especially young persons who may need confidential assis-tance for drug abuse matters. Don't duck the issues.  Provide 

needed help, or know where skilled guidance can be obtained. 

• Be alert for signs of drug use that may mean trouble for the company, managers, supervisors, and employees. Confront drug problems with knowledge. Considerable resources are devoted to expensive treatment and to chemical testing of body fluids.  Millions  are spent on law enforcement and prosecutions. None of these methods have been very effective in reducing the demand for drugs. Aware-ness through education is a more logical approach to the demand problem. Drug education/awareness programs for management, employees and their families should be viewed as preventive and corrective maintenance contracts, protecting investments and productivity. The cost to industry to educate the employer and em-ployee, will be less expensive than the cost of treatment, high insurance rates, and losses through absenteeism, poor workmanship, and theft. The bottom line is, employees are the company, it costs less to help employees and their families, than to lose them to the drug epidemic. 

Drug  Use  in the Workplace  

> ~

65 percent of young people entering the workforce have used illegal drugs. 

• The National  Institute  on Drug Abuse estimates that one out of eight workers between ages 26 and 35 abuse drugs. 

• 20  percent of workers 18-25 use drugs on the job. 

• Drug users incur medical costs that average three times higher than non using company employees. 

• Drug users are absent from work twice as often as non using company employees. 

• Drug users are five times as likely to be involved in acci-dents when off the job. 

WHAT  OTHERS  HAVE  TO  SAY  ABOUT  THE  DRUGS  OF  ABUSE  DIGEST                                         

> The Drugs of Abuse Digest was reviewed and found to be scientifically accurate, in conformance with public health principles and policies and approporate forthe intended audience. The book will be added to the Materials Database in the National Clearinghouse for Alcohol and Drug Information. Director National Clearinghouse for Alcohol and Drug Information
> Office for Substance Abuse Prevention
> Drugs of Abuse Digest. A Prevention Guide for the Family. School &Workplace is interesting, technically correct, and provides an insight the reader can easily grasp. It gets the message across without sensationalizing or causing undue curiosity. In this era of searching for ways to tell the twe story about drug abuse, this is probably the best handbool< around. Tough on Drugs, Inc.
> San Diego, CA 92128 Thank you for making the drug prevention material available. The Drugs of Abuse D!gest is the best and most interesting text on drugs of abuse that we ever read. We urge every
> S.E.P.T.A. employee and their family to read it thoroughly. Employee Southeastern Pennsylvania
> Transit Authority

5The Drugs of Abuse Digest is a  well  developed resource which incorporates the latest research on drugs in an easily read book. A wealth of information on drugs of abuse is packed in this book.  It  is a solid addition to schools, libraries, parent groups and for those interested in becoming  knOWl-        

> edgeable about the subject of drugs and the hazards in-volved. National Parents' Resource
> Institute for Drug Education, Inc.
> Thank you forthe fine training you developed and adapted for our Head Start staff. Your ANSWERS video and the Drugs of Abuse Digest manual provided the best adult source of information that we came across during our extensive search for such materials.
> Project Manager Hea.d Start Department
> Office of the County Administrator
> Hillsborough County, Florida

# CANNABIS  SATIVA  L, the botanical name for marijuana, is a tall annual woody shrub with notched, hair-like covered leaves and separate male and female flowering tops. The leaves and flowers of the plant have the most potent THe content, marijuana's principal mind-altering ingredient.  Smok-

## ing  marlj:uana  produces a /thigh  II  or a false and exaggerated feeling of lIinner joy.  II 

> 6

Marijuana-History and Description 

Marijuana is  Indian  hemp, an annual plant that is grown in mild 

climates  all  over the world, and, while known to man for over  6,000 

years, marijuana is the least understood of  all  natural  drugs. 

Its  tough fibers have been used to make twine, rope,  cloth-

ing, and bags.  Sterilized  mari-

juana seeds are sold as bird seed, its oil is used as an  ingredi-

ent in paint, and more than  20 

million Americans smoke its 

tobacco-like  leaf. Marijuana plants can grow to heights of 12 to 14 feet and grow best in semitropical areas  

> Cannabis Leaves

throughout the world. Colombia, Jamaica, Hawaii, Africa,  South-

east Asia, the Middle East, and certain areas of Mexico  all  con-

tribute to the estimated  30  million pounds of marijuana imported into this country every year. Domestic growers produce about  1,700 

metric tons of sinsemilla and commercial grade marijuana, approximately 12 percent of the total  U.S.  supply. 

Sinsemilla  growers have improved breeding techniques and researchers say that it is up to  250%  stronger than marijuana 

> Pipes, roach clips and other paraphernalia used to smoke Marijuana

sold in the  mid-1970s. 

The primary substance obtained from the leaves and flowering tops of the marijuana plant is Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). THC is one of 62 cannabi-noids in the 426 or more known chemicals that have been  identi-

fied in Cannabis  Sativa. 

It  is the THe content of the marijuana that determines its effect on the user. Marijuana can be either a stimulant (an upper) or a depressant (downer), and it is also a  hallucinogen  having some sedative qualities.  Generally,  the THC content varies from one to four percent depending on growth conditions and type of plant. Most wild  U.S.  marijuana is considered inferior because of a low concentration of THC,  usually 

less than  0.5  percent. Much of the marijuana from Jamaica, Mexico, and Colombia has a THC content of from  0.5  to seven percent. 

One  of the most selective marijuana products on the market today is sinsemilla  (Spanish  for without seed), cultivated from the un pollinated female plant. The THC concentration in  sin-

semilla ranges up to  20  percent making this high potency marijuana more dangerous 7than uncultivated marijuana. 

Slang  or  Street  Names for Marijuana 

Marijuana is commonly  called 

pot, grass, weed, tea, stuff, rope, hay, joints, reefer, hemp, Mary Jane, Texas tea, Acapulco gold, goof butt, pakalolo (Hawaiian), jive, stinkweed, bhang, ganja, Kef or Kif, smoke and whack. 

How Marijuana is Used 

The most common method of abusing marijuana is by smoking it in a cigarette or pipe.  Sometimes 

a cigarette is rolled with tobacco and marijuana to make it burn slowly and evenly. Marijuana cigarettes are often used in a group situation, whereby one smoker passes the cigarette on to the next. Each user holds the smoke in his or her lungs as long as possible to get the most effect of the THC into the body. The burned-out remnants of the cigarette  Uoint),  known by the name  "roach,"  are often saved and smoked. Marijuana may be consumed by mouth, but the effects achieved by smoking are three times more powerful. Because of the coarseness of that there is insufficient and in the marijuana, the cigarettes  are  many instances no reliable, cred-made with a heavy grade of ible, scientific evidence supported tobacco paper, hand rolled and by properly conducted scientific closed on both ends to hold the research to support a conclusion dry, loose fill. When burning, the that marijuana has a medical use joint gives off a distinctive, sweet to treat any ailment or disease.  In  Health  Service  had previously smell of burning rope or alfalfa. addition, there is a lack of scientific approved 13 patients to receive Cigars stuffed with marijuana evidence to support a conclusion federally grown marijuana. Under are now popular with our young that marijuana is safe for use the new ruling, they will no longer people. Philly Blunts, blunts for under medical supervision. The receive marijuana from the federal short, are cheap cigars that are Administrator further urged the government. hollowed out and packed with American public not to experiment marijuana. with a potentially dangerous, mind- Why  People  Start  Smoking 

altering drug such as marijuana in Marijuana No  Valid  Medical Use of an attempt to treat a serious illness 

Marijuana or condition. Peer pressure is the greatest single reason people start using Marijuana, hashish, and Marijuana Therapy Rescinded marijuana. Most young people are hashish oil, three types of drugs introduced to marijuana by their derived from cannabis, are being  In  March of 1992, the  U.S.  peers, who can be brothers and distributed in illicit markets in the Public Health  Service  announced sisters, old or new acquaintances, United  States.  Having no  officially  that it would no longer provide or friends. A recent government accepted medical use, these drugs government supplied marijuana survey shows that 47 percent of are controlled under the Controlled to patients suffering from  AIDS,  male tobacco smokers use  mari u

Substances Act  (CSA)  of  1970.  cancer or glaucoma. Scientists juana as compared to 7 percent of The American Cancer  Society  from the National  Institute  of Health nonsmokers. Federal health and the American Medical Asso- stated that existing evidence officials say they are worried that ciation have both stated that the does not support recommending young people who start out experi-results of clinical investigations are smoked marijuana as a treatment menting with alcohol and tobacco insufficient to warrant the decontrol of choice for any of the medical are more likely to try marijuana and or use of marijuana for medical conditions.  Instead,  the govern- other illegal drugs. Many young-purposes. The National Multiple ment advocates the use of legal sters, unknowing of the threat to Sclerosis  Society  has concluded medicines such as Marinol, a their mind and body, readily take that marijuana is not an accepted synthetic form of marijuana's the offered joint to be part of the medical treatment for spasticity. active ingredient. group. Evaluating marijuana against its Citing the harmful  effects  of Marijuana is the most widely  

> !{
> ~'f

criteria for safety and effective- marijuana, the  U.S.  Public Health abused illegal drug in the  U.S.;  an  

> ;:

ness, the Food and Drug Adminis- Service  disclosed that the drug estimated 12 million people smoke :,'  

> ~;

tration has concluded that there is may actually be dangerous to it once a month or more.  

> ~

inadequate scientific evidence to  AIDS  patients who are prone to ;:;. 

> ~':

support a finding that marijuana is pneumonia and other lung infec- Recognizing the Marijuana Abuser ti  •

> \

"I.  safe and effective for treating tions. As to the claim that mari-I'c' 

nausea and vomiting experienced juana relieves pain caused by  In  the early stages of mari-by patients undergoing cherno- glaucoma by reducing pressure in juana use, smokers appear to be 

> ~:

therapy. the eye, a Health  Service  spokes- more animated than usual. They  

> ~"

The American Academy of man said, ''There simply isn't any exhibit loud talking and bursts of Ophthalmology has also concluded evidence that with the new drugs laughter, followed by sleepiness that insufficient data exists to that are available  for  glaucoma, and a lethargic period during demonstrate the safety and that smoked marijuana would be which the user often crashes or efficacy of using smoked marijuana any more useful or even as useful sleeps off the effects of the THC. in the treatment of glaucoma. as what is available  legally."  They may also experience dis-The Administrator of the Drug The Food and Drug Adminis- torted perception and some  

> ~r

Enforcement Administration stated tration had previously approved hallucinations. 

~ 28 patients and the  U.S.  Public 

# i 8Pupils of the marijuana smoker may be dilated and  blood-

shot, they often wear sunglasses indoors as  well  as outside to disguise their reddened eyes. Heart beat and pulse rate go up and the mouth and throat become dry. 

Effects of Marijuana  Smoking 

on the Mind and Body 

The effects of marijuana THC taken into the body can be felt within minutes, reaching their peak in  10  to  30  minutes. They may linger for two to eight hours, depending on the potency of the THC and the expectation and experiences of the user. Marijuana can impair or reduce short-term memory and reduce ability to do jobs that require concentration or swift reaction time. Driving a car or operating other machinery is hazardous as depth and time perception may be distorted. Low doses of the drug tend to cause restlessness and an increased sense of  well  being, 

followed  by a dreamy state of relaxation and frequent hunger. Changes in sensory perception, such as a sharpened sense of sight,  smell,  hearing, touch and taste, may also occur. Stronger doses intensify these reactions. The mental makeup of the user is crucial.  One  smoker may be relaxed; another more  talka-

tive; and a third disoriented, filled with rapidly fluctuating emotions and disturbed associations. Afourth user may become  zombie-

like,  stoned, or  "out  of  it."  High doses may result in image  distor-

tions, a loss of personal identity, fantasies, and  hallucinations. 

Very high doses can result in toxic psychosis or being out of touch with reality. Marijuana abuse is  wide-

spread. Estimates of those who have used marijuana at least once range up to  50  million 

people. Medical researchers and emergency  room  accounts report findings that habitual pot users don't want to hear; 

Lungs: The smoke of one marijuana cigarette  (usually  held in the lungs longer than tobacco smoke) is as damaging to lung tissue as  smoi~ing  16 ordinary 

Cigarettes.  According to the National  Institute  on Drug Abuse, marijuana smoke contains some of the same ingredients as  to-

bacco smoke that can cause emphysema and cancer. Those who combine pot smoke with tobacco smoke run an  in-

creased risk. 

Brain: When marijuana is smoked, the THC ingredient is absorbed by most fatty tissues and most organs of the body, including the liver, lungs,  repro-

ductive organs, and the brain. 

Unlike  alcohol, the THC in the body is not readily washed out after use. THC may remain in the body up to two weeks, in some cases, up to 4.6 months. Tests indicate that  the 

toxicity of THC tends to be  cumu-

lative. This simply means that because of its tendency to  accu-

mulate in fatty tissues, including the brain, regular use of  mari-

juana can result in brain damage. 

Heart: Use of marijuana increases the heart rate as much as  50  percent, depending on how potent the THC content is in the cigarette smoked. Chest pain may occur in those people who have poor circulation, this is similar to the pain caused by heavy cigarette smoking.  Mari-

juana users increase their risk of heart attack. 9

The Immune  Syste~:  The capacity of the body to resist infection and  other·  foreign agents, such as cancer  cells,  is the immune system. Medical  re-

searchers report that marijuana, used in animal tests, suppresses the immune system and may do so in the case of humans. 

Nervous  System:  THC causes poor transmission of nerve impulses between cells. This can cause impaired speech, loss of memory, insomnia, lack of coordination, impaired vision, loss of muscle strength and  unex-

pected mood changes. 

Reproductive  System: 

Studies  show without a doubt that the sperm count in young men diminishes as marijuana abuse. increases with some abnormality of sperm occurring in chronic marijuana users. Fortunately, when the marijuana smoker being tested returns to normal living without marijuana, the level of testosterone (male sex hormone) returns to normal as  well.  Contin-

ued abuse of marijuana is a cause for grave concern, because of possible genetic consequences caused by abnormal sperm in the male user. Marijuana can increase levels of testosterone in women, thereby increasing male  charac-

teristics.  It  was reported in one experiment that defective  men-

strual cycles resulted. That is, the failure to ovulate or have regular menstrual periods proved three times greater in marijuana users than in non-marijuana users. Use during pregnacy can result in premature babies, increased birth defects and infant mortality. There are many  excellent 

resources available for more  in-

depth information regarding the effects of marijuana on the mind and body.  See  References. Marijuana Burnout 

Burnout describes the effects of prolonged marijuana use. Such people become  dull,  inattentive, slow in their movement, and are sometimes so unaware of where they are that they do not respond when friends speak to them. Worst of  all,  they do not realize they have a problem. 

Ability to Drive 

Marijuana smokers invite problems when they take to the road. Pot smokers are overly represented in fatal highway crashes that can be traced to poor depth perception and impaired motor coordination, causing slowness in responding to traffic signa!s or other traffic conditions on the road. Driving while under the influence of marijuana is dangerous. The combination of marijuana and alcohol increases the risk of a fatal  crash. 

Indoor  Marijuana  Cultivation 

Statistics indicate that indoor marijuana cultivation is becoming the preferred method of producing sinsemilla. Growing marijuana indoors provides a controlled environment to produce a stronger drug in a shorter time period and minimize detection by law  enforce-

ment officers. 

It  is reported that the price of marijuana has doubled to as much as  $8,000  a pound, this in spite of a dramatic increase in the production of home-grown marijuana and one  billion  dollars worth of marijuana being  illegally 

harvested in our national forests each year. Marijuana is a dangerous drug that reaps tremendous profits for the grower and/or trafficker. Amature cultivated plant yields up to 2.4 pounds of a marketable  prod-

uct. The average marijuana grower produces approximately  250  plants per growing cycle, realizing a profit of approximately  $750,000. 

A Solution  to the Marijuana Threat 

Our  young children should be taught to resist peer pressure in whatever form it comes. They need to be more informed about what happens to their bodies and minds when they take drugs of any kind. Parents should be  continu-

ally  involved in learning  all  they can about the dangers of drugs,  includ-

ing marijuana, in order to teach their children as much as  possible 

about the hazards of using drugs. Parents who may have tried marijuana more than a generation 

10 

ago must realize that marijuana is now  250%  stronger than the marijuana  sold  in the mid-1970s. Educators need to continue to do their part from the elementary grades through the high school years. With proper drug education, young men and women in our 

school  systems, leaders of future generations, will know and  under-

stand that marijuana (or any other drugs) should not be allowed to influence or affect the mind,  educa-

tional training, personal integrity, and strength of character needed to playa positive, productive role in the  adult  world.   

> Female marijuana flower Field of marijuana

Hashish 

Hashish or hash is the dark brown resin obtained from the tops of the Cannabis Sativa or marijuana plant. When the secretions are  collected,  dried, and compressed into flat bricks or soles, the result is a concen-trated, compact product that is easy to smuggle. The THC concentrated in the product is as high as  10  percent, which is several times the percentage of normal marijuana leaves pre-pared for smoking. Hashish can be formed into  balls,  cakes, or 

cookie-like  sheets depending on what the customer orders. 

> Hashish

Hashish  Oil 

Hashish oil contains the most concentrated form of THC that can be made.  It  has been analyzed as having a THC con-tent as high as 63 percent, and it is possible that even higher concentrate levels can be reached. Hashish oil is produced by a process of  distilling  or fluxing ground-up marijuana plants inside a container  filled  with a solvent. When heated, the solvent perco-lates through the plant SUbstance producing a solution that be-comes hashish  oil.  Of  course, the process is not as simple as described, but the theory is correct. The more often the hashish oil solution is percolated through the container, the more powerful it becomes. 

In  laboratory tests, one process yielded 2  112  quarts of hashish oil with about 35 percent THC content from 82 pounds of marijuana.  One  or two drops of hashish oil on a regular tobacco cigarette would be as strong as one regular marijuana joint, perhaps more. 

Hashish  Oil  Laboratories 

Hashish oil laboratories have been located in several parts of the United States, in Central and South America, in Europe, and in the Middle East. Laboratories have been seized in the middle and western parts of the United States, in Mexico, and in South America. The majority of hashish oil originates in  India  or Afghanistan. 

In  the past, some shipments have been made by air freight to the United States or Canada, but this pattern may very  well  change as Americans acquire the  skill  to process their own hashish oil at home. 11 The threat presented by this powerful concentrated product is serious. The THC content ranges from  30  percent to a potential of 

90  percent.  In  the past, mari-juana users smoked a cigarette with a two to  10  percent THC content. The relatively naive marijuana user can no longer predict what effect one or two drops of the concentrated hallu-cinogenic drug on his next ciga-rette  will  produce.  In  the slang expression of today, the  possibili-

ties  literally  blow the mind.  

> Hashish Oil

# NARCOTICS  are natural opium derivatives that are ob-tained from the opium poppy, Papaver somniferum L, or opiates, which are synthetic drugs. This latter group of drugs is derived from coal tar or petroleum. Use of  all  nar-cotics causes  dulling  of the senses, induces sleep and can result in addiction. 

> 12 Incised Seedpod

Opium Poppy  Cultivation  and 

Field  Laboratories 

The majority of the world's opium, from which morphine, heroin,  and·other  alkaloids are produced, comes from poppy plants cultivated in the narrow belt of mountains that range along the southern rim of the great Asian land mass. These mountains extend from Turkey's 

Antolian  Plateau, through the reaches of the  Indian  subconti-nent, and into the remote moun-tains of Burma, Thailand, and Laos. Lesser amounts of poppy plants are also grown  illegally  in the mountain ranges of Mexico. 

In  the fall or early spring the opium farmer sows his poppy seeds. He plants on remote 

hillsides  that have been roughly cleared by slash-and-burn meth-ods. Sometimes plants are concealed between rows of corn or other legitimate crops.  In 

some European countries, poppy seeds are  legally  cultivated in areas assigned to the poppy crop and closely monitored by govern-ment agents, much like tobacco crop  allotments  are managed in the United  States. 

About three months later, the poppy plant is waist high and in bright flower. When the petals drop, the bare, unripened, egg-shaped pod is ready for lancing or cutting. A milky sap oozes out and slowly hardens into a gummy, brownish substance. This gum is laboriously scraped off by hand and stored for proc-essing after the harvest.  Opium 

gum has a sweet, pungent aroma like the  smell  of hay; not unpleas-ant at a distance but nauseating at close range. The raw opium is formed into a ball,  wrapped in leaves, then with cellophane to keep it moist. 

Finally,  it is covered with water-proof wrapping paper. The odor is now almost undetectable. After the opium gum has been  collected  by the opium buyer, it is ready for conversion into morphine base in makeshift laboratories that are concealed in the hills or hidden in houses or out-buildings away from the eyes of government law enforcement agents. The raw opium is soaked in water and filtered, treated with lime and ammonium chloride and made into crude morphine base. This base is then further refined into heroin through heating, filtering, and treatment with other chemicals in.cluding acetone, salt, and acetic anhydride. Acetic anhydride, commonly available, is a commercial chemical used in making polyester fabrics, ciga-rette filters, aspirin, plastics, perfumes, and dyestuffs. As a general rule of thumb, 

10  pounds of opium gum are needed to produce one pound of morphine base, and one pound of morphine base converts into one pound of heroin. Purity of the heroin can range up to 96 percent or higher, depending on the skill level of the laboratory chemist. 

Legally  Imported  Opium  to the United  States 

For medicinal purposes, more than  400  tons of opium, or its equivalent in opium poppy straw concentrate are  legally 

imported yearly into the United 13 

States  under strict controls. The most modern method of processing opium today is known as the opium poppy-straw con-centrate method, a procedure where the whole poppy pod and stem is harvested, dried, and then 

all  25 or more alkaloids in the pod are processed into either  liquid, 

solid, or powder form. (Alkaloids are organic bases occurring in seed plants that contain nitrogen and  usually  oxygen). Medical uses of the various alkaloids of opium include pain relievers and cough suppres-sants, such as morphine and codeine, as well as anti- diarrhea preparations such as paragoric and similar medicines.  Virtually 

all  of the  controlled  opium im-ported into this country is broken down into its natural alkaloid constituents, morphine and codeine. Heroin, on the other hand, is not a natural product.  It  is a synthetic that was first made from opium alkaloids in 1874, and then commercially produced in 1898. Heroin is a strictly  'cont~olled 

substance in the United  States  .. 

Opium  Derivatives 

Including  morphine and heroin, there are 25 alkaloids that can be extracted from opium. Codeine is one of the more common opium alkaloids. Co-deine was first isolated in 1832 as an impurity in morphine. Be-cause of the abuse potential of codeine, this drug is classified as a controlled  SUbstance.  Most codeine today is produced from morphine. Codeine is used for relief of moderate pain.  It  comes in the form of tablets, capsules,  liquid 

cough preparations, and to alesser extent in injectable form. Combining codeine and aspirin (Empirin), codeine and acetam-inophen (Tylenol) or codeine, aspirin, phenacetin and caffeine 

(A.P.C.  and Fiorinal), results in avariety of  pain-killing  tablets and capsules in different  milligram 

dosages. Antitussives such as Robitussin AC, Cherocol and terpin hydrate are combined with codeine and sold as cough medicines. These preparations are exempt from strict control regulations, are less addictive than morphine or heroin and less potent in terms of inducing eu-phoria.  All  are useful medicines when taken as directed. 

Origin of Heroin 

Heroin (Diacetylmorphine) is a potent derivative of morphine, a narcotic drug that induces sleep 

> Codeine

through depression of the central nervous system. Both heroin and morphine are extremely addictive drugs. Morphine, a standard pain reliever long used as a measure of the effectiveness of other narcotic drugs, was first isolated from opium poppy gum in  1803 

by German scientists. Because morphine was widely used during the American Civil War to treat wounded soldiers, some  45,000 

of them unknowingly became addicts.  Since  then, the use of morphine as a medical treatment has been strictly  controlled. 

Synthetic  heroin was com-

mercially  produced in the labora-tory by the Bayer Company in Germany in 1898, and was intended for use as a cure for morphine addiction. But, to the dismay of  all  concerned, heroin was found to be up to  10  times more addictive than morphine. Today, production of mor-phine and heroin for medicinal purposes is  carefully  regulated by the  U.S.  government.  Specific 

production records and strictly regulated security measures are enforced by  the  Drug Enforce-ment Administration  (U.S.  DfJpart-

ment of Justice). 

Heroin  Smuggling  Routes 

Heroin is smuggled  to  mar-kets in Europe and into North American cities and towns by complex networks of expert smuggling organizations.  Operat-

ing in time-tested ways, these smugglers have great patience and are willing to take some losses as part of their cost of doing business.  Smugglers 

dispatch their product by land, sea, and air shipments concealed in freight cargoes, on the bodies of travelers (known as mules), in 14  

> «•

luggage on board aircraft, as well as in vehicles or other innocent-appearing packages. Most shipments are in bulk quantities to a distributor  or' 

dealer who sees that the heroin is diluted, to improve his profit margin, before sending it further down the distribution ladder to the addict on the street. Heroin flows into America across the northern borders from Canada hidden in vehicles that often clear checkpoints unde-tected.  It  comes across the southern borders from Mexico, and into the east and west coasts by publicly and privately owned ships and airplanes. No border is immune to profit-motivated nar-cotics organizations serving the demand for narcotics in America. An estimated six metric tons of heroin will be smuggled into the United  States  this year, according to  State  Department reports (one metric ton equals 2,204.6 pounds).  It  is estimated there are  500,000  users of heroin in the United  States  at this time. Heroin-Appearance and Purity 

Most heroin found on the streets of the  U.S.  is a brown or white  flour-like  substance.  In  its pure state, it has a bitter taste. When first exposed to air from its 

sealed  container, a  smell  of vinegar often can be detecteu. Street heroin  usually  has been mixed with a variety of additives or  diluents  to make more product to  sell.  Some  of these additives  include  milk sugar or  lactose,  quinine, starch,  talcum 

powder, cocoa, brown sugar, and other food  coloring. 

The percentage of street heroin purity is  usually  about five percent, but  could  range down-ward to two percent or  less 

depending on how many times the  dealer  steps on, cuts, or dilutes his product. Heroin is known by a number of street names, including but not  limited 

to Big H, Boy,  Black  Tar, Brown, Brown  Sugar,  Caballo,  Chiva, Crap, Estuffa, H, Heroina, Hombre, Horse, Junk, Mexican Mud,  Polvo,  Scag,  Smack,  Stuff, 

and Thing. A rough  example  of how the price of opium gum grown in the poppy  fields  of Southeast Asia 

escalates  on the streets of Amer-ica is as  follows:  Ten  kilograms  of raw opium gum (22 pounds) is  "" 

> It

15 

# ~~  t 

> l';;: It

# •

> Heroin

sold  for  $350  to a merchant who 

collects  it when the harvest is over. This opium gum can then be converted to about  45,000 

bags of five-percent pure heroin worth $5 per bag, a total street value of about  $225,000  or more. 

Illegal  Heroin  Imports 

Illicit  heroin trafficking into North America can be  called  aphenomenon of the post-war world. Law enforcement agencies up to this time were able to deal with the heroin problem which, for the most part, was confined to the ghettos and slum areas of our major cities.  It  wasn't until the heroin epidemic of the sixties broke out that heroin addiction began to receive nationwide attention. Primary sources of supply for pure white heroin were identified as sophisticated, underground laboratories in the south of France that received morphine base from Turkish sources. The turning point in dampen-ing this phase of the heroin epidemic was the remarkable success enjoyed by the Turkish government when it instituted a ban on poppy cultivation in 1972. 

In  the Middle East, despite 

, vigorous crop substitution efforts sponsored (in 1981) by the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control, heroin is  still  exported from Pakistan,  Iran,  and Afghani-stan.  It  is estimated that almost half the heroin reaching the United States and Europe comes from these areas. And now, DEA reports that Colombia is growing opium. The 

c:!imate  is  conducive to poppy plant cultivation and the morphine content of this opium is higher than other heroin producing areas worldwide.  Iranian  and Thai chemists are training Colombian chemists in techniques to process opium into heroin. 

Opium  production worldwide has doubled in the past two years. The supply of heroin to the U.S. has steadily increased over the last four years. 

Mexican Brown Heroin 

According to Federal authori-ties in the United States,  40 

percent of  all  heroin seizures reported in 1972 were brown heroin from Mexico. And, by the mid-to-Iate  1970's,  heroin from Mexico had increased in a volume estimated as high as 89 percent of  all  heroin removed from the streets of North America. There  followed  a remarkably effective joint effort between the Mexican Government and the United States in 1976, in which the two governments agreed to use herbicides in an air and ground operation against the Mexican poppy crop. The heroin threat was subsequently reduced to manageable proportions as a result of those efforts. However, by the mid  1980's,  U.S. State Department reports indicated Mexico had once again become one of the chief sources of heroin (and marijuana) despite eradica-tion efforts. The name Mexican Mud is derived from the brown color of the finished product. This heroin is produced in crude laboratories located on the remote slopes of the Sierra Madre Mountains near Sinaloa, Chihuahua, and Durango. Using a simple proc-ess, laboratory operators make morphine hydrochloride by adding water, lime,  salt,  and hydrochloric acid to the poppy opium gum. The resultant product is filtered by squeezing it in a cloth. This removes impurities leaving heroin hydrochloride, the "brown  mud"  or "Mexican Brown" of street fame. 16 

Black  Tar Heroin 

A deadly new form of Mexi-can heroin has been discovered in American cities and may be responsible for a sharp rise in heroin overdoses.  Called  black tar because of the tar-like appear-ance of the drug, this heroin is 45 times as pure as conventional heroin and  sells  for one-tenth the price of powdered Mexican heroin. According to federal reports, addicts can obtain black tar for as  little  as  $2.50  a dose but unaccustomed to such high potency, they frequently overdose on it. Black tar is manufactured in a crude, short cut process that leaves many contaminates such as plant by-products in the fin-ished materials. Various diluents 

> Black Tar

are  used-to  cut black tar, however regular users have come to prefer and tolerate the more potent, undiluted form of the drug. Black tar is also  called  ball, 

goma (Spanish for gum), tootsie 

roll  and a variety of other names. 

It  is  usually  sold on the street in golf  ball  size weighing less than an ounce.  It  is referred to as a piece or Mexican ounce (25 grams). Black tar can appear as a dark brown to black sticky sUbstance or it can be hard like  Ci. 

piece of  coal. 

Because of a fear of Ac-quired  Immune  Deficiency Syn-drome  (AIDS),  some of the heroin population has switched from injecting to smoking or sniffing black tar heroin.  Others  are experimenting with cocaine freebasing and tar smoking. To counteract cocaine withdrawal, some users take black tar heroin to overcome the effects of severe depression. This differs from speed  balling  which combines cocaine and heroin to enhance the heroin reaction. Heroin Abuse and  Its 

Symptoms Because heroin is  10  times more powerful than morphine, the euphoric high produced when heroin is taken into the body has made it the most popular narcotic among addicts. Heroin in solution is  usually 

injected by hypodermic needle into a vein, a process  called 

mainlining.  The drug addict or heroin junkie's kit often consists of a teaspoon with a bent handle, a syringe or medicine dropper, a hypodermic needle (often not sterile), and a piece of cotton. The heroin is put into the spoon (a bottle cap  will  do in a pinch), mixed with water, and heated by a match or other flame to form a solution. This solution is then drawn through the cotton into the syringe and injected into a vein. The vein is made to stand out by applying a tourniquet made from a belt or any kind of rope or cord. Because heroin is often injected by needle into the veins of the arms or elsewhere on the body, tracks or needle scars are com-mon signs of heroin abuse.  In 

South Vietnam, American military personnel learned to  smoke 

almost pure heroin, which they sprinkled on marijuana Cigarettes or on regular cigarettes to achieve a high without lea.ving tracks or marks on the body. Heroin can also be taken by mouth or injected just under the skin, a method  called  "skin  pop-ping." However, when taken this way, the high experienced is less intense and occurs more slowly. Users or junkies who regularly use any of the variety of heroin mixes on the street (called  "junk") 

often go on the nod, or exhibit alternating cycles of dozing and awakening. After very large doses or high-purity fixes, the junkie cannot be awakened; his pupils become  smaller;  his skin be-comes cold, moist, and bluish in color; breathing slows; and death may occur. Signs of narcotics abuse include red, watering eyes; runny nose; and sniffles accompanied by a cough that disappears when the next fix is obtained. Narcotics users often scratch themselves a lot, eat candy and other sweets, and drink sweet liquids. 

All  heroin addicts run the risk of  AIDS  from non-sterile needles. 

Other  risks include blood poison-ing, hepatitis, and abscesses of the liver, brain, and lungs. The euphoria caused by a dose of heroin lasts only a few minutes, depending on the strength of the dosage and on the tolerance level of the user, which builds up with prolonged use. When heroin is not available to the addict, morphine, codeine, or Dilaudid are widely  used  as substitutes, even though the 

17 

euphoria produced is less intense. The addiction is satisfied until the craving for the next fix is felt. Heroin Withdrawal Symptoms Withdrawal symptoms 

usually  begin about eight to 12 hours after the addict's last fix and, if heroin is withheld, gradu-

ally  increase over a period of 36 to 72 hours. The addict experi-ences a recurring cycle of body pangs, hot and cold flashes, nausea and nervousness, ab-dominal cramps, and diarrhea. These symptoms  gradually 

subside within seven to  10  days, but sometimes sleeplessness and a craving for drugs can last for months. Medical assistance is advis-able during the withdrawal period, since the addict is usually uncon-cerned with his nutrition or health in  general.  In  fact, his only con-cern is satisfying his craving for heroin. Complaints and pleas by the addict for his drug are evident. 

Other  signs are restlessness, irritability, loss of appetite, insom-nia, heavy perspiration, yawning, and sneezing. Pains in the back muscles and in the bones are common, and muscle spasms cause kicking movements, which may be why withdrawal is  called 

kicking the habit. Specific anti-dotes for narcotic poisoning are available at hospitals. KING  HEROIN 

Behold my friend for I am Heroin, known to all as the destroyer of man. Where I come from no one really knows. But I'm from the lands where the poppy grows. I am seldom pure and often diluted. 

Once  in your blood, I will make it polluted. Whole nations have gathered to plot my destruction. For I am a breeder of crime and corruption. I entered this country without a passport. Ever since, I have been hunted and sought. In cellophane bags, I have found my way. To great men in office and children at play. Men profit by me, amassing great sums. Even though I am sold in the lowest of slums. A mere school boy will forget his books. A world famous beauty will forget her looks. While in China, I financed an Army. I'm honored in Turkey and respected in Japan. Be you Italian, Irish, Negro or Mex. I will make most of you forget about sex. 

Some  try to renege, but I won't let them kick. Denied the needle, I will make them sick. I take gold from the rich man and make him destitute. And make the foolish young maiden a prostitute. I chastise the wives and destroy the meek. 

I misuse the fool and make a strong man weak. And now you are sick and lain in jail. I can't get to you by visit or mail. You will twist, turn, vomit and cough. After six nights of this madness, you may throw me off. When you have returned to a normal state. I will be waiting at the gate. 

Go ahead run,  I will not chase. As sure as  I'm  Heroin, you will come for your taste. Put your foot in the stirrup and ride me well. For the white horse of Heroin is taking you straight to Hell! 

Author unknown 18 

> Dlluadid

Dilaudid 

Dilaudid is the second oldest, semi-synthetic narcotic painkiller on the market. When abused, it has a high potential for producing physical as well as psychological dependence. Therefore, it is regulated by the Controlled Substance Act of 1970. 

. Some  narcotic addicts prefer the narcotic Dilaudid, which is available in either tablet or an injectable form. Dilaudid is the most highly acceptable drug after morphine, from the heroin user's viewpoint. Dilaudid is considered to be more of a sedative than morphine, yet it is two to eight times more powerful. According to a  U.S.  Drug Enforcement Administration spokesman, the price for Dilaudid on the street reached an all-time high in 1984, with tablets selling from  $60  to  $80  each. This drug reaches the abuser through diversion from legitimate sources. Thefts from pharmacies, forged prescriptions, and unscrupulous doctors account for almost all illegally obtained Dilaudid. 

Possible  effects of using Dilaudid include euphoria, drowsi-ness, respiratory depression, constricted pupils, and nausea. Effects of an overdose of Dilaudid include slow and shallow breathing, clammy skin, convul-sions, coma, and possible death. When withdrawing from abuse of Dilaudid, the user  will 

display watery eyes, runny nose, yawning,  loss  of appetite, irritabil-ity, tremors, panic, chills, sweat-ing, cramps, and nausea. 

Methadone-its  Origin 

German scientists made methadone  synthetically  during 

World  War  II  because of a mor-phine shortage.  While  chemically 

unlike  morphine and heroin, methadone nevertheless pro-duces many of the same effects. 

It  does not produce the same high or euphoric effect as mor-phine or heroin, but, when used by a narcotic addict, it prevents withdrawal pangs and other painful symptoms and lessens the addict's craving to use other opiates. Thus, when used as a treatment of narcotics addiction, it serves to break the cycle of dependence on  illegal  drugs such as heroin. Methadone was introduced into the United States in 1947 as an analgesic or  painkiller  under such names as Methadone, Amidone, and Dolophine.  It  has been used to treat narcotic ad-dicts since the  1960's.  Metha-done is substituted for heroin in a

controlled  program of treatment that  allows  patients in the pro-gram to  lead  more  normal,  pro-ductive  lives. 

> Methadone

19 Administration and Effects of Methadone 

The effects of methadone differ from morphine-based drugs. The effects of methadone  last  up to 24 hours, which permits ad-ministration, in a heroin drying-out program, once a day. More importantly, methadone is given by mouth not by  needle,  and, even though some tolerance and dependence can  develop,  with-

drawal  symptoms  develop  more 

slowly  and are  less  severe. Methadone can be considered the  lesser  of two  evils  when comparing it to heroin. When patients are receiving methadone in a treatment  clinic 

or in a controlled  environment, they are  less  inclined  to seek and buy  illegal  drugs on the street. They have more time and energy to benefit from the  counseling 

and vocational training provided and  will  generally reach the desired  goal  of becoming a drug-free citizen. There have been some  less 

than satisfactory  results  in using methadone as a substitute for heroin. The average methadone-maintenance patient remains in the program for  only  six months and then  relapses  to drug use. The maintenance and detoxifica-tion facilities have notoriously served as distribution points for an  illegal  market in methadone that, since 1973, has been re-sponsible for more deaths in New York City than heroin. 

It  is true, many patients cannot be  completely  cured  and returned to straight  Ihting,  and some of these  people  may  sell 

their methadone to other addicts on the street. But this can be controlled by prohibiting metha-done dosages from ever  leaving 

the treatment center, and by 

limiting  dosages to on-the-spot treatment. 

# I:-.....  ~·-···,  -. "'-, -.'. , '~~  <~.,  '.  .0  ' .    

> ,1.,'),." <f'. ,: ""

,"~','  .,  a.,:          

> ',' .' ,.' '-
> ••I••
> Darvon Percodan Fiorlnal

Methadone and  Related  Drugs 

A close  relative  of metha-done, marketed under the name of Darvon, is used for the  relief  of mild to moderate pain. Darvon is manufactured in  pill  form, and is 

less  addicting than methadone or other opiates. However, because it has been abused and used 

illegally  by narcotic addicts and other dependent users, Darvon has been  placed  on the  list  of controlled SUbstances  along  with other drugs of similar abuse potential, such as Percodan, LAAM, Leritine, Levo-Dromoran, Tussionex, Fentanyl, Fiorinal, 

Talwin,  and  Lomotil. 

Research scientists are continually searching for  chemical 

products such as Darvon-N, which has  low  addictive  qualities, 

for use in rehabilitation  clinics. 

Antagonist Compounds 

The search for more effec-tive pain-relieving medicines, without dependence-producing qualities, has  led  to the  develop-

ment of a  class  of compounds known as antagonists. These drugs tend to  block  the high and reverse the physical-dependence effects of narcotics. For  example, 

Nalorphine, introduced as a 

clinical  medicine in 1951, is a 

partial  antagonist.  In  a drug-free person, it produces  morphine-like 

effects while the opposite effect is produced on those persons under the influence of narcotics.  Talwin 

and  PBZ  are trade names for 

## 20 

partial  antagonists.  1's  and 

Blues,  a slang  name for a combi-nation of pentazocine,  (Talwin) 

and tripelennamine,  (PBZ),  has caused more abuse problems. 

Where to go for  Help 

It  has been demonstrated that anyone can become addicted if opiates are taken  regularly  for a few weeks (wounded  Civil  War soldiers, for example). However, certain kinds of  people  are more 

likely  to become  involved  with heroin abuse than others under 

similar  life  situations. The addic-tion-prone  people  have  low 

frustration tolerances and great dependency. They are often impulsive, immature, now ori-ented, and seeking an immediate high without regard for the future. 

Should  a reasonably mature, 

stable  person become addicted, the prospects of successful rehabilitation are much better than those of the immature, 

unstable  individual. 

Heroin (narcotic) addiction or dependence can be cured. Kick-ing the habit is not easy, and treatment success rates vary considerably.  Once  off heroin, a person needs  counseling  and 

probably  job training  rehabilita-

tion. Ex-addict, and  self-help 

groups such as Narcotics Anony-mous have been beneficial to some, while other addicts have benefitted from methadone maintenance programs. The 

federal  government and some states have  civil  commitment and voluntary  rehabilitation  programs, and many narcotic addict rehabili-tation centers are coming into being at the community  level. 

The  Yellow  Pages  of most phone directories, under Drug Abuse and Addiction Treatments identify treatment centers that offer  reliable  and professional 

help. STIMULANTS,  sometimes called /tuppers," refer to those drug compounds that affect the central nervous system by . accelerating its activities. They tend to increase alertness and physical activity.  

> 21 Coca plant

The group of drugs that directly stimulate the central nervous system are known as stimulants. The two most preva-lent, non-controlled and  socially 

acceptable stimulants are nico-tine, found in tobacco products, and caffeine, found in coffee, tea, and cola. There are other more potent stimulants whose use must be controlled because they are so powerful and so often abused. These are the closely related drugs amphetamines, metham-phetamines, and synthetics. The most potent of  all  stimulants is cocaine. Controlled stimulants are legally available by medical prescription. Unfortunately, many Americans obtain these drugs illegally, since they are manufac-tured in vast quantities at home and abroad for distribution on the illicit market. The market value of this business has been estimated to generate in excess of  $30 

billion in street sales of cocaine alone. 

Cocaine 

Cocaine, the most potent stimulant, is a powerful drug obtained from the leaf of the coca plant (Erythroxylon coca). Co-caine is harvested in the hills of South America, in the countries of Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia, and Chile. There the coca plant is grown and trimmed to three to six-foot heights for ease of leaf picking. Leaf harvesting occurs several times a year, since the plant is an evergreen. For centuries the  Indian 

farmers of the area have chewed the coca leaf, or made tea from it to relieve muscle aches and pains and to help them endure long, exhausting hours of labor without apparent fatigue and with little nourishment. This practice continues to this day, except lately the harvests are increasing in size. More and more of the end product, illicitly manufactured cocaine, is being delivered to American and European marketplaces. 

Cocaine  Production 

Cocaine  being prepared for distribution to the illicit market-places of the world is made in crude, but effective ways. Coca leaves in large quantities are placed in a drum, a pit in the ground, or in some other home-made press device. The leaves are then mixed with a solvent, often kerosene (readily available in the hills and in village markets), to make a pulpy paste. This mass is then treated with a solvent, hydrochloric acid, which serves to separate out impurities and other undesirable chemicals. After  all 

purification steps are completed, essentially what remains is co-caine hydrochloride in salt-crystal 

22 

form. These salt crystals may be as pure as  90  to  100  percent. Cocaine, when ready for the illicit marketplace, is usually a fluffy white, almost odorless,  c(ystalline 

powder. The U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) has taken steps to prevent illegal drug man-ufacturers from obtaining ether, another key chemical for purifying cocaine. However, benzene, a cancer causing carcinogen, may be a ready substitute for ether according to recent DEA reports. Benzene is banned from con-sumer products in the United States because it has been shown to cause leukemia. 

> Cocaine Lab

Cocaine-its  Early  Use 

Pure cocaine, the mind-altering ingredient of the coca leaf, was first isolated in the 1880's, and used principally as an anesthetic for eye operations. No previously known drug had been satisfactory for these operations. Cocaine also proved effective for surgery of the nose and throat because of its ability to constrict blood vessels and limit bleeding. Today, less dangerous synthetic drugs have replaced cocaine as an anesthetic. These new drugs include procaine, novacaine, and xylocaine. During the  early  days of patent medicines (tonics and a variety of soft drinks), a number of cocaine-containing products appeared on the market. These included ointments, nose pow-ders, suppositories, throat  loz-

enges, sprays, wines, and coca cigarettes. They were touted as cures for  all  sorts of disorders, including  alcoholism,  asthma, 

colds,  corns, eczema, neuralgia, venereal disease, and opiate addiction. The most famous coca-containing product of this period (1886-1903) was the 

internationally  known drink Coca-

Cola.  By 1903, Coca-Cola no 

longer  contained cocaine syrup, but had been changed to a flavoring derived from de-co-cainized coca leaves. The initial wide acceptance of cocaine soon became tem-pered with the  realization  that cocaine produced undesirable side effects, such as dependence in susceptible individuals, and that death  could  result  from improper use. Therefore, the Harrison Narcotics Act was passed in 1914 restricting the 

availability  of  cocaine.· 

Routes to  Illicit  Marketplaces 

Cocaine traffic bound for the 

United  States from clandestine laboratories in the mountains of South America is smuggled through Miami, New York, Los Angeles,  along  the Southwest border and through other interna-

tional  air and seaports. The coke is hidden in airplane baggage or ships cargo, carried  along  by couriers or passengers, or brought in by privately owned sea and air transportation means. A bizarre body-smuggling technique was first reported by Dr.  Charles  V.  Wetli  of the Dade County Medical Examiner's  Office 

in Miami, Florida. Three cocaine smugglers from Colombia  swal-

lowed  a number of  cocaine-filled 

condoms before  they  passed through U.S. Customs inspection for incoming passengers in Miami. Later, one or more of the condoms ruptured inside the 

alimentary  canals  of these smug-

glers,  releasing high-purity co-caine and causing death by respiratory  collapse.  In  each of these instances between 27 to 75 condoms had been  swallowed. 

The victims apparently were convinced that the cocaine  would 

not harm them. They thought it 

would  pass through their bodies, and afterwards be prepared for street distribution. Trade patterns include routes from Peru through Ecua-dor and Panama, then to Mexico and the United States. Another route starts in  Chile,  extends through Latin America to Pacific-coast ports, Mexico and into the United States. A third route can be traced from  Bolivia  through Brazil to the West  Indies  and then to North America. 

Cocaine on the  Street 

By the time cocaine reaches the streets, it has been  diluted  by a variety of substances such as lactose, mannitol, procaine, 

lidocaine,  inositol,  glucose, 

23 

hydrochloride, caffeine, quinine, or morphine. There obviously is no  quality  control.  When cocaine is mixed with heroin, the potent combination is known as a 

> Cocaine

"speedball,"  a powerful blending of  stimulant  and relaxant drugs. 

Allergic  reactions to some or 

all  of these adulterants have been reported,  especially  quinine, which has been reported as a factor in the heroin sudden-death syndrome. Cocaine is known by many names: coke, snow, toot,  flake, 

girl,  lady,  ice,  blow,  nose candy, happy dust, snort, base, crack, rock, gravel,  blinky,  white tor-

nado;  white, big C, and snowbirds. Cocaine-How it is Abused 

Cocaine, the most popular drug among all social and eco-nomic groups, has become increasingly popular due to a false and misleading belief among many first-time users that it is no more harmful than tobacco or alcohol. (Recent experiments with monkeys and rats indicate pure cocaine is more addictive than heroin.)  It  is estimated there are 3 to 5 million users of cocaine in the United States at this time. These users are easily seduced by the most powerful and most pleasurable drug readily available on the street. Cocaine is taken by snorting it through the  nostrils,  but it can be injected when dissolved in water.  It  can also be smoked in abase form. The cocaine base has a low melting point and quickly turns to gas which is readily absorbed into the lungs. The effects on the central nervous system are almost immediate and last for a very short time-a matter of minutes-producing an intensely pleasurable high or euphoric reaction. The user feels a sense of increased strength and psychic well-being, accompanied by reduced fatigue. Many users inhale or sniff the cocaine powder, which is ritualistically arranged on asmooth, glassy surface in thin lines about one inch long. These lines are sniffed into the nose through a rolled-up paper tube. Sometimes a nasal spray is used to assure the cocaine mixture reaches the nasal membranes in a form readily absorbed into the bloodstream. Less common, and for heightened effect, the drug is injected directly into a vein to achieve the desired high more quickly and intensely. The amount of time before the user achieves his high varies with the tolerance his body has built up, as well as with the volume of coke he takes and the method of ingestion.  It  varies from about three minutes when the coke is snorted to about half that time when it is injected di-rectly into a vein, and within seconds if inhaled into the lungs via the smoking method. 

Smoking Cocaine 

Smoking cocaine rocks or free base is the most dangerous and addictive form of using cocaine. Cocaine smoking has gained sudden and widespread popular-ity across the United States. Dependent cocaine abusers and . first-time users have turned to new forms of cocaine base smoking. Crack is preferred by most cocaine smokers because it is readily available and conven-ient to use. Much of its popularity also stems from its low price which makes the drug attractive to the general public and espe-cially to our youth. Smoking cocaine is also considered the 

"safer"  alternative to cocaine injection because of possible exposure to the  AIDS  virus associated with the use of con-taminated needles. Cocaine smoking produces a rapid and intense state of eupho-ria which lasts about 3-5 minutes. This euphoric effect creates a powerful compulsion to repeat the sensation, an almost insatiable craving for more of the drug ... thus making it highly addictive. 

24 

Much confusion exists over terms used to describe the vari-ous forms of cocaine being smoked. However, the conse-quences of using any form of base cocaine are the same, addiction and possible death. 

> Crack

Cocaine Smoking Products and Other Terms Crack, a name for cocaine which has been converted to abase form from cocaine hydro-chloride salt or powder using baking soda or ammonia and water. Cocaine hydrochloride salt is ordinary street cocaine that is snorted or injected. As a base it is used for smoking. Crack is similar in appearance to pieces of wall plaster or slivers of soap and more recently as small rectangu-lar slabs.  In  some parts of the country, police have discovered crack pills. The crack in pill form is smooth on one side and scored on the other, is beige in color and slightly smaller than an aspirin. The crack  pill  is not meant to be swallowed, it is smoked. Crack 

may  be sprinkled on a cigarette but is more likely to be smoked in an ordinary pipe, a glass water pipe, or a pipe fashioned from a beer or soft drink can. Some users say the name  "crack"  came from the crackling sound it makes when smoked. Rock, gravel, slab and cooked cocaine are syno-nyms for crack cocaine. Crack 

Rock Cocaine, not to be confused with crack or rock, is produced when a bonding agent is added to cocaine hydrochloride powder. This mixture is then compressed and stamped with a punch press to create a product of uniform size. Rock cocaine is 

generally  white to off-white in color and about the size of a pencil eraser. 

Freebase is the purified base form of cocaine hydrochlo-ride salt.  It  is a colorless, odor-less, transparent  crystalline 

substance. Freebase, when mixed with volatile chemicals, 

usually  ether, is smoked in aspecial  alcohol-filled  glass pipe using a high temperature flame source such as a propane torch. This method of smoking cocaine is extremely dangerous as ether is highly flammable and easily ignited. 

Coca Paste, Bazooka, Basuco or  BCiZUCO  is a crude extract of the coca leaf. Known as cocaine sulfate, paste or base, it is the intermediate form of cocaine; one step away from coca leaves and one step before cocaine hydrochloride salt. Ba-zooka is light tan in color, is mixed with tobacco or marijuana and smoked in a cigarette. This is the most contaminated form of smoking cocaine often containing lead petroleum and sulfate by-products. 

Lidocaine is an adulterant utilized in the process of convert-ing cocaine hydrochloride salt to 

"crack".  Lidocaine also increases the amount of  "crack"  produced from cocaine; however when smoked along with crack it has serious health effects. Lidocaine, benzocaine and procaine as  well 

as stimulants such as ampheta-mine and ephedrine, when com-bined with cocaine cause  life 

threatening reactions due to the disruptive effects of these drugs on blood pressure and heart rhythm. 

Packaging and Prices 

Packaging  and pricing variations have been noted in different areas of the United States. Crack has been pack-aged in small vials similar to over-the-counter cold or diet capsules which are either clear or multi-colored. Some vials are similar to those used for perfume samples. The vials, some with plastic stoppers at one end, come in avariety of sizes. Glassine envelopes contain-ing a  viallvials  with brand names such as White Cloud, Cloud 9, and Super White are becoming common. The glassine bags containing the vials of crack are secured with scotch tape and then stamped with the brand name on the scotch tape. Crack vials are also being  hermetically 

sealed in  small  one inch plastic baggies. Crack is also being sold in ready-to-use two to six inch pyrex tubes approximately 114 inch wide. A screen is placed on one end so the pellet will not fall out. 

Small  foil wrapped packets are also used in some parts of the country to distribute crack, how-ever, the clear plastic vial ap-25 pears to be the most popular because the package need not be opened to examine the crack. 

Prices  for vials of crack vary according to the size ordered.  In 

most cities, crack sells for ap-proximately  $10.00  to  $50.00  in quantities ranging from one-tenth of a gram to one-half of a gram (one gram:::: about 1/28 of an ounce).  Other  sources indicate prices as low as  $2.00  to  $5.00 

for a  "one  hit"  vial containing approximately one grain of crack. 

Pieces  of crack (rocks) weighing 

300  milligrams generally  sell  for 

$5.00  -$10:00.  Crack pills sell for 

$6.00  each. Bazooka is sold in folded white paper.  It  is the most inexpensive form of cocaine, selling for as  little  as  $1.00  per dose. 

Selling  Methods 

A Cracl<  House is generally an apartment or house but can 

also  be a storefront or club room where crack can be purchased. The definition of what constitutes a crack house varies from city to city. A crack spot is a take-out only service, operated from a fortified premise or apartment; a small hole in the door permits goods and money to be ex-changed without the need for visual contact. Base houses are compa-rable to opium dens or heroin 

"shooting  galleries."  These loca-tions are usually a club room, apartment, or private home. There is usually an admission charge to enter the base  house 

and a separate charge for the use of a pipe and torch.  Other houses do not sell the drug on the premises, they simply provide a room and a device for smoking. Abusers must bring their own crack. Groups of persons or indi-

viduals  who are seen signaling or shouting that they have crack to sell are said to be  "hawkers." 

"Hawking"  locations range from the roadside to selling  openly 

on.the street. Many of these 

"hawkers"  are children. These 

children  are  usually  school  drop-outs with no  skills  or vocational training. For a desperately poor kid, the streets sing a siren song of fancy cars and designer jeans. There's easy money and fast drugs. 

Hazards of  Smoking  Cocaine Products 

Crack may have a  low 

introductory price, but  the  de-mand for continued use can make the practice one of the most expensive drug habits. Some cocaine smokers have become paranoid immediately after using crack, hearing strange things or  se~ing  things move that are not in motion; others  believe 

people  are after them and be-come  violent.  Some users  hallu-

cinate and  feel  little  insects, 

"cocaine  bugs,"  are  crawling 

under their skin. 

Health  problems  include 

sore throat, hoarseness, parched tongue and  lips,  respiratory 

problems,  chronic coughing and spitting up  black  phlegm.  Long term abusers are said to  lose 

weight, and may acquire oily skin that may turn a yellow or gray tinge. Smoking cocaine can cause death by failure of the respiratory system, convulsions and heart attack.  Prolonged  use can  lead  to psychosis and strong paranoia. Smoking crack may cause the abuser to think he sees 

"halos"  surrounding objects on which he attempts to focus. The 

halo  effect is often  called 

"snowlights"  by users. Withdrawal symptoms 

include  loss  of energy and appe-tite, difficulty in  sleeping  and deep depression.  It  is noted that some cocaine users have used  black 

tar heroin, a new  low  cost form of Mexican heroin, to overcome severe depression associated with cocaine smoking. 

Profile of Cocaine  Smokers 

The majority of crack users appear to be between  20  to 35 years  old,  however, increased teenage abuse has been noted. 

It  is  also  reported that children as young as  10  or 11 years  old  are being introduced to crack. These children are afraid of  needles, 

and don't  like  swallowing  pills  but do not hesitate to take a puff of a cigarette  laced  with cocaine base. There is fear that the crack epidemic is reaching  children 

under the age of  10.  One  story indicated that a five year  old  had been given crack by his nine year 

old  brother.  While  there does not appear to be many abusers in this age category, the potential exists for  children  of those addicted. 

Finding Solutions 

The  problems  associated with smoking cocaine extend far beyond the user. Crimes of 

violence  have increased.  People 

talk  of depleting  life  savings to buy crack. Scores have turned to 

dealing,  stealing,  and prostitution 

26 

to support their habit. Law en-forcement officers are admitting they are  losing  the war and  law 

makers are  calling  for tougher penalties for the  dealer  and the user. There must be a united effort to stop this epidemic. Educators are recommending drug educa-tion in our  schools  beginning as 

early  as kindergarten.  Parents 

have the  ultimate  responsibility  to teach the  child  to abstain from mind-altering drugs.  If  we want to prevent  chemical  abuse, we must work together as a community, parents,  schools,  law  enforce-ment agencies,  all  committed in fighting the drug epidemic which has  already  destroyed one gen-eration of our  children  and is threatening the next. 

Effects and Symptoms of Cocaine Abuse 

The effects of cocaine abuse are  well-defined.  Following  adosage of cocaine into the  blood-

stream and brain, the user experi-ences a  short-lived  rush of  pleas-

urable  feeling.  There  follows  atemporary  abolishment  of  all  self-

doubt and an increased  feeling  of self-esteem and self-confidence. There are  also  increased esti-mates of one's self-creativity, competence, productivity, and power. The user often  becomes 

excited in his behavior and is talkative. He is stimulated into increased activity, and can go without  sleep  for long periods of time. Unfortunately, the high or 

pleasurable  experience is  fol-

lowed  more often than not by 

feelings  of depression,  irritability, 

impatience, and pessimism. Since this period of depression, known as  "crashing,"  can be cured by taking another  stimulant, 

an abuse pattern of repeated dosages often begins.  It's  apattern that is increasingly difficult to break. Heavy users may resort to taking larger dosages at in-creasingly frequent intervals until all they can think of is getting their next dose. Another noticeable, outward effect of the cocaine user is pupil dilation. Sometimes the pupils become fixed.  Some  habitual cocaine users suffer from severe weight loss, anxiety, and halluci-nations. They sometimes imagine the sound of footsteps approach-ing, and often feel bugs or insects crawling under their skin.  In  this condition, a person should be handled with care and caution, because an addict may some-times behave like a frightened animal and attack the individual trying to help him. Occasional use of cocaine causes a stuffy or runny nose, while chronic snorters develope an ulceration to the mucous membranes of their nose. Those who inject cocaine with an unster-ile needle run the risk of contract-ing  AIDS  or infecting themselves with hepatitis (inflammation of the liver).  Smoking  cocaine increases the rate of heartbeat and blood pressure. Worst of  all,  the abuse of cocaine in this fashion in-creases the risk of addiction. The number of infants born to drug-addicted mothers is becoming a crisis, according to Brian Udell, M.D., chief neona-tologist at Broward General Medical Center in Fort Lauder-dale, Florida. Hospitals are reporting an increasing number of sickly newborns dubbed "cocaine babies." A mother using cocaine is, in effect, smothering the fetus. Cocaine babies suffer from various problems, from strokes to heart attacks. Withdrawal from cocaine is very painful and the user is often driven back for more cocaine. Tolerances to cocaine build over time, so more and more of the substance is required. Cocaine has been known to cause death by convulsions, by failure of the respiratory system, and by heart attack.  Prolonged 

use of cocaine  can  lead to psycho-sis, feelings of suicidal despair, and strong paranoia brought about by the cocaine and other drugs with which it has been mixed, such as quinine, ephredrine, metham-phetamines, and heroin. 

Help  is  Available 

Treatment for cocaine-related illness is best accom-plished on the basis of symptoms shown. For acute anxiety, a sedative such as Valium can be prescribed. For a severe over-dose situation, hospitalization and respiratory assistance is recom-mended to avoid death by respira-tory arrest.  Once  the critical period of possible cardiac failure or respiratory arrest is past, a recovery prognosis is favorable, although the cocaine abuser may suffer persistent headaches and general listlessness for periods of days and even weeks. After recovery, psychological support is of the utmost importance. The four basic ways cocaine dependence is treated are similar to the techniques used by heroin addicts.  Some  persons are strong and determined enough to kick the habit by  themselves,  cold turkey, by simply not taking any more of the addicting drug. But for the majority of cocaine-de-

. pendent persons trying to cure themselves, the support of others is necessary. There are groups similar to Alcoholics Anonymous, appropriately called Cocaine Anonymous, willing to offer support to anyone needing help. 

In  addition, there are other profes-sionally supervised and highly structured programs available in which counseling and other 

27 

training on an out-patient basis are provided. For  those  who require regular medical or profes-sional supervision, in-patient care in a cocaine-free, controlled environment with appropriate counseling is advisable. 

Persons  seeking confidential expert advice about cocaine may contact the National Cocaine Helpline at  i-aOO-COCAINE.  This toll-free hotline is available nation-wide 24 hours a day. The National Institute on Drug Abuse  (NIDA) 

HOTLINE,  1-aOO-662-HELP,  is aconfidential information and referral line that directs callers to cocaine abuse treatment centers in the local community. 

Will the Cocaine Epidemic Continue? 

At a White House conference in December,  1990,  President 

George Bush said, "Virtually every piece of information we have tells us that drug use trends are headed in the right direction -down. Nevertheless, as long as there are hospital rooms filled with drug addicted babies, neighbor-hoods ravaged by drug violence or children threatened byaddic-tion, a declaration of victory would be premature." .The  1990  Omnibus  Crime Bill substantially increases law enforcement resources at the federal and local levels. Despite our law-enforcement efforts at home and on the border areas, the supply is up as growers in 

South  America continue to keep their cash crop on the move. According to estimates by the House  Select  Committee on Narcotics Abuse, up to  150  tons of cocaine  could  enter the United States this year. Cocaine is 

prevalent  throughout America. Users beget users, friend turns on friend, workers  supply  co-work-ers, and  professional  colleagues 

supply  fellow  colleagues,  that is the way this drug is distributed in this country. So what is the best way to put an end to this epidemic? There is no  simple  answer. Americans need to understand that the use of cocaine causes 

psychological  and  physical  de-pendency, a  feeling  that causes the user to  feel  that he can't function without the drug. Learn about the effects of cocaine on the mind and body and don't use it. Students in high  school  or in 

college,  homemakers, and men and women in the  workplace  or at 

leisure,  should  be  encol!,raged  to stand by their convictions when pressured to use cocaine. The best thing to do when offered cocaine is to  politely  refuse. We must  all  work together,  parfmts, 

law  enforcement agencies, community groups, and  schools 

in sending a firm message: cocaine use is wrong,  harmful, 

and sometimes  deadly. 

Amphetamines and Methamphetamines Manufactured Stimulants 

Amphetamines and metham-phetamines are synthetic sub-stances, made in pill or capsule form, that increase the reactions of the  central  nervous system when taken into the body. Regu-

lated  by the  Controlled  Sub-stances Act of 1970, ampheta-mines, when  properly  used, have been  beneficial  to the treatment of Parkinson's disease, for  help-

ing to  control  obesity (on a short-term basis), for some. forms of depression, treatment of certain types of hyperactivity in children, and to treat  narcolepsy,  a rare disorder marked by uncontrolled 

sleep  patterns. The benefits of ampheta-mines (often referred to as uppers or speed), are many, and so are the temptations to abuse their 

stimulating  qualities. 

Amphetamine Abuse is Widespread 

Amphetamine, dextroam-phetamine, and methamphetam-ine are  all  so  similar  in induced effects that they can be differenti-ated from one another  only  by 

laboratory  analysis. 

Since 1935, when ampheta-mines were produced to treat 

28 

> Methamphetamine

depression and to curb  app'etites, 

their abuse has increased. Since the  World  War  II  days of the mid-40's, Americans have been buying amphetamines in quanti-ties that  currently  run in the 

billions  of  tablets  each year. Because of their  medical 

side effects, physicians are 

careful  in prescribing ampheta-mines as  diet-control  agents to their patients. Despite their being 

listed  as a  controlled  substance 

regulated  by the CSA, and de-spite being  classified  in the same category as morphine and co-caine (having a high abuse 

potential  and  little  medical  value), 

the abuse of amphetamines is a serious  problem  today. It  has been estimated that as much as  half  of  all  the  legally 

manufactured supply of  ampheta-

mines find their way into  illegal, 

non-prescribed channels.  Addi-

tionally,  black- market  laborato-

ries at home and abroad turn out imitation  pills  and capsules that 

only  skilled  technicians in  labora-

tory surroundings can detect from the real thing. Clandestine laboratories that manufacture  illicit  methamphet-amine have proliferated because of the ease of production and the limited  skills  needed to run them. Because many of the chemicals used in production have industrial or household uses, they are easy and inexpensive to obtain. Most laboratory operators are  "cooks" 

rather than trained chemists and their recipes are usually  pub-

lished or handwritten. Amphetamines and  metham-

phetamines are known by a wide variety of slang names: 

Amphetamines 

Bennies Black Beauties Roses White Cross Pep Pills Wheels Dexies Oranges 

Football 

Cartwheels Coast to Coast L.A. Turn-abouts or West Coast Turnarounds Uppers Ups Copilots Bumblebees Hearts 

Methamphetamines 

Speed Meth Crystal Bombida Crank Crystal Meth 

Ice,  crystals batu (Filipino) shabu (Japanese) hiroppon (Korean) 

Methamphetamine 

Methamphetamine is known on the street as  "crank",  "crystal" 

or  "ice".  Crank or crystal, a powdered form of methamphet-amine, has been around for years and is the most prevalent,  clan-

destinely manufactured  controlled 

substance in the United States. This powerful stimulant drug has effects of intoxication similar to cocaine. Crank is being referred to as the poor man's cocaine and according to the National  Institute 

on Drug Abuse, crank looms as a potential national drug crisis in the 1990's. The drug is often injected intravenously but can be snorted or taken  orally. 

Ice,  a crystalline,  smokeable form of methamphetamine, first appeared in Hawaii in 1985 and has now spread from Hawaii to the U.S. mainland. 

> Ice

The ice trail goes back to South Korea, a major exporter of this drug. The Koreans learned about methamphetamine from the Japanese who invented it in 1893. During World War  II,  the Japanese supplied meth to their workers and weary soldiers.  It 

was banned in Japan in the 

1950's  but Japan remains the largest market for ice. 

29 

Ice  appears in two forms; water-based ice is translucent, oil-based ice is  yellow.  Ice  looks like rock candy or rock salt. 

Ice  is usually sold in papers, clear, heat sealed cellophane packets or opaque glass vials. 

One  hit,  (.10  of a gram)  sells  for 

$50  with an ounce going for as much as  $7,000.  One  gram of ice is said to produce  10-15  hits.  Ice 

seized in Hawaii has been  ana-

lyzed at  98-100  percent pure. 

> Ice Pipe

While the powdered form of methamphetamine is snorted or taken orally, ice is  usually 

smoked in a glass pipe.  Ice  is odorless and can be smoked in public with little danger of  detec-

tion. A telltale  sign of a meth-pipe user are burn marks on fingers used to seal the vent hole in the pipe chamber during heating. 

Called  "amping"  for the 

amplified  euphoria it gives them, ice smokers experience a high that can last up to 14 hours. The drug tends to keep the user awake and alert. The effects of coming off an ice high can be much worse than coming off a crack high and can  last  for days or until the next smoke. Use of ice can  lead  to  vita-

min and mineral deficiencies, rapid weight loss, lowered  resis-

tance to disease, strokes, heart attacks and pulmonary edema; abusers  virtually  drown in their own body fluids. This drug seems certain to become more destructive than a second  Ice  Age. Effects on the  User 

Illicit  use of amphetamines, methamphetamines and dex-troamphetamine closely  parallels 

that of cocaine in the range of its short-term and long-term effects. Amphetamines make a person feel alert and lively. Truck drivers on  all-night  runs, students studying for an exam, entertain-ers, athletes who need to be up for a performance, and people trying to lose weight are known to take speed.  Others  take them just to get high. The first reaction after popping a pill or capsule is a 

feeling  of heightened awareness and well-being. Users become more talkative, and may even try to answer questions before they are asked. They feel any chal-lenge can be met and solved easily. No problem! The student cramming for an examination or the athlete who wants to excel in an athletic contest, may find that this kind of abuse leads to real difficulties. Instances of death during athletic contests have been traced to amphetamine use. When the stimulation of the amphetamine pill or capsule wears off, the feeling of being able to solve any of the big problems in life fades as well. The user feels tired, and his jaw muscles are tight from clenching his teeth. He remembers that it's been a long  time  since he had anything to eat, but his appetite is gone. Sleeplessness sets in. Dizzy, sweaty, tired to exhaus-tion, he must keep moving or he will crash. The easy solution-incorrectly perceived-is to pop another pill. When the  collapse  does come, and it surely  will,  the helpless feeling of losing all the strength in his muscles sets in, and it's frightening. Symptoms similar to the flu are common. They include sickness, head-aches, shakes, anxiety, and dizziness. People who have used large amounts of amphetamines over long periods of time also develop hallucinations. They see, hear, and feel things that do not exist. They have irrational thoughts (delusions) and feelings that people are out to get them (para-noia). People in this state should be treated with caution. They frequently display violent and unpredictable behavior.   

> How Stimulant Abuse Affects The Body

Amphetamines stimulate the central nervous system by in-creasing the amount or  availabil" 

ity of adrenalin to the nerve-cell connections. This is particularly true of areas in the brain associ-ated with vigilance, heart action, and mood.  Such  stimulation is normal in emergency or life-threatening situations, but if the stimulation is prolonged exces-sively by amphetamines, other undesirable side effects occur. 

It  is easy to understand why amphetamines are called uppers or speed. Amphetamines keep you awake. Heart action and breathing rates increase as does blood pressure. Appetite de-creases and there exists a feeling of well-being and heightened awareness. 

Other  less desirable effects of amphetamines include a dry mouth, sweating, headaches, blurred vision, dizziness, anxiety, and sleeplessness. Extremely high doses can cause skin to become flushed or pale, rapid or irregular heartbeat, loss of coordi-nation, and even physical col-lapse. Long-term effects on the body caused by heavy use  of 

amphetamines can lead to malnu-trition, skin disorders, ulcers, and diseases related to vitamin defi-

30 

ciencies. Sleeplessness, weight loss, and depression also result from regular use. Frequent use of large amounts of the drug can cause brain damage evidenced by slurred speech and thought disturbances. Injection of amphetamines is life threatening because of non-sterile equipment and contami-nated, self-prepared solutions. 

> Methods of Abuse

Amphetamines may be used in a social setting, although there are many solitary users, some of whom combine this stimulant with alcohol. Most users simply pop the pill or capsule and experiment with the various effects obtained from a wide variety of combina-tions. Use of amphetamines 

usually  begins with an average dose of 2.5 milligrams or 15 to  30 

milligrams per day. As tolerances increase, the user tends to in-crease the dosage until  feeling 

compelled to change to the intravenous injection route. Those on a speed binge have been known to inject as much as 

1,000  milligrams  every  two or three hours. Upon withdrawal, the speed freak feels terribly depressed and lethargic, yet he can't sleep. This condition leads the user to other drugs that temper the effect, such as barbiturate drugs commonly called  "downers,"  and the cycle continues. The addicted amphetamine speed freak is not very  cool.  In 

fact, he is a social failure who can't stop talking and doesn't make much sense. He is continu-

ally  on the move, often  belliger-

ent, unstable, sexually inept, and jittery. Like the cocaine or heroin addict, the speed freak will do anything to obtain his supplies. Clandestine  Lab Dangers 

Several  chemicals involved in the production of amphetamine and methamphetamine present danger from fire or explosion. Risk of injury or toxicity from chemical exposure depends on the toxic properties of the chemi-cal, quantity, concentration and duration of exposure. Chemicals classified as solvents or corro-sives produce the greatest poten-tial for danger.  Some  common chemicals used in the laboratory are: hydrogen cyanide,  acetone, 

chloroform, ether, methanol and thorium. Inhalation of hydrogen cyanide can cause coma, respira-tory failure and death. Thorium is an alpha emitting radioactive 

material. 

> Clandestine lab

Children living near a labora-tory environment are subject to accidental skin or inhalation exposure in addition to accidental ingestion of chemicals.  Symp-

toms may include burns to the skin, intoxication, dizziness, loss of coordination and nausea. Drugs produced in clandes-tine labs contain an excess of contaminants and by-products. Impurities found in some drugs have resulted in severe and permanent neurologic disability 

following  intravenous injection. 

If  you suspect that a clan-destine laboratory is operating in your community, don't ignore it, report your suspicions to a law enforcement agency. Danger of explosion and fire comprise the greatest risk from chemicals stored in the lab. An active laboratory that is supplied with chemicals presents a great risk of adverse health effects for occu-pants and emergency personnel responding to a fire or health  call. 

Some  lab operators set up chemi-cal  "booby  traps" in an effort to disable or injure intruders. An unsuspecting or curious child could suffer chemical exposure. 

If  a home or building is discov-ered to be a clandestine drug lab, it should be considered unsafe for entry and reported to the proper authorities. 

Appetite  Suppressants-·The 

Anorectic Drugs 

In  recent years, diet-control drugs somewhat less potent than amphetamines have been manu-factured. These drugs, the so-

called  anorectic drugs, have been found to produce many of the effects produced by ampheta-mines. They also are on the list of controlled substances for safety purposes.  Some  of these drugs are known by the trade names noted here: 

Didrex Pre-Sate Voranil 

Tenuat,g 

Pondimin Sanorex Plegine Meffiat Statobex Tanorex lonamin Adipex-P Dexedrine Cyclert Bacarate Ritalin Preludin 

31 

Prevention 

Obviously, the elimination of large-scale,  illicit  suppliers of amphetamines and better appli-cation of controls over legitimate production and distribution of these drugs is part of the answer. More importantly, the complica-tions and consequences of abuse of amphetamines must be made more widely known through improved educational approaches at  all  levels, starting in the ele-mentary grades. The user needs help if he is hooked on amphetamines. This 

usually  means  skilled  treatment, since  all  too many of those ad-dicted will be difficult to rehabili-tate. Close support from the user's friends and family is neces-sary, plus medical and psycho-logical help. Hospitalization may be required. Unfortunately, the speed freak who wants to stop his habit may continue to be attracted to the enormous chemical high he has experienced. This may cause a relapse after seemingly having broken the habit. Group therapy  in  which ex-speed freaks can interact with others undergoing recovery treatment has been successful in many cases. Those who have come through the speed scene themselves are trusted, and their counsel is more likely to be accepted by the user who really wants to kick his destructive drug habit. DEPRESSANTS,  also  called  IIdowners,  II  refer to those drug compounds that affect the central nervous system by decelerating its activities. Synthetic or natural depressants include those used to induce sleep (hypnotics), produce a

# relaxed state leading to sleep (sedatives), or relieve anxiety without sleep (tranquilizers). 

> 32 -------------------------

Barbiturates 

Barbiturates, commonly manufactured in  pill  or capsule form, are the most widely abused of the  synthetically  produced depressant drugs. Chronic users of these drugs in high dosages seek a  feeling  of elation, tranquil-ity, and  well-being. 

Barbiturates depress or calm the  c;:entral  nervous system, just the opposite of the stimulant drugs. Barbiturate drugs are 

Jaluable  in the treatment of 

iilsorpnia,  epilepsy, anxiety, 

hypehhyroidism,  and high blood pressure. They are used to treat mental as  well  as physical ill-nesses, since their essential effect is to  be  a sedative rather than to  relieve  pain.  It  is not surprising then that barbiturates are often  called  downers.  Other 

slang  narT}es  are taken from the color of the capsule, such as 

blues  or  yellow  jackets, or the shape of the tablet, such as peanut. Barbiturates, like heroin, 

> Barbiturates

create  physical  as  well  as psy-chological dependence. They are also  controlled  by the CSA. 

Classification of Barbiturates 

There are three  generally 

different kinds of barbiturates available, classified according to the speed of the drug onset and 

the  duration of its reaction time in the body. The  following  are examples. 1) Ultra-short onset time, 

usually  within one minute after administration of the drug and with a relatively short duration that makes them unattractive to the drug abuser. These are: 

Generic name: 

hexobarbital methohexital thiamylal thiopental 

Trade name: 

Evipal Brevital Surital Pentothal 

2) Short-acting and interme-diate-acting barbiturates, having 33 an onset time within 15 to  40 

minutes after taking the drug 

(usually  by mouth) and a duration lasting up to six hours, an attrac-tive period of time to the abuser, hence this group is most sought after: 

Generic name: 

pentobarbital secobarbital amobarbital butabarbital butalbital allobarbital aprobarbital vinbarbital 

Trade name: 

Nembutal Seconal Amy tal Butisol Lotusate Dial A lura te Delvinal 

3) Long-acting barbiturates with an onset time of up toone hour and a duration of up to 16 hours. These are  normally  used as sedatives, hypnotics, and anticonvulsants. They include: 

Generic name: 

barbital phenobarbital mephobarbital or methylpheno-

Trade name: 

Veronal Luminal barbital Mebaral metharbital Gemonil 

There are about  2,500 

derivatives of barbituric acid that have been synthesized, but of these only about 15 remain in medical use. Trade Names and  Slang  Terms 

Generally,  barbiturates are 

called  sleepers, downers, candy, goof balls, goofers, peanuts, beans, Christmas trees, and barbs. Other names relate to the brand or particular classification of the barbiturate. 

Slang/Street 

Names 

Yellow jackets 

Yellows 

Nimbys Blues Blue heaven Blue birds Blue devils Reds Red birds Red devils 

Seccy  or  Seggy 

Pink Red and Blues Rainbows Double trouble 

Trade or Other Names 

Pentobarbital . sodium Amobarbital sodium Secobarbital sodium Amobarbital and Secobarbital in combination 

Barbiturates Are Addictive 

Because use of barbiturates can be habit forming a.nd addic-tive, these drugs must be taken according to a physician's instruc-tions. Regular use over a long period of time results in increased tolerance, so that larger and larger dosages are needed to achieve the same effect. When regular users stop taking barbs, they feel physical withdrawal pangs manifested by simple restlessness, anxiety, and insomnia leading sometimes to convulsions and death. Those who become psychologically dependent  feel  they must have their drug supply to function. Their one aim in life becomes sharply focused on getting more of the drug.  

> Amy tal Noludar

Effects of Heavy Barbiturate Usage 

Continued and excessive use of barbiturates results in slurred speech, staggering, loss of balance, quick-tempered responses, and a quarrelsome disposition. The appearance of drunkenness without the smell of alcohol clearly points to barbitu-rate intoxication. 

People  who use more barbi-turates than they should include those who have difficulty dealing with anxiety, or simply those who have trouble sleeping.  Some  are under excessive stress and find it easier to bear if sedatives are taken. Sometimes those taking pep pills or uppers find they need barbiturates or downers to get them back to feeling normal. Only that doesn't work too well as the two drugs do not actually balance each other.  Soon,  the user is taking an ever increasing 

34 

Depressants  

> Nembutal Lotusate
> SK· Bamate

number of uppers and more downers to achieve the desired feeling. All too often the situation gets out of control.  It  has been recorded that as many as  50  pills 

per day have been consumed by people addicted to sleeping pills. The sleeping-pill sedative can prove fatal when combined with the depressant effect of alcohol, because the total effect of botll depressants is multiplied more than two times. The list of celebrities who have overdosed on a combination of alcohol and sleeping pills includes Marilyn Monroe, Judy Garland; Dorothy Kilgallen, Alan Ladd, Janis Joplin, and Elvis  Presley  to name a few. Accidental deaths have occurred by taking sleeping pills in larger numbers than intended. Sometimes a person wakes up after taking the usual dose of one or two pills at bedtime, forgets having taken the earlier dose, and takes more. Methods of Abuse and Recognizing Symptoms 

Barbiturates are cJmmonly taken in  pill  or capsule form. Barbiturates in solution have been taken into the muscle or intrave-nously by injection. The duration of the se.dative effect lasts from one to 16 hours, depending on the dosage and the kind of barbi-turate used. \.. 

Too much of the drug taken into the body results in slurred speech, drunken behavior, and disorientation. An overdose of barbiturates often results in coma, accompanied by cold and clammy skin, rapid and  shallow  breathing, dilated pupils, and a weak and rapid pulse.  If  not treated, death could result. When a person stops taking barbiturates, withdrawal symp-toms are indicated by  feelings  of anxiety, sleeplessness, tremors, 

delirium,  and convulsions. Again, death is possible if treatment is not available. 

Breaking the Habit 

Barbiturate addicts must be helped through withdrawal under close medical supervision.  Con-

vulsions (and possible death) may 

occur  up to the 16th day of with-drawal. Barbiturate overdose has been a factor in nearly one-third of all reported drug-related deaths, including suicides and accidental drug  pOisonings.  The danger  lies  in the fact that with barbiturates there is little differ-ence between the amount it takes to induce sleep and  the  amount that kills. Withdrawal from barbitu-rate overdoses can be more serious than withdrawal from heroin. For this reason alone, medical supervision is needed when an addicted person is with-drawing from barbiturate abuse. A dangerous part of with-drawal is lack of muscular  coordi-

nation, similar to epileptic seizures which can also occur. Respiratory failures can happen during with-drawals as  well. 

The goal of treatment is to assure stabilization of the patient to prevent such extreme with-drawal symptoms, and to  allow 

gradual recovery. 

Other  Abused Sedative-Hypnotic Depressant Drugs 

There are other depressant drugs being abused, including benzodiazepines. Examples of these products are Diazepam (Valium), chlordiazepoxide (Lib-rium), and chlorazepate (Tranxene).  All  are being sold on the street in illegal channels as downers. 

Other  depressants  include· 

glutethimide (Doriden), ethchlor-vynot  (Placidyl),  methaqualone (Sopor, Quaalude), and chloral hydrate (first made in 1862), which is available in  liquid  form or in gelatin capsules. Meprobamate, first made in 

1950,  is used as a mild tranquilizer and is identified in the marketplace by brand names such as Miltown, Equanil, Kesso-Bamate, and SK-Bamate. 

35 -------

Methaqualone-What is it? 

Methaqualone is yet·another synthetic sedative, one that is 

chemically  unrelated to all other depressants.  Once  mistakenly thought to be nonaddictive and effective as an aphrodisiac, methaqualone, known as Quaa-ludes, Ludes, 714's, and 747's, has caused many cases of seri-ous poisoning. 

Once  marketed under brand names such as Quaalude,  Parest, 

Optimil, Somnafac, and Sopor in the United States, pharmaceutical manufacturers in this country have voluntarily stopped making methaqualone. Countries in Europe and other parts of the world that previously  ~upplied  the raw powder for producing counterfeit methaqualone (mostly in Columbia, South America) are now withholding these materials. As a result of these self-imposed controls by the legitimate drug industry, illegal street sales of the drug have virtually dried up, according to the Drug Enforce-ment Administration. Quaaludes are administered by mouth. When too much is taken, overdosing can occur. This is evidenced by convulsions and thrashing movements, typical of grand mal seizures. In  1981,  Ouaaludes  were reported as being the  popular 

drug of choice with  adolescents, 

ranking next to marijuana. As with most depressants, using  Ouaaludes  creates a 

feeling  of  well-being,  similar to an 

alcoholic  high. The user  feels 

more outgoing,  pleasantly 

friendly,  and  less  inhibited. The effects of a heavy sedation of 

Ouaaludes  can soon cause 

walking  and  talking  difficulties. 

Additionally,  the use of Ouaa-

ludes  is dangerous, because it causes severe distortion of judgment and depth perception. Driving a car  while  under the 

influence  of  methaqualone  is dangerous and  suicidal.  Chloral  Nydrate 

36 1---

# HALLUCINOGENS  refer to that group of drugs that affect the central nervous system) causing thought disrup-tion) distortion of ego) emotional changes) and alterations in perception. Most of these natural or synthetic substances (some are extracted from a fungus)) have no medical value and pose special dangers to users because of the high potency in very small doses. 

> 37 Blotter paper

The third general category of dangerous drugs, in addition to stimulants and depressants, is the 

hallucinogens,  so-called  because they may produce illusions or 

hallucinations  of the various senses. When experiencing an  illu-

sion, a person's  ability  to perceive is distorted, disoriented, and no longer related to the real world. Marijuana is classified  basically  as a hallucinogenic  drug, but is also astimulant and a depressant.  (See 

Cannabis section). Most hallucinogenic drugs in the  illicit  trade are manufactured in secret laboratories.  Some  are legitimately made, but then illegally diverted or stolen for purposes of profiteering.  Some  hallucinogenic products are made from naturally grown plant parts, such as Mesca-

line,  which is obtained from the peyote cactus and  Psilocybin  from the mushroom. Although irresponsibly  pro-

moted as a means of expanding consciousness,  hallucinogens 

have yet to be proven medically valuable. Hence, there are no standards of  quality  control in existence. 

Illegal  labs produce their product in capsules, tablets,  pills, 

powders, and  liquids.  Peddlers 

then transport the drug to market in a multitude of ways. For example, 

LSD-25  (lysergic acid Diethylamide)' has been found in sugar cubes, candy, paper, aspirin, 

liquor,  cloth, and on the back of postage stamps.  

> LSD 25

LSD  is a colorless, odorless, and tasteless chemical made from lysergic acid derived from the ergot fungus that grows on rye grain.  It 

can be found in liquid  or  powder form. First produced in 1938, its psychedelic qualities were first discovered when a chemist  acci-

dentally  ingested some  LSD  in 1946 and took a hallucinogenic trip. He experienced  light  intensifi-cation and with his eyes closed saw a stream of fantastic images of extraordinary vividness, accom-panied by a rapidly shifting display of colors. His trip lasted two hours. A dosage of  LSD  in liquid form no larger than enough to cover the point of a pin  (50  to  200 

micrograms) is sufficient to take auser on a trip for approximately eight to 16 hours.  LSD  is the most potent of  all  hallucinogenic  sub-

stances used by man. A minute amount reaching the brain  pro-

duces striking effects in mental functioning. 

How  LSD  is  Sold  and Used 

LSD  is most often  sold  on the street as a tablet, on blotter paper (impregnated with  liquid  LSD),  as window panes  (~mall  square gelatin sheets), and microdots (small balls of powder on a paper). The similarity between childrens' decals and decorated blotter paper has led to warnings that tell  par-

ents to be aware of blue star tattoos and postage stamp-size pictures of Superman, Mickey Mouse and other characters that are impregnated with  LSD.  The Drug Enforcement Administration 

38 

says there has never been adocumented incident in which  LSD-

soaked tattoos have been given to children. 

LSD  is usually taken by mouth, but can be injected.  It  is seldom diluted, in fact, it is so powerfully concentrated that  weak-

ening of the product is not easy. Tolerance to taking  LSD  develops rapidly. However, there appears to be  little  or no physical dependence on the drug. 

Effects of  LSD  on the User 

During the first hour after taking  LSD,  the user may experi-ence visual changes and extreme changes in mood.  In  this hallucina-tory condition, the user may see distortions in objects, and experi-ence distortion in depth and time perception. He is no longer able to make sensible judgments, to recognize common dangers, or to see objects in a normal context. 

Physical  evidence of  LSD 

usage may include dilated pupils, lowered body temperature, nausea, goose bumps, increased blood sugar, and rapid heart beat.  Often 

the hands become clammy and trembling, breathing is labored, and chills may develop. 

LSD  is totally unpredictable, and its  decline  in popularity since the late 1960's is certainly under-standable.  LSD  has been  aban-

doned by most of its  earlier  users because too many bad trips or bummers were being experienced. The good trip that made one feel  all 

knowing and able to solve any problem all too often turned into hours of dread and terror. Too many users were hurting  them-

selves  physically,  and some died while hallucinating. -Flashback  Experiences 

Regular users of LSD report the experience of flashbacks, or reoccurrence of some of the LSD experiences that happened days or months after the previous dose.  Often  a flashback experi-ence can result in considerable depression and a fear that one is going mad. Such occurrences have been known to lead to suicide. The flashback experi-ence may be related, in part, to the extremely high potency of the chemical and its structural rela-tionship to a chemical  present in the brain. Because of these factors, LSD is used to study the mechanisms of mental illnesses. Flashback experience may be triggered by physical or psy-chological stress, or by medica-tions such as antihistamines, or by marijuana. Slang terms include LSD, Acid, Cubes, Sugar, 25, The Big 

0,  the Cube, Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds, Green or Red Dragon, Blue Heaven, White Lightning, and Microdot. While physical dependence does not appear to be a problem (as in other drugs), the danger of psychological dependence on LSD is certainly present. And as tolerance to LSD or Acid, as it is commonly called, builds up, so will psychological dependence. 

PCP  (Phencyclidine) 

PCP  was first developed as an anesthetic in the  1950's,  but was found to cause side effects such as confusion and delirium in patients.  In  the  1960's,  PCP  was commercially used in veterinary medicine, under the trade name Sernylan, to tranquilize animals. Because of continued side-effect problems, production was halted in  1970.  PCP,  known by a variety of names on the street, is most often called  "Angel  Dust."  It  is available in many illegally manu-factured forms, including tablets, capsules, or as white, crystal-like powder. When sold on the street it may appear in any color e.g. (red, green, blue).  It  can be smoked, inhaled, sniffed, or injected.  PCP  is sometimes sprinkled on marijuana (called 

SuperPot),  or sprinkled on pars-ley and smoked. 

> Phencyclidine-PCP

Street Names 

PCP  is sold on the street by a variety of names that reflect the range of bizarre and volatile effects it causes. These names are: Angel Dust, Supergrass, Crystal, Killer Weed, Embalming Fluid, Hog, Lovely, Loveboat, Rocket Fuel, Devil Stick, Elephant Juice, and Dummy Dust.  It  has been sold as LSD, THC, and Mescaline. 

39 

Effects of  PCP  on the User 

Physical  reactions to  PCP 

depend on how much of the drug is taken by an individual and how it is used. The heart beat is elevated as well as blood pres-sure, while flushing, sweating, dizziness, and numbness also occur. Large doses can cause death from repeated convulsions, heart and lung failure, or ruptured blood vessels in the brain. Reported effects of  PCP  on the abuser are varied. For some, 

PCP  is a stimulant (when taken in small amount.s) speeding up body functions.  Other  users report their own bodies and objects around them are changed. Speech, muscle  coo~dination  and vision are also affected. Dulled to the sense of pain and touch, with users' body movements slowed and the sense of time spaced out, some users are essentially in a state of tranquilization. Some users report numb-ness, slurred or blocked speech, and loss of coordination, which may be accompanied by a feeling of great strength and invulnerabil-ity. A blank stare, rapid and involuntary eye movement, and an exaggerated gait are among the more common, observable effects of the  PCP  abuser. Audi-tory hallucinations, image distor-tion as in a house-of-mirrors, and severe personality disorders may occur, producing acute anxiety, a feeling of impending doom, and, in some, paranoia and violent hostility. 

PCP  can produce reactions similar to schizophrenia, a mental disorder characterized by  halluci-

nations and delusions of persecu-tion. Although such extreme psychic reactions are associated with repeated use of the drug, they have been known to occur in some cases after just one dose and to  last  or recur intermittently 

long  fifter  the drug has  left  the body. 

Dangers to PCP Users 

PCP  users can have flash-backs or recycling effects, which have occurred for up to  30  days after a single dose, without apparent re-exposure to the drug. 

PCP  has caused violent and erratic behavior in people who are not  normally  that way. Such behavior has led to drownings, 

falls  from high places, burns, and automobile accidents. Regular 

PCP  users find their memory, perception, concentration, and judgment adversely affected. 

Others  may show signs of para-noia, fearfulness, and anxiety. During these times, the users may become aggressive, while others withdraw and can't com-

fnunicate  very well. Long term users suffer memory and speech difficulties as  well  as  hallucina-

tions, seeing and hearing that which does not exist. 

Medical  Treatment of PCP Patients 

The combination of  PCP  with other drugs makes the manage-ment of drug-overdose situations a critical problem.  PCP  and barbiturates are often a fatal combination, sometimes leading to respiratory  collapse.  Suppor-tive medical care is recom-mended in a quiet and reassuring environment. Valium is often used to reduce or relieve muscle spasms and as a sedation. 

Mescaline 

Mescaline, the primary hallucinogenic ingredient of the peyote cactus, comes from the fleshy parts or buttons of the plant, and for centuries has been used by various  Indian  tribes of Central America and the south-western United States as part of their traditional religious rites. The Native American church has used peyote in its ceremonies since earliest recorded times, and has been exempted from certain provisions of the  Controlled 

Substances Act. 

Usually  ground into powder, mescaline is taken by  mo·uth.  Adose of  350  to  500  milligrams 

produces hallucinations and 

illusions  lasting from five to 12 hours. Mescaline is not  likely  to cause physical dependence, but it may cause psychological depend-ence. Mescaline is also known as Mesc, Buttons, and Cactus. Some of the possible effects on the user include  illusions  and hallucinations.  Poor  perception of time and distance often results. With an overdose of mescaline, the user experiences longer, more intense trip episodes, psychosis (lost contact with reality), and sometimes death. Users report the peyote-button hallucinogenic drug tastes bitter and often causes vomiting. 

It  is considerably less potent than LSD, hence its reputation as a mellow psychedelic. 

40 

Psilocybin-Psilocyn Mushrooms 

Psilocybin  and psilocyn are obtained from mushrooms grown in many parts of the world includ-ing the United States, but mostly from mushrooms grown in Mex-ico. Like mescaline, mushroom-derived hallucinogens have been used in  Indian  religious rites for centuries. When eaten, these  "sacred" 

or  "magic"  mushrooms affect the mind and perception in a manner similar to that of LSD. The mush-rooms are also dried and used in capsules or pills.  Others  drink the water in which the mushrooms have been cooked. The effects last up to six hours depending on the dosage. The active ingredients of the mushroom, psilocybin and psilo-cyn, are chemically  related  to LSD, and while occurring natu-rally, they may also be syntheti-cally produced. Unfortunately for the user of  Ithe mushroom hallucinogen, the product being sold on the street often contains other chemical compounds. Strangely enough, street users who want nothing to do with LSD will pay for mush-rooms because they are organic. Another problem with psilo-cybin or psychedelic mushrooms is that any look-alike mushroom can be substituted for the real thing. This could result in mush-room poisoning. Unless the user really knows his mushrooms, buying psilocybin on the streets is a risky business. The effects of psilocybin on the user are the same as those described for Mescaline. Why Try Hallucinogenic Drugs? 

Many reasons are given for trying  LSD  and other  hallucino-

genic drugs, ranging from curios-ity to a desire to know oneself. Most people take the drug for the high or to feel better, because they are unable to deal with life's frustrations or perhaps because they are left out of things.  It  is clear that without the high created by  LSD,  the drug would never have been popularized. 

PCP  is an extremely unpre-dictable and powerful drug. When smoked in a marijuana or regular cigarette, it is a very risky proposition. There is no way to measure the quality or potency of Angel Dust  (PCP)  being sprinkled on a cigarette. Quality control for any of these  illicitly  produced drugs does not exist. The user never knows for certain what he is taking into his  body,  A word to the wise: watch out for  PCP,  it can drive you crazy. 

> Peyote cactus Psilocybe mushroom

41 INHALANTS  are chemicals, the vapors of which are breathed in to achieve n7ind-altering effects. Solvents, aerosols, and anesthetics are the most common inhalants abused. They tend to act in slowing down body functions: 

> 42
> r~

# IL~._ Sniffing Abuse 

The practice of  inhaling 

vapors for their psychoactive effect goes back to ancient Greece. The psychoactive effects of inhalants such as nitrous oxide and chloroform were noted in the early  1800's.  Ether was first inhaled at the beginning of the twentieth century. Sniffing of solvents began in the late 

1950's  and aerosols in the 

1960's. 

Inhalants  have been de-scribed as breathable chemicals. They include solvents, aerosols, and some anesthetics. Solvents commonly abused include model airplane glue, nail  polish,  cleaning fluids, and  gasoline.  When inhaled into the lungs, these chemicals produce a psychoac-tive or mind-altering condition that can be anesthetic in its effect, or slow down body functions. 

Inhaling  low doses produces 

slight  stimulation.  Inhaling  higher amounts produces a lessening of inhibitions, and the user feels less in  control.  Inhaling  high doses can result in loss of consciousness. Aerosol products (available in the  marketplacG1)  that are often inhaled include butane, paints, cookware coating agents, hair sprays, and other products. Butane is one of a variety of hydrocarbon derivatives such as correction fluid or the coolant Freon. Butane abusers risk loss of coordination, confusion, lung, 

liver,  bone marrow and brain damage and possible death. For most people, butane is the 

propellent  that fuels cigarette lighters. For a growing number of teens who inhale it, butane is another way to get high. Anesthetics include nitrous oxide (laughing gas), halothane, 

amyl  nitrite, and butyl nitrite. Amyl nitrite is a clear, yel-lowish  liquid  sold in a small, cloth-covered, sealed bulb. When the bulb is opened it makes a snap-ping or popping sound; thus the nicknames,  "snappers"  and 

"poppers".  Because amyl nitrite dilates the blood vessels and makes the heart beat faster, it is used in the treatment of heart patients and for diagnostic pur-poses. Prior to 1979, amyl nitrite was available without prescrip-tion. When it became available by prescription only, many abus-ers switched to butyl nitrite. Butyl nitrite is packaged in small bottles and sold under a variety of names such as Satan's Scent, Locker Room,  Climax, 

Rush, Bolt and Bullet. When used as an inhalant, it produces a high that lasts from a few sec-onds to a few minutes.  Its 

effects on a user are decreased blood pressure followed by increased heart rate, flushed face and neck, dizziness, and head-ache. Some researchers  believe 

that butyl nitrite depresses the body's immune system, weakening its ability to ward off the  AIDS  virus or any infection, perhaps irreversibly. 

Methods of Abuse 

The type of chemicals and how they are abused are limited only by the imagination and ingenuity of the user. Aerosol sprays  al"·$  released into a pop-top, beer or soft drink can and the vapors inhaled through the small hole at the top of the can.  Other 

chemical vapors are trapped in apaper or plastic bag and then inhaled from the bag. A cloth may be moistened with a chemi-cal and the fumes inhaled directly from the cloth. Regardless of the 

43 

method used, inhaling chemical fumes is a dangerous and some-times lethal practice. 

The  Inhalant  Abuser 

Inhalant  abusers are gener-ally between the ages of 7 and 17 and from low  income  neighbor-hoods. Most youngsters start sniffing inhalants because of peer pressure and because inhalants are readily available and inexpen-sive.  Inhalant  abuse is an inter-national problem.  In  America it is estimated that about 7 million people from all segments of society have experimented· with inhalants. 

Sniffing Death 

The medical profession  calls 

it sudden sniffing death.  Inhaling 

highly concentrated amounts of aerosol sprays can cause heart failure and instant death. Striking quickly, death can occur any time a person sniffs. Non-aerosol  inhalaQts  can cause death from suffocation by displacing the oxygen in the lungs.  Inhalants  may also pro-duce suffocation by depressing the central nervous system to a point that breathing slows and then stops. The risk of overdose in-creases when inhalants are used while taking other depressants such as alcohol, tranquilizers or sleeping pills. Loss of conscious-ness, Goma or death can result. Persons experiencing inha-lant overdose should receive immediate medical attention. While waiting for help, those in attendance should make sure that the person's mouth arid throat are free from any obstructions. Efforts should also be made to keep the person awake by having him/her walk and talk. Effects of  Inhalant  Abuse 

Initial  effects of deep breath-ing these various chemical vapors include nausea, sneezing, nose-bleeds, bloodshot eyes,  feeling 

and looking tired, bad breath,  lack 

of coordination, thirstiness, and 

loss  of appetite. The heart beat and breathing rate change and there is often a noticeable effect in a person's judgment. The 

Warning  Signs 

effects are immediate and they can  last  from 15 to 45 minutes after  inhaling  has stopped. Continued abuse of these inhalants can  result  in  loss  of weight and self-control, violent behavior, nausea and vomiting, and possible heart failure. 

Inhaling  concentrated fumes from a bag greatly increases the chance of suffocation. Even when painting or using volatile Signs that a person may be abusing inhalants are as follows: 

• loss  of interest in personal appearance, food, and family activity 

• peculiar,  spaced-out behavior 

• lack  of coordination 

• altered time and distance perceptions 

• sores on nose and mouth 

• unpleasant, chemical breath 

• increased coughing and 

salivation 

44 products for legitimate purposes, it is best to do so in a well-venti-lated room or outdoors. Long-term use of inhalants develops a tolerance to the product.  Inhalants  can cause permanent damage to the nerv-ous system, reduce physical and mental capabilities, and damage the liver, kidneys, blood, and bone marrow. 

• cleaning rags in room, closet or basement 

• dried paint or spray on clothes and body 

• empty spray cans, tubes of  glue PRESCRIPTION  DRUGS  are natural or legally manufactured drugs used as a medicine under a

# doctor's written order. 

> 45

Prescription Drugs-Women Are  Often  Victims 

Over  200  million  prescrip-tions for tranquilizers, sedatives, stimulants, and pain-killing drugs are written in America every year. Two-thirds of these prescriptions are for women who have gone to their doctors for a variety of medical reasons. For anxiety, a prescription for  Valium  or Librium is issued; for sleeplessness, a prescription for Seconal or Luminal; for ten-sion, a prescription for Fiorinal; for back pain, a prescription for 

Percodan;  and for surgery pains and discomforts, prescriptions for Darvon and  Valium  are issued. 

It  is estimated that 2  million 

American women are victims of prescription drug abuse. They are addicted and need help.  It 

has become a major social problem. 

. A U.S. Food and Drug Ad-ministration survey of doctors in 1982, found that  they  had issued one prescription for every patient seen the previous week. Dr. Ted  Williams,  former head of the chemical abuse  clinic 

at the Naval Hospital in Long Beach,  California,  where former First Lady Betty Ford received treatment, says, "Women aren't more susceptible to drug abuse, but men don't go to doctors as much.  It's  more macho to go out and get drunk. Women learn early in life to go to a doctor and ask for a  pill." 

"It  starts out innocently," Dr. 

Williams  explains.  "It  is much easier for a doctor to write a prescription than to suggest alter-native ways of  dealing  with tension or pain. Talking isn't profitable for one thing, and it takes a lot of patience.  It's  hard not to write a prescription." .Without realizing what is happening, a woman taking 

Valium  on prescription soon finds that the  original  five  milligrams 

doesn't do the job, and soon she asks for 1 (1  milligrams  to achieve the desired effect. Why? The body has adapted to the drug, and has learned to tolerate its presence. The more of these  pills 

taken, the more the brain adapts to them. At the same time, the 

liver,  the main organ that  elimi-

nates a drug from the body, be-comes more adept at removing it. Soon the person using a certain drug finds it necessary to in-crease the dosage. 

Treatment for Prescription Drug Addiction 

Recovery centers or  clinics 

for the  chemically  dependent are available throughout the country. Many  specialize  in both inpatient and outpatient programs and comprehensive aftercare. Costs for treatment vary, ranging from 

$2,000  to  $20,000  or more. Most major U.S. medical centers have such  clinics  and there are hun-dreds of recovery  clinics  spon-sored by private and non-profit organizations. Medical expenses for treatment are covered by many health insurance plans. Many corporations and other businesses provide confidential 

rehabilitation  programs at com-pany expense as part of their Employee Assistance  Programs. 

The first four or five days in atreatment center are spent in de-toxification or withdrawal by the patient,  followed  by four to 12 weeks of therapy,  counseling, 

and learning how to go on  living 

without chemical dependency. An estimated one out of every three persons undergoing reha-

46 

bilitation  from chemical depend-ency relapses or drops out of the program, refusing to admit that they have a disease  called 

addiction. Every person who completes the  rehabilitation  program  usually 

has a sponsor, similar to Alcohol-ics Anonymous or Narcotics Anonymous, to provide a support system when regular life is re-sumed. Ways to treat tension, pain, and the original causes for prescription drug addiction in-clude physical therapy, relaxation techniques, acupuncture, acu-pressure, biofeedback, special diet, and special vitamins. Say 

"No"  to prescription drugs unless absolutely necessary for medical problems. 

Steroids 

All  across America and throughout the world, athletes, lawyers, stockbrokers, teachers, clergymen, construction workers and kids are taking steroids. The obsession with bigness has created an  illicit  demand for steroids. That demand is being met by manufacturers who pro-duce anabolic steroids faster than U.S. doctors can prescribe them for legitimate medical reasons. Steroids have become the ego drug for males, pop a  pill  and-good-bye wimp, hello Rambo! 

In  general, steroids are organic compounds which have many functions in the body. Examples of steroids include cholesterol, Vitamin E, male and female sex hormones and hormones that regulate body 

metabolism. 

Anabolic  steroids are syn-thetic derivatives of testosterone, a male sex hormone. The testos-terone hormone has two main actions - anabolic and andro-genic. The androgenic action causes  masculine  traits in men, the  anabolic  action is a building process.  Anabolic  steroids have legitimate uses for several medi-

cal  conditions such as treatment of osteoporosis, certain types of breast cancer, certain anemias and  male  hormonal disorders. 

Anabolic  steroids can be taken orally or by injection. 

> Steroids

Effects of  Anabolic  Steroids  on the Body 

In  teen-agers,  anabolic 

steroids can stunt body growth by causing the  growth  plates, the spongy parts of the long, young bones to close prematurely. A woman taking an  anabolic 

steroid is taking a  masculine 

hormone that is antagonistic to the estrogens, female hormones, in her body.  Anabolic  steroids change fat distribution by increas-ing muscle mass and shrinking breast size. Female vocal cords enlarge and cause the voice to deepen. They  also  spur growth of facial and body hair and cause enlargement of the  clitoris. 

In  men, large doses of steroids  will  cause the male's pituitary gland to stop the body from producing testosterone because so much of the synthetic testosterone is already in the body. This shutdown can cause breasts to grow, testes to shrink, a lowered sperm count and decreased sexual drive. 

Damage to the B'ody Steroids cause the body to retain nitrogen and this causes the body to retain more water for balance, resulting in edema. This extra fluid in the body elevates the blood pressure, causing hypertension and heart disease. High blood pressure can lead to kidney and heart failure and can promote atherosclerosis, an artery-clogging disease. Doctors report that early heart disease is a real  threat. The most accurate lab tests show steroids add three to four times to the risk of heart disease.  Oral  steroids have  also 

been  implicated  in the develop-ment of  liver  tumors. Body builder Daniel Baroudi died at age 26 of liver cancer; this was the first documented case linking steroids and  liver  cancer. 

Psychological  Complications 

Dr. Harrison  Pope,  Jr, a psychiatrist at McLean Hospital in Belmont, Massachusetts and Dr. David Katz of Harvard Medical 

School,  conducted a study on the psychiatric dangers of steroids. Their study was  published  in the April, 1988 issue of the American Journal  of  Psychiatry.  They found that high doses of steroids could cause severe depression, manic behavior and other serious mental problems. Research, based on interviews with athletes, found that one-third had suffered delusions, hallucinations, manic episodes, and depression. Mental problems associated with steroid abuse are unpredict-

able  as one individual may be affected by a small  dose while another may not be affected by a massive dose. Violence and aggression are  also  problems. An example is that of a steroid user who became enraged when a driver  rn  front of him  left  his turn 47 signal flashing; at the next stop-

light,  he leaped from his car and smashed the driver's windshield. Another young man bought a 

$17,000  sports car while taking the steroid methandrostenolone or Dianabol (no longer available by prescription). When he stopped taking the drug he real-ized he couldn't afford the  pay~ 

ments and sold the car. A year later, he was taking steroids again and impulsively bought a 

$20,000  sports car.  Some  users become paranoid  believing  that friends  steal  from them while others become euphoric and 

believe  that nothing in the world can hurt them. 

Sports  and  Steroids 

In  1974 the International 

Olympic  Committee added ster-oids to the  list  of banned sub-stances. Unfortunately, the use of steroids continues. At the 1988  Summer  Olympics,  an athlete  lost  his  gold  medal when tests revealed that he had run with an anabolic steroid, stano-zolol, in his system.  Oral  drugs are often used prior to competi-tion and have a shorter detection period. Steroid injections  last 

longer, six months or more. 

In  1975, the  International 

Amateur Athletic Foundation, the world-wide track federation said it would ban, for  life,  anybody caught using steroids. The National  Collegiate  Athletic Association began a mandatory drug testing program in 1986 and even the National  Football 

League (NFL) has cracked down on steroid users. 

Withdrawal  Effects 

Anabolic  steroids are not without withdrawal effects. A number of athletes have said that after they stopped taking the hormone drug they felt  listless, 

powerless and depressed. To top it off, the body nitrogen level drops and the edema or water weight, is lost and all weight gains disappear within weeks, sometimes even to alower level than before taking the steroids. Athletes report looking in the mirror and watching their body shrinking before their eyes ... depression is definitely a problem. 

The Law 

California became the first state to make steroids a  con-

trolled substance, thereby making sale or possession of them for sale a felony.  Penalties  range up to five years in prison and a

$20,000  fine. California also made it a felony for doctors to prescribe steroids for body  build-

ing and toughened  penalties  for legal manufacturers of steroids. 

California  is the only state to enact legislation requiring steroid education programs. 

In  Florida, it is a third-degree felony punishable by five years in prison and a $5,000  fine for any person or pharmacy selling steroids without a prescription. Florida law also  calls  for a  maxi-

mum penalty of license revocation for doctors who prescribe  ana-

bolic  drugs to athletes for  muscle-

enhancing purposes. 

In  1990,  President  George Bush signed into law legislation to crack down on the illegal steroids market by classifying anabolic steroids as a controlled  sub-

stance. Under the new  law,  DEA has the authority to investigate steroid trafficking.  Penalties  for steroid trafficking increased from three years to a minimum of five years, with sentences doubled for repeat offenders and offenses involving children.  

> Prescription Drugs-Most Abused

The legitimately  manufac-

tured prescription drugs in the following illustrations are those most commonly abused. Unlike illicit drugs, these drugs are more easily recognized because of the consistency of their sizes, shapes, and colors. Stringent manufacturing standards require each tablet or capsule of aspecific type to appear the same. Markings such as a groove through the center of the  tablet~ 

known as scoring, indentations, numbers, letters, or trade and manufacturers' names on tablets or capsules, further help to make visual identification possible. The size and color of a tablet or capsule aids in  explain-

ing the strength and potency of a particular drug product. The ingredients or compounds, as they are called, that go to make up each individual tablet or capsule are generally measured in grams or  milligrams.  By increasing the  milligram  levels of a drug compound in a tablet or capsule, the strength or potency of the product is increased. A doctor's prescription will usually list the dosage amount in  milli-

grams, informing the pharmacist how strong to make the  medica-

tion ordered for the patient. Unfortunately for those who misuse drugs, some prescription drugs are counterfeited and sold on the street as the real thing. They may look the same in size, shape,  color,  and markings, 48 however, their strength is  un-

known.  People  who use such drugs risk overdosing on them, causing severe physical and psychological reactions. Prescription drugs pose an additional hazard often  over-

looked. Most bathroom medicine cabinets in the home contain various prescribed medications. Many of these prescription drugs are psychoactive tablets or  cap-

sules that are no longer taken by the patient and would probably not be missed  If  removed from the cabinet. For the drug abuser, the medicine cabinet can be a ready source of drugs.  Parents  and grandparents should dispose of drugs that are not  being  used. Medications in  use  should be properly secured, especially when youngsters are present. The illustrations that follow do not cover all legitimately manufactured drugs, nor are they intended to substitute for a  chemi-

cal analysis where  such  action is warranted.  It  will  help the reader quickly identify some commonly abused drugs encountered  out-

side a valid medical-use situation. A suspected drug may be  com-

pared to the illustrations for identification. The lack of distinctive  mark-

ings on some of the  drugs  illus-

trated sometimes makes them more difficult to recognize,  how-

ever, this is the  only  means of visual identification available. The drugs presented are  repro-

duced as closely as possible to actual sizes and colors, but some allowance should be made for slight color variations associated with the actual drugs. All illustrations are grouped as depressants, narcotics or stimulants. DEPRESSANTS  affect the central nervous system by de-celerating its activities. Synthetic or natural depressants include those used to induce sleep (hypnotics), produce a

# relaxed state leading to sleep (sedatives), or relieve anxiety without sleep (tranquilizers). Some signs to look for: drunken behavior without odor of alcohol, disorientation, slurred 

# speech  lack of coordination. 

# ( ·r· /'1, 

\ ;. , I' 

j

1. Ativan  0.5  mg  .•  1 mg.,  2 mg. 2.  Valium  2 mg .. 5 mg.,  10  mg. 

C~··· 

# t

3. Tranxene 3.75 mg .. 7 mg., 15 mg. 

# .. 5. Librium 5 mg.,  10  mg., 25 rng. 

# --7.  Dalmane  15  mg"  30  mg. 8.  Restoril  15  mg"  30  mg. 

# - -11.  Seconal  100  mg. 12.  Tuinall00  mg.,  200  mg. 

# . (

15; Ooriden  0.5  GM 16.  Halcion  0.25  mg.,  0.5  mg. . .fl'  

> .~

""  ".. 19. Darvan 65 mg.  20.  Darvon Compo  - 65 

49 

4.  Serax  10  mg., 15 mg.,  30  mg .

> ....--. '0,

f .

6. Xanax  0.25  mg.,  0.5  mg., 1 mg 

9.  Nembutal  50 mg.,  100  mg.  

> /'f'

f

13.  Phenobarbital  15 mg. 

30  mg.,  60  mg .

17.  Talwin  NX 21. Oorvocet  n-50.  n-l00 

10.  Pentobarbital 

100  mg. 14.  Placidyl  500 mg. 18.  Talacen 

22. Wygesic ("" 

23. Codeine 15 mg ..  30  mg. 27.  Percodan 

31.  Tylox 

# f.<:""-\  ("'"-""  r"· \ \ \, 

35.  Tylenol  w/Codeine 2. 3. 4

39. Dexedrine 5 mg. -43.  lonamin  15 mg ..  30  mg. 

(Phentermine  Resin) 

# NI:.RCOTICS  cause  dulling  of the senses and induce sleep. Their prolonged use can result in addiction.  Some 

# signs to look for: drowsiness, slurred speech, euphoria, constricted pupils, watery eyes, runny nose. 

24. Morphine 15 mg ..  30  mg. 

28.  Percocet 

32. Hycodan 

36. Phenaphen w/Cadeine 3. 4

25.  Dalophine  HQ  10  mg. 

29.  Dilaudid  1 mg .. 2 mg  .• 

3 mg .. 4 mg. 33. Empirin w/Codeine 2. 3

26.  Demerol  50 mg ..  100  mg. -30.  Mepergan Fortis 34. Empracet 337.  Fiorinal  Tablet  and  Capsule  38.  Fiorinal  w/Codeine 2.3 

# STIMULANTS  affect the central nervous system causing increased alertness and physical activity.  Some  signs to look for: talkative, state of euphoria, rapid pulse. loss of appetite, insomnia. 

40.  Dexedrine  Spansule  5 mg .. 

10  mg .. 15 m.g. 44.  Preludin  50 mg .. 75 mg. 47. Tenuate 25 mg. 

50 

41.  Ritalin  5 mg ..  10  mg .• 

20  mg. 45.  Prelu  - 2 105  mg. 48. Tenuate Daspan 75 mg. 

# :----C

42. Biphetamine  12~  mg. 

20  mg. 46. Didrex 50 mg. Fentanyl 

> Designer Drugs

Designer drugs refer to chemical substances produced in clandestine laboratories by unscrupulous chemists who convert available controlled substances into new, legal, and uncontrolled drugs, which can then be sold on the street to drug addicts and abusers. Fentanyl, a synthetic nar-cotic marketed under the name Sublimaze, was developed by Janssen  Pharmaceuticals  in Bel-gium. By tinkering with the molecular structure of fentanyl, an underground chemist in California produced an extremely powerful, addictive, and euphoric substitute for heroin. 

Thi's  new synthetic drug which first appeared in 1979, was called China White because it re-sembled the finest-quality heroin from Southeast Asia.  In  1983 another designer drug called  Per-

sian White was identified in California.  It  was  1,000  times more powerful than heroin. Both China White and  Persian  White are close relatives to the parent drug, fentanyl, but with just enough difference in their make-up to have made them uncon-trolled substances. They have now been declared illegal by the 

U.S.  Drug Enforcement Admini-stration (DEA). Fentanyl has taken its toll in the medical profession. The alluring effects of fentanyl have caused anaesthesiologists to be an over-represented group of addicted doctors in the United 

States.  According to a report in the August 1986 issue of Discover Magazine, a recent study indicated that among 173 anaesthesiologists using fentanyl, 37 died as a result of addiction to the drug. Anaesthesiologists account for 4 percent of Amer-ica's  500,000  doctors. Designer drugs have caused widespread havoc.  In  1982 fentanyl analogs (variants of fentanyl) are known to have caused  107  deaths in California, Arizona and  Oregon.  A bungled attempt at producing  MPPP, 

an analog of the pain-killer Mep-eridine (Demerol) resulted in more than  400  drug abusers to suffer side effects of  Parkinson's 

disease. Twenty people were permanently crippled as a result of using this drug. More than 

200  other variations of fentanyl have been created and the total number of variations could reach  1,000. 

The designer-drug business is not restricted to heroin substi-tutes alone. Synthetic cocaine and amphetamine products are also on the market. Designer chemists are even making an amphetamine-mescaline hybrid known as MDA, which is now illegal. A variation of this hallu-cinogen called Ecstasy, Adam, Essence or MDMA is a highly abused drug, even though it is claimed by some  t(":'  be useful in the field of psychotherapy. MDMA may become the new  LSD 

of the  1980's.  Unlike  LSD,  how-ever, this psychedelic drug ap-pears to be addictive. To help combat these com-51 plex challenges, the  U.S.  Con-gress in late 1984 gave DEA emergency powers to deal with the problem of designer drugs. Now, instead of the  normal  six months to a year needed to bring an abusable drug product under controi, DEA can within  30  days ban uncontrolled use and take up to a year to justify the action. While legitimately manufac-tured drugs are tested on ani-mals, designer drugs are tested on humans and the drug buyer doesn't know he is a test subject. Even the addicted doctor who must seek fentanyl on the street because he can no longer divert it from  legal  channels does not know what he is buying.  So 

called  "bucket"  chemists can produce designer drugs in their garage with a minimal amount of chemicals. Like the infamous 

MPPP  chemist who was respon-sible for causing' symptoms of 

Parkinson's  disease in so many people, a small mistake applying heat or acid during synthesis of designer drugs can have destruc-tive results for users. The flood of cocaine and other drugs on the street may be the only thing limiting the spread of designer drugs.  It  could be the next epidemic.   

> The Look·Alike Problem

Tablets and capsules con-taining readily available, over-the-counter ingredients made to resemble popular controlled stimulant or depressant products are known as look-alikes. They mimic popular controlled stimu-lant products, or  "uppers,"  such as Biphetamine, lonamin, Dex-amyl, Dexedrine, Eskatrol, and Fastin. They also imitate con-trolled depressant substances, or 

"downers,"  such as  Valium 

and Librium. Compounds used in look-alikes are the same as those contained in over-the-counter nasal decongestants, analgesics, diet aids and sleep aids, allergy, asthma, or cold remedies. These materials are simply caffeine, ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolimine, antihista-

mine,  and analgesics. Look-alike products are usually promoted as being safe and  legal  stimulants, diet aids, or sleep aids, and their promotion often implies they can be resold for huge profits. Such advertising usually has been directed at high school and college youth through direct mail, magazines, or flyers distributed at sports events or rock concerts. 

Often  a buyer purchases improperly labeled look-alike products under the impression that these tablets or capsules are in fact controlled SUbstances. They pay from  50  cents to $2 for a product that only cost the distributor 2 to 15 cents each. Look-alike products can be harmful if taken in large  quantities 

or in combination with  alcohol. 

Reactions can range from nerv-ousness, insomnia, or drowsiness to a sharp rise in blood pressure, cerebral hemorrhaging, or tempo-rary psychotic episodes. 

52 

In  1981 DEA distributed to 

all  U.S. states a Model  Imitation 

Controlled Substances Act, making it  illegal  for anyone to manufacture, distribute, possess, or advertise an imitation con-trolled SUbstance. By 1984, at least 43 states had passed some form of legislation against look-alike and act-alike drugs. Despite these efforts, there remains a hard core of manufacturers and distributors who find their profits lucrative enough to continue to resist government regulations and remain in business.   

> Look-alike stimulants
> ------------

# ALCOHOL is a colorless, volatile, pungent liquid; the intoxicating  ingredien1t  in beer, whiskey, gin, rum, wine coolers, and other distilled or fermented liquors. A depressant, it affects the central nervous system by slowing its activities.  

> 53 Alcohol-Use and Misuse

Alcohol is a paradox. Almost any statement you make about it is true.   

> •It

quenches thirst, but can trigger  uncontrolled,  compulsive drinking. 

• It  is an appetite stimulant, but often a false substitute for health-giving food.   

> •It

symbolizes gracious 

living,  yet is a possible way to an ungracious death.   

> •It

is a medicine, but can cause blood, heart, and liver disorders. 

• It  is a cultural amenity, a part of everyday  living,  yet often a factor in the breakdown of the family.   

> •It

releases inhibitions, but can read to overpowering feelings of isolation. 

• It  is used to drink a toast to good health, drinking it can destroy good health. Alcohol is a central nervous system depressant, the most widely used and misused  non-

prescription drug in the United 

States.  Ethyl alcohol or ethanol is the kind of alcohol contained in alcoholic beverages such as beer or wine and in more potent hard 

liquors  like  whiskey, rum, gin, vodka, bourbon, or brandy, which are  all  made by fermentation or distillation of fruits, vegetables, and grains.  It  is the ethyl alcohol in these drinks that causes  intoxica-

tion or drunkeness. America's beer, wine and 

liquor  companies spend about $2 

billion  on advertising and  promo-

tion campaigns that are designed to promote the idea that  consum-

ing alcohol is necessary for social well being. But, bear in mind that alcohol is an addictive drug and is the nation's leading drug problem causing an annual  100,000  alco-

hol-related deaths and  $130  billion in economic costs. The presence and use of alcohol is customary and  accept-

able in many family homes and social and business environments. Because alcohol is so  com-

monly and legally available in drug or food stores, in bars and  restau-

rants, at sports events, and in many homes, it is important to remind our young people that even though alcohol is a legal drug, it is 

illegal  to drink it until they are of legal age. They should learn early in their developmental years that alcohol is a. very powerful and often addictive drug.  Unfortu-

nately, surveys reflect that most young Americans take their first drink of alcohol during their  el-

ementary or middle school years, usually at home in the company of family members or close friends. 

It  is estimated that more than 

20  rnillion Americans misuse alcohol.  Surveys  show that eight out of  10  high school seniors have tried alcohol more than once, that twenty percent of all ninth grade boys can be  called  problem  drink-

ers and that seven out of  10  adults drink at least  occasionally. 

Drugs,  like  alcohol and marijuana, are considered  "gate-

way drugs" or  "stepping  stones" 

that can lead users to other drugs such as cocaine, speed,  LSD, 

angel dust (PCP), or even  pre-

scription drugs such as  tranquiliz-

ers, sleeping pills, or narcotics. 

Over  5,000  teenagers are killed yearly in auto crashes where alcohol is involved. The National Highway Traffic  Safety  Administra- .

tion reported that in 1992 there were 39,325 traffic crashes. Drunk driving or the use of alcohol was 54 responsible for about 45.1 percent of  all  traffic fatalities. The 17,699 fatalities in alcohol-related crashes during 1992 represent an average of one alcohol-related fatality every 

30  minutes.  

> Alcohol Percentage in Drinks

The alcohol percentage in beer, wine, whiskey, or mixed drinks varies. Most beer contains four to six percent alcohol. Wine contains more alcohol than beer; between 12 to  20  percent plus some fruit juices and mineral content. Hard liquor or distilled spirits such as whiskey, gin, bourbon, brandy, or vodka contain 

40  to  50  percent  alcohol. 

Wine Coolers, a mixture of fruit juices, sugar, red or white wine and carbonation, contain the same amount of alcohol as a 12 oz. beer. However, carbonation mixed with alcohol causes greater impairment. Half of the proof number, found on the label of a distilled whiskey or gin bottle, equals the percentage of alcohol in that drink. For example, an 86-proof bottle of whiskey contains 43  per-

cent alcohol and 1aO-proof  bour-

bon contains  50  percent alcohol. A rule of thumb:  One  12-

ounce can of beer contains the same amount of alcohol as a 1  1/2-

ounce shot or jigger of whiskey or a five-ounce glass of wine.  So,  if you drink a six-pack of beer you are drinking six doses of a very powerful and addictive drug. 

Some  people put more than one jigger (1 1/2 ounce) of whiskey in their glass; or they make mixed drinks (cocktails) that contain two or three shots of hard liquor. Martinis made from gin and dry vermouth, and Manhattans made with bourbon and sweet vermouth, combine hard liquor and wine with an alcohol content between  50  and 

60  percent. Obviously mixed drinks - -- -

one glass of wine (5 ounces) has one can of beer (12 ounces) has one shot glass with 

111.!  ounces of hard liquor has       

> 1;2 ounce of actual alcohol 1;2 ounce of actual alcohol

Y2  ounce of actual alcohol are far more potent than a  glass 

of wine or beer, and can produce a pronounced effect on the body in a shorter period of time. 

The Effects of  Alcohol 

The effects of  alcohol  on the body depend on several things such as body weight, age, past 

drinking  experience, how many drinks are taken over a period of time, and, sometimes, what the drinker expects the  alcohol  to do. 

People  usually  drink to relax, to fee! good, to forget about minor worries or problems, or to  relieve 

aches  and pains. Many people drink because it is the socially  ac-

ceptable thing to do  ..  Others  drink to get drunk. The  alcohol  in any drink first enters the stomach and then passes directly into the  blood-

stream (is absorbed) through the 

walls  of the stomach and  small 

intestines.  Alcohol  requires no digestion and once in the  blood-

stream goes directly to  all  parts of the body including the heart, brain, and liver. 

In  the brain  alcohol  acts to slow down or numb the drinker's normal sense of judgment and other important coordination centers such as speech and movement. The  liver  serves an important function, that of converting  alco-

hol  in the bloodstream into water, carbon dioxide, and energy. This conversion cannot be hastened and takes place at a rate of about one-half ounce of pure  alcohol 

per hour. This is about the 

volume  of  alcohol  in a 12-ounce can of beer, a 1 1/2-ounce shot or jigger of whiskey, or a five-ounce 

glass  of wine. When  alcohol  is taken into the body at a rate faster than one drink per hour, excess alcohol, which has to wait to be oxidized by the  liver,  accumulates in the bloodstream where it continues to affect the heart, brain,  coordina-

tion centers, and other functions. The rate that  alcohol  passes into the bloodstream can be slowed if food is taken  while 

drinks are being consumed. 

Alcohol  on an empty stomach will pass into the  blood  stream immediately. Contrary to popular myths, 

55 

excess  alcohol  in the bloodstream cannot be removed or burned off by having a drunk person drink 

black  coffee or  walk  about briskly. The  only  way a person can sober up after excessive drinking is to 

allow  the  liver  time to complete its oxidation process, about one hour per drink. Some drinkers get  boister-

rous and rowdy.  Others  who consume the same amount of 

alcohol  become  mellow  and happy. Still others, gregarious 

and  uninhibited. The behavior of a drinker is not always  predict-

able,  but on one point the experts 

all  agree,  alcohol  is a powerful sedative that acts as a  depres-

sant or downer when taken into the body. 

Stages of  Intoxication 

Recognizable stages of  in-

toxication can be generally  de-

scribed. First the happy phase. After a drink or two the drinker appears to be in a happy,  relaxed 

state. With three or four drinks the drinker enters the next or excited phase. The senses of emotional  control  and judgment are affected, reactions are  some-

what  slower,  and poor judgment is evident.  In  the third phase, after five or six drinks, the senses are even more  dulled  and a confused state is evident. Some staggering, disorientation, and mood changes occur. Speech is 

slurred  and  double  vision can occur. When more drinks are consumed without allowance for the body to recover, the drinker is not  able  to stand or  walk  and is soon in a stupor,  barely  con-

scious.  In  this condition, if the drinker continues to take  alcohol, 

the  final  stage or coma is reached in which unconsciousness occurs. Few body reflexes are  visible  and the person  could  die from respiratory paralysis. Blood  Alcohol 

Concentration (BAC) 

It  takes approximately five to six drinks consumed within two hours for a 155 pound person to reach a BAC level of  .10  per-

cent. Even  a .03  percent BAC level indicates judgment and ability are lowered and can lead to risky driving. 

Reliable  BAC percentages show that with a BAC level of  .10 

percent the average driver is six or seven times more likely to have an accident than if completely sober. The more inexperienced the driver the more dangerous driving and  drinking  becomes. With a BAC of .15 the same driver's accident rate increases from six to seven to a likelihood of 25 to one. 

Tile  average person arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol has a BAC level of .19 percent, increasing the accident-prone rate to  100  to one. 

Damage to Body  Organs 

Can  Occur 

Prolonged and excessive misuse of alcohol can  perma-

nently damage the organs of the body.  It  can cause cirrhosis or scarring of the liver. Heart and brain damage can also occur. An overdose can cause convulsions, hallucinations, and death. When diagnosed early enough the damaging effects of alcohol in the body can be treated and arrested, but damage caused cannot be reversed. A more complete  listing  of long-term, harmful effects of prolonged alcohol consumption includes: 

Liver Damage: scarring of the  liver,  po~sible  cancer of the 

liver,  and hepatitis. 

Heart Disease: enlarge-ment of the heart, decreased cardiovascular endurance. 

Damage to Developing Fetus: or unborn babies can result through premature births, and increased infant mortality. 

Ulcers  and Gastritis: 

caused by irritation to stomach tissues. 

Malnutrition: alcohol has no  food  value and can interfere with the proper digestion of food. 

Cancer:  the incidence of cancers to the mouth, larynx, tongue, throat, liver, and lungs is high. Excessive alcohol  nega-

tively affects high and low blood sugar and uric acid levels. 

Brain  Damage~  brain cells are destroyed by bouts of heavy drinking that generally weaken strength, power, muscular  endur-

ance, and speed. Reaction time, hand-eye coordination, accuracy, balance, and complex coordina-tion skills are all adversely  af-

fected by excessive consumption of alcohol. 

Delirium  Tremens: (D.T.'s) 

result when an alcoholic  with-

draws or stops drinking alcohol. Memory loss, sometimes  halluci-

nations, and disorientation occur. 

Fatal  Effects: drinking is directly associated with 45.1 percent of the 39,235 traffic fatalities that occur annually. Abusive use of alcohol can shorten the  life  span of a heavy drinker by  10  to 12 years. Medical experts recommend that alcohol should be avoided if you have any of the  following 

physical ailments: heart, liver, kidney, gastritis, or high blood pressure problems.  If  blood sugar levels fluctuate, including  uncon-

trolled diabetes, alcohol should not  be  taken. 

If  you want to lose weight avoid alcohol, which has  150 

calories in each shot (1 1/2 

ounces).  If  you are pregnant 

56 

avoid alcohol. lIf  you do drink, moderation is best maintained by consuming no more than three or four ounces of alcohol per week, preferably not on one occasion. A commonly accepted belief that moderate alcohol usage lowers one's risk of heart disease is being evaluated in light of the multiple health risks associated with its usage. There are safer options to prevent heart disease. 

Drinking and Driving 

Because of stepped up efforts by citizen groups,  law-

makers, police officials, and judges against drunk drivers, the alcohol related death toll on our nation's highways dropped to 17,699 in 1992. That compares with 25,165 killed in 1982. The successful reduction of highway  fatalities  was sparked by organizations such as Mothers Against Drunk Drivers (MADD), Remove Intoxicated Drivers 

(RID),  Students Against Drunk Drivers (SADD), Boost Alcohol Consciousness Concerning the Health of University Students (BACCHUS), and  other  groups. Virtually every state in the nation has tightened drunk-driving laws and in recent years some 223 new statutes have been enacted. Some of these more significant laws are: 

In  29 states plus the District of Columbia, driver's  licenses  are immediately suspended upon involvement in a drunk driving arrest. 

In  41 states tavern or bar owners can be held liable for damages caused by a drunk driver if they could have taken steps to prevent that drinker from driving. Ten states have strength-ened the legal definition of drunk driving, changing the  standard from  .10  percent to  .08  percent blood alcohol content (BAC). 

In  July, 1984, President Reagan signed into law, legisla-tion making 21 the legal age for purchasing and drinking alcoholic beverages.  States  are required to follow suit. The penalty for not doing so will be to deprive states of federal highway funding. Police and sheriff  depart-

ments are conducting roadside sobriety tests more often.  Week-

end checkpoint tests are set up during the evening hours to check drivers' abilities. Drunk drivers are identified by highly accurate blood analysis tests. A reliable and easy-to-administer saliva test is now being used by some medical and enforcement officers. The test can identify within  min-

utes, after a simple saliva  sam-

pling, whether or not a driver'S 

blood contains alcohol. The sampling reflects a blood alcohol concentration (BAC) range from sobriety to the rating of  .10  per-

cent BAC, the level of legal intoxication and probable cause for arrest. 

School  children are taught about the dangers of driving and drinking. Parents have the  re-

sponsibility and obligation to reinforce that knowledge by setting a good example.  

> Alcohol and Auto Crashes

About 2 in every 5  Ameri-

cans will be involved in an  alco-

hol-related crash at some time in their lives. Extremely large quantities of alcohol in the bloodstream can stun the brain's control over breathing and cause death. This rarely happens because the drinker passes out before a lethal or life-threatening BAC level of 

.50  percent can be reached. Younger people are  espe-

cially vulnerable to the effects of alcohol on judgment and  behav-

ior.  In  addition to becoming less inhibited in their actions some young drivers become more susceptible to the suggestions or demands of others, and may commit destructive or dangerous acts they normally would not have considered. 57 1992 statistics reveal that drivers in the 16 to  20  age group, who had a BAC of  0.10  or greater, were involved in 17.5 percent of alcohol-related  fatalities.  College-age students and young workers in the 21 to 24 age group who had a BAC of  0.10  or greater were involved in  30.5  percent of  alco-

hol-related fatalities. To make the problem worse, these youths are in the age group least likely to use their seat belts. 

In  short, alcohol misuse combined with the wrong peer pressure suggestions can result in the commission of dangerous acts that threaten life and limb of ahigh percentage of youthful drivers.   

> Alcohol Plus Other Drugs

When alcohol is combined with other drugs, particularly addictive drugs such as some tranquilizers, methadone, cocaine, or heroin, their combined effects are often multiplied  an~  physical dependence to these addictive drugs can be accelerated. The  following  is a brief summary of what can happen when other drugs are taken or combined with alcohol. The effects listed vary considerably according to factors such as  past 

drinking habits (tolerance to the amount of alcohol consumed) and perhaps chronic illnesses:  

> Antihistamines,

(cold or allergy medicines) plus alcohol result in drowsiness due  \0  central nervous system depression. Alcohol can dissolve the outer coating of timed-release pills, such as cold, diet and allergy capsules, resulting in a single, large overdose.  

> Aspirin,

or other non-narcotic painkillers such as Tylenol, with alcohol can result in stomach and intestinal bleeding or irritation. Narcotics, such as codeine  alcoholic  beverages to an extent  Alcoholism  and alcohol or heroin, plus alcohol depress that causes repeated or contin- abuse together are epidemic, a the central nervous system, ued harm to the drinker. The national health problem of signifi-leading to possible respiratory harm caused may be physical, cant proportions outranked only arrest. mental, social, or economic. by cancer and heart disease. 

Antabuse, (an anti-alcohol- Anybody who experiences re- The American Medical Associa-ism medicine), plus alcohol result peated or long-lasting injury from tion (AMA) has recognized alco-in flushing, drowsiness, vomiting, drinking would change drinking holism as a disease since 1956, and hyperventilation. habits if they could. When a but fortunately a disease that 

High Blood Pressure person can't change his habits is treatable. medications with alcohol may and can't control drinking, that cause blood 'pressure to be person is considered to be lowered to a dangerous  level.  an  alcoholic.  Warning  Signs  Of  Alcoholism Diabetic Drugs  (Oral)  The alcoholic cannot predict combined with alcohol cause a how much he or she  will  drink Although there is no conclusive reaction similar to antabuse with once that first drink is taken. test of whether or not a person is alcohol and reduces the effect of Dependent on alcohol in order to an alcoholic, the  following  ques-the diabetic medicine. cope with  life,  the  alcoholic  finds tions, provided by alcoholic 

Antibiotics plus alcohol the thought of drinking alcohol to treatment centers, can help cause a reaction similar to be tempting, appealing, soothing, determine whether a person's antabuse and alcohol. and comforting. Some alcoholics drinking has reached a danger-

Tranquilizers or Sedatives drink just enough to function ous level. Checking yes to four combined with alcohol result in without experiencing the shakes. or more of these  questions 

increased central nervous system  Other  alcoholics  drink in a socially  indicates cause for concern and depression. Alcohol increases normal fashion most of the time, suggests corrective action should the effect of the tranquilizer but suddenly will get drunk with- be taken. medication; accidental deaths out warning. have occurred.  Alcoholics  may develop a  YES  NO 

Marijuana or Hashish plus powerful craving for the chemical () () Like to drink alone? alcohol increases drowsiness and ethyl alcohol, and for these () () Lose time from school confusion and affects an individ- people, one drink is too many or work from drinking? ual's  ability  to function or think and  1000  not enough. This clearly. craving for alcohol doesn't have () () Have lapses of 

Cocaine combined with to exist for a person to be consid- memory while or after alcohol tends to increase the ered alcoholic. An  alcoholic  could drinking? euphoric high or pleasurable be a teenager who drinks beer () () Need a drink  the 

feeling  that its users seek. Physi- only on weekends. morning after cal as well as psychological There is no single cause for drinking? addiction increases.  alcoholism.  It  usually involves a () () Need a drink at a combination of factors including a definite time each desire to escape from unpleasant day? 

The  Alcoholic  And Alcoholism problems. Perhaps the pain or 

loneliness  caused by having too () () Gulp drinks hurriedly 

It  has been estimated that few close ties; perhaps by moving and sneak extras? seven out of  10  adults in America too often, being uprooted or () () Drink to relieve stress, drink  alcoholic  beverages, and separated from loved ones. fear, insecurity, one of them becomes a victim of Sometimes the shy, insecure shyness? the  illness  known as  alcoholism.  person may gain some confi- () ()  Often  drink to escape Both women and men are in- dence through regular use of the blues? volved and three of every four alcohol. There is evidence that alcoholics are respected mem- points to hereditary factors in () ( ) Become moody, bers of their communities, not some instances. There is no irritable, or jealous skid-row outcasts. clinical test that proves conclu- after drinking? Alcoholism can be defined sively whether or not a person () () Need a drink before as the repetitive intake of is alcoholic. going to bed? 58 ( ) ( ) Get the shakes  unless 

you continue drinking? ( ) ( ) Drink  all  the alcohol in the house before bed? ( ) () Drinking making your home life unhappy? ( ) () Losing ambition and drive since drinking? 

Alcoholism  is not an illness 

like  the common cold, rather it often is a  slowly  developing progressive disease. No clear line exists between casual  drink-

ing and alcohol dependency and no clear line exists between alcohol dependency and  alcohol-

ism. Therefore, warning signs suggested in the preceding questions should be heeded. 

New Concerns 

The  liquor  industry is  launch-

ing new 12-proof,  low-alcohol 

cocktails that are mixed with soda or fruit juice. These new cocktails with names such as Dixie Jazzberry and Lynchburg  Lime-

ade, are flooding into grocery stores and liquor outlets. Liquor marketers deny they 

are  targeting underage drinkers with this new kiddie cocktail that is often  sold  in a 12-ounce aluminum can just like other  non-alcoholic 

drinks. 

One  marketer recently changed its recipe from rum to wine,  allowing  it to get into  thou-

sands of stores that are barred from  selling  hard  liquor.  Tile 

marketer estimates it  will  gain supermarket distribution in  20  new states because of the change. 

In  New York City, a recent survey on high-school drinking found that canned cocktails and such are the drink of choice among girls. Beer was the preference of boys. Cisco is a fortified wine that looks and  smells  like a wine cooler, but it isn't.  It  is a potent, potentially 

lethal  alcoholic  beverage. Cisco contains  20  percent  alcohol,  the equivalent of four to six shots of liquor.  It  is particularly dangerous to teenagers who may think they are drinking a wine cooler that 

normally  has a 4 to 7 percent alcohol content. The drink can cause hallucinations,  disorienta-

tion, loss of motor control and loss of consciousness. A  100  pound person who drinks two 375  milliliter 

bottles within an hour could die of acute alcohol poisoning. 

Cisco  is carbonated and comes in five flavors.  It  is being sold in  small  bottles shaped  like 

wine  coolers  and is stocked in convenience stores near ordinary wine coolers. The maker of Cisco has told Congressional critics it 

will  change its bottle design so the product won't be confused with less potent wine coolers. 

There  Is  Help 

Alcoholism  is ca_using pain and suffering for  10  million  or more Americans, according to conservative estimates from the Consumer  Information  Center in Washington, D.C. This disease affects the lives of another  40 

million  family members,  fellow 

workers, and associates. Each  alcoholic  person is different from another, depending on emotional needs. But before treatment and recovery can begin the drinker must first recognize that a problem exists.  Recogni-

tion is not always easy to  accom-

plish.  Denial is the most common characteristic of the  alcohol 

abuser, who often steadfastly refuses to admit that drinking is uncontrolled. Despite efforts by family, friends, and associates to shame, argue, or persuade a 

59 

drinker to seek help, it  usually  is not until confrontation occurs that the drinker realizes help must be obtained if the destructive effects of  alcoholism  are to cease. Treatment for those addicted to  alcohol  is available. A Simple 

cure is abstinence plus learning how to say  UNo"  to that first drink. The  alcoholic  must  also  learn how to deal with the overwhelming emotional and physical temptations that first caused  him  to drink or take other addictive drugs such as heroin, codeine, cocaine, or other chemicals. The  goal  of the  alcoholic 

person is to learn again how to be comfortable without drinking, to learn again how to be sober, and to overcome the cravings for another drink or another drug.  It 

is not easy, but it is possible. Help is available from Alcoholics Anonymous. You will find a  local 

listing in your  telephone  directory. 

Physical  treatment for the medical aspects of alcoholism is available through hospitals and other private treatment centers. The American Medical  Associa-

tion urges  all  hospitals to accept 

alcoholic  patients. There are organizations devoted to helping problem drinkers. These  helpful 

agencies can be found in the 

Yellow  Pages  of your  local  tele-

phone directory under such headings as: Alcoholism  Informa-

tion & Treatment Centers or under Drug Abuse & Addiction-Infor-mation & Treatment. NICOTINE  is the chief active, addicting ingredient in tobacco leaves. Nicotine,  (e 10  H14  N)  is a poisonous alkaloid. A small amount injected directly into the blood stream would kill a person within one hour. 

60 

# -Tobacco and How it is Produced 

Tobacco belongs to the family of  plants  called  nightshade. 

Related  to the tobacco plant are the petunia, the  Irish  potato, tomato, garden pepper and eggplants. The tobacco  plant 

most often used in tobacco products in America is  called  Ni-cotiana tabacum.  It  was first developed in Jamestown, Virginia by John Rolfe, the husband of 

Indian  Princess Pocahontas.  In 

1613,  Rolfe  sent the first ship-ment of Virginia tobacco to Eng-

land  and today growing tobacco and manufacturing its products is one of the leading industries in the United States. Products include cigarettes, cigars, snuff, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco and c6'rtain  chemicals  that are used to  kill  fungi and insects. Raised from tiny seeds as 

small  as  ground pepper, tobacco 'is first planted in seed beds and covered with cheesecloth for protection. The tobacco plants are transplanted to fields after they have grown about six inches high.  In  about three months the plants are four to six feet  tall  and ready for harvesting,  usually  in 

July  and August.  One  ounce of tobacco seed is sufficient to  plant 

about four acres of  land  that can produce up to  50  thousand tobacco leaves. The finest,  long,  broad leaves are picked and then cured or dried in airtight, heated barns for three to five days. Some farmers cure their tobacco leaves by drying them in  sunlight.  After curing, the leaves are sorted and graded according to quality and weight, tied into bundles of 15 to 

30  leaves, ready for market. Tobacco selected for cigarette and pipe smoking is  allowed  to age in  large  barrels  called  hogs-heads for about three years. Cigar leaves on the other hand,  

> n~ed

only  about six months of aging before they are ready to use. Aging tends to reduce the amount of nicotine in the leaves because of certain chemical changes which tend to increase the flavor and mildness of the leaves. 

Is  There A Safe  Tobacco Product? 

Smokeless  Tobacco - In 

the  mid-1500's,  Jean Nicot, France's ambassador to Peru, sent tobacco plants and seeds to France. He  later  persuaded the Queen of France to sniff the dried tobacco leaves and  eventually, 

Europe became devoted to this form of smokeless tobacco. The snuff box became a status sym-bol; the beauty of the decorative box reflected the wealth and rank of its owner. 

> Smokeless Tobacco

Smokeless tobacco is used in the  following  ways: chewing-a quid,  plug  or chaw of tobacco is placed in the pouch of the cheek and is chewed or sucked on. The tobacco juices are spit or  swal-

loWed.  Dipping  (snuff) - placing a pinch of powdered tobacco between the  lower  lip  and gums or between the gum and cheek where it is mixed with saliva. This also causes an increase in saliva and spitting of the juices .. Plug tobacco comes in the form of a flattened brick and is wrapped in 

foil.  Leaf tobacco is loose and carried in a pouch. Snuff is dried, powdered tobacco which comes in a circular container. Because of evident health problems, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) has adopted 61 

> Gum Ulcer

regulations that require health labels be placed on containers of chewing tobacco and snuff. Effective February 27, 1988, these  labels  contain warnings that chewing tobacco and snuff may cause mouth cancer, throat cancer, gum diseases and tooth loss and that they are not a safe alternative to cigarettes. 

Cigars and Pipes - Pipe and cigar smoke contains many of the same harmful ingredients as cigarette smoke, often in higher amounts. Smokers who inhale pipe or cigar smoke have a greater risk of death from lung or heart disease than do cigarette smokers. Pipe smokers face a high risk of getting  lip  cancer. Pipe and cigar smokers have higher risks of dying from cancer of the mouth, throat or larynx (voice box). 

Clove  Cigarettes - Manu-factured in  Indonesia,  clove ciga-rettes are composed of  60  per-cent tobacco,  40  percent ground cloves, clove oil and other addi-tives. Because cloves are a 

flavorful  and widely used spice, it is assumed that clove cigarettes are safe. However,  clove  oil (eugenol) is suspected of causing cancer when burned and inhaled. Government studies reveal that clove cigarettes produce 

levels  of tar, nicotine and carbon monoxide similar to  all  tobacco cigarettes. Doctors report that 

clove  cigarette smokers develop s~lmptoms  of coughing up  blood, 

severe sore throats, nosebleeds and frequent upper respiratory infections. 

Low  Tar and Nicotine -Many cigarette smokers now use brands that are low in tar and nicotine. Those cigarettes mayor may not be less dangerous because of the way smokers use them.  In  order to compensate for low levels of tar and nicotine and to achieve certain nicotine levels or taste more flavor, smok-ers tend to  smol<e  more often, take more than one puff a minute, and to hold the smok.e in their lungs longer. More and more manufactur-ers of low tar cigarettes are using additives to try to improve taste. They are not required to  list  the additives on cigarette labels and health effects are unknown. There is no safe tobacco product. 

Why  Smoke? 

Many young people start smoking because they have friends who smoke.  Peer  pres-sure is a powerful influence; . some people tend to imitate other people they admire, others try new customs because their friends recommend them. Another influence is advertis-ing. Cigarette companies spend 

billions  of  dollars  linking  ciga-rettes with physical activities by sponsoring numerous sporting and entertainment events. Many smokers who began smoking in their teenage years report they did so because smoking made them feel grown up. By smoking they showed they were free from adult  control.  To a lesser degree, some young men and women associate smoking with being macho and  liberated,  attractive, slender and successful. 

Parents  who smoke often have children who smoke. Studies indicate that if both parents in a family smoke, a high percentage of children in that family  will  also smoke. A lowel' 

percentage of children become smokers in  those  families  where only one parent smokes and the least percentage of children become smokers in those  families 

where neither parent smokes. Consequently, parental example is a definite factor on whether or not children smoke. 

How  Smoking  Affects the Body 

A beginner smoker may feel dizzy when  inhaling  tobacco smoke and may get an upset stomach. This is caused partly by two substances in the blood-strearn that affect the nervous system, nicotine and carbon monoxide. Some dizziness may be caused by less oxygen being carried to the brain by the blood-stream because of smoke sub-stances in the system. When cigarette smoke is 

inhaled,  between  70  and  90 

percent of the chemical sub-stances in smoke are retained in the lungs.  Of  the  hundreds  of substances present in smoke, the three most damaging are nico-tine, tars, and carbon monoxide. 

In  his annual report, The Health Consequences of Smoking, issued May, 1988, C. Everett Koop, the U.S. Surgeon General, charged that nicotine, the active ingredient in tobacco, is every bit as addicting as heroin and cocaine. Nicotine is a  power-

ful pharmacologic agent that acts in the brain and throughout the body. Koop compared nicotine with heroin and cocaine, stating it has  all  the criteria for an addictive drug. Nicotine has mood-altering effects and it promotes consistent and repetitive patterns of use and the need to increase the dosage. Cessation leads to withdrawal 

62 

symptoms, including irritability, poor concentration and sleep disturbances.  "The  use of nico-tine and  other  drugs is driven by strong, often irresistible urges and can persist despite repeated efforts to quit," said Koop. The report represented the contribu-tions of more than  50  scientists and  cited  studies showing that nicotine can have harmful effects on the central nervous system, the muscles, the cardio-vascular system and the endocrine system. 

> Enphysematous Lung

Nicotine enters the blood stream through the lungs and causes the blood vessels in the body to constrict. This reduces the flow of blood and oxygen through the body and causes the heart to work harder.  Billions  of tiny particles of tar in cigarette smoke damage  delicate  lung tissues. Tar is a component of tobacco  smoke  and is made up of hundreds of chemicals. When tar cools in the lungs, it forms a brown, sticky mass containing chemicals that have produced cancers in tests on animals. The tobacco industry developed  filter 

tips to help trap tar but the ciga-rette filters cannot remove  all  the tar. Carbon monoxide, a color-less, odorless, poisonous gas, drives oxygen from red blood cells and stays in the bloodstream robbing the body of its oxygen for as long as six hours after a person has stopped smoking. Smoking  just one cigarette speeds up the heartbeat, increases olood pressure, upsets the  flow  of 

blood  and air in the lungs and causes a drop in skinJemperature in the fingers and toes. A few puffs 

also  slows the action of the  Gilia 

inside the bronchial tubes. These tiny  hair-like  bodies normally work like brooms to sweep away germs, 

mucus  and dirt from the lungs. The smoke from one cigarette makes the cilia sluggish and inhaling over  long  periods  para-

lyzes them, exposing the lungs to a variety of infections. However, the cilia begin working again after a sustained period of no smoking. 

If  a pregnant woman smokes, it can cause adverse effects on her unborn baby. Harmful gases and poisonous substances in the smoke, such as carbon monoxide, pass from her blood through the placenta and into the fetal  blood-

stream. Evidence shows that smoking slows the rate of fetal growth and increases the risk of spontaneous abortion. According to the American Lung Association, each year 

400,000  Americans die  prema-

turely from the effects of smoking. Millions more live with crippled lungs and overstrained hearts. Cigarette smoking is a major cause of emphysema, lung cancer, chronic bronchitis and coronary heart disease.  

> Rup~ured Heart

Second  Hand  Smoke-

The  Involuntary  Smoker 

Tobacco smoke is a very complex mixture of some very hazardous compounds such as tar, nicotine, carbon monoxide,  ben-

zene, formaldehyde, ammonia and hydrogen sulphide. There are dozens of others and anyone can damage the body. Researchers have shown that two-thirds of the smoke from a burning cigarette goes into the immediate environment. Pollution from cigar and pipe smoke is even higher. Both the  Surgeon  General and the National Academy of Sciences have concluded there is increased risk of developing lung cancer for nonsmokers who breath the smoke of others. Nonsmokers married to heavy smokers were found to have 2 to 3.5 times the risk of lung cancer as those married to nonsmokers. Children of smokers have a greater chance of developing certain illnesses such as colds, bronchitis,  pneu-

monia, chronic coughs, ear -infections and reduced  lung 

function. Nonsmokers have the right to breathe clean air. Factory owners are fined when they  pollute  the air and water. We use unleaded gasoline on cars and maintain catalytic converters that reduce the amount of pollutants blown into the air. Why then are smokers allowed to foul the air with harmful and irritating tobacco smoke? Quitting? Expect Withdrawa[ Symptoms Based on Mayo  Clinic  experi-

ence and the advice of other health professionals, smoking is more than just a habit, it is an addiction involving chemicals that affect behavior. Quitting smoking is 

63 

difficult for some people, often resulting in failure the first and second time they try to stop-but early failure is no reason to give up. Life expectancy and longevity are at stake. When a person  really  de-

sires to quit and makes a firm decision to do so, that person will succeed. When you quit smoking, physical withdrawal symptoms will occur and persist for one to two weeks. They will disappear as the body reacts to the withdrawal of regular doses of nicotine. Aperson can expect a decrease in heart rate and blood pressure, plus changes in hormones that affect the nervous system, sensations of tingling or numbness as circulation improves, difficulty in sleeping, increased coughing as the lungs try to clear out years of  accumu-

lated tobacco residues, a slight sore throat, fluid retention and  per-

haps headaches, constipation and other gastrointestinal discomforts. These physiological effects are temporary and tolerable. Nicotine stimulates the body's metabolism. Stopping smoking slows the body's metabolism. Appetite increases, food tastes better. For the unwary, this  combi-

nation can result in unwanted weight. Nutritionists caution the addictive force in every smoker sets them up for failure.  Some 

people gain weight as fast as possible as an excuse to go back to smoking. The best way to deal with the weight problem  is  to allow for some weight changes until smoking is firmly under  control. 

Planning a sensible diet is the key to weight  control. 

Think of fruit and eat it often. High potassium contents will help flush out the excess fluid in the body and  help  diminish nicotine craving  plus  providing something sweet without a  lot  of empty calories. Avoid  alcohol  which is notorious for undermining will power and for its empty calories. Contrary to common impressions, experts say that two-thirds of those who quit smoking either stay the same weight or  lose  afew pounds. Recognizing that these things can happen in one degree or another when you stop smok-ing, can  help  a person  deal  with them. With each denial of the urge to smoke, the urge dimin-ishes and soon the physical discomfort disappears.  Some 

effects may  last  longer. These include intense cravings for tobacco, a testimony to the strength of the addiction, nerv-ousness, tension, tiredness, /ight-headed ness, irritability and aggressiveness. These condi-

tions  can be countered by im-proved diet,  getting  extra sleep, stepped up exercises, drinking additional fluids, avoiding caffeine and being  mentally  tough and de-termined to win the struggle against addication. Make no mistake, quitting the smoking habit is not easy.  All 

too often people resume smoking the first week after stopping. Why? Because withdrawal from nicotine is incomplete.  Subse-

quent relapses during the first three months are often caused by the  lack  of new,  nonsmoking 

habits. A change in routine is vital for success. For help,  call  your  local 

American Lung Association, American Cancer Society, or American Heart Association. Curbing the Use of Tobacco There is a growing move-ment to establish smoke-free environments in municipal build-ings and other  public  areas for people who do not wish to inhale carcinogens. Many restaurants have separate sections for smok-ers and nonsmokers.  Airlines  are banning smoking on flights of two hours or less. Various regulatory means to curb cigarette smoking  include 

suggestions that Congress make cigarette sales unprofitable by raising the Federal Excise Tax and using these monies to pay the enormous  health  costs of smoking.  Removal  of the tax-de-ductible status now enjoyed by cigarette company advertisers is another means to control  sales. 

In  1988, about $2  billion  was spent on advertising by tobacco companies. The repeal of current 

legislation  to hamper product 

liability  suits being brought against tobacco companies is yet another means of bringing to-bacco  sales  under  control.  Re-duction of the Government's price support system has  also  been recommended by some as has an outright ban on  all  advertising of cigarettes. The Surgeon  General  has proposed that America become a smoke-free society by the year 2000.  If  you are not using to-bacco pr'Oducts, don't start.  If  you are using tobacco products, stop. There are simply no  medically 

sound  values  for using snuff, chewing tobacco or smoking tobacco. Tobacco use is  linked  to disability  anp  death. Quitting the tobacco habit is not a deprivation, it is an advantage! Now  available,  a companion to the Digest. .. 

ANSWERS,  A Drug Prevention  Video  for the 

Family,  School  and  Worl·tplace. 

ISAR  promotes no use of any illegal drug and no illegal use of any /egal drug 

64 ~-~~~~~--------

Glossary  Of  Drug  Slang  Terms 

This glossary of drug and alcohol related terms is presented to acquaint the reader with the language of those who use, deal, and supply drugs. Street phrases or slang terms frequently change and vary between  locali-

ties and ethnic groups. This list does not cover all slang terms that may now be in use, however, it does represent those drug terms more commonly used today.  Slang  terms that describe the chemical substances are located in each section of the book where the particular drug is discussed. A

ACID  HEAD  User  of  LSD 

AIRHEAD  Under the influence of manjuana 

B

BAD  TRIP  Unpleasant episode with a hallucinogen 

BAG MAN Person who transports money 

BANG To inject narcotics 

BIG  MAN Supplier of drugs 

BINDLE  A small packet of drug powder 

BLANKS  Low-quality drugs 

BLASTED  Under the influence of drugs 

BLOW  Snort  or sniff cocaine or smoke marijuana 

BONG  A cylindrical water pipe used to smoke marijuana 

BREAD  Cash 

BROKER  Go-between for a

drug deal 

BUMMER A bad experience with drugs 

BURNED Purchase non-genuine drugs 

BURNOUT Heavy abuser of drugs 

BUSTED  Arrested 

BUY Purchase drugs 

BUZZ  Under the influence of drugs 

C

CAPS  Drug capsule 

CHARGED  UP Under the  influ-

ence of drugs 

CHIPPY  Person who uses drugs infrequently 

CHIPPING  Occasional  use of drugs 

COASTING  Under the influence of drugs 

COLD  TURKEY Sudden  with-

drawal from drugs 

CONNECT  To purchase drugs 

CONNECTION  Supplier of drugs 

COP  To obtain drugs 

CRASH  Sleep  off effects of drugs 

CUT  To adulterate drugs 

CUT  OUT  To leave from some place 

# o

DEALER A seller of illegal drugs 

DECK  A packet of drugs 

DIME  BAG Ten dollar bag of drugs 

DOPE  Drugs 

DROP  To take drugs orally, or a

place where money or drugs are left 

DRUNK AND  DISORDERLY  Aperson is drunk and acting up (out of control,  yelling,  etc.).  It  is 

a crime in many states 

D.U.I.  Driving under the Influence 

D.W.!. Driving While Intoxicated 

DYNAMITE  High-quality or potent drugs 

E

EASY  SCORE  Obtaining drugs without difficulty 

EIGHTH  One-eighth of a pound of drugs 

ETHYLALCOHOUETHANOL 

A liquid obtained from fermenta-tion of sugars and starches and used as a solvent in drugs and in intoxicating beverages 

F

FACTORY  Place where drugs are diluted, packaged, or  manu-

factured 

FALL Arrested 

FEDS  Federal Agents 

FERMENTATION  Yeast acting on sugar and starches in fruits andlor grains producing alcohol 

FIX  Inject drugs 

FLASHBACK  Reoccurrence of hallucinations 

FLEA  POWDER  Poor-quality drugs 

FL  YING  Under the influence of drugs 

FREE  BASING  Smoke  cocaine through a special water pipe 

FREEZE  To renege on a drug transaction 

65 

FRONT  To put money out before receiving the merchandise 

FUZZ  Police 

G

GOODS  Drugs 

GRAM A metric measure of weight 

GUN Equipment for injecting drugs 

H

HAND-TO-HAND  Direct delivery and payment 

HANGOVER  Sick  feeling  (head-

ache, upset stomach, etc.), caused by drinking too much alcohol 

HEAT Police (or gun) 

HEAD  SHOP  Store  that  special-

izes in the sale of drug parapher-nalia 

HEELED Having plenty of money 

HIGH  An early stage of  in}oxica-

tion andlor under the influence of drugs 

HIT  A single dose of drugs 

HOLDING  In possession of drugs 

HOOKED  Addicted 

HOPPED  UP Under the  influ-

ence of drugs 

HOT  Wanted by authorities 

HOT  SHOT  Injecting an  over-

dose of drugs 

HUSTLE  Attempt to obtain drug customers 

HYPE Heroin addict 

I

ICE  CREAM  HABIT  Occasional use of drugs 

IN  Connected with drug suppliers 

INTOXICATION  Becoming drunk by drinking too much alcohol 

J

JAG Under the influence of drugs or alcohol 

JIVE  Drugs 

JOY  POPPING  Occasional use of drugs 

JUNKIE  Narcotic addict K

KEY Kilogram 

KICK  Getting off a drug habit 

KIDDIE  DOPE  Usually prescrip-tion drugs 

KIT  Equipment to inject drugs 

L

LEMONADE  Poor-quality drugs 

LETTUCE  Money 

LID  One  ounce or less or mari-juana 

LINE Cocaine arranged in a row 

LOAD  A large quantity of drugs 

M

MAINLINER  A person who injects directly into the veins 

MAN Police 

MEET Buyer and seller get together 

MERCHANDISE  Drugs 

METHYL  ALCOHOL  A type of alcohol that is poisonous when taken by mouth. It is found in antifreeze, paint thinner, and fuels. Sometimes referred to as 

wood alcohol 

MINOR  A person who is not 

leflally  an adult. State law deter-mmes at what age a person becomes an adult. Minors cannot buy alcohol or vote. 

MONKEY  Drug dependency 

MULE  A carrier of drugs 

N

NAILED  Arrested 

NARC  Narcotic agent 

NEEDLE FREAK A person who prefers to take drugs with a

needle 

NICKEL  BAG A $5 bag of drugs 

# o

O.D.  Overdosed  on drugs 

ON  A TRIP  Under the influence of drugs 

ON  ICE  In jail 

ON  THE  BRICKS  Walking the streets 

ON  THE  NOD  Under the influ-ence of narcotics or depressants 

Answers to  QUIZ 

OUT  OF  IT  Under the influence of drugs 

O.Z.  One  ounce 

P

PANIC  Drugs not available 

PEPSI  HABIT  Occasional  use of drugs 

PICKUP  Purchase drugs 

PIECE  Usually one ounce of drugs 

PLANT A hiding place for drugs 

POT  HEAD Marijuana user 

PROOF  The word used to de-scribe the amount of alcohol in hard liquors. The proof number is 

always  double the percentage of alcohol.  100  proof whiskey contains  50  percent alcohol 

> Q

QUACK  Doctor 

R

RAP Criminally charged, or to talk with someone 

RIDING  THE WAVE Under the influence of drugs 

RIG  Equipment for injecting drugs 

ROACH  CLIP  A device used to hold the butt of a marijuana cigarette 

ROLLERS  A term used by a

lookout and yelled when police come 

RUSH  A sudden, intense, eu-phoric effect from taking drugs 

S

SCENE  A special location or condition 

SCORE  Purchase drugs 

SCRATCH  Money 

SCRIPT  A doctor's prescription 

SHOOT  UP  To inject drugs 

SHOOTING  GALLERY Place where drugs are used 

SKIN  POPPING  Shooting (inject-ing) drugs under the skin 

SLAMMER  Jail 

SNORT  To sniff drugs 

SOBER  Not intoxicated 

SOCIAL  DRINKER  A person who takes a drink when in the company of others. Drinking a

toast to the newlyweds, celebra-tion, etc. 

SPACE  CADET  Habitual user of marijuana 

SPACED  OUT  Under the influ-ence of drugs 

SPEED  FREAK Habitual user of methamphetamine 

SPIKE  Needle (syringe) 

SPLIT  To leave from someplace 

STASH  Place where drugs are hidden 

STEP  ON  To dilute drugs 

STONED  Under the influence of drugs 

STRAIGHT  Not using drugs 

STRUNG  OUT  Heavily addicted to drugs 

T

TAKE A  ,POWDER  To leave or get lost 

TASTE  A small sample of drugs 

TOKE  Inhaling marijuana or hashish smoke 

TOOT  To sniff cocaine 

TRACKS  A row of needle marks on a person 

TRAP Hiding place for drugs 

TRIP  Under the influence of drugs 

TURF  A location where drugs are sold 

TURKEY  Non-genuine drugs 

TURNED  ON  Introduced to drugs, or under the influence of drugs 

U-V 

UNCLE  Federal agents 

W

WASTED  Under the influence of drugs. Also murdered 

WORKS  Equipment for injecting drugs 

Z

ZOMBIE  Heavy user of drugs 

1.B 2.A  3.04.A  5.0  6.B  7.C  8.A  9.0  10.B  11.A 12.A 13.C 14.A  15.0 

16. E 17. A 18. A 19.  0 20.  0 21. A 22.  0 23. B 24. E 25. A 

66 '----~-----------------------------------------

# REFERENCES 

American Lung Association,Cigarette Smoking, 

#0171,3/87 

American Lung Association,  Clove  Cigarettes, 

10/85  (Rev.) American Lung Association, Is There A Safe 

Tobacco?, #1092, 6/86 

American Lung Association of West Virginia; West Virginia Department of Health, 

Smokeless Tobacco 

American  Council  for Drug Education; American Lung Association. Marijuana: A Second Look, #4176,1984 

American Lung Association, Second Hand . Smoke,  #0006,  8/86 

Bohmer,  Steven  A., M.D., Answers To Five Questions About Steroids, April 19, 1988 

Brody, Jane, "Quit Smoking Without Weight 

Gain."  Your Health. January 1986 

Channing  L. Bete  Co.,  Inc.,  W.flat  Every Teenager Should Know About Alcohol. 

Channing  L. Bete  Co.,  Inc.,  South Deerfield, MA 01373, 1982 

Channing  L. Bete  Co.,  Inc.,  What Everyone Should Know About Alcoholism. 

Channing  L. Bete  Co.,  Inc.,  South Deerfield, MA  01373,  1981, 1982 

Channing  L. Bete  Co.,  Inc.,  Alcoholic In The Family.  Channing  L. Bete  Co.,  Inc., 

South Deerfield, MA 01373, 1982 

Christopher News Notes, Alcoholism. 

Pamphlet  #199, 12 East 48 Street, New York,  N.Y.  10017 

Drug Enforcement Administration, Black Tar Heroin in the United States, March 1986 

Drug Enforcement Administration,  "Crack," 

Special  Report, A New Form of Cocaine Abuse, May 1986 

Drug Enforcement Administration, Dealers, Dollars and Drugs.  U.S.  Government 

Printing  Office,  July  1979 

Drug Enforcement Administration, Domestic 

Cannabis  Eradication/Suppression 

Program,  December 1991 

Drug Enforcement Administration, Drug Abuse and Misuse.  U.S.  Government  Printing 

Office,  1978 

Drug Enforcement Administration, Drugs of Abuse.  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office, 

1985, 1988 

Drug Enforcement Administration, "Hashish 

OiL"  National  T{fJ.ining  Institute, Number 

58, May, 1973 

Drug Enforcement Administration, Narcotics Investigator's  Manual.  U.S.  Government 

Printing  Office,  1983 

Drug Enforcement Administration, Ships 

Officers  Guide To Help  Stop  Drug Smuggling, Bangkok, Thailand, 1976 

Drug Enforcement Administration, The Mexican Eradication.  U.S.  Government 

Printing  Office,  February 1977 

DuPont,  Robert L., Getting Tough on Gateway Drugs. American  Psychiatric  Press, 

Washington  D.C.,  1984 

Everett.  Glenn  D., "Brain Damage Starts With The First Drink." Reprinted from Listen, Journal of Better Living. Volume 22, 

Number 12. (A Report of the Research by Dr. Melvin H. Knisely) Florida Medical Association,  Inc.,  "Cocaine 

Babies." FMA  TadayVolume  II,  Number 

9, September 1986 

Finn,  Peter;  Lawson, Jane, Kids and Alcohol. 

Developed by Abt Associates  Inc., 

Cambridge,  Massachusetts, for  U.S. 

Department of  Health,  Education, and Welfare (HEW),  Office  of Education Division of Educational Technology 

Gallup  Survey, "Habits of the American Teenager." Parade Magazine, February 

3, 1985 

Garey, Richard E.,  "PCP:  An  Update."  Journal 

Of  Psychedelic Drugs Reprinted Volume 

11 (4),  October  to December, 1979 

Garrison, Lloyd "Asia-Let Them Shoot 

Smack."  Time Magazine, March 19, 1984 

Gest, Ted; Skrzycki,  ICindy;  Solorzano, Lucia; Thornton, Jeannye; "War on  Alcohol 

Abuse  Spreads  tl)  New Fronts."  U.S. 

News and World  Heport,  December 24, 1984 

Gilkeson, Robert  C.,  M.D.,  Marijuana: Toxic To 

Cells,  Synopsis  From  the Videotape "Marijuana: Myths al1d Misconceptions," 

1990 

Gold, Mark  S.,  M.D.,  BOO-COCAINE.  Bantam Book, 1984 

Goldman, Bob; Klatz,  Ronald;  Bush,  Patricia; 

Death in the Locker Room,  Icarus  Press, 

Inc.,  South Bend,  Indian.a  1984 

Hanson, Diane H.,  Ph.D.,  "Reducing ADrinking  Problem  Takes Much Time And 

Patience."  Washington  Po.'>t  News 

Service,  September 1984 

"Here's How To Quit  Cigarettes."  The Tampa Tribune-Times, Reprinted  from  Mayo 

Clinic  Health Letter, January 8, 1989 

"Ice  Age in Hawaii." Honolulu  Polict1  Depart-

ment, Honolulu, Hawaii 1989 

Insurance  Information  Institute,  Drunk  Driving and Liquor Liability,  Insurance  Issues 

Update, August 1993 

Johnson, Lloyd D.,  "Campus  Cocaine." 

Parade  Magazine,  October  5, 1986 

Kasindorf, Jeanie,  "Innocent  Addicts: Women Hooked." Woman's Day, July  10,1984 

Landers, Ann, The Lowdown  On  Dope. Field Enterprises,  Inc.,  1983 

Mann,  Peggy,  Marijuana Alert. McGraw-Hili, New York, N.Y. 1985 

Mann,  Peggy,  Pot  Safari: A Visit to the Top Marijuana Research in the  U.S. 

Woodmere  Press,  New York, N.Y., 1985 

"Marijuana Rescheduling  Petition  Denied By DEA," Federal Register,  Vol.  54, No. 249, 

December 29,1989 

McCarthy,  Colman,  "Alcohol  Promotions 

Misleading." Vera Beach Press  Journal, 

Column,  December 31, 1988 67 

National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 

Alcohol  Traffic Safety Facts, 1992 

Needle, Richard H., Basic Concepts of Tobacco and Smoking, Third Edition, Laidlaw Brothers,  Publishers,  A Division of Doubleday & Company,  Inc.  1979 

Oregon  Department of Human Resources. 

Hazardous Chemical Guidelines. 4th ed. 

Portland,  Oregon,  1988 

Russell,  George K., Marijuana Today. The Myrin  Institute  for Adult Education, New York, Revised 1982 Edition Sapienza, Frank, "The  Look-Alike  Problem." 

Drug Enforcement. U.S. Government 

Printing  Office,  Summer 1984 

Schiller, Ronald, "Why Americans Are Drinking Less." Reader's Digest, January 1985 

Tennant, Forest, M.D., Dr.,  P.H.,  Anabolic Steroids: The Steroid Heart... a ticking time bomb. Veract,  Inc.,  West  Covina,  CA 

91790,1989 

"The  Bulky Boom." The Miami Herald, 

May 17, 1987 

"The  Fire of  'Ice'."  Newsweek, 27 November 

1989:  37-40 

"The Newest Drug War." Newsweek, 3 April 

1989:  37-40 

United States Department of Education, 

Schools Without Drugs. What Works Series, Washington  D.C.,  1989 

Certain  photographs courtesy of  U.S.  Drug Enforcement Administration, Honolulu  Police 

Department, and American Lung Association of Southeast Florida,  Inc. -------------~-------- ----------------------------------.------------------

# isar 

"------' 

Institute 

for Substance Abuse Research   

> .---------------------

ISBN  0-935847-09-X 

jI
