Title: San Francisco pursues plan to give drug-free welfare participants $100 per week

URL Source: https://san.com/cc/san-francisco-pursues-plan-to-give-drug-free-welfare-participants-100-per-week/

Published Time: 2024-07-31T19:00:22+00:00

Markdown Content:
Consent
Details
Ad Settings
About
Responsible use of your data
We and our 983 partners process your personal data, e.g. your IP-number, using technology such as cookies to store and access information on your device in order to serve personalized ads and content, ad and content measurement, audience research and services development. You have a choice in who uses your data and for what purposes. Your privacy choices are only applicable on this digital property where you have made your choices. You can change or withdraw your consent any time from the Cookie Declaration or by clicking on the Privacy trigger icon.

If you allow, we would also like to:
Collect information about your geographical location which can be accurate to within several meters
Identify your device by actively scanning it for specific characteristics (fingerprinting)
Find out more about how your personal data is processed and set your preferences in the details section.

We use cookies to personalise content and ads, to provide social media features and to analyse our traffic. We also share information about your use of our site with our social media, advertising and analytics partners who may combine it with other information that you’ve provided to them or that they’ve collected from your use of their services.
Consent Selection
Necessary
Preferences
Statistics
Marketing
Deny
Allow selection
Allow all
Skip to content

Straight Arrow News

News
Media Miss
Video Podcasts
Watch and Listen
Politics
San Francisco pursues plan to give drug-free welfare participants $100 per week
Jul 31, 2024 at 07:00 PM UTC
Lauren Keenan (Anchor)
Pause
Skip backward 10 seconds
Skip forward 10 seconds
Unmute
Current Time 
0:17
/
Duration 
1:21
Loaded: 79.81%
 
Captions
Fullscreen
Video/Audio Toggle - Currently in video mode
Currently in video mode
Image credit: Getty Images
Full story

In San Francisco, a city grappling with a severe fentanyl crisis, Mayor London Breed has predominantly used law enforcement to address drug use. Now, city leaders, including Supervisor Matt Dorsey, are shifting to the “Cash Not Drugs” initiative, offering up to $100 weekly to welfare recipients who test negative for illicit drugs.

The program aims to support recovery and encourage a drug-free lifestyle by offering financial incentives instead of punitive measures. It targets members of the San Francisco County Adult Assistance Program, about a third of whom struggle with substance use disorders.

Download the SAN app today to stay up-to-date with Unbiased. Straight Facts™.

Point phone camera here

Dorsey, a recovering addict, advocated for the program. He said it encourages sobriety through financial incentives rather than punitive measures.

“The humane and effective approach to San Francisco’s drug crisis should also include rewarding good behavior and not just punishing bad behavior,” Dorsey said.

Pending full approval from the Board of Supervisors, this initiative would start as a three-year pilot program managed by San Francisco’s Human Services Agency in collaboration with the Department of Public Health. The plan includes regular assessments by an independent organization to gauge the program’s effectiveness and report findings annually.

William Jackson (Producer) and Zachary Hill (Video Editor) contributed to this report.
TAGS: CALIFORNIA, FENTANYL, SAN FRANCISCO, SAN FRANCISCO POLICE DEPARTMENT
Show Transcript
Trending stories
U.S.
10 hrs ago
8 min read
Hamas can’t access all hostage remains; Trump authorizes CIA in Venezuela
U.S.
10 hrs ago
8 min read
A clog in the housing pipeline: Baby boomers don’t want to move out
U.S.
20 hrs ago
6 min read
The impact of mass protests with ‘No Kings’ scheduled this weekend
Sports
Yesterday
3 min read
Ohio high school star wide receiver files lawsuit to earn NIL money
Related stories
Tayfun Coskun/Anadolu via Getty Images
Politics
May 12
4 min read
California Gov. Newsom orders homeless encampments effectively banned in state
Getty Images
U.S.
Dec 2, 2024
2 min read
New San Francisco program adds ballet and church as part of drug treatment
Getty Images
Politics
Dec 11, 2024
4 min read
Deportation showdown: San Diego sheriff will defy new ‘super sanctuary’ law
Getty Images
U.S.
Oct 30, 2024
2 min read
San Francisco’s new program pays people to stay sober
Getty Images
U.S. Elections
Nov 8, 2024
2 min read
San Francisco Mayor Breed loses reelection in race about crime, safety
Getty Images
U.S.
Sep 24, 2024
2 min read
What the numbers tell us about homelessness in San Francisco
Welcome back to trustworthy journalism.
Certified unbiased reporting

According to media bias experts at AllSides.

Transparent and credible

Perfect reliability rating, according to experts at NewsGuard

What people are saying

Finally, unbiased news that lets you see both sides. It’s refreshing to have facts without the spin.”

Mike, Michigan

This app gives me the news without pushing a political agenda, which is rare to find.”

Nancy, Florida
News
Politics
Business
U.S.
Military
Tech
Lifestyle
Sports
Energy
International
U.S. Elections
Video Podcasts
Unbiased Updates™
Bias Breakdown™
Weapons and Warfare™
Media Miss
About SAN
About Us
Editorial Mission
Our Team
Careers
Mobile App
About Media Miss and Media Landscape
Contact
Newsletter
Corrections Policy
Advertise with us

Unbiased news.
Directly to your inbox. Free!

Join us
By entering your email, you agree to the Terms & Conditions and acknowledge the Privacy Policy.
Stay connected
YouTube
TikTok
X
Facebook
Instagram
LinkedIn
RSS Feed
Mail

Terms and Conditions

|

Privacy Policy

|

Copyright Policy

|

Cookie Settings

|

Sitemap

©️ 2025 Straight Arrow News
