Title: Terrorist Watch List Screening and Background Checks for Firearms

URL Source: https://www.congress.gov/crs_external_products/R/PDF/R42336/R42336.4.pdf

Published Time: Sat, 21 Jun 2025 07:02:28 GMT

Markdown Content:
Terrorist Watch List Screening and 

# Background Checks for Firearms 

# Updated May 1, 2013  

> Congressional Research Service
> https://crsreports.congress.gov
> R42336 Terrorist Watch List Screening and Background Checks for Firearms
> Congressional Research Service

# Summary 

The November 2009 shooting at Fort Hood, TX, renewed interest in terrorist watchlist screening 

and background checks for firearms through the National Instant Criminal Background Check 

System (NICS). Pursuant to the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act ( P.L. 103 -159 ), in 

November 1998 the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) activated NICS for the purposes of 

determining an individual ’s firearms transfer and possession eligibility whenever a private person 

seeks to a cquire a firearm from a federally licensed gun dealer. Prior to February 2004, however, 

the FBI did not conduct terrorist watchlist queries as part of firearms background checks because 

being a known or suspected terrorist was not a disqualifying factor fo r firearms transfer and 

possession eligibility; nor is it today under current law. 

Similarly, the April 15, 2013 , Boston Marathon bombing could generate renewed interest in 

terrorist watchlist screening, because at least one of the alleged perpetrators wa s possibly entered 

into the National Counterterrorism Center ’s (NCTC ’s) Terrorist Identities Datamart Environment 

(TIDE). As a consequence, he was possibly watch -listed in the FBI -led Terrorist Screening 

Center ’s Terrorist Screening Database —the U.S. gover nment ’s master watchlist of known and 

suspected terrorists. In addition, o n April 18, 2013, both alleged perpetrators —Tamerlan and 

Dzhokhar Tsarnaev —are further alleged to have sho t and killed a police officer, high -jack ed an 

automobile and taken its owner hostage at gun point, and engaged in a subsequent shootout with 

police. The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF) is tracing a pistol 

recovered at the scene of the shootout . If the watch -listed brother, Tamerlan, had acquired the 

pistol from a federally licensed gun dealer , it might have generated a terrorist watchlist hit 

through NICS . Critics could argue that watchlist hits through NICS, or border and aviation 

security screening systems , might have prompted federal investigators to scr utinize Tamerlan 

Tsarnaev ’s travels and activities more closely prior to the bombing . As described in this report, 

moreover, a NICS -generated watchlist match might have prevented him from acquiring the pistol. 

Following the September 11, 2001, terrorist a ttacks, the U.S. government reevaluated its terrorist 

screening procedures. As part of this process, the Department of Justice (DOJ) and FBI modified 

the Brady background check procedures and recalibrated NICS to query an additional file in the 

National Cr ime Information Center (NCIC) that included terrorist watchlist records. Since 

February 2004, information related to the subjects of NICS -generated terrorist watchlist matches 

have been passed on to the FBI Counterterrorism Division and special agents in t he field, who are 

usually members of Joint Terrorism Task Forces (JTTFs). These FBI agents, in turn, verify the 

match between the individual and the watchlist record, and they check for information that would 

prohibit that individual, the prospective trans feree, licensee, or permittee, from possessing 

firearms or explosives (e.g., illegal immigration or fugitive status). 

While the modified NICS procedures initially generated little public opposition, those procedures 

called three possible issues into quest ion. One, should terrorist watchlist checks be incorporated 

statutorily into the firearms - and explosives -related background check processes? Two, given 

certain statutory prohibitions related to prohibiting a firearms registry, should approved firearm 

tran sfer records be maintained on a temporary basis to determine whether persons of interest in 

counterterrorism investigations have obtained firearms? Three, should the Attorney General be 

granted authority to deny a firearms transfer based solely on a terror ist watchlist match? Since the 

109 th Congress, several related legislative proposals have been introduced. Several of those bills 

would have addressed the retention of firearms -related transfer records. Another proposal would 

have prohibited persons watch -listed as terrorists for aviation security purposes on the “No Fly ”

list from firearms transfer or possession eligibility. Terrorist Watch List Screening and Background Checks for Firearms  

> Congressional Research Service

In the 110 th Congress, Senator Frank Lautenberg and Representative Peter King introduced a bill 

based on a legislative proposal developed by DOJ that would have authorized the Attorney 

General to deny the transfer of firearms or the issuance of firearms (and explosive s) 

licenses/permits to “dangerous terrorists ” ( S. 1237 /H.R. 2074 ). In the 111 th Congress, t hey 

reintroduced this bill (S. 1317 /H.R. 2159 ), which supporters dubbed the “Terror Gap ” proposal .

In t he 112 th Congress , the y introduced similar bills (S. 34 and H.R. 1506 ). And, in the 113 th 

Congress they reintroduced their bills (S. 34 and H.R. 720 ) once more. When the Senate 

considered the Safe Communities, Safe Schools Act of 2013 (S. 649 ) in April 2013, Senator 

Lautenberg also filed an amendment ( S.Amdt. 734 ) to that bill, which is nearly identical to S. 34 .

While the Senate leadership set S. 649 aside, if the Senate r econsiders this bill, it might also 

consider S.Amdt. 734 . In addition, Representative James Moran has included similar provisions 

in the NRA Members ’ Gun Safety Act of 2013 ( H.R. 21 ). 

The Terror Gap proposal raises several potential issues for Congress. One, should the Attorney 

General notify watch -listed individuals who have been deemed to be “dangerous terro rists ” for 

the purposes of gun control? Two, what form of redress and/or remedy would be provided to 

individuals wrongfully denied a firearm transfer because they were misidentified, or improperly 

watch -listed, and then deemed to be a “dangerous terrorist ”? Three, if enacted, would such a law 

draw unwanted attention to related terrorist screening procedures, possibly undermining the 

effectiveness of these procedures by making terrorists and other adversaries aware of them, and 

possibly setting a judicial re view precedent for other terrorist watchlist screening processes? Terrorist Watch List Screening and Background Checks for Firearms 

> Congressional Research Service

# Contents 

Recent Developments  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  1

Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .....  2

Post -9/11 Reforms and Modified NICS Procedures  ................................ ................................ ........  5

NICS Procedures  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  5

HSPD -6 and Terrorist Watchlists  ................................ ................................ ..............................  8

DOJ -FBI Modified NICS Procedu res (February 2004)  ................................ ..........................  12 

GAO Report Recommendations (January 2005)  ................................ ................................ ....  13 

Possible Issues Raised by the Modified NICS Procedures  ................................ .....................  14 

DOJ Draft Proposal (April 2007)  ................................ ................................ ............................  15 

GAO Follow -Up Report (May 2009)  ................................ ................................ ......................  16 

Terror Gap Legislation  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  17 

HSGAC Hearing on the Fort Hood Shooting ................................ ................................ ..........  18 

Denying Firearms and Explosives to Dangerous Terrorists Acts of 2011 and 2013 (S. 

34 and H.R. 1506/S. 34 and H.R. 720)  ................................ ................................ ................  20 

Firearms Eligibility and Dangerous Terrorist Determination  ................................ ...........  20 

Notification of a Dangerous Terrorist Determination  ................................ .......................  21 

Tenth Class of Prohibited Persons Under 18 U.S.C. §922(g)  ................................ ...........  22 

Remedies for Erroneous Firearms Denials  ................................ ................................ .......  22 

Denial and Revocation of Firearms and Explosives Licenses  ................................ ..........  23 

Attorney General Implementing Guidelines  ................................ ................................ .....  23 

Possible Policy Issues Raised by the Terror  Gap  Proposal ................................ ............................  24 

Would the Proposed Non -notification Authority Be Feasible?  ................................ ...............  24 

Would Adequate Opportunity for Redress and Remedy Be  Provided?  ................................ ...  24 

Would a Precedent Be Set for Other Screening Processes?  ................................ ....................  25 

# Appendixes 

Appendix. Acronyms and Abbreviations  ................................ ................................ .......................  26 

# Contacts 

Author Information ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................  27 Terrorist Watch List Screening and Background Checks for Firearms  

> Congressional Research Service 1

# Recent Developments 

The April 15, 2013 , Boston Marat hon bombing that killed 3 people and wounded 264 could 

generate renewed interest in terrorist watchlist screening and background checks for firearms, 

because at least one of the alleged perpetrators was reportedly watch -listed as a suspected 

terrorist. 1 An d, on April 18, 2013, the alleg ed bombers —brothers Tamerlan and Dzhokhar 

Tsarnaev —are also alleged to have shot a police officer to death, hi gh -jacked an automobile and 

taken its driver hostage at gun point, and engaged in a subsequent shootout with police. 2

According to press accounts, in March and September 2011, the Russian Federal Security Service 

(FSB , or Federal'naya Sluzhba Bezopasnosti ) contacted the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) 

and Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), respectively, with information that suggested that 

Tamerlan Tsarnaev (the older brother) had become a n Islamic extremist in the past year and 

intended to travel to Russia to meet with like -minded extremist s.3 While neither the FBI nor CIA 

reportedly found that Tsarnaev was “radicalized, ” based on a reasonable suspicion, records on 

him were possibly included in several border and aviation screening systems. 4 These systems 

reportedly included an FBI record in a file on “persons of interest, ” who might engage in 

“suspicious trav el, ” in the Department of Homeland Security ’s (DHS ’s) TECS; 5 and a file based 

upon a CIA nomination to the National Counter Terrorism Center ’s Terrorist Identities Datamart 

Environment (TIDE), which was subsequently the basis of a terrorist watchlist recor d placed in 

the FBI -administered Terrorist Screening Center ’s Terrorist Screening Database (TSDB). 6 Both 

the TIDE and TSDB are described in greater detail below. 

However, Tamerlan Tsarnaev ’s name was possibly spelled or transliterated differently from the 

Cyrillic alphabet , or even misspelt, on the watchlists in TECS and the TSDB, or on the passenger 

flight manifests submitted to DHS for pre -flight screening; as a possible consequence, potential 

watchlist matches were not made and authorities were not fully alerted about his travels to Russia 

from January through July 2012. 7 Critics claim that had those officials been more fully alerted to  

> 1

“Marathon Bombing Suspect Was on Government Watch Lists,” Reuters , April 24, 2013.  

> 2

“102 Hours in Pursuit: For Five Indelible Days, The Unthinkable Became Routine in Boston. And No One Felt That 

More Than the Police and Agents Mounting the Largest Manhunt in Regional History and Parsing Its Most Complex 

Crime Scene. It Took a Cast of Tho usands —Also Courage, Sacrifice, Teamwork, and Luck —To Crack the Case. But 

They Did It,” Boston Globe , April 28, 2013.  

> 3

Eric Schmitt and Michael S. Schmidt , “Slain Bombing Suspect Was Placed on Two Federal Watch Lists in Late 

2011,” New York Times , April 25, 2013. Eileen Sullivan and Kimberly Dozier, “Officials: Dead Bomber Name in 

Terrorism Database,” Associated Press , April 25, 2013. Pam Benson, “Bombing Suspect Was in Security Files, but Not 

on Watch Lists,” CNN , April 25, 2013.  

> 4

Ibid.  

> 5

TECS is a lega cy Department of the Treasury law enforcement computer system that includes several sub -systems 

and files used by the Secret Service, customs, and immigration officials. Hence, it was previously known as the 

Treasury Enforcement Communications System (TECS ), but the Department of Homeland Security has renamed this 

computer system as simply “TECS.” In other words, TECS is no longer an acronym. One of the TECS sub -systems is 

the InterAgency Border Inspection System (IBIS), which is the screening system used b y inspectors at land, air, and sea 

ports of entry to screen international travelers. IBIS queries a terrorist watchlist that is generated from the FBI -led 

Terrorist Screening Center (TSC), from its Terrorist Screening Database (TSDB). Under Homeland Securi ty 

Presidential Directive -6, the TSDB is the master terrorist watchlist, for both international and domestic terrorists, 

maintained by the TSC for the U.S. government.  

> 6

Ibid.  

> 7

Peter Grier,” Boston Marathon Bombing: Did US Really Miss Chance To Prevent I t?; A Republican Senator Is 

Blaming the White House for Failing To Heed Red Flags on Boston Marathon Bombing Suspect Tamerlan Tsarnaev. 

But Others Call That A Rush To Judgment,” Christian Science Monitor , April 25, 2013. Terrorist Watch List Screening and Background Checks for Firearms  

> Congressional Research Service 2

his travels, they might have been prompted to more carefully scrut inize his behavior prior to 

the  bombing. 8

In addition , on April 18, 2013, the Tsarnaev brothers allegedly shot and killed a Massachusetts 

Institute of Technology campus police officer, in an attempt possibly to seize that police officer ’s

firearms. 9 The brothers were reportedly armed with a 9mm Ruger semiaut omatic pistol, when 

they attacked this police officer. 10 This pistol was reportedly recovered at the scene of the 

subsequent shootout with police, and t he Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives 

(ATF) is tracing this pistol. 11 Prior to the shooti ng, attempts had been made to obliterate the 

pistol ’s serial number, but authorities managed to raise all nine digits of its number .12 This tracing 

process may provide information about how the brother(s) acquired the firearm. If the older 

brother, Tamerlan , had acquired the firearm from a fede rally licensed gun dealer, then the 

federally required background check may have triggered a terrorist watchlist hit that, in turn, 

would hav e possibly prompted authorities —particularly the FBI -led Bo ston Joint Terrori sm Task 

Force —to reopen a preliminary assessment that it had previously conducted on him based upon 

the March 2011 Russian FSB tip and apparently closed in June 2011. The Boston JTTF, 

moreover, may have found cause to deny the firearms transfer to him. The Administration is 

reportedly conducting a top -to -bottom review to make sure that intelligence on the bombing was 

not missed, and Members of Congress have called for hearing s.13 

In the 113 th Congress, even before the Boston bombing, Senator Frank Lautenber g and 

Representative Peter King had reintroduced their similar, but not identical, bills, the Denying 

Firearms and Explosives to Dangerous Terrorist Act of 2013 (S. 34 and H.R. 720 ), known to 

supporters as the “Terror Gap ” proposal. Also, in April 2013 when the Senate considered the Safe 

Communities, Safe Schools Act of 2013 (S. 649 ), Senator Lautenberg filed an amendment 

(S.Amdt. 734 ) to this bill that is similar, but not identical, to his Terror Gap proposa l ( S. 34 ). 

While the Senate leadership has set S. 649 aside, if the Senate reconsiders this bill, it might also 

consider S.Amdt. 734 . In the wake of Boston, Senator Lautenberg has called for Congress to 

consider his bill to close the “Terror Gap. ”14 In addition, Representative James Moran has 

included similar provisions in the NRA Members ’ Gun Safety Act of 2013 ( H.R. 21 ). 

# Introduction 

Following the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks (9/11 attacks), the George W. Bush 

Administration took measures to consolidate and expand the use of terrorist watchlists maintained 

by the federal government. As part of this process, the Department of Justice (DOJ) directed the 

FBI to modify their firearms - and explosives -related backgrou nd check procedures to screen 

prospective firearms buyers and state -issued permit applicants (Brady background checks), as 

well as explosives license and permit applicants, against terrorist watchlist records. 15 Those              

> 8Sari Horwitz and Greg Miller, “Bo ston Suspect’s Ties Overseas Scrutinized,” Washington Post , May 1, 2013.
> 9Scott Wilson and Greg Miller, “Suspect Points to Anger at U.S.,” Washington Post , April 24, 2013.
> 10 Sari Horwitz and Greg Miller, “Boston Suspect’s Ties Overseas Scrutinized,” Washi ngton Post , May 1, 2013.
> 11 Ibid.
> 12 Ibid.
> 13 David Jackson and Kevin Johnson, “Review Hunts for Signs that Intelligence on Bombings Was Missed,” USA
> TODAY , May 1, 2013.
> 14 Office of Senator Frank R. Lautenberg, “Press Release: As Reports Indicate Boston Bomber Was on Terror List,
> Lautenberg Highlights Bill to Close ‘Terror Gap’,” April 25, 2013.
> 15 The background check procedures were established pursuant to the Brady Handgu n Violence Prevention Act (known Terrorist Watch List Screening and Background Checks for Firearms
> Congressional Research Service 3

modified procedures became effective in February 2004. In addition, under the modified 

procedures FBI counterterrorism agents found it useful and arguably prudent to maintain and 

share information about terrorist watchlist -related matches for approved firearms transfer records. 

However, a provi sion of federal firearms law requires that all approved firearms transfer records 

held by the National Instant Criminal Background Checks System (NICS), including those related 

to terrorist watchlist matches , be destroyed within 24 hours. 

While the Attorn ey General has no specific statutory authority to screen those buyers and 

applicants against the terrorist watchlist records nor maintain records on approved firearms 

transfers for longer than 24 hours, the modified background check procedures initially ge nerated 

little public outcry from opponents of greater federal gun control. At the same time, several 

Members of Congress raised public safety concerns about the possibility that terrorists might 

exploit the general availability of firearms in the United S tates. They tasked the Government 

Accountability Office (GAO) with evaluating the modified Brady background check procedures 

for firearms and, later, background check procedures for explosives. Since then, GAO has 

reported on several occasions that subject s of positive terrorist watchlist hits were transferred 

firearms and, less frequently, explosives. 16 Over nearly 7 years (2004 -2010), 1,453 federal 

firearms -related background checks resulted in terrorist watchlist matches; 1,321 (90.9%) were 

allowed to pro ceed. 17 Those transfers were allowed to proceed because being on a terrorist 

watchlist is not, in and of itself, a disqualifying factor under either federal firearms or explosives 

law. 

GAO ’s confirmation that firearms have been transferred from federally l icensed gun dealers to 

individuals watch -listed as known or suspected terrorists has lent impetus to a legislative proposal 

that was originally developed by DOJ, under Attorney General Alberto Gonzales, and submitted 

to Congress in April 2007. This proposa l would give the Attorney General discretionary authority 

to deny firearms or explosives transfers to any watch -listed individuals if he deemed them to be 

“dangerous terrorists. ” In the 110 th Congress, Senator Lautenberg and Representative King 

introduced this proposal as the Denying Firearms and Explosives to Dangerous Terrorists Act of 

2007 ( S. 1237 /H.R. 2074 ). Supporters later dubbed this bill the “Terror Gap ” proposal. 

as the “Brady Act”; P.L. 103 -159 ; November 30 1993; 107 Stat. 1536). The permanent provisions of the Brady Act 

became effective on November 30, 1998, with the activation of the National Instant Criminal Background Check 

System. The Brady Act amended the Gun Control Act of 1968 (GCA; P.L. 90 -618; October 22, 1968; 82 Stat. 1213). 

The GCA is codified, as amended, at 18 U.S.C. §§921 et seq . For further information, see CRS Report RL32842, Gun 

Control Legislation , by William J. Krouse .

As part of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 ( P.L. 107 -296 ; November 25, 2002; 116 Stat. 2135), Congress amended 

federal explosives statutes with the Safe Explosives Act (SEA; 116 Stat. 2280). SEA added additional categories of 

prohibited persons, extended the li censing requirement to persons who transfer or ship explosives in intrastate 

commerce, and requires employees who handle explosives to undergo background checks. The federal statutes 

regulating explosives commerce in the United States were enacted under Ti tle XI of the Organized Crime Control Act 

of 1970 (P.L. 91 -452; 84 Stat. 952 (1970)). These statutes are codified, as amended, at 18 U.S.C. §§841 et seq .

Pursuant to SEA, in February 2003 the FBI began conducting background checks on all applicants for a federal 

explosives license or permit for the ATF.  

> 16

U.S. Government Accountability Office, Gun Control and Terrorism: FBI Could Better Manage Firearm -Related 

Background Checks Involving Terrorist Watch List Records, GAO -05 -127, January 2005; Firearm and Ex plosives 

Background Checks Involving Terrorist Watch List Records, GAO -09 -125R, for the Honorable John Conyers, Jr., the 

Honorable Robert C. Scott, and the Honorable Frank R. Lautenberg, May 21, 2009; and Terrorist Watchlist Screening: 

FBI Has Enhanced Its Use of Information from Firearm and Explosives Background Checks to Support 

Counterterrorism Efforts, GAO -10 -703T, May 5, 2010.  

> 17

U.S. Government Accountability Office, Update on Firearm and Explosives Background Checks Involving Terrorist 

Watch List Reco rds , for the Honorable Frank R. Lautenberg, United States Senate, April 27, 2011, p. 2. Terrorist Watch List Screening and Background Checks for Firearms  

> Congressional Research Service 4

In the 111 th Congress, the November 2009 Fort Hood shooting renewed interest in this proposal, 

which Senator Lautenberg and Representative King had previously reintroduced ( S. 1317 /H.R. 

2159 ). In May 2010, the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee 

(HSGAC) held a hearing on “te rrorists and guns ” and debated the need to pass legislation like the 

Terror Gap proposal. While no further action was taken on the bill, Senator Lautenberg and 

Representative King reintroduced the Terror Gap proposal ( S. 34 and H.R. 1506 ) in the 112 th 

Congress. 

This report examines potential policy issues that could arise under the Terror Gap proposal. For 

contex t, a basic overview of the U.S. government ’s post -9/11 terrorist watchlist procedures is 

provided, as well as an analysis of the Terror Gap proposal, which has been reintroduced in the 

113 th Congress ( S. 34 and H.R. 720 ). Possible issues could include the following: 

 Should U.S. persons —citizens and legal permanent residents —be notified when 

the Attorney General ma kes a “dangerous terrorist ” determination about them for 

the purposes of gun control following a terrorist watchlist match? 

 What form of redress and remedy would be provided for misidentifications, 

improper watch -listing, and wrongful denial? If enacted, moreover, would these 

redress and remedy provisions serve as a precedent for other terrorist screening 

procedures for which Congress has not provided similar avenues of relief? 

 Would the Terror Gap proposal draw unwanted public attention to terrorist 

watchlists and related screening procedures, possibly undermining the 

effectiveness of those measures by making terrorists and other adversaries aware 

of them, and possibly setting a judicial review precedent for other terrorist 

watchlist screening process es? 

As noted above, the Terror Gap proposal would grant the Attorney General the authority to deny 

firearms transfers and state -issued firearms permits, 18 as well as federal licenses to deal in 

firearms, to watchlisted persons if he deemed them to be “dange rous terrorists. ” The proposal 

would also grant the Attorney General similar authority to deny federal licenses to deal in 

explosives or federal permits to handle explosives. However, the gravity of a denial of a federal 

license to deal in either firearms or explosives, or a federal permit to handle explosives —which is 

arguably the denial of a privilege as opposed to a constitutionally enumerated right —would not 

be as compelling as the denial of a firearms transfer or state -issued permit to an individual. 19 

Hence, the principal focus of this report is on the potential policy issues that could be generated 

by the denial of a firearms transfer or a state -issued permit to an individual under the Terror Gap 

proposal. Although the due process issues raised by the Terror Gap proposal are not addressed in 

this report, the arguably parallel policy issues are examined in detail. To further this examination, 

this report provides (1) an overview of the post -9/11 reforms that led to the incorporation of       

> 18 While federal law does not require a private person to acquire a firearms license or permit for the purposes of
> firearms possession or transfer (purchase) eligibility , some states require an individual to acquire such documentation
> for that purpose. For example, Hawaii, Illinois, Massachusetts, New Jersey, and the District of Columbia require either
> a license or permit for eligibility for any firearms (handguns or long guns). By comparison, California, Connecticut,
> Iowa, Maryland, Michigan, Minnesota, Nebraska, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, and Rhode Island require either a
> license or permit for eligibility for handguns only. In these states, background checks are perfo rmed prior to license or
> permit issuance.
> 19 The possible constitutional due process interests at stake under the Terror Gap proposal are arguably elevated by
> recent Supreme Court decisions. For further information, see CRS Report R41750, The Second Amendment: An
> Overview of District of Columbia v. Heller and McDonald v. City of Chicago , by Vivian S. Chu .Terrorist Watch List Screening and Background Checks for Firearms
> Congressional Research Service 5

terrorist watchlis t checks into the Brady background check process, (2) an analysis of key 

provisions of the Terror Gap proposal, and (3) a summation of possible issues for Congress. 

# Post -9/11 Reforms and Modified NICS Procedures 

Under the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act (Brady Act), 20 Congress required the Attorney 

General to establish a computerized system to facilitate background checks on individuals 

seeking to acquire a firearm from federally licensed gun dealers. Under the permanent provisions 

of the Brady Act, t he FBI activated the NICS on November 30, 1998. 21 Initially, the FBI did not 

conduct terrorist watchlist queries through NICS as part of Brady background checks for firearms 

because being a known or suspected terrorist was not, and is not, a legally disqual ifying factor for 

firearms possession eligibility under federal law. Conducting terrorist watchlist checks as part of 

Brady background checks for firearms raises three possible issues for Congress: 

 Should terrorist watchlist checks be incorporated statuto rily into the Brady 

background check processes? 

 Given certain statutory restrictions prohibiting a permanent or temporary registry 

of firearms or firearms owners, should approved firearm transfer records be 

maintained on a temporary basis to determine whe ther persons of interest in 

counterterrorism investigations had or have obtained firearms? 22 

 Should the Attorney General be granted authority to deny a firearms transfer 

based solely on a terrorist watchlist match? 

To explore these issues in greater depth , the modified background check procedures, which were 

adopted in February 2004, are discussed below. 

# NICS Procedures 

Prior to the 1993 Brady Act, five states had established computerized, name -based criminal 

history record background check systems for fir earms. 23 However, the federal system under the 

Gun Control Act was largely paper -based. The Brady Act built upon this paper -based system, 

which essentially entailed the following procedures. When a private person (non -licensee) seeks 

to acquire a firearm (l ong gun or handgun) from a federally licensed gun dealer, he and the gun 

dealer are required to fill out ATF Form 4473. The gun dealer is also required to verify the 

purchaser ’s name, address, date of birth, and other information by examining a state -issue d piece 

of identification, most often a driver ’s license. As the prospective transferee, the private person 

attests on ATF Form 4473, under penalty of perjury, that he is not a prohibited person.       

> 20 P.L. 103 -159 ; November 30, 1993, 107 Stat. 1536.
> 21 Under the interim provisions of the Brady Act (November 30, 1993, through November 30, 1998), federally licensed
> gun dealers were required to contact state and local chief law enforcement officers to determine the eligibility of
> prospective customers to b e transferred a handgun.
> 22 As described below, the Brady Act includes a provision that prohibits using NICS -generated records to establish a
> registry of firearms, firearms owners, or firearms transfers and dispositions. In January 2005, the Government
> Accountability Office (GAO) re commended that the Attorney General clarify what information generated by the NICS
> background check process could be shared with counterterrorism officials. However, whether the Attorney General
> acted on this recommendation is not part of the public record . In the absence of any clarification made by the Attorney
> General, the maintenance of NICS -generated records related to approved firearms transfers for any purposes not
> expressly authorized under the Brady Act could be viewed as being at cross purposes wi th that act.
> 23 Those states were Delaware, Florida, Illinois, Rhode Island, and Virginia. Terrorist Watch List Screening and Background Checks for Firearms
> Congressional Research Service 6

Under current law, there are 10 classes of prohibited perso ns. Nine of those classes are prohibited 

from shipping, transporting, receiving, or possessing firearms or ammunition. They include 

 persons convicted in any court of a crime punishable by imprisonment for a term 

exceeding one year; 

 fugitives from justice ;

 unlawful users or addicts of any controlled substance as defined in Section 102 of 

the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. §802) ;

 persons adjudicated as “mental defectives ” or committed to mental institutions; 

 illegal/unauthorized immigrants and most nonimmigrant aliens (with some 

exceptions in the latter case); 

 persons dishonorably discharged from the U.S. Armed Forces; 

 persons who have renounced their U.S. citizenship; 

 persons under court -order restraints related to harassing, stalking, or threat ening 

an intimate partner or child of such intimate partner; and 

 persons convicted of misdemeanor domestic violence. 24 

In addition, a 10 th class of persons is prohibited from shipping, transporting, or receiving firearms 

or ammunition. It includes 

 persons u nder indictment in any court of a crime punishable by imprisonment for 

a term exceeding one year. 25 

As part of a background check, a federally licensed gun dealer is required to submit a prospective 

firearms transferee ’s name, sex, race, date of birth, and state of residence to the FBI through 

NICS. Social security numbers and other numeric identifiers are optional, but the submission of 

these data is likely to increase the timeliness of the background check (and reduce 

misidentifications). 26 The transferee ’s information is crosschecked against three computerized 

databases/systems to determine firearms transfer/possession eligibility. Those systems include the 

Interstate Identification Index (III), National Crime Information Center (NCIC), and NICS 

index. 27 If the transferee indicates that he is a non -U.S. citizen, his information is also checked 

against the immigration and naturalization databases maintained by the Department of Homeland 

Security (DHS), Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE). 28         

> 24 18 U.S.C. §922(g).
> 25 18 U.S.C. §922(n).
> 26 NICS is designed to turn firearms -related background checks around within minutes, but as described below, if
> necessary a firearms transfer can be delayed under current law for up to three business days. Such delays are usually
> the result of partial or incomplete criminal history records that require the FBI to contact state and local authorities to
> finalize a determinatio n about the transferee’s firearms possession eligibility.
> 27 The III, or “Triple I,” is a computerized criminal history index pointer system that the FBI maintains so that records
> on persons arrested and convicted of felonies and serious misdemeanors at eit her the federal or state level can be shared
> nationally. The NCIC is a database of documented criminal justice information that is made available to law
> enforcement and authorized agencies, with the goal of assisting law enforcement in apprehending fugitiv es, finding
> missing persons, locating stolen property, and further protecting law enforcement personnel and the public. The NICS
> index contains disqualifying records not found in either the III or NCIC on all the classes of prohibited persons
> enumerated in the GCA.
> 28 Those databases include the Central Index System (CIS); Computer Linked Application Information Management
> System (CLAIMS); Deportable Alien Control System (DACS); National Automated Immigration Lookout System
> (NAIL II); Nonimmigrant Informatio n System (NIIS); Student and Exchange Visitor Information System (SEVIS); Terrorist Watch List Screening and Background Checks for Firearms
> Congressional Research Service 7

The FBI h andles background checks entirely for most states, while other states serve as full or 

partial points of contact (POCs) for firearms background check purposes. In POC states, federally 

licensed gun dealers contact a state agency, and the state agency conta cts the FBI for background 

checks. 29 Under no circumstances is a federally licensed gun dealer informed about the 

prohibiting factor upon which a denial is based. 30 A denied person is also not informed initially 

about the reason for his denial. However, a de nied person may challenge the accuracy of the 

underlying record(s) upon which his denial is based. 31 He would initiate this process by 

requesting (usually in writing) the reason for the denial from the agency that conducted the NICS 

check (the FBI or POC). The denying agency has five business days to respond to the request. 

Upon receipt of the reason and underlying record for the denial, the denied person may challenge 

the accuracy of that record. If the record is found to be inaccurate, the denying agency i s legally 

obligated to correct that record. 

As with other screening systems, particularly those that are name -based, false positives occur as a 

result of background checks. Although the frequency of these misidentifications has not been 

reported, the FBI has taken steps to mitigate false positives. In July 2004, DOJ issued a regulation 

that established the NICS Voluntary Appeal File (VAF), which is part of the NICS Index 

(described above). 32 DOJ was prompted to establish the VAF to minimize the inconvenienc e

incurred by some prospective firearms transferees (purchasers) who have names or birth dates 

similar to those of prohibited persons. These persons agree to authorize the FBI to maintain 

personally identifying information about them in the VAF as a means to avoid future 

misidentifications and delayed transfers. Current law requires that NICS records on approved 

firearms transfers, particularly information personally identifying the transferee, be destroyed 

within 24 hours. 33 

Redesigned Naturalization Casework System (RNACS); Refugee, Asylum, and Parole System (RAPS); Enforcement 

Case Tracking System (ENFORCE); and TECS (previously known as the Treasury E nforcement Communications 

System).  

> 29

In 13 states, state agencies serve as full POCs and conduct Brady background checks for both long gun and handgun 

transfers. In four states, state agencies serve as partial POCs for handgun permits; in four other states , state agencies 

serve as partial POCs for handgun transfers only. In these eight partial POC states, checks for long gun transfers are 

conducted entirely through the FBI. In the 30 non -POC states, the District of Columbia, and five territories (American 

Samoa, Guam, Northern Mariana Islands, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands), federally licensed gun dealers contact 

the FBI directly to conduct background checks through NICS for both handgun and long gun transfers. For state 

agencies (POCs), background che cks may not be as expeditious, but they may be more thorough because state agencies 

may have greater access to databases and records that are not available through NICS. According to the Government 

Accountability Office (GAO), this is particularly true for domestic violence misdemeanor offenses and protective 

orders. For further information, see GAO, Gun Control: Opportunities to Close Loopholes in the National Instant 

Criminal Background Check System , GAO -02 -720, July 2002, p. 27.  

> 30

Statement of Daniel D. Roberts, Assistant Director, Criminal Justice Information Services, Federal Bureau of 

Investigation, Terrorists and Guns: The Nature of the Threat and Proposed Reforms: Hearing Before the S. Comm. on 

Homeland Sec. and Gov’t Affairs , 111 th Cong., May 5, 201 0.  

> 31

Correction of Erroneous System Information, 28 C.F.R. §25.10.  

> 32

Final Rule, National Instant Criminal Background Check System Regulation, 69 Federal Register 43892 (July 23, 

2004) (codified at 28 C.F.R. §25.10(g)).  

> 33

For FY2009, see Section 511 of the Omnibus Appropriations Act, 2009, ( P.L. 111 -8, 123 Stat. 596). In the 

Consolidated and Further Continuing Appropriations Act, 2012 ( P.L. 112 -55 ), Congress strengthened the “futurity” 

language, which makes this proviso permanent law, as opposed to an annual appropriations restriction. Nevertheless, 

for FY2010 it was included in the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2010 ( P.L. 111 -117 ). For FY2011, 

notwithstanding the “futurity” language, the provision was carried over in the Department of Defense and Full -Year 

Cont inuing Appropriations Act, 2011 ( P.L. 112 -10 ). For FY2012, the provision was also included in the Consolidated 

and Further Continuing Appropriations Act, 2012 ( P.L. 112 -55 ). Terrorist Watch List Screening and Background Checks for Firearms  

> Congressional Research Service 8

There is also a provision of fed eral law that allows the Attorney General to consider petitions 

from a prohibited person for “relief from disabilities ” and have his firearms transfer and 

possession eligibility restored. 34 Since FY1993, however, a rider on the ATF annual 

appropriations for salaries and expenses has prohibited the expenditure of any funding provided 

under that account on processing such petitions. 35 While a prohibited person could petition the 

Attorney General, bypassing ATF, such an alternative has never been successfully te sted. As a 

result, the only way a person can reacquire his lost firearms eligibility is to have his civil rights 

restored or disqualifying criminal record(s) expunged or set aside, or to be pardoned for 

his  crime. 

# HSPD -6 and Terrorist Watchlists 

In Septemb er 2003, the U.S. government moved to consolidate and expand its use of watchlists to 

better screen for known or suspected terrorists at consular offices and international ports of entry, 

and to better track them if they manage to enter the United States. This effort came under 

Homeland Security Presidential Directive 6 (HSPD -6), which is discussed below. 36 Prior to the 

9/11 attacks, terrorist watchlists were maintained by several agencies primarily to prevent 

international (foreign) terrorists from entering the United States. 

Under HSPD -6, the Attorney General established the Terrorist Screening Center (TSC) to 

consolidate the U.S. government ’s approach to screening both international and domestic 

terrorists. 37 The  National Counterterrorism Center (NCTC) als o plays a pivotal role, because it 

serves as the U.S. government ’s central and shared knowledge bank on known or suspected 

international terrorists and international terrorist groups. The NCTC maintains the Terrorist 

Identities Datamart Environment (TIDE),  the U.S. government ’s central repository on 

international terrorist identities and principal source of international terrorist screening records. 38 

Federal agencies within the U.S. Intelligence community (IC) 39  forward nominations to the  

> 34

18 U.S.C. §925(c). See also Relief from Disabilities Under the Act, 27 C.F.R. §478.144.  

> 35

For FY1993, see P.L. 102 -393 ; 106 Stat. 1732 (1992). For FY2012, see P.L. 112 -55 ; 125 Stat. 609 (2011). The 

FY2012 limitation provides “that none of the funds appropriated herein shall be available to investigate or act upon 

applications for relief from Federal firearms disabilities under 18 U.S.C. 925(c).”  

> 36

Homeland Security Presidential Directive 6 (HSPD -6), Integration and Use of Screening Information (September 16, 

2003), http://www.dhs.gov/ xabout/ laws/ gc_1214594853475.shtm . 

> 37

According to the FBI, international terrorists include those persons who carry out terrorist activities under foreign 

direction . For this purpose, they may include both citizens and noncitizens; citizens are included under the rationale 

that they could be recruited by foreign terrorist groups. Or, noncitizens (alie ns) could immigrate to the United States 

and naturalize (become citizens), having been unidentified terrorists before entry, or having been recruited as terrorists 

sometime after their entry into the United States. By comparison, domestic terrorists are no t under foreign direction 

and operate entirely within the United States. According to the Administration, both sets of data (on international and 

domestic terrorists) include, when appropriate, information on “United States persons.” The definition of “Uni ted 

States person” is found at 50 U.S.C. §1801(i): a citizen of the United States, an alien lawfully admitted for permanent 

residence (as defined in §1101(a)(2) of Title 8), an unincorporated association of which a substantial number of 

members are citizen s of the United States or aliens lawfully admitted for permanent residence, or a corporation that is 

incorporated in the United States, but does not include a corporation or an association that is a foreign power, as 

defined in subsection (a)(1), (2), or ( 3) of this section.  

> 38

Pursuant to the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004 ( P.L. 108 -458 ), the NCTC (formerly, the 

Terrorist Threat Integration Center) was charged with serving as the primary organization in the U.S. government for 

analyzing and integrating all intelligence possessed or acquired by the U.S. government pertaining to terrorism or 

counterterrorism, excepting law enforcement information (crim inal intelligence) pertaining exclusively to domestic 

terrorists and domestic terrorism. The NCTC was placed under the aegis of the Director of National Intelligence (DNI).  

> 39

The intelligence community includes the Office of the Director of National Intell igence (ODNI), Central Intelligence 

Agency (CIA); the National Security Agency (NSA); the Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA); the National Geospatial -Terrorist Watch List Screening and Background Checks for Firearms  

> Congressional Research Service 9

NCTC to place perso ns known or suspected to be international terrorists into TIDE based on 

evaluations of intelligence and law enforcement information. 40 According to NCTC, if a person 

engages in certain types of conduct, it could warrant their entry into TIDE, and possibly a terrorist 

screening nomination as well. Examples of that conduct could include 

 commits international terrorist activity; 

 prepares or plans international terrorist activity; 

 gathers information on potential targets for international terrorist activity; 

 solicits funds or other things of value for international terrorist activity or a 

terrorist organization; 

 solicits membership in an international terrorist organization; 

 provides material support (e.g., safe house, transportation, communications, 

funds, t ransfer of funds or other material financial benefit, false documentation or 

identification, weapons, explosives, or training); or 

 is a member of or represents a foreign terrorist organization. 41 

As of December 2011, TIDE contained over 740,000 persons, mos t with multiple minor spelling 

variations of their names. 42 U.S. persons (including both citizens and legal permanent residents) 

made up less than 2% of TIDE listings. 43 The NCTC supports the U.S. government ’s various 

terrorist screening operations by provid ing unclassified, “For Official Use Only, ” international 

terrorist screening records to the FBI -administered TSC for inclusion in the Terrorist Screening 

Database (TSDB). As of May 2010, the TSDB contained information on 423,000 individuals. 44 

According to the TSC, U.S. persons make up about 5% of TSDB listings. 45 

Although there is little information about the terrorist nomination processes for other IC entities, 

according to a May 2009 DOJ Inspector General ’s audit, FBI Special Agents investigating 

internati onal counterterrorism cases forward watchlist nominations on international terrorists to 

the NCTC for inclusion in TIDE and, subsequently, that information is forwarded to the TSC for 

inclusion in the TSDB. 46 In addition, FBI Special Agents investigating do mestic counterterrorism 

cases forward domestic terrorist watchlist nominations directly to the TSC for inclusion in the             

> Intelligence Agency (NGA); the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO); the other DOD offices that specialize in
> national intelligence through reconnaissance programs; the intelligence components of the Army, Navy, Air Force, and
> Marine Corps; the FBI; the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA); the Department of Energy; the Coast Guard; the
> Bureau of Intelligence and Research (INR) at the Department of State (DOS); the Office of Intelligence and Analysis at
> the Department of the Treasury; and elements of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) that are concerned with
> the analyses of foreign intelligence informati on (50 U.S.C. §401a(4)).
> 40 National Counterterrorism Center, “Terrorist Identities Datamart Environment (TIDE) Fact Sheet,”
> http://www.nctc.gov/ docs/ Tide_Fact_Sheet.pdf .
> 41 Ibid.
> 42 Ibid.
> 43 Ib id.
> 44 Federal Bureau of Investigation, Office of Congressional Affairs.
> 45 Terrorist Screening Center, http://www.fbi.gov/ fbi -search? cx= 004748461833896749646%3Ae41lgwqry7w& cof=
> FORID%3A10%3BNB%3A1& ie= UTF -8& q= Terrorist+Screening+Center+Statistics& siteurl= www.fbi.gov%2F .
> 46 U.S. Department of Justice, Office of the Inspector General, Federal Bureau of Investigation’s Terrorist Watchlist
> Nomination Practices , Audit Report 09 -25, May 2009, p. 13. Terrorist Watch List Screening and Background Checks for Firearms
> Congressional Research Service 10

TSDB. 47 Hence, the TSDB is the U.S. government ’s consolidated watchlist of all known or 

suspected terrorists, whether they are of the int ernational or domestic type. 

It is noteworthy that, in the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004 ( P.L. 108 -

458 ), Congress required the Director of Natio nal Intelligence (DNI), in consultation with the 

Secretary of Homeland Security, the Secretary of State, and the Attorney General, to report to 

Congress on the criteria for placing individuals in the TSDB, including minimum standards for 

reliability and ac curacy of identifying information, the threat levels posed by listed persons, and 

the appropriate responses to be taken if those persons were encountered. 48 While it is unknown 

whether the DNI reported to Congress on this matter, in another report, the DHS Privacy Office 

underscored that those criteria could not be made public without (1) compromising intelligence 

and security or (2) allowing persons wishing to avoid detection to subvert those lists. 49 In October 

2007, the GAO reported that the FBI and Intell igence Community were using reasonable 

standards for watch -listing persons who are suspected of having possible links to terrorism. 50 

The TSC shares TSDB -generated terrorist screening records with frontline screening agencies for 

inclusion in their compute r systems. The TSC, moreover, tailors those records and shares them in 

accordance with the missions and legal authorities under which the screening agencies operate. 51 

Hence, those shared terrorist screening records are subsets of the TSDB, and are often vi ewed by 

observers to be distinct terrorist watchlists despite the intent of HSPD -6. Periodically, usually 

coinciding with a perceived U.S. government failure to watch -list a known or suspected terrorist 

properly, critics of the status quo have argued that visa and passport applicants, as well as air 

passengers, ought to be screened against the full set of available government data on potential 

terrorist threats. 52 

The TSC director, in coordination with other federal agencies and national security staff, deve lops 

policies and procedures related to the criteria for including terrorist identities data in the form of 

terrorist screening records (or watchlist records) in the TSDB. All the data entered into the TSDB 

are collected by other agencies in accordance wit h applicable, pre -existing authorities. Although 

the TSC is not limited in its ability to address certain issues related to misidentifications because 

it has access to classified or law enforcement -sensitive information, it is restricted from divulging 

tha t information to the public. In a similar fashion, frontline screening agencies, such as the 

Transportation Security Administration (TSA) and U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP), 

have access to both unclassified traveler identifying information and se nsitive intelligence or law 

enforcement information collected by other agencies. Such records would be considered security -               

> 47 Ibid.
> 48 See Section 4012(c); 118 Stat. 3718 (2004).
> 49 U.S. Department of Homela nd Security, DHS Privacy Office Report on Assessing the Impact of the Automatic
> Selectee and No Fly Lists on Privacy and Civil Liberties , April 27, 2006, p. 9.
> 50 U.S. Government Accountability Office, Terrorist Watch List Screening, Opportunities Exist to Enhance
> Management Oversight, Reduce Vulnerabilities in Agency Screening Processes, and Expand the Use of the List , GAO -
> 08 -110, October 2007, p. 19.
> 51 For example, the TSC supports the terrorist screening activities of frontline screening agencies, like DH S’s
> Transportation Security Administration (TSA) and Customs and Border Protection (CBP), as well as the Department of
> State’s Bureau of Consular Affairs (CA). Similar terrorist watchlist records are also shared with the Department of
> Defense and selected foreign governments. In practice, a much greater percentage of TSDB -generated terrorist
> screening records is provided to CA for purposes of screening visa applicants than is provided to TSA for purposes of
> screening air passengers. As a practical matter, p olicymakers attempt to strike a balance between detecting threats and
> minimizing false positives . For further information, see CRS Report RL33645, Terrorist Watchlist Checks and Air
> Pas senger Prescreening , by William J. Krouse and Bart Elias .
> 52 By extension, the same argument could be made for persons undergoing firearms -related Brady background checks. Terrorist Watch List Screening and Background Checks for Firearms
> Congressional Research Service 11

sensitive information. Hence, it is generally the policy of the federal government neither to 

confirm nor deny whether any individual is on a terrorist watchlist. 

While the post -9/11 terrorist screening policies have resulted in positive terrorist watchlist 

matches and encounters, misidentifications and erroneous watchlist entries have also been a 

recurring concern for Congress. 53 Initia lly, these problems were most frequently associated with 

TSA, but they also emerged as a problem for CBP. 54 DHS addressed misidentifications and 

erroneous watchlist entries through its Traveler Redress and Inquiry Program (TRIP) and earlier 

efforts, such as , TSA ’s Office for Transportation Security Redress (OTSR). 55 In addition, 

individuals who believe they have been denied boarding or unduly scrutinized in secondary 

screening/inspections, because they believe they have been misidentified as a terrorist while 

being screened by TSA or CBP, have another avenue for relief. If they feel that the relief and/or 

remedy provided under TRIP was unsatisfactory, they may pursue administrative review of TRIP 

determinations in federal court. To date, Congress and the Admin istration have shown little 

inclination toward providing any further judicial review to persons adversely affected by terrorist 

watchlist screening. 56  

> 53

The Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004 ( P.L. 108 -458 ) required the TSA and DHS to 

establish appeals procedures by which persons who are identified as security threats based on records in the TSDB may 

appeal such determinations and have such records, if warranted, modified to alleviate such occurrences in the future. 

Also, provisions in the Implementing Recommendations of the 9/11 Commission Act of 2007 ( P.L. 110 -53 ) required 

DHS to establish an Office of Appeals and Redress to establish a timely and fair process for individuals who believe 

they have been delayed or prohibited from boarding a commercial aircraft because they were wrongly identified as a

threat. The provisions further establish a requirement to maintain records of those passengers and individuals who have 

been misidentified and have corrected erroneous information. (See 49 U.S.C. §§44903, 44909, and 44926. )

In addition, in the 111 th Cong ress, the House passed the FAST Redress Act ( H.R. 559 ) under suspension of the rules on 

February 3, 2009, a bill introduced by Representative Yvette D. Clarke. This bill was similar to a proposal ( H.R. 4179 )

passed in the 110 th Congress, also introduced by Representative Clarke. Senator Amy Klobuchar introduced an 

identical proposal ( S. 3392 ). The FAST Redress Act would have amended the Homeland Security Act of 2002 ( P.L. 

107 -296 ) to direct the Secretary of Homeland Security to establish a timely and fair process for individuals who believe 

they were delayed or prohibited from boarding a commercial aircraft because they were wrongly identified as a threat 

when screened against any terrorist watchlist or datab ase used by TSA or any component of DHS. It would have also 

authorized an Office of Appeals and Redress within DHS to implement, coordinate, and execute this process. If 

enacted, these bills would have arguably replicated and, thus, emphasized existing law . 

> 54

See, for example, Rahman v. Chertoff, 530 F. 3d 622 (7 th Cir. 2008). In this suit travelers alleged that delays 

attributable to watchlist -related misidentifications constituted a violation of their Fourth and Fifth Amendment rights. 

This suit was later dismissed in district court. See Rahman v. Chertoff, No. 05 -C 3761, 2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 31634 

(N.D. Ill. March 31, 2010) . 

> 55

Also, in December 2010, TSA fully implemented its Secure Flight program and the frequency of terrorist watchlist 

misidentificati ons is expected to abate. See Department of Homeland Security. DHS Now Vetting 100 Percent Of 

Passengers On Flights Within Or Bound For U.S. Against Watchlists, Press Release, November 30, 2010.  

> 56

Some commentators who have analyzed the larger watchlist ar chitecture under HSPD -6 have maintained that there is 

an absence of a transparent, accurate, and timely redress process for persons misidentified or wrongly placed on a 

watchlist as a known or suspected terrorist. For example, one legal memorandum publishe d by the Heritage Foundation 

posited that although terrorist watchlist screening programs offer a viable response to the problem of terrorism, such 

screening programs would only be acceptable if they included a robust redress process that allowed for the c orrection 

of false positives (i.e., individuals being wrongly matched or wrongly listed). It recommended both administrative 

review and a private right of action to appeal an adverse administrative action. Further, it recommended that judicial 

review of an administrative action should be de novo and that once a watch -listed individual establishes a prima facie 

case that his continuing presence on the watchlist is without foundation, the burden would shift to the government to 

prove the contrary by clear and convincing evidence, which is a more stringent than preponderance of the evidence. See 

Paul Rosenzweig and Jeff Jonas, Correcting False Positives: Redress and the Watch List Conundrum , Heritage 

Foundation, no. 17 (June 17, 2005), pp. 9 -10. See also Consti tution Project, Promoting Accuracy and Fairness in the 

Use of Government Watch Lists , December 2006. Terrorist Watch List Screening and Background Checks for Firearms  

> Congressional Research Service 12

# DOJ -FBI Modified NICS Procedures (February 2004) 

In November 2003, DOJ directed the FBI to reassess its NI CS procedures to include measures to 

screen prospective firearms transferees and permittees against terrorist watchlist records. 57 This 

reassessment was arguably taken in tandem with the terrorist watchlist reforms initiated under 

HSPD -6, as well as a Febru ary 2002 NICS transaction audit in which it was determined that 

prohibited aliens (noncitizens) had been improperly transferred firearms. 58 

Effective February 2004, the FBI began routinely running background checks for firearms and 

explosives against a ter rorist watchlist that resides in NCIC because inclusion on such a list 

suggests that there may be an underlying factor that would bar the prospective transferee, 

licensee, or permittee from possessing firearms or explosives. 59 Following the 9/11 attacks, a 

subset of terrorist watchlist records that was included in an NCIC file designated by the FBI as 

the Violent Gang and Terrorist Organization File (VGTOF) was substantially expanded with 

TSDB -generated terrorist screening reco rds. Later, the FBI segregated the gang - and terrorist -

related records in NCIC -VGTOF, and terrorist screening records are currently downloaded into an 

NCIC file designated by the FBI to be the “Known or Suspected Terrorist File (KST File). ”

As part of the background check process, NICS typically responds to a federally licensed gun 

dealer, otherwise known as a federal firearms licensee (FFL), with a NICS Transaction Number 

(NTN) and one of three outcomes: (1) “proceed ” with transfer or permit/license issua nce because 

no prohibiting record was found; (2) “denied, ” indicating that a prohibiting record was found; or 

(3) “ delayed, ” indicating that the system produced information suggesting that there could be a 

prohibiting record. 60 In the case of a possible wat chlist match, NICS sends a delayed transfer (for 

up to three business days) response to the querying federally licensed gun dealer or state POC. 

During a delay, NICS staff contacts immediately the FBI Headquarters ’ Counterterrorism 

Division and FBI Special Agents in the field, and a coordinated effort is made to research 

possibly unknown prohibiting factors. If no prohibiting factors are uncovered within this three -

day period, firearms dealers may proceed with the transaction at their discretion. However, F BI 

counterterrorism officials continue to work the case for up to 90 days in case disposition 

information is returned that permits a final determination. 61 

To assist in verifying whether a KST hit is a positive encounter (a match), NICS staff often 

contact the federally licensed gun dealer to gain additional information on the applicant, such as 

his address, driver ’s license number, social security number, or alien registration number (if 

applicable). 62 It is noteworthy, however, that GAO reported that feder ally licensed gun dealers are                   

> 57 U.S. Government Accountability Office, Gun Control and Terrorism: FBI Could Better Manage Firearm -Related
> Background Checks Involving Terrorist Watch List Records, GAO -05 -127, January 2005, p. 2.
> 58 It is notable that unauthorized immigrants and most nonimmigrant aliens are prohibited from possessing firearms in
> the United States. Nonimmigrant aliens are noncitizens who have been admitted to the United S tates on a temporary
> basis, as opposed to immigrants (legal permanent residents) who have been admitted to the United States on a
> permanent basis.
> 59 Dan Eggen, “FBI Gets More Time on Gun Buys,” Washington Post ,November 22, 2003, p. A05. See also U.S.
> Gov ernment Accountability Office, Gun Control and Terrorism: FBI Could Better Manage Firearm -Related
> Background Checks Involving Terrorist Watch List Records, GAO -05 -127, 2005, p. 7.
> 60 Accessing Records in the System, 28 C.F.R. §25.6.
> 61 U.S. Government Accou ntability Office, Gun Control and Terrorism: FBI Could Better Manage Firearm -Related
> Background Checks Involving Terrorist Watch List Records, GAO -05 -127, January 2005, p. 32 .
> 62 Statement of Daniel D. Roberts, Assistant Director, Criminal Justice Informati on Services, Federal Bureau of
> Investigation, Terrorists and Guns: The Nature of the Threat and Proposed Reforms: Hearing Before the Senate
> Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs , 111 th Cong., May 5, 2010. Terrorist Watch List Screening and Background Checks for Firearms
> Congressional Research Service 13

not legally obligated to provide NICS staff with this additional identifying information. 63 If NICS 

and TSC staff believes the KST hit is a verified, positive encounter, the TSC staff will forward 

this information to the FBI ’s Terrorist Screening Operations Unit (TSOU). 64 Next, NICS staff and 

the TSOU agent handling the encounter take further steps to make a final determination that the 

KST hit is a positive encounter. 65 

At this juncture, the FBI Counterterrorism Division and the TSOU agent determine whether the 

applicant is the subject of an FBI investigation. 66 If so, efforts will be made to coordinate with the 

appropriate Joint Terrorism Task Force (JTTF) 67 and verify whether FBI Special Agents in the 

field have any disqualifying information on the applicant with which to block the transaction. 68 If 

the applicant is not under investigation, then the FBI will generally initiate an investigation based 

upon the positive encounter and the fact that the watch -listed applicant had attemp ted to acquire 

either a firearm or a permit, or an explosives license/permit, if allowable under pertinent Attorney 

General investigative guidelines. 69 In either case, the TSOU case agent is obligated to respond 

back to the NICS Command Center within 72 hou rs so NICS staff will know how to handle the 

NICS transaction. 70 

After a federally licensed gun dealer receives notice that the transaction may proceed, all 

identifying information submitted by or on behalf of the transferee is to be destroyed within 24 

ho urs. 71 In the case of a delayed response, all identifying information except for the NTN (NICS 

Transaction Number) and date of the transaction is to be destroyed in 90 days, unless a 

prohibiting factor is reported to the NICS Center. 72 Generally, if an FFL p roceeds with a 

transaction at his discretion following three business days, and the applicant is subsequently 

found to be disqualified, the ATF is notified and a firearms retrieval action is initiated in 

coordination with a JTTF. 

# GAO Report Recommendation s (January 2005) 

Senators Joseph Biden and Frank Lautenberg requested that GAO report on the modified NICS 

terrorist watchlist procedures. In January 2005, GAO reported that in a five -month period —

February 3, 2004, through June 30, 2004 —NICS checks resulte d in an estimated 650 terrorist -

related record hits. 73 Of these potential hits, 44 were found to be positive matches. Yet, 35 of                    

> 63 U.S. Government Accountability Office, Terrorist Watchlist Screening: FBI Has Enhanced Its Use of Information
> from Firearm and Explosives Background Checks to Support Counterterrorism Efforts, GAO -10 -703T, May 2010, p.
> 8.
> 64 Statement of Daniel D. Roberts, Assistant Director, Criminal J ustice Information Services, Federal Bureau of
> Investigation, Terrorists and Guns: The Nature of the Threat and Proposed Reforms: Hearing Before the Senate
> Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs , 111 th Cong., May 5, 2010.
> 65 Ibid.
> 66 Ibid.
> 67 JTTFs are FBI -led, multi -agency teams of investigators, analysts, linguists, and other specialists. JTTFs are based in
> 103 cities nationwide, including at least one in each of the 56 FBI field offices. http://www.fbi.gov/ about -us/
> investigate/ terrorism/ terrorism_jttfs .
> 68 Ibid.
> 69 Ibid.
> 70 Ibid.
> 71 Retention and Destruction of Records in the System, 28 C.F.R. §25.9(b)(1)(iii).
> 72 Ibid. at §25.9(b)(1)(ii).
> 73 U.S. Government Acc ountability Office ,Gun Control and Terrorism: FBI Could Better Manage Firearm -Related
> Background Checks Involving Terrorist Watch List Records , GAO -05 -127, January 2005, p. 9. Terrorist Watch List Screening and Background Checks for Firearms
> Congressional Research Service 14

these transactions were allowed to proceed because, as noted above, being identified as a known 

or suspected terrorist is not gr ounds to prohibit a person from being transferred a firearm. Another 

six were denied, one was unresolved, and two were of an unknown status. 74 GAO recommended 

that the Attorney General (1) clarify what information generated by the NICS background check 

proc ess could be shared with counterterrorism officials; and (2) either more frequently monitor 

background checks conducted by full and partial POC states that result in terrorism -related NICS 

hits or allow the FBI to handle these cases entirely. 75 Following th is GAO recommendation, NICS 

procedures were altered and the NICS and TSC staff currently handle all KST hits for both full 

and partial POC states. However, with regard to the former recommendation, it is unknown 

whether the Attorney General clarified what NICS -generated information could be shared with 

counterterrorism officials. 

# Possible Issues Raised by the Modified NICS Procedures 

When Congress passed the Brady Act in November 1993, the use of terrorist watchlists during 

firearms -related background checks was not considered. Correspondingly, the Attorney General 

has no specific statutory authority to screen prospective gun buyers against terrorist watchlist 

records. Nevertheless, the DOJ and FBI have adopted procedures to do this because being on 

suc h a list suggests that there may be an underlying factor that would bar a prospective 

background check applicant from possessing a firearm. Hence, a possible issue for Congress 

could be whether terrorist watchlist checks should be incorporated statutorily into the background 

checks for firearms. 

In addition, a proviso attached to the FY2004 DOJ annual appropriation and every year thereafter 

requires that NICS -generated approved firearms transaction records be destroyed within 24 

hours. 76 As described above, the FBI does not maintain those records for more than 24 hours after 

a federally licensed gun dealer has been notified by NICS that a firearms transaction has been 

approved. However, when background checks result in either partial or incomplete criminal 

hi story records, or a terrorist watchlist (NCIC -KST) hit, the firearms transactions is delayed for 

up to three business days. If a final determination cannot be made within three business days, 

NICS staff maintains the transaction record in an “open ” status for up to 90 days. Upon a final 

determination, the FBI destroys the NICS firearms transaction records if the transferee is not 

found to be a prohibited person. However, to reach this final determination, information on the 

subjects of those background chec ks is passed on to FBI Special Agents and Intelligence Analysts 

in the field. While the NICS records are eventually destroyed for approved firearms transfers, it is 

unknown what happens to the information generated by NICS -related terrorist watchlist hits that 

are passed on to the FBI Counterterrorism Division and investigative personnel in the field, who 

are usually assigned to Joint Terrorism Task Forces. Information about those firearms transactions 

is possibly recorded and stored electronically in the F BI ’s investigative case files. 

In the Brady Act, moreover, there is a provision that prohibits the (1) transfer of any NICS record 

to any other federal or state agency, or (2) the use of the NICS system as a national registry of               

> 74 Ibid.
> 75 Ibid.
> 76 In the Consolidated and Further Continuing Appropriations Act, 2012 ( P.L. 112 -55 ), Congress “futurity” language in
> this provision ( §511 ), which makes the provision permanent law, as opposed to an annual appropriations restriction.
> This provision was first added to the FY2004 CJS Appropriations bill ( H.R. 2799 ) as part of a larger amendment that
> Representative Todd Tiahrt offered in full appropriations committ ee markup .For further information, see CRS Report
> RS22458, Gun Control: Statutory Disclosure Limitations on ATF Firearms Trace Data and Multiple Handgun Sales
> Reports , by William J. Kr ouse .Terrorist Watch List Screening and Background Checks for Firearms
> Congressional Research Service 15

firearms, firearms owners, or firearms transactions or dispositions. 77 In light of the former 

prohibition, a second issue for Congress could be whether to grant the FBI greater authority to 

maintain and access NICS records for the purposes of counterterrorism, or whether existing 

st atutory limitations that were arguably designed to prevent the maintenance of and access to such 

records should be strengthened. 

In light of the first two issues, it follows that a third issue for Congress could be whether the 

Attorney General should be g iven explicit authority to deny firearms transfers to watch -listed 

persons on a case -by -case basis, or whether all known or suspected terrorists should be statutorily 

prohibited from possessing firearms and explosives. 

In the 109 th Congress, several piece s of legislation were introduced that were related to NICS 

background checks and terrorist watchlists. For example, Senator Lautenberg and Representative 

John Conyers introduced the Terrorist Apprehension and Record Retention Act of 2005 ( S. 

578 /H.R. 1225 ), a bill that would have (1) required that the FBI, along with appropriate federal 

and state counterterrorism officials, be notified immediately when NICS background checks 

indicated that a person seeking to obtain a firearm was a known or suspected terrorist; (2) 

required that the FBI coordinate the response to these occurrences; and (3) authorized the 

retention of all related records for at least 10 years. In both the 110 th and 111 th Congresses, 

Senator Lautenberg introduced a similar proposal, the Preserving Records of Terrorists & 

Criminals Transactions Act ( S. 2935 and S. 2820 ). 

Also, in the 109 th Congress Representative Peter King introduced H.R. 1168 , a bill that would 

have required the Attorney General to promulgate regulations to preserve records of terrorist - and 

gang -related matches during these background checks until they had been provided to the FBI. 

Although these proposals would ha ve addressed the issue of record retention, they would not 

have provided the Attorney General with a specific statutory authority to conduct terrorist 

watchlist checks, nor would they have authorized the Attorney General to deny a firearms transfer 

based s olely on a terrorist watchlist match. However, Representative Carolyn McCarthy 

introduced a proposal in the 109 th Congress ( H.R. 1195 ) that would have barred anyone on the 

“No Fly ” list from possessing a firearm. 78 Prompted by some Members of Congress, DOJ 

developed a proposal to authorize the Attorney General to deny a firearms transfer to any watch -

listed person he deemed to be a “dangerous terrorist, ” as discussed below. 

# DOJ Draft Proposal (April 2007) 

Although watch -listed persons may be subjects of ongoing foreign intelligence, national security, 

and criminal investigations, they may not be persons prohibited from possessing firearms or 

explosives under current federal law. As su bsequent events would indicate, DOJ concluded that it 

was limited under current law in its authority to use terrorist watchlists as part of the background 

check processes to deny firearms and explosives transfers to known or suspected terrorists. In        

> 77 For example, subsection 103(i) of the Brady Act ( P.L. 103 -159 ; 107 Stat. 1542) includes the following provision:
> PROHIBITION RELATING TO ESTABLISHMENT OF REGISTRA TION SYSTEMS WITH RESPECT TO
> FIREARMS. –No department, agency, officer, or employee of the United States may –(1) require that any record or
> portion thereof generated by the system established under this section be recorded at or transferred to a facilit y owned,
> managed, or controlled by the United States or any State or political subdivision thereof; or (2) use the system
> established under this section to establish any system for the registration of firearms, firearm owners, or firearm
> transaction or dis position, except with respect to persons, prohibited by section 922 (g) or (n) of title 18, United States
> Code or State law, from receiving a firearm.
> 78 The “No Fly” list is a terrorist watchlist employed by TSA to screen passengers prior to boarding commercial aircraft
> and other conveyances. Terrorist Watch List Screening and Background Checks for Firearms
> Congressional Research Service 16

hearin gs before the House Committee on the Judiciary, then -Attorney General Alberto Gonzales 

was questioned several times by Members of Congress about NICS procedures and terrorist 

watchlist hits. 

Representative Chris Van Hollen: “Does it make sense to you that we stop a person from 

boarding the airline in order to protect the public safety, [but] that an individual can turn 

around, get in their car, go to the local gun shop and buy 20 semiautomatic assault 

weapons?” 

Attorney General Gonzales: “I think we should be doing everything we can to ensure that 

people [who] are in fact terrorists shouldn’t have weapons in this country, the truth of the 

matter is. But unless they are disabled [disqualified] from having a weapon under the 

statute there’s not much that we ca n do other than maybe try and get them out of the country 

or, by the way, to see if there’s any disability under the statute that would allow us to deny 

them a firearm.” 79 

In 2005, Attorney General Gonzales directed the DOJ to form a working group to review federal 

gun laws —particularly in regard to NICS background checks —to examine whether additional 

authority should be sought to prevent firearms transfers to known or suspected terrorists. 80 Nearly 

two years later, in April 2007, DOJ proposed legislation tha t would give the Attorney General the 

authority to deny a firearms transfer, state -issued firearms permit, or explosive license to any 

person found “to be or have been engaged in conduct constituting, in preparation for, in aid of, or 

related to terrorism. ”81 In the 110 th Congress, Senator Lautenberg and Representative King 

introduced this proposal ( S. 1237 /H.R. 20 74 ), but no further action was taken on either bill. In 

addition, Representative McCarthy reintroduced her proposal, newly titled the No Fly, No Buy 

Act ( H.R. 1167 ). 

# GAO Follow -Up Report (May 2009) 

In May 2009, nearly four years after its first report on NICS -related terrorist watchlist hits, GAO 

issued a follow -up report . According to that report, from February 2004 through February 2009 

there were 

 963 NICS background checks that resulted in positive terrorist watchlist matches, 

and of those checks, about 90% (865) were allowed to proceed and a firearms or 

explosives transfer may have occurred; 

 of those checks described above that resulted in positive terrorist watchlist 

matches a nd a proceed with transfer, only one involved a potential explosives 

transfer; and           

> 79 Testimony of Alberto Gonzales, Attorney General, Department of Justice, USA Patriot Act: A Review for the
> Purpos e of Reauthorization: Hearing Before H. Comm. on the Judiciary , 109 th Cong. 81 -82, April 6, 2005.
> 80 See U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Legislative Affairs , Letter to the Honorable Richard B. Cheney, President,
> United States Senate, from Richard A. Hertling Acting Assistant Attorney General, February 13, 2007,
> http://lautenberg.senate.gov/ assets/ terrorgap/ Feb_2007_DOJ_Reply.pdf ; Letter to Honorable Robert S. Mueller, III,
> Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and Honorable Alberto Gonzales, Attorney General, November 1, 2006,
> http://lautenberg.senate.gov/ assets/ terrorgap/ 2006_Lautenberg_Biden_Letter.pdf .
> 81 This proposal was drafted by the Department of Justice for consideration by Congress. See U.S. Department of
> Justice, Office of Legislative Affairs, Letter to the Honorab le Richard B. Cheney, President, United States Senate, from
> Richard A. Hertling Acting Assistant Attorney General, April 25, 2007, ht tp://lautenberg.senate.gov/ assets/ terrorgap/
> Cheney_DOJ_Drafted_Bill_Re_Dangerous_Terrorists_Act_2007.pdf .Terrorist Watch List Screening and Background Checks for Firearms
> Congressional Research Service 17

 of the 10% that resulted in denials (98), the denials were based on felony 

convictions, illegal immigration status, fugitive from justice status, or the 

unlawful use of, or addiction to, a controlled substance. All of these denials 

involved firearms, as opposed to explosives. 82 

GAO also recommended that if Congress were to move forward with legislation providing the 

Attorney General with the discretionary authority to deny a f irearms transfer or permit or an 

explosives license/permit based on a terrorist watchlist hit, then it should consider including a 

provision in that legislation that would require the Attorney General to promulgate guidelines that 

would delineate under wha t circumstances that authority could be exercised. Following this 

report, Representative King and Senator Lautenberg reintroduced the DOJ draft proposal as 

nearly identical bills ( H.R . 2159 and S. 1317 ), which supporters dubbed the “Terror Gap ”

proposal. 83 

# Terror Gap Legislation 

During the 111 th Congress, the November 5, 2009, Fort Hood shooting, in which 13 per sons were 

shot to death and 32 wounded, served to heighten congressional interest in the use of terrorist 

screening records and firearms -related background checks. Leading up to the shooting, the 

alleged shooter, U.S. Army Major Nidal Malik Hasan, had corr esponded by email with a radical 

Muslim imam, Anwar al -Aulaqi, who U.S. authorities had long suspected of having substantial 

ties to al -Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula. 84 Although FBI counterterrorism agents had been aware 

of Hasan ’s communications with al -Aulaqi, 85 it was unclear at what level Hasan was scrutinized 

by the FBI. 86 If he had been the subject of a full counterterrorism investigation, FBI policy would 

have required that he be watch -listed as a known or suspected terrorist. 87 Had Hasan been watch -

lis ted, there is a possibility, depending on the sequence of events, that his purchase of a pistol and 

the required background check could have alerted FBI counterterrorism agents to that transfer, 

and they might have been able to take steps that would have p revented the shooting. 88 This event  

> 82

U.S. Government Accountability Office, , Firearm and Explosive Background Checks Involving Terrorist Watch List 

Records, GAO -09 -125R, May 2009, p . 8.  

> 83

Also, in the 111 th Congress Representative McCarthy reintroduced the No Fly, No Buy Act ( H.R. 2401 ). And, 

Senator Lautenberg introduced a bill that would have allowed the Att orney General to maintain NICS records on 

approved transfers that were also related terrorist watchlist hits ( S. 2820 ). Congressional attention following the Fort 

Hood shooting, howev er, was largely focused on the Terror Gap proposal.  

> 84

Carrie Johnson, Spencer C. Hsu, and Ellen Nakashima, “Hasan Had Intensified Contact with Cleric: FBI Monitored 

E-mail Exchanges Fort Hood Suspect Raised Prospect of Financial Transfers,” Washington Post , November 21, 2009, 

p. A01.  

> 85

Philip Rucker, Carrie Johnson, and Ellen Nakashima, “Hasan E -mails to Cleric Didn’t Result in Inquiry; Suspect in 

Fort Hood Shootings Will Be Tried in Military Court,” Washington Post , November 10, 2009, p. A01.  

> 86

According t o a November 11, 2009, FBI press release, Hasan’s communications with Anwar al -Aulaqi were assessed 

by the FBI in connection with an investigation of another subject, and the content of those communications was 

explainable by his research as a psychiatrist at the Walter Reed Medical Center and nothing else derogatory was found 

that would have suggested that he was involved in terrorist activities or planning; U.S. Department of Justice, Federal 

Bureau of Investigation, Investigation Continues Into Fort Hood Shooting , November 11, 2009, http://www.fbi.gov/ 

news/ pressrel/ press -releases/ investigation -continues -into -fort -hood -shooting . 

> 87

U.S. Depart ment of Justice, Office of the Inspector General, Audit Division , Federal Bureau of Investigation’s 

Terrorist Watchlist Nomination Practices, Report 09 -25, May 2009, p. 11.  

> 88

Michael Bloomberg and Thomas Kean, “Enabling the Next Fort Hood? Congress’s Curbs on Gun Data Hurt 

Investigations,” Washington Post , November 27, 2009, p. A23. Terrorist Watch List Screening and Background Checks for Firearms  

> Congressional Research Service 18

and several other terrorist attacks or disrupted plots involving firearms prompted Members of 

Congress to reexamine the Terror Gap proposal. 

# HSGAC Hearing on the Fort Hood Shooting 

In May 2010, the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee ( HSGAC )

held a hearing on “terrorists and guns, ” during which issues related to the Fort Hood shooting and 

a proposal to give the Attorney General additional authority to deny firearms transactions to 

persons wat ch -listed as terrorists were explored. 89 Senator Joseph Lieberman, chairman of 

HSGAC, noted that firearms had been used in at least two deadly terrorist plots perpetrated by 

“radicalized jihadists ”: the Fort Hood shooting and the June 2009 Little Rock, AR, recruiting 

center shooting in which two U.S. servicemen were shot —one killed and one wounded. In other 

thwarted plots, conspirators were arrested for planning to use firearms to attack servicemen at 

Fort Dix, NJ, in 2006 and the Quantico, VA, Marine base i n 2009. 90 As part of his opening 

statement, Senator Lieberman voiced his strong support for the Terror Gap legislation and urged 

its prompt passage. 91 He observed that 

Terrorists armed with semi -automatic and high -powered weapons can inflict heavy 

casualties in seconds. While it is true that homegrown terrorists are generally less 

sophisticated than those sponsored and trained overseas by Al Qaeda, they may also –

particularly if acting alone – be harder to detect and stop. And the easy availability of lethal 

weapons ensures that these homegrown terrorists can legally obtain sufficient firepower to 

cause terrible damage. 92 

These concerns were reinforced in June 2011 when Al Qaeda ’s U.S. -born spokesperson, Adam 

Gadahn, exhorted Muslim extremists in the United St ates to acquire firearms and carry out 

terrorist attacks in the United States in an internet posting. 93 

For the hearing, GAO released updated statistics on firearms and explosives background checks 

and subsequent transactions that involved individuals watch -listed as terrorists. 94 GAO also 

reported on measures taken by the FBI to improve firearms and explosives background checks for 

counterterrorism purposes. In this update, GAO reiterated that if Congress were to move forward  

> 89

Terrorists and Guns: The Nature of the Threat and Proposed Reforms: Hearing Before the Senate Committee on 

Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs , 111 th Cong. May 5, 2010, CQ Congressional Transcripts. For further 

information on Muslim extremists and terrorist plots in the United States, see CRS Report R41416, American Jihadist 

Terroris m: Combating a Complex Threat , by Jerome P. Bjelopera . 

> 90

Ibid.  

> 91

Opening Statement of Chairman Joseph I. Lieberman, Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental 

Affairs, Terrorists and Guns: The Nature of the Threat and Proposed Reforms , May 5, 2010, available at 

http://hsgac.senate.gov/ public/ index.cfm? FuseAction= Hearings.Hearing& Hearing_ID= a6061b56 -3636 -4fa c-8446 -

b3c0dd65d02d . 

> 92

Ibid.  

> 93

Larry McShane, “Terror At Gun Store. U.S. Great Place To Buy Firearms, ‘American Al Qaeda’ Tells Jihadis,” 

Daily News (New York), June 4, 2011, p. 6.  

> 94

U.S. Government Accountability Office, Terrorist Watchlist Screening: FB I Has Enhanced Its Use of Information 

from Firearm and Explosives Background Checks to Support Counterterrorism Efforts , GAO -10 -703T, May 2010. In 

this report, GAO reported that from February 2004 through February 2010, there were 1,228 positive encounters 

through NICS -related firearms or explosives transactions with individuals who had been placed on a terrorist watchlist. 

These encounters involved 650 individuals because 450 of these individuals were involved in multiple transactions. Six 

of these individ uals were involved in 10 or more transactions. In 1,119 encounters, the transactions were allowed to 

proceed. In 109 encounters, the transactions were denied. From March 2009 to February 2010, there were 272 positive 

encounters and all of the transactions were allowed to proceed, including one that involved explosives. Terrorist Watch List Screening and Background Checks for Firearms  

> Congressional Research Service 19

with legislation providing the A ttorney General with the discretionary authority to deny firearms 

or explosives transfers to individuals watch -listed as terrorists, then it should consider including a 

provision in that legislation to require the Attorney General to promulgate guidelines that would 

delineate under what circumstances such authority could be exercised. 95 

Daniel Roberts, FBI Assistant Director for the Criminal Justice Information Services Division, 

also testified about the modified background procedures that were adopted in February 2004 to 

include terrorist watchlist screening as part of firearms and explosives background checks. 96 In 

addition, GAO reported that in October 2008, the FBI Counterterrorism Division initiated an 

analysis of firearms and explosives background chec ks that resulted in terrorist watchlist hits as a 

precaution prior to the presidential inauguration. 97 Based on this analysis, the Counterterrorism 

Division began issuing analytical reports on this data on a monthly and quarterly basis. 98 These 

classified re ports are circulated to FBI field offices and Joint Terrorism Task Forces (JTTFs), and 

they have reportedly been instrumental in several FBI investigations. 99 FBI officials indicated to 

GAO that they are generally allowed to collect, retain, and share infor mation on watch -listed 

individuals who have engaged in a firearms or explosives transaction, regardless of whether the 

transaction was denied or allowed to proceed. 100 Hence, background checks for firearms and 

explosives have arguably become a valuable sourc e of criminal intelligence for the FBI. 

Senator Lautenberg and Representative King testified in support of their bills ( S. 1317 and H.R. 

2159 ). Both New York City Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg and NYC Police Chief Raymond W. 

Kelly also testified in favor of these bills. Los Angeles Assistant Police Chief Sandy Jo 

MacArthur testified about the Los Angeles Police De partment ’s ability to respond to events 

involving multiple attacks with firearms and/or explosives. Underscoring that many criminal 

assailants and terrorists often choose long guns and explosives, MacArthur opined that the “tools ”

(statutes) used to preven t firearms from falling into the hands of felons and domestic violence 

misdemeanants ought to be applied to known or suspected terrorists. 101 

Conversely, Liberty Coalition Privacy Director Aaron Titus avowed that the Terror Gap 

legislation would “strip citi zens of their enumerated constitutional right to bear arms without any 

meaningful due process. ”102 Senator Lindsey Graham concurred, arguing that denying a firearms 

transfer based on a felony conviction in a lawful court was fundamentally different from doin g so 

based on a terrorist watchlist record. He emphasized that watchlist records are created by an 

investigator or intelligence analyst based upon his reasonable suspicion that the subject is a 

terrorist or terrorist supporter. Given th at firearms possessi on for self -defense is protected as an 

individual right under the Second Amendment of the Constitution, he surmised that such a denial             

> 95 As described below, such a provision has been included in the Senate version of the Terror Gap proposal ( S. 34 ), but
> it has not been included in the House version ( H.R. 1506 ).
> 96 Statement of Daniel D. Roberts, Assistant Director, Criminal Justice Information Services, Federal Bureau of
> Investigati on, Terrorists and Guns: The Nature of the Threat and Proposed Reforms: Hearing Before the Senate
> Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs , 111 th Cong., May 5, 2010.
> 97 Ibid. at 9.
> 98 Ibid.
> 99 Ibid.
> 100 Ibid. at 10.
> 101 Terrorists and Guns: The Na ture of the Threat and Proposed Reforms: Hearing Before the Senate Committee on
> Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs , 111 th Cong. May 5, 2010, CQ Congressional Transcripts.
> 102 Ibid. Terrorist Watch List Screening and Background Checks for Firearms
> Congressional Research Service 20

would be improper. 103 Similarly, Senator Susan Collins observed that denying a firearms transfer 

raises issues, possibly co nstitutional in nature, that denying an explosives license or permit 

would  not. 104 In a February 2011 special report, the HSGAC categorized the November 2009 Fort 

Hood shooting as the worst terrorist attack on U.S. soil since the 9/11 attacks. 105 

# Denying Firearms and Explosives to Dangerous Terrorists Act s of 

# 2011 and 2013 (S. 34 and H.R. 1506 /S. 34 and H.R. 720 )

In the 112 th Congress, Senator Lautenberg and Representative King reintroduced their Terror G ap 

proposal as the Denying Firearms and Explosives to Dangerous Terrorists Act of 2011 ( S. 34 and 

H.R. 1506 ). Supporters include d 550 mayors of U.S. cities, who are represented by Mayors 

Against Illegal Guns. 106 They assert ed that if the federal government can stop an individual on a 

terrorist watchlist from boarding a commercial aircraft, then the federal governmen t ought to be 

empowered to stop an individual on a terrorist watchlist from acquiring a firearm. Opponents of 

the bill, including the National Rifle Association (NRA), argue d that the Terror Gap proposal, if 

enacted, would be unconstitutional because it wo uld allow the Attorney General to deny a person 

his “individual right to keep and bear arms, ” and do so “without due process of law. ”107 

Supporters of the Terror Gap bill counter ed that it would provide a level of redress and remedy 

that are currently unavai lable to others who face a denial of some other benefit or activity because 

they are identified as known or suspected terrorists through other federal terrorist screening 

activities. 

As noted above, i n the 113 th Congress, even before the Boston bombing, S enator Frank 

Lautenberg and Representative Peter King had reintroduced this proposal ( S. 34 and H.R. 720 ). In 

the wake of the Boston bombing, Senator Lautenberg has called for Congress to consider his bill 

to close the “Terror Gap. ”108 

Firearms Eligibility and Dangerous Terrorist Determination 

The Terror Gap bill would grant the Attorney General discretionary authority to make a 

determination and designate an individual as a “dangerous terrorist. ” This determination would be 

the basis for a denial of a firearms transfer, state -issued firearms pe rmit, or an explosives or 

firearms -related federal firearms license. Background checks would likely trigger this 

determination because the bill would amend provisions of current law related to firearms and 

explosives eligibility and to background checks co nducted through NICS. The Attorney General 

could make the determination if the individual in question              

> 103 Ibid.
> 104 Ibid.
> 105 U.S. Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, A Ticking Time Bomb: Counterterrorism
> Lessons from the U.S. Government’s Failure to Prevent the Fort Hood Attack, A Special Report by Joseph I.
> Lieberman, Chairman, and Susan M. Collins, Ranking Member , February 3, 2011, p. 7.
> 106 Letter from Mayors Against Illegal Guns to the Honorable John Boehner, Speaker of the House, and the Honorable
> Harry Reid, Senate Majority Leader, Re: 550 Mayors Call on Congress to Support H.R. 1506 /S. 34 and Close the
> “Terror Gap,” May 11, 2011.
> 107 National Rifle Association, Institute for Legislative Action, “Keeping An Eye On ‘Terror Watchlist’ Legislation,”
> May 20, 2011.
> 108 Office of Senator Frank R. Lautenberg, “Press Release: As Reports Indicate Boston Bomber Was on Terror List,
> Lautenberg Highl ights Bill to Close ‘Terror Gap’,” April 25, 2013. Terrorist Watch List Screening and Background Checks for Firearms
> Congressional Research Service 21

is known (or appropriately suspected) to be or have been engaged in conduct constituting, 

preparation for, in aid of, or related to terrorism, or providi ng material support or resources 

for terrorism, and [there is] a reasonable belief that the [individual] may use a firearm in 

connection with terrorism. 109 

This provision could have been designed to be discretionary for several possible reasons. First, 

not all individuals who are watch -listed as known or suspected terrorists present the same 

potential level or type of threat to public safety and/or national security. Second, there are likely 

individuals whom federal intelligence officers and counterterrorism agents would want to monitor 

more closely if given the option, but they would not want to alert those individuals to the 

possibility that they had been identified and watch -listed as a known or suspected terrorist. 

Indeed, there may be occasions when FBI counterterrorism agents would want to allow a firearms 

transfer to proceed so that they could surveil the known or suspected terrorist to see what he 

might do with that firearm or see to whom he might subsequently transfer those firearms. Third, 

the Attorn ey General may not want to call undue public attention to terrorist screening sources 

and methods that a denied, high -profile firearm(s) transfer might generate if and when a 

“dangerous terrorist ” determination were made public. 

On the other hand, the bil l could be viewed as making the Attorney General responsible for 

making risk assessments about all potential firearms transfers that involved terrorist watchlist 

hits, despite the discretionary nature of the provision. While these risk assessments are alre ady 

being performed at some level under the modified firearms background check procedures, this 

new authority, once granted, could create a public expectation that the Attorney General and his 

subordinates would always be correct in making the risk assessm ents. Consequently, if a watch -

listed person were allowed to acquire a firearm from a federally licensed gun dealer, perhaps 

mistakenly, and he went on to commit a terrorist act, particularly one involving a mass shooting 

and loss of life, many in the publ ic may perceive the Attorney General as being responsible for 

that outcome. 

Notification of a Dangerous Terrorist Determination 

Under the bill, the Attorney General would also be granted discretion about whether to inform a 

watch -listed and denied individ ual of the underlying “dangerous terrorist ” determination that had 

been made about him. Hence, the Attorney General could potentially follow several paths with 

regard to any watch -listed person: 

 decline to make the determination and allow the transfer to go forward; 

 make the determination, notify the individual, and deny the transfer; or 

 make the determination, decline to notify the individual, but deny the transfer. 

Under current law, however, an individual who is prohibited from being transferred a fi rearm has 

a right to learn the reason(s) for his firearms transfer denial. Whether notified or not, a person 

denied a firearms transfer under the bill would presumably be able to follow the same procedures 

in an attempt to learn the reason(s) for his denia l. Under the bill, if the FBI continued the policy 

of neither confirming nor denying whether a person was watch -listed and was therefore unable to 

inform the individual about the reason for his denial, the individual might deduce that he had 

been watch -lis ted, because he would have been informed for any other reason(s).      

> 109 Proposed 18 U.S.C. §§922A and B. The proposal would define “terrorism” as both international and domestic
> terrorism as defined at 18 U.S.C. §2331, and define “material support or resources” as defined at 18 U.S.C. §2339A.
> For further information on material support, see CRS Report R41333, Terrorist Material Support: An Overview of 18
> U.S.C. 2339A and 2339B , by Charles Doyle .Terrorist Watch List Screening and Background Checks for Firearms
> Congressional Research Service 22

Tenth Class of Prohibited Persons Under 18 U.S.C. §922(g) 

The bill would add persons whom the Attorney General had given “actual notice ” of a “dangerous 

terrorist ” determination to the nine classes of persons who are already prohibited from shipping, 

transporting, possessing, or receiving a firearm or ammunition under the GCA. 110 As a result, any 

firearms previously possessed by the individual would become illegal upon notification of a 

“dange rous terrorist ” determination. He would be obliged to give up control over any firearms he 

possessed until he successfully challenged the Attorney General ’s determination in federal court 

(as described below). On the other hand, if the Attorney General sho uld choose not to notify the 

individual about the “dangerous terrorist ” determination, the denied individual would continue to 

be legally eligible to possess any firearms that he previously possessed, as long as his previous 

possession were legal. It would also be legal for him to acquire firearms from private persons if 

those transfers were intrastate and in compliance with state laws. The bill would also prohibit any 

person from knowingly transferring a firearm to any person determined to be a “dangerous 

terrorist ” by the Attorney General, although it is unclear how anyone in the general public (i.e., 

private persons) would be aware of that determination. 

Remedies for Erroneous Firearms Denials 

With regard to NICS denials and “dangerous terrorist ” determi nations, the bill would amend the 

Brady Act to allow a denied individual to request from the Attorney General notification of the 

reason(s) for the denial, but it would also give the Attorney General the authority to withhold 

those reasons if he determines that the disclosure would compromise national security. 111 The bill 

would make a similar amendment to the Brady Act in regard to correcting erroneous 

information. 112 Any denied person would also be able to challenge that determination in U.S. 

federal court wi thin 60 days of notice. The court would be required to sustain the Attorney 

General ’s determination upon a showing by the U.S. government by a preponderance of the 

evidence standard that the determination satisfied the proposed provisions described above ( 18 

U.S.C. §§922A and B). 

Pursuing remedy under the bill could prove very difficult because it would give the Attorney 

General considerable latitude to withhold from the court any information that would compromise 

national security. The court would be allo wed access to summaries or redacted versions of 

documents underlying those determinations, as long as those documents did not contain 

information that might compromise national security. The bill does not address, however, whether 

the petitioner (denied pe rson) or his attorney would be allowed access to those documents. In 

addition, at the court ’s option or on the motion of the petitioner, the court would be allowed to 

review the full, undisclosed documents ex parte and in camera .113 The court would also be 

allowed to determine whether the summaries or redacted versions of those documents were fair 

and accurate representations of the underlying documents. However, the court would not be 

allowed to overturn the Attorney General ’s determination based solely on t he full, undisclosed 

documents. 

Furthermore, the bill does not address any of the implications of a determination being 

overturned. For example, if the petitioner were erroneously placed on the list, would there be any          

> 110 18 U.S .C. §922(g).
> 111 P.L. 103 -159 , Section 103(f); 107 Stat. 1542 (1993).
> 112 P.L. 103 -159 ,Section 103(g); 107 Stat. 1542. (1993).
> 113 Ex parte means a proceeding in which the defendant is not present or represented. In camera means either the
> hearing is before the judge in his chambers or all spectators and jurors are excluded from the courtroom. Terrorist Watch List Screening and Background Checks for Firearms
> Congressional Research Service 23

obligation on the part of the Attorn ey General to remove him from the watchlist? Or, if the 

petitioner were misidentified as a known or suspected terrorist, would some other form of redress 

be appropriate? One possible remedy under the bill could be a court order directing the firearms 

trans fer, although this is unclear. Notwithstanding these ambiguities, the “remedies ” provisions of 

the bill could possibly serve as a precedent under which other individuals adversely affected by 

the use of terrorist watchlists could challenge the outcomes of other terrorist screening activities 

conducted by frontline screening agencies in federal court. As described above, individuals who 

believe they have been misidentified as a terrorist while being screened by TSA or CBP, or other 

frontline screening agenci es, arguably have narrower avenues for relief than that which would be 

provided under the bill. 

Denial and Revocation of Firearms and Explosives Licenses 

The bill would also make similar amendments to firearms and explosives licensing statutes. 114 

According ly, as it does for firearms, the bill would prohibit any individual who had received 

notice of a determination by the Attorney General that he was a “dangerous terrorist ” from 

shipping, transporting, possessing, or receiving any explosive. In addition, the Attorney General 

would have the authority under the bill to deny or revoke any federal firearms license or 

explosives license or permit if he determines that the prospective or current holder of a firearms 

license or an explosives license or permit 115 is a known or suspected terrorist, and there is a 

reasonable belief that he might use firearms or explosives in a terrorist act. Interestingly, the bill 

does not address the renewal of such licenses or permits. Hence, the bill could be interpreted as 

authorizin g the Attorney General to screen licensees and permit holders on a continuous basis to 

determine whether they have been watch -listed as known or suspected terrorists and then consider 

whether these persons should be determined to be “dangerous terrorists. ” Although the bill would 

allow an individual to challenge the denial or revocation of either a firearms license or explosives 

license/permit in federal court, it would similarly authorize the Attorney General to withhold 

certain information in those lawsui ts if its disclosure could compromise national security. 

Attorney General Implementing Guidelines 

Although Senator Lautenberg ’s and Representative King ’s Terror Gap proposals a re nearly 

identical, the Senate bill includes an additional provision. As recommended by GAO in 2009, it 

would require the Attorney General to issue guidelines outlining the circumstances under which 

the authority to make “dangerous terrorist ” determinations would be exercised. The guidelines 

would be intended to provide account ability and a basis for monitoring how the authority is 

exercised so that the intended goals and expected results of the bill are achieved. This would 

arguably be done in a manner that safeguards privacy and civil liberties in accordance with 

Homeland Secu rity Presidential Directives, under which the George W. Bush Administration 

sought to strengthen terrorist screening policies and procedures.       

> 114 18 U.S.C. §§841 et seq .; Organized Crime Control Act, P.L. 91 -452; 84 Stat. 952 (1970).
> 115 Under federal explosives law, permits are issued to responsible persons. A “responsible person” is defined in 18
> U.S.C. §841(s) as “an individual who has the power to direct the management policies of the applicant pertaining to
> explosive materials.” In other words, these permits are issued to employees of explosives licensees who have access to
> and handle explosives. Under federal firearms law, there is no similar analog with regard to employees of federally
> licensed guns dealers. Terrorist Watch List Screening and Background Checks for Firearms
> Congressional Research Service 24

# Possible Policy Issues Raised by the 

# Terror  Gap  Proposal 

Arguments for the Terror Gap bill and similar proposals often coalesce around the need for 

greater public safety in light of the fact that terrorists have used, or plotted to use, firearms and 

explosives in attacks in the United States. Conversely, arguments against the Terror Gap bill could 

coalesce around sev eral issues, including the feasibility of non -notification, adequate opportunity 

for redress, and possible precedents for judicial review. 

# Would the Proposed Non -notification Authority Be Feasible? 

Under the Terror Gap bill, the Attorney General would have the discretionary authority to deny a 

firearms transfer to any person that he determined to be a “dangerous terrorist, ” but he would also 

have the authority to choose whether to notify the subject of that determination. As previously 

discussed, under the Brady Act, however, the agency holding the prohibiting record(s) on an 

individual is obligated to inform a denied person of the reason(s) for his NICS denial. 116 On the 

other hand, it is generally the policy of the federal government to neither confirm nor d eny 

whether an individual has been placed on a terrorist watchlist. If not notified of the “dangerous 

terrorist ” determination, the denied person could inquire about the reason for the denial. If no 

reason were given for the denial upon inquiry, the denied person might deduce that he had been 

placed on a terrorist watchlist; otherwise, he would have been informed of the reason for denial. 

Some observers might question whether the policy of neither confirming nor denying whether an 

individual is watch -listed following a firearms denial based on a “dangerous terrorist ”

determination would be sustainable in the long run. In other words, if the only possible deduction 

that a denied person could make is that he was on a terrorist watchlist, why not tell him so? 

# Would Adequate Opportunity for Redress and Remedy 

# Be  Provided? 

Denied individuals who believe they have been misidentified or mistakenly placed on a terrorist 

watchlist could face formidable obstacles to seeking redress. Proponents of the Terror Gap bill 

could argue that the FBI would most likely respond to the denied person within five business 

days, leaving him 60 days to conclude that he had been placed on a terrorist watchlist in the case 

of non -notification, and then hire an attorney and present his ca se in a federal court. Opponents of 

the proposal could counter that a person mistakenly determined to be a “dangerous terrorist ”

would have little opportunity to make an effective legal challenge to clear his name, particularly 

if he were not explicitly no tified by the Attorney General of the determination. Furthermore, 

opponents could argue that, due to the extraordinary nature of a “dangerous terrorist ”

determination, a petitioner should be afforded more time to mount a legal challenge. A possible 

issue f or Congress could be whether a petitioner would have sufficient time under the bill to 

appeal a denial in federal court, especially in a case where the Attorney General chose not to 

inform him of a “dangerous terrorist ” determination.   

> 116 Correction of Erroneous System Information, 28 C.F.R. §25.10. Terrorist Watch List Screening and Background Checks for Firearms
> Congressional Research Service 25

# Would a Precedent Be Set for Other Screening Processes? 

Supporters of the Terror Gap proposal have argued that it would provide a denied person an 

opportunity to appeal a “dangerous terrorist ” determination that is currently unavailable to 

individuals identified as known or su spected terrorists in other federal government screening 

operations, such as passenger screening at an airport. At the same time, opponents of the proposal 

could argue that such redress and remedy provisions, if implemented, would likely draw 

unwanted atte ntion to the U.S. government ’s use of terrorist watchlists and set a precedent for 

providing judicial review to persons who are adversely affected by the federal government ’s use 

of terrorist watchlists and screening operations. Terrorist Watch List Screening and Background Checks for Firearms  

> Congressional Research Service 26

# Appendix. Acronyms and Abbreviations 

ATF: Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives 

CA: Bureau of Consular Affairs 

CTD: Counterterrorism Division 

CBP: Customs and Border Protection 

DHS: Department of Homeland Security 

DOJ: Department of Justice 

DOS: Department of State 

FBI: Federal Bureau of Investigation 

FFL: Federal Firearms Licensee 

GAO: Government Accountability Office 

GCA: Gun Control Act 

HSPD -6: Homeland Security Presidential Directive Six 

IC: Intelligence Community 

JTTF: Joint Terrorism Task Force 

KST File: Known or Suspected Terrorists File 

NCIC: National Crime Information Center 

NCTC: National Counterterrorism Center 

NICS: National Instant Criminal Background Check System 

NTN: NICS Transaction Number 

POC: Point -of -contact 

TIDE: Terrorist Identities Datamart Environment 

TRIP: Traveler Redress and Inquiry Program 

TSA: Transportation Security Administration 

TSC: Terrorist Screening Center 

TSDB: Terrorist Screening Database 

TSOU: Terrorist Screening Operations Unit 

VAF: NICS Voluntary Appeals File 

VGTOF: Violent Gang and Terrorist Organization File Terrorist Watch List Screening and Background Checks for Firearms       

> Congressional Research Service R42336 · VERSION 4·UPDATED 27

# Author Information 

William J. Krouse 

Specialist in Domestic Security and Crime Policy 

# Acknowledgments 

Vivian S. Chu, CRS Legislative Attorney, contributed to this report. 

# Disclaimer 

This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan 

shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and 

under the direction of Congress. Information in a CRS Report should n ot be relied upon for purposes other 

than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in 

connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not 

subject to copyr ight protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be reproduced and distributed in 

its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or 

material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permissio n of the copyright holder if you wish to 

copy or otherwise use copyrighted material.
